THE HARMONY OF holy Scriptures.

With the several Sentences of sundry learned and worthy VVriters.

Collected for the comfort of all such as are desirous to seek after their
souls health.

By I. B.

Vnum est necessarium.

Ecclesiastes. 12. verse. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth; whiles the evil days come not, nor the years draw near, wherein thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them. AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Nicholas
Ling, and are to be sold at the West door of Paul's. 1600.

To the right Honorable William Ryder, Lord Mayor elected for the City of
London: And to the right Worshipful Ma. Thomas Smith, and Ma. Thomas Cambell
Esquires, Sheriffs of the same City: All happiness wished in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.
IT may be thought great boldness in me (right Honorable and right Worshipful)
being one altogether unknown to you, that I should thus presume to seek the
patronizing of these my poor endeavors, under the protection of your Honorable
and Worshipful countenaunces, and so in some sort I do my self acknowledge.
But if the name and nature of my book be but rightly considered, and your
dignity of place and office therewith justly equalled: that boldness (I hope)
will be thought in me but modest duty, and your kind acceptance hereof, the
true testimony of religious devotion. You are chosen in this City as chief
Magistrates for this year ensuing, first, to see that God may be rightly
honored, her Majesty's laws justly administered, the people in peace and love
discreetly governed, and sin and iniquity duly punished. All which depending
one upon another, as the parts in Music do, and that you your selves, (with
the rest of your worshipful brethren) are the ground of this Oeconomicall
Music, for all the rest that be under you to sing sweetly in tune by, (as
example is the best guide to order, and order cannot be kept where example
wants:) even so this Harmony of holy Scriptures, (in my poor opinion) does
rightly challenge you as Patrons, being drawn from the true foundation of
your seated authority: for whatsoever is not to Gods glory, ought most
carefully to be shunned. In this regard I humbly desire, that your Honor and
Worships will but listen to this Harmony, and give it such entertainment as
it worthily deserves: not for any matter of attribution to my self any way,
but for his sake to whose honor it is meant and intended: who bless you and
yours with all happiness in this world, and make you partakers of far
greater blessedness in the world to come.

Your Honors and Worships in all duty, James Bentley.

To the Reader.
SInce it has been observed as a custom (courteous Reader) in all times
heretofore, that in the publication of books, some method or other of the
VVriters meaning, should be expressed for the Readers better understanding: I,
being bound (as it were) to that ceremony, though no way distrustful of thy
kind opinion and judgment, first, wishing thy health and happiness in Christ,
and next entreating thy christianlike consideration of me and this present
labor, pray thee to take notice of these few lines following.

These gathered places out of the most sacred Scriptures, marshalled in the
best manner that I could devise, concerning those nine necessary points, which
in the page next after this Epistle are more at large explaned; likewise the
grave and religious Sentences of the Doctors and Fathers, as also the sweet
sayings of sundr^ Philosophers: Though they have cost me more pains then here
I will express, and have proved to my comfort, as I pray they may to thine,
yet if thy freendly acceptance answer but my good meaning, and ouer-rash
reading deliver not as rude censuring, I doubt not but our benefit hereby will
prove both alike; and all redound to his honor, in whose reverence it was
undertaken.

If thou demand a reason, why I entitle it by the name of The Harmony of holy
Scriptures, my answer is, that all the sentences herein set down, both in
sound, sense, and sweetness, do savor of a musical imitation, and concord
together after the nature of a divine harmony, as from the beginning to the
end of each section thou may easily perceive. Secondly, as in Music, be
there never so many parts, yet all must agree and make a perfect Unison: even
so do these answer to one another as in report, all tending to one effect and
purpose, and all at full approving the argument handled. First the Scriptures
being the ground and plaine-song, the Doctors following thereon in sweet divine
descant, and the Philosophers bearing a by part among to make up the melody,
and all in one sound, sing to Gods glory.

As for the Heathen authorities herein alleged, albeit they express not
only singular wisdom, but likewise savor of a very devout (though
ignorant) zeal: they are not inserted with any intent in me, that by them
should be proved the very least principle of Christian Religion; but rather to
declare, how near such men as came short of any right knowledge of God, yet
by the bare light of Nature only, aimed at the truth; and made a kind of
religious use to themselves, of a further desire to know that truth.

If in the first point handled, it shall be objected, that I have not so justly
observed the order of an harmony, as in the other following, by using needles
words of the Fathers, as says such a one, and such a one: I did the more
willingly slip from my course in that case, because the words are none of mine
own, and I could not (in my conceit) give right enough to them that owed them,
or sufficiently deliver, how soundly their sentences approved every alleged
place.

Now, if any nice ear, (whom no note can please, and to whom the very best
music seems unpleasant,) shall in this flowing age of right skilful
Masters in Gods music, whose number (for his Names sake) may he more and
more increase; if such a one I say, do object what I freely confess, that
here wants such art and schollarship, as such a serious subject worthily
deserved: let me thus answer for my self; As there be master workmen in
Gods buildings, so there must be some to carry stones, lime and mortar, of which
place neither though I account my self any way worthy, yet let not the poorest
laborers pains in such a service be despised. I did it diverse years since
for my own instruction, and thought to have kept it only for my private
comfort, till others thinking better thereof then I my self can, would needs
prevail with me to have it published: which since I could not well deny,
let this serve for all objections whatsoever. The reverend regard of Gods Name,
in me both began and finished the work, desire to benefit others as simple as
my self, was the chief mark I aimed at, and the hope I have that some good
may ensue hereof, is the only recompense I request for my pains. He then
that began and ended, thou that read and art comforted, all that see my good
intent and therewith are pleased; First his blessed Name be honored, thy
comfort daily increased, and all our saiths for ever through Jesus Christ
established.

Thine I. B.

The contents of the whole book following.
1. OF God: that he is great in power: rich in mercy: slow to anger: just in
judgment: righteous in all his ways: and wonderful in all his works. 2. What
Man is by nature: how short and uncertain the days of his life are: And how
sure it is, that after this life ended, we must all appear before the
Judgment seat of God, to receive every one according as his works shall be.
3. Of Christ: why he came: and what profit we have by his Death: Resurrection:
and Ascension. 4. Of Faith, Fear, and Love: being three principal virtues,
necessarily belonging to every true Christian. 5. What the will and desire of
Almighty God is concerning men: and how lovingly he admonishes every one to
come to repentance: promising mercy and forgiveness to all those that amend.
6. What manner of service is required of us, during this life, both toward God
and our Neighbor. 7. Of trouble and affliction: whereby God tries the hearts
of all those that faithfully fear and love him. 8. Of the manifold benefits
of God, bestowed upon the godly here in this life: with the promises of their
everlasting felicity in the world to come. 9. Of the heavy wrath of God,
against the wicked and ungodly here in this world, with the threatenings of
their eternal torments in the world to come.
The Names of all the Authors mentioned in this Book.
Christian Authors.
SAint Ambrose S. Augustine. S. Jerome. S. Chrysostom. S. Gregory. Clem.
Alexandri. Epiphanius. Hilarious. Origin. Cyprian. Cyrill. Isidorus. Basil.
Beda. Anselmus. Bernard. Erasmus. Constantius. Vincentius. Lactantius.
Ignatius. Tertullian. Theophilactus. Ireneus. Iusti. Martyr. Cassianus.
Cassiodorus. Eugenius. Euagoras. Fulgentius. Fulgotius. Luther. Pet. Ramus.
Marlorate. Plotinus. Pacuuius. Calvin. Lyra. Boethius. Virgilius. Orosius.
Rauisius. Pet. Lombardus. Polion. Maxentius. Carolus Magnus. Sigismundus.
Arnobius. Anth. Gueuara. Bullenger. Leo. Aeneus Siluius. Pet. Martyr. Phil.
Melanctho^. Martin Bucer. Hemingius. Becon. Osorius. Beza. Granado. Iunius.
Tremelius. Vrsinus.
Heathen Philosophers.
SOcrates. Plato. Hermes. Plutarch. Pythagoras. Solon. Cicero. Macrobius.
Cleobulus. Seneca. Crates. Thales. Chilo. Bias Menander. Protogenes.
Antisthenes. Anaxagoras. Heraclitus. Pyndarus. Marcus Aurelius Gallen.
Hipocrates. Alex. Seuerus. Euripides. Aristides. Demonax. Valerius Max. Dion.
Theophrastus. Salust. Quintilian. Zenophon. Isocrates. Xenocrates. Diogenes.
Aristotle. Anacharsis. Herodotus. Thucidides.
Faults escaped.
Page 14, line 4, for setteh, read sets. Page 39, line 4, for wondefull,
read wonderful. Page 63, line 25, for or God, read our God. Page 265, line 28,
for and that that it, read and that it. Page 352, line 17, for body, read
belly. Page 500, line 25, for misciefe, read mischief. Page. 512, li. 20, for
imagination, read imaginations.
The Harmony of holy Scriptures.
Of God: that he is great in power: rich in mercy: ^^ow to anger: just in
judgment: righteous in all his ways: and wonderful in all his works.
VISDOM 15. verse. 3. For to know GOD, is perfect righteousness, and to know
his power is the root of immortality. Of God. etc.
. 1.
Moses, the servant of the living GOD, (after he had seen many miracles,
and wrought diverse wonders, through Divine assistance, before the face of
Pharao, King of Egypt, and the children of Israel in the wilderness) talking on
a time familiarly with his Maker, (amongst many other petitions,) humbly Exo,
33. 18,
besought the Lord to show him his glory: Whereunto, the Almighty returned
this (...)swear, saying; Thou can not see my Exo, 33, 20.
(...)or there shall no man see me and live.

No man (says S. John) has seen God John, 1, 18,
at any time: the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he
has declared him.

No man knows the Son, (says Christ) Math, 11, 27
but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him.

. 2.
What man has seen GOD, that the Ecclus, 43, 31
might tell us? (says the Wiseman,) o^ who can magnify him as he is? Who
shall declare * unto us the power of his greatness? Ecclus, 18, 4
or who will take upon him to tell ou^ his mercy?

Can thou, (says Zophar unto Job) by Job, 11, 7, 8, 9,
searching find out God? Can t^ou find out the Almighty to his perfection?
The Heavens are hie, (says he) what can thou do? It is deeper the^ Hell,
how can thou know it? The measure thereof is longer then the Earth, and it
is broader then the Sea.

By which kind of questioning, the holy man seems to tell us, that if we be
not able to comprehend the height of heaven, the depth of hell, the length of
the ea(...) or the breadth of the sea, which are but (...)tures, it will be much
more impossible for us, to understand the perfection of the Creator, which is
God himself. For he, (as Sirach rightly says) is * above all his works.
Ecclus, 43, 28


. 3.
Solomon, as we read of him, was the richest man in wisdom that ever lived,
and one that gave his mind to know as much as man might know, yet could he
not by all his diligence, come near the perfection of the Almighty, but
plainly (even in his Book of Wisdom) confesses both his own, and all other
men's imperfections in that point, where he says; Hardly can we discern the
things that are upon the earth, Wisd, 9, 16.
and with great labor find we out the things which are before us, who can the^
seek out (says he) the things that are in heaven?

For like as the ground is appointed to bear the wood, and the Sea to carry
his 2, Esdr, 4, 21
floods, so they that dwell upon the earth, can understand nothing, but that
which is upon the earth, and they that are in the heavens, the things which are
above the height of the heavens.

. 4.
Wisdom wills us therefore, (as Fulgosius Fulgosius.
says) not to be ouer-quisitiue in searching out, either the secrets of Gods
hidden counsel, or the greatness of his incomparable majesty, for fear we
be suddenly smitten, with the thunderstroake of his glory.

But let it rather suffice us in knowledge, (touching the proportion of his
person) to say as Plato that divine Philosopher said: Plato.
God is without any body, invisible, and also immortal; whose form cannot be
deprehended with the eyes of mortal men, nor yet described by any sensible
knowledge.

Or, to say, as learned Hermes Trismegistus Hermes.
said; That is God, which lacks beginning and ending: which God, being made
of none, has by his own power created all things.

Or else, to say as much as a more worthy man then any of them both, namely,
holy Job said; Behold, God is excellent, and we Job, 36, 26,
know him not, neither may the number of his years be searched out.

He only has immortality, and dwells in 1, Tim, 6, 16
the light that none can attain unto, whom never man saw, neither can see.

He is Alpha, and Omega, the beginning Reave, 22, 13 and 1, 8.
and the end, the first and the last, which is, and which was, and which is to
come, even the Almighty.

. 5.
Before me, says the Almighty, there was Esaias, 43, 10, 11, 13.
no God formed, neither shall there be after me; I, even I, am the Lord, and
beside me there is no Savior. Yea, before the day was, (says he) I am: and
there is none that can deliver out of mine hand.

I am the first, and I am the last, (says the Esaias, 44, 6,
Eternal,) and without [or besides me] there is no other God.

I am the Lord that made all things, that Esaias, 44, 24,
spread out the heavens alone, and stretched out the earth by my self.

Yea,] I, (says the everliving God) have Esaias, 45, 12.
made the earth, and created man upon it.

Surely, my hand has laid the foundations Esaias, 48, 13,
of the earth, and my right hand has spanned the heavens; when I call the^
(says he) they stand up together.

. 6.
Understand therefore this day, and consider Deuteronomy, 4, 39,
(as Moses says) in thy heart, that the Lord our God, he is God in heaven
above, and upon the earth beneath, there is none other.

He is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, Deuteronomy, 10, 17
a great GOD, mighty and terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes
reward: who does right unto the fatherless and widow, and loves the
stranger, giving him food and raiment.

Yea, the Lord our God, as the same Moses Deuteronomy, 6, 4,
says unto Israel, is Lord only.

And there is, (as the Apostle truly affirms) 1, Cor, 8, 4,
none other God but one.

Though there be that are called Gods, 1, Cor, 8, 5, 6
whether in heaven or in earth, as there be many Gods, and many Lords, yet unto
us there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in
him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Of the mighty power of God.
. 1.
THE Lord reigns, (says David) Psalm, 93, 11,
and is clothed with majesty, the Lord our God, is clothed and girded with
power.

Who is like, says he, [or may be compared] Psalm, 113, 5,
unto the Lord our God, which has his dwelling on high?

Which covers himself with light, as Psalm, 104, 2, 3, 4, 5.
with a garment, and spreads out the heavens like a Curtain; Which lays
the beams of his Chambers in the waters, and makes the clouds his Chariot,
and walks upon the wings of the wind. Which makes his spirits his
messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers.

Which gives the Sun for a light to Iere, 31. 35,
the day, and the courses of the Moon, and of the stars for a light to the
night. Which breaks the Sea when the waves thereof do roar. His Name, (as
says the Prophet) is the Lord of Hosts.

He, (as the Psalmist says) is high above Psalm, 113, 4,
all Nations, and his glory above the heavens.

He has prepared his throne in heaven, Psalm, 103, 19
and his kingdom rules over all.

He, by his power, has placed the earth Lactantius.
upon her firm foundations.

And he has set bounds about the waters, Job, 26, 10,
until the day and night come to an end.

. 2.
There is a GOD, (says Cicero) which Cicero.
does rule and govern all things, which maintains the course of the
Stars, the changes of times, the alteration and order of all things,
beholding both Sea and Land: Who also plainly sees, both the lives and doings
of all men that dwell upon the earth, and whatsoever else has any being in the
world.

The same God, is our God, (as Baruch Baruch, 3, 35
the Scribe says,) and there shall none other be compared unto him.

For he it is which has prepared the Baruch, 3, 32
earth for evermore, and has filled the same with foure-footed beasts.

He it is, which by his own almighty Mar. Bucer.
power has created all kind of creatures, and by his wonderful providence
they live and are preserved.

Yea, he, (as Daniell says) is the living Dan, 6, 26,
God, and remains for ever: his kingdom shall never perrish, and his
dominion shall be everlasting.

He [also] it is which rescueth and delivers: verse, 27,
and he works signs and wonders in heaven and in earth.

When he sends out the light, it goes, Baruch, 3, 33
and when he calls it again it obeys him with fear.

The stars also shine in their watch, and verse, 34.
rejoice; and when he calls them, they say, Here we be; and so with
cheerfulness they show light unto him that made them.

. 3.
He that forms the Mountains, (says Amos, 4, 13*
Amos) and creates the wind, and declares unto man what is his thought;
which makes the morning darkness, and walks upon the hie places of the
earth, the Lord God of Hosts is his Name. Nahum, 1, 3


He has his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the Clouds are the
dust of his feet. Psalm, 104, 32


He looks on the earth, and it trembles, he touches the Mountains, and
they smoke. Esaias, 40, 22,


Yea, he sits (as Esaias says) upon the circle of the earth, and the
inhabitants of the whole world, (in comparison of him) are as it were a
company of Grasshoppers. He stretches out the heavens as a Curtain, and
spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in. verse, 23, 24.


He, brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth as
vanity. As though they were not planted as though they were not sown, as
though their stock took no root in the earth: For as soon as he blows upon
the^, they wither, and fade away, as the stubble does in a whirlewind.

He [also,] is wise in heart, and mighty Job* 9, 4,
in strength. For who (as Job says) has been fierce against him, and has
prospered? He remooueth the Mountains, and they verse, 5, 6, 7, 8.
feel not when he overthrows them in his wrath: he remooueth the earth out
of her place, that the pillars thereof do shake. He commands the Sun, and
it rises not: he closes up the stars as under a signet. He, himself
alone, spreads out the heavens, and walks upon the height of the Sea. etc.

He does great things, and unsearchable, Job, 9, 10. 11, 12,
yea, marvelous things without number. Lo, when he goes by me, I see him
not, and when he passes by, I perceive him not. Behold, when he takes a
pray, who can make him to restore it? [Or] who shall say unto him, What do
thou?

For,] all Nations before him, are as nothing: Esaias, 40, 17
and they are counted to him, less then nothing, and vanity.

. 4.
Again; The Lord our GOD, (as David Psalm, 95, 3, 4, 5,
says) is a great God, and a great King above all Gods: in his hands are all
the corners of the Earth, and the heights of the Mountains are his. To him the
Sea belongs, for he made it, and his hands formed the dry Land.

Know thou not, or have thou not Esaias, 40, 28, 29,
heard, says Esaias, that the everlasting God the Lord, has created the ends
of the earth? he neither faints nor is weary, there is no searching of his
understanding: but he gives strength unto him that faints, and unto him that
has no strength he increases power.

He, (as Nehemiah says) is Lord alone: Nehe, 9, 6,
he has made heaven, and the heaven of all heavens, with all their host, and
the earth, and all that therein is, the seas also, and all that are in them:
and he preserves them all, and the host of the heaven worshippeth him.

Yea, all things (as himself says) were 2, Esdr. 6, 6.
made by him alone, and by none other: by him also they shall be ended, and by
none other.

. 5.
The world (says the Almighty) is mine, Psalm, 50, 12.
and all that therein is.

I have made the earth, the man and the Ierem, 27, 5,
beast that are upon the ground, by my great power, and by mine outstretched
arm; and I have given the same, says he, unto whom it pleases me.

And that we may the better be persuaded to believe his speeches, and
somewhat the more willingly moved, herein to admire his wonderful great
might, he presently confirms his saying with the example of Nabuchadnezzer,
King of Babel: Into whose hands, for a time, (as Jeremy Iere, 27, 6, 7.
writes) God gave all Lands, and beasts of the field, and all Nations; for
to serve him, and his son, and his sons son.

And for the majesty that GOD gave Dan, 5, 19.
him, all people, Nations, and Languages trembled and feared before him. He put
to death whom he would; he smote whom he would; whom he would, he set up; and
whom he would, he put down.

But, when his heart was puffed up, and his verse, 20, 21,
mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they
took his honor from him. And he was driven from the sons of men, and his
heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild Asses; they
fed him with grass like Oxen, and his body was wette with the dew of heaven;
till he knew (says Daniell) that the most high GOD bare rule over the kingdom
of men, and that he appoints over the same whom soever he pleases.

Unto Saul, likewise, God gave a great and mighty Kingdom, selecting him for
1, Sam, 9, 21
Prince and Ruler over his own chosen and beloved people, the Children of
Israel: he being before, (by his own confession,) but of a small Trybe, and
very poor family: yea, such a fellow, that (as the Text says) he went
wandering about the Country, to enquire and seek after his Fathers Asses that
were lost. A man truly in human judgment, (by reason of his baseness) very
unlikely to prove a King: Notwithstanding, God which can do whatsoever
pleases him, bestowed the cheifest kingdom under the Sun upon him. And
afterward, when (through his disobedience) he fell from the favor of God, the
Almighty, as well to make manifest his power in displacing him, as for other
causes best known to his secret wisdom, rent the foresaid kingdom from him,
and gave it unto his neighbor 1, Sam, 15, 28.
(says the holy Ghost) that * was better then he.

Well may we therefore confess, and say Psalm, 145, 3. and 147, 5,
with the Psalmist, Great is the Lord our God, and most worthy to be praised:
great is his power, his wisdom is infinite, and his greatness is
incomprehensible.

His Name, (as Daniell says) be praised for ever and ever: for wisdom and
strength Dan, 2, 20, 21, 22.
are his. He changes the times and seasons, he takes away Kings, and he
setteh up Kings: he gives wisdom unto the wise, and understanding to those
that understand: he discovers the deep and secret things: he knows what
is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him.

. 6.
Who is GOD, besides the Lord? 2, Sam, 22, 32.
says David, Or, who is mighty, save our God?

With him is wisdom and strength, he Job, 12, 13, 14.
has counsel and understanding. Behold, he will break down, and it cannot
be built, he shuts a man up, and he cannot be loosed.

Behold, he withholds the waters, and verse, 15.
they dry up, but when he sends them forth, they destroy the earth.

With him is strength and wisdom, he verse, 16,
that is deceived, and that deceives, are his.

He causes the Counselors to go as verse, 17, 18, 19.
spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: he loses the collar of Kings, and
girdeth their loins with a girdle: he leads away the Princes as a pray, and
overthrows the mighty: he takes away the speech from verse, 20, 21,
the faithful Counselors, and takes away the judgment of the ancient:
he powers contempt upon Princes, and makes the strength of the mighty weak.

He discovers the deep places from verse. 22, 23
their darkness, and brings forth the shadow of death to light: he
increases the people, and destroys them: he enlarges the Nations, and
brings them in again.

He takes away the hearts of them that verse, 24,
are the chief over the people of the earth, and makes them to wander in the
Wilderness, out of the way. etc.

He [also] gives rain upon the earth, Job, 5, 10, 11,
and powers down water upon the streets: he sets up, on hie, them that be
of low degree, and exalts the sorrowful to salvation.

He scatters the devises of the crafty, verse, 12,
so that their hands cannot accomplish that which they do enterprise.

Yea, he takes the wise in their craftines, verse, 13, 14
and overthrows the counsel of the wicked. Insomuch, that they meet with
darkness in the day time, and grope at noone day, as in the night.

He [also] puts his hand upon the Rocks, and overthrows the Mountains
Job, 28, 9, 10, 11,
by the roots: he breaks Rivers in the Rocks, and his eye sees every
precious thing: he binds the floods that they do not ouer-flowe, and the
thing that is hid, brings he to light.

He it is that makes poor, and he it is 1, Sam. 2, 7.
that makes rich: he brings low, and he exalts.

Yea, he (as Hannah says) raises up verse, 8.
the poor out of the dust, and lifts the beggar from the dunghill, to place
them among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory. For the
pillars of the earth (says she) are his, and he has set the round world
upon them.

. 7.
Behold now, says the Almighty, for I, Deuteronomy. 32, 39
I am the Lord, and there is no Gods with me, I kill, and give life* I wound
and make whole: and there is none that can deliver out of mine hand.

I destroy the tokens of the Soothsayers, Esaias. 44. 25,
and make them that conjecture, fools: I turn the Wisemen backward, and make
their knowledge foolishnes.

I form the light, and create darkness: Esaias, 45, 7.
I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord, (says he) do all these things.

. 8.
Our God is in heaven, faith David, and Psalm. 115. 3,
he does whatsoever pleases him.

The heaven is his seat, and the earth is Esaias, 66. 1.
his footestoole.

He remains for ever, his throne is Lam. 5, 19.
from generation to generation. * And there 1. Sam. 2, 2.
is no God like our God.

For he* (as Solomon says,) has the Wisd, 16. 13
power of life, and death; he leads down, even to the gates of hell, and
brings up again.

. 9.
God that made the world, and all things Acts, 17, 24, 25.
that are therein, (says the Apostle) seeing that he is Lord of heaven and
earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is he worshipped with
men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all, life and
breath, and all things.

For in him we live, and move, and have verse, 28.
our being.

Yea, he, (as Plato says) by his almighty Plato.
power is in all things, and in every part of the world, and by his providence,
all things are preserved, governed, and moved: and he himself, is of none
other, either moved or governed, but is the first incomprehensible mouer.

The eyes of all things, wait upon him, Psalm, 145. 15, 16.
and he gives them their food in due season: he opens his hand, and
fills with his blessing every living thing.

But if he hide his face, they are troubled: Psalm. 104, 29.
if he take away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.

For in his hand, is the soul of every living Job, 12. 10.
thing, and the breath of all mankind.

. 10.
The earth, is the Lords, says David, and Psalm. 24. 1,
all that therein is, the world is his, and so are all they that dwell therein.

Prosperity and adversity, life and death, Ecclus, 11, 14, 15.
poverty and riches, come of the Lord: Wisdom, and knowledge, and
understanding of the Law, are all of the Lord: love and good works come of
him.

For he only is the Author of all goodness, Hermes.
and the giver of all good gifts.

Yea, every good and perfect gift, as Saint James. 1. 17.
James says, is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with
who^ is no variableness, neither shadow by turning.

For the divine nature and substance of Aristotle.
God, suffers neither change nor end, because, as Aristotle truly says, it
is both immutable and infinite.

. 11.
To come to preferment also, is neither Psalm, 75. 6, 7.
from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the South: but the Lord (as
David says) is the Judge, he puts down who^ he will, and he sets up
whom he pleases.

It is the Lord that gives, and it is the Job, 1, 21,
Lord that takes away: even as it pleases the Lord, so comes things to
pass.

. 12.
We read in the second book of chronicles that when Asa, King of Judah, was
2. Chron. 14 9, 10, 11.
urged to give battle against an Army of ten hundred thousand Ethiopians,
first, before he began the fight, he made his humble supplication to the
Almighty; and in his prayer, (to show that the conquest consisted not in the
great company of his enemies soldiers, but only in the might and power of him
that made both heaven and earth,) he said: Help us, o Lord our God: It is
nothing with thee, to save with many or with no power; help us, o Lord our
God, for we rest on thee, and in thy Name, (says he) are we come against
this multitude.

Jonathan likewise, venturing by stealth 1. Sam. 14, 6
to set upon the Philistians garrison at unawares, and being accompanied with
none but only his Armor bearer, for his better encouragement he told him, that
it was not hard with the Lord, to save with many, or with few.

For the victory of the battle, depends 1. Mac. 3. 19.
not on the many thousands that are in the host, but the strength comes from
heaven.

And is only at his pleasure to be disposed, whose power, as * Judith says,
stands Judith. 9, 11.
not in the multitude of Soldiers, nor his might in strong men.

As may more at large be perceived, by reading the happy success, which
followed the enterprises, of the aforesaid King Asa, and Jonathan the Son of
Saul, against their enemies.

. 13.
Another example also, concerning the power of Almighty God in this point, is
set down in the book of Judges; where Judges. 7, 12
Gedion being appointed by the Lord, to go and fight against the Midianites,
(which were so mighty an host, that as the Text says, they lay in the valley
like a company of Grasshoppers, and their Cammels were without number, as is the
sand by the Seaside for multitude,) mustred up an Army Iuges. 7. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
of thirty two thousand men. And when he had done thus, the Lord God called
unto him, and said; Gedion, the people that are with thee, are too many for me
to give the Midianites into their hands, least Israel make their vaunt
against me, and say, Mine hand has saved me. Now therefore, (says the most
Mighty) proclaim in the audience of the people, and say; Whosoever he be that
is timorous, or fearful, let him return, and depart. Then says the Text,
there departed of the people twenty two thousand, and ten thousand remained.

And the Lord called again unto Gedion, and said; The people are yet too
many, bring them therefore down unto the water, and I will try them for thee
there: and of whom I say unto thee, this man shall go with thee, the same shall
go with thee, and of whomsoever I say unto thee, this man shall not go with
thee, the same shall not go. So Gedion, according as he was commanded,
brought down the people to the water, and the Lord said unto him: As many as
thou shall see to lap the water with their tongues, as a dog lappeth, put
the^ by themselves, and every one that shall bow down on his knees to drink,
put them likewise apart.

Now, among those ten thousand that came to the water to drink, there was
found but only three hundred which lapped the water, by putting their hands
to their mouths; by which 300. men, God most miraculously saved Israel, and
delivered the Midianites into their hands.

So that both by this example, and the former, that sentence of our Savior is
verified, where he says: * The things which Luke. 18, 27
are impossible with men, are possible with GOD.

And surely, (as Plato says) he alone is Plato.
most worthy to be taken for a God, which is not only a Creator, but also a
Preserver, a Savior, a Comforter, and a Deliverer in time of need.

. 14.
I know, (says David) that the Lord is Psalm. 135. ^. 6.
great, and that our God is above all Gods: Whatsoever pleased him, that did
he, in heaven, and in earth, in the Sea, and in all the deepes.

He has made the earth by his power, and Ierem. 10. 12, 13.
established the world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by
his discretion: he gives by his voice, the multitude of waters in the heaven,
and he causes* the clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth: he turns
lightnings to rain, and brings forth the winds out of his treasures.

He gives peace and prosperity unto Aeneus Siluius.
such as serve him, and sends trouble and adversity, to the^ that disobey
him: he lifts to honor who^ he likes, and brings to base estate whom
he pleases: he makes manifest his might on whom he will, by what means he
will, and at what time he will, no man being able to withstand his power.

For when he gives quietness, who can Job, 34, 29*
make trouble? Or, when he hides his face, who can behold him? whether it be
upon whole Nations, or upon one man only?

. 15.
With the Lord our God also, and in Pet. M^r. ^
his only power, (as Peter Martyr affirms) it rests to pardon our offenses,
and forgive us our sins.

For who is he, (as the Scribes said unto Mark, 2, 7.
Christ) that can forgive sins, but GOD only.

No man, as Saint Ambrose says, can be Ambrose.
partner with God, in forgiving of sins: for it is Christ's only office*
that has taken away the sins of the whole world.

Yea, it appertains only unto GOD, (faith he) to forgive sins, and to give
the holy Ghost: he alone forgiueth sins, which alone died for our sins.

Also; that the Lord might evidently Augustine.
show, (says S. Augustine) that sins be forgiven by the holy Ghost, (who^
he has given unto his faithful, and not by the merrites of men;) he says in
a certain place, Take * ye the holy Ghost: and straightway John, 20, 22, 23.
after these words uttered* he said this saying; If ye forgive any man his
sins, they are forgiven. That is, the holy Ghost forgiueth, and not you.

. 16.
Besides, this point may be further proved, by the speech of Almighty God
himself, where speaking by the mouth of his Prophet unto Israel, he says; I,
even I am Esaias, 43, 25,
he, o Israel, that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake, and will
not remember thy sins any more.

Again; I have put away thy transgressions Esaias, 44. 22.
(o Israel) like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist, (says the most
merciful,) turn unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

Again; I am the Lord thy God (o Israel) Hosea, 13. 4.
from the Land of Egypt, and thou shall know no God but me: for there is no
Savior besides me.

Also; sundry times may be found in the book of Psalms, with what thankfulness
the Prophet David confesses the pardon of all his sins to proceed only
from the mercy of his Maker: As namely amongst the rest, in the 103. psalm,
where he says: Psalm, 103. 2. 3. 4.
Praise the Lord, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits, which forgiueth
all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities, which redeemeth thy life from
destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness.

. 17.
Moreover; there is, as the Apostle affirms, James. 412,
one Lawgiver, which is able to save, and to destroy.

And that Lawgiver is God, unto who^, as Job says, it * certainly
appertains, to Job, 3431.
say, I have pardoned, I will not destroy.

Blessed therefore, and most happy is he, Psalm, 32, 1,
whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.

Yea, blessed is the man, (as the Psalmist verse, 2.
says) unto whom the Lord [our GOD] imputes not iniquity.

. 18.
The Lord our God, is terrible, and very Ecclus. 43, 29
great, says Sirach, and marvelous is his almighty power.

He is to be feared above all Gods; for all Psalm, ^6. 4, 5,
the Gods of the Heathen are Idols and vanity; but the Lord [our God] made the
heavens.

He is the living God, and an everlasting Iere. 10. 10.
King. At his anger the earth shall tremble, and the Nations cannot abide his
wrath.

For, who can stand (as Nahum says) Nahum. 1, 6.
before the wrath of the Lord? or who can abide in the fierceness of his
wrath? His wrath is powered out like fire, and the rocks are broken by him?

Yea, the pillars of heaven, tremble and quake at his reproof: the sea also is
made Job 26. 11. 12.
calm by his power, and by his understanding he smites the pride thereof.

. 19
Behold, as Sirach says, the heaven; yea, Ecclus. 16, 18
the heaven of all heavens, which are for God, the deep, the earth, and all
that therein is, shall be moved when he shall visit.

All the world, which is created and made verse, 19
by his will, the mountains also, and the foundations of the earth, shall
shake for fear, (says he) when the Lord looks upon them.

And, this whole speech of Sirach, (in effect,) is likewise further witnessed,
by the words of God himself, in the prophecy of Esaias, where speaking in
praise of his own power, he says: Behold, at my rebuke Esaias, 50, 2, 3
I dry up the Sea, I make the floods desert, their fish rotteth for water, and
dies for thirst* I clothe (says he) the heavens with darkness, and make a
sack their covering.

And for some proof of his power, according to the tenure of this speech, we
find, that his might was sufficiently made manifest by example, when he sent
such a * palpable darkness over all the Land of Exodus, 10, 22 23,
Egypt, (the place where the children of Israel dwelt only excepted,) that
for the space of three days, no man could see another, neither could any one
rise up, from the place where he was.

He also by his power, after this, parted in sunder the Red Sea, and made the
waters Exodus, 14. 16. etc.
thereof to stand like two walls, and a path of dry ground to appear in the
midst, whiles all his people had safe passage, from the fury of Pharao and
his mighty host, which speedily pursued after them, to their own destruction.

. 20.
Moreover, the Lord our God, in the last book of Moises, both to terrify the
rage of Tyrants, and comfort in calamities as many as put their confidence in
him, utters this fearful menace following, against all the wilful
contemners of his power and glory, saying: * If I whet my glittering sword,
Deu. 32, 41. 42.
and my hand take hold on judgment, I will execute vengeance on mine
adversaries, and will reward them that hate me: I will make my arrows drunk
with blood, and my sword shall eat flesh, for the blood of the slain, and of
the captives, when I begin to take vengeance on the enemy.

And, to make yet a little more manifest the might of our God, and his
prevailing power against the disturbers of his peoples peace, the Prophet
David, (after his victories obtained, in four great battles which 2, Sam, 2^.
he had with the Philistians) declares the same most pithilie in the second
book of Samuel, by the description of a tempest, saying; In my * trouble did
I call upon the 2. Sam. 22. 7.
Lord, and cry to my God, and he heard my voice out of his Temple, and my cry
did enter into his ears.

Then the earth trembled and quaked, the verse, 8, 9. 10, 11. etc.
foundations of the heavens moved and shook, because he was angry: Smoke
went out of his nostrils, and consuming fire out of his mouth, coals were
kindled thereat. He bowed the heavens also, and came down, and darkness was
under his feet: He rode upon the Cherub and did fly, and he was seen upon
the wings of the wind. He made darkness a Tabernacle round about him, with
waters gathered together in thick clouds.

At the brightness of his presence, the coals of fire were kindled: the Lord
thundered from heaven, and the most High gave his voice: he shot arrows and
scattered them, to wit, he sent lightning and destroyed them. The channels also
of the Sea appeared, and the foundations of the world were discovered, by
reason of the rebuking of the Lord, and through the blast of the breath of his
nostrils. etc.

. 21.
By the which speech of the Prophet, and sundry other like precedent places to
this purpose, every Christian Reader may indifferently perceive the power of
his Preserver: and by often contemplating the same, be the better encouraged,
(according to the example of holy Jeremy) boldly to confess his Makers
almightines, saying: There * is none like unto thee, o Lord our Ierem, 10, 6,
God, thou only art great, and thy Name is great in power.

Who would not fear thee, o King of verse. 7, 8.
Nations? For unto thee appertains the dominion. Among all the Wisemen of the
Gentiles, and in all their Kingdoms there is none like thee, but altogether
they doat and are foolish. For the stock is a doctrine of vanity.

But thou (o Lord) have ever had great strength and might, and who can
withstand Wisd. 11. 18, 19.
the power of thine arm? For as the small thing that the balance wayeth, so
is the world before thee; and as a drop of the morning dew, that falls
down upon the ground.

Thine o Lord, is greatness, and power, and 1. Chro. 29, 11.
glory, and victory, and praise: for all that is in heaven and in earth is
thine.

Both riches and honor come of thee, and 1. Chro. 29, 12.
thou raignest over all: In thine hand also is power and might, and in thine
hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.

Of the Wisdom of God.
. 1.
WHere, (says Job) is Wisdom Job, 28, 12, 13, 14.
to be found? Or, where is the place of Understandings habitation? Surely, no
man can tell, (says he) how worthy a thing Wisdom is, neither is she to be
found in the Land of them that live. The deep says, she is not with me: the
Sea says, she is not with me.

She cannot be gotten for the purest verse, 15. 16,
gold, neither may the price of her be valued with any silver. She shall not be
bought with the wedge of the gold of Ophir, no^ with the precious Onix, nor
the Saphir.

No Gold nor Crystal may be compared verse, 17, 18
unto her: neither shall her exchange be for plate of the finest Gold. For
perfect Wisdom is more worth then any Gold or Pearls. etc.

From whence then comes Wisdom? Job, 28, 20. 21.
and where is the place of Understanding? Seeing she is hid from the eyes of
all men living, and from the fowls of the air?

Destruction and Death say, We have verse, 22, 23* 24, etc.
heard the fame of her with our ears, but it is GOD that understands her
way, and he knows her place. For, he beholds the ends of the world, and
looks upon all that is under heaven.

When he wayed the winds, and measured verse, 25, 26, 27. etc.
the waters, when he set the rain in order, and gave the mighty floods a law,
then did he see her, then declared he her, prepared her, and knew her.

And unto man he said; Behold, to fear the Lord, is Wisdom: and to depart
from evil, is Understanding.

. 2.
There is one wise, (says Sirach) even the Ecclus, 1, 8, 9,
most high God; the Creator of all things; the Almighty; the King of power,
glory, and majesty; (of who^ men ought to stand greatly in awe,) which
sits upon his throne. He is the Lord that has created Wisdom through
the holy Ghost: He has seen her, numbered her, and measured her.

He also has powered her out upon all verse, 10,
flesh, according to his gift: and he gives her abundantly unto the^ that
love him.

It is likewise the lord our God alone, that by wisdom, (as Solomon says)
has laid Prou, 3, 19, 20.
the foundation of the earth, and stablished the heavens through understanding.
By his knowledge the deepes are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew.

He only, (as S. Augustine says) is the Augustine.
Author of all perfect wisdom and knowledge; and he of his goodness, gives
wisdom and understanding unto who^ it pleases him.

Science, (as Aristotle says) may be had Aristotle.
by diligence, but wisdom and discretion comes from God.

For, he gives wisdom: out of his Prou, 2, 6,
mouth comes knowledge and understanding.

Yea; all wisdom comes from God, Ecclus, 1, 1,
and has been ever with him, and is with him for ever.

. 3.
Wisdom, (as Sirach says) has been created Ecclus, 1, 4,
from the beginning, and the understanding of Prudence from everlasting.

She is the mother of beautiful love, of Ecclus, 24, 20, 21,
fear, of knowledge, and of holy hope. In her, is all grace, life, and truth:
and in her, is all hope of life and virtue.

For she, (as Solomon says) is the breath Wisd, 7, 25,
of the power of God: and a pure influence that flows from the Almighty:
therefore can no defiled thing come unto her.

Yea; She is the brightness of the everlasting verse, 26,
light: the undefiled mirror of the majesty of God, and the Image of his
goodness.

She, being one, can do all things: and verse, 27,
being steadfast herself, she renews all: and according to the ages, she
enters into the holy souls; and makes them the friends of God, and
Prophets.

For GOD loves no man, but him in verse, 28,
whom Wisdom dwells.

Wherefore, if any man lack Wisdom, James, 1, 5,
let him (as the Apostle counsels) ask it of God, which gives to all men
liberally, and reprocheth no man; and it shall be given him.

For it is he that leads unto Wisdom, Wisd, 7, 15, 16.
and teaches how to use the same aright. In his hand are both we and our
words: yea, all our wisdom, our understanding, and the knowledge of all our
works.

. 4.
If riches (says the Wiseman) be a possession Wisd. 8, 5, 6
to be desired in this life, what is richer then Wisdom, that works all
things? For if Wisdom works, what is it among all things that works
better then she?

If a man love righteousness, her labors verse, 7,
are full of virtue: for she teaches soberness, prudencie, righteousness, and
strength, which are the most profitable things that men can have in this life.

If a man desire great experience, she can verse, 8.
tell the things that are past, and discern the things that are to come: she
knows the subtilties of words, and the solution of dark sentences: she
foreseeth the signs and wonders or ever they come to pass, and the success
or end of all times, and ages to ensue.

Who so awaketh unto her betimes, shall Wisd, 6, 14.
have no great travail in seeking her, for he shall find her sitting at his
doors.

To think upon her, is perfect understanding, verse, 15,
and who so watches for her, shall be soon without care.

For, she walks about, seeking such as verse, 16,
be meet for her, and shows herself cheerfully unto them in their ways,
and meets them in every thought.

She is an infinite treasure unto men, Wisd, 7, 14,
which who so use, become pertakers of the love and freendship of Almighty God:
and are accepted for the gifts of knowledge, and understanding.

All Gold is but gravel, in respect of her, Wisd, 7, 9,
and Silver shall be counted but clay before her.

She is more worth then precious stones, Prou, 8, 11.
yea, all things that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her.

She has her dwelling with knowledge, verse, 12,
and prudent counsel is her own.

By her, Kings do reign, and Counselors Prou, 8, 15, 16,
make just laws: through her, do Princes bear rule, and all the Judges of
the earth execute judgment.

By her also, we may be preserved from Solon.
the many perrils of this world, and through her, we may attain unto a happy
end.

. 5.
To conclude; Of all the gifts that ever Plato.
God gave unto man, says Plato, Wisdom is the most excellent: For, she is
the defense of the soul, and the mirror of reason: she is the ground and
root of all good endeavors: she orders the mind of man, and instructs his
understanding: she directs his life, and rules the works thereof: she
teaches what ought to be done, and what to be left undone: and without her,
(says he) no man living can be safe.

Also, this likewise knew Solomon (a far better Divine then Plato,) to be most
true, as appears in his prayer which he so earnestly made unto the Lord for
wisdom: and where, vvithall, in the same place he plainly confesses, that
* although a man Wisd, 9, 6,
be never so perfect among the children of men, yet if the wisdom of GOD be
not with him, he shall be nothing regarded.

For, the wisdom of this world, is foolishnes 1, Cor, 3, 19,
with God.

Because (as the Apostle says) it is earthly, James, 3, 15
sensual, and deuilish.

But the wisdom that is from above, verse, 17.
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
and good fruits, without judging, and without hypocrisy.

Of the knowledge of Almighty God.
. 1.
THe Lord looks down from heaven, says David, and beholds all Psalm, 33,
13, 14.
the children of men: From the habitation of his dwelling, he beholds all
them that dwell upon the earth.

He facioneth the hearts of every one of verse, 15.
them, and he understands all their works.

For, he is, (as Hannah says) a God of 1, Sam, 2, 3,
knowledge, and by him enterprises are established.

Yea; from the beginning of the world, Acts, 15, 18,
says S. James, the Lord our God knows all his works.

He also, understands and sees, both Pet. Lomb.
the deeds, and the thoughts, of all men living in the world: and from his
knowledge no secret can be hid.

For, his eyes, as Sirach says, are ten thousand Ecclus. 39. 19
times brighter the^ the Sun, beholding all the ways of men, and the ground of
the deep, and considers the most secret parts. * He knew all things or
ever they were verse, 20.
made, and after they be brought to pass also, he looks upon them all.

The works of all flesh are before him, and Ecclus, 39, 19 20.
nothing can be hid from his sight. He sees from everlasting to everlasting,
and there is nothing wondeful [or hard] unto him.

For, his wisdom is great: he is mighty Ecclus, 15, 18
in power: and he beholds all things continually.

So that nothing can be done in heaven, Calvin.
earth, or hell without his providence.

Neither is there any creature which is not Heb, 4, 13,
manifest in his sight, but all things are naked, and open, to the eyes of
him, concerning whom we speak.

For, his eyes are upon the ways of man, Job, 34, 21.
and he sees all his goings. * His eyes, in every Prou, 15, 3,
place behold the evil and the good.

And he only knows the hearts of all 1, Reg, 8, 39
the children of men.

. 2.
Behold, says Esdras, the Lord [our God] 2, Esdr, 16, 46.
knows all the works of men: their imaginations, their thoughts, and their
hearts.

Yea; he knows our inventions, and verse, 55.
what we think or imagine in our heart, when we sin, and would hide our selves.

No thought may escape him, neither Ecclus, 42, 20
may any word be hid from him.

For, he * understands every heart. Ecclus, 16, 20


Hell, with her pain, (says Solomon,) is Prou, 15, 11
known unto the Lord, how much more the hearts of all the sons of men?

The grave [likewise,] is naked before Job, 26, 6,
him; and destruction cannot be covered from him.

The ways of all men in the world, are Bernard.
known to him: the words of all mouths in the world, are heard of him: and
the thoughts of all hearts in the world, are plainly perceived of him.

There is nothing so secret, but he sees P. Melanct.
the same, nor any purpose so privily practiced, but it is openly known unto
him.

The righteous, and the unrighteous, are Bullenger.
both in their doings of him regarded: and he discerns the counterfeite
Christian from the faithful professor.

. 4.
Saint Paul the Apostle, writing unto his Scholar Timothy, in his second
Epistle and second chapter, (both for his confirmation and comfort against the
doctrine of false Teachers.) tells him, That * the 2, Tim, 2, 19
foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal; The Lord knovveth who
are his.

And, the Almighty himself, talking with his servant Moises, says; * Thou
have Exodus 33. 17
found favor in my sight: and I know thee by name.

Likewise, unto the Prophet Jeremy, in the very beginning of his book, he
uses these words; * Before I formed thee in thy Ierem, 1, 5.
mothers womb, I knew thee; and before thou cammest out of the womb, I
sanctified thee and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto the Nations.

. 5.
Now, as by these few former places, we find it most apparently proved, that
the friends and servant of Almighty God, are alvvayes known unto him; so
may we likewise by this ensuing example and speech of the Prophet to
Senacharib, certainly assure our selves, that the Lord God knows who are his
enemies also.

For, when that proude-daring King of 2, Reg, 18, 28. 29, 30. ^
the Assvrians, sent Rabsaketh his foulemouthed messenger, to blaspheme the
Holy one of Israel, the Almighty returned him this answer by the mouth of
Esaias, saying: * I know thy dwelling; yea, thy 2. Reg. 19, 27, 28.
going out, and thy coming in, and thy fury against me: And because thou
ragest against me, and thy tumult is come up to mine ears, I will put my
hook in thy nostrils, and my bridle in thy lips, and will bring thee back
again the same way thou cammest.

Moreover; the Lord [our God,] as Esdras affirms, knows all them that sin
2, Esd. 15. 26
against him: and therefore delivers he them unto death and destruction.

For, there is (as Job says) no darkness, Job, 34, 22,
nor shadow of death, that can hide the wicked dooers from his sight.

He declares the things past, and the Ecclus. 42, 19
things that are to come: he also discloseth the path of those things that are
secret.

He searches the ground of the deep, 2. Esd. 16. 49
and the treasures thereof: he has measured the Sea, and [knoweth] what it
contains.

. 6.
Let all men therefore, (as Cicero well says) in this be truly persuaded,
that God ^ Cite^s.
is the only moderator and governor of all things: and that all things also
be done by his power and appointment. And that he it is, which most clearly
beholds every man, both what he does, what he admits in himself, with
what mind and godliness he does love and favor Religion: and that he has
also a respect to the proceedings, both of all godly and wicked men.

Yea, the Lord our God only, (as Siluius Siluius.
says) by his eternal wisdom has made all: by his everlasting providence
he preserves all: and by his most absolute understanding he knows all.

For, of him, and through him, and for Rom, 11, 36
him, (as the Apostle says) are all things: to him be glory for ever.

Amen.
Of the great mercy and loving kindness of God.
. 1.
THE Lord our God, (according to Nehe. 9. 17,
the confession of the Levites, in the ninth of Nehemiah,) is a GOD of mercies;
gracious, and pitiful: of long suffering, and of great mercy.

He is (as David says) good to all: and Psalm, 145, 9,
his mercies are over [or aboue] all the rest of his works.

Yea; he is full of compassion and mercy, Psalm, 103, 8, 9.
slow to anger, and of great kindness. He will not always chide, neither will
he keep his anger for ever.

He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities. verse, 10, 11, 12, 13,
For, as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
the^ that fear him: and as far as the East is from the West, so far has he
removed our sins from us. * As a Father has compassion on verse, 14. 15.
his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him: For, he
knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are but dust.

. 2.
Where, (says Micah) is there any God Micah, 7, 18
like unto the Lord our God, that takes away iniquity, and passes by, [or
winketh at] the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage? He retains not
his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him.

He is, (as Solomon says) gracious and Wisd, 15, 1,
true, long suffering, and governs al things by mercy.

He is, (as Sirach says) kind and pitiful: Ecclus, 2, 12
he pardons and forgiueth sins: he saves in the time of trouble: he is
a defender of all the^ that seek him in the truth. And, * as his greatness is,
so is his mercy. Ecc^us, 2, 21 Cyrill.


For, he can no more cease to be merciful, then he can cease to be God.

The mercy that a man has, (says Sirach) Ecclus, 18, 12
reaches unto his neighbor, but the mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh.

He is the Father of mercies, and the God 2, Cor, 1, 3,
of all comfort.

His mercy reaches unto the heavens, and Psalm, 36, 5,
his faithfulness unto the clouds.

His mercy is everlasting: and his truth Psalm. 100. 5.
endures from generation to generation.

. 3.
Oh how excellent, (as David says) is the Psalm, 36, 7,
mercy of the Lord our God! therefore the children of men (says he) put their
trust under the shadow of his wings.

The very remembrance of Gods mercy, Bernard.
(says Bernard) makes glad the hearts of all the godly: and the hope of
heavens help is comfortable to every penitent person.

The tongues of all men living, (says Marlorate.
Marlorate) cannot tell out Gods mercy: nor the pens of all the VVriters in
the world, sufficiently express the same.

His wrath, (as Erasmus says) is alvvaies Erasmus.
given by weight; but is mercy is infinite, without either end or measure.

Besides; if we ask yet further, after the Augustine.
several works of Gods mercy, we shall find, (as S. Augustine says) that
they pass all number, as there can be no number made of our miseries, and
daily necessities.

For, what man living, (says Becon) can Becon.
tell how often through frailty he has offended, or truly reckon, how many
ways he has been preserved from perrill, through the only mercy of the
Almighty extended toward him?

Also; If the sins of all the world, were (as S. Chrysostom says) in one
man, yet Chrysostom.
would they be nothing to the mercy of the Almighty: but the burden of them,
in comparison of his mercy, would seem like the Spyders web, before the
boisterous wind.

Yea; the multitude of all men's offenses, ^ Fulgentius.
in respect of Gods mercy, is like a small drop of rain to the greatest Sea.

. 4.
Furthermore; the mercy of the Lord Chrysostom
our God, is (as S. Chrysostom says) both general, and special. It is
general, in supplying the present wants, both of the just and unjust. It is
special, in succouring the just only.

It is likewise temporary, (says he) in sparing the wicked for a time: and it
is everlasting, concerning the everlasting salvation of the godly; not only in
choosing, but also in regenerating, in justifying, and in glorifying them.

Also; King Solomon, as we read in his book of Wisdom, after some mention
made of Gods almighty power, utters these speeches following in praise of his
love and mercy, saying; Thou (o Lord) Wisd. 11. 20 21, 22, 23.
have mercy upon all, for thou have power over all, and make as though thou
saw not the sins of men, because they should amend. For, thou love all
the things that are, and hate none of them who^ thou have made: For, thou
would have created nothing that thou had hated. And, how might any thing
endure, unless it were thy will? or, how could any thing be preserved,
except it were called of thee? But thou sparest all, for they are thine, o
Lord, which art the lover of souls. And * for that thou Wisd, 12, 16
art Lord of all things, it causes thee to spare all things.

And, not much unlike to this saying of Solomon, is the confession of Esdras
unto the Angel, which was sent to instruct him, where he says; I know
(Lord) that the 2, Esdr. 7. 62 63, 64. etc.
most High is called merciful, in that he has mercy upon them which are not
yet come into the world. And, that he has pity on those that walk in his
Law. And, that he is patient: for he long suffers those that have sinned,
as his creatures.

And, that he is liberal, for he will give as much as needs. And, that he
is of great mercy; for he overcomes in mercy, those that are present, those
that are past, and them that are to come. For, if he were not abundant in his
mercies, the world could not continue* nor they that have the possession
thereof.

He pardons also; for if he gave not of his goodness, that they which have
done 2, Esdras, 7. 68, 69, 70.
evil, might be relieved from their wickedness, the ten thousand part of men
should not remain alive.

And, if he being Judge, forgave not those that be healed with his word, and
took away the multitude of their sins, there should be very few people
left, among an innumerable multitude.

. 5.
Moreover; the Lord our God is so full of pity and compassion, that (as
Gueuara Anth. Gueuara.
says) he never sends down his wrath upon any people, as a punishment for
their offenses, but he first seeks, rather by admonishment, to bring them to
his mercy and favor, through their true humility, and unfeigned repentance.

And, many also are the testimonies which we find in holy Scripture,
concerning the great kindness and compassion of Almighty God to the penitent:
but among sundry other, I suppose (for breuities sake) that this one example
following may sufficiently serve to instruct us.

Jonas being sent of God to preach and Jonas. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc.
denounce his judgments against Niniuie, the cheifest City of the Assyrians,
entered into the same a days journey, (says the Text) and he cried, and said;
Yet forty days, and Niniuie shall be overthrown.

Whereupon, the King believing the speech of the Prophet* descended from his
princely throne, and speedily caused this Proclamation to be made, that neither
man nor beast should taste any food, nor drink any water, but let man and
beast (quoth he) put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let every
man turn from his evil ways, and from the wickedness that is in their
hands. And, * when the Almighty verse, 10.
saw their works, that they repented, and turned from their evil ways, he
repented himself of the evil that he had said he would do unto them, and
he did it not.

Which thing, (as the Text says) displeased Jonas exceedingly, and he was
angry. Notwithstanding, he prayed unto the lord, and said: I pray thee, o Lord,
was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I prevented
it, and fled unto Tarshish, for I knew, says he, that thou art a gracious
God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness: repenting thee of
the evil. etc.

After this, Jonas went out of the City, Jonas, 4, 1, 2.
and sat him down under the East side thereof, expecting what should be
done unto the same. And the Lord in one night, caused a Gourde to spring up
over Jonas, that it might be a shadow over his head, and a defense for him
against the heat of the Sun: but the next morning, he prepared a Worm
also, which smote the Gourd and it withered.

Then Jonas perceiving himself bereft Jonas, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc.
of this succor, and wexing faint through the extreme heat of the Sun,
wished in his heart to die, and said; It is better for me to die, then to live.

But the Lord God called unto him, and said: Jonas, do thou well to be
angry? Thou have pity on the Gourde, for which thou have not labored,
neither made it to grow, which came up in a night and perished in a night:
and should not I, (says the most merciful) spare Niniuie that great City,
wherein are six-score thousand persons, that cannot discern between their
right hand and their left, and also much cattle?

By the which speech of the Almighty, and example of his clemency, most
plainly it is approved, that the Lord our God, as S. James says, * is very
pitiful and merciful. James, 5, 11,


And that (as Jeremy says,) * he does Lam, 3, 33.
not punish willingly.

Nay more; so prone is the Almighty to pardon, and so much inclined to mercy,
that although (through man's unrighteousness) he be highly provoked to anger,
and even ready (as it were) to execute his fierce wrath upon the ungodly: yet
notwithstanding, it sometimes pleases him to spare a great company of wicked
offenders, by reason that some few righteous persons have their habitation
among them.

As may for example be seen in the eighteen of Genesis, where we find, that
(according to the six several peticions of the Patriarch Abraham) he was
content to grant, first, that if fifty; secondly, that if fortie-fiue;
thirdly, that if forty; fourthly, Gene. 18.
that if thirty; fifthly, that if twenty; lastly, that if but ten righteous
men could be found in all Sodom, the whole City should be spared for
those ten men's sake.

. 6.
Thus prove we our God to be, as David says, a pitiful God, and merciful:
slow Psalm, 86, 15
to anger, and great in kindness and truth.

Yea, such a God, whose compassion also is of no short co^tinuaunce, but as the
Psalmist says, * endures for ever and ever, upon Psalm, 103, 17
them that fear him: and his righteousness upon their childrens children.

Showing mercy unto thousands of them Deuteronomy. 5. 10.
that love him, and keep his commandments.

All ye [therefore] that worship the Dan, 3, 90.
Lord, bless the God of Gods: praise him, and acknowledge him; for his mercy
endures world without end.

And only by the reason thereof, all men living are preserved: according to
that speech of Jeremy in his Lamentations, where he says: * It is the Lords
mercies Lam, 3. 22.
that we are not consumed: because his co^passions fail not.

For, he has mercy, on whom he will Exodus, 33, 19
have mercy, and he has compassion, on whom he will have compassion.

Of the justice of Almighty God.
. 1.
AS it is a matter most needful, for every Christian believer to know, that
God his Creator, is very kind and merciful; so is it likewise greatly
necessary for him to remember, that the Lord of everlasting glory, is also
just and true. For, he that does continue in his sin, running the race of his
life in all kind of wilful negligence* and builds the whole burden of his
iniquities, upon the persuasion of his Makers mercy, without any reckoning or
regard of his justice; such a man for certainty, lives in a most loathsome
state, and is ready, at every step which he treads, to set his foot with
Pharao, in the perrilous path of presumption.

Contrariwise, he that does acknowledge God to be just, severe, and true, and
by too much hammering the same in his brain, loses, or lets slip, the
sweet taste, and feeling comfort of his unspeakable love and mercy,
entertaineth by this means, a servant more then he needs, who waiting
continually at his elbowe, never cease to prompt and perfect his master in *
Caines part, until the disquiet of his Gene, 4, 13,
mind, drive him to the soule-destroying sin of desperation.

Wherefore, since we have already found, (in our short discourse of Gods mercy)
the precious potion, which presently cures the dangerous disease, of all such
troublesome and distempering thoughts: Let us now likewise, by expressing some
few speeches of Gods justice. seek out such simpl^s* as may dreadfully keep
us, from the offense of too much boldness, in ouer-prouing the great patience,
of our most mighty Preserver.

. 2.
Understand therefore, that when the Altie descended from heaven in a cloud,
and proclaimed his Name unto his servant Moises in Mount Sinai, (because he
would have him know, that he was the God of justice, as well as the Lord of
mercy,) he uttered these speeches as he passed by him, saying; * The Lord,
the Lord, strong, Exodus, 34, 5, 6, 7,
merciful, and gracious; slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth:
reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and
sin.

Then follows;] And, not making the wicked innocent; visiting the iniquity
of the Fathers upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third
and fourth generation.

The same Moises likewise, that he might cause the people to consider Gods
justice, as well as make them mindful of his mercy, forgets not in his
repetition of the Law to tell them; That the Lord their God, is a Deuteronomy, 5, 9,
10.
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, even
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him: and showing mercy
unto thousands, of them that love him, and keep his commandments.

And, to the intent also that Gods justice might be as well remembered as his
mercy, the Prophet Jeremy, in his prayer which he made unto the Lord in
prison, spares not to speak of them both together, saying: * O Lord our GOD,
it is thou that Ierem, 32, 17, 18.
have made heaven and earth by thy great power, and by thine outstretched
arm, and there is nothing hid from thee; Thou show mercy unto thousands,
and recompencest the iniquity of the Fathers, into the bosom of their children
after them.

Besides, the Prophet David in the ninth Psalm, plainly affirms, that * the
Lord Psalm, 9, 16
our God is known by executing judgment.

. 3.
Saint Chrysostom (as we read) speaking generally of the justice of Almighty
God, makes breefely this definition thereof, saying; The justice of God is
that, whereby all Chrysostom.
those good things be performed, which do belong unto a true God, and can be
done by none but by him alone: As namely, his creating and making of those
things which be not; and his breeding, increasing, governing, and continual
preserving of those things which be.

But Saint Ambrose, speaking more particulerly of Gods justice, deuideth the
same into three parts, saying; The first is, that as Ambrose.
he is God, so he is the only Creator and conseruer of all things; which is
nothing else, but the goodness of his own nature.

The second is, that as he is Lord and master, so he governs all things by
just authority, according to the pleasure of his own will.

The third is, that as he is Judge, so he will deal rightly in judgment
with all men, and reward every one at his death, according to the works
which he has done in this life.

And, like as S. Ambrose makes mention of three sorts of justice to be in
God, so S. Augustine speaks of three special Augustine.
causes, which daily move men to sin against their Maker.

The first is, says he, when we foolishlie flatter our selves in our
iniquities, and think that the Almighty sees not our sins.

The second is, when we persuade with our selves, that GOD cares not for our
sins.

The third is, because we weigh not Gods justice, but supposing him to be only
merciful, we will therefore of purpose, vvexe more and more sinful.

But let not (my brother) says S. Bernard, Bernard.
the subtilties of satan so seduce thee, that by too much buzzing in thy
brain the greatness of Gods mercy, he thereby cause thee clean to extinguish,
the remembrance thou should have of thy Creators justice.

Neither be thou drawn at any time, through his inducements, to tempt and
abuse Ambrose.
the patience of the most Mighty: for it is the next way to shut thee out of
the grace of salvation, and utterly to disappoint thy self, of all the mercy
and favor which the Almighty was minded to have used toward thee.

. 4.
We read in the fifth of S. John, that our Savior Christ, having by the only
power of his word, miraculously made whole a man which had been diseased
eight and thirty years, chanced afterward to find the same fellow in the
Temple, and before they parted, he gave him this kind and freendly
admonishment to forewarne him, saying; * Behold, thou art made whole, John,
5, 8, 14,
sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

The like counsel also in effect, gives Sirach unto all men, in the fifth of
his book, where he says: Because thy sin is forgiven Ecclus, 5, 5, 6.
thee [my sonne] be not without fear, to heap sin upon sin: neither say
unto thy self, The mercy of God is great, he will forgive my manifold sins:
for, mercy and wrath come from him, and his indignation comes down upon
sinners.

And, * as his mercy is great, so is his punishment Ecclus, 16, 12
also: for, he judges a man according to his works.

. 5.
Perfect, (as Moises says) is the work of Deuteronomy, 32, 4.
the mighty GOD: For, all his ways are judgment. God is true, (says he) and
without wickedness: just and righteous is he.

If thou sin against him, and prove Osorius.
truly penitent, he will be found ready to grant thee forgiveness: but, if
thou persist in evil, and presume upon his mercy, the path thou walk in is
very perrillous, and thou daily stand in danger of his heavy wrath and
judgment.

For, although it sometimes please God, Mar. Aur.
(as Marcus Aurelius affirms) to forbear the sins and transgressions of
diverse persons, that persist in their evil living a great while, yet
notwithstanding, we ^ften see by example, that he does not s^are at length,
suddenly and unawares, to chastise such offenders, with so much the greater
chastisement, according to the measure of their many iniquities.

For, God is in his corrections (says he) like unto a man that gives a blow
to another body, the higher that he lyfteth up his hand, with the greater
force falls down the stroke: semblably, the more years that the Almighty
forbeareth our sins, the more will he afterward afflict us with punishment
for them, unless we repent.

. 6.
It is not (as Melancthon says) the great Phil. Mel.
wealth of worldly rich men, that can cause their Creator to withold his
wrath from the wicked: neither is it the magnificence of mighty men, that can
procure him to prove partial in judgment.

For, there is no iniquity with the Lord 2, Chro. 19 7.
our God, says Iehosaphat, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of reward.

He, being Lord over all, will spare no Wisd. 6. 7,
person, neither shall he fear any greatness: For, he has made the small and
great, and cares for all alike.

He, has no respect unto the persons of Job, 34, 19
Princes, neither regards he the rich more then the poor: for they be all
the work of his hands.

He, (as Tobie says) is just, and all his Tob, 3, 2,
works, and all his vvayes are mercy and truth: and he judges truly and
justly for ever.

For his eyes, are upon all the ways of the Iere, 32, 19,
sons of men, to give to every one according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his works.

Whosoever he be therefore, (as Vincentius Vincentius.
says) that walks in the way of the wicked, and yet notwithstanding looks
for the reward of the righteous, foolishlie flatters himself with a false
hope: and has more need of good counsel to reclaim him from error, then
he has of badde encouragement, to cause him continue his course.

. 7.
Behold, says the Almighty, all souls Ezech, 18, 4, 20.
are mine: both the soul of the Father, and also the soul of the son are
mine. The same soul that sins, it shall die: the son shall not bear the
iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the iniquity of the
son: but the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon himself.

For, every man shall bear his own burden. Gala, 6, 5,


And, as his works are found, so shall Luther.
his reward be given.

Also; It is most certain, (says Job) that Job, 34, 12,
the Lord our God will not do wickedlie, neither will the Almighty pervert
judgment.

He will not cast away an upright man, Job, 8, 20.
neither will he take the wicked by the hand.

For, as he is called the * God of judgment. Esaias, 30. 18,


So he is termed the rightful * Judge of Gene, 18, 25
all the world.

And therefore, he will undoubtedly, as David says, * judge the world in
righteousness, Psalm, 9, 8.
and the people with equity.

. 8.
Diverse examples also may be collected from the Scripture, concerning the
justice of almighty God, and the expressing of his punishments upon offenders:
but these few following show proof enough to persuade us. As namely: how he
punished * Achan Joshua, 7.
the son of Carmi, for his theft.

Nadab and Abihu, for presuming to offer Leuit, 10, 1,
* strange fire before him.

The two sons of Eli, * for abusing the 1, Sam, 4,
Priests office.

King Saul * for his disobedience, in sparing 1, Sam, 15,
Agag.

Gehazi, the servant of Eliah, * for his 2, Reg, 5,
covetousness.

Ananiah and his wife Saphira, for * lying Acts* 5,
unto the holy Ghost.

By which examples and the like, we may conjecture, that as the mercy of the
Lord is marvelous great, to those that fear and love him, so is his
punishment also, upon such as walk in wickedness, and wilfully presume to
offend him.

For, as the Angel said unto Esdras, there 2. Esdr, 7, 19
is no Judge more just then God, nor any more wise then the most High.

Of the ways of Almighty God.
. 1.
THE * way of the Lord or God, 2, Sa. 22. 31,
(as David says) is vncorrupt.

And * all his paths are mercy Psalm. 25. 10.
and truth.

Unto such as * keep his covenant, and Psalm, 103. 18
think upon his commandments to do them.

. 2.
God has not (as Calvin says) made Calvin.
manifest unto man one way only, but he has showed unto us all his ways:
that is, all that is needful to make us walk aright: so that we can never go
amiss, if we follow the direction which he in his holy Word has set down
before us.

. 3.
The ways of the Lord our God, (as S. Augustine.
Augustine says,) are to be taken for all manner of his doings: and how
soever it pleases him at any time to remove things, first to one side, then to
another, yet his ways therein are always righteous, and he best knows
wherefore he does so.

Besides, It is not to be doubted (says he) that God does well: yea, when
soever he suffers to be done, whatsoever things are evil done; for, he
does not suffer this, otherwise then by just judgment: and surely, all that
is just is good. Although therefore those things that be evil, inasmuch as
they be evil, be not good, yet it is good, that there should be things not
only that are good, but also that are evil. For, except it were good, that
there should be things that are evil, the Almighty goodness would by no
means suffer them to be. For, it is (no doubt) as easy a thing to him, not
to suffer that thing to be, which he would should not be, as it is to do
that, which he is willing to do.

Therefore, whatsoever happens here at any time against our wills, we ought
to understand, that it happens not but by the will of God, by his providence,
by his decree, by his commandment, and by his Law. And, although we know
not, why and wherefore it is done; yet we must consider, it is done according
to his wisdom that governs all things, and that it is not done without some
special cause.

For, the Lord our God, is righteous (as Psalm, 145. 17
the Psalmist says) in all his vvayes, and holy in all his works.

Yea; his vvayes are righteous; and the just Hose, 14, 10
shall walk in them, but the wicked shall fall therein.

For, as his ways are plain and right unto Ecclus, 39, 24
the just so are they stumbling blocks unto the wicked.

. 4.
But, to the end we should not imagine the ways of Almighty God to be like
our ways, nor his secret intents, to resemble, our devises, it has pleased
the Lord himself (in the prophecy of Esaias) fully to assure us of the
contrary by his own speech, where he says; * My thoughts o house of Esaias,
55, 8, 9
Israel, are not your thoughts, neither are your ways, my ways: For, as the
heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways; and
my thoughts above your thoughts.

And, an example partly to approve this speech of God, may be found in the
first Book of Samuel: where we read that when the Prophet (according as he
was appointed) went about to annoint a now King in steed of Saul, over
Israel, he first, after he came to Bethlehem, called for Elihab, 1, Sam, 16,
the eldest son of Ishai, a goodly tall fellow; and presently supposed him,
because he was of an high stature and comlie countenance, to be the man whom
God had chosen.

But, when the Lord refused him, ^ee called for the second son, and after
that, the third, and so in order, until he had seen seven of Ishais sons;
and at the last, when there remained only but one more, named David, the most
unlikely amongst all the rest, to be elected King, the Lord (far contrary both
to the expectation of his Father and the Prophet,) as soon as the lad came
into their presence, called unto Samuel, saying: Arise, and annoint him, for
this is he.

Giving us hereby to understand, that he respects not (as we do,) the
outvvarde appearance, and comely proportion, of every beautiful person, but
rather the godly inclination of man's mind, and the fervent affection of his
hidden heart.

. 5.
Now, although indeed we are not able, (as S. Jerome says) by reason of our
many Jerome. ^
infirmities to conceive Gods wonderful counsels, or attain to the knowledge
of his hidden purposes, for that his secret determinations seem like a deep
Gulf unto us; yet must we always in duty acknowledge him, (in whatsoever
he does) to be just and true in all his ways; and humbly confess, that he
keeps an upright and even hand, in the performing of all his promises
whatsoever.

And, far more fitly also will it become us, reverently to admire the marvelous
workings of the Almighty, then over busily to beat our brains, about
matters that are beyond our capacity: saying in all humility of spirit, as the
Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans says; * O the deepenesse of Rom, 11, 33
the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are
his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

Of the Word of God.
. 1.
THE Word of the Lord our God, Heb, 4, 12.
(as says the Apostle) is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then
any two edged sword.

It enters through, even unto the dividing in sunder of the soul and the
spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts,
and the intents of the heart.

. 2.
The Word of God, (as Saint Ambrose Ambrose.
says) is the pleasant Garden of Paradise, where, the Tree of knowledge is
appointed by God unto all the elect: In the midst whereof, stands the Tree of
Life, which is Christ our Savior. No Cherubin with a fiery sword (says he)
keeps the entrance, but it is opened by the instinct of the holy Ghost, and
the light of the Gospel to all that are hungry.

In it, are the Rivers of lively water, by which, the Church of all the
faithful is overflowed and cherrished, and the minds of the godly enriched
with the treasures of heavenly graces.

Therein also, are Trees of all sorts, very fair and fruitful; that is, the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, planted by Gods own hand: and the voice of
God continually walking, earnestly seeking the salvation of mankind, and
leading them unto the way of life.

. 3.
The Word of God, (as Saint Augustine Augustine.
says) is the womb of God, wherein all his Children are conceived, carried,
borne, and nourished.

It is the Lantern, whereby our feet Fulgentius.
may be directed: and the true Light, by which our paths may be guided unto
Christ.

It is, as it were the Lydian Touchstone, Ambrose.
which rightly tries all the opinions and teachings of men, whether they be
true, or counterfeit.

It is (as the Apostle says) the * sword of Ephe, 6, 17
the Spirit; And the * power of God unto Rom, 1, 16,
salvation, to every one that believes.

It is the mystery or secret of the will of Romans 16. 25
GOD.

And his Letters, or freendly Epistles, sent Augustine.
unto us from our heavenly Country, to instruct us in faith, and godliness of
life.

It is the lively meat or food of man's Ambrose.
soul, with the which it is nourished, fed, and daily governed.

It is the wholesome doctrine of the holy Jerome.
Ghost, wherein is contained, whatsoever is needful to be known of us in this
life, concerning our future felicity in the world to come.

. 4.
The very authority of Gods Word alone, is (as S. Augustine says) more the^
all Augustine.
the sharpness of man's imagination or invention: for it has one constant,
plain, simple, and holy meaning, wherein the truth consists; by which only
we fight and overcome.

And, whatsoever in argument (says S. Gregory) has not authority from the
Gregory.
Word of GOD, it may well be avoided, with the same ease with which it is
affirmed.

For, as whatsoever gold is without the Origin.
Temple, is not sanctified: so vvhat-soeuer sense is without the holy
Scriptures, although unto some it seem wonderful, yet it is not holy, because
it is not contained in the sense of the Scriptures.

. 5.
The entrance, as David says, into the Psalm 119. 130.
Word of the Lord, shows light: and gives understanding unto the simple.

For, it is * proved to be most pure. It Ps. 119, 140. Ecclus. 1. 5, Ps. 119,
160 Psalm. 119, 72, 104,
is * the wel-spring of wisdom. And the * beginning of it is truth.

The Law of thy mouth, o Lord, says he, is better unto me then thousands
of gold and silver. By thy precepts have I gotten understanding.

And, by thy commandments, thou have Psa. 119, 98
made me wiser then mine enemies.

Therefore love I thy commandments Psalm, 119 127,
above gold: yea, above most fine gold.

I rejoice [also] at thy Word, as one that Psalm, 119. 162.
finds a great spoil.

And, my soul (o Lord) has kept thy Psalm, 119. 167.
testimonies; for, I love them exceedingly.

. 6.
Again; The Law of the Lord [our Psalm, 19, 7, 8, 9, 10.
God] as the Psalmist says, is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony
of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple: the statutes of the
Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure,
and gives light unto the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures
for ever: the judgments of the Lord are truth, they are righteous altogether;
and more are they to be desired the^ gold: yea, then much fine gold, they are
sweeter also then Honey, and the Honey comb.

By them, o Lord, (says he) is thy servant Psalm, 19, 11
made circumspect, and in keeping of them, there is great reward.

. 7.
VVhat-soeuer things are written before Rom, 15, 4,
time, are written (as the Apostle says) for our learning: that we through
patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.

For, the whole Scripture, (says he) is 2, Tim, 3. 16 17.
given by inspiration of God: and is profitable to teach, to convince, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be absolute,
being made perfect unto all good works.

Yea; vvhat-soeuer is required for our salvation, Chrysostom.
is already contained (as S. Chrysostom says) in the holy Scripture. He that
is ignorant, shall find there what he may learn: he that is stubborn and a
sinner, may find there scourges of the judgments to come, the which he may
fear: and he that is troubled, may find there the joyful promises of
everlasting life; through the beholding of the which, he may be stirred up to
do good works.

Finally, the Scripture of God, (as S. Basil Basil.
says) is like unto an Apothicaries shop, full stored with medicines of sundry
sorts: so that every man may there choose, a convenient remedy for his disease.

And surely, (as Beda says) without the Beda.
understanding of the will of God, by the sacred Scriptures, our sight is but
blindness, our knowledge, ignorance; our wisdom, foolishnes; and our devotion,
deuilishnes.

. 8.
Now, although indeed, (as Granado Granado.
says) we must confess with Saint Peter, that there are some places in the
Book of God, * hard to be understood: yet may we 2. Pet. 3, 16.
likewise (says he) say with the same Apostle, that those places are hard, to
such as are unlearned and unstable, which pervert and wrest them to their own
destruction.

For, every word of God, (as Solomon Prou, 30. 5.
says) is pure.

And, the precepts of the Lord are plain, Prou, 8, 9.
to him that will understand: and easy unto all them that desire to find
knowledge.

Nay more; It cannot be possible, (says Vincentius) that, that man, which
with earnest study, and fervent desire, often reads Vincentius.
the holy Scriptures, should evermore be forsaken, (or, left without
understanding of Gods holy will:) For, although he want the instruction of
learned men, yet God himself from above, entering into his heart, by his holy
Spirit lightneth his mind, pours his beams of grace into his wits, opens
those things that before were hidden, and becomes unto such a man a
Schoolemaister of that he knew not, only if he will do so much as lies in him.

Besides; the holy Ghost, as S. Augustine Augustine.
says) has by his wisdom, so notably and wholsomely tempered the Word, that
he might with the easy places thereof, satis-fie the greedy hunger of men,
and with the darkest places of it, take away our lothsomnesse. For, there is
no point almost found of the darkest meaning in one place, but it is plainly
spoken of, and easy to be understood in another.

So that if the Gospel of Christ be yet hid, it is hid, as the Apostle says,
* to them 2, Cor, 4, 3, 4.
that perrish: whose minds, satan, the god of this world, has blinded, to
the end, the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of
GOD, should not shine unto them.

The certain truth of which Gospel, is so highly to be esteemed, and
reverently regarded, that if an Angel from heaven, Gala, 1, 8,
should come and preach unto us any other doctrine, then what we find therein
already contained, we ought for his tidings to count him accursed.

Of the works of God.
. 1.
THE works of Almighty God, although Chrysostom.
of themselves (as S. Chrysostom says) they are infinite in number, yet may
they all be reduced into these five heads following: namely, his work of
Creation: his work of Conservation: his work of Redemption: his work of
Justification: and his work of Predestination.

. 2.
By the word of the Lord, says David, Psalm. 33, 6, 9,
were the Heavens made, and all the host of them, by the breath of his mouth:
For, he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood.

As soon as he said, Let the Earth be 2, Esdr. 16, 47,
made, it was made: Let the Heaven be created, and it was created.

By his word [also,] were the Stars verse, 48,
established, and he knows the number of them.

Yea; he * counts the number of the Psalm, 147, 4.
stars, and calls them all by their names.

At his commandment [likevvise] the Ecclus, 39, 17
water stood as an heap: and at the word of his mouth, the waters gathered
themselves.

He also, has shut the sea, in the midst of 2. Esdras, 16 50.
the waters: and with the word of his mouth, has he hanged the earth
upon the waters.

. 3.
Thy word, o Lord, says David, endures Psalm, 119. 89, 90, 91,
for ever in heaven: thy truth also remains from one generation to another:
thou have laid the foundation of the earth, and it abides. They continue even
to this day by thine ordinances, for all things serve thee.

The Heavens are thine; the earth also is Psalm, 89. 11
thine; thou have laid the foundation of the World, and all that therein is.

Thou spakest expressly in the first creation, 2, Esdras, 6, 38.
(even the first day) and co^maundedst that the Heaven and Earth should be
made, and the work followed thy word. etc.

Upon the second day, thou createdst the 2, Esdr. 6, 41.
heavenly air, and commaundedst it, that, going between, it should make a
division betvveene the waters; that the one part might remain above, and the
other beneath.

Upon the third day; thou co^maundedst, that the waters should be gathered
together 2. Esd. 6, 42.
in the seventh part of the earth: six parts have thou dried up, and kept
them, to the intent that men might sow, and occupy husband^y therein.

Upon the fourth day, thou createdst the 2, Esdr. 6. 45. 46.
light of the Sun, and of the Moon, and the order of the S^arres: and gave
them a charge, that they should do service, even unto Man that was for to be
created.

Upon the fifth day, thou sayd'st unto 2, Esdr. 6. 47. 48.
the seventh part, where the waters were gathered, that it should bring forth
beasts, as fowls and fishes; and it was so. For, the dumme waters, and without
life, brought forth living things, at the commandment of GOD, that the
Nations might praise thy wondrous works.

Upon the sixth day, thou gave commandment 2. Esdr. 6. 53
unto the Earth, that before thee it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and
creeping things.

And besides this, Adam also, whom verse, 54,
thou made Lord over all the works which thou have created. Of him come
we all, and the people also whom thou have chosen.

. 4.
He that lives for ever, made al things Ecclus. 18. 1, 2.
together, (says Sirach) the Lord, who only is just: and there is none other
but he, and he remains a victorious King for ever. He orders the world
with the power of his hand, and all things obey his will: for, he governs
all things by his power, and deuideth the holy things from the profane.

O how delectable (says he) are all the Ecclus, 42, 22, 23,
works of God, and to be considered even to the sparks of fire: they live
all, and endure for ever: and when soever need is, they are all obedient.

They are all double one against another, verse, 24, 25
he has made nothing that has any fault: the one commends the goodness of
the other, and who can be satis-fied with beholding Gods glory?

For, all the works of the Lord our God Ecclus, 39, 33, 34,
are good, and he gives every one in due season, and when need is: So that a
man need not say this is worse then that, for in due season; they are all
worthy praise.

. 5.
The heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm, 19, 1, 2,
(says David) and the firmament shows his handie work: Day unto day,
utters the same, and night unto night, teaches knowledge.

The Sun also, a marvelous instrument, Ecclus, 43, 2, 3, 4,
when it appears, declares at his going out, the work of the most mighty
God. At noone, it burns the earth, and who may abide the heat thereof? It
burns the mountains three times more then he that keeps a furnace with
continual heat. It [likewise] casts forth fiery vapors, and with shining
beams it blinds the eyes.

Great is the Lord our God that made it, Ecclus. 43, 5,
and by his commandment he causes it to run hastily.

For, it turns round about heaven, in 1, Esdr. 4. 34
one day, and runs again into his own place.

The Moon also, has he made to appear, Ecclus, 43, 6. 7
according to her season: that she should be a declaration of the time, and a
sign for the world.

The remembrance of solemn feasts are verse, 8.
appointed by her: she is a light that diminishes, and increases again. The
month is called after the name thereof: and she grows wonderously in her
changing.

The Army of Heaven also, is in the Ecclus. 43. 9
height in the firmament of heaven: it gives a clear and glorious shine. This
is the cleerenes of the stars, the beautiful apparel of heaven; and the
ornament that shines in the high places of the Lord.

By the commandment of the Holy verse, 10,
one, they continue in their order, and not one of them fails in his watch.

Look upon the Rainbow, and praise Ecclus, 43. 11
him that made it, very beautiful is it in the brightness thereof.

It compasses the heaven about with a verse, 12,
glorious circle, and the hands of the most High have bended it.

Through his commandment also, he Ecclus. 43, 13
makes the snow to fall, and the thunder of his judgment to smite speedily.

At the word of his mouth, the treasures verse, 14,
are opened, and the clouds flee forth as the fowls.

For, in his power has he strengthened Ecclus, 43, 15
the clouds; and by his might has he broken the haylestones.

The Mountains melt at the sight of verse, 16,
him; and the South-winde blows according to his will.

The sound of his thunder beats the Ecclus, 43, 17
earth, and so does the storm of the North: The vvhirle-winde also, as byrds
that fly, scatters the snow; and the falling down thereof, is as the
Grasshoppers that light upon the ground.

The eye meruaileth at the beauty of the verse, 18,
whitenes thereof, and the heart [of man] is astonished at the rain of it.

He also, pours out the frost upon the Ecclus, 43, 19
earth like salt, and when it is frosen, it sticks on the tops of pales.

When the cold North-winde blovveth, verse, 20.
an Ice is frosen of the water, and it abides upon all the gatherings
together thereof: and covers the^ over, as it were with a breastplate.

It [likewise] deuoureth the mountains, Ecclus. 43. 21
and burns the Wilderness, and destroys that, that is green, like fire.

But, the remedy of all these, (says Sirach) verse, 22,
is when a cloud comes hastily: and when a dew comes upon the heat, it
refreshes it.

. 6.
With all manner of living beasts, (as the wise man says) has the Lord our
God Ecclus, 16, 30
covered the face of the earth; and they shall all be turned into it again.

In the desert [likewise] has he made 2, Esdras, 16, 52, 53,
springes of water, and Pooles upon the tops of Mountains, to pour out
floods from the high Rocks, to water the ground.

Yea, he has made Man also, and put his heart in the midst of his body; and
given him breath, life, and understanding.

So that among all the works of God, Augustine.
his creation of Man (as S. Augustine says) is the cheifest, and has the most
principal, or first place.

For, in creating all other creatures but Ambrose.
Man, he said, FIAT: Let this be, and that be; but, in creating Man, he
spoke in the person of the Trinity, saying; FACIAMVS, Let * us make Man,
according to our similitude. etc.

(But, here by the way, we ought thus much to understand; that Man, as Beza
Beza. ^
says, is the Image of God, neither as touching his body, neither yet as
touching his soul; but as touching the principality and dominion, that God
has given him.

For, GOD calls the principality and Chrisostoms.
lordship that he gave to Adam, his Image and likeness; because he made him
Emperor and Ruler, over all things upon earth.

Besides, the Image of Almighty God, in Man, is referred, as S. Augustine
says, unto Augustine.
the works of righteousness, and true sanctification of our lives. As the
speech of God himself imports in the Law, where he says: Be * ye holy;
because I the Lord Leuit, 19. 2.
your God am holy.

And, the very words likewise of the Apostle, testify as much unto us, where
he says: * Put ye on the new man, which Ephe, 4, 24
after God is created unto righteousness, and true holiness.)

Moreover; God has created Man, as S. Bernard says, four several ways. The
Bernard.
first, without Man and Woman, as Adam out of the earth. The second, of man
without woman, as Eve of Adams ribbe. The third, of man and woman, as we are
all now borne into the world. The fourth and last, of a virgin without man, as
Christ our Savior, of the blessed virgin Mary.

And, of all the creatures of GOD under the Sun, (says Lyra) there is none
Lyra.
more noble and greater then Man: for, all things in the World are ^ut under
his power.

. 7.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works! Psalm, 104. 24, 25,
(says David) in wisdom have thou made them all; the earth is full of thy
riches: so is the sea, great and wide; for, therein are things creeping
innumerable, both small beasts and great.

There go the ships, and the Leuiathan verse, 26.
also, whom thou have made to play therein.

They that sail over the Sea, tell of the Ecclus, 43, 24, 25,
perrils thereof, and when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat:
For, there be strange and wondrous works; diverse manner of beasts; and the
creation of Whales.

Yea; such men see the works of the Psalm, 107, 24, 25. 26, 27, etc.
Lord, and behold his wonders in the deep. For, he commands and rayseth
the stormy wind, and it lifts up the waves thereof. They mount up to the
heaven, and descend down to the deep, so that their soul melts for
trouble. They are tossed to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and all
their cunning is gone.

Then they cry unto the Lord in their verse, 28, 29
trouble, and he brings them out of their distress. He turns the storm to
calm, so that the wau^ (...)ereof are still.

When they are quieted, they are glad; verse, 30.
and he brings them to the Haven where they would be.

Let them therefore confess before the verse, 31,
Lord, his loving kindness, and his vvonderfull works before the sons of
men.

And let them exalt him in the congregation verse, 32,
of the people, and praise him in the assembly of the Elders.

For, by his word, he stilleth the vvinde: Ecclus, 43, 23
and by his counsel he appeaseth the deep, and planteth Islands therein.

. 8.
Behold, (says Solomon,) the work of Ecclesi. 7. 15
GOD: for, who can make straight, that which he has made crooked?

I know, says he, that whatsoever God Ecclesi. 3. 14
shall do, it shall be for ever; to it can no man add, and from it can none
diminish: for, God has done it, that they should fear before him.

. 9.
Among the Gods, says David, there is Psalm, 86, 8,
none like unto thee, o Lord: neither is there any that can do like thy
works.

Thou have made thy wonderful works Psalm, 40 5.
so many, that none can count in order to thee, thy thoughts toward us: I
vvoulde declare and speak of them, (says he) but they are more then I am able
to express.

. 10.
Who can, (as the Psalmist says) declare Psalm, 106, 2,
the noble acts of the Lord [our God?] or show forth all his praise?

Which made heaven; and earth; the sea; Psa^, 146, 6,
and all that therein is. [And,] which keeps his fidelity for ever. Which
[also] verse, 7,
executes justice for the oppressed: and gives bread unto the hungry. Psalm,
147 8, 9,


Which covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and
makes the grass to grow upon the Mountains. Which gives to beasts their
food, and feeds the young Ravens that cry unto him.

Praise him, and magnify him as much as Ecclus, 43, 30
ye can yet does he far exceed: exalt him with all your power, and be not
weary, yet can ye not attain unto it.

Neither may the number of his works be counted. For, * his works, are
wonderful: Ecclus, 11, 4,
his works are glorious: secret and unknown are his works among men.

And * we have seen but a few thereof. Ecclus, 43, 32 Ecclus, 16, 21
For, the most * part of them are hid.

. 11.
To finish therefore this first point; I will say, as Jesus the son of Sirach
says: As for the wondrous works of the Lord, there Ecclus, 18, 5, 6.
may nothing be taken from them; neither can any thing be put unto them;
neither may the ground of them be found out. But when a man has done his
best, he must begin again: and when he thinks to come to an end, he must
return again to his labor. Also; * when we have spoken Ecclus, 43, 27
much, we cannot attain unto them: But this is the sum of all, that GOD is
all.

He [onely,] has set his works in good Ecclus, 16, 26
order from the beginning; and part of them has he sundred from the other when
he first made them.

He has garnished them for ever, and verse, 27, 28
their beginnings so long as they shall endure: they are not hungry, nor
wearied in their labors, neither cease from their offices. None of them
hinders another; neither was any of them disobedient unto his words.

For, all his works are exceeding good, Ecclus, 39, 16
and all his commandments are done in due season.

A man need not to say; What is this? Ecclus. 39, 21
Wherefore is that? For, he has made all things for their own use.

Yea; he [alone,] has garnished the excellent Ecclus. 42, 21
works of his wisdom. And, he is from everlasting to everlasting, and for
ever: unto him may nothing be added; neither can he be diminished: he has no
need of any Counselor.

What Man is by nature: how short and uncertain the days of his life are: And
how sure it is, that after this life ended, we must all appear before the
Judgment seat of God, to receive, every man his wages or reward, according to
the works which he has done in this life.
WISDOM. 2. verse, 23. 24. God created Man without corruption, and made him
after the Image of his own likeness; Nevertheless, through the envy of the
devil, Death came into the world. Of Man: and of his natural inclination.
. 1.
WE read in the third of Genesis, that when Almighty GOD pronounced the
heavy sentence of his great displeasure, conceived against our first Father
Adam, for tasting the fruit of the forbidden Tree, he closed up the end of
his speech with this Period; telling Adam, that (as concerning his body) he
was created of no better thing then the very dust of the earth: and Gene. 3. 19.
that into dust he should be turned again.

We read also, that the Prophet David, in the 144. psalm, demanded of God
this question, saying; Lord, what is Man, Psalm. 144. 3.
that thou regardest him? or the son of Man, that thou think upon him?

And, being sufficiently instructed by the holy Ghost, he presently gives
answer in the same place to his own question, saying: * Man is like to
vanity; his days are verse, 4.
like a shadow that vanishes.

. 2.
What is Man? says Sirach, Whereto Ecclus. 18. 7
serves he? What good or evil can he do?

Surely, all Men are vain by nature: and Wisd. 13. 1.
are ignorant of God.

Every Man is a beast by his own knowledge. Iere, 10, 14.


And in his best estate, he is altogether Psalm, 39, 5,
vanity.

. 3.
By one Man, namely, by Adam, (says Rom, 5, 12.
the Apostle) sin entered into the world.

And, by nature, we are all the children Ephe, 2, 3,
of wrath.

For every man from his youth is given Ecclus. 17, 14
to evil: and their stony hearts cannot become flesh.

. 4.
I know, o Lord, (says Jeremy) that the Iere, 10. 23,
way of Man is not in himself, neither is it in Man, to walk and to direct
his steps.

The heart of Man purposes his way; Prou. 16, 9.
but the Lord does direct his steps.

For, the steps of man, are ruled by the Prou. 20, 24
Lord: how can a man then understand his own ways?

Yea; the Kings heart [also,] is in the hand Prou. 21. 1.
of the Lord: and as the Rivers of waters, he turns it wheresoever it
pleases him.

. 5.
A mortal man, (says Sirach) has but a Ecclus, 18, 29
dead heart.

And his natural inclination leads him Rom, 7, 23.
captive unto the law of sin.

The imagination of man's heart [also] is Gene, 8, 21.
evil, even from his youth.

Yea; all the imaginations of the thoughts Gene, 6, 5,
of man's heart, are only evil continually.

And, like as when one sifteth any thing, Ecclus. 27, 4.
the filthiness of that which he sifteth, remains in the bottom of the Sieve:
so the uncleanness of man, continues still in his thought.

For, the very heart of man, is defiled and Arnobius.
unclean: and all manner of sins committed by man, proceed from thence; as
from a Fountain full of all evil and mischief. For, every sin committed,
is conceived first in the heart, and afterward finished in the word or fact.

Yea; from thence, even out of the heart Mark, 7, 21 22, 23.
of man, proceed evil thoughts; adulteries; fornications; murders; thefts;
covetousness; wickedness; deceit; uncleanness; a wicked eye; backbyting; pride;
foolishness. All these things, come from within, and defile a man.

. 6.
Man is borne in iniquity, (says David) Psalm, 51, 5,
and conceived in sin.

For, the Corn of evil ^eede, has been 2, Esdr. 4* 30
sown in the heart of Adam, from the beginning.

And, in many things we sin all. James. 3, 2.


. 7.
Certainly, says Solomon, there is no man Ecclesi. 7. 22
just in the earth; that does good, and sins not.

For, we have already proved, that all, Rom, 3, 9. 10.
both Jews and Gentiles, are under sin. As it is written; There is none
righteous: no, not one.

If we say, we have no sin; we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. [Nay 1. Ioh. 8. 10,
more,] If we say, we have not sinned, we make God a liar: and his word, [or
doctrine] is not in us.

For, who can say, I have made my heart Prou, 20, 9,
clean: I am innocent from my sin?

Seeing] all men are gone out of the way: Psalm, 14, 3,
they are all corrupt; there is none that does good; no, not one.

8.
What is man, (says Job) that he should Job, 15, 14,
be clean? and he that is borne of a Woman, that he should be just.

Behold, God found no steadfastness in verse, 15, 16,
his Saints; yea, the heavens are unclean in his sight: how much more then,
is man abominable and filthy, which drinks iniquity like water.

Behold, God found no steadfastness in Job, 4, 18, 19,
his servant, and laid folly upon his Angels; how much more, in them that
dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which shall be
destroyed before the Moth?

The Moon also, and the stars, are unclean Job, 25, 5, 6.
in the sight of GOD, how much more, man, a worm? even the son of man,
which is but a worm?

. 9.
Verily, (says Esdras) there is no man among 2, Esdr. 8, 35.
them that be borne, but he has done wickedly: nor any among the faithful,
which has not done amiss.

For, there is no man that sins not. 2, Chr. 6. 36.


But as in every Pomegranate, there is some Plato.
grain rotten: so is there no man, but has some evil condition.

Yea; what soul so-euer is borne in the Origin.
flesh, it is undoubtedly defiled, with the filth of wickedness and sin.

And, man's heart also, is so set upon evil, Jerome.
even from his child-hoode, that the nature of man, is not one day from his
birth, free without sin.

. 10.
We have all, (as Esaias says) been as an Esaias, 64, 6,
unclean thing: and all our righteousness, is as filthy and polluted clowtes.

Yea, such is the corruption of our wicked nature, (by reason of original
sin received by descent from our first Father Adam) that * we are not able of
our selves, to 2, Cor, 3, 5,
think any [good] thing, as of our selves: but our sufficiency, is of God.

And, it is he that works in us, both the Philip, 2, 13,
* will and the deed; even of his good pleasure.

For, we, of our selves, have neither liberty Augustine.
nor ability to do the will of God: but are subject to sin, and shut up
under the burden thereof.

And, ever since that free will has been Gregory.
corrupt in our first father Adam, we are not able to will any good thing;
except we be helped by the grace of God.

All manner of evil, we are indeed most Musculus.
prone to practice, and ready to run into by nature: but it is God only,
that directs our mind to goodness; and gives us the grace to do well.

Yea; all the knowledge that we have of Calvin.
Gods holy will, and our obedience thereunto, comes only by the grace and
favor of God toward us: who teaches us by his Word; gives understanding by
his Spirit; and frames our hearts, through his gracious assistance, to obey him.

We ought therefore, to boast of nothing; Cyprian.
because we have nothing of our own that is good.

For, the first man Adam, having a wicked 2, Esdr. 3, 21
heart, transgressed, and was overcome: and so are all they that are borne of
him.

Upon which consideration also, of man's infirmity, through Adams fall, we
find that the holy man Esdras, in the 7. chapter of his second Book, (even as
it were in the anguish of his heart) vehemently cries out, saying; O Adam, what
have thou done? 2, Esdr. 7, 48.
For, in that, that thou have sinned, thou art not fallen alone; but the fall
also redoundeth to us that come of thee.

And; by reason that Adam has sinned, Augustine.
through his own free will, (says S. Augustine,) he has thereby cast both
himself, and all that come of his stock into necessity.

So that [now againe] if we live well, or Augustine.
that we understand aright, we have it of God: of our selves we have nothing
but only sin; that is within us.

And surely, deserved pain, [through Adams Augustine.
fault,] would bring al men into everlasting death: unless the undeserved
grace of God, [through faith in Christ] delivered some from it.

. 11.
All men, in the first man, namely Adam, were created of God, (says S.
Ambrose) Ambrose.
without vice, or fault; and all our nature was sound, and in health: but by
the sin of the same man, we have lost it.

Also; We say truly, in affirming, that the Augustine.
first man only could fulfill that he would, when as yet his free will of
choice was sound, and whole, before the fault.

But man misvsing his free will, lost both Augustine.
himself, and his will.

The first man, was created in nature, Augustine.
without blame in nature: without fault, he was created upright: he did not
make him self upright: It is known what he made himself; falling out of the
hand of the Potter, he was broken. For, he that made him, did govern him,
but he was willing to forsake him that made him, and God suffered him so to
do, as it were, saying thus: Let him forsake me, that he may find himself;
and that he may by his misery prove, that without me, he can do nothing. By
this mean therefore, would God show unto man, what free will is able to do
without God.

Free Will before the fall of Adam, was Augustine.
an upright free will: before which, fire and water was laid of God, and the
first man did reach his hand unto which he would: he did choose fire, and
forsook water. See therefore the righteous Judge; the same which man being
free, did choose, he did receive; he would have evil, and the same did follow
him.

We had free will before sin, to work Chrysostom.
well, but after sin we had none; because we were not able by our own power
and strength, after sin, to escape from the power of the devil. But as a
ship when the stern is broken, is driven hither and thither where the tempest
will: so by the devil we are driven from one sin to another; neither
hitherto can we do any thing, but even as the devil will. And except GOD
do deliver us with the strong hand of his mercy, we shall remain in the
bonds and chains of sins unto death. For, by our own wills and negligence
we are bound; but it is only by the mercies of almighty God, that we are
loosed, and set at liberty.

. 12.
No man can believe, hope, or love; unless Augustine.
he will; (says S. Augustine) yet even the self same will, to believe, hope,
and love, comes not of our selves, but from God.

We (indeed) thinking, believe; thinking, we speak; thinking, we do
whatsoever Augustine.
we do: But, as touching that, that appertains unto the way of godliness,
and true worship of God, we are not able to think any thing, as of our
selves; but our ableness comes of God. For, our own hearts, and our own
thoughts, are not in our own powers.

Also; that we should believe in GOD, and live godly; it lies not in the will
or running Augustine.
of man, but in the grace and mercy of God: Not, that we ought not, both to
will, and to run; but, because that God himself, (by his holy Spirit) does
work in us, both to will, and also to run.

. 13.
Man's natural free will then, we do verily Maxentius.
believe (says Maxentius) is of no more value, but only for carnal or
worldly desires: or such deseruings, which possibly may seem glorious among
men, but not with God. For, those things which belong unto everlasting life, we
can neither think, neither will, neither desire, neither perform; except it
be by the infusion and operation of the holy Ghost.

Besides; our prayers are always made Ambrose.
in vain; if it be in our own free will, to do what we will.

Let no man (therefore) flatter himself; Augustine.
for, of his own, he is a very satan: he has that of GOD only, whereby
he is blessed.

. 14.
There is a sentence in Salomons Proverbs, where the Wiseman thus speaks,
saying; * The preparations of the heart, are Prou, 16, 1,
in man: but the answer of the tongue, is of the Lord.

Upon which words, S. Augustine thus Augustine.
writes. Some, not understanding this place well, are deceived, insomuch that
they believe, that to prepare the heart, that is, to begin goodness, without
the help of the grace of God, pertains unto man.

But God forbid, (says he) that the children of promise should so understand
it, as though thereby they would confute the Lord, whereas they have heard
him, saying; * Without me, ye can do nothing. And John, 15, 5,
say, Behold, we are able of our selves to prepare our heart, and by that to
think some goodness. God forbid that any man should understand it so; save the
proud defenders of their will. For, therefore it is written: It is the man's
part to prepare the heart, and the answer of the tongue is of the Lord;
because the man prepares the heart: yet for all that, man cannot prepare his
heart, without the help of God. For, God does so work in the hearts of men,
and in their free will it self, that every good thought, good counsel, and
all good motions of the will or mind, is of God.

He does first prevent us with his grace, Gregory.
that we may be willing, (to leave evil, and do good,) and afterward, with
his helping hand also he does follow us, least we should will in vain.

Yea; It is God that works in us, both Augustine.
to will, and also to work. We will then, but it is God that works in us,
even to will. We work then, but it is God also that does work in us, the
work; even freely, of his own good will. It is expedient for us, both to
believe this, and also to confess this. This is godly; this is true, that our
confession may be humble, and lowly: and that all goodness may be ascribed unto
GOD alone.

No man can come unto me, says Christ, John, 6, 44,
except the Father which has sent me, draw him.

Neither can any man say, that Jesus is the 1, Cor, 12, 3
Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

For, to believe, is the gift of God. As Mat, 16, 17,
Christ's own words testify unto Peter, where he says; * Blessed art thou
Simon, the son of Jonas: For, flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father, which is in heaven.

Also, It is written in the Prophets: And John, 6, 45.
they shall be all taught of GOD. Every man therefore, that has heard, and
has learned of the Father, comes unto me.

Yea;] All that the Father gives me* John, 6, 37, ^
shall come to me: and him that comes unto me, I cast not away.

. 16.
Moreover;] Except a man be borne again, John, 3, 3.
says Christ, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

That is, as our Savior himself expounds it: Except that a man be borne of
Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: John, 3, 6,
and that, that is borne of the Spirit, is Spirit.

A man can receive nothing, except it be John, 3, 27.
given him from heaven.

. 17.
Why do men [then] presume so much Augustine.
of the possibility of nature? (says S. Augustine) seeing it is wounded; it
is ^^angled; it is troubled; it is lost. It behooves us rather, truly to
confess it, then falsely to defend it.

For* in our flesh the evil lurketh; and Bullenger.
out of us iniquity arises. Whereupon, the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Romans, says; * I know, that in me, that is, in my Rom, 7, 18, 19.
flesh, dwells no good thing. For, to will, is present with me: but I find
no means to perform that which is good. For, I do not the good thing, which I
would, but the evil* which I would not, that do I.

Also, it furthermore seems, that the very consideration of this our weak
and sinful nature, whereunto we are yoked, was the only cause, which enforced
the same Apostle, within 5. verses following, vehemently to break forth into
these speeches, saying: O wretched man that I am; who shall deliver Rom, 7, 24.
me from the body of this death?

But comforting and recovering himself, through faith in his Redeemer, he
presently makes this reply in the next verse after, saying: * I give thanks
unto God, through Romans 7, 25.
Jesus Christ our Lord.

For, he delivers us from the wrath of 1, The. 1. 10
God to come.

And GOD has given us the victory 1, Cor. 15, 57.
through him.

Yea; the victory is wholely gotten in his Augustine.
Name, that has taken man upon him, and has lived without sin: that in him,
and through him, being both the Priest and the Sacrifice, remission and
forgiveness of sins should be obtained and given. That is to say, by the
Mediator of GOD and Man, that man Jesus Christ, by whom the purging of our
sins being made, we are reconciled unto God. For, men be not separated
from God, but by sins; whereof the purging is not made, or which are not
purged in this life, by our own virtue and strength, but by the mercy of God:
by his pardon and clemency, and not by our own power. For, the same small
virtue and strength, that is called ours, is granted and given unto us, by the
merciful goodness of Almighty GOD.

Thus much, only to show what Man is of himself by nature.

Of the shortness and uncertainty of Man's life.
. 1.
IT follows next to be considered what the life of Man is; and so
consequently, how short and uncertain the same. To begin therefore first
with Man's life, we find in the fourth of S. James, that the Apostle does not
there compare, or liken it to smoke; but plainly says, * It is even James, 4,
14.
a vapor [or smoake*] that appears for a little time, and afterward
vanishes awav.

We read also in the second Book of Samuel, that the subtle woman of Tekoah,
pleading with King David for the reconcilement 2. Sam. 14. 4
of his son, compares the life of Man to no better thing then water spilt
upon the ground: which being once down, can never be gathered up again.

Besides; the Prophet Esaias, with the aforesaid S. James, and S. Peter, do all
three agree in one sentence about the life of man, Esaias* 40, 6. lames, 1. 10.
1. Pet. 1, 24,
saying; * All flesh is grass; and the glory of man, is as the flower of
grass.

Even as a flower of the field, so florisheth Psalm, 103, 15, 16.
Man; for, the wind goes over it, and it is gone: and the place thereof shall
know it no more.

. 2.
Man, that is borne of a woman, says Job, Job. 14, 1, 2.
is of short continuance, and full of trouble: he shoots forth like a
flower, and is cut down; he vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not.

The days of his life are determined; and the Job, 14, 5.
number of his months are known to thee, o Lord: thou have appointed him his
bounds, beyond the which he cannot pass.

. 3.
The time of Man's life, (says the Psalmist) Psalm, 90, 10,
is threescore years and ten: and if they be of strength, foure-score
years: yet their strength is but labor and sorrow: for, it is cut off
quickly, and we flee away.

If the number of a Man's days do amount Ecclus. 18. 8,
to an hundred years, it is very much. And, no man living, has any certain
knowledge of his death.

But, even as fishes, when they think themselves Ecclesi. 9. 12
in most safety, are taken with the hook: and as birds are caught in a
snare, when they think nothing less: so death suddenly smites men in an
evil season, when Granado.
they are least mindful of any such matter.

. 4.
Now, if we consider, by the authority of these few former places only, what,
and how short the life of Man is; seeing the longest term thereof,
(according to the saying of the Psalmist) passes not threescore and ten, or
foure-score years: (for, all the rest, if any man's life be drawn a little
longer, is but labor and sorrow:) and Granado.
abate out of this, (says Granado,) the time of our infancy, which is rather
a life of beasts then men; and withal, the time that we spend in sleep, at
which instant we have not the use of our senses and reason: we shall find,
that this life of ours is a great deal shorter then it seems unto us.

For, we cannot well reckon the time of our infancy for any part of our life;
because the life of infancy, when we are not yet come to the use of reason,
(which only shows us to be men) is as it were the life of a young Goat, that
goes wantonly about, leaping and skipping, in diverse places at pleasure. And
especially, because we plainly perceive, that in all that age, there is nothing
either learned or done, that may well beseem the dignity of a man.

And, as for the time we spend in sleep, that may much less, be counted any
part of our life; seeing it is the common custom of men, to sleep the third
part of the day and night, which is eight whole hours. VVhere-vppon it
follows, by this account, that the third part of our life is consumed in
sleep; and so consequently, that during that time, we do not live.

Besides all this, if we do compare this life of ours, with the eternity of
the life to come, (which endures everlastingly,) we shall find, that it will
scarcely seem so much as a minute.

Very well therefore, and advisedly, did that Philosopher write, who likened
the life of man to lightning; which continues Crates.
but a flash: and the largest date of his days, to no longer abiding then a
bauens blaze.

And, with good consideration also, did that Wiseman silently make answer,
who being demanded what he thought of the life of man? Suddenly turned
himself about, before them that asked the question, Solon.
and presently departed out of their sight. Giving them thereby to understand,
that our life is no more but only a turn about, and of short continuance.

. 5.
Short is Man's life; (says Aurelius,) and Mar. Aur.
upon very short and sudden warning, we are commanded to leave the World,
to close our eyes, and to follow the common course of death.

Yea; as soon as thou art borne to possess the earth, incontinent Death
issues Basil.
out of his Sepulcher to find thee: and, although thou art uncertain, and
know neither when nor where he will meet thee, yet must thou remember, that
always, and in every place he seeks for thee.

And, when thy last hour is come, necessity Polion.
carries thee hence; though thou be never so much unwilling to depart.

For, Death is a thing that cannot be Pythagoras.
eschewed; and therefore it ought of all men the less to be feared.

. 6.
What man living in this world, (says Thales.
Thales) can either by his power or policy prevent the sudden stroke of
death? or who can assure himself of so much certainty, as to perform
tomorrow, what he left undone to day? For, man has no assurance of his own
life; but lives uncertain of his last hour, finding nothing in this world
that he may boldly lean or trust unto.

He vvanders always up and down Socrates.
among most uncertain and doubtful chances, only comforting his mind with
hope; but never knowing certainly what shall befall him, or how, when, or
where, he shall leave his carcass.

When he goes out of his house, he is Seneca.
not sure to return into the same again: and when he enters into his house,
he is as much uncertain to go forth again. Likewise, when he sits down
to meat, he knows not that he shall rise up again, and lying down in his bed
at night, he cannot promise to come safe from thence the next morning.

But this thing only, of all other in the Demonax.
world, is most certain to man, that death is common to all; though to some
one way, and to some another.

. 7.
Lastly; if we well weigh with our selves, how frail, short, and uncertain
the life of man is, we shall find small cause to blame Zerxes that great King
of Persia for weeping; when from the top of an high Hill he beheld his
whole Army, and fell into this remembrance with himself, that within few
years following, there should not one man among so many thousands in that huge
company, be left alive.

With as little reason also, may we reprove Thales the Philosopher, for
saying: The life of man, is no more but even as it were the shooting of a
star, that passes at a trice, and is quickly gone out of sight: and, within
a little while after, the very sign thereof which was left behind, vanishes
out of sight also. So fares it with man; For, within few days after he is
dead, the very remembrance of him dies with his life, though the party (in
this world) were never so great and honorable.

Besides; this is very certain, that there is Salust.
nothing in this tottering world among me^, perpetual; nor any thing firm and
stable: but all things pass and repasse continually, like unto the ebbing and
flowing of the Sea.

And, all things at the last, have an end by Mar. Aur.
Death; save only Death himself: whose end is unknown.

For, black ugly Death, makes al things Augustine.
subject to the rigor of his Law.

And, as there is nothing among men, ^laeto.
more certain then death; so is there nothing more uncertain to man, then the
hour of his death.

Of the many miseries happening to Man in this life.
. 1.
GReat travail, says Sirach, is created Ecclus, 40, 1, 2, 3, 4.
for all men, and an heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam, from the day that
they go out of their Mothers womb, till the day that they be buried in the
earth, the common Mother of all things.

Namely, their thoughts, and their fear of heart; their imagination of the
things they wait for; and the day of their death. Even from him that sits
upon the glorious throne, unto him that is lowest, and the most simple upon
earth. From him that is gorgiously arrayed and wears a Crown, Ecclus, 40. 5,
6, 7, 8, etc.
even unto him that is but homly, and porelie clothed: there is nothing but
wrath, envy, trouble, unquietness, and fear of death; with rigorous anger
and strife.

Also, in the time of night, when Man should take his rest upon his bed, the
sleep changes his understanding and knowledge: so that little or nothing is
man's rest in his sleep, as well as in the day of his labor. For, he fears,
and is disquieted in the vision of his heart; like unto one that runs out of
a battle.

And, when all is past, he awaketh out of his sleep, and meruaileth that the
fear was nothing. Such things as these, happen unto all flesh, both man and
beast: but seven times more unto the ungodly.

And this also, is the state or condition of Man's life, set down by the holy
Ghost himself in the book of Job; That while Job. 14, 22.
man lives, he shall be sorrowful: and, so long as his soul is in him, it
shall mourn.

Only the Sun, the Moon, the stars, Marlorate.
the Sea, and the Land, are pleasant; because they are by nature beautiful:
but all other things are doubtful, and grievous. And, Man above them all;
for, if any good thing happen unto him, he feels (undoubtedly)
there-withall, some inward sorrow and coffeehouse.

Yea; the whole life of man, is of it self a Menander.
most grievous thing: full fraught with misery; and continually accompanied
with innumerable cares and griefs.

So that it is counted no better thing, but Plato.
even a miserable fetter, which chayneth the pure and everlasting soul, to the
vile, sinful, and corruptible body.

. 2.
Certainly, (says Hermes) God has so Hermes.
ordained for mankind, that we should live in care: For, we see by often
experience, that among all things living and moving upon earth none is more
miserable or wretched, then Man.

All manner of beasts, are (during this Menander.
life) far more happy and wiser then man: For, behold the Ass of beasts, no
doubt a most simple and miserable creature; yet has he no harm through his
own default, save what does hap to him by nature. But we, besides our
natural evils, daily procure unto our selves many other: For, we are angry
for every little misfortune; displeased at every evil word; amazed at every
strange chance; and afraid of every shadow.

Yet is there none either so great an Orator, Plato.
or so mighty an Enchaunter as the life of Man is; for, it subtly persuades
us the contrary of that which we often both see in others, and feel in our
selves: For, notwithstanding that we know our own frailetie, and that we
must die; yet what wrongs, what hatreds, what labors of the body, and
molestations of our mind, do we greedily devise, and daily begin afresh? even
as it were in hope, or rather full assurance of so much time of life, as shall
be sufficient to finish our determinations, and suffer us to enjoy the desired
fruit of our enterprises.

Rightly therefore says the Philosopher, Socrates.
that the chief cause of all evils that happen to man, is man himself: for
he, through his greedy lusts, and covetous desires, is both troublesome to
himself, and offensive to all other creatures.

What a shame and folly is it then, for Theophr.
men to complain of God, for the shortness and many miseries of their life,
when as they themselves, through riot, malice, contention, murder, and vvarres,
make it much more shorter, and fuller of troubles then otherwise it would be,
both in themselves, and sundry other men.

. 3.
If man would consider well his life, says Marcus Aurelius.
Aurelius, he should surely find that there is nothing in it, but trouble of
heart, vexation of mind, combersome business, and careful thoughts.

One while, providing things necessary to defend the body from cold; another
while seeking means needful, to protect it from too much heat. To day
diligent, in casting plots which way he may best augment his wealth; to morrow
circumspect* how he may safely keep, the goods which he has already
gotten. Sometime, very provident for the food of his belly; next, altogether
mindful, for clothes to his back. In the day time, molested with a thousand
cogitations; in the night time, disquieted with fantasies and visions.

So that he is never apt of himself, to Bias.
keep any mean or measure in his actions, concerning either gladness or
sorrow: but is continually driven and carried away by the violence of affection;
sometime with compassion; and sometime with rage and fury; even as his desire
present does ouerrule and govern him.

Whereby it is manifest, that miseries in Herodotu^.
this world have power over man: not man over miseries.

And sooner shall we want tears to lament, Senec^.
then cause of sorrow to complain, during this life.

Wherefore; if we reckon our life by the Melancthon.
years of nature, how long we may live; we shall find the time very short:
but if we count it according to the continual cares and troubles therein, we
shall think it too too long.

And surely, were it not for the hope we Bernard.
may have here, to attain at last to the kingdom of heaven, this life of ours
would seem little better then the life of hell it self.

. 4.
O life, (says Pythagoras) how, or which Pythagoras.
way may a man get from thee, without deaths help? Thy evils are infinite;
and no man is perfectly able, either to avoid or to abide them.

For, there is no kind of life in this world, Menander.
but it may be exceedingly discommended, as having in it no notable, worthy,
or honorable thing: but all mingled with frailty, weakness, and many
molestations. What life then should a man lead? Abroad, that is to say in
offices, he is oftentimes combered with strifes, and many troublesome actions:
at home, he is vexed with greefes: in the field, wearied with labors: on the
sea, molested with fear: in wandering or ^ournying, if it be void of perrill,
yet shall he find it painful and tedious.

Art thou a married man? then can thou not live without cares. Art thou
unmarried, then is thy life vain and solitary. Have thou children? they bring
with them many sorrows. Have thou none? the want of them makes thy life seem
unpleasant. Art thou a young man? youth is wanton, wild, and foolish. Art thou
an old man? age is froward, weak, and feeble.

. 5.
Alas, alas, (says the weeping Philosopher) Heraclitu^.
how many are the miseries. and strange the calamities, that diverse ways
happen to men in this life? One, being in the morning in wealthy estate, is by
some sudden accident, ere night, made miserably poor and need^e; woefully
bewayling the loss of his children, wife, and goods. Another, lamenteth the
lack of his health, liberty, or necessary living. A third, laboring for his
living, mayneth himself by mischaunce with his own working-toole, whilst he
is earnestly plying his business.

The idle person, is pined with famine, bitten with dogs, imprisoned and
whipped in every good Town. The gamster, breaks his leg in dancing, his
stones in vaulting, his lunges in running; his arm, his shoulder, or his neck
in wrestling.

The adulterer consumes himself with botches and filthy lepry. The dicer, is
suddenly stabbed in with a dagger. The studient, is continually troubled with
the rewme, or the gowte. What man is free from the strokes of thieves and
murderers? or from the wounds, slaughters, and violence of soldiers?

Besides all these, we often see just and innocent men wrongfully punished;
imprisoned; banished; and some-time put to a shameful kind of death. Children
are smothered in the cradle, fall into the fire, are drowned in the water,
ouer-run with beasts, poisoned with Spyders, murdered, plagued, or infected
with the corruption of the air. And besides these also, we are subject to
diverse sicknesses, and casual mishaps; as falling of houses, dearth, famine,
thunderbolts, lightning, floods, and many more troublesome chances, which
suddenly light upon all mankind indifferently.

The consideration whereof, caused Aristotle Aristotle.
to say; That Man is the pattern of frailety; the spoil of time; the play of
fortune; the image of inconstancy; the trial of envy and misery; and all the
rest of him fleame and choler.

Of the causes why God suffers man to be so much subject to misery.
. 1.
THE many miseries happening to Granado.
man in this life, are ordained of God, (says Granado) as a punishment for our
sins, and a means to withdraw our hearts from the inordinate love of this
present world. Yea, the very cause (says he) why God would have us to be so
often molested and vexed in this life, is, that we might the more willingly
forsake it; and sigh continually for the true life, which is only to be
enjoyed in the world to come.

For, little reckoning would we make, and H^rmes.
small regard would we have, of the blessed life of the soul, which it
enters into after it is parted from the body, if this life had any certain
pleasure in it.

Wherefore, he that thinks to live in Plato.
this world without labor and sorrow, is a fool: for, GOD has so appointed
our state, that we, by virtue of our soul, should suffer, and subdue all kind
of adversities.

Yea; God has purposely ordained, the Euagoras.
greefes, miseries, and sorrows of this life, to be so many and so great; and
the pleasures thereof so small and few: to make us the more desirous of the
heavenly life, which is nothing else but joy and pleasure.

And surely, it seems by the speech of the Apostle, that he knew well which
was the better choice of the twain; when he said: * I desire to be
dissolved, [or loosed Philip. 1, 23,
from this flesh,] and to be with Christ: which is best of all.

For, we know (says he) that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be
destroyed, we 2, Cor, 5, 1, 2
have a building given of God: that is, an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. And therefore do we sigh, desiring to be clothed
with our house which is from heaven.

. 2.
These things being thus, o how happy Rauisius.
were it now (says Rauisius) for unhappy man, if forgetfulness deceived him
not, to remember the sickle estate of his life: both how short it is, and also
how full of misery, vanity, and woe: an approved exile, and has nothing in
it permanent.

But is even a continual conflict, strife, and Mar. Aur^l,
war; a wandering wilderness, and a vale of wretchedness; wherein we are
continually compassed, with most terrible, fierce, and fearful enemies: to the
deadly wounding, sleying, and ouer-throwing, both of body and soul into hell.

All these miseries considered, why should man then have any desire to live in
this wretched world, and to abide in such a loathsome and laborious life? Were
not death much rather to be desired? Were not the hour of death much better
then the continuance of such a life? For, to the godly, death is no death, but
rather the most happy messenger, and quick dispatcher of all such
displeasures: the end of al trouble and sorrow: the bed of all rest: the
door of good desires: the gate of gladness: the port of Paradise: the haven
of heaven: the entrance to felicity: the manumission from all grief and
misery: and the beginning of everlasting joy and blessedness.

Death therefore, ought rather to be desired H^rmes.
then despised: for, it changes us from this world of uncleanness and shame,
to the pure world of worship and worth: From this transitory life, to life
everlasting: from a world of folly and vanities, to a world of wisdom,
reason, and truth: and from a world of trouble, travail, and pain, to a world
of rest, comfort, and consolation.

Let each man therefore wisely consider of Pacuuius.
his own estate: let him also fear to offend the majesty of Almighty God:
and not fear the day nor hour of death: but always abide with patience his
appointed time: and when he perceives that his turn is come, let him give
thanks unto his Maker for his change.

Of the parting of the soul from the body: and of the immortality thereof.
. 1.
TO all things (says Solomon) there Eccles. 3, 1. 2
is an appointed time; and a time to every purpose under the heaven: a time to
be borne, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that
which is planted.

For, here have we no continuing City: Heb. 13, 14,
but we seek one to come.

All flesh waxes old as does a garment; Ecclus. 14. 17
and this is the condition of all times: Thou shall die the death.

For,] what man is he that lives, and shall Psalm, 89, 48.
not see death?

Since that law is general, which commands Salust.
to be borne and to die.

. 2.
All things that are of the earth, (says Sirach) Ecclus, 40, 11
shall turn to earth again: and they that are of the waters, shall return
into the Sea.

But the soul or spirit of man [being immortal] Eccles. 12. 7
shall return unto God that gave it.

For, as the beginning of our creation comes Aristotle.
from GOD, so it is meet, that after death, our soul return unto him again.

. 3.
GOD has created (says Beda) three Beda.
kinds of living Spirits; the first incorporeall, proper to Angels only: the
second, covered over with flesh, but not mortal, or dying therewith; that is,
the soul or Spirit of man, dwelling in his body: the third, carnal, and
dying with the flesh; namely, the spirit or life of beasts.

The soul of man (also) being once Augustine.
made, shall surely endure for ever, either in the body, or out of the body:
For, it should never bear the name, to be made according to the Image of Gods
own likeness, if it might possibly be enclosed in the bonds of death.

. 4.
The most precious and excellent creature Hermes.
that God has created here on earth, (says Hermes) is man; and the most
worthy thing in him, is his soul or spirit: which endeavoring in this life to
follow goodness, shall after death be rewarded with eternal glory.

For, this is to be believed, that the souls Socrates.
of good men, so soon as they are forth of the body, they pass speedily
into a better life; but the souls of the wicked, go from this world to a
worse.

If death were the dissoluing both of body Plato.
and soul, then happy were the wicked, which being once rid of their body,
should also for ever after be rid of their soul and wickedness: but forasmuch
as it is evident, that the soul is immortal, there is no comfort left for the
ungodly to trust in. For, the immortality of the soul, excludes all hope
from the wicked, and establishes the good in their goodness.

. 5.
By the justice of God, (says Plato) the Plato.
soul must needs be immortal: and therefore no man ought to live careless or
negligent thereof.

For, though the body die, yet the soul Solon.
dies not; but by the stroke of death, it passes forth of the body, into
another world, more swiftly the^ any bird that flies.

Yea; the souls of all men (doubtless) Socrates.
are immortal: but the souls of the godly, are both immortal and divine.

Wherefore, if thy soul be good, the Basil.
stroke of death cannot hurt thee: for thy spirit shall thereby live blessedly
in heaven.

. 6.
But for better proof of this matter, then the speech of any Philosopher in
the world can afford, we find it plainly affirmed in the Gospel of S. Luke,
by the testimony Luke, 16, 22, 23. etc.
of Truth it self, that the soul of Lazarus, was no sooner out of his body*
but it was immediately carried up by the Angels into Abraham's bosom.
Contrariwise, the soul of Dives* after his death was speedily borne to hell
torments. The first, to joy and pleasure: the last, to pain and grief.
Between which two places also, there is such a great gulf or swallowing pit
set, that there cannot possibly be any passage from one of them to the other.

Saint John likewise witnesses in the Revelation, that when the 5. seal of
the book Reave. 6. 9.
of God was opened, he saw under the Alter in heaven, the souls of them that
were killed here on earth, for the word of God, and for the testimony of his
truth.

And, to show that they live there, he further adds in the next ve^se
following, that they cried unto God, with a loud voice, verse, 10,
saying: How long Lord, holy and true, tariest thou to judge and avenge our
blood, etc.

King Solomon also, in his book of wisdom affirms, that the souls of the
righteous Wised. 3. 1. 2, 3, 4.
are in the hand of God, and no torment shall touch the^. Though in the sight
of the unwise (says he) they appeared to die, and their end was thought
grievous, and their departing from us destruction; yet they rest in peace: and
though they suffer pain before men, yet is their hope full of immortality.

. 7.
Besides these former places of holy scripture, we find also diverse other
proofs in the book of God, concerning this point: as namely, the hopeful
speech of David; who when news was brought him, that his base-borne child
(for whom he fasted, prayed, and wept) was dead, he lamented no longer, but
presently washed his hands and called for meat. And being demanded 2, Sam,
12. 23.
the reason thereof by his servants: he answered; I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me.

Also; when old Tobias was derided of his kinsfolks and acquaintance, and
scoffingly Tobie, 2.
demanded by the^, where his hope was, for the which he had done alms and
buried the dead, (considering he was now, even after the finishing of a good
work, suddenly smitten blind?) he, nothing therewith dismayed,
confidently rebuked them, saying; Say not so; for, we are the children of holy
men; and look for the life, which God shall give unto them that never turn
their belief from him.

The same Tobias also at another time, to witness unto the world what
confident hope he always had of the souls immortality, earnestly requested
of the Almighty, Tobie, 3, 6,
that his spirit might be taken from him, and that his body might be dissolved
and become earth.

The like may be read in the prayer of Elias, when he desired to die, saying: o
Lord, 1, Reg, 19, 4
I pray thee take my soul, for I am no better then my Fathers. etc.

. 8.
And to show yet a little further, that it rests in the power of God to take
the soul from the body, and to give it again at his pleasure; we find in
the first Book of Kings, that the foresaid Elias, found such 1, Reg, 17, 22,
23.
favor in the sight of God, that when the son of his hostess was dead, he
through his earnest prayer obtained that the childs soul was restored to him
again.

So did Elisha, in the same manner, obtain 2, Reg, 4, 32, 33.
his peticion of the Lord, and revived the dead body of the Shunamites son.

We read also in the Gospel written by S. Matthew, that after our Savior had
given up the Ghost, the Scpulchers of dead Math, 27, 52, 53.
men, (through the miraculous working of the Almighty) opened themselves; and
many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose, and came forth of the graves
after his resurrection; and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many.

So that by these sayings and examples, Gene, 5, 24. 2, Reg, 2, 1^ Number, 16, 32,
33,
(with the taking up of Henoch and Elias both body and soul into heaven, the
swallowing down of Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, quick into hell,) and sundry
other proofs in the Book of God to this purpose, we may sufficiently assure
our selves, that the soul of Man is immortal: and that there is not only a
place of rest ordained of God for the godly; but also, a loathsome pit, or
place of punishment, appointed by him for the wicked, after this life.

The verity whereof, is likewise further witnessed unto us by the words of S.
Augustine, Augustine.
where he says; The souls of the godly, being separated from their bodies,
are in rest: and the souls of the ungodly do suffer punishment; until such
time as the bodies of the righteous do rise again unto life everlasting; and
the bodies of the unrighteous unto eternal death: which is also called the
second death.

Of the first Judgment after death, called by Divines particular Judgment:
when the soul of every man (after it is parted forth of his body) shall
presently receive sentence from God, either of eternal joy, or everlasting
pain.
. 1.
IT is appointed unto men, (says the Apostle) Heb, 9, 27,
that they shall once die; and after that comes the judgment.

For, we must all appear before the Iudgement-seate of Christ, that every man
2, Cor, 5, 10
may receive the works which are done in his body; according to that he has
done: whether it be good or bad.

Also, at the very hour of death, the soul Cyprian.
must render up a particular account unto God, concerning all her doings in
this life: and then shall it be judged, and know assuredly, what shall become
of it for ever.

If it find favor in the sight of God, it Basil.
shall presently enter into the rest and joy of the righteous: if otherwise, it
shall be condemned by the Judge to perpetual torments.

Yea;] Of every idle word, that men Math. 12. 36
shall speak in this life, they shall give an account at the day of judgment.

For, GOD will bring every work into Eccles. 12. 14.
judgment; with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil.

He will render unto man according to Job, 34, 11.
his work: and cause every one to find according to his way.

That is, to them which by continuance Rom, 2, 7, 8,
in well doing, seek glory, and honor, and immortality, shall be eternal
life: but unto them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath.

Tribulation and anguish [also] shall be Rom, 2, 9, 10,
upon the soul of every man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Grecian* But to every man that does good, shall be glory, and honor, and
peace. etc.

. 2.
Again, so soon as the soul of man, says Augustine.
S. Augustine, is parted from the body, it passes presently to the tribunal
seat of God, under the custody both of good and evil Angels: and after it
has there abidden the trial of a strait examination, it shall forthwith
receive the sentence, either of eternal blessedness, or else, of endless vvoe
and misery.

Yea; every one of us shall give accounts Rom, 14, 12,
of himself to God.

And, every man shall receive his wages 1, Cor, 3, 8.
[or reward] according to his work.

But in most happy state, shall the souls Beda.
of all the godly be, after their departure hence; who (through grace given
them from GOD) have earnestly in this life resisted evil, and followed
goodness: for, they shall then enter into that place of perpetual happiness,
which Christ their Captain has prepared for all the company of the
faithful, in the kingdom of his Father.

And, thus much likewise witnesses the words of S. John in the Revelation,
where he says; * Blessed and holy is he, that Reave. 20, 6^
has part in the first resurrection: for, on such the second death has no
power.

Blessed [also] are the dead, which hereafter Reu^, 14, 13
die in the Lord: even so says the Spirit; for, they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them.

Of the last Judgment after death: commonly called the general judgment, or
Doomes day: When the body and soul of every Man departed out of this life,
being (by the power of God) joined again together, shall (with the rest of
all mankind then living) receive the final sentence, either of eternal
pleasure or pain.
. 1.
AFter death (says Esdras) shall the 2, Esdras, 14. 35.
day of Judgment come, when we shall live again; and then shall the names of
the righteous be made manifest, and the works of the ungodly shall be declared.

And, many of them that sleep in the Dan, 12, 2.
dust of the earth, shall awake; Some, to everlasting life: and some, to shame
and perpetual contempt.

. 2.
But, before the coming of this day, (says Christ) there shall be great
wars and Luke, 21, 10, 11.
troubles in the world: For, Nation shall rise against Nation, and Realm
against Realm. There shall also be great Earthquakes in diverse places, and
pestilence, and hunger, and fearful things appearing from heaven; and many
other great signs and wonders.

There shall be signs in the Sun, and Luke, 21. 25, 26,
in the Moon, and in the stars: and upon the earth trouble among the Nations
with perplexity. The Sea and the waters shall roar, and men's hearts shall
fail them for fear, and for looking after those things which shall come on
the World. For, the powers of heaven shall be shaken.

. 3.
After this, shall appear the sign of the Math. 24, 30.
son of man in heaven: and then shall all the kindreds of the earth mourn.

Then [also] shall the wicked go into the Esaias, 2, 19,
holes of the Rocks, and into the Caves of the earth, from before the fear of
the Lord, and from the glory of his Majesty, when he shall rise to destroy
the earth.

Then shall they begin to say to the Luke, 23, 30
Mountains, fall on us; and to the Hills, cover us, and hide us, from the
presence of him that sits upon the throne; and from the Reave, 6, 16, 17,
wrath of the Lamb: for, the great day of his wrath is come, and who can stand?

In those days, men shall seek death, and Reave, 9, 6.
shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

And they shall see the Son of man Math. 24. 30
come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. Who (being
ordained of Acts. 10, 42,
* God to be the Judge both of the quick and dead,) shall send his Angels
with a Mat. 24, 31.
great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect, from the 4.
winds, and from the one end of heaven unto the other.

. 4.
Then shall Christ sit upon the throne Math, 25, 31 32, 33.
of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd seperateth the sheep from the
goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the
left.

The shall the earth restore those that 2, Esdr. 7, 3^.
have slept in her, and so shall the dust, those that dwell therein in silence:
and the secret places shall deliver the souls that were committed unto them.

And they shall come forth that have John, 5, 29.
done good, unto the resurrection of life; but they that have done evil, unto
the resurrection of condemnation.

For, Christ our righteous Judge, will Math. 16. 27
then give to every man according to his deeds. And reward every one,
according Reave, 22, 12
as his work shall be.

He will then say to the righteous whom Math, 25. 34, 35, etc.
he has placed on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world. For, I was
hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger, and ye lodged me; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and
ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the just say, Lord, when have we done these things unto thee? And
the King shall answer; Verily, when you did them to the least of my brethren,
you did them to me.

Then will he say to the wicked, standing Math. 25, 41, 42, etc.
on his left hand: Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the devil and his Angels. For, I was hungry, and ye fed me not;
I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye lodged me
not; I was naked, and you clothed me not; I was sick, and in prison, and ye
visited me not.

Then shall they also answer, saying; When, o Lord, have we seen thee
hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and have
not ministered unto thee? And he shall answer; Truly, I tell you, inasmuch as
ye have not done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not
to me.

And these men shall go into everlasting pain; and the righteous into life
eternal.

. 5.
Miseries (says Esdras) shall then vanish away; 2, Esdr, 7* 33 34.
and long suffering shall have an end. Justice only shall continue: the Truth
shall remain; and Faith shall be strong.

The work shall follow, and the reward verse, 35,
shall be showed: the good deeds shall be of force; and unrighteousness shall
bear no more rule.

For, the day of Judgment, shall be the 2, Esdr. 7, 43.
end of this world, and the beginning of the immortality to come; wherein all
corruption shall cease.

Then shall no man be able to save him 2, Esdr. 7. 45,
that is destroyed: nor oppress him that has gotten the victory.

. 6.
We find in the New Testament, that Saint Paul the Apostle, vvriting to the
Corinthians, to prove the resurrection of the dead, and the second coming of
Christ, uses many arguments to express the same: and near unto the end of
his chapter he thus concludes. * Behold, I show 1, Cor, 15, 51, 52, 53,
you a secret thing; we shall not all sleep, [or die,] but we shall all be
changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the last trumpet: for, the
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible, and we
shall be changed. For this corruptible, must put on incorruption: And this
mortal, must put on immortality. etc.

According also to the former part of the Apostles speech in the afore-saide
chapter, (concerning the coming of Christ to judgment; with the resurrection
of men's bodies, and the immortality of the soul,) speaks holy Job, in the
19. of his book, with a confident and perfect hope thereof, saying: * I am
sure that my Redeemer lives, Job, 19, 25, 26, 27,
and that he shall stand the last on the earth. And though after my skin,
worms destroy this body, yet shall I see GOD in my flesh: whom I my self
shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me; though my raines
are consumed within me.

The aforesaid S. Paul likewise, comforting the Thessalonians, with the
remembrance of the resurrection of the body, and last Judgment, says thus; *
I would not 1. These. 4, 13. 14. 15. 16, etc.
Brethren, have you ignorant, concerning them that are a sleep; that ye
sorrow not, even as other which have no hope. For, if we believe that Jesus is
dead, and is risen; even so them which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him. For, this say we unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which live
and are remaining at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which
sleep. For, the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a showte, and
with the voice of the Archangell: and with the trumpet of GOD: and the dead in
Christ shall rise first. Then shall we which live and remain, be caught up
with them also in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we
ever be with the Lord.

By the testimony of which places, it plainly appears, that at the last
judgment, there shall not only be a general raising up of all men's bodies,
(which from the beginning of the world have already departed out of this
life,) but also, a sudden changing of all men's bodies then living on the
earth: which change, shall be unto them in sted of death. And then shall the
saints of God, presently after the final sentence from Christ our Judge
pronounced, enter both body and soul into endless pleasure, and the wicked
both body and soul into eternal pain.

of the uncertain time of the last Indgement.
. 1.
Now, for that the time of this day is uncertain, and the hour of Christ's
coming unknown; our Savior himself, and his beloved Apostles, have
therefore vouchsafed to leave behind them many forewarning speeches, as a very
necessary means to make us more wary and watchful of the same. Affirming that
suddenly, * and in an hour that we think not, Math, 24. 44
will the son of man come.

But of that day and hour, says Christ, Math, 24, 36
knows no man: no, not the Angels of heaven, but my Father only.

But as the days of Noe were, so likewise Math. 24, 37, 38, 39,
shall the coming of the Son of man be. For, as in the days before the
floode, they did eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage, until the day
that Noe entered into the Arc, and knew nothing, until the flood came, and
took the^ all away; so shall also the coming of the son of man be.

Likewise also, as it was in the days of Luke, 17, 28, 29, 30,
Lot, they eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they
built; but in the day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone
from heaven, and destroyed them all. After these ensamples shall it be in the
day when the son of man is revealed.

At that day, he that is upon the house, and Luke, 17, 31
his stuff in the house, let him not come down to take it out: and he that
is in the field likewise, let him not turn back to that he left behind.

Then two shall be in the fields, the one Math. 24, 40, 41, 42.
shall be received, the other refused: two women shall be grinding at the Mill,
the one shall be received, and the other shall be refused. Watch therefore, for
ye know not what hour your Master will come.

Whether at even, or at midnight: at the Mar, 13, 35,
Cock-crowing, or in the dawning.

Of this be sure, (says Christ) that if the Math, 24. 43, 44.
good man of the house knew at what time the thief would come* he would
surely watch* and not suffer his house to be dug through. Therefore be ye
also ready: for in the hour that ye think not, will the son of man come.

If thou will not watch (says he) I will Reave, 3, 3,
come on thee as a thief, and thou shall not know what hour I will come upon
thee.

. 2.
These, and sundry other such like speeches, are set down in the New Testament,
as admonishments to forewarne us; and caueats, to make us careful how we spend
our time, least at that hour we be found with the five foolish Virgins
unprovided. For, * the day of the Lord will come as a thief 2, Pet, 3, 10.
in the night; in the which, the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
elements shall melt with heat and the earth, with the works that are therein,
shall be burnt up.

Seeing then that all these things must be 2, Pet. 3. 11. 21, 13, 14.
dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conversation and
godliness: looking for, and hasting to the coming of the day of God; by which
the heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt
with heat? But we look for new heavens, and a new earth; according to his
promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye
look for such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace,
without spot, and blameless. etc.

And take heed to your selves; least at Luke, 21, 34
any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares
of this life, and least that day come on you at unawares.

For, as a snare shall it come on all them verse, 35, 36
that dwell on the face of the whole earth. VVatch therefore, and pray
continually; that ye may be counted worthy to escape all those things that
shall come to pass: and that ye may stand before the Son of Man.

And those things that I say unto you, I Mar, 13, 37,
say unto all men: vvatch.

For,] blessed is that servant, whom his Math, 24, 46
Master when he comes, shall find so doing.

Of Christ: Why he came into the world: and of the profit we have by his
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension.
JOHN. 17. verse, 3. To know GOD, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, is life
everlasting. Of Christ. etc.
. 1.
AT sundry times, and in diverse manners, Heb, 1, 1, 2,
(says the Apostle) God spoke in the old time to our Fathers by the Prophets:
in these last days, he has spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made
heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds.

Who being the brightness of the glory, verse, 3, 4.
and the ingraued form of his person, and bearing up all things by his
mighty word, has by himself purged our sins; and sits at the right
hand of the Majesty in the highest places: and is made so much more excellent
then the Angels, in as much as he has obtained a more excellent name then they.

For, unto which of the Angels said he at Heb, 1, 5,
any time: Thou art my son, this day begat I thee? And again: I will be his
Father, and he shall be my son.

Or,] unto which also of the Angels said Heb, 1, 13.
he at any time; Sit at my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy
foote-stoole?

. 2.
By this man, (namely Christ,) were all Colos. 1. 16, 17.
things created, which are in heaven, and which are in earth: things visible,
and invisible: whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or
Powers: All things were created by him, and for him: and he is before all
things, and in him all things consist.

He is the head of the body of the verse, 18, 19, 20.
Church; he is the beginning and the first begotten of the dead; that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence.

For, it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness dwell: and by him,
to reconcile all things unto himself; and to set at peace through the blood of
his Cross, both the things in earth, and the things in heaven.

Wherefore, God has also highly exalted Philip. 2, 9. 10, 11.
him, and given him a Name above every name, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth; and things
under the earth. And, that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is
the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.

For, in him, dwells all the fullness of Colos. 2, 9.
the Godhead bodily.

And in him are hid all the treasures of Colos. 2. 3.
wisdom and knowledge.

Unto him is all power given, both heaven and in earth. Math. 28. 18


For, the Father loves the Son, and John, 3, 35,
has given all things into his hand.

The Father judges no man, but has Ioh, 5, 22, 23
committed all judgment unto the Son, because that all men should honor
the Son, as they honor the Father.

In his hand also, are the keys both of hell Reu, 1, 18.
and of death.

And, he [likewise] has the key of David, Reave. 3. 7.
which opens, and no man shuts: and shuts, and no man opens.

. 3.
Wherefore, if any man be willing to John, 14, 6.
come unto God, our Savior Christ declares himself to be the Way, the Truth,
and the Light: and, that no man comes unto the Father, but by him.

He is the door; by him if any man enter John, 10, 9,
in, he shall be saved: and shall go in, and go out, and find pasture.

He is the true light, which lights every John, 1, 9,
man that comes into the world.

He is that prevailing seed of the woman, Gene, 3, 15.
which was promised in Paradise by God the Father unto Adam, that he should
break the head of the devil.

He is that spiritual Rock, of who^ all our 1, Cor. 10. 3.
Fathers did eat and drink.

He is acknowledged and openly confessed Mark, 5, 7.
by his greatest enemy, to be the Son of the most high God.

Yea; he is confirmed by a voice from Math, 3, 17
heaven, to be that beloved son, in whom God the Father is well pleased.

He is that son whom David wills Psalm. 2, 12,
us to kiss and embrace; least he be angry, and we perrish from the right way.

He is the Lord of Lords, and King of Reave, 17, 14
Kings: and they that are on his side, are called, and chosen, and faithful.

He is the Lamb of God, which takes John, 1, 29.
away the sins of the world.

He is that kind and loving Samaritane, Luke. 10, 34
which healed the wounded man, that was found in the highway half dead.

He is that gentle and compassionate Sovereign, Math, 28, 27
which freely forgave his servant the ten thousand talents that he owed unto
him.

He is that chief corner stone, which Acts, 4, 11,
the Jews (counting themselves builders) refused.

He is the Mediator of the Newe-Testament. Heb, 12. 24.


He is the end of the Law for righteousness, Romans 10. 4.
unto every one that believes.

He is the only Mediator between 1. Tim, 2. 5.
God and man.

He is [both] the power of God, and the 1, Cor. 1. 24.
wisdom of God.

He is our wisdom, and righteousness, 1, Cor. 1. 30
sanctification, and redemption.

He is that Lord of life, whom God has Acts, 3. 15.
raised from the dead.

He * is our peace. And the * Prince of Ephe. 2. 14. Heb, 2. 10.
our salvation.

He is the Shepherd and Bishop of our 1, Pet. 2. 25.
souls.

He is the Vine, and we are the branches. John, 15, 5, Heb, 6, 20.


He is our high priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedecke.

He is our Advocate unto God the Father. 1. Ioh, 2, 1,


He is the reconciliation for our sins: 1, John, 2, 2,
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

Finally; he is the Author and finisher Heb, 12, 2.
of our faith.

For, without him, we can do nothing. John. 15. 5.


. 4.
If any man thirst, (says Christ) let him John, 17, 37,
come unto me and drink.

He that believes in me, as says the verse, 38,
Scripture, out of his belly shall flow rivers of water of life.

I am the light of the world; he that follows John, 8, 12
me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.

I am the bread of life; he that comes John. 6. 35,
to me, shall not hunger: and he that believes in me, shall never thirst.

I am that living bread which came down John, 6, 51,
from heaven; of whom whosoever eats, he shall live for ever.

I am the resurrection and the life; he that John, 11, 25, 26.
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever lives
and believes in me, shall never die.

Of Christ's coming into the world: and the several causes thereof.
. 1.
We, when we were children, says the Apostle) were in bondage Gala* 4, 3,
4, 5.
under the ordinances of the world. But when the fulness of time was come, GOD
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, and made bond unto the law, to redeem
them which were bond unto the law: that we [through election] might receive the
inheritance that belongs unto the natural sons.

. 2.
Man lived in the world for a time (says S. Augustine) without the Law
written; Augustine.
to teach him, that he was not a law to himself: and a certain time under the
Law, to make him find by proof, that he was not able to perform it. But
afterward, GOD (through his great love and mercy) sent his only Son Christ
into the world, both to fulfill the Law, and also, to offer grace unto man;
which remained as it were upon a scaffold, where he saw nothing but death,
ready to devour him.

Christ came also at such time, as learning did most flourish, and when the
greatest Empire Augustine.
was in the cheifest pride: to the end, that all worldly wisdom, should
acknowledge it self to be foolishnes, and all power weakness, before him.

Yet came he not to be served, but to Mar. 10, 45
serve: and to give his own life for the ransom of many.

He came [likewise,] not to destroy the Math, 5, 17
Law or the Prophets; but to fulfill them.

Neither came he to destroy men's lives, Luke, 9, 5.
but to save them.

For, God sent not his Son into the world, John, 3, 17,
that he should condemn the world; but that the world through him, might be
saved.

And this is a true saying, and by all means 1, Tim, 1, 15
worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.

. 3.
It was a matter greatly standing with the Jerome.
justice of God, (says S. Jerome) that Christ should come into the world, and
become man for us; because, that in the same nature whereby GOD was offended,
in the same nature likewise should satis-faction be made: sin was committed
in man's nature, and therefore it was necessary that Christ should come in man's
nature, to appease the wrath of God for sin.

And forasmuch also, as by the right of Chrysostom.
creation, every man is bound in conscience to fulfill even the very rigor and
extremity of the mortal Law, but man being fallen from his first estate, was
no way able to observe it: therefore, it was requisite that Christ should come,
and become man, that in man's nature he might fulfill all righteousness which
the Law does exact.

. 4.
Christ came into the world (says Becon) Becon.
both true God, and true man; God, of God his Father, from before the beginning
of all time; and man of us: borne of the kindred of Abraham and David,
according to Gods promise. Yea, true and natural man, made of our flesh, and
of our blood; this alone excepted, that we received our nature with sin, and
in sin, and by natural conjunction, but Christ received his humanity, of his
Mother Mary, the blessed Virgin, without sin, and without the company of any
man; only by the operation of the holy Ghost.

For, by the salutation of an Angel, the Gregory.
Word, entered the womb; and straight the Word in the womb became flesh.

And, the same Word being made flesh, John, 1, 14,
dwelt among us; and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only
begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

. 5.
Furthermore, it greatly behooued (says Calvin.
Calvin) that the son of God, should become for us Emanuell: that is, God
with us: and that in this sort; that by natural joining, his Godhead and
nature of man, might grow into one together; otherwise, neither could the
neerenesse be near enough, nor alliance strong enough for us to hope by, that
God dwells with us: So great was the disagreement between our filthiness,
and the most pure cleanenes of God. And, although man had stood undefiled
without any spotte, yet was his estate too base, to attain unto GOD, without
a Mediator.

Besides; it was no mean thing that the Calvin.
Mediator had to do: for, it was so to restore us into the favor of God, as
to make us, of the children of men, the children of God: of the heirs of hell,
the heirs of the kingdom of heaven. And who could do this, unless the son
of God, were made also the son of man: and so take ours upon him, to
conceive his into us; and to make that ours by grace, which was his by nature?

Therefore it was for the same cause very Calvin.
profitable, that he which should be our Mediator and Redeemer, should be
both very God, and very man. It was his office to swallow up death; who could
do that, but Life it self? It was his office to overcome sin; who could do
that, but Righteousness it self? It was his office to vanquish the powers of
the world and of the air: who could do that, but a Power above both world
and air?

Now, in whose possession is life, or righteousness, or the Empire and power of
heaven, Calvin.
but in Gods alone? Therefore the most merciful God, in the person of his
only begotten son, made himself our Mediator and Redeemer, when his will
was to have redeemed. And forasmuch therefore, as neither being only God, he
could feel death, nor being only man, he could overcome death; he coupled
the nature of man, with the nature of GOD; that he might yield the one
subject to death, to satisfy for sins: and by the power of the other, he
might wrestle with Death, and get the victory for us.

6.
Christ came from heaven (says Gregory) Gregory.
into a vvomans womb; from a vvomans womb into a Cratch or Manger; from the
manger, to the Cross; from the Cross, to the grave; and from the grave he
went to heaven again.

Yea; he by his incarnation came down Ambrose.
from heaven to us: that we, being made partakers of his grace, might ascend
up into heaven by him.

And, for this purpose appeared the Son 1, John, 3, 8.
of GOD, that he might loose the works of the devil.

Which are, Fulgentius.
sin; death; and hell.

He came [also,] that we might have life; John, 10, 10
and that we might have it in abundance.

Finally;] he came into the world, to Luke, 19, 10
seek and save that which was lost.

And, not to call the righteous, but sinners Math, 9, 13.
to repentance.

. 7.
Moreover,] we know, (says S. John) 1, John, 5, 20
that the son of God is come; and has given us a mind to know him, which is
true: and we are in him that is true; that is, in his Son Jesus Christ:
this same is very God, and everlasting life.

Yea; he is come a light into the world; John, 12, 46
that who soever believes in him, should not abide in darkness.

He has [also] appeared, that he might 1, John, 3, 5.
take away our sins: and in him is no sin.

Every spirit [therefore] which confesses 1, Ioh, 4, 2, 3
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And, every spirit that
confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God.

Of the Passion: Death: Burial: Resurrection: and Ascension of our Savior
Christ.
. 1.
AFter that S. Peter had fully answered the demand of his Master; by Math,
16, 16 20.
confessing him to be Christ, the son of the living God: our Savior
presently charged him, and the rest of the disciples, that they should [as
then] tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ.

And, from that time forth, he began to verse, 20.
show and foretell them of his Passion; Death; and Resurrection; saying: *
The Mark, 8, 30, 31,
son of man must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders,
and of the Highpriests, and Scribes, and be slain, and rise again the third
day.

Also, in the 20. of Matthew, the ninth of Luke, 9, 44.
Mark, and the eyghteene of Saint Luke, besides sundry other places, he
cease not to instruct and perfect them in this point: bidding them * mark
his words diligently. For, it shall come to pass, says he, that the Son of
man shall be delivered into the hands of men. etc.

Likewise, being in the way going toward Mat, 20, 17, 18, 19.
Jerusalem, he took the twelve Disciples apart, and began again to tell
them, what things should come unto him: saying; Behold, Mark, 10, 32, 33, 34,
we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered unto the
Highpriests, Luke, 18, 31, 32, 33,
and to the Scribes; and they shall condemn him to death; and shall deliver
him unto the Gentiles. And they shall mock him, and scourge him, and spet upon
him, and kill him: but the third day he shall rise again. * For, as Jonas was
three Mat. 12. 40.
days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the son of man be three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth.

And, as Moises lift up the Serpent in the Ioh, 3, 14, 15
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lift up: that who-soeuer believes
in him, should not perrish, but have everlasting life.

. 2.
After all these several fore-tellings of his Passion, Jesus entered into
Jerusalem, and Mark, 11, 11, 15.
went into the Temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought
therein, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money changers, and the seats of
them that sold Doves.

Saying unto them: Take these things John, 2, 16,
hence: make not my fathers house, a house of merchandise.

For, it is written; My house shall be called, Mat. 21. 13.
the house of Prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves.

Also, he taught daily in the Temple. Luke, 19. 47,
And the High-priestes, and the Scribes, and the chief of the people, sought
to destroy him.

But they could not find what they verse, 48,
might do unto him: for all the people hanged upon him when they heard him.

. 3.
Then one of the twelve, named Judas Math, 26, 14, 15,
Iscariot, went unto the chief Priests, and said; What will ye give me,
and I will deliver him unto you?

And, when they heard it, they were glad, Mar, 14, 11,
and promised that they would give him Math, 26, 15, 16.
money: namely, thirty pieces of Silver. And from that time he sought
opportunity to betray him.

. 4.
Now, he that betrayed Jesus, had given Math. 26, 47. 48.
them a token, saying: VVhom-so-euer I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on
him.

And, forthwith he came to Jesus, and said; GOD save thee Master, and kissed
him.

Then the Band, and the Captain, and John. 18. 12. 13, 14.
the officers of the Jews, took Jesus, and bound him, and led him away, to
Annas first; for he was father in law to Caiphas, which was the high Priest
that same year. And Caiphas was he that gave counsel to the Jews, that it
was expedient that one man should die for the people.

. 5.
The chief Priests [therefore] and the Mat. 26. 59. 60. 61.
Elders, and all the whole Counsel, sought false witness against Jesus, to
put him to death: but found none. And though many false witnesses came, yet
found they none whose witness agreed together. But at the last, came two false
witnesses, saying: Mark, 14, 56 57, 58, 59,
We heard this man say; I will destroy this Temple of God made with hands,
and within three days I will build another, made without hands. But their
witness yet agreed not together.

Then the high Priest stood up amongst Math, 26, 63 64, 65, 66.
them, and said unto Jesus; I charge thee by the living God, that thou tell
us, if thou be Christ the Son of God.

And, when Jesus had told him the truth of that which he asked, he believed
him not, but presently rent his clothes, saying; He has blasphemed, what have
we any more need of witnesses? Behold, now ye Mark. 14, 61 62. 63, 64.
have heard his blasphemy. What think ye? And they all condemned him to be
vvorthie of death.

. 6.
Then spate they in his face, and buffetted Math. 26. 67 Luke 22, 63 64, 65,
him. And * the men that held Jesus, mocked him, and struck him. And when
they had blindfolded him, they smote him on the face, saying; Prophecy unto
us, (o Christ) who is he that smote thee. And many other things blasphemously
spoke they against him.

Besides; when the morning was come, Mat, 27, 1,
all the chief Priests and Elders of the people, took counsel against Jesus,
to put him to death.

And they led him away bound, and delivered verse, 2.
him unto Pontius Pilate the Governor.

And, they began to accuse him, saying: Luke, 23, 2,
We have found this man perverting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute
to Caesar, saying; That he is Christ, a King. etc.

. 7.
Pilate, after he had examined Jesus, and Luke, 23, 4, 7. 11. 15.
could find no fault in him, sent him to Herod. Herod, with his men of war
despised and mocked him: and arrayed him in white, and sent him back again to
Pilate.

Pilate, seeing nothing worthy of death was done unto Jesus by Herod,
assembled together the Jews, and demanded of the^, Math, 27, 22, 23,
what * he should do with Jesus, which was called Christ? Then answered
they all at once, saying: Let him be crucified. And, when he asked them,
saying: What evil has he done? they cried the more vehemently: Let him be
crucified.

So Pilate willing to content the Jews, Mark, 15, 15
loosed unto them Barrabas, a malefactor, who^ they desired; and after he had
scourged Jesus, delivered him unto the Soldiers, that he might be crucified.

. 8.
The soldiers of the Governor, (having Math, 27, 27 28, 29,
Christ in their custody) led him into the Common Hall, and presently gathered
about him the whole Band; and they strypped him, and put upon him a Scarlet
robe. Then platted they a Crown of thorns, and put it upon his head, and a
Reed in his right hand, and bowed their knees before him, and mocked him,
saying: God save thee, King of the Jews.

They also spate upon him, and smote him verse, 30, 31,
on the head with the Reed. And, after they had mocked him, they took the
robe from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify
him.

And, as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon; him they
compelled verse, 32,
to bear his Cross.

And, they brought him to a place named Mar, 15, 22.
Golgotha: which is by interpretation, the place of Dead-mens skuls. * There
they John, 19, 18.
crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the
midst.

This was done about the sixth hour, and Luke, 23, 44
there was darkness over all the Land until the ninth hour.

The Sun was darkened, and the veil verse, 45, 46
of the Temple rent through the midst. And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and
said; Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit. And when he thus had said,
he gave up the Ghost.

. 9.
Thus suffered our Savior (according to his own foretelling) many wrongs,
injuries, and reproaches of his enemies, for our sakes. And, in the end, after
all his vvhyppings, buffettings, mockings, and reuilings, he was * delivered
to death [vpon Rom, 4. 25.
the Crosse] for our sins.

Yea; he was delivered to death, by the Acts, 2, 23,
determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God.

Otherwise, it had not been in the power of his enemies to deprive him of life.
For, no man could take his life from him: but he laid it down of himself. For
he, [being John, 10, 18.
both God and man,] had power to lay down his life; and power to take it again.

Yet, forasmuch as he came down from heaven, not to do his own will, but the
* will of God which sent him; he (therefore) Ioh, 6, 38,
willingly gave * himself for our sins: that he might deliver us from
this Gala, 1, 4.
present evil world, according to the will of God, even our Father.

And that, by his suffering; he might Jerome.
make an excellent and merritorious satisfaction unto his Father, for man's
iniquity.

For, to this end especially was the passion Chrysostom.
of our Savior Christ; that GOD might thereby bring to pass a work, in which
he might more fully manifest both his justice and mercy, then he did in the
Creation: namely, the reconciliation between himself and man; through the
suffering of his only son for sin.

So that the Passion of Christ, being considered Augustine.
as a bare passion, ministers no comfort unto us: but all our joy stands in
this, that by faith we apprehend it, as a full satis-faction, means, or
agreement, made unto God, for our iniquities.

And confess withal, that as the principal Augustine.
cause thereof, was the price of man's Redemption; so it was done by the decree
and providence of God.

. 10.
After our Savior had thus fully suffered for our offenses; there came a rich
man of Math, 27, 57 58, 59, 60.
Arimathea, named Joseph, who had also himself been Jesus disciple: he went
to Pilate, and requested the body of Jesus. And Pilate, (* after he
understood that Mar. 15, 45.
Jesus was dead,) commanded the body to be given him. So Joseph took it, and
wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and put it in his new Tomb, which he had
hewne out in a Rock, wherein (before that time) was Ioh, 19, 41, 42
* never any man laid. There then did he, and Nicodemus helping him, lay the
body of Jesus. And when they had done, Math. 27. 60
they rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher, and departed.

At this time also, there were certain women, Math, 27, 55, 56,
which had followed Jesus from Galile, ministering unto him, among whom was
Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James and Ioses, and the mother of
Zebedeus sons. These beheld the Sepulcher, Luke, 23. 55, 56.
and saw how the body of Jesus was laid. And they returned, and prepared
odours and sweet ointments, but rested the Saboth day, according to the
commandment.

. 11.
On the morrow after the Saboth, being Luke, 24, 1, 2, 3,
the first day of the week, these foresaid women came early in the morning
unto the Sepulcher, bringing with them the odours which they had prepared. And
perceiving the stone to be rolled away from the door thereof, they went in,
but found not the body of the Lord Jesus.

And it came to pass, that whilst they verse, 4. 5. 6, 7, 8.
were amazed thereat, two men suddenly stood by them in shining vestures.
And as they trembled and durst not look up, the men said unto them: Why seek
ye him that lives, among the dead? He is not here, but is risen. Remember
how he spoke unto you while he was yet in Galilee, saying; The son of man
must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified; and the
third day rise again.

And they remembered the words of verse, 9, 10.
Christ, and returned from the Sepulcher; and told all these things unto the
eleven, and to all the remnant. etc.

The same day [also,] Jesus himself, Mark, 16, 9, 10. 11, 12,
(that he might make manifest his Resurrection to such as loved him) appeared
first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven devils. And, at another
time, after that, he appeared unto two of his disciples, as they went into the
Country. And they went and told these things unto the Apostles, and the rest
of his disciples: but they believed it not.

After this, he appeared also unto the Mark. 16. 14
eleven, as they sat together; and reproved them for their unbelief, and
hardness of heart: because they believed not the^ which had seen him, being
risen up again.

And further, to confirm them in an undoubted belief of his most certain
Resurrection, and to assure them by plain proofs, that he was truly their
Lord and master Christ which appeared unto them, and no deceitful or
deluding Spirit, (as Luke, 24, 37 38, 39. 40.
they at the first sight supposed him to be,) he first showed unto them his
hands and his feet, and then commanded them to handle and feel his body, and
to behold his flesh and bones. * Afterward, he asked verse, 41. 42, 43, etc.
them for meat, and did eat the same in their presence. He also opened their
understanding, and expounded the Scriptures unto them, saying: Thus it is
written: and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead
the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins, should be preached
in his Name among all Nations; beginning at Jerusalem. etc. Afterward, he led
them * forth into Bethania, and Luke, 24, 50
lift up his hands and blessed them.

And when he had sundry times presented himself alive unto them, (after that
he had suffered,) and sufficiently proved his resurrection * by many
infallible tokens; Acts, 1, 3, 4. 5.
(being seen of them by the space of forty days, and speaking of those
things which appertain to the kingdom of God,) he then gathered them
together, and commanded them, that they should not depart from Jerusalem; but
wait for the promise of the Father: which (said he) ye have heard of me.
Namely, the coming of * the holy Ghost. etc. John, 14, 26


. 12.
And when Jesus had spoken these things unto his Apostles, (to the intent they
might as well be eyewitnesses of his Ascension, as records to the world of
his Resurrection,) while * they beheld, he was taken up: Acts. 1. 9.
for a cloud took him out of their sight.

And for further surety hereof, then the bare sight of their eyes only,
(though that alone, were of it self, above all other most sufficient,) they
heard with their ears, the very same thing which they saw with their eyes,
further affirmed unto them by two heavenly witnesses: for, while they looked
steadfastly after him, toward heaven as he went, * behold, two men stood by
the^ in Acts, 1, 10. 11.
white apparel, which also said; Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
into heaven? This Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come,
as ye have seen him go into heaven.

Thus much, only to prove, according to the Scriptures, the Passion, Death,
Burial, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior Christ. Whom * the Heaven
Acts, 3, 21.
must contain, until the time that all things be restored, which GOD has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began.

Of the several benefits which we have, by the Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of our Savior Christ.
. 1.
AS by diverse places in the Book of GOD, we find it manifestly affirmed, that
there is only but one God, which alone, by his own almighty power, has made
Heaven, and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is: So from the self same
sacred Scriptures it may plainly be proved, by the speech of the Apostle,
that there is [onely] but one Mediator between God, and man; namely, the man
1, Tim. 2. 5. 6.
* Christ Jesus: who gave himself a ransom for all men, to be a testimony
in due time.

He [alone] died for our sins, according 1, Cor. 15, 3, 4.
to the Scriptures; and he was buried, and rose again the third day, according
to the Scriptures.

Yea; he died for all: that they which 2, Cor, 5, 15,
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves; but unto him which died for
them, and rose again.

. 2.
Christ, that he might kill death, (says S. Augustine.
Augustine,) was clothed with death: for, death could not die, but in life:
even as that which is sower and bitter, dies not, but in that which is
pleasant and sweet.

And, as Elizeus made the iron to swim, Cyrill.
which naturally sinketh: so Christ by his death, brought us back from the
gates of hell, which deservedly we should have entered.

He also, by his own death, has destroyed Heb. 2, 14, 15.
him that had the power of death: that is to say, the devil: and has delivered
all them, which for fear of death, remained all their life time subdued unto
bondage.

Yea, he by his coming, has abolished 2, Tim, 1, 10
or put away death: and brought life and immortality unto light, through the
Gospel.

. 3.
O Death, where is thy sting? (says the 1, Cor, 15, 55, 56, 57,
Apostle,) o grave, where is thy victory? the sting of Death, is sin; and
the strength of sin is the Law: but thanks be unto God, which has given us
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

For, he [onely] delivers us from the 1, These. 1, 10.
wrath of God to come.

And to him also give all the Prophets Acts, 10, 43.
witness; that through his Name, all that believe in him, should receive the
forgiveness of their sins.

. 4.
We were not redeemed (as S. Peter 1, Pet, 1, 18, 19, 20.
affirms) with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from our vain
conversation, which we received by the traditions of the Fathers: but with the
precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb undefiled and without spot; which was
ordained before the foundation of the world, but was declared in the last
times. etc.

Who his own self, bare our sins in 1, Pet, 2, 24,
his body on the tree: that we being delivered from sin, should live in
righteousness: by whose stripes we were healed.

For, he has taken on him our infirmities, Esaias, 53, 4.
and borne our pains.

He was wounded for our transgressions, Esaias, 53, 5,
he was broken for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him;
and with his stripes we are made whole.

All we like sheep, have gone astray: verse, 6,
we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon him, the
iniquity of us all.

Yea; God has made him which knew 2. Cor. 5, 21.
no sin, to be sin for us: that we should be made the righteousness of GOD
in him.

And, those things which GOD before Acts, 3, 18,
had showed by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, the
same has he fulfilled.

Yet was his death voluntary, and not of Augustine.
constraint.

. 5.
Mankind labors in this world, (says Bernard.
S. Bernard) of a three-folde disease: his birth; his life; his death. The
first, unclean; the second, sinful; the third, dangerous: but Christ by his
coming, brought unto us three remedies: He was borne; he lived; he died.
His birth, refined ours, his life, instructed ours; his death, overcame ours.

And, as a strong corrasiue laid to a sore, Jerome.
eats away all the rotten and dead flesh: so Christ's death, being applied
to the heart of a penitent sinner by faith, weakens and consumes that corruption
of sin, which cleaves so fast unto our natures; and dwells within us.

. 6.
It was very needful (says S. Augustine) Augustine.
that Christ the son of God, should both become man, and die for us; for two
causes. First, to satisfy Gods justice. Secondly, that he might fulfill the
truth of Gods Word, which had said; That man eating the forbidden fruit,
should die the death.

For surely, if the son of God, had not Beza.
come into the world in our nature, (sin only excepted) and died upon the
Cross, to appease the wrath of God for man's offenses; we should yet remain
subject to eternal death and damnation.

But he has loved us; and has given himself Ephe, 5. 2,
for us: to be an offering, and a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling savor unto
God.

Yea; he has loved us, and washed us Reave. 1, 5.
from our sins in his own blood.

He [also] has redeemed us from the Gala, 3, 13.
curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us.

And, he [likewise] being rich; for our 2. Cor, 8. 9.
sakes became poor: that we through his poverty, might be made rich.

. 7.
Christ, (says S. Peter) has once suffered 1, Pet, 3, 18.
for sins; the just for the unjust; that he might bring us to God: and was
put to death, concerning the flesh; but was quickened in the Spirit.

Yea, even when Christ suffered death Epiphanius.
in his flesh upon the Cross, the Godhead and manhood were [still] together;
but his Godhead did not suffer: that we might be justified not only in his
flesh, but also in his Divinity: and that we might be saved, both in his
God-heade and manhood together.

For, we could never have been delivered Augustine.
by that one only Mediator between God, and men, the man Christ Jesus,
unless he had been also God.

The benefits which we d^ily receive by Ambrose.
his death, are four. The first is, the change of our natural death. The
second is, in that he has quite taken away the second death from those that
are in him. The third is, that his death is a means to satisfy his last will
and Testament. The fourth is, that it does serve to abolish the original
corruption of our sinful hearts.

The means also of our salvation by him, Augustine.
are two: his Merrite; and his Efficacy. The first is, in that by his
obedience to the Law, and by his death, he made full satis-faction unto his
Father for all our sins; freed us from death; and reconciled us unto God. The
second is, in that he gave his Spirit to mortify the corruption of our
natures; that we thereby may daily die unto sin, and live unto righteousness:
and have true comfort in terrors of conscience, and in the pangs of death.

Believing assuredly, that what-so-euer Calvin.
Christ has suffered, he has suffered for us; and that all his righteousness,
through faith is made our righteousness. For, he himself alone, has fully
discharged by his death, the debt which all we owed: and has made us by his
obedience, the sons of God, and fellow heirs with him, of everlasting glory.

For, he has put out the hand-vvriting Colos. 2, 14, 15.
that was against us, contained in the Law written, which was contrary to us;
he even took it out of the way, and fastened it upon the cross: and has
spoiled the Principalities and Powers; and has made a show of the^ openly,
triumphing over the^ in the same cross.

. 8.
The Law, (says S. John) was given by John, 1. 17.
Moises; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.

For, God sending his own son, in the Rom, 8, 3,
similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin; condemned sin in the flesh; that
the righteousness of the Law, might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit.

And we, through the spirit, wait for Gala, 5, 5,
the hope of righteousness through faith.

Be it known unto you therefore, men Acts, 13, 38, 39,
and brethren, that through this man (Christ) is preached unto us, the
forgiveness of sins: and from all things, from which we could not be
justified by the Law of Moises; by him, every one that believes, is justified.

For, the Law made nothing perfect: but Heb, 7, 19.
the bringing in of a better hope made perfect, whereby we draw near unto God.

And, albeit that we in time past, (being Ephe. 2. 11. 12. 13.
Gentiles, and uncircumcised people in the flesh,) were indeed without Christ;
and were aliants from the commonwealth of Israel; and strangers from the
couenaunts of promise; and had no hope, and were without God in the world: yet
now, by the means of Christ Jesus, we which once were far off, are made
near by the blood of Christ.

For he, being our peace, has made of Ephe, 2. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18.
both one; and has broken down the stop of the particion Wall, [that was
between the Jews and us,] in abrogating through his flesh, the hatred;
namely, the Law of Commandments, which stands in ordinances: for, to make
of twain one new man in himself, so making peace: And that he might
reconcile both unto God in one body, through his Cross, and sley hatred
thereby, he came and preached peace; both to us which were a far off, and to
them also that were near. For, through him, we both have an entrance unto
the Father by one spirit.

And GOD, which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved
Ephe* 2, ^, 5, 6, 7.
us, even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us, [both Jews and
Gentiles] together in Christ; by whose grace we are saved: and has raised us
up together, and made us sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
That he might show in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of his grace,
through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.

Not by the works of righteousness Titus, 3, 5, 6, 7.
which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing
of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost; which he shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior that we being justified by his
grace, should be made heirs, according to the hope of eternal life.

For, God so loved the world, that he Ioh, 3, 16.
has given his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perrish, but have everlasting life.

And, herein was the love of God made 1. Ioh, 4, 9.
manifest amongst us; in that he sent his only begotten son into the world,
that we might live through him.

Yea; herein is love; not that we loved 1, Ioh. 4. 10.
GOD, but that he loved us; and sent his Son to be a reconcil^ation for our
sins.

For Christ, when we were yet of no Rom 5, 6,
strength, at his time died for the ungodly.

And he, being very God, equal with Philip. 2. 6, 7, 8.
the Father in power and glory, made himself (notwithstanding) of no
reputation; taking on him the form of a servant, and was made like unto men;
and was found in shape as a man. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto
the death, even the death of the Cross.

That he might he^eby deliver us, from the wrath of God, and from the danger
of Becon.
eternal damnation; whereunto (through our Father Adams transgression) we
all remained subject.

Likewise then, as by the sin of one, Rom, 5, 18.
(namely Adam) there sprang up evil on all men to condemnation: even so, by
the righteousness of one, (namely Christ) ^pringeth good upon all men, to the
righteousness of life.

For, as by one man's disobedience, many verse, 19,
were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many also be made
righteous.

. 1.
CHrist, (says the Apostle) is risen from 1, Cor. 15. 20.
the dead; and was made the first fruits of them that slept*

For, since by man came death* by man verse. 21, 22,
came also the resurrection of the dead* and ^^ in Adam, all die; even so in
Christ, shall (...) be made alive.

Yea; Christ himself, and no other for him, did by his own power, raise
himself Augustine.
to life. Which proves, that he was not only man, but also true God.

Wherefore, if he were able to give life Jerome.
unto himself, being dead, and buried; then much more now, being alive, and
in heaven glorified, he is able by his own power to raise up all those that
be his members from death.

For, his Resurrection* even unto the dead Bernard.
is life; to the Saints glory; and to sinners mercy.

And, like as when a man is cast into the Chrysostom.
Sea, having all his body under the water, and that there is nothing to be
looked for but present death; yet if he carry his head above the water, the^e
is good hope of his recovery: so Christ himself, though he were dead and
buried in the grave; is risen again; as a sure pledge, that all the just shall
likewise rise again. For, he is the head^ unto his Church; and therefore all
his members must needs follow him in they^ time.

. 2.
The resurrection of our Savior Christ* Augustine.
(says S. Augustine) vv^s long since pre^^gured in our first Father Ada^: For,
as he rising from his sleep, did know Eve to ^e flesh of his flesh; so Christ,
rising from ^is death; by the wound of his side, acknowledged his Church.

And, his resurrection is sufficiently ^uailable Augustine.
for all them that believe in him: for, by the same power, whereby he raised
himself, he raises all his members: and therefore he is called a quickening
Spirit.

Besides, it was most needful that Christ Ambrose.
our Savior should rise again after his death, for these three causes
following.

First, that he might thereby show to all the people of God, that he had fully
overcome death.

Secondly, Christ which died was the son of GOD, therefore the Author of
life it self: and for this cause, it was neither meet nor possible, for him
to be holden of death, but needs he must rise from death.

Thirdly, Christ his Priesthood consists of two parts: one, to make
satis^faction for sin, which he per^^^ted by his one only sacrifice upon the
Cross; the other, to apply [through the secret working of his holy Spirite]
the virtue of this sacrifice, to every one that believes in him: which could
not be, unless he had risen again from the dead.

. 1.
CHrist our Savior, having once offered himself a sufficient sacrifice unto
his Father for our sins, sits, (as the Apostle says) for * ever at the
right hand of Heb, 10, 12, 13.
God; and from henceforth tarrieth, until his enemies be made his footestoole.

For, with one offering, has he made verse, 14,
perfect for ever, them that are sanctified.

Yea, be is now at the right hand of God; 1, Pet, 3, 22,
gone into heaven; and to him, the Angels, powers, and might are subdued.

Also; when he ascended up on hi^, he Ephe, 4, 8,
led captivity captive: and gave gifts unto men.

He gave some to be Apostles; some to Ephe, 4, 11, 12, 13.
be Prophets; some to be E^angelists; and some to be Pastors, and Teachers;
for the gathering together of the Saints; for the work of the Ministry; and
for the edification of the body of Christ: till we all meet together in the
unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of GOD, unto a perfect man.

. 2.
Christ, (says S. Jerome) is ascended into Jerome.
heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father; the same nature of flesh,
wherein he was borne, and suffered, and rose again, remaining still. For, the
substance of his human nature, was not done away, but glorified.

Wherefore, we must believe, that although Cyrill.
Christ be absent from us as concerning his body; yet by his divine power he
governs us and all things; and is evermore present with all the faithful,
(according as himself has promised) even * until Math. 28. 20
the end of the world.

For, like as when he was conversant here Cyrill.
on earth, as man, yet then he filled heaven; and did not leave the company of
Angels; even so, being now in heaven with his flesh, yet he fills the
earth, and dwells in all them that love him.

So that he is with us, and not with us; for Virgilius.
those whom he left, and went from, as concerning his humanity, those he left
not, nor forsook them not* as touching his divinity. For, as touching the
form of a servant, (which he took away from us into heaven) he is absent
from us: but by the form of God, (which goes not from us) he is always
present with us in earth. And nevertheless, both present, and absent, he is
all one Christ.

. 3.
Christ, by his ascension, (says S. Augustine) Augustine.
has, like a noble Captain, taken sin and ^athan prisoners, and has
pinioned the^ fast; so that all the power which they heretofore had, is now
in Christ's hand.

And this benefit likewise comes unto Augustine.
us by his ascension; that he is ascended not only to rest personally in
heaven himself, but also to prepare a place of endless felicity, for as many
as shall believe in him.

And, that he might the better by his ascension, Ambrose.
take away al excuses from them that will not seek his king dome, he has
se^^e marks and bounds in the way, and has placed guides in it: namely, his
Ministers; to show all passengers, a straight and ready course unto the
kingdom of God.

Nay more; even with his own blood Jerome.
he has vouchsafed to train the way for us to the kingdom of heaven; and
has there made a perpetual purchase for us: requiring nothing of us, but that
we would come to possess the place, which he has already paid for.

. 4.
We read, (says S. Bernard) that no Bernard.
man ascends up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven. What shall we
do then? shall we despair? Nay rather by this, says he, our hope is made
stronger: for although Christ only ascend, yet rest we fully assured, that
every part of him goes with him; for, a bone of him shall not be broken; and
the head in Gods kingdom, is not found without the members.

Thou therefore which fear death, remember Jerome.
that Christ is gone into heaven, to prepare a place for thy bodie^ where it
must be glorified, and live for ever, with the blessed* Trinity, and all the
holy Saints, and beautiful Angels: though for a while it lie dead, and ^ot in
the earth.

For, as sure as Christ our Captain is ascended Beza.
into heaven in man's nature; so certainly shall all we that are his members, by
his almighty power, be likewise received into heaven, in the same nature
wherein he is ascended.

. 5.
What shall we then say to these things? Romans 8, 31, 32.
If GOD be on our side, who can be against us? Who spared not his own son,
but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him, give us all things
also?

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of verse, 33. 34,
Gods chosen? It is GOD that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ
which is dead; yea, or rather which is risen again: who is also at the right
hand of God, and makes request for us.

Satan and his Angels are fallen, and Augustine.
have no Savior; but Man, falling, had (through the great mercy of God) a
Mediator and Savior to restore him; namely; Jesus Christ.

Who, as he stood in our room upon Ambrose.
the Cross, and made satisfaction unto his Father for our sins; so now in
heaven, he appears as a public person in our stead, representing all the
Elect that believe in him.

Yea; the self same Christ, which dyed Augustine.
for us here upon the earth; makes intercession unto his Father for us, now
in heaven.

And, whatsoever his request was in our Ambrose.
behalf here on earth, the same for substance it continues still in heaven.

. 6.
Before the fall of Adam, says S. Jerome, Ier^me.
man could speak to God, face to face: but now Christ is his Intercessour. And
this work of intercession, is the sole work of Christ, God and man: not
belonging to any other creature besides, either in heaven or earth.

The work of Christ's Passion, serves Chrysostom.
as a satisfaction unto Gods justice for our offenses; and is as it were the
tempering of the plaster, by which we may be healed: but Intercession goes
further; for it applies the same satis-faction of Christ to us, and lays the
very salve to the sore of every penitent sinner.

Besides; the work of Christ's Intercession Chrysostom.
or Mediation, serves not only to preserve all repentant sinners in the
estate of grace, (that being once sanctified and justified, they may so
continue to the end,) but it also makes our works acceptable in the sight of
GOD; and causes him to account them righteous, through our faith in Christ.

. 7.
Christ our Savior, (being both our Heb, 9, 24,
high Priest and Mediator, as the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews
calls him) is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands; which
are similitudes of the true Sanctuary: but is entered into heaven it self, to
appear now in the sight of GOD for us.

Not that he should offer himself often, verse, 25, 26.
as the High Priest (among the Jews) entered into the Holy place every year
with other blood, (for then must he have often suffered since the foundation
of the world) but now, in the end of the world, has he appeared once, to put
away sin, by the sacrifice of himself.

And, as it is appointed unto men, that verse, 27, 28.
they shall once die, and after that comes the judgment; so Christ was once
offered, to take away the sins of many: and unto them that look for him,
shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.

Again; among the Jews many were Hebr. 7, 23.
made Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by reason of death;
but this man [Christ,] because he endures ever, has an everlasting
priesthood. Wherefore, verse, 24. 25,
he is able also, perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them.

For, such an High Priest it became us to verse, 26. 27.
have, which is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made
higher then the heavens: which needed not daily, as those High-priestes, to
offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples; for
that did he once, when he offered up himself.

. 8.
The same Christ [likewise,] being come Hebr, 9, 11. 12.
an High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and a more perfect
Tabernacle, not made with hands: that is to say, not of this building; neither
by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, entered he in once
into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption for us.

For, if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, verse. 13. 14.
and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinckling them that are unclean, sanctifies as
touching the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ,
which through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge
our conscience from dead works to serve the living God?

And for this cause is he the Mediatou^ of verse, 15.
the new Testament, that through death, which was for the redemption of the
transgressions that were in the former Testament, they which were called,
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

For, where as is a Testament, there must verse, 16, 17,
also be the death of him that made the Testament. For, the Testament is
confirmed when men are dead; and is yet of no force, so long as he that made
the same remains alive. etc.

. 9.
Doubtless, (says S. Paul) one will scarce Rom, 5, 7,
die for a righteous man; but yet for a good man, it may be that one dare die.

But God sets out his love toward us, verse, 8, 9,
seeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ d^ed for us. Much more then
being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

For, if when we were enemies, we were verse, 10,
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life.

And, not only so, but we also rejoice verse, 11.
in GOD, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the
atonement.

For, God has not appointed us unto 1, These. 5, 9, 10.
wrath, but to obtain salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which died for us; that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together
with him.

Wherefore,] if any man sin, we have 1, Ioh. 2, 1, 2.
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just: he is the reconciliation
for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole
world.

By him, we have redemption through Ephe, 1, 7, 8,
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to his rich grace:
whereby he has been abundant toward us in all wisdom and understanding.

By him, we are made the sons of God, John, 1, 12.
if we believe in his Name.

And of his fulness have all we received: verse, 16,
even grace for grace.

By his blood [also] we may be bold to Heb, 10. 19, 20.
enter into the Holy place, by the new and living way which he has prepared
for us, through the veil; that is, his flesh.

For, we are made partakers of Christ, if Heb, 3, 14,
we keep sure unto the end, the beginning wherewith we are vpholden.

And, we are justified freely, by the grace Romans 3, 24. 25.
of God, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set
forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood.

For, the blood of Jesus Christ the son 1. John, 1. 7.
of God, cleanses us from all sin.

And, without sheading of blood, is no Heb, 9, 22.
remission.

. 10.
Seeing then that we have a great Highpriest, Heb, 4, 14,
which is entered into Heaven, even Jesus the Son of GOD, let us hold fast
our profession.

For, we have not an High Priest which verse, 15.
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all things
tempted, like as we are: yet without sin.

Which in the days of his flesh, did offer Heb, 5, 7,
up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was
able to save him from death: and was also heard in that which he feared.

And though he were the Son, yet learned verse, 8. 9.
he obedience by the things which he suffered. And being consecrate, [or
perfectly holy,] was made the Author of eternal salvation to all the^ that
obey him.

And is called of GOD an High Priest Heb, 5, 10,
[ Heb, 7, 21
for ever,] after the order of Melchisedeck.

For, it became him, for whom are all Hebr, 2, 10.
things, and by whom are all things, seeing that he brought many children unto
glory, that he should consecrate the Prince of their salvation through
afflictions.

Yea; in all things it behooued him, to be Heb, 2, 17.
made like unto his brethren, that he might be merciful: and a faithful
High Priest in things concerning God, that he might make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. For, in that he suffered, and was verse, 18.
tempted; he is able also to succor them that are tempted.

. 11.
These things are written, that ye might John, 20, 31
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God; and that in believing,
ye might have life through his Name.

For, other foundation can no man la^, 1, Cor, 3, 11,
then that which is laid, which is; Jesus Christ. The Mark. 5. 7.
Son of the most high God.

Who gave himself for us; that ^e might Titus, 2, 14,
redeem us from all iniquity; and purge us to be a peculier people unto
himself: zealous of good works.

Neither is there salvation in any other: Acts, 4, 12.
for, among men, there is given none other Name under heaven, whereby we must
be saved.

Let us therefore by him, offer the sacrifice Heb. 13, 15,
of praise always unto GOD; that is to say; the fruit of those lips which
confess his Name.

For, he [onely] is our mouth, whereby Ambrose.
we speak unto the Father: he is our eyes, whereby we see the Father: he is
our right hand, whereby we offer our selves unto the Father. And, without his
intercession, neither we, nor any of the Saints, have ought to do with GOD.

But he, evermore prays for us; prays Beda.
in us; and is prayed of us. He prays for us, as our Advocate and
everlasting Priest: He prays in us, as our head: and he is prayed of us, as
our God.

For, he is the Mediator between God and Cyrill.
man, not only because he has reconciled man unto God; but also, because he
is naturally and substantially, both God and man in one person.

Yet does it not follow, that he makes intercession Theod. Beza.
to himself; seeing that the Father is one, and the Son is another, in
several persons thoroughly distinct, albeit, that the Father and the son be
both one thing, and one God, if the essence of them be considered without their
persons. For, like as in Christ incarnate, there be several things, and not
several persons; so in the Godhead, there be several persons, but not
several things.

. 12.
In him likewise, and through him, we Ambrose.
have all things. For, if we desire to be cured of our wounds, he is our
Physician: If we be grieved with our sins, he is our righteousness: If we
lack help, he is our strength: If we fear death, he is our life: If we be
in darkness, he is our light: If we will go to heaven, he is our way.

Yea, the whole sum of our salvation, and all C^luine.
the parts thereof, are comprehended in Christ. If we seek for salvation, we
are taught by the very Name of Jesus, that it is in him; If we seek for any
other gifts of the Spirit, they are to be found in his annoynting; If we seek
for strength, it is in his dominion; If we seek for cleanenes, it is in his
conception; If we seek for tender kindness, it shows it self in his birth,
whereby he was made in all things like unto us, that he might learn to sorrow
with us; If we seek for redemption, it is in his passion; If we seek for
absolution, it is in his condemnation; If we seek for release of the curse, it
is in his cross; If we seek for satisfaction, it is in his sacrifice; If we
seek for clensing, it is in his blood; If we seek for reconciliation, it is in
his going down into hell; If we seek for mortification of the flesh, it is in
his burial; If we seek for newnes of life, it is in his resurrection; If we
seek for immortality, it is in the same; If we seek for the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven, it is in his entrance into heaven; If we seek for defense,
for assurednes, or, for plenty and store of all good things, it is in his
kingdom.

Finally; since the treasures of all sorts of Calvin.
good things are only in him; let us draw thence, and from no where else, even
till we be full withal. For, they which being not content with him alone,
are carried hither and thither, into diverse hopes; although they have
principal regard unto him, yet even in this they are out of the right way,
that they turn any part of their knowledge; [or comfort,] to any other-where.

Of Faith: Fear: and Love: being three special Virtues, necessarily
belonging to every true Christian.
HEBREWS. 11. verse. 6. Without Faith, it is impossible to please GOD; for
he that is in coming toward God, must believe that there is a God: and that
he is a rewarder of them that seek him. Of Faith.
. 1.
Faith, (as S. Paul the Apostle affirms) Hebr. 11. 1.
is the ground of things which are hoped for; and the evidence of things which
are not seen.

It is also a confident persuasion, of almighty Vrsinus.
Gods everlasting love and mercy toward us; in, and by the means of Christ
Jesus: grounded wholely on the promises of our heavenly Father in his holy
Word; wrought in our hearts by hearing the Gospel preached; and witnessed in
us by the testimony of the holy Ghost. By which, we certainly assure our
selves in soul and conscience, that all our sins, are as freely forgiven us
for Christ's sake, as if we never had committed any; and all his righteousness
and obedience, as perfectly imputed unto us, as if we had performed the same
in our own persons.

This faith, is the gift of God; and breathed Augustine.
only by his Spirit, into the hearts of all those that be his children.

. 2.
Through faith, we understand that the Hebr. 11. 3.
World was ordained by the word of God; so that the things which we see, are
not made of things which did appear.

For, God in the beginning, by the only Lactantius.
power of his Word, made all things of nothing: and he likewise, by the power
of his Word alone, is able to destroy all things again, when it pleases him.

. 3.
From faith, if it be perfect and lively, Euagoras.
we come to fear; from fear, to flying of sin; and by flying of sin,
we attain unto a patient mind to suffer tribulation: by the which we
obtain sure hope and trust in GOD; through the which hope, our souls sit
safe in a sure chair of a certain expectation of that glory, which is laid up
in store for us in the kingdom of heaven. For, 2, Cor, 5, 7
we walk by faith, and not by sight.

And, by it, our forefathers were well reported Heb. 11. 2,
of.

. 4.
By faith, Abraham when he was called, Heb, 11, 8.
obeyed God, to go out into a place, which he should afterward receive for
inheritance; and he went out of his own country, not knowing whether he went.

Through faith also, Sara the wife of Abraham, Heb, 11, 11.
received strength to conceive seed, and was delivered of a child when she
was past age: because she judged him faithful which had promised.

By faith, Moises when he was come to Heb. 11, 24. 25.
age, refused to be called the son of Pharaos Daughter; and chose rather to
suffer adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sins
for a season.

Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater verse, 26.
riches then the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of
the reward.

By faith, the woman of Cananee, (after Math. 15* 22 23. 24. etc.
three repulses given her, from our Savior Christ himself,) received help
for her daughter, which was misterably vexed with an unclean spirit.

By faith, Saint Peter confessed his Lord Math, 16* 16
and Master Jesus, to be Christ, the son of the living God.

And, who-soeuer else, (having in him Math, 16, 18
the Spirit of God) shall confidently make such like confession of his faith
when he is demanded, as S. Peter made, our Savior gives him this assurance,
that the gates of hell shall not be able to prevail against it.

Wherefore, if thou shall confess with thy Rom, 10, 9,
mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart, that God raised him up
from the dead, thou shall be saved.

For, with the heart, man believes unto verse, 10.
righteousness; and with the mouth, man confesses unto salvation.

. 5.
Who is it that overcomes the world, 1, John, 5, 5
(says S. John) but he which believes that Jesus is the son of God?

For, whosoever confesses, that Jesus is 1, Ioh, 4, 15,
the son of GOD, he dwells in God, and God in him.

Yea; who-soeuer believes that Jesus is 1, Ioh, 5, 1,
the Christ, is borne of God.

And, all that is borne of God, overcomes 1, John, 5, 4,
the world: and the victory that overcomes the world, is our faith.

And, * the end of our faith, is the salvation 1. P^t, 1* 9,
of our souls.

. 6.
Verily, verily, (says Christ) he that believes John, 6, 46
in me, has everlasting life.

And, this is the will of him that sent John, 6. 42,
me; that every man which sees the Son, and believes in him, should have
everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.

Now, although every man cannot with John, 20, 29
his bodily eyes, (as S. Thomas did) first see Christ, and afterward believe:
yet are all men, (even by the mouth of Truth) pronounced blessed, which have
not so seen him, and yet have believed.

. 7.
We read in S. John, that when Martha John, 11, 39, 40.
seemed doubtful, that Christ could not call again her brother Lazarus to
life, because he had been four days dead, and buried in his grave: our
savior thus gently reproved her, saying; Said I not unto thee, that if thou
did believe, thou should see the glory of God?

Also; when certain friends of Iairus came unto him, willing him to forbear
to Mark, 5, 35, 36,
trouble Christ any further for the health of his daughter, seeing she was
already dead* Our Savior (notwithstanding) thus comforted the discomforted
father, saying: Be not afraid; only believe.

For, if thou can believe, all things are Mark, 9, 23.
possible to him that believes.

Expressing unto us by these speeches, both the great power of God, and
wonderful force of faith.

. 8.
We read furthermore, in the Acts of the Apostles, that when Paul and
Silas Acts, 16, 22, 23, 24, 25,
were whypped and imprisoned at Philippi, (a chief City in Macidonia,) for
their testimony of Jesus; at midnight they prayed, and sung Psalms unto God:
and suddenly, there was a great Earthquake, so that the whole foundation of
the prison was shaken; and by and by all the doors opened, and every man's
bands were loosed.

Then the Keeper of the prison vvaked verse, 27, 28.
out of his sleep; and when he saw the prison* doors open, he drew out his
sword, and would have killed himself; supposing that the prisoners had been
fled. But Paul cried out with a loud voice unto him, saying; Do thy self no
harm: for we are all here.

Then called he for a light, and leaped in, verse, 29, 30.
and came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them
out, and said: Sirs; what must I do to be saved?

To which demand of his, they made verse, 31,
no other answer but only this: Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and thou
shall be saved, and thine household.

Our Savior Christ, being likewise demanded by certain Jews which heard
him teach, what they might do to work John, 6, 28 29.
the works of God? [or, the works which might be acceptable unto God?] This is
the work of God, (quoth he) that ye believe in him whom he has sent.

For, except ye believe that I am he* John, 8, 24,
[namely, the Christ, the Son of GOD, which according to the saying of the
scripture, should come into the world to redeem both you, and all mankind
from death and hell,] you shall die in your sins.

Search [therefore] the Scriptures; for in John, 5, 39,
them ye think to have everlasting life: and they are they which testify of
me.

Also; while ye have light, believe in the John, 12, 36
light; that ye may be the children of the light.

. 9.
The Father loves the Son, says Christ, John, 3, 35, 36.
and has given all things into his hand. He that believes in the Son, has
everlasting life: and he that obeys not the Son, shall not see life; but the
wrath of God abides on him.

He that believes in the Son, shall John, 3, 18.
not be condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned already; because he
believes not in the Name of the only begotten Son of God.

. 10.
He that believes in the Son of God, 1, John. 5. 10
has the witness [of God] in himself: he that believes not God, has made
him a liar; because he believed not the record, that God witnessed of his
Son.

And, this is the record; that God has verse, 11, 12
given unto us everlasting life: and this life is in his Son. He that has
the Son, has life: and he that has not the Son of God, has not life.

These things have I written unto you, 1, John, 5. 1^
that believe in the Name of the Son of GOD; that ye may know that ye have
everlasting life: and that ye may believe in the Name of the Son of God.

For, he that shall believe, and be baptized, Mar. 16. 16.
shall be saved: but he that will not believe, shall be damned.

. 11.
S. Paul, going about in his Epistle to the Galathians, to prove our
justification to come only by the grace and mercy of God, through faith in
Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the Law; begins thus. We * which are
Jews by nature, and Gala. 2. 15. 16.
not sinners of the Gentiles, know, that a man is not justified* by the
works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. Even we, I say, have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ,
and not by the works of the Law; because that by the works of the Law, no
flesh shall be justified.

But, we believe to be saved* through Acts, 15. 11.
the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For, as many as are of the works of the Gala. 3. 10.
Law* are under the curse. For, it is written: Cu^sed is every man that
continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the Law, to do
them.

And, that no man is justified by the law Gala, 3, 11.
in the sight of God, it is evident: for the just shall live by faith.

I, through the Law (says he) am dead to Gala, 2, 19. 20.
the Law: and that I might live unto God, I am crucified with Christ.
Nevertheless, I live; yet not I now, but Christ lives in me: and in that,
that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God; who has
loved me, and given himself for me.

I do not abrogate the grace of God; for verse, 21.
if righteousness be by the law, then Christ died without a cause.

But now is the righteousness of GOD Rom, 3, 21, 22,
made manifest without the Law, having witness of the Law, and of the Prophets.
To wit, the righteousness of God, by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and
upon all that believe.

For, by grace we are saved through faith, Ephe, 2, 8, 9,
and that not of our selves; it is the gift of God. Not of works, least any man
should boast himself.

. 12.
If Abraham (says the same Apostle) Rom, 4, 2, 3.
were justified by works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God. For,
what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteoushes.

Now, to him that works, the wages is verse, 4, 5,
not counted by favor, but by debt: but to him that works not, but believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.

(For, Gregory.
only believing, is righteousness.)

Besides; it is not written for Abraham Rom, 4, 23, 24, 25.
only, that it was imputed to him for righteousness, but also for us, to whom
it shall be imputed for righteousness; which believe in him that raised up
Jesus our Lord from the dead: who was delivered to death for our sins; and is
risen again for our justification.

Know ye therefore, that they which Gala, 3, 7,
are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

For* the Scripture foreseeing, that God verse, 8, 9.
would justify the Gentiles through faith, preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham; saying: In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed. So then they which
be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.

For* the promise that he should be the Rom, 4, 13*
heir of the world, was not given to Abraham, or to his seed, through the
Law, but through the righteousness of faith* For, if verse, 14,
they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void; and the promise is
made of none effect.

For, the Law causes wrath; but where verse, 15.
no Law is, there is no transgression.

(By the law [also] comes the knowledge Rom, 3, 20.
of sin.

Nay, I knew not sin, but by the law; Romans 7, 7.
for, I had not known lust, except the law had said; Thou shall not lust.)

Therefore is the promise by faith, that it Romans 4, 16.
might come by grace, and the promise might be sure unto all the seed: not to
that only which is of the law; but also to that which is of the faith of
Abraham: who is the father of us all.

. 13.
Do we then make the law of none effect Rom, 3, 31
through faith? God forbid: yea, we rather establish the law.

For, the doctrine of faith, is the ornament Calvin.
of the law; and by it we embrace Christ: who, by his death has fully
satisfied the law. So that the law, which could not bring us to salvation, by
reason of our own corruption; is now made effectual to us, by the means of
Christ Jesus.

I^ the law then against the promise of Gala, 3, 21, 22.
God? God forbid. For, if there had been a law given* which could have given
life: surely righteousness should have been by the law. But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ, should
be given to them that believe.

But before faith came, we were kept under verse* 23.
the law, and shut up unto the faith, which should afterward be revealed.

Wherefore, the law was our Schoolemaister verse, 24,
to bring us to Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith. But after
that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoole-maister: for, we are all
the sons of God, by faith in Jesus Christ.

Not that the doctrine, or any commandment Calvin.
of God in the law concerning virtuous life is abolished: but that all Jewish
Ceremonies are now ceast: and the curse or condemnation of the law* which
was due unto us for our sins; is clean taken away* through faith in our
Redeemer* Christ Jesus.

Who came into the world, (as has already Math, 5, 17.
been showed) not to destroy the law, or the prophets, but that he might fulfill
them.

We conclude therefore, that a man is* Rom, 3. 28.
i^stis^^d by faith, without the works of the Law.

And* being iustifie^d by faith, we have Rom, 5, 1, 2,
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom also ^ we have ac^esse
through faith unto this grace; wherei^ we stan^^, and rejoice under the hope of
the* glory of God.

Neythe^ do we^so^ only; but also we Rom, 5, 3, ^ 4. 5.
rejoice in tribulations; knowing tha^ tribulation brings forth patience; and
patience experience; and experience hope; and hope makes not ashamed: because
the love of GOD (...) abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is given
unto us.

Thus much for fi^^th only.

. 14.
Now; as we find true faith in Jesus Christ, to be the chief and only means
of our justification; so may we likewise certainly assure our selves* that it
is also the very vvell-spring or Fountain* (...) whence al^^e all good works
^oe flow. For surely, it is as much impossible for true ^ayth to be without
good works, as it is for a man to speak, without a to^^g^e; to see, wanting
eyes; or to live, lacking a heart.

A^ example further to confirm us in the vndoubt^d truth ^eereof, may be read
in the story of Zacche^s; who had no sooner ^^c^iued Christ^into his house,
(and much m^re into his ^art by faith*) but presently he brake forth into
these sp^^ches; saying ^ Behold* Lord, the half of ^^y Luke, 19, 8,
good^^ give unto the p^ore: and if I have taken from any man, by false or
unlawful means, ^ restore him four fold.

Again; what (...) it my Br^^heren, Iam, 2, 14. 15, 16, 17,
(says ^ James) though (...) say ^ee has faith* when ^ee has no works* Ca^
that faith save him? For, if a brother or a sister be naked* and d^stitu^^ of
daily f^^de, and one of you say unto the^; Depart in peace; God send you
warmnes and food: Notwithstanding, you give them not those things which are
needful to the body* what helpe^h (...)* Even so the ^ayth, if it have no
work^^ i^ dead in itself.

But some man might say; Thou have the James, 2, 18
^aith, and I have works: Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will
show thee my faith by my works.

Thou beleeuest that there is one God; verse, 19.
thou do well; the devils also believe it, and tremble.

But will thou understand (o thou vain verse, 20, 21 22,
man) that faith without works is dead? Was not Abraham our Father justified
through works, when he offered Isaac his son upon the Altar? See thou not,
that the faith wrought with his works? and through the works was the faith
made perfect.

And* the Scripture was fulfilled, which verse, 23,
says: Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness: and
he was called the friend of God.

Ye see then, how that of works a man verse, 24,
is justified; and not of faith only.

For, as the body without the Spirit is verse, 26.
dead; even so the faith without works is dead.

. 15.
We must not yet here think, that the Augustine.
sayings of the two Apostles, S. Paul and S. James, are contrary one to the
other; where as Paul says; A man is justified without works. And James
says; Faith without works is vai^e. For, Paul speaks of the works that
go before faith, and James speaks of the works which follow after faith.

Our Religion likewise, does not discern Augustine.
the righteous from the unrighteous, by the law of works, but by the law of
faith; without the which, even those works that seem good, are turned into
sins.

For, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Rom, 14, 23


And, where faith is not, good works is Augustine.
not. The intent [indeede] makes a good work; but faith directs that intent.

Besides; good works make no man to be accounted just, or righteous in the
sight of God: but a man being once justified by faith; does good works through
love.

Also,] in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision Gala, 5, 6.
avails any thing; neither uncircumcision: but faith, which works by love.

For, like as the goodness of a Tree, is Luther.
always known by the good fruit which it brings forth: even so the faith
of a godly man, is evermore declared unto the world; by his religious obedience
toward the law of GOD; and his works of charity toward his neighbor.

We are justified [therfore] by that Beza.
lively faith, which does apprehend all the merciful promises of God* made
toward us in Jesus Christ.

Which faith, neither sleeps nor is Beza.
idle; but always awaketh: and is continually busied, about the performing of
some good work.

Resting fully persuaded, that good Bernard.
works are the way to the kingdom of heaven; though they be not the cause
of reigning there.

Of Fear.
. 1.
Fear, (as Pacuuius says,) is a divine Pacuuius,
affection or passion of the mind* by a feeling regard conducting virtue to
all the actions of the soul. It grows from an undoubted belief in GOD, and
makes a man careful to lead his life pleasing, in the sight of his Creator.

But before I enter any further into the discourse of this Virtue, I am to
inform the Reader, that there are two sorts of Fear: The one, Se^uile, or
slavish: the other, F^liall, or chyld-like.

The Servile, or slavish fear; is that which every bondman bears to his
bodily Master; or wicked offenders, to wise Judges. This fear, is also a
defect of the mind, and a harmefull hinderance to all virtuous resolutions:
killing courage by cowardice, and piety through distrustment. It many times
causes the tongue to control the heart, and makes the mouth to mar the
meaning of the mind. It teaches men to talk according to the time; and
enforces faint-harted subjects, to sooth the sins of their Sovereign.

Like unto those people of whom Plutarch Plutarch.
speaks: Whose hearts, (says he) harbor hatred, against an ungodly Tyrant,
for his bad government, and yet notwithstanding, with the labor of their
lyps, they never cease, fearfully to flatter him in his folly; to the end he
should not hurt them.

But the Filial, or Chyld-like Fear, (whereof I only mean in this place to
speak) is a divine chastiser of evil in it self, having in it such force,
that it causes concupiscence to fly; and makes a man to abstain from all
sin and wickedness. It depends not on hate, but on love; not resembling the
fear of servant, but the fear of sons: not like the trembling and
despayring fear of * Saul, when satan in 1, Sam, 28, 19, 20
the form of Samuel, foretold him how little awhile he had to live. But
rather, like the reverent and religious fear of David, * when he kept Abisha^
his Captain from 1, Sam, 26. 9
killing the Lords anointed.

This (...) fear; as we find in diverse places of the holy Scripture; has
always been a guide unto the godly to direct their doings: and a Tutor to
teach them, the perfect pathway to eternal felicity.

. 2.
Plato the Prince of Philosophers, affirms; Plato.
that this excellent fear, was so excellently excelling in the hearts of the
Heathen, that in Sparta, they built a Temple to true Fear: in which, they
daily used to burn thev^ first sacrifice. And, so much likewise affirms
Socrates* who was Platos Socrates.
Schoole-maister.

But King Solomon the son of David, being far wiser in knowledge then
either Socrates or Plato; gives in his Proverbs many praises of this virtue:
Telling us plainly; that, * the fear of the Lord, Prou, 9. 10,
(which is a dutiful reverence and awe of the Almighty, firmly fixed in the
hearts of all the godly,) is, Initium sapie^^e: the very beginning of wisdom.

That, in it is an assured strength. Prou. 14. 26 Prou, 10, 27 Prou, 14, 27,


That, it increases our days.

That, it is as a Wellspring of wisdom, to avoid the snares of death.

That, it leads to life; and that he that Prou. 19. 23
is filled therewith, shall prosper, and shall not be visited with evil.

. 3.
Jesus likewise, the son of Sirach, who well deserves the name of a second
Solomon for his great wisdom; tells us, in the beginning of his Book:
That, the fear of the Lord, is worship; and triumph; Ecclus, 1, 11.
gladness; and a joyful crow(...)

That, it is an holy knowledge. Ecclus. 1. 16.


That, it is both wisdom and discipline. Ecclus. 1, 32. Ecclus, 25, 13


That, it is the beginning of the love of GOD.

That, it passes all things in clearenes. Ecclus. 25, 11


That, it makes a merry heart, and gives Ecclus, 1, 12.
gladness, joy, and long life.

That, it expels, sin, and drives away Ecclus, 1, 26.
anger.

That, it is the Crown of wisdom; and Ecclus, 1. 22
gives pleace and perfect health.

That, it is the root of wisdom; and Ecclus. 1. 24.
the branches thereof are long life.

That, it is a pleasant garden of blessing: Ecclus. 40. 27
and that there is nothing so beautiful as it is.

Neither is there any thing sweeter then Basil.
the same.

. 4.
Besides; Sirach does not only give co^mendations of this virtue it self, but
also utters sundry speeches in praise of the man that is enriched therewith:
and consequently declares, how much mindful it makes them that have it,
provident to please God in all their proceedings; saying: Ecclus. 10. 25
The great man; the Judge; and the man of authority; are all of them
honorable: yet is there none of them greater then he that fears the Lord.

He that has small understanding, and Ecclus. 19. 23
fears God, is better then he that has much wisdom, and transgresses the
law of his Maker.

Oh how great is the man that finds Ecclus. 25. 10
wisdom and knowledge: yet is there none above him that fears the Lord.

. 5.
They that fear the Lord, (says he) will Ecclus. 2. 18,
prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in his sight.

They will [also] seek out the things Ecclus. 2. 1^.
that are pleasant unto him.

They will keep his commandments. Ecclus. 2. 19. Ecclus. 32. 15
And receive his doctrine.

They will honor their Parents, and do Ecclus. 3. 8,
service unto them*

Yea; they that fear the Lord* will be diligent Ecclus. 15. 1. Ecclus. 2. 16
to do good; and will not disobey his Word. And, such as fervently love the
Lord, will ever be careful to keep his ways.

For, as by the fear of God, our hearts are Vincentius.
first framed to the obedience of his holy will: so through the love of God*
we are afterward enforced to go forward, daily more and more, with joy and
delight in his service. Yet, Augustine.
^ee that loves GOD best, always fears him most.

. 6.
With this holy, religious, and loving Gene, 39, 10 11. 12.
fear of the Lord, was the heart of Joseph the son of Jacob fully stored
when being servant with Potipha^ in Egypt, he fled from the company and
unlawful liking of his masters w^fe.

This true and reverent fear also of the Almighty, kept the three young men
Dan. 3. 18.
mentioned in Daniell; from falling down before the false God, which
Nabuchadnezzar the great King of Babell had set up.

It likewise caused Daniell himself to do Dan, 6, 10.
contrary to the Decree of Darius. And made the * fair and constant wife of
Ioakim, Dan, 13.
to withstand the wit-wanting Rethorick of the two Isralite Rulers.

Also; whosoever else he be, that truly Gueuara.
fears God as he ought, shall undoubtedly find the same such a stay unto
him in the time of temptation, that he shall thereby be kept safe from falling
in those dangers which lead men into destruction.

For, the fear of God, does not only Boethius.
withdraw the hand, the eye, and other members of the body, from committing
evil: but it also helps to cleanse the mind, and to keep the consent thereof
from yielding to evil.

Very well therefore says Saint Bernard; Bernard.
That there is nothing of greater force and efficacy, to keep us in the
grace* and favor of God* then to live continually in his fear: and to eschew
by all means that may be, the performance of our proud and presumptious
thoughts.

But if the fear of GOD be once gone Bernarde.
from a man, then there remains in him, nothing else but lewdnes of life,
extreme rashness, forgetfulness of virtue, and a harmfull running headlong into
all kinds of sin and wickedness.

. 7.
It is written of Job, that he was an upright and just man; one that feared
God, Job, 1, 1,
and ^s^hewed evil. Whereby I understand, that the true fear of God, kept
him upright in life: and his abstaining from evil, caused him to be counted
just.

And, to show further, that Job led his whole life in the fear of God, it is
as a special testimony, plainly expressed unto us by his own speech, where
(in effect) he thus speaks, saying: * I am afraid of all Job, 9, 28,
my doings (o Lord) knowing that thou will not judge me innocent; or,
without sin in thy sight.

The Prophet David likewise, although himself be many times praised in the
sacred Scriptures, for his religious holiness, and vprightnes of life: yet to
make known unto all men, how much he was acquainted with the true fear of GOD,
he spares not to reveal the same in the hundred and nineteen Psalm; where
he says: * My Psalm, 119 120.
flesh trembles for fear of thee (o Lord,) and I am afraid of thy judgments.

We find furthermore, that S. Paul the Apostle, was commended by the Lord
himself, to be an elect and chosen vessel Acts, 9, 15,
unto him, to bear his Name before the Gentiles, and Kings of the Earth.

Yet notwithstanding, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, by his own
words it is witnessed, how greatly he feared God in all his actions; as
namely, in the 9. chapter, where he says: * I do beat down my 1, Cor. 9. 27
body, and bring it into subjection: least by any means it should come to
pass, that after I have preached to others, I my self should be reproved.

. 8.
Thus see we, both by several sentences and examples, that the Saints of God;
yea, such men as were most high in Gods favor, have always been careful to
serve their Creator with fear and reverence.

And, without true fear and reverence, Augustine.
no man living can be righteous in the sight of God.

Boldly hereby, may we then with Sirach, Ecclus, 18, 26
count him a wise man, that fears God in all his actions.

And rightly with Solomon, pronounce Prou. 28. 14
him blessed, that stands always in dread to do that which may offend his
Maker. But he that hardneth his own heart, shall fall into evil.

Happy [therefore] is the man, unto who^ Ecclus. 25. 12.
it is granted to have the fear of God.

And, blessed is the soul of him that fears Ecclus. 34. 15
the Lord.

Yea;] blessed is every one that fears Psalm. 128. 1.
the Lord, and walks in his ways.

It shall go well with such men at the last, Ecclus. 1, 13.
and they shall find favor in the day of their death.

For, who so fears the Lord, he shall Ecclus, 1, 18,
prosper; and at the end of his life he shall be blessed.

Yea; the spirits [or soules] of such men, Ecclus. 34, 13
shall surely live: for, their hope is in the Lord their God, that can help
them.

Of Love.
. 1.
Love, (as Plotinus says) is a divine Plotinus.
passion of the soul or Spirit: inspiring it with a celestial desire of
heavenly things; and inflaming the har^ to Godward, through the hope which i^
conceiueth of everlasting felicity.

But like as I have said before of Fear that there are two sorts thereof: so
do I here certify unto every one that reads* that diverse worldly men, have
out of this holy root of Love, derived two several Trees. Namely, this
divine Love, wholelie dedicated to Piety: and an immodest affection, extending
it self to base Concupiscence; which they entitle by the name of Love also.

This vile Love, or rather Concupiscence, is, (as Aristotle says) the vvorst
Aristotle.
work of a man's Malus Genius. It disturbeth the passions of the heart, and
makes the senses mad. It is the root of violence; fury; murders; and
execrations: and the sole confounder of all the holy actions of the soul.

Full fraught with this filthy lust-loue, was the heart of wicked Amnon; when
2. Sam. 13.
through his deceitful policy, he obtained means to abuse by violence, the
body of his sister Thamar.

But the other Love, surnamed Charity; which is true; perfect; divine; and
only sacred: * is the very original, and chief Gregory.
ground of all godly actions.

It is the way of man to God, and the way Augustine.
of God to man.

It is heavens Ambassador to the soul; Rauisius.
and the whole scope or fulfilling, of all Gods commandments.

. 2.
This Love, (as the Apostle says) suffers 1, Cor, 13, 4. 5, 6, 7.
long: It is bountiful: It enuieth not: It does not boast it self: It is not
puffed up: It disdaineth not: It seeks not that which is her own: It is not
provoked to anger: It thinks not evil: It rejoices not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth: It suffers all things: It believes all things: It
hops all things: It endures all things.

This love, teaches us true wisdom; Plato.
namely, to love the soul more then the body, and not the body ^etter then the
soul.

This love, being both divine and charitable; moves a man (according to the
Deuteronomy, 6, 5,
commandment of God in the Law,) to love his Maker above all things: and his
Leuit, 19. 18
neighbor as dearly as he loves himself.

This love, being a good and gracious Plotinus.
affect of the soul; so works in the hearts of the godly, that they have no
fancy to esteem, value, or ponder any thing in the wide world, beside, or
before the care and study, how to please God.

For, the greatest argument of godly love, Pacuuius.
is to love that which God wills: and to forbear to do that which he has
forbidden.

. 3.
This love, resembles fire; which naturally Erasmus.
inflameth all things that it touches.

This love, teaches us, (according to the commandment of our Savior
Christ,) Math, 5, 44.
to love our enemies; to bless them that curse us; to do good to them that
hate us; and to pray for them that hurt us, and persecute us.

Yea; this love, covers all trespasses. Prou, 10, 12


It is strong as death. Much water cannot Cant, 8, 6. 7,
quench it: neither can the floods drown it.

This love, makes men to forsake sin, Chrysostom.
and embrace virtue.

This love, increases faith; begets Augustine.
hope; and makes us at peace with God.

This love, in adversity is patient; in prosperity Bernard.
temperate; in passions strong; in good works quick; in temptations
confident; in hospitality bountiful.

This love, is never idle; but always laboring Ambrose.
to serve him whom it loves.

. 4.
This love, (as Pacuuius says) cannot Pacuuius.
stand with any worldly care or study, for the things of this life; neither
abides it the coupling with any other love. It bears no partial affection
to kindred. It knows no difference between poor and rich. It knows not
what means mine and thine: Neither can it divide a foe from a friend. For,
he that truly and perfectly loves GOD, loves him alone; nothing besides
him, nor with him; but all things indifferently, in him, and for him.

By which speech it appears, that the * right measure wherewith we ought
to Bernard.
love God; is to love him entirely, without either end or measure.

Not in part; but in whole: (as he himself in his holy Word has willed
us,) Leuit, 6. 5. Luke, 10, 27
namely; with all our heart; with all our soul; with all our mind; and with
all our strength.

Which speech of GOD, being by Master Becon in a certain Sermon of his
Becon.
expounded, he enterpreteth the same in this manner; saying: To love God with
all our heart; is to prefer the love of him, both above, and before all things
else whatsoever. To love God with all our soul; is to love him discreetly. To
love God with all our mind; is continually to meditate upon his
commandments. And, to love him with all our strength; is manfully to suffer
all kinds of adversities, with willingness and patience, for the testimony of
his truth.

. 5.
With this sacred and religious love of man to his Maker, was the heart of
holy David greatly enflamed, as may for example be seen in sundry places of
his psalms; where, in zealous affection to the Lord and his Law, he first of
all says: * One Psalm, 27. 4,
thing have I desired of the Lord, the which I will still require; even that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life; to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his holy Temple.

I have loved, o Lord, (says he) the habitation Psalm, 26. 8,
of thine house; and the place where thine honor dwells.

The zeal of thine house (o Lord) has Psalm, 69, 6.
eaten me up.

One day in thy Courts, is better then a Psalm, 84, 10.
thousand other-where. I had rather be a Doore-keeper in the house of my GOD,
then to dwell in the Tents of the ungodly.

As the Heart brayeth for the Rivers of Psalm, 42, 1, 2,
water, so pants my soul after thee (o Lord.) My soul thirsts for God,
even for the living God. When shall I come and appear before the presence of
God?

I will love thee dearly (o Lord) my Psalm, 18. 1.
strength.

Whom have I (o Lord) in heaven but Psalm, 73, 25.
thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire, in comparison of thee.

I have longed (o Lord) for thy salvation: Ps. 119. 174.
and thy law is my delight.

Oh how I love thy law! It is my meditation Psalm, 119. 97
continually.

Oh teach me thy statutes (o Lord,) Psalm, 119. 26, 27.
make me to understand the way of thy commandments; and I will meditate in
thy wondrous works.

Teach me (o Lord) the way of thy statutes; Psalm, 119, 33 34,
and I will keep it unto the end. Give me understanding, and I will keep thy
Law: yea, I will keep it with my whole heart.

Direct me in the path of thy commandments; verse, 35,
for therein is my delight.

Behold, I desire thy commandments; verse, 40,
quicken me in thy righteousness.

And,] incline my heart unto thy testimonies. verse, 36,


Deal with thy servant (o Lord) according Ps, 119, 124. 125.
to thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes. I, o Lord, am thy servant, grant
me therefore understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

Look upon me, and be merciful unto Psalm, 119, 132.
me, as thou use to do unto those that love thy Name.

Direct my steps in thy Word, and let verse, 133.
none iniquity have dominion over me.

Teach me to do thy will; for thou art Psalm, 143. 10
my God. Let thy good Spirit lead me unto the Land of righteousness.

By these, and many more such like sayings in the Book of Psalms, does this
princely Prophet make manifest, (as I said before) with what earnest zeal and
fervent affection, he always loved the Lord and his Law.

The true and perfect love also of man to his Maker, was (as it seems) deeply
rooted in the heart of old Eleazer, when he refused all the friendship and
worldly favors, 2, Mac, 6, 28
that were offered unto him by the servants of Antiochus; and chose rather to
suffer death by torments, then to save his life by breaking the rules of his
Religion.

With the like love and constancy, did the seven brethren and their mother,
endure 2, Mac. 7.
death by tortures, under that wicked Tyrant Antiochus; and left behind them a
worthy remembrance of their fervent affection to the Law of the Lord their
God.

We read also in the Newe-testament, that Saint Stephen the first Martyr
after Acts, 7, 59.
Christ, through his religious love to his Lord and Master, willingly suffered
himself to be stoned to death: commending his spirit into the hands of his
Creator.

And such like divine and holy love to Christ our Captain, ought every
Christian professor to harbor in his heart, else may it greatly be doubted,
that he shall shoot short of life everlasting.

. 6.
But, as I said in the beginning, this love is both divine and charitable.
First, moving man to love the Lord and his law, for the sundry blessings and
benefits, which God both already has, and daily does bestow upon him through
Christ. Secondly, to love his neighbor, or brother, as himself; because GOD
in his holy Word has so commanded him: and for that he is the very form of
his own Image or likeness.

With which kind of charitable love of man to man, or man to his neighbor,
was the heart of the Samaritane softened: who Luke, 10. 33 34, 35.
finding a stranger in the high-vvay half dead, first bound up the wounds of
his body, and then setting him upon his own beast, brought him to an Inn, and
made provision for him; commanding the Host of the house to take care of him:
and look (quoth he) what-soeuer the charges of this man comes unto, more
then the two pence which I now give thee; at my next coming hither, I will pay
thee all.

But, with more then charitable love of man to his neighbor, was the heart of
holy Moises moved, when through his great affection he prayed unto the Lord,
to pardon the foolish and Idolatrous sin of his people. Yea, such was his
fervent affection and more the^ charitable love toward them, that he desired
of GOD in his prayer, to Exodus, 32, 32
grant, that their foul offense might be forgiven; or else his own name to
be rased out of the Book of life.

And, with more also then charitable love of man to his neighbor, was the
Apostle Saint Paul acquainted, when very zeal for Gods glory, and love to
his own Nation, enforced him to say: * I would Rom, 9, 3.
wish my self to be separated from Christ, [or to loose mine own saluation]
for my Brethren; that are my kinsmen according to the flesh.

I term these two last ensamples more then charitable love, because it made
these men ready to refuse their own souls health, rather then their Brethren
should be unpardoned; and cast from their Creator for their offenses.

. 7.
By which few examples only, we may sufficiently perceive the forcible effect
of true and perfect love; and justly may we confess with the aforementioned
Apostle, That * although we speak with the tungs 1, Cor, 13, 1, 2, 3.
of men and Angels, and have not love, we are but as sounding Brass, or a
tinckling Cymball. And though we had the gift of prophecy, and knew all
secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if we had all faith, so that we could remove
mountains, and had not love, we were nothing. And though we feed the poor
with all our goods, and give our bodies to be burned, and have not love, it
profits us nothing.

For, God has chosen us in Christ Jesus, Ephe, 1, 4,
before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love.

And this commandment have we of 1, Ioh, 4, 21.
him; that he which loves GOD, should love his brother also.

For, as a King is honored in his Image, Bernard.
so God in man, is either loved or hated: he cannot hate man, who loves GOD,
neither can he love GOD, who hates man.

Also; like as the body without the soul Fulgoti^^.
enjoys no life; so all other virtues without godly love, are but cold and
fruitless.

. 8.
If we love one another, (says S. John,) 1, Ioh, 4, 12,
God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us.

Also,] he that loves his Brother, abides 1, Ioh, 2, 10,
in the light, and there is none occasion of evil in him.

But he that hates his brother, is in darkness, verse, 11.
and walks in darkness; and knows not whether he goes; because that
darkness has blinded his eyes.

. 9.
Love, (says the Apostle) does no evil Rom, 13, 10
to his neighbor: therefore is love the fulfilling of the law.

For, all the law is fulfilled in one word, Gala. 5, 14.
which is this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

Wherefore,] If any man say, I love 1, Ioh, 4, 20.
God, and hate his brother, he is a liar; for how can he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, love God, whom he never saw?

Moreover; Whosoever he be, that has this worlds good, and sees his brother
have 1, John. 3, 17
need, and shuts up his compassion from him: how dwells the love of God
in him?

For, by the true and perfect love which Erasmus.
we bear unto God, we rightly understand what our duty is toward our
neighbor.

And, this is the commandment of God, 1, Ioh, 3, 11.
which we have heard from the beginning: That we should love one another. *
Even Ephe, 5, 2.
as Christ himself has loved us.

. 10.
Beloved, let us [therefore] love one another: 1. Ioh, 4, 7, 8,
for, love comes of God, and every one that loves, is borne of God, and
knows God. He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love.

Let us not love in word; neither in 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
tongue only; but in deed and in truth.

That we may walk worthy of the vocation Ephe, 1, 1, 2. 3.
whereunto we are called: with all humblenes of mind, and meekness: with
long suffering, supporting one another through love; endeavoring to keep the
unity of the Spirit, in the bond of peace.

What the will and desire of Almighty God is concerning men: and how lovingly
he admonishes every one to come to repentance: promising mercy and forgiveness
to all those that amend.
2. ESDRAS. 7. verse. 20. 21. Many perrish in this life, because they despise
the Law of God that is appointed. For, God has diligently admonished such as
came, so often as they came, what they should do to have life; and what they
should observe to avoid punishment. What the will of God is. etc.
. 1.
THis is the will of God, (as says the Apostle) even our sanctification: 1.
These. 4. 3. 4. 5. 6.
that we should abstain from fornication: that every one of us should know
how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor: and not in the lust of
concupiscence, as do the Heathen which know not God: that no man oppress or
defraude his brother, in any matter; for the Lord is the auenger of all such
things.

He therefore that despises these things, 1, These, 4, 8.
despises not man but God, who has given unto us his holy Spirit.

And, whose will is, that all men should 1, Tim, 2, 4,
be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the truth.

For, it is not the will of God that one of Math, 18, 14
the least should be lost.

. 2.
Dearly beloved, (says S. Peter) be not 2, Pet, 3, 8, 9,
ignorant of this one thing; that one day is with the Lord, as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack concerning the
promise [of his coming,] (as some men count slacknes,) but is patient toward
us; and would have no man to perrish; but would have all men to come to
repentance.

For, GOD would not that man should 2, Esdr. 8, 59,
perrish.

But, unto them that will repent, he gives Ecclus, 17, 22
them grace to return; and exhorts such as fail with patience: and sends
them the portion of the verity.

Amend your lives therefore, and turn, Acts, 3, 19.
that your sins may be put away, when the time of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord.

And, as it came into your mind, to go Baruc, 4, 28.
astray from your God, so endeavor your selves ten times more, to turn
again, and to seek him.

For, he that is Lord over all, is rich unto Romans 10, 12
all that call upon him.

. 3.
Make no tarrying to turn unto the Ecclus, 5. 7.
Lord: neither put it off from day to day: for, suddenly shall the wrath of
the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed: and thou
shall perrish in time of vengeance.

Wherefore, as the holy Ghost says: Hebr, 3, 7, 8,
To day, if ye shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

Yea;] this day, if ye hear his voice, Heb, 4, 7,
harden not your hearts.

For, it is a fearful thing, to fall into the Heb, 10, 31,
hands of the living God.

. 4.
We find in the eyghteene of Ezechiell, and the 23. verse, that the
Almighty, by the mouth of the same Prophet, exhorting the Children of Israel
to repentance, first makes this demand of them; Ezec, 18, 23
saying: * Have I any desire that the wicked should die? or shall he not live
if he return from his ways?

Then follows in the 27. and 28. verses, Ezec, 18, 27 28, 31, 32,
sundry promises of Gods love and mercy, unto him that truly repents, and
forsakes his sins.

And, in the 31. and 32. verses of the same chapter, he thus concludes all his
former speech held with them to that purpose, saying: Cast away from you all
your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed: and make you a new heart,
and a nevve Spirit; for why will ye die, o house of Israel?

For, I desire not the death of him that dies: cause therefore one another to
return, and live.

. 5.
We find likewise in the prophecy of Esaias, that the Lord, being there
desirous to withdraw that wicked and obstinate people of Israel, from their
grievous offenses, (in which too long they had wilfully continued;) begins
also first with a gentle admonishment, saying: * Wash you: Esaias, 1, 16, 17,
make you clean; take away the evil of your works from before mine eyes:
cease to do evil; learn to do well; seek judgment; relieve the oppressed;
judge the fatherless; and defend the widow.

And, having thus foretold them what they ought to do, he then presently
adds: * Come now, and let us reason together; Esaias, 1, 18,
though your sins were as Crimson, they shall be made white as snow: though
they were read, like Skarlet, they shall be as wool.

Declaring hereby unto us, how ready he is to receive them that truly
repent; and how prone to put all their former offenses, clean out of his
remembrance.

As may further appear again, even by the witness of his own words in the
18. chapter of the aforementioned Ezechiell; where he says: * If the wicked
will return Ezec, 18, 21.
from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do
that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live, and shall not die.

All his transgressions that he has committed, verse, 22.
they shall not be mentioned unto him: but in his righteousness that he has
done, he shall live.

Moreover; When the wicked (says Ezec, 18. 27
he) turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and does that
which is lavvfull and right, he shall save his soul alive.

Because he considers, and turns away verse, 28,
from all his transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live, and
shall not die.

Again; when I, says the most Merciful, Ezech. 33, 14, 15,
shall say unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die: if he turn from his
sins, and do that which is lawful and right; to wit: If he restore the
pledge, and give again that he had taken away by robbery, and walk in the
statutes of life, without committing iniquity, then shall he surely live, and
not die.

None of the sins that he has committed, verse, 16,
shall be mentioned unto him, [or any more thought upon,] for, insomuch as he
does now the thing that is lawful and right, he shall surely live.

. 6.
These places of Scripture only, if no more such could be found, might serve
sufficiently to prove* that God delights not in a sinners death. Yet
notwithstanding, for our greater comfort, and as it were more certain
assurance, the Lord, besides his promise, has vouchsafed to give his oath to
this effect. And because he knew none, either in heaven or earth, greater to
swear by, he has therefore sworn unto us by himself, saying: * As truly as
I live, I have Ezec. 33, 11.
no pleasure in the death of the wicked: but rather, that the wicked should
turn from his evil way and live.

And, to make yet a little more manifest how greatly he desires our good; he
spares not by sundry other speeches, both in the old and New Testament, to
express his kindness and compassion toward us, in this point. As namely, in
the fifth Book of Moises, where he says: * Oh that there Deuteronomy, 5, 29.
were such a heart in my people, as to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments always: that it might go well with them, and with their
children for ever.

Behold, (says he) I stand at the door and Reave, 3, 20,
knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him,
and will sup with him, and he with me.

Also; by the voice of his Gospel, he daily more now then ever heretofore,
manifests his everlasting love toward us: in that he thereby vouchsafes
continually to call us; saying: * Come unto me, all yet Math. 11. 28
that are weary and laden, and I will ease ^ou*

Take my yoke on you, and learn of me, verse, 29, 30
that am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
For, my yoke is easy, and my burden light.

7.
Cleanse [therefore] your hands, ye sinners; James. 4. 8,
and purge your hearts ye wavering minded.

Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, Deuteronomy. 10, 16
and harden your necks no more.

Return unto the lord; and he will return Mala, 3, 7,
unto you.

Cease from your sins, and forget your 2, Esdr. 16. 59,
iniquities, and meddle no more from henceforth with them: so shall God lead
you forth, and deliver you from all troubles.

Yea, let the wicked forsake his ways, and Esaias, 55, 7,
the unrighteous his own imaginations; and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him: and to our GOD, for, he is very ready to forgive.

. 8.
Return then unto the Lord, and forsake Ecclus, 17, 23
thy sins: make thy prayer before his face, and take away the offense.

Turn again unto the most High: for verse, 24,
he will bring thee from darkness to wholesome light: forsake thine
unrighteousness, and hate greatly all abomination.

Learn to know the righteousness and verse, 25,
judgments of God; stand in the portion that is set forth for thee, and in
the prayer of the most high GOD: and go in the portion of the holy world,
with such as be living and confess God.

Also; if thou be withered and worn away Chrysostom.
of sin, renew thy self again, through hearty sorrow, and true repentance.

For godly sorrow, causes repentance 2, Cor, 7, 10,
unto salvation; not to be repented of: but worldly sorrow causes death.

And, the best remedy if thou have offended, Hermes.
is true repentance, and amendment of life.

. 9.
But to the end we may somewhat the better understand what true repentance
is, I will here rehearse some few places collected from diverse of the divine
Doctors of the Church: and first of all, from S. Augustine, where, speaking to
this purpose, he says: * True repentance, is greatly to Augustine.
deplore sins past, and fully to resolve in mind and heart, never to commit
any hereafter.

It consists of three parts: namely, Contrition of heart; Confession of
mouth; and Satisfaction of deed. For, we have (says he) offended God three
manner of ways; by the delight of thought: by the lapse of tongue: and by the
pride of works: And these three are to be cured by three contrary remedies.
Delight of thought, by the inward sorrow and contrition of the heart. The lapse
of tongue, by the confession of the mouth. And the pride of works, by our
upright living, and uncorrupted satis-faction.

Contrition, is a hearty sorrow and inward Bernarde.
grief, taken for the sins which we have already committed: with a full
inten: and purpose of confession and satisfaction; and hereafter not to commit
any more.

For otherwise, thy repentance is no true Augustine.
repentance, but rather seems to be fained; if thou pollute thy self again
with thy former offenses: and thy penitent tears are to small purpose, if
thou multiply thine iniquities. For, true repentance is to cease from sin.

We ought also, in the true contrition of Cassianus.
heart, to be sorrowful for these three things; First, for the sins we have
committed: Secondly, for the good we have omitted: Thirdly, for the time we
have lost.

And this kind of contrition, is more auailable Augustine.
in the sight of God, then to go on pilgrimage throughout the world.

. 10.
Confession, which has the second place Augustine.
in true repentance, is the health of the soul; an expeller of vices; a
restorer of virtue; an impugner of wicked spirits: and an impediment of the
devil.

By it, the lurking disease of the soul is Isidore.
opened, to the praise of God: and through it, we obtain hope of pardon for
all our offenses past.

Besides; when the confession of the Ambrose.
heart, proceeds forth of the mouth, then the vengeance of GOD cease to
pursue the penitent person.

And, he likewise that accuses himself Augustine.
of his sins, preuenteth thereby the devil of his purpose; so that he
cannot accuse him at the day of judgment: if in confessing his sins unto
God, he blot those offenses out by repentance, which he has committed: and
cease to renew those sins again, which he now is sorry for.

For, those sins shall never be condemned Leo.
in judgment, which were purged before, with confession and true repentance.

Neither is Jesus Christ any longer their Cassiodoru^.
Judge, but their Advocate, who accuse themselves by their own confession.

So that confession, joined with true contrition, Augustine.
opens the gates of heaven, and stops the mouth of hell.

. 11.
Satisfaction, being the third and last part Augustine.
of repentance, is; cheefely to cut off the causes of such sins, as in
former time we have loved; and not to cherrish henceforth by suggestions, any
entrance into them.

For, we do not truly satis-fie, although Gregory.
we cease from iniquity; unless we persecute by opposite bewailings, the
evils which heere-to-fore we have most affected; and endeavor with all our
might, daily to with-stand all such kind of pleasures, as provoke men to sin
and wickedness.

We ought also to understand, that in Phil. Mel.
the work of true repentance, satis-faction is to be made three several
ways. First, unto God: to wit, when through faith and confidence, we humbly
present our selves in prayer before him, and earnestly entreat his majesty,
that he will vouchsafe, to accept the passion and death of his Son Christ, as
a perfect, full, and sufficient satisfaction, for all the sins which we have
committed.

Secondly, satis-faction is to be made unto the Church, after Excommunication,
for such offenses as we have done: testifying thereby, both in the sight of God
and man, our humble submission and unfeigned repentance.

Thirdly, satisfaction ought to be made unto our neighbor or brother, if we
have any way wronged him, either in word or deed: namely thus; he must be
recompensed by confessing the fault unto him: and restitution must likewise be
made, according to the damage we have done him: otherwise, our repentance is
greatly to be suspected of hypocrisy, if (being able) we make not recompense
by restitution.

Again; in making satis-faction, the reconciliation, Chrysostom.
ought to be equal to the precedent offense; and thou ought to be as ready
to lament, as thou wast to offend. And, as thine intent was before to offend,
such also ought now thy devotion to be in repenting: For, according to the
greatness of thy sins, ought the greatness of thy grief and sorrow to be:
and as thy delight and love was before, to those things which were evil; so
ought now thy hatred and lothing to be against those things which are evil.

. 12.
Understanding now by these fevve former speeches what true repentance is; *
Let us, (according to the counsel which Lament. 3. 40, 41.
the Prophet Jeremy gives,) search and try our ways, and turn again unto
the Lord. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens.

Yea, let us, (as Erasmus wills,) return Erasmus.
again unto the Lord our God, with hearty sorrow, and true repentance; humbly
confessing before him, the faults which we have committed; and earnestly
desiring of him, that he will alvvaies hereafter, so strengthen us with his
grace, that we may daily more and more, dutifully become obedient to his holy
will, and ever study to please him, our whole life time following.

For, if we acknowledge our sins, God 1, Ioh, 1, 9.
is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

He that hides his sins, shall not prosper; Prou, 28. 13
but he that confesses, and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

Wherefore, if the testimony of thine own Pacuuius.
conscience, do at any time accuse, vex, or trouble thee, for any evil
conceived or done; confess thy fault speedily, defer not the time; dally not
with God; but be earnestly repentant; trust in his mercy, and seek not to
hide thine iniquity from him: so will he have compassion on thee, and not
impute sin unto thee.

Besides; when thou truly repentest, and ask pardon of God for thine
offenses: Bo^tius.
then cannot thy sins disquiet thee, nor have any power to hurt thee. But
when thou art unrepentant, and cea^est to call for mercy, then thy sins
rage over thee, and cry daily unto God for vengeance against thee.

Also; the sin that is not foorth-with Gregory.
cleansed, and purged by repentance, does speedily draw on another with his
weight.

Sleep not therefore without repentance Plato.
for thy sins done and past.

. 13.
It behooves a man so to live (says Basil,) Basil.
that he look for death every hour: and to be always in a readiness for the
coming of death.

For, as God finds thee to be when he Gueuara.
calls thee, so will he judge thee.

And, as the tree falls, so shall it be taken Eccles, 11, 3.
up.

Trouble not thy self then with taking S^crates.
thought how thou may live long, but rather be careful to live well: and
forasmuch as thou ar^ uncertain in what place Death abides for thee* be thou
ready prepared in eac^ plac^ to m^^te him.

Let not thy ^ea^ be laid down to rest, Isidore.
before thou have considered how thou have bestowed the day past: If thou have
well done, give thanks to God; if otherwise, repent, and ask him forgiveness.

Also; if thou intend to do well, defer Plato.
it not till to morrow; for thou know not what may chance unto thee this
night.

Never trust too much to time; for it suddenly Hermes.
deceives them that trust thereto.

Think not, that another time will be Rauisius.
soon enough for thee to repent, if thou now feel thy conscience touched with
the remembrance of thy sin.

For although we find, that God in many Gregory.
places of his holy Word, has promised pardon to the penitent; yet we no where
read, that ever he promised to morrow unto a sinner.

. 14.
Certainly, (says Aurelius,) those men Mar. Aurel.
do live very evil, that are always beginning to live well: forasmuch as
their often beginnings, do make their lives still more and more imperfect.

Well therefore says Zenophon, that to Zenophon.
see, is a small matter; but to foresee, is a token of good wit.

And the difference between a wise man Di^genes.
and a fool is this: the one is provident to prevent an evil before it come;
the other wishes for remedy, when it is too late.

As may for example more plainly be perceived, by reading the different
doings of these two men following. Baltazar the king of Babel, (as Daniell
affirms,) even in the time of his banqueting amongst his Dan. 5. 5. 6.
thousand Princes, perfectly discerned the hand of a man, writing upon the
plaster of his wall, and was greatly (for the time) terrified thereby;
insomuch, that the very joints of his loins were loosed, his countenance
changed, his thoughts troubled, and his knees smote one against the other for
fear of Gods judgments. Yea, by Daniels divine interpretation, he also
understood verse, 25.
the mystical meaning of those words which were written; the sum whereof,
contained no less (for his offenses) then the speedy subversion of his whole
kingdom, and his own utter overthrow for ever. Yet seeing, and knowing all
this, but wanting grace to foresee, and prevent the danger by true repentance,
he perrished the verse, 30.
same night, according to the saying of the Prophet.

Contrariwise; by Samuel it is affirmed: that king David did not only see the
foulness of his offense, wherein too long he had (in a manner) sencelesly
lived, so soon as the shril-sounding voice of Nathan, had once (by denouncing
Gods anger) thoroughly 2, Sam. 12. chap.
awaked him out of his deadly slumber: but also presently foresaw, by
believing the speech of the Prophet, and speedily prevented, by his unfeigned
repentance and amendment, the heavy wrath of the Almighty; which otherwise was
likely for his iniquity, to fall upon him.

Mark therefore, what counsel Sirach gives to this purpose, and endeavor
diligently to follow the same, where he says: My * son, have thou sinned?
do so no Ecclus. 21. 1. 2
more; but pray for thy former sins that they may be forgiven thee. Flee from
sin, as from a Serpent; for if thou come too near it, it will bite thee:
the teeth thereof, are as the teeth of a Lion, to sley the souls of men.

Make much [also] of time; and eschew Ecclus, 4, 20
the thing that is evil.

Remember that death tarrieth not, and Ecclus, 14, 12
that the covenant of the grave is not showed unto thee.

Defraude not thy self of the good day; Ecclus, 14, 14
neither let the portion of good desires ouer-passe thee.

Give and take, and sanctify thy soul: verse, 16.
work thou righteousness before thy death, for in the hell there is no meat to
find.

Neither is there any more place or time Cyprian.
of repentance left for any man, after he is once departed out of this
world: life is here either lost or won: everlasting salvation is only
here provided for, by the due worshipping of God, and the fruits of faith.

And no man is let, either by sins Cyprian.
or by years, to come to the obtaining of salvation: for, as long as the soul
is yet abiding in the body, no repentance is in vain. And, what-soeuer is
truly done, is never too late done.

Yet thus much always understand, that Osorius.
thy repentance is then most acceptable to God, when thou do offer the same
in the prime of thy youth, and in the time of thy perfect health: For, such as
never cease to sin, till sin (through age and feeblenes) begin to forsake them;
it may greatly be feared, that they in the mean while, daily drink up the
dreggs of Gods wrath.

. 15.
Furthermore; although there be indeed, Augustine.
* many in the world, which are not ashamed to sin, but are ashamed to
repent; yet if thou look for favor in Heaven, thou must both confess and
forsake thy sins here on earth.

For, he that here in this life, receives Ambrose.
not remission of his sins: shall have no part with the godly, in the
felicity to come.

Follow therefore, for thine own good, the example of King David; and with
the like humility of heart, be ready to say unto God, as he said: * Lord have
mercy upon Psalm, 41, 4,
me; and heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

Or, as Manasses King of Judah, in his penitent 2, Chro, 36.
prayer, said: * I have sinned, o Lord, I have sinned, above the number of the
sand of the Sea. My transgressions are multiplied, my offenses: are exceeding
many: and I am not worthy to behold and see the height of the heavens, by
reason of the multitude of mine iniquities. For, I have provoked thy wrath, and
done evil before thee. I did not thy will, neither kept I thy commandments.

Now therefore I bow the knee of my heart, beseeching thee of grace. I have
sinned, (o Lord) I have sinned: and I acknowledge my transgressions: but I
humbly beseech thee to forgive me. O Lord forgive me, and destroy me not
with my transgressions. Be not angry with me for ever, by reserving evil for
me: neither condemn me into the lower parts of the earth.

For, thou art the God, even the God of them that repent: and in me thou vvilt
show all thy goodness: for, thou (o Lord) vvilt save me, that am vnvvoorthy;
according to thy great mercy: therefore I will praise thee for ever, all the
days of my life. etc.

Or, as the prodigal son spoken of by Christ, in the gospel did: remember
thine own estate in time: live no longer like a slave to sin, and a stranger
from the fellowship of the faithful; but rather return home, and say unto God
thy Father, as he said to his: * I have sinned, o Father, against heaven, and
before thee; and am no Luke, 15, 16
more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servant.

And thou shall surely find, if thou make an unfeigned conversion, that the
Lord thy God will be ready to receive thee. For, there * is more joy among the
Angels in Luke, 15, 7.
Heaven, for one sinner that conuerteth; then for ninety and nine just men,
which need none amendment of life.

Yea; at the true repentance and conversion Bernard.
of sinners, the Father rejoices; the Son rejoices; and the holy Ghost
rejoices. The first, figured in the prodigal Son. The second, in the lost
sheep. The third, because they are the temple and chosen vessels of the holy
Ghost, even all the Angels in heaven do rejoice.

. 16.
O how good a thing is it then, (as Sirach Ecclus. 20. 4.
says,) so soon as thou art reproved, to manifest thy repentance! for
thereby shall thou escape wilful sin.

Who so hates to be reformed, is in the Ecclus, 21, 6.
way of sinners: but he that fears the Lord, conuerteth in h^rt.

Seek the Lord [therefore] while he Esaias, 55, 6,
may be found: call upon him while he is near.

For, he will be found of them that Wisd. 1. 2.
tempt him not; and appears unto such as prove not unfaithful unto him.

Get thee righteousness before thou come Ecclus. 18. 18
to judgment. Learn before thou speak, and use physic or ever thou be
sick.

Examine thy self, before thou be judged; verse, 19.
and in the day of the visitation thou shall find mercy.

Humble thy self, before thou be sick: verse. 20.
and whilst thou may yet sin, show thy conversion.

Let nothing let thee to pray always unto verse, 21.
God: and defer not unto death to be reformed: for the reward of GOD endures
for ever.

And, in what place or state soever a man Gregory.
shall be found, when he departs out of this life, in the same state and
degree, the last day of the world shall find him.

For, such as every man shall be in the day Augustine.
of his death; [concerning either his virtue or vice,] even such shall he
appear again before God, in the day of general judgment.

And, except we be converted, and become Math, 18, 3,
as little children, we shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Not children in understanding, but as 1. Cor. 14, 15.
concerning maliciousness, [or any other evil,] we must be children: and, in
understanding of a ripe ag^.

What manner of service is required of us during this life: both toward God
and our neighbor.
ECCLVS. 15. verse, 17. Before man is life and death; good and evil; what him
likes, shall be given him. What service God requires. etc.
. 1.
WHen Christ our Savior was demanded by a certain Ruler Math, 19, 16, 17,
Luke, 18, 18
this question; Good Master, what good thing shall I do* that I may have
eternal life? He presently returned him this answer; saying: Why call thou
me good? there is none good, but one; even God: but if thou will enter into
life, keep the commaundedements.

And, being likewise asked at an other time by a tempting Pharisee, which was
the greatest, or cheifest commandment Math. 22, 36 37, etc.
in the law of God? He forthwith made this reply unto the party; saying:
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart; with all thy soul; and
with all thy mind. This is the first, and the greatest commandment. And the
second is like unto this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these
two commandments, hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.

Also; being in talk with his own Disciples, a little before the time of his
suffering; amongst many other things which he then taught, he gave this short
lesson following, as a special rule for them to direct their life by, saying:
* If ye love me, keep John, 14, 15
my commandments.

And, as in the 15. of S. John's Gospel, John, 15, 14
our Savior Christ counts all those men to be his friends, which do
whatsoever he has commanded them.

So in the second of S. John's Epistle, the 1, Ioh, 2, 4.
holy Ghost reckons every one to be a liar, which says, he knows God,
and keeps not his commandments.

Take heed therefore, that ye do as the Deuteronomy, 5, 32.
Lord your God has commanded you: turn not aside to the right hand, nor to
the left.

But walk in all the vvayes which the verse. 33.
Lord your God has commanded you: that ye may live, and (...) that it may
go well with you; and that your days may be prolonged in the Land which ye
possess.

. 2.
Let not the Book of the Law, (as says Joshua, 1, 8,
the Lord unto Joshua) depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and
night: that thou may observe and do, according to all that is written
therein; for, then shall thou make thy way prosperous; and then shall thou have
good success.

Yea; let thy mind, be upon the ordinances Ecclus. 6, 38
of the Almighty, and be thou continually occupied in his commandments: so
shall he stablish thy heart, and give thee wisdom at thine own desire.

For, the knowledge of the commandments Ecclus, 19, 19
of God, is the doctrine of life: and they that obey him, shall receive the
fruit of immortality.

. 3.
Delight thy self [then] in the Lord [thy Psalm, 37, 4,
God,] and the shall give thee thy hearts desire.

Commit thy works unto him, and thy Prou, 16, 3,
thoughts shall be directed.

Love the Lord all thy life long, and call Ecclus, 13, 15
upon him for thy salvation.

Believe in him, and he will help thee; Ecclus, 2, 6,
order thy way (...), and trust in him: hold fast his fear; and grow old
therein.

Trust in him with all thine heart, and lean Prou. 3. 5, 6, 7.
not unto thine own wisdom. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy steps. Be not wise in thine own eyes, but fear the Lord, and
depart from evil*

So health shall be unto thy navel, and verse, 8,
marrow unto thy bones.

. 4.
The Lord (says Ms^ah) has shovved Mica. 6, 8,
thee, o man, what is good; and what he requires of thee: namely, to do
justice; to love mercy; and to humble thy self to walk with thy God.

And now, o Israel, (says Moises) what Deuteronomy, 10, 12
is it that the Lord thy GOD requires of thee; but to fear the Lord thy God;
to walk in all his ways; and to love him, and serve him, with all thine heart,
and with all thy soul.

For, this commandment which I command Deuteronomy, 30, 11
thee this day, is not hid from thee; neither is it far off.

It is not in heaven, that thou should verse, 12, 13,
say; Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it us, and cause us to hear
it that we may do it? Neither is it beyond the Sea; that thou should say;
Who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it us, and cause us to hear it,
that we may do it?

But the Word is very near unto thee: verse, 14,
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, for to do it.

And this (says the Apostle) is the word Rom, 10, 8,
of faith which we preach.

. 5.
If any man (says Saint Peter) long after 1, Pet, 3. 10. 11.
life, and to see good days; let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his
lips that they speak not guile. Let him eschew evil, and do good: let him
seek peace, and follow after it.

Let every man be swift to hear; slow Iam, 1, 19,
to speak; and slow to wrath.

(For, he that has knowledge, spares Prou. 17, 27
his speech.

And, he that sins not in word, is a James. 3, 2.
perfect man; and able to bridle his whole body.)

Be swift to hear good things; and let Ecclus, 5, 12
thy life be pure; and give a patient answer.

If thou have understanding, answer thy verse, 13.
neighbor: if not, lay thy hand upon thy mouth; least thou be trapped in an
indiscreet word, and so be blamed.

Apply thine heart to instruction: and Prou, 23, 12.
thine ears unto the words of knowledge.

Be humble to hear the word of God, Ecclus, 5, 11
that thou may understand it: and make a true answer with wisdom.

For; to lack knowledge, is a very evil Orosius.
thing: to think scorn to learn, is worse: but, to with-stand and repugne
the truth, against men of knowledge teaching the same, is the worst thing that
may be, and furthest from all grace.

Wherefore; if thou desire to be good, Pet. Lomb.
endeavor thy self to learn to know, and to follow the truth: for he that is
ignorant therein, and will not learn, can never be good.

Endeavor thy self diligently, even in Siluius.
thy youth, to learn wisdom and knowledge, though for the time present it
seem painful unto thee: for, it is less pain for a man to learn in youth,
then in age to be unskillful.

. 6.
Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, 1, Pet, 3, 15. 16.
(says the Apostle,) and be ready always to give an answer to every man
that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you: and that with meekenes and
reverence, having a good conscience; that when they speak evil of you, as of
evil dooers, they may be ashamed, which blame your good conversation in Christ.

Yea,] let the word of Christ dwell in Colos, 3. 16.
you plenteously, in all wisdom; teaching and admonishing your own selves,
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs: singing with a grace in your
hearts unto the Lord.

And, whatsoever ye shall do in word, verse, 17.
or in deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus; giving thanks to God, even
the Father, by him.

For, God is a Spirit, and they that worship John, 4. 24,
him, must worship him in spirit and truth.

He is likewise, a God of wonderful great Tertullian.
power, might, and majesty: and therefore we ought, always to serve him
truly, with fear and reverence.

. 7.
I beseech you brethren, by the mercies Rom, 12. 1. 2.
of God, (says S. Paul) that ye give up your bodies a living sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to GOD; which is your reasonable serving of God. And fashion
not your selves like unto this world; but be ye changed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, and acceptable, and
perfect.

Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity James, 1, 21. 22.
of maliciousnes, and receive with meekness the word which is grafted in
you, which is able to save your souls. And be ye dooers of the word, and
not hearers only, deceiving your selves.

For, if any man hear the word, and do verse, 23, 24,
it not, he is like unto a man that beholds his natural face in a glass.
For, when he has considered himself, he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what manner of one he was.

But who so looks in the perfect Law verse, 2^.
of liberty, and continues therein: he not being a forgetful hearer, but a
dooer of the work, shall be blessed in his deed.

For, the hearers of the Law, are not righteous Rom, 2. 13,
before God: but the dooers of the law shall be justified.

And, not every one that says unto Christ, Math, 7, 21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the
will of God, which is in heaven.

Take heed therefore, that ye walk Ephe, 5. 15. 16,
circumspectly; not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, for the days
are evil.

That is, that ye cast off, concerning the Ephe, 4, 22, 23, 24,
conversation in time past, the old man, which is corrupt through deceivable
lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind. And put on the new man,
which after God is created, in righteousness and true holiness.

For, the grace of GOD, that brings Titus, 2. 11. 12.
salvation to all men, has appeared: and teaches us, that we should deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and that we should live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world.

Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty God,
verse. 13. 14.
and of our savior Jesus Christ: who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculier people unto
himself, zealous of good works.

. 8.
Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered ^, Pet. 4, 1.
for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind; which is,
that he which has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin: that he
hence-foorth should live, (as much time as remains in verse, 2. 3,
the flesh) not after the lusts of men; but after the will of God. For, it is
sufficient for us, that we have spent the time past of the life, after the
lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, and lusts, in excess of wines, in
excess of eatings, in excess of drinkings: and in abominable Idolatries.

Therefore, if any man be in Christ, let 2. Cor. 5. 17.
him be a new creature.

For, they that are Christ's, have crucified Gala, 5, 24,
the flesh, with the affections and the lusts.

. 9.
The night (says the Apostle) is past, and Rom, 13, 12 13. 14,
the day is at hand: let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let
us put on the Armor of light: so that we walk honestly, as in the day; not in
gluttony, and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife
and envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. * For, if ye live after the flesh, ye
Rom, 8, 13,
shall die, but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall
live.

Walk then I say in the Spirit, and ye Gala. 5. 16, 17,
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: for, the flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary one to
another, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would.

Strive therefore to enter into heaven at Luke, 13, 24
the strait gate: for many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

. 10.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those Colo, 3, 1, 2,
things which are above; where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set
your affections on things which are in heaven, and not on things which are on
the earth.

Gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace
that is 1, Pet, 1, 13. 14, 15, 16.
brought unto you by the revelation of Jesus Christ, as obedient children: not
fashioning your selves unto the former lusts of your ignorance: but as he
which has called you is holy; so be ye holy in all manner of conversation:
because it is written; Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Let no corrupt communication proceed Ephe. 4. 29.
out of your mouths, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it
may minister grace unto the hearers.

For, evil speakings corrupt good manners. 1, Cor, 15, 33.


And those things are always dishonest Iraeneus.
to be spoken of, which are filthy to be done.

Only let your conversation be as it becomes Philip. 1. 27,
the Gospel of Christ.

That ye may walk worthy of the Lord, Colos. 1, 10,
and please him in all things: being fruitful in all good works, and
increasing in the knowledge of God;

Who has saved us, and called us with 2. Tim, 1, 9. 10,
an holy calling; not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given to us through Christ Jesus before the
world was; but is now made manifest, by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ: who has [as I have already declared,] abolished death, and has
brought life and immortality unto light, through the Gospel*

. 11.
Dearly beloved, (says S. Peter) I beseech 1, Pet, 2, 11,
you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against the soul.

And have your conversation honest among verse, 12.
the Gentiles, that they which speak evil of you, as of evil dooers, may by
your good works which they shall see, glorify God in the day of visitation.

Yea; let your light so shine before men, Math. 5, 16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven.

. 12.
Be sober [also] and watch: for your adversary 1, Pet. 5, 8, 9.
the devil walks about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour:
whom resist steadfast in the faith.

Join moreover virtue with your faith; 2, Pet, 1, 5, 6, 7, 8,
and with virtue, knowledge; and with knowledge, temperance; and with
temperance, patience; and with patience, godliness; and with godliness,
brotherly kindness; and with brotherly kindness, love. For, if these things be
among you, and abound, they will make you that ye neither shall be idle, nor
unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

. 13.
Be ye therefore followers of God, as Ephe. 5, 1. 2.
dear children, and walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and has
given himself for us, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor unto God.

But fornication, and all uncleanness, or verse, 3, 4,
covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as it becomes Saints;
neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are things
not comely; but rather giving of thanks.

For, this ye know; that no whoremonger, verse, 5.
neither unclean person, nor covetous person, which is an Idolater, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God.

Wherefore, be ye not unwise; but understand Ephe, 5, 17,
what the will of the Lord is.

And be not drunk with wine, wherein Ephe. 5, 18, 19, 20, 21,
is excess, but be fulfilled with the Spirit: Speaking unto your selves in
Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs; singing and making melody to the
Lord in your hearts. Giving thanks always for all things unto God even the
Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ: and submitting your selves one to
another in the fear of God.

. 14.
Flee fornication: every sin that a man 1, Cor, 6, 18.
does, is without the body; but he that commits fornication, sins against
his own body.

And, who will count him just, that sinn^th Ecclus. 10, 30,
against himself; or honor him, that dishonors his own soul?

Know ye not, that your body is the temple 1, Cor, 19. 20,
of the holy Ghost, which is in you, who^ ye have of God? and ye are not your
own; for ye are bought for a price: glorify God therefore in your body, and in
your spirit: for they are Gods.

Know ye not [likewise] that to whomsoever Rom, 6, 16,
you give your selves as servant to obey, his servant ye are to whom ye
obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?

Know you not [also] that all we which Romans 6., 4.
have been baptized into Jesus Christ, have been baptized into his death? We
are buried then with him by Baptizme into his death, that like as Christ was
raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in
newnes of life.

(For, all that are baptized into Christ, Gala, 3, 27.
have put on Christ.)

And if we be grafted with him, to the similitude Romans 6. 5. 6, 7,
of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection:
knovving this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, and hence-foorth we should not serve sin. For, he that
is dead, is freed from sin.

Wherefore, if we be dead with Christ, Rom, 6, 8, 9. 10. 11.
we believe that we shall live also with him: for in that he died, he died
once to sin: but in that he lives, he lives to God. Likewise think ye
also, that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God, in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let not sin reign therefore in your verse, 12, 13,
mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof: Neither give ye
your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin; but give your selves
unto God, as they that are alive from the dead: and give your members as
weapons of righteousness unto him.

For the wages [or reward] of sin, is Rom, 6. 23.
death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Mortify therefore your members which Colo, 3, 5, 6,
are on the earth: [namely,] fornication; uncleanness; the inordinate
affection; evil concupiscence; and covetousness, which is idolatry. For the
which things sake, the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.

. 15.
Furthermore;] These are the things Zach, 8, 16, 17.
that ye shall do. Speak ye every man the truth unto his Neighbor; execute
judgment truly, and uprightly in your gates; and let none of you imagine evil
in his heart against his Neighbor; Neither love any false oath: for, all these
are the things that I hate, says the Lord.

See that none recompense evil for evil 1, These, 5, 15
unto any man: but ever follow that which is good, both toward your selves, and
toward all men.

If it be possible, as much as in you is, Rom, 12, 18
have peace with all men.

And, let love be without dissimulation. Rom, 12, 9
Abhorring that which is evil: and cleaving unto that which is good.

Also;] seeing your souls are purified in obeying the truth through the
Spirit, to 1. Pet, 1, 22. 23.
love brotherly without faining, love one another with a pure heart fervently:
being borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of
God, who lives and endures for ever.

Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking be put
away from Ephe, 4, 31, 32,
you, with all maliciousness. And be ye courteous one to another, and tender
hearted, freely forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake freely
forgave you.

Be all of one mind; one suffer with another; 1. Pet. 3, 8, 9
love as brethren; be pitiful; be courteous; not rendering evil for evil,
neither rebuke for rebuke: but contrariwise bless, knowing that ye are
thereunto called, that ye should be heirs of blessing.

Bless them which persecute you: bless Rom, 12. 14 15. 16.
I say, and curse not: rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that
weep: Be of like affection one toward another: be not hie minded, but make
your selves equal to them of the lower sort: Be not wise in your own eyes.

But rather pray unto the most High, that Ecclus. 37, 15
he will direct thy way in truth.

. 16.
Ye have heard, that it has been said: Math, 5, 43, 44, 45,
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. But I (says Christ) say
unto you, love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that
hate you; and pray for them that hurt you; and persecute you: that ye may be
the children of your Father which is in heaven: For, he makes his sun to
arise on the evil, and on the good: and sends down rain on the just and
unjust.

For, if ye love them which love you, verse, 46. 47,
what reward shall ye have? do not the ungodly even the same? And, if you be
Luke, 6, 32,
friendly to your Brethren only, what singular thing do ye? Do not even the
ungodly likewise?

Ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Math. 5. 48,
Father which is in heaven is perfect.

. 17.
Avenge not your selves, but give place Rom, 12. 19
unto wrath: for, it is written; Vengeance is mine; I will repay says the Lord.

Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feed verse, 20,
him: if he thirst, give him drink: for, in so doing, thou shall heap coals
of fire upon his head.

Contrariwise,] he that seeks vengeance, Ecclus. 28. 1,
shall find vengeance of the Lord: and he will surely keep his sins.

Should a man bear hatred against man, Ecclus, 28. 3,
and yet desire forgiveness of the Lord?

He will show no mercy to a man that is verse, 4.
like himself; and will he ask forgiveness of his own sins?

If he which is but flesh, nourish hatred, and ask pardon of God, who will
entreat Ecclus, 28, 5.
for his sins?

Remember [therefore] the end, and let verse, 6,
enmity pass: imagine not death and destruction to another through anger, but
persevere in the commandments.

And forgive thy neighbor the hurt that Ecclus. 28. 2,
he has done thee; so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also, when thou
prayest.

. 18.
If thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke Luk, 17, 3, 4
him; and if he repent, forgive him. And though he sin against thee seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again unto thee, saying; It
repents me, thou shall forgive him.

For, if you do forgive men their trespasses, Math, 6, 14, 15,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you your trespasses: but if you do not
forgive others, God will not forgive you.

Be always therefore, as ready to forgive Iunius.
thy brother when he repents; as thou thy self art willing to be pardoned
of God when thou prayest.

And be not overcome of evil, but overcome Rom, 12, 21
evil with goodness.

. 19.
Now the end of all things (says the Apostle) 1. Pet, 4, 7, 8,
is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watching in prayer. But above all
things have fervent love among you; for love covers the multitude of sins.

Be ye [likewise] harberous one to another verse, 9, 10,
without grudging. And let every man, as he has received the gift, minister
the same one to another, as good disposers of the manifold grace of God.

If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God. If any man minister,
let 1, Pet, 4, 11,
him do it as of the ability which God ministers; that GOD in all things
may be glorified through Jesus Christ.

. 20.
Cast away profane and old wives fables, 1. Tim, 4, 7, 8.
and exercise thy self unto godliness: For, bodily exercise profits little:
but godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the promise of the life
present, and of that, that is to come.

Flee also from the lusts of youth: and follow 2. Tim, 2. 22
after righteousness, faith, love, and peace; with them that call on the Lord
with a pure heart.

For, the end of the commandment, is love out of a pure heart; and of a good
conscience; 1. Tim, 1. 5.
and of faith unfeigned.

. 21.
Be nothing careful, but in all things let Phil. 4. 6. 7,
your requests be showed unto GOD in prayer and supplication, with giving of
thanks. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall preserve
your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

Be [also] at peace among your selves; 1. These, 5, 13. 14,
admonish them that are unruly; comfort the feeble minded; bear with the
meek; be patient toward all men.

Rejoice evermore; pray continually; in 1. These, 5. 16, 17, 18.
all things give thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you.

Quench not the Spirit; despise not prophesying: 1. The. 5. 19 20, 21, 22,
try all things, and keep that which is good. Abstain from all appearance of
evil.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, Hebr, 13, 5,
and be content with those things that ye have.

Remember them that are in bonds, as Heb. 13, 3.
though ye were bound with them: and them that are in affliction, as if ye
were also afflicted in the body.

Be [alwaies] affectioned to love one Rom, 12, 10
another with brotherly love.

Rejoice in hope: be patient in trouble: Rom, 12. 12, 13.
and continue in prayer. Distributing unto the necessity of the Saints, and
giving your selves to hospitality.

Also;] whatsoever things are true, Philip, 4, 8,
whatsoever things are honest, what soever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good
report; if there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, think on these
things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard.

Those things [also] do, and the God of verse. 9.
peace shall be with you.

. 22.
Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Ephe. 6. 10. 11, 12.
Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the assaults of the devil. For, we wrestle not
against flesh and blood; but against principalities; against powers; against
vvorldly governors; the princes of the darkness of this world; and against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the hie places.

For this cause take unto you the whole Ephe. 6, 13.
Armor of God, that ye may be able to resist in the evil day: and having
finished all things, stand fast.

Stand therefore, and your loins girded Ephe, 6, 14, 15.
about with the truth, and having on the breast plate of righteousness, and your
feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

Above all, take the shield of faith, verse. 16. 17,
vvhere-with ye may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: and take the
helmet of salvation and the svvorde of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

And pray alvvaies, with all manner of verse, 18.
prayer and supplication in the Spirit: and watch thereunto, with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints.

Let every one also that calls on the 2, Tim, 2, 19
Name of Christ, depart from iniquity.

And what-soeuer ye would that men Math, 7, 12,
should do unto you, even so do ye unto them: for this is the Law and the
Prophets.

Of Prayer and thanksgiving.
. 1.
Ask, (says Christ) and it shall be given Math, 7, 7,
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

For, whosoever asks, receives: and verse, 8,
he that seeks, finds: and unto him that knocks, it shall be opened.

But let him that asks, ask in faith, and James, 1, 6, 7
waver not; for he that wauereth, is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the
wind, and carried away: neither let that man think that he shall receive any
thing of the Lord.

Therefore, I say unto you, whatsoever Mark, 11, 24
ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall have it, and it shall be
done unto you.

Provided always, that thou never ask Beza.
in prayer, any such thing as seems good only in thine own conceit or
fantasy: but that thy peticion be evermore aunswerable to the word of God; and
wholly limited within the pleasure of his holy will.

For, this is the assurance that we have in 1. John, 5, 14, 15,
God, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: and if
we know that he hears us, what-soeuer we ask, we know that we have the
peticions that we have desired of him.

. 2.
Before thou prayest (says Sirach) prepare Ecclus. 18. 22
thy self thereunto; least thou be as one that tempts the Lord.

For, prayer is like a ship in the Sea, Plotinus.
which if it be good, saves all that is therein; but if it be naught, it
suffers them to perrish.

First therefore, ere thou beginnest to Plotinus.
pray unto GOD, examine thy self what thou intendest to ask; and cast away
from thee (with a repentant heart) all thy former iniquities: then call upon him
with a lowly and humble spirit; and he will assuredly hear thee; relieve thy
necessity; quiet thy conscience; and most joyfully comfort thee.

. 3.
And, when thou prayest, be not as the Math, 6, 5.
hypocrites; for they love to stand and pray in the Sinagogues, and in the
corners of the streets, because they would be seen of men. Verily, I say
unto you, they have their reward.

But when thou prayest, enter into thy Math, 6, 6,
chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray unto thy Father which is
in secret, and thy Father which is in secret, shall reward thee openly.

Also, when ye pray, use no vain repetitions verse, 7. 8,
like the Heathen; for they think to be heard for their much babbling. Be ye not
like them therefore: for your father knows whereof ye have need before you
ask him.

. 4.
Furthermore, when thou enterest in to pray, let thy prayer be to this end
especially, Pacuuius.
that God, as he is merciful, so he will for his promise sake, grant unto thee
those things which thou desire, if it stand with his blessed will: otherwise,
so far forth only to grant thy peticion, as it may tend to his glory, and
thine own good.

Desire him likewise, that as he is good to all that call upon him, so he will
be merciful B^con.
unto thee, in forgiving all thy offenses past: and daily more and more purify
thy heart, through the powerful working of his holy Spirit, that thereby thou
may be made both apt and able to understand his truth; and dutifully to
appear obedient in the performing of his heavenly will, by expressing the
fruits of faith in thy life and conversation.

Yea; forget not to pray often unto God Eugenius.
for the clensing of the impuritie of thine heart, and carefully endeavor to
restrain, that the corruption thereof break not out, either to the hurt of
thy self, or to the harm of any other.

Moreover; thou ought in thy prayer, Hemingius.
not only to make peticion unto God for thy self; but also for the happy
estate and prosperity of thy Prince; and for all others that by him are placed
in authority: for, of them depends the peace and tranquillity of the weal
public.

And of this matter does the Apostle S. Paul himself admonish us, where he
says: * I exhort therefore, that first of all, 1, Tim, 2, 1, 2.
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men: for Kings, and for all that are in authority; that we [vnder them] may
lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

. 5.
Acknowledge your faults one to another, James. 5. 16,
and pray one for another, (says Saint James) that ye may be healed: For, the
prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent.

Elias was a man subject to the like passions James, 5, 17,
as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not
on the earth for three years and six months.

Afterward, he prayed again; and the James, 5, 18,
heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

The prayer also of Moises, so mightily prevailed in the presence of his
Maker, that it seemed (as it were) to stay the very power of God, from pouring
down his wrath upon the people: and caused him to say: * Let me alone
Moises, that my wrath Exodus, 32, 10
may wax hot against this Nation to destroy them.

As if he should have said to Moises, as he said to Lot; * Get thee hence, for
I can Gen, 19, 22,
do nothing till thou be gone.

We read likewise, that after Hezekiah had received a special commandment
Esaias, 38, 1, 2, 3, etc.
from God, to set the affairs of his house in good order, and to prepare
himself to die: he (being unwilling so soon to forsake his life,) fervently
prayed to the Giver of time, and obtained so much favor through his earnest
petition, that his reign was afterward more enlarged, by the length of
fifteen years.

. 6.
Let no man (says Saint Bernard) be unmindful Bernarde.
to pray often unto God, for prayer is a virtue that greatly prevails against
temptation; against all assaults of infernal spirits; against the false
delights of this lingering life; and against the motions of our own flesh.

And, like as by reverent fasting and Erasmus.
abstinence, the bodily passions of man are to be cured: so by fervent prayer
and supplication unto God, the pestilent infections of the mind are to be
healed.

Pray therefore, as the Apostle counsels, 1, These. 5. 17
continually.

And vvatch in the same, with thanksgiving. Colos. 4, 2,


Yea; watch and pray, that ye enter not Mark. 14. 38
into temptation.

And, what-soeuer ye ask in prayer, if Math, 21. 22
ye believe, ye shall receive it.

. 7.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever 1, Cor, 10* 31,
ye do, says the Apostle, let all be done to the glory of God.

Giving thanks always unto him that Ecclus. 32, 14
has made thee, and replenished thee with his goods.

For, we ought evermore to be as forward Pet. Mart.
in giving thanks to God, for the several blessings which we have already
received; as we are vvilling when we pray, to obtain from him those
graces which are most needful for us.

Yea; we ought to prevent the Sunnerising Wisd. 16. 28
to give thanks unto God: and to salute him [vvith prayses] before the day
spring.

At thy down lying therefore, and at thy vprising; at thy sporting, eating,
and banqueting, Tertullian.
be mindful of thy Maker: be thankful unto him for his benefits, and remember
his manifold mercies*

Be thankful unto him for thy creation, Becon.
redemption, vocation, and sanctification.

Be likewise thankful unto him for the Euagoras.
sundry helps and succors, which many times he has graciously extended
toward thee: and also for the daily sustenaunce, which he prouidently
provides for thee.

For, the hope of the unthankful, shall Wisd. 16. 29
melt as the winter ye; and flow away as the unprofitable waters.

But he that offers praise, shall glorify Psalm, 50. 23
me, says the Lord; and to him that disposes his way aright, will I show
the salvation of God.

Of Fasting and Almes-deedes.
. 1.
THat which goes into the mouth, (says Math, 15, 11
Christ) defiles not the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, that
defiles the man.

Perceive ye not, that vvhat-soeuer enters Math. 15. 17
into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is afterward cast out into the
draught? But those things which proceed out of verse, 18,
the mouth, come from the heart, and they defile the man.

For, out of the heart, come evil thoughts, verse, 19.
murders, adulteries, fornications, theftes, false testimonies, slanders.

These are the things, which defile a verse. 20.
man: but to eat with unwashed hands* defiles not a man.

. 2.
Wherefore, if at any time thou feel thy Luther.
conscience inwardly grieved with the remembrance of thy sins past, and art
truly willing in heart to fast for thy former offenses; endeavor then diligently
to purge thy soul from filth, by abstaining from evil, for, God is better
pleased therewith, then by thy abstaining from meats.

If thou will fast, fast after the commandment Origin.
of Christ in the Gospel, and keep in thy fasting the rules of the Gospel.
Fast from all sin, abstain from the meat of hatred and malice; take no
delight in vain pleasures; be not enflamed with the wine of excess: fast
from evil actions; for bear evil thoughts; touch not the stolen bread of
wrong and perverse doctrine; lust not after the deceitful food of Philosophy,
which may lead thee away from the truth of Gods word. This kind of fasting
pleases God: and this kind of fasting is allowed of him.

. 3.
The honor of fasting, is not the abstinence Chrysostom.
from meats, but the flying from sin.

For, what avails it, if we abstain from B^con.
the lawful use of meats needful, and by backe-byting and slaundering, eat
and devour our brothers flesh?

The most healthful kind of fasting, is Ambrose.
to keep our bodies from excess and surfeiting; and our souls from sin and
vice.

And, then are our fastings acceptable to Augustine.
God, when they that fast through need and necessity, are charitably refreshed
of us.

For, it is not such a kind of fasting as hypocrites use, which pleases the
Lord; Esaias, 58, 5, 6.
namely, that a man should afflict his soul for a day, and bow down his head
like a Bulrush, and lie upon the ground in sackcloth and ashes: but rather this
is the fasting which pleases the Lord; to wit, that thou loose him out of
bondage that is in thy danger: that thou break the oath of wicked bargains:
that thou let the oppressed go free, and take from them all manner of burdens.

To deal thy bread to the hungry, and verse. 7.
to bring the poor that wander home to thy house: when thou see the naked,
that thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh.

Then shall thy light break forth as the verse, 8.
morning, and thy health shall grow speedily: thy righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall embrace thee.

Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shall cry, and he
shall say; verse, 9,
Here I am: If thou take away from the mids of thee the yoke: the putting
forth of the finger, and wicked speaking.

If thou power out thy soul to the hungry, verse, 10, 11,
and refresh the troubled soul: then shall thy light spring out in the
darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noone day. And the Lord shall guide
thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones:
and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose
waters fail not.

. 4.
Seek therefore, to restrain and bridle Fulgentius.
thine own flesh, by moderate fasting and abstinence; endeavor diligently to
do good, by exercising the works of mercy toward the poor: and pray
always earnestly unto God for his grace, that thou may be made willing to
do his will.

Likewise, know this; that we ought a Bernard.
great deal rather to fast from sins and vices, then from meats. Let
therefore thine eyes fast: let thine ears fast: let thy t^nge fast: let thy
hands fast: and let also thy soul fast.

Let thine eyes fast, from all vain and wanton looks; let thine ears fast,
from Bernard.
filthy and naughty tales and rumors; let thy tongue fast, from backbyting,
slaundering, and murmuring, and from unprofitable, vain, and filthy words; let
thy hands fast, from vain signs, and from works what-soeuer are not*
commanded: but much more warily let thy soul and mind fast, from fond
imaginations, and from thine own ungodly desires. For, ^urelie, without we
fast after this manner, our fasting is no true fast.

Also; when ye fast, look not sour, as Math. 6. 16.
hypocrites do; for they disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men
to fast. Verily I say unto you that they have their reward.

But when thou fastest, annoint thine verse. 17, 18.
head, and wash thy face; that thou seem not unto men to fast, but unto thy
Father which is in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, will reward
thee openly.

. 5.
To do good, and to distribute, (says Hebr. 13, 16
the Apostle) forget not: for, with such sacrifices God is pleased*

While we have therefore time, let us do Gala, 6, 10.
good unto all men^: but specially unto them that are of the household of faith.

Do good unto the righteous, and thou Ecclus, 12, 2,
shall find great reward: though not of him, yet of the most High.

Help thy neighbor according to thy Ecclus, 29. 22
power; and beware that thou thy self fall not.

Give alms according to thy substance; Tob, 4. 8.
and though thou have but a little, be not afraid to give a little alms.

For, if there be first a willing mind, it is 2. Cor. 8, 12,
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

This yet remember; that he which sows 2, Cor. 9. 6, 7
sparingly, shall ^eape also sparingly: and he that sows liberally, shall
reap also liberally. As every man wishes in his heart, so let him give, not
grudgingly, or of necessity: for, God loves a cheerful giver.

. 6.
Because (says the Lord) there shall be Deuteronomy, 15, 11
ever some poor in the Land, therefore, I command thee, saying: Thou shall
open thy hand unto thy brother; unto thy needy; and unto thy poor in the land.

Bestow thy treasure [then] according to Ecclus. 29. 11, 12.
the commandment of the most High, and it shall bring thee more profit then
gold. Lay up thine alms in thy secret chambers, and it shall keep thee from
all afflictions.

Lay not up treasures for your selves upon Math, 6, 19, 20, 21,
earth, where the moth and canker corrupt, and where thieves dig through and
steal: but lay up treasures for your selves in heaven: where neither the moth
nor canker corrupts; and where thieves neither dig through, nor steal.
For, where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.

. 7.
If thou will be a good Merchant, or a Augustine.
gainefull Usurer, give that which thou can not keep, that thou may
receive that which thou can not loose. Give a little, that thou may receive
a hundred fold: give a temporal and fading possession, that thou may receive
an everlasting inheritance.

And vvhat-soeuer thou give, give it Augustine.
freely, for he never gives in vain, that gives in zeal.

Neither do I remember, that ever I Jerome.
read of any one that dyed an evil death, who willingly exercised the works
of mercy. For, they have the prayers of many; and it is vn^ossible but that
their prayers should be heard.

. 8.
Give unto the most High, according as Ecclus. 35, 10
he has enriched thee: and look what thy hand is able, give with a
cheerful eye.

For, the Lord recompenseth, and will give verse, 11.
thee seven times as much.

Stretch out thine hand unto the poor Ecclus, 7, 32
and needy, that thy blessing and reconciliation may be accomplished.

Be as a father unto the fatherless, and as Ecclus, 4, 10
an husband unto their mother: so shall thou be as the son of the most High,
and he shall love thee more then thy mother does.

. 9.
Charge them that are rich in the world, (says Paul unto Timothy,) that
they be 1. Tim. 6. 17 18. 19.
not high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches; but in the
living God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy. That they do
good, and be rich in good works, and be ready to distribute and communicate:
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may obtain eternal life.

For, he that gives alms, lays up for Tob, 4. 9.
himself a good store against the day of necessity.

Because the alms of a man, is as a thing Ecclus, 17, 20
sealed up before God, and he keeps the good deeds of men, as the apple of
the eye; and gives repentance to their sons and daughters.

At the last [also] shall he arise and reward verse, 21.
them, and shall repay their rewards upon their heads.

Give alms therefore, of those things Luke, 11, 41
which thou have.

Give of thy bread to the hungry; give Tob, 4, 16.
of thy garments to the needy and naked; and of all thine abundance give alms:
and let not thine eye be envious when thou give thine alms.

For, nothing does so much commend a Ambrose.
Christian, as commiseration and charity.

. 10.
Let it not at any time grieve thee to do Plotinus.
good unto the poor and needy; but rather covet to be liberal in thy gifts,
to such as want, and are distressed: for, the almesdeedes of the liberal, do
more profit the giver, then benefit the receiver.

Have always compassion on the poor, Calvin.
the blind, and the lame: and endeavor by good counsel to comfort him that is
afflicted in conscience.

Forget not often to visit the sick; to Gueuara.
relieve them that are in bonds; to succor poor Orphans; and to defend the
cause of the widow and oppressed.

For, pure Religion and undefiled before James, 1, 17.
God, even the Father, is this; to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world.

Also; like as all things else that are bred upon the earth, are all created
and ordained Cicero.
for the use and commodity of man: so man for the benefit of man, is begotten
and borne into the world, to the end they should continually do good, by
helping one another.

And, they which exercise alms and righteousness, Tob, 12, 9,
shall be filled with life.

But every one that sins, is an enemy Tob, 12, 10
to his own soul.

. 11.
Alms, (says Tobie,) is a good gift before Tob, 4, 11,
the most High, to all them which use it.

And, it is better to give Alms, then to Tob. 12. 8.
lay up gold.

Say not unto thy neighbor, Go and Prou, 3, 28,
come again, and to morrow I will give thee, if thou now have it.

For, he that gives unto the poor, shall Prou. 28. 27.
not lack: but he that hides his eyes, shall have many curses.

Give alms therefore, of thy substance: Tob, 4, 7,
and when thou give thine alms, let not thine eye be envious, neither turn
thy face from any poor body, least that God turn his face from thee.

Give part of that which thou possessest, Iraeneus.
though thy gift amount to no more in value then the poor widows two mites.

Give also at the first asking: for the gift Socrates.
is not worth thanks, which is often craved.

Besides; the gift which is grudginglie Plato.
given, may well be called a stony loaf: which although it be hard, yet it is
needful to be received of him that is hungry.

. 12.
He that has mercy upon the poor, Prou, 19, 17.
lends unto the Lord; and the Lord will recompense him that which he has
given.

For, GOD so greatly loves the poor, Jerome.
that what-soeuer good deed is done unto any of them for the love of him; he
takes it as it were done unto himself.

And, he shall undoubtedly find many Leo.
great blessings at Gods hand, who lets not the poor and needy depart from
him, without comfort.

. 13.
But; when thou mindest to distribute, or give any thing unto the poor; thou
Rom, 12, 8,
must euer-more observe this rule therein: namely, to do the same, (as the
Apostle counsels) with simplicity.

Not causing a trumpet to be blown before Math, 6, 2, 3, 4.
thee when thou give thine alms, as the hypocrites do in the Sinagogues,
and in the streets, to the end they may be seen and praised of men. For,
verily I say unto you, that they have their reward.

Wherefore, when thou give thine alms, let not thy left hand know what thy
right hand does: that thine alms may be in secret, and thy Father which sees
in secret, will reward thee openly.

. 14.
Likewise, regard well, that the Alms Isidorus.
which thou art willing to bestow on the poor, be taken from some part or
portion of thine own true-gotten goods: for, other-wise in giving, thou shall
highly provoke GOD to anger; and sooner bring down a curse, then a blessing
upon thee.

For, the offering of the righteous, makes Ecclus, 35, 6,
the Altar fat, and the smell thereof is sweet before the Lord.

But he that gives an offering of unrighteous Ecclus, 34, 18
goods, offers a mocking sacrifice, and the gifts of the ungodly please not
God.

The sacrifice of the righteous, is acceptable; Ecclus, 35, 7.
and the remembrance thereof shall never be forgotten.

But the most High does not allow the Ecclus, 34, 20
offerings of the wicked, neither is he pacified for sin through the
multitude of their sacrifice.

For, the sacrifice of the wicked, is an abomination Prou, 15, 8,
unto the Lord.

And, he that brings an offering of the Ecclus. 34. 21
goods of the poor, does as one that sacrifices the son before the fathers
eyes.

Which, as in reason every man may well persuade himself, that the father of
such a child, would never willingly be content, either to see or suffer: so by
the testimony of these few former places, may we certainly assure our selves,
that God will much more unlikely be pleased, with the gifts of ill-gotten
goods.

Of Humility and Obedience.
. 1.
THe greater thou art (says Sirach,) the Ecclus. 3, 19.
more humble thy self in all things; so shall thou find favor before the Lord.

For, thus says he that is hie and excellent; he that inhabiteth the
eternity, whose Esaias, 57, 15.
Name is the Holy one; I dwell in the hie and holy place; with him also that
is of a contrite and humble spirit: to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
give life to them that are of a contrite heart.

. 2.
There be (as Orosius says) three degrees Orosius.
of humility; the first is of repentance; the the second is, in hungering and
thirsting after righteousness; the third, consists in extending the works
of mercy, to such as have need of comfort.

And, the chiefest point of all man's true Just. Mar.
humility, consists in this, to subject and frame his will, according to
the will of God, in all things what-soeuer.

For, them that be meek, will God guide Psalm, 25, 9.
in judgment; and teach the humble his way.

. 3.
It is nothing prayse-worthy for a man to Clem. Alex.
be humble in adversity, because necessity then compels him: but in the
midst of prosperity to bear an humble mind, deserves great commendation.

Wherefore, if thou desire to ascend Bernard.
where God the Father sits, thou must put on the true humility, which
Christ his Son teaches.

For, every one that exalts himself, Luke, 18, 14
shall be brought low; but he that humbles himself, shall be exalted.

. 4.
Pride and humility be two contraries: Cicero.
the one is both of GOD and man greatly disliked; the other is of God and man
very much beloved.

And, as the one directs the way to hell, Mar. Bucer.
so the other teaches the way to heaven.

If thou arrogantly lift up thy self unto Augustine.
God, he will flee further off from thee; but if thou humble thy self
unfeignedly before him, he will then draw near, and come down unto thee.

. 5.
Let nothing (says the Apostle) be done Philip, 2, 3.
through contention, or vain glory, but in meekness of mind, let every man
esteem other better then himself.

For, like as lowlines of heart, and meekenes Epiphani^^.
of mind, makes a man highly in favor with God; so strife, vainglory, and
contention, procures hatred and disdain amongst men.

And, like as pride sleyeth love, provoke disdain, kindles malice,
confounds Pacuuius.
justice, and subuer^eth Weals public; even so meekenes, gentleness, or
humility, do stir up affection, augment benevolence, intend charity,
support good equity, and preserve in peace and concord, both Countries and
Commonweals.

. 6.
It is better (says Solomon,) to be of an Prou, 16. 19
humble mind with the lowly, then to divide the spoils with the proud.

Now therefore, as the elect of God, holy, Colos. 3. 12. 13.
and beloved, put on tender mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekness,
long suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel to another, even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye.

And, above all these things put on love, Colos, 3, 14.
which is the bond of perfectnes.

And, let the peace of God rule in your verse, 15.
hearts, to the which ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful.

Likewise ye younger, submit your selves 1, Pet, 5, 5.
unto the elders, and submit your selves every man one to another; deck your
selves inwardly in lowlines of mind: for GOD resists the proud, and gives
grace to the humble.

Humble your selves therefore, under the 1, Pet, 5, 6,
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time.

Cast down your selves before the Lord, James, 4, 10,
and he will lift you up.

. 7.
Submit your selves (says S. Peter) unto 1, Pet. 3, 13 14.
all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be unto the King,
as unto the Superior, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him,
for the punishment of evil dooers, and for the praise of them that do well.

Yea; Let every soul be subject unto the Rom, 13, 1, 2.
higher Powers; for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves
condemnation.

Be subject [then] to the principalities and Titus, 3, 1,
powers: be obedient; and ready to every good work.

For, obedience is better then sacrifice; 1, Sam, 15, 22, 23.
and to harken, is better then the fat of Rams. But rebellion is as the
sin of vvitchcraft; and transgression is wickedness, and idolatry.

. 8.
Obedience, (says Plotinus) is an incomparable Plotinus.
virtue, and due both to God and man: that is to say, first and cheefely unto
God; secondly, unto the Prince; and so consequently, unto all other Magistrates
that by him are placed in authority.

For, as the Prince, being placed only Virgilius.
by the providence of God in the highest seat of honor, owes equal justice
and meek conversation to all his subjects: so ought the people to owe dutiful
obedience to their Prince, in reuerencing his person, and fulfilling his
commandments.

And, he that rightly obeys his superior, Cyrill.
by his good ensample instructs his inferior.

Also; he that honors and obeys Tertullian.
his Prince, honors and obeys God: for the Prince is Gods Vizegerent here
on earth, and represents amongst men, (using his authority as he ought) the
glorious state and high Majesty of GOD in heaven.

. 9.
Obey them, (says the Apostle) that have Heb, 13, 17,
the ouer-sight of you, and submit your selves: for, they watch for your
souls, as they that must give accounts, that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.

The Elders that rule well, (says he) are 1, Tim, 5, 17. 18,
worthy of double honor; specially they that labor in the Word and doctrine.
For, the Scripture says; Thou shall not mousell the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn: and, The labourer is worthy of his wages.

Now [therefore*] we beseech you brethren, 1, These. 5, 12, 13,
that ye know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you; that ye have them in singular love for their works sake. * And
Philip. 2. 29.
make much of such.

. 10.
Honor all men: love brotherly fellowship: 1, Pet, 2, 17.
fear God: honor the King.

For, the Kings wrath, is like the roaring Prou, 19, 12
of a Lion; but his favor is like the dew upon the grass.

And as Princes are men before God; so Lactantius.
are they Gods before men.

This always yet remember; That we Acts. 5, 29.
ought rather to obey God than man.

A further declaration, of diverse other special commandments which we find
contained in the Book of GOD: concerning our duty toward him, and our love
toward our neighbor. With many profitable sayings tending to the same effect
and purpose, collected forth of the works of sundry learned and worthy
Writers.
Against the worshipping of Images and false Gods.
. 1.
THus spoke the Almighty unto Israel Exodus 20* 1, 2, 3.
in the twenty chapter of Exodus, saying; I am the Lord thy GOD, which have
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall
have none other Gods but me.

Thou shall make thee no graven Image, verse. 4.
neither any similitude of things that are in heaven above, neither that are in
the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters under the earth.

Thou shall not bow down to them, Exodus, 20, 5,
nor serve them: for, I am the Lord thy God, a ielous God, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me.

And showing mercy unto thousands in verse, 6.
them that love me, and keep my commandments.

. 2.
To whom (says Esaias,) will ye liken Esaias, 40, 18.
GOD? or what similitude will ye set up unto him?

He is a King everlasting, immortal, 1, Tim, 1, 17
and invisible. * And, there is none like unto Deu^. 33. 26
to him.

Take therefore good heed unto your Deuteronomy, 4, 15 16.
selves: for ye saw no image in the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb,
out of the mids of the fire: that ye corrupt not your selves, and make you a
graven image, or representation of any figure, whether it be the likeness of
male or female.

The likeness of any beast that is on the verse, 17, 18,
earth, or the likeness of any fethered foul that flies in the air. The
likeness of any thing that creeps on the earth; or the likeness of any fish
that is in the waters beneath the earth. etc.

For, the Lord thy GOD, is a consuming Deuteronomy, 4, 24,
fire, and a ielous God.

. 3.
Confounded be all they (says David,) Psalm, 97, 7,
that serve graven Images: and that glory in their Idols.

Miserable are they, and among the dead Wisd, 13, 10
is their hope, that call them Gods, which are the works of men's hands.

For, the worshipping of Idols, which Wisd, 14, 26
ought not to be named, is the beginning, the cause, and the end of all evil.

The inuenting of them, was the beginning Wisd, 14, 11
of whoredom; and the finding of them, is the corruption of life.

For, they were not from the beginning; verse, 12. 13,
neither shall they continue for ever. The vainglory of men, brought them
into the world; therefore shall they come shortly to an end.

They have mouths and speak not: Psalm* 115, 5. 6. 7.
they have eyes and see not: they have ears and hear not: they have noses and
smell not: they have hands and touch not: they have feet and walk not: neither
make they any sound with their throat.

They that make them, are like unto the^: and so are all they that put their
trust in Psalm, 115, 8,
them.

But] cursed be the Image, and the imagemaker: Wisd. 14, 8,
he, because he made it; and it, because that being a corruptible thing, it
was called God.

. 4.
VVho-soeuer (says S. Augustine) adoreth or makes his prayer, beholding an
Image; Augustine.
he is so moved thereby in his own mind, that he thinks the Image hears
him: and also hops that it will perform his peticion.

An unhappy memory (therefore) is that, which to remember Christ, who never
Carolus magnus.
ought to depart out of the heart of the just man, stands in need of a
sightfull conceit; nor otherwise can have the presence of Christ within him,
unless he have his Image painted on a wall, or expressed in some other
matter: for such a memory, as is nourished and kept by Images, proceeds not
of hearty love, but necessity of eyesight.

And, out of all doubt there is no true religion Lactantius.
to be looked for, wheresoever an Image has any abiding.

Against swearing.
. 1.
THou shall not take the Name of the Exodus, 20, 7,
Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes
his Name in vain.

Ye have heard that it was said to them Math, 5, 33,
of old time; Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform thine oath
unto the Lord.

But I say unto you, swear not at all: neither verse, 34, 35
by heaven, for it is the throne of God, nor yet by the earth, for it is his
footestoole, neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King.

Neither shall thou swear by thine head, verse, 36.
because thou can not make one hair white or black.

But let your communication be, Yea, verse, 37,
yea; Nay, nay: for vvhat-soeuer is more then these, comes of evil.

. 2.
Above all things my brethren swear James, 5, 12.
not; neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your yea,
be yea, and your nay, nay, least ye fall into condemnation.

Accustom not thy mouth to swearing, Ecclus, 23, 9,
for in it there are many falls: neither take up for an ordinary use the
naming of the Holy one: for thou shall not escape unpunished for such things.

For, as a servant that is often beaten, verse, 10.
cannot be without some skarre, so he that swears, and names GOD
continually, shall not be faultlesse.

But as he blasphemeth the Name of Sigismund.
GOD, by his often swearing: so he daily procures unto himself, many plague
for his punishment.

Yea; the man that uses much swearing; Ecclus, 23, 11
shall be filled with wickedness: and the plague shall never go from his house:
when he shall offend, his fault shall be upon him: and if he acknowledge not
his sin, he makes a double offense: and if he swear in vain, he shall
not be innocent, but his house shall be full of plagues.

Use not thy mouth [therefore] to ignorant Ecclus, 23, 13
rashness: for therein is the occasion of sin.

Of sanctifying the Sabaoth-day.
. 1.
REmember thou keep holy the Sabbath Exodus 20. 8.
day. Six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do.

But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the verse. 9.
Lord thy God: in it thou-shalt do no manner of work; neither thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man servant, nor thy maid servant, nor thy
cattle, nor the stranger that is within thy gates.

For, in six days, the Lord made heaven, verse, 10.
and earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day:
wherefore, the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

. 2.
If, (says the Almighty,) thou turn away Esaias. 58. 13.
thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it, as glorious unto the Lord, and shall
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor
speaking a vain word;

Then shall thou delight in the Lord: verse, 14.
and I will cause thee to mount upon the hie places of the earth; and feed
thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father: for, the the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it.

But,] take heed to thy foot when thou Ecclesi. 4, ^7
entrest into the House of GOD, and be more near [or ready] to hear, then to
give the sacrifice of fools: for, they know not that they do evil.

Of honoring our Parents.
. 1.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that Exodus, 20, 12
thy days may be prolonged in the Land which the Lord thy GOD gives thee.

Honor thy father from thy whole heart, Ecclus, 7, 27 28.
and forget not the sorrows of thy mother. Remember that thou wast borne of
them, and how can thou recompense them the things that they have done for
thee?

Obey thy father [therfore] that has begotten Prou, 23, 22.
thee; and despise not thy mother when she is old.

For* the Lord will have the father honored Ecclus, 3, 3,
of the children: and has confirmed the authority of the mother over them.

. 2.
It is the first law, even of nature, (says Val. Max.
Valerius) that we should in all kindness and affection, dearly love our
parents.

And, the honor which we owe unto Chilo.
them, is no otherwise to be understood, but to judge discreetly, reverently,
and honorably of them; and to esteem well of all their doings: not only
because they are our elders, but chiefly because they are our parents; whom it
pleased God to use as instruments, to the intent, that by them we might have
our first beginning, and natural entrance into this world: and by whom also,
after our birth, we be most tenderly brought up, carefully attended on,
naturally beloved, and most daintily fed and nourished, both in sickness and
in health.

Also; in dutifully honoring of our parents, Chilo.
we do not only honor the great virtue and power of God, but also the
excellency of his goodness, whereby we are made men, and borne into the
world, even of the blood of man.

. 3.
Honor thy father and thy mother, (says Ecclus, 3, 9, 10.
Sirach) in deed and in word, and in all patience, that thou may have Gods
blessing, and that his blessing may abide with thee in the end. For, the
blessing of the father, establishes the houses of the children; and the
mothers curse rooteth out the foundations.

Help thy father in his age, and grieve Ecclus, 3, 13
him not as long as he lives.

And, if his understanding fail, have patience verse, 14.
with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength.

For, the good entreaty of thy father shall verse, 15,
not be forgotten, but it shall be a fortress for thee against sins.

And, in the day of trouble thou shall be verse, 16.
remembered: thine iniquities also shall melt away as the y^e in the fair
weather.

. 4.
Who so honors his father, his sins Ecclus, 3, 4, 5,
shall be forgiven him; and he shall abstain from them, and shall have his
daily desires. And, he that honors his mother, is like one that gathers
treasure.

Who so honors his father, shall verse, 6,
have joy of his own children: and when he makes his prayer, he shall be
^eard.

Who so honoreth his father, shall have a verse, 7,
long life; and he that is obedient unto the Lord, shall comfort his mother.

But,] he that forsakes his father, shall Ecclus, 3, 17
come to shame; and he that despises his mother, is cursed of God.

He [also] that curses his father, or his Exodus, 21, 17
mother, shall die the death.

And, that child's light, shall be put out Prou, 20, 20.
in obscure darkness.

Against Pride.
. 1.
THere are six things (as Solomon says) Prou, 6, 16. 17, 18, 19.
which the Lord hates, yea, his soul abhors seven: [namely these;] hautie
[or proude] looks; a lying tongue; the hands that shed innocent blood; a
heart that imagines wicked enterprises; feet that be swift in running to
mischief; a false witness that speaks lies; and him that raises up
contentions among brethren.

. 2.
Pride, (as Pacuuius says) is a subtle Serpent, Pa^uuius.
which slilie insinuates her self into the minds of men; and the very chief
cause of all superstition and envy.

It is an ugly and loathsome monster both Plato.
in the sight of God and man, and continually accompanied with these four bad
companions: Folly; Rashness; Audacitie; and Impudency.

The beginning of man's pride, is to fall Ecclus, 10, 13
away from God, and to turn away his heart from his Maker.

For, pride is the original of sin, and he verse. 14.
that has it, shall power out abomination, till at last himself be
overthrown.

But] the reward of humility and the Prou, 22, 4,
fear of God, is riches, honor, and health.

. 3.
Pride, envy, and impatiencie, are the Augustine.
three capital enemies of man's constancy.

And, it commonly falls out, that he Arnobius.
which is proud himself, thinks it a matter impossible, for any man to be
humble.

Pride is also such a turbulent evil to him Ambrose.
that is possessed therewith, that it makes his master like a ship without a
Pilot, tossed up and down upon the waves, by the winds and tempests.

For, by reason of his unquiet thoughts, Pyndarus.
and aspiring spirit, he can never content himself in any mean vocation.

But still strives higher and higher to be Hemingius.
exalted, till the burden of his sin bruise both his life and soul with the
weight.

. 4.
My son, (says Sirach) be not proud Ecclus, 6. 2. 3,
in the devise of thine own mind, least thy soul rent thee as a Bull; and
eat up thy leaves, and destroy thy fruit: and leave thee like a dry tree in
the wilderness.

For, a wicked soul destroys him that Ecclus. 6. 4.
has it, and makes him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies; and brings
him to the portion of the ungodly.

Wherefore, if thou will be beloved both Plotinus.
of God and good men, endeavor diligently to abstain from pride; and be not of
an hautie, stout, and stately spirit: neither arrogantly boast thy self at
any time of the good gifts of God; whether of wisdoms, beauty, policy,
strength, authority, or riches. For, it is one God that is only wise,
amiable, puissant, wealthy, and full of all felicity. Which God, ought of
every man to be worshipped with humbleness of heart.

For, who separateth thee? [o man, from other men and prefers thee?] or what
1, Cor, 4, 7,
have thou, that thou have not received? if thou have received it, why
reioycest thou, as though thou had not received it?

. 5.
And, although it please God to bestow Mar. Bucer.
some kind of gift on some men, in more plentiful manner then on others; and
to place one man in authority above another here on earth; yet ought not he
that is so enriched, or raised, to swell in pride against his inferior
therefore.

For, God by creation has made all men Hermes.
alike: and hovv-soeuer we deceive our selves, as dear unto him is the
poorest beggar, as the most pompous Prince in the world.

Also; thus fore-warneth us the Lord himself, saying: Let not the vvise-man
glory in his wisdom; nor the strong man Ierem, 9, 23, 24,
glory in his strength; nor the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me. For, I am the
Lord which show mercy, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. etc.

. 6.
Why is earth and ashes proud, seeing Ecclus, 10, 12
that when a man dies, he is the heir of Serpents, beasts, and worms*

And, he that thinks himself as rich as Plato.
the richest during his life, shall be made as poor as the poorest, soon
after his death.

For, all men have one entrance unto life, Wisd, 7, 6,
and a like going out.

Be not proud then of clothing and raiment; Ecclus. 11. 4,
neither exalt thy self in the day of honor.

For, pride goes before destruction, and Prou, 16. 18,
an high mind before the fall.

As may for example be seen in the story Acts. 12. 21. 22. 23.
of Herod: who being in the midst of his pride and royalty, was suddenly
smytten by the Angel of God, and forced speedily to forgo his life, riches,
and glory.

The like example also, as a special forewarning, 2. Mac. 9.
is left unto us in the story of Antiochus; whose wicked life, and miserable
death, is set down at large in the second Book of the Maccabees.

Let men therefore fear the Almighty: Job, 37, 24.
for he will not regard any that are wise in their own conceit.

Against envy, hatred, malice, anger, wrath, and murder.
. 1.
THou shall not (says the Lord) hate thy Leuit, 19, 17
neighbor [or brother] in thine heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy
neighbor, and suffer him not to sin.

Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful Leuit, 19, 18
of wrong against the children of thy people, but shall love thy neighbor as
thy self.

Say not thou, I will recompense evil: Prou, 20, 22. and 24, 29
or, I will do to him, as he has done to me: but wait upon the Lord, and
he shall save thee.

For, where envying and strife is, there is James, 3, 16
sedition, and all manner of evil works.

. 2.
Envy, (says Plato) is the daughter of Plato.
Pride, the author of murder and revenge, the beginner of all secret
sedition, and the perpetual enemy to virtue.

So that there is not a more wicked thing, the^ for a man to hate, or be
envious: by the Mar. Aur.
which effect, the devils be most miserable.

And, the only difference between envy Aristotle.
and hatred is this: the first, works evil secretly: the second, pursues
after revenge publicly.

. 3.
As of all vices Pride is the greatest, so of Socrates.
all evils, Envy is the most ancient, and Gluttony the foulest.

Envy never walks abroad, without his Pythag.
companion Slander in his company: for they are as it were two brothers,
linked together to work wickedness.

And, as envy intends evil against his Phocilides.
neighbor secretly in his thought, so slander endeavors privily to defame
him with his tongue.

. 4.
The malicious man, does always drink Seneca.
the most part of his own poison. And, like as iron is consumed with rust, so
the hearts of the envious, are daily eaten and consumed by envy.

The man also that is envious, becomes Boethius.
euer-more a troublesome tormentor to himself during his life; and never
hurts any man else by his hatred whilst he lives, so much as he harmeth
himself at the time of his death.

An example hereof may be seen in the 2. Sam, 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
actions of Ahitophell; who having greatly abused his wit, by beating his
brain to give wicked counsel to king David's son against his Father; and
seeing afterward his purpose prevented, and his counsel contemned, he was
presently so molested with inward malice, and overcome of secret envy, that
more Asse-like then the Ass which he rode on, he made have home to hang
himself.

. 5.
Be not thou (says Solomon) of an hasty Eccles, 7, 11.
spirit to be angry; for anger rests in the bosom of fools.

And, as the vapor and smoke of the Ecclus. 22. 24
chimney goes before the fire, so evil words, rebukes, and threatenings, go
before bloodshedding.

. 6.
If thy anger be but a small time deferred, Dion.
thou shall plainly perceive that it will thereby be greatly abated; but if thou
nourish and suffer the same to continue, it will never cease, until by revenge
it bring thee to ruin.

He therefore may well be said to be conqueror Chilo.
over a stout enemy, that can by his wisdom and patience, overcome his own
anger.

For, he that delights in peace and quietness, Perdicas.
sleeps secure: but he that loves strife and anger, is continually subject
to wrath and danger.

. 7.
Ye have heard (says Christ) that it was Math, 5, 21,
said unto them of the old time; Thou shall not kill: for, who-soeuer kills,
shall be culpable of judgment.

But I say unto you, whosoever is angry verse, 22.
with his brother unadvisedly, shall be culpable of judgment.

If any man kill with a sword, he must be Reave, 13, 10
killed by a sword.

And who so sheddeth man's blood, by Gene, 9, 6,
man shall his blood be shed: for in the Image of GOD has the Almighty made
man.

. 8.
Cease from anger, and leave off wrath: Psalm, 37. 8. 9.
fret not thy self also to do evil: for evil dooers shall be cut off; and
they that wait upon the Lord, they shall enherite the Land.

Be angry, but sin not; let not the Sun Ephe, 4, 26, 27.
go down upon thy wrath: neither give place to the devil.

If thou have not so much power over Hermes.
thy self, as presently to refrain thine anger; yet strive to dissemble it,
and so by little and little forget it.

For, he that is slow to anger, is better Prou, 16, 32
then the mighty man: and he that rules his own mind, is better then he
that wins a City.

. 9.
Beware of strife, and thou shall make Ecclus, 28, 8,
thy sins fewer: for an angry man kindles strife.

The more wood there is, the more vehement Ecclus, 28, 10.
is the fire, and the mightier that a man is, the greater is his wrath: and the
longer the strife endures, the more wrath is enflamed.

An hasty brauling kindles a fire: and verse. 11.
an hasty fighting sheddeth blood.

Meddle therefore as little as thou may, Thales.
with the man that is not able to rule his own anger: for, either by his
company keeping, thou shall be made like him: or else on the sudden, thou
shall receive some vnloo-ked-for-euill by him.

. 10.
Strive not with a mighty man, least thou Ecclus, 8, 1. 2, 3,
happen to fall into his hands: neither make any variance with a rich man,
least he on the other side wey down thy weight: for, gold and silver has
destroyed many, and has subverted the hearts of Kings. Strive not with a man
that is full of words; neither lay thou any sticks upon his fire.

Travail not by the way with him that is Ecclus, 8, 15,
rash, least he do thee injury: for such a man will follow his own
wilfulnes; and so shall thou perrish through his folly.

As innocent Abel perrished by the Gene, 4, 8,
hands of his elder brother Caine, in his unadvised rage and fury.

. 11.
If thine enemy have threatened thee, be Plutarch.
not too hasty to give credit to his flattering speeches: for Serpents never
sting so deadly, as when they bite without any hyssing.

He that hates, will counterfeit with his Prou, 26, 24
lips; but in his heart he hourdeth up deceit.

Wherefore,] if he speak thee fair, verse, 25,
believe him not; for there are many abominations in his heart.

Blood is as nothing in such a man's sight, Hermes.
and when thou least think harm, he will then be most ready to hurt thee.

As may for example be perceived, by the treacherous dealing of Ioab, with Abner
and 2, Sam. 3. 27 and 20. 10.
Amafa; whose blood he spilt Iudas-like; saluting the^ with outward signs of
peace, and inward intent of murder.

Against Sloth, and Idleness.
. 1.
Love not sleep, (says Solomon) least Prou, 20, 13
thou come to poverty: but open thine eyes, that thou may be satisfied with
bread.

Let not laborious work seem tedious Ecclus, 7, 15.
unto thee: neither the husbandry which the most High has created.

Seek not excuses when thou should Ecclus, 10, 27
do thy work: neither be ashamed thereof through pride in the time of
adversity.

For, slothfulness causes a man to fall a Prou, 19, 15
sleep: and a deceitful soul shall suffer hunger.

. 2.
Idleness, (says Cicero) is the only nurse Cicero.
and nourisher of all sin, and the sole maintainer of fleshly affections.

It is an enemy to all virtuous endeavors, Plotinus.
and the very train or highway to want and ruin.

It is a vice that greatly dulleth a man's understanding; Gallen.
breeds melancholy; increases many bad humors in the body; choketh the
brain; hinders thrift; and provoke the anger of God.

. 3.
God, (as the holy scripture testifies) has generally commanded, that man
should labor all the days of his life, saying first unto Adam after he was
cast out of Paradise; * In the sweat of thy face shall Gene, 3, 19.
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the earth from whence thou camst.

Wherefore, if there be any that refuses 2. These. 3, 10.
to labor, let him not eat.

For, idle people in a Commonwealth, Thales.
are as hurtful to be suffered, as Drones among the Bees.

. 4.
By slothfulnes (says Solomon) the roof Eccle, 10, 18
of the house goes to decay; and by the idleness of the hands, the house
droppeth through.

As a door (says he) goes too and fro Prou, 26, 14
upon his hinges, so turns the slothful man upon his bed.

He hides his hand in his bosom, and Prou, 26, 15
it greeueth him to put it again to his mouth.

He is wiser in his own conceit, then verse, 16.
seven men that can render a reason.

He says, a Lion is without, I shall be Prou, 22, 13
slain in the street.

He will not go to plowe, because it is Prou, 20, 4,
Winter; therefore shall he beg in the Summer, but have nothing.

5.
Suffer not thy self (says Aurelius) to be Mar. Aurel.
subject to sloth and idleness: for if thou use thy self thereto, thou shall
not be able to endure labor in time of need.

Though thou may live at ease, because Tertullian.
thou have store of riches, yet forget not to labor sometimes of thine own
accord: for, if it chance thee afterward to be compelled thereto, thou shall
away with it the better.

. 6.
Employ thy self always about some Mar. Aurel.
laudable exercise, and let not idleness have any rule over thee. For, idleness
may well be counted the grave of living men. It is an evil wherein life
dies, and the soul of man is thereby twice buried in him: once in his body;
next, in his sloth.

This odious sin also of idleness, is the Mar. Aurel^
very sink that receives in to it self, all the filthy channels of vice
whatsoever: which being once brimme full, suddenly runs over, through the
whole City or Country: and with his pestiferous air, infecteth and poysoneth
a great multitude of people, before it can be remedied.

Yea; neither the filth of secret chambers; Alex. Seue.
the stinch of pumps in ships, nor the ordures of whole Cities, do so much
corrupt the air, as idle persons do infect the people.

He therefore that passes his life in a Plato.
Commonwealth without profit, ought (as one unworthy to live,) to have the
rest of his life taken from him.

For, there is nothing more reprochful and Macrobius.
cruel in any Kingdom, then are a multitude of vagabonds and idle people:
who by their sloth and negligence, do not only live wickedly themselves, but
also daily induce others to do like them, by their bad ensample, and want of
punishment.

Against Covetousness.
. 1.
TAke heed, and beware (says Christ) Luke, 12, 15
of covetousness; for, though a man have abundance, yet his life stands not
in his riches.

Godliness is great gain, if a man be content 1. Tim. 6. 6. 7.
with that he has: for we brought nothing into the world, and it is certain
that we shall carry nothing out.

Therefore, when we have food and raiment, let us ther-with be content. For,
they verse, 8, 9.
that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and
noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction.

For, the desire of money, is the root of verse, 10.
all evil; which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and
perced themselves through with many sorrows.

. 2.
There is not a more wicked thing (says Ecclus, 10. 9.
Sirach) then for a man to be covetous, and a lover of money: for, such an one
will even sell his soul.

And, where a greedy desire of gain Iraeneus.
rests, there reigns all manner of sin and wicked works.

Besides, a covetous man's eye, has never Ecclus, 14, 9,
enough of a portion: and his wicked malice withers his own soul.

While such a man lives, the poor people Macrobius.
daily curse him: and after he is dead, his own kindred fall at strife and
contention about his goods.

. 3.
Covetousness is such a poisoned evil, and Erasmus.
of such force where it is rooted in the heart of man, that it works in him,
not only a carelesnes of Gods holy will, but an utter contempt also of God
himself. For, whosoever with that infection is sick, and entangled,
endeavors with all his might to follow the love of filthy lucre, and the life
of Gods holy word is loathsome unto him.

He makes none account either of his Cleobulus.
good name, or office in which he is placed to do justice; but flies as
greedily after gain, as hungry Ravens do after stinking carrion. And, the
better to attain his purpose, he will undermine all men, and prove trusty to
no man; but craftily lie in wait for every ones goods: never making any
conscience, whom, or by what means he does deceive, so he may get gold by
the bargain.

For, as the Gluttons cheifest desire is to Bernard.
fill his belly, and the Lechers to satisfy his lust; so the covetous man's
mind, is wholly employed to get abundance of gold.

He so well loves lucre, that he makes Boethius.
gold his God: and his chiefest confidence, is locked up close in his coffers.

He miserably spares both from his own Anachar.
belly and back; and lives like a beggar all his life, coveting only to be
found rich in money at his death.

But,] he that loves gold, shall not be Ecclus, 31, 5.
justified; and he that follows corruption, shall have enough thereof.

. 4.
The mind of a covetous rich man, says Pacuuius.
Pacuuius, can never be thoroughly satisfied or contented so long as he lives,
though he possess plenty of all things; for, the more he has, the more he
still desires.

And, like as a greedy curre speedily deuoureth Hermes.
whatsoever he can catch, and presently gapeth for more: so when it happens
the covetous man to obtain any thing that he desires, he seems
notwithstanding to set little by it, and says, Alas, it is nothing; but
wishes ever to have it doubled. The only reason is, because his covetousness
increases, as fast as his substance is augmented.

. 5.
It is no marvel (says Aurelius) though Aurelius.
he be good, which is not covetous, but it were a vvonder to see a covetous
man good.

For, great abundance of gold and silver, Jerome.
cannot of any man, be both gathered and kept without sin.

To delight in riches, is a foul and dangerous Socrates.
vice, but to be a bond-slaue to covetousness, is the confusion of a man's own
soul.

. 6.
O thou horrible hunger of gold and silver, Tully.
what is it not that thou do compel, the hearts of men to buy and to sell?

Who has been tried thereby, and Ecclus, 31, 10
found perfect? Let him be an example of glory. Who might offend, and has not
offended? or do evil thereby, and has not done it?

Many are destroyed by reason of gold; Ecclus, 31, 6,
and diverse have found their destruction before them.

It is as a stumbling block to them that verse, 7.
sacrifice unto it, and every fool is taken therewith.

. 7.
There is (says Solomon) an evil sickness Eccles, 5, 12, 13,
which I have seen under the Sun: to wit, riches reserved to the owners
thereof for their evil.

Now surely, none can be more wretched Fulgosius.
by the riches which he possesses, then the hungry-harted money-monger; whose
desire is never satisfied, though he have sufficient; but is ever complaining
of want, when he is most stored with wealth.

For; his very travail after riches, pineth Eccles, 31, 1,
away his body; and the care thereof, drives away his sleep.

Many ways does he daily molest his Clem. Alex.
mind, first to get gain; and when through much troublesome business he has
obtained abundance, he is then no less combred with care, how to keep
safely that which he has gotten: but above all; his greatest dolor is at the
day of death; to think with himself, that he must then perforce depart from
whatsoever he has, and leave all behind him.

VVhere-vpon Sirach very well says: Ecclus, 41, 1,
O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that lives at rest
in his possessions: yea, to the man that has nothing to vex him, and that
has prosperity in all things!

For doubtless, to him that makes Euagoras.
wealth his only happiness in this world, Death at his coming, is a most
unwelcome guest.

Thus is it with the man that gathers riches Luke, 12, 21
to himself, and is not rich in God.

. 8.
Trust not [therefore,] in oppression, Psalm, 62, 10.
nor in robbery: be not vain; if riches increase, set not your heart thereon.

Put no confidence in thy riches: neither Ecclus, 5, 1, 8,
say unto thy self; I have enough for my life: for riches shall not help thee
in the time of vengeance and indignation.

Let not thy soul be subject to the sin Mar. Bucer.
of covetousness; but live content with that which thou have, though it be but
little, never seeking to increase thy substance by deceit: for, goods gotten by
honest labor, bring with them joy of heart, and peace of conscience: but the
wealth that is won by any wicked means, cannot long be possessed, without
some inward grief and vexation.

. 9.
If thou vvilt live according to nature, Seneca.
thou shall never be poor: but if thou will live after thine own greedy
desire, thou shall never be rich.

If thou covet to be rich in vvorldly Hermes.
wealth, thou shall receive therewith, sorrow, care, trouble of mind, and
many other greeuances: but if thou seek to be godly, thou shall thereby find
comfort, quiet, and everlasting felicity.

Prepare thy self therefore of such riches, Plotinus.
as when the ship is broken, may swim, and escape to land with their master.

For, no man is more wealthy, then he Augustine.
that is rich in good works.

Against Usury.
. 1.
IF thou lend money to my people, (says Exodus, 22, 25
the Lord) that is, to the poor with thee, thou shall not be as an Usurer unto
him: ye shall not oppress him with usury.

If thy brother be impouerished, and Leuit, 25, 35
fallen in decay* with thee, thou shall relieve him; and as a stranger and
soiourner, so shall he live with thee.

Thou shall take no usury of him, nor advantage; Leuit, 25, 36
but thou shall fear thy GOD, that thy brother may live by thee.

Thou shall neither give him thy money verse, 37,
to usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.

Moreover;] if thou take thy neighbors Exodus, 22, 26
raiment to pledge, thou shall restore it unto him before the Sun go down.

For, that is his covering only, and this verse, 27.
is his garment for his skin: wherein shall he sleep? Therefore, when he
cries unto me, I will hear him: for, I am merciful.

. 2.
Some men, (says S. Jerome) think usury Jerome.
to be only in money; which thing the Scripture foreseeing, does name the
ouerplusse in all things.

For, usury is, where more is required Bernard.
then was delivered, whether in money, or in meats, or in any other thing. As
if thou deliver ten shillings, and look for more at the return thereof:
or deliuerest a bushel of Corn, and requirest above that. So, after the like
sort in any thing else, whatsoever is received more then the principal, it is
usury.

Yea, whatsoever name thou give it, the Ambrose.
ouer-plus in all things received, more then was delivered, is usury.

. 3.
Usury, (says Constantius) is the daughter Constantius.
of Avarice, the nurse of Idleness, and the cause of civil discord among
brethren.

It is also a secret evil, which daily deuoureth Cassianus.
the wealth of our neighbor; and may well be likened to a greedy whirle-poole,
which speedily swalloweth what-soeuer it catches.

Of all evil members therefore in a Commonwealth, Perdicas.
none is more perrillous then the greedy-minded Usurer: for, he privily
deceives every man with whom he medleth, and never does good to any, so long
as he lives.

He is worse then a thief; for, a thief Agesilaus.
robs only by night, but the Usurer robs both by day and night.

And, like as a Hare delivers, nourishes, Pet. Lomb.
and is with young all at once; so the fraudulent Usurer, before he has fully
finished his deceit against one man, casts in his mind, how he may best
beguile another, through some subtle bargain.

. 4.
But,] he that increases his riched by usury Prou* 28, 8,
and interest; gathers them for him which will be merciful unto the poor.

And, as a Partrich gathers together Iere, 17, 11,
the young which she has not brought forth; [who afterward forsake her,
when they perceive that she is not their damme,] so he that gets riches,
and not by right, shall leave them in the mids of his days, and at his end,
shall be a fool.

For,] the gathering of treasures by a deceitful Prou, 21, 6,
tongue is vanity tossed to and fro, of them that seek death.

And, he that through usury oppresses Basil.
the poor, robs both his conscience of comfort, and his soul of salvation.

Against Gluttony and drunkenness.
. 1.
BE not greedy (says Sirach,) in all delights; neither be thou too hasty upon
all meats. For, excess of meats brings sickness, and gluttony turns into
choleric diseases. By surfeit many have perrished; but he that d^eteth
himself, prolongeth his life.

Oh how little is sufficient for a man well Ecclus, 31, 19
taught? For, thereby he belcheth not in his chamber, nor feels any pain.

A sweet and wholesome sleep [also] comes verse, 20.
of a temperate feeding: such a man feels no inward pain; he rises up
betimes in the morning, and is well at ease in himself. But an insatiable
eater sleeps unquietly; and is troubled with panges of the belly, and many
other hurtful diseases.

. 2.
Gluttony, is a filthy, vile, and ugly vice, Gueuara.
consisting only in a greedy desire after dainty fare.

It is the sworn enemy to temperance; Hipocrates.
a mortal or deadly foe to health; and a most loathsome blemish to humanity.

Oh what a monstrous sight is it to behold Protogenes.
the full furnished table of some insatiable and rich glutton; and how with
sundry sorts of the most rarest meats and costliest delicates it is thoroughly
beset and covered, from end to end. And as the master of the feast is himself
thereunto strangely affected, such guests for his companions will he commonly
be sure to have about him, who (like flattering Parasites,) weighing his
inclination, will for their own profit sake, highly extol him in his gross
work of wickedness; and feed his humor, not only with vain talk and
foolish jesting, but now and then also with some show of scurility, to make
his meat have the better digestion.

But, they that are so greatly addicted to Crates.
belly-cheere, and regard more the pampering of their panch, then the wisdom
of the mind; may well be likened to fools, who give more credit to their
own conceit, then to any other man's grounded reason.

And, the man that refraineth not his apperite, Prou, 25, 28
is like a City broken down, and without walls.

. 3.
It is not the needful use of meat, that Augustine.
any man ought to forbear; but it is the inordinate desire thereof, which
ought to be blamed.

And, he is not to be counted a glutton, Aristotle.
which feeds only sufficiently for the nourishment of his own nature: but
he that gurmundizeth much more in quantity then sundry other men; and he
that daily delights to fare deliciously; satisfying the pleasure of his
sensual appetite through excess, and making his belly his God.

For, meat and drink are the good gifts Gueuara.
of God, and ought of all men thankfully to be received; and moderately taken
at times convenient for our natural use and sustenaunce: but he that greedily
consumes more then he needs, abuses both his body through his misdiet, and
the good gifts of God; by turning them from the right use for which they were
ordained.

. 4.
Of all the parts of man's body, (says Tully.
Tully) the bolly is the most unthankful; for it never requiteth any pleasure
done unto it, but continually craves, more then is needful for it.

And when it is full fraught with dainty Gregory.
fare, then are the prickings and prouocations to lust, most forward to stir
up the flesh to filthy sin.

Wherefore, if thou sit at a costly table, Ecclus, 31, 12 13.
open not thy mouth wide upon it, and say not, Behold much meat. Remember that
an evil eye is a shrew: and what thing created is worse then a wicked eye?
for, it weepeth for every cause.

Stretch not thine hand where-soeuer it Ecclus. 31, 14.
looks, neither thrust it with thine eye into the dish.

Ponder with thy self what thy neghbour verse, 15,
would feign have that sits by thee: and be discreet in every point.

Eat modestly that which is set before verse. 16.
thee, and devour not, least thou be hated of them that behold thee.

Leave thou off first for nurtures sake: and verse, 17.
be not insatiable, least thou offend.

. 5.
My son (says Tobie) drink not wine Tob, 4, 15,
to make thee drunken; neither let drunkenness go with thee in thy journey.

For, drunkenness increases the courage Ecclus, 31, 30
of a fool till he offend* it diminishes his strength, and makes wounds.

Show not thy valiantnes at any time in Ecclus, 31, 25
wine; for wine has been the destruction of many.

And, as the fiery furnace proves the verse, 36,
iron in the tempering; so does wine prove the hearts of the proud by
drunkenness.

. 6.
Drunkenness, (says Macrobius) is a Macrobius.
deformed monster with many heads: as filthy talk; fornication; wrath;
murder; swearing; cursing; and diverse other dishonest actions.

It disturbeth man's reason; robs him Boethius.
of his senses; enfeebleth his remembrance; sends in forgetfulness; powers in
errors, induces to sluggishnes: and in the end, utterly vndooeth him that
delights therein.

. 7.
Wine was made from the beginning to Ecclus, 31, 27, 28,
make men glad, and not for drunkenness. Wine measurably drunken, and in time,
is profitable for the life of man: and brings gladness of heart, and
cheerfulness of mind.

But wine drunken with excess, makes verse, 29.
bitterness of mind, with sundry brablings, and much strife.

Also; of two much drinking, proceed Gallen.
dropsies, wherewith the body, and oftentimes the visage, is svvolne and
defaced: bedlam fury, wherewith the mind is molested and perrished: but of
all other evils most odious, swinish beastlines, wher-with both the body and
soul is defiled: and the figure of man, is as it were by enchauntment,
transformed into the likeness of some misshapen creature.

. 8.
Men overcome with wine, are far worse Diogenes.
then beasts: for beasts will not enforced to drink any more then may well
content them: but such men as take pleasure in excess of drinking, voluntarily
swallow down more then is sufficient for them, and being oftentimes not able
when they have it, to carry it clenly away, they are thereby constrained to
show forth their own shame, even in the view of every present beholder.

And, like as when the Wine purges, it Plutarch.
commonly breaks the vessels, and that which before lay in the bottom,
comes now up to the brim: even so the tongue of a drunkard, in the mids of
his uncomely mirth, sticks not to reveal to every new acquaintance in his
company, the secret thoughts of his hidden heart.

. 9.
Wine, is a mocker, and strong drink Prou, 20, 1,
is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise.

For,] to whom is vvoe? to whom is sorrow? Prou, 23, 29.
to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds without cause?
and to whom is the redness of the eyes?

Even to them (says Solomon) that tarry verse, 30.
long at the wine: to them that go and seek mixed wine.

VVoe [therefore] to all such as rise up Esaias, 5, 11,
early to follow drunkenness: and to them that continue until night, till the
wine do inflame them.

VVoe unto them that are mighty to verse, 22,
drink wine, and to them that are strong to power in strong drink.

For, it is a property meeter for a sponge Demosth.
then for a man, to drink much.

. 10.
Look not thou upon the wine when it Prou, 23, 31
is read* (says the wiseman) and when it shows his color in the euppe; or
goes down pleasantly.

For,] in the end it will bite like a serpent, verse, 32,
and hurt like a Cockatrise.

Thine eyes shall look upon strange women, verse, 33, 34,
and thine heart shall speak lewd things: and thou shall be as one that
sleeps in the mids of the Sea; and as he that sleeps in the top of the
mast.

Yea; in such danger shall thou be by reason Iraeneus.
of thy drunkenness, that thou shall very hardly be able to vvithstand the
sundry prouokements of thine own flesh, which as then will be most prone and
ready, to prick thee forward to evil.

For, it is one of the first evils that springs Ambrose.
from drunkenness, to make shipwreck of chastity.

As may for an example appear, by the ardent desire of Olophernes toward
Iudeth Judith, 13.
in the time of his banketting. Who notwithstanding, clean contrary to his
expectation, after he had fully tippled som-what more then enough, lost his
head for his labor, by the hands of the self same woman, whilst he lay in
his bed soundly sleeping.

Against adultery and fornication.
. 1.
THou shall not (says the Almighty,) Exodus, 20, 14
commit adultery.

Thou shall not give thy self unto thy Leuit. 18. 20
neighbors wife, by carnal copulation to be defiled with her.

. 2.
He that commits adultery with a woman, Prou, 6, 32,
(says Solomon) is destitute of understanding: he that does it, destroys
his own soul.

And, all the children that are borne of Wisd, 4, 6,
the wicked bed, shall be witness of the wickedness against their Parents when
they be asked.

. 3.
Ye have heard, (says Christ) that it was Math. 5. 27 28.
said to them of old time; Thou shall not commit adultery. But I say unto you,
that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
with her already in his heart.

Wherefore, if thy right eye cause thee to offend, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee. Math, 5, 29.
For, better it is for thee, that one of thy members perrish, then that thy
whole body should be cast into hell.

. 4.
To pluck out the eye that offends, is not meant by the words of Christ,
that thou should disfigure thy face; but rather, as Sirach says, to turn
away thine Ecclus, 9, 8.
eye from beholding a beautiful woman: and not to look upon others beauty.
For, many have perrished by the beauty of women; and through the beholding
thereof, love is kindled as a fire.

King David, by overmuch looking 2, Sam, 11, 2, 3, etc.
at the bayte of beauty, forgot himself, and so fell in love with another
man's wife: from love, he fell to unlawful lust; from lust, to dissembling,
and counterfeit show of kindness toward her innocent husband. And, in the end,
when he could devise no other shift to cover his own shame, he caused Vriah
himself, to carry a letter to Ioab his chief Captain; wherein was politiquely
plotted, the death of him that brought it.

Moreover; a rash and wicked eye, that Plat^.
delights to behold vanity, may well be called the window of death: for it
is the deadly minister of the hearts concupiscence, and the forerunner of
filthy facts, thefts, robberies, extortions, and sundry other iniquities.

. 5.
All men are (indeed) by nature naturally Aeneas Siluius.
given, to feel in themselves, the boiling and raging lusts of the frail and
unconstant flesh* Notwithstanding, he that suffers himself to be led
captive in the filthy sin of whoredom and adultery, falls thereby into
innumerable inconveniences. For first of all, this wicked evil clean takes
away from a man his good name and credit. It also consumes his substance, and
brings him in the end to plain beggary. It kills at once, both the
strength and beauty of the body. It decays and greatly hurts health. It
ingendereth many bad diseases. It disfigureth the flower of youth long before
the time. It hastes or draws on riueled and ill-fauoured age. It diminishes
the strength and quicknes of the wit: It dulleth the sight of the mind. It
draws from him all honest studies, and makes him delight in nothing but that
which is vile and dishonest. It takes away the use of reason, which is the
native property of man. It makes a young man peevish, melancholy, and
slanderous. It makes an old man odious, wretched, and filthy. Demonax,
Finally, it is a pleasure bought with pain; a delight hatched with disquiet;
a content passed with fear; and a sin finished with sorrow.

. 6.
Can a man (says Solomon) carry coals Prou, 6, 27, 28, 29.
in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? or, can a man go upon coals,
and his feet not be hurt? So, he that goes in to his neighbors wife and
touches her, shall not be guiltless.

Fly therefore, the filthy lusts of the flesh: Hermes.
and as thou would willingly for thy bodily healths sake, abstain from
hurtful meat; so ought thou to abstain from sin, for the salvation of
thy soul.

For, when lust has conceived, it brings James, 1, 15,
forth sin; and sin when it is finished, brings forth death.

. 7.
Know ye not, that your bodies are the 1, Cor, 6, 15, 16, 17.
members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an harlot? God forbid: Do ye not know, that he which coupleth
himself with an harlot, is one body? For, two, says he, shall be one flesh.
But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit.

Know ye not [also,] that the unrighteous 1, Cor, 6, 9. 10,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicatours,
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor
covetous, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the
kingdom of God.

. 8.
Woe then be unto that man, which contemning Socrates.
the excellency of his own nature, and the divine part that is in him, serves
only his bodily lusts; defiling his own soul, through his lascivious
desires, and beastly delights.

For, he cease to be a man; and is indeed Plato.
no better then a brute beast, that leaves the rules of reason, and gives his
mind solely to the fulfilling of his fleshly inclinations.

Besides; if they be counted miserable, Aristotle.
which have cruel Masters, although they may be released from them: how
much more are they miserable, which serve their bodily lusts as their masters,
from which they cannot fly?

For, he that has enthraled himself to Hermes.
the fulfilling of his fleshly motions, is thereby more bound, then any bondman
else what-soeuer.

Yea, such a man, never cease to waste and Pa^^uius.
consume the strength of his own body; he daily spotteth and polluteth the
beauty of his soul; he continually draws unto himself diverse diseases; and
walks hourly in danger of eternal damnation.

. 9.
Enforce thy self therefore with all the Erasmus.
might thou may, to abstain from ungodly lusts: and the better to bridle the
unruly passions of thine own affections, endeavor diligently to study and
follow virtue: for, the desires that are good, will evermore mortify and
destroy, the desires that are evil.

But if so be that thou can not abstain, 1. Cor, 7, 9.
thou may then use the lawful remedy that God has appointed: namely,
marriage. For, it is better to marry, then to burn.

Also;] to avoid fornication, let every 1, Cor, 7, 2,
man have his wife, and let every woman have her own husband.

For,] marriage is honorable among all Hebr, 13, 4,
men, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers, God will judge.

Against stealing, lying, slaundering, falsewitnes-bearing, and coveting of our
neighbors wealth.
. 1.
Ye shall not steal; (says the Lord our Leuit, 19, 11
God,) neither deal falsely; nor lie one to another.

Let him that stole, steal no more: but Ephe, 4, 28,
let him rather labor and work with his hands the thing that is good: that
he may have to give unto him that needs.

. 2.
My son, (says Sirach) sow not a lie against Ecclus, 7, 12, 13.
thy brother, neither do the same against thy friend. Use not to make any
manner of lie; for the custom thereof is is not good.

Aristotle, being demanded what vantage Aristotle.
a man might get by lying? answered: To be vnbeleeued when he tells the
truth.

. 3.
Doubtless;] a lie is a wicked shame in Ecclus, 20. 23
a man, yet is it often in the mouth of the unwise.

A thief is better then a man that is accustomed verse, 24.
to lie: but they both shall have destruction everlastingly.

For, by lying, the truth is broken, God Hermes.
himself grievously offended, and the state of our neighbor and our selves
greatly impaired.

. 4.
The conditions of liars are always dishonest: Ecclus. 20, 25
and their shame is ever with them.

He that is known to be a liar, shall commonly Thales.
be held in contempt amongst all men; and such only as before thought well of
his company, will afterward care very little for his acquaintance.

Besides; he that is accustomed to lying, Becon.
loses not only his credit and good name amongst men, but also shuts
himself out from the grace and favor of GOD, and most horribly joins
himself to the devil, who has no truth in him.

But is a liar from the beginning; and the John, 8, 44,
father of lies.

Wherefore, cast off lying; and speak Ephe, 4, 25,
every man the truth unto his neighbor: for, we are members one of another.

. 5.
Thou shall not (says the Lord) walk Leuit. 19. 16
about with tales among thy people.

If thou have heard a word against thy Ecclus, 19, 10
neighbor, let it die with thee: and be sure it will not burst thee.

Declare not other men's manners neither Ecclus, 19. 8,
to friend nor foe: and if the sin appertain not unto thee, reveal it not.

For, he shall harken unto thee, and mark verse. 9.
thee: and when he finds opportunity, he will hate thee.

. 6.
Men ought always to hear, twice so Thales.
much as they speak: for, to that end (says Thales,) Nature has given us two
ears, and but one tongue.

A wise man will therefore, well consider Crates.
of a matter when he has heard it, and ponder thereof advisedly with himself,
before he speak of it again.

But a fool trauaileth when he has heard Ecclus, 19, 11
a thing, like unto a woman that is about to bring forth a child.

And, as an arrow that sticks in a man's verse, 12.
thigh, so is news in a fools heart.

. 7.
The words of a talebearer, (says Solomon) Prou, 18, 8,
are as flat^erings; and they go down into the bowels of the belly.

They sinck deeply into the memory of Gueuara.
him that willingly gives ear thereunto: but he that resists a
tale-bringer, puts thereby a perrillous enemy to silence.

For,] without wood, the fire is quenched, Prou, 26, 20
and without a talebearer, strife cease.

But] as the coal makes burning coals, verse, 21.
and wood a fire, so the contentious man is apt to kindle strife.

Be not [then] counted a talebearer, Ecclus, 5, 15
neither lie thou in wait with thy tongue: for shame and repentance follow the
thief, and an evil condemnation is over his head that is double tunged; but
he that is a backbiter, shall be hated, envied, and confounded.

. 8.
Slander no man; whether he be thy Boethius.
friend or thy foe; neither speak any evil of thy neighbor behind his back.
For he that defameth another with his tongue, wounds his own soul by his
words.

And, a common slaunderer, striving to Polion.
bring other men forth of favor, through his detracting speeches, becomes
thereby odious himself.

. 9.
Thou shall not (says the Lord) bear Exodus, 20, 16
false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not receive [or, report] a Exodus, 23, 1,
false tale; neither shall thou put thy hand with the wicked, to be a false
witness.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors Deuteronomy, 5, 21,
wife, neither shall thou desire thy neighbors house, nor his land, nor his
man servant, nor his maid servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing
that thy neighbor has.

. 10.
Let no man with coin corrupt thee, Hemingius.
to bear false witness at any time against the vnguiltie person: neither suffer
thy tunge to testify an untruth, through the vain hope of worldly preferment.

But be well advised what thou undertake Tully.
before thou speak; and consider rightly of the cause, before thou give
record thereof in the presence of any Ruler.

For,] a false witness shall not escape unpunished: Prou, 19, 9,
and he that speaks lies, shall perrish.

Against injustice, wrongful dealing, and oppressing the poor.
. 1.
YE shall not (says the Lord) do unjustly Leuit, 19, 15
in judgment.

Ye shall have no respect of person in D(...), 1, 17,
judging; but shall hear the small as well as the great: ye shall not fear
the face of man: For, the judgment is Gods.

. 2.
Thou shall not favor the person of the ^euit. 19. 15
poor, nor honor the person of the mighty: but thou shall judge thy neighbor
justly.

Thou shall keep thee far from a false Exodus, 23, 7,
matter; and shall not sley the innocent and the righteous: for, I will not
justify a wicked man.

. 3.
Wrest not the law, (says Moises,) nor Deuteronomy, 16, 19
respect any person; neither take reward: for the reward blinds the eyes of
the wise, and peruerteth the words of the just.

And makes Magistrates dumb, that Ecclus, 20, 28
they cannot reprove faults.

That which is just and right, shall thou Deuteronomy, 16, 20
follow; that thou may l^^e and possess the land which the Lord thy GOD
gives thee.

But to have respect of any person in Prou, 24, 23
judgment, is not good.

For, if ye regard the persons, ye commit James, 2, 9*
sin, and are rebuked of the Law as transgressors.

. 4.
He that is placed to be a Judge, (says Tertullian.
Tertullian,) ought always to be true in his word; honest in his thought; and
virtuous in his deed: without fear of any but GOD; and without hate of any
but the wicked.

For, equity or justice, is a measure ordained Lactantius.
of GOD amongst men upon earth; to defend the feeble from the mighty; the
truth from falsehood; and to root out the evil from among the good.

Notwithstanding; we oftentimes perceive Aristotle.
it to fall out, that either through affection to their friends; hatred to
their adversaries; or corruption by gifts; the Judges do forget the truth: and
so leave undone the just execution of their duty and straight charge.

Also; as the Judge of the people himself Ecclus. 10, 2.
is, so are his officers under him; and what manner of man the Ruler of the
City is, such are all they that dwell therein.

But, as the Lord loves righteousness, Becon.
and hates iniquity; so he will reward the just man for his justice, and
punish the ungodly person for his sin.

. 5.
Ye shall not, (says the Almighty) do Leuit, 19, 35 36,
unjustly in judgment, in line, in weight, or in measure. Thou shall have just
balances, true weights, a true Ephah, and a true Hin.

Thou shall not have in thy bag two Deuteronomy. 25, 13 14.
manner of weights, a great, and a small: neither shall thou have in thy house
diverse measures, a great and a small.

But thou shall have a right and just Deuteronomy, 25, 15
weight; and a perfect and just measure shall thou have: that thy days may be
lengthened in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

For, all that do such things, and all that Deuteronomy, 25, 16
do unrighteously; are ^bhomination unto the Lord thy GOD. * But a perfect
Prou, 11, 1,
weight pleases him.

. 6.
Thou shall not pervert the right of the Deuteronomy, 24, 17
stranger, nor of the fatherless; Neither shall thou take a Widows raiment
to pledge.

Ye shall not trouble any widow, nor Exodus, 22, 22, 23,
fatherless child. If thou vex or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto
me, I will surely hear his cry.

Then shall my wrath be kindled, and I verse, 24.
will kill you with the sword: and your wives shall be widows; and your
children fatherless.

. 7.
Complaints and tears, (says Gueuara,) are the cheifest revenge of the
fatherless, Gueuara.
and oppressed. For, he that is rich, commonly seeks to revenge himself
either by law or arms: but the poor man's remedy, is wholly procured from God,
by his pitiful lamentations and mournings.

Does not the tears run down the Ecclus, 35, 15
widows cheeks? and her cry is against him that caused them: for, from her
cheeks do they go up unto heaven: and the Lord which hears them, does
accept them.

For,] he despises not the desire of the Ecclus, 35, 14
fatherless, nor the widdowe, when she powers out her prayer before him.

But hears the peticion of the party Ecclus, 35, 13
oppressed.

. 8.
Thou shall not (says the Lord) do thy Leuit. 19. 13
neighbor wrong; neither rob him. The worke-mans hire shall not abide with
thee until the morning.

Thou shall not oppress an hired servant Deuteronomy, 24, 14
that is needy and poor; neither of thy brethren, nor of the stranger that is
in the Land within thy gates.

But] thou shall give him his hire for the day, and shall not let the sun go
down verse, 15.
upon it: for, he is poor, and there-withall sustaineth his life: least he
cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.

. 9.
Rob not the poor, because he is poor: Prou, 22, 22 23.
neither oppress the afflicted in judgment: for, the Lord will defend their
cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoil them.

Withold not the good from the owners Prou, 3, 23,
thereof, though there be power in thy hand to do it.

Neither let the wages of any man that Tob, 4, 24,
has wrought for thee, tarry with thee, but give it him out of hand.

The bread of the needful, is the life of Ecclus, 34, 22
the poor, and he that defraudeth him thereof, is a murderer.

He that takes away his neighbors living, verse, 23,
sleyeth him: and he that withholds the laborers hire from him, is a
bloodshedder.

And, this ye know; that no man-sleyer 1. Ioh, 3, 15,
has eternal life abiding in him.

. 10.
Use therefore mercy, gentleness, pity, ^ulgosius.
and compassion toward the poor: and suffer not him that has done thy will,
to make suit unto thee for, his recompense.

Defraude not the poor of his living; Ecc^us, 4, 1.
neither make the needy eyes to wait long. Make not an hungry soul sorrowful,
neither vex a man in his necessity. Trouble verse, 2, 3,
not the heart that is grieved, neither defer thou the gift of the needy.

Refuse not the prayer of him that is in trouble, neither turn away thy face
from verse, 4, 5. 6,
the poor. Turn not thine eyes aside in anger from the poor, neither give
him any occasion to speak evil of thee. For, if he curse thee in the
bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him.

For,] the prayer of the poor, going out Ecclus, 21, 5.
of the mouth, comes unto the ears of the Lord; and justice is done him
incontinently.

Yea, the prayer of him that humbles himself, [is of such force] that it
pierces Ecclus, 35, 17
through the clouds, and cease not till it come near, and will not depart
till the most High have respect thereunto, to judge righteously, and to
execute judgment.

And, the Almighty will not be slack, nor Ecclus, 35, 18
tarry long from them; till he has smitten in sunder the loins of the
unmerciful, and avenged himself of the heathen; [or ungodly ones,] till he
has taken away the multitude of the cruel, and broken the scepter of the
unrighteous; till he give every man after his works, and reward them after
their devises; till he have judged the cause of his people, and comforted them
with his mercy.

. 11.
Let it not [then] grieve thee to bow Ecclus, 4, 8,
down thine ear unto the poor: but pay thy debt, and give him a friendly
answer.

For, if thou show compassion v^^o the Isidorus.
poor that can do but little; thou shall be highly favored of GOD, that can
do much.

But who soever stops his ear at the Prou, 21, 13
crying of the poor; he shall also cry himself, and not be heard.

Against ouer-hastie and rash judgment.
. 1.
IVdge not, (says Christ) and ye shall not Luke, 6, 37,
be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned.

For, with what judgment ye judge, ye Math, 7, 2,
shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you
again.

. 2.
Thou art inexcusable, o man, (says the Rom, 2, 1.
Apostle,) whosoever thou art that iudgest. For, in that, that thou iudgest
another, thou condemnest thy self: for thou that iudgest, do the same
things.

Why see thou the mote that is in thy Math, 7, 3, 4,
brothers eye, and perceiuest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Or, how
say thou to thy brother: Suffer me to cast out the ^^te out of thine eye,
and behold a beam is in thine own eye?

Hypocrite, first cast out the beam that verse, 5,
is in thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out
of thy brothers eye.

Besides,] who art thou that iudgest or Rom, 14, 4, James. 4. 12,
condemnest another man's servant? he stands or falls to his own master.

Judge nothing therefore before the time, 1, Cor, 4. 5.
until the Lord come; who will lighten the the things that are hid in darkness,
and make the counsels of each heart manifest: and then shall every man have
praise of God.

. 3.
Judge not according to the appearance, John. 7. 24.
(says Christ,) but judge righteous judgment.

For, Eli the priest, being somewhat too forward to judge by conjecture,
rashly reproved 1. Sam. 1. 14.
Hannah of the sin of drunkenness, when she was zealously busied at her
prayers.

And, the barbarous people of Malta, Acts. 28. 3. 4, 5, 6.
seeing a viper fastened to the hand of Paul, presently at the first sight
thereof, condemned him for a murderer. But when they saw him shake off the
worm into the fire, and feel no harm thereby; then, (showing themselves as
far from reason, as they were before from wisdom) they imagined him to be
a God.

. 4.
Commend no man for his beauty (says Ecclus, 11, 2.
Sirach,) neither despise a man in his utter appearance.

For,] the Be is but small among the verse, 3,
fowls; yet does the fruit of her labor pass in sweetness.

Blame no man, before thou have enquired Ecclus, 11, 7,
the matter; understand first, and then reform righteously.

Give no sentence, before thou have heard Ecclus. 11. 8.
the cause; neither interrupt any man in the midst of his tale.

For, he that gives sentence before the Thales.
matter be thoroughly heard, shows himself either partial in affection, or
culpable in doing wrong, for some private advantage.

And, he that takes a tale out of his Pl^tarch.
neighbors mouth, is like him which seeing another about to be kissed, will
needs thrust forth his head, to take away the courtesy from him.

Against justifying our selves, foolish boasting, and regarding of other men's
faults.
. 1.
IVstifie not thy self before the Lord, Ecclus, 7, 5,
(says Sirach) for he knows thy heart.

Neither boast thy self at any time of thy Pet. Lomb.
good deeds, least thy evil be also laid to thy charge.

For, he that prayseth himself, is not allowed; 2, Cor. 10, 18.
but he whom the Lord prayseth.

Besides, he that supposes himself to be Fulgosius.
righteous, falls thereby unadvisedly from his hope in God; and by trusting
too much to his own merrites, loses the confidence he should have in his
Creators mercy.

Resembling the folly of the foolish-bragging Luke, 18, 11
Pharisee, which entered into the temple with the Publican to pray.

But S. Paul teaches us better wisdom by his own example, where he says: *
I 1, Cor, 4, 4,
know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified: but he that judges
me, is the Lord.

. 2.
How, (says Job) should man compared Job, 9, 2, 3,
unto God, be justified? If God would dispute with him, man could not answer
him one thing of a thousand.

If I would justify my self, (says he) Job, 9, 20,
mine own mouth shall condemn me: and if I would be perfect, he shall judge
me wicked.

For, he is not a man, as I am, that I Job, 9, 32,
should answer him, if we come together to judgment.

Well therefore says the Psalmist: * Enter Psalm. 143, 2,
not (o Lord) into judgment with thy servant: for, in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

. 3.
Let no man glory in his works, (says S. Ambrose.
Ambrose,) because no man is justified by his works: but he that is just,
has it freely by gift.

For, if God would deal with us according Augustine.
to that we have deserved; he should find nothing but that he might condemn.

And, woe would be to all our righteousness, Augustine.
if it be judged: mercy being taken away, or set aside.

. 4.
If any man, (says the Apostle) seem to Gala, 6, 3*
himself that he is somewhat, when he is nothing; he deceives himself in
his imagination.

Let him therefore that thinks he stands, 1. Cor. 12. 10.
take heed least he fall.

And, let not the sinner say, that he has 2, Esdr, 16, 45.
not sinned: for, coals of fire shall burn upon his head, which says: I
have not sinned before the Lord God and his glory.

. 5.
This (says S. Bernard) is our righteousness; Bernarde.
to lay sure hold on the worthiness of Christ by faith, and humbly to confess
before God, that we of our selves, are altogether unrighteous.

And, then are we said to be righteous, Jerome.
when as we do acknowledge our selves to be wicked sinners.

But if we behold our own merrits, we Jerome.
shall thereby be driven to desperation.

For, we are counted but unprofitable Luke, 17, 10
servant, when we have done all that we can do; seeing we have done no more
then was our duty to do.

And, in doing no more but what we Chrysostom.
ought, we deserve no greater reward, then that we bear about us.

. 6.
If our doings were good indeed, (says Origin.
Origin) then were we not unprofitable servant: but any good deed of
ours, is called good, not rightly, nor duly, but by abuse of speech.

For, holy men do know, that ever since the Gregory.
fall of the first father Adam, they be borne of a corruptible stock; and that
they be not by any virtue of their own, but only by the heavenly grace that
does prevent them, turned into good desires or works: and what evil soever
they know to be in themselves, they confess that it is deserved, and come of
their mortal kind; but what good soever they see to be in themselves, they
acknowledge it to be the gift of the immortal God. And, for this gift which
they have received, they count themselves debtors unto him, which by
preventing them, did give unto them grace, that they should will that good
thing which they would not; and by following, did grant, that they should be
able to do, that good thing which they would.

. 7.
Be not vainglorious at any time of thine Iunius.
own doings, (says Iunius,) neither use to speak many words in thine own
praise.

For, it is far better to be silent, then Alex* Se^e.
to brag or boast vaine-gloriously any thing in our own commendation.

Let another man praise thee, and not Prou, 27, 2,
thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips.

For, nothing dispraiseth a man so much Arn^bius.
as his own praising; especially, when he makes repeticion of his charitable
deeds.

. 8.
It is a token of an impudent creature, Plato.
(says Plato) to seek to get credit with others, by commending himself.

And, such kind of people as praise themselves, Pl^tarch.
may fitly be compared to famished persons: for, like as the famished, for
lack of other meat, are feign sometimes to eat their own flesh; so many
that are vain* glorious, are forced to praise themselves, because no man else
will give them any commendation.

. 9.
Despise not the man (says Sirach,) that Ecclus, 8, 9,
turns himself away from sin, neither cast him in the teeth with his
former fault: but remember that we are all worthy blame.

Be* not glad when thine enemy falls, Prou, 24, 17 18.
neither let thy heart rejoice when he stumbleth: least the Lord see it, and it
displease him, and he turn his wrath from him.

Laugh no man to scorn in the heaviness Ecclus, 7, 11,
of his soul: for, GOD which sees all things, is he that can bring down,
and set up again.

. 10.
To rejoice at the harm which another Socrates.
man receives, is a sign of an evil nature in thy self.

And busily to upbraid a penitent person Crates*
with his passed offenses, is the next way to deprive thy self of all men's
compassion, when thou stand in need.

Fly therefore and eschew thine own vices, Socrates.
and be not curious in serching after other men's sins.

For, it is the property of a fool, to look Tully*
narrowly into other men's faults, and to forget his own.

But it is a sign of great wisdom, warily Thales.
to avoid those evils our selves, which we think worthy to be blamed in
other men.

Against the following of falsete^^hers.
. 1.
BE not carried about (says the Apostle) Hebr. 13. 9.
with diverse and strange doctrines.

For, he that is hasty to give credit, is light Ecclus, 19. 4,
minded; and he that erreth, sins against his own soul.

Let no man deceive you with vain Ephe. 5. 6.
words.

But] beware of false Prophets, which Math, 7, 15, 16.
come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. Ye
shall know them by their fruits.

Believe not every spirit; but try the spirits, 1, I^h, 4. 1,
whether they are of God, [ or no^] for many false Prophets are gone out into
the world.

Yea,] many deceivers are entered into the world, which confess no^ that Jesus
Christ 2, Ioh, 1, 7,
is come in the flesh. He that is such a one, is a deceiuer, and ^n Antichrist.

. 2.
I beseech you Brethren* (says S. Paul,) Rom, 16, 17 18,
mark them diligently* which cause division and offenses* contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned* and a^oyde them. For, they that are such s^rue
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but they^ own (...): and with fair speeches and
flattering* de^e^ue the hearts of the simple.

Ye are dearly bought; be not the servant 1. Cor, 7, 23,
of men.

But] stand fast, and keep the instructions 2. These. 2. 15
which you have been taught, either by word, or by our Epistle.

If any man teach otherwise, and consents 1, Tim, 6, 3, 4, 5.
not to the wholesome words of our lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine
which is according to godliness, he is puf^ up, and knows nothing: but doateth
about questions, and strife of words: whereof comes envy, strife* raylings,
evil surmisings, vain disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth, which think that gain is godliness. From such separate thy self.

. 3.
Brethren; (says the same Apostle,) be Phil. 3, 17,
followers of me, and look on them which walk so, as ye have us for an
ensample.

For, many walk, of whom I have told verse, 18, 19,
you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Cross
of Christ: whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is to their shame, which mind earthly things.

But our conversation is in heaven, from verse, 20,
whence also we look for the Savior even the Lord Jesus Christ.

Who shall change our vile body, that it verse, 21.
may be facioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working,
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

. 4.
Let us henceforth be no more children, Ephe, 4, 14, 15.
wavering, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of
men and with craft^nes; whereby they lay in wait to deceive. But let us follow
the truth in love, and in all things grow up unto him, which is the head; even
Christ.

And] beware least any man spoil you Colos, 2, 8.
through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, and
according to the ordinances of the world, and not after Christ.

For,] whosoever transgresses, and abides 2, Ioh. 9. 10,
not in the doctrine of Christ, he has not God. He that endures in the
doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son.

If there come any unto you, and bring verse. 11.
not this doctrine, receive him not to house, neither bid him, God speed. For
he that bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Against the choice of meats, and difference of days.
. 1.
LEt no man (says the Apostle) trouble Colos. 2, 16, 17.
your conscience about meat and drink, or, in respect of an holy day, or of
the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days: which are but shadows of things to
come: but the body is in Christ.

It is a good thing that the heart be stablished Heb, 13, 9,
with grace, and not with meats, which have not profited them that have been
occupied therein.

For, the kingdom of God, is not meat Rom, 14, 17
nor drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.

For, whosoever in these things serves verse, 18.
Christ, is acceptable unto God, and is commended of men.

. 2.
One believes that he may eat al things, Rom, 14, 2,
and another that is weak, eats herbs.

This man esteems one day above another Romans 14, 5,
day, and another man counts every day alike.

Let not him that eats, despise him that Rom, 14, 3,
eats not: and let not him which eats not, judge him that eats: for, God
has received him.

Let every man [also] be fully persuaded Romans 14, 5. 6.
in his mind, that he which observes the day, observes it to the Lord: and
he that observes not the day, observes it not to the Lord. He that eats,
eats to the lord, for he gives God thanks: and he that eats not, eats
not to the lord, and gives God thanks.

Meat makes not us acceptable to God. 1, Cor, 8, 8,
For, neither if we eat, are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we
the worse.

VVhat-soeuer is sold in the Shambles, 1, Cor, 10, 25, 26,
eat ye, and ask no question for conscience sake. For, the earth is the
Lords, and all that therein is.

. 3.
And, seeing that GOD has created all Erasmus.
things for the use of man, and requires nothing of us but holiness, what
forces he whether we eat flesh of foure-footed beasts, or of fishes, or
of Birds that fly? There is none of all these that either makes or marreth
holiness: neither puts any thing to it, or takes any thing from it.

The choice of these things, and the putting Erasmus.
of difference between one and another, may make a man superstitious, and to
have vain religion in himself, but it cannot make him holy. Christ taught no
difference herein: therefore it may be counted great rashness, if a wretched
man, should go about to burden and charge any man with such ordinances. Let
every man eat what he likes, as his body requires, so it be done soberlie,
and measurably; and for all things, let him give thanks unto God.

For, to believe that meats are evil, or Augustine.
causes evil, or sin to them that receive them; it is the property, not of
Christian men, but peculiarly of the Hierarchies, and Maniches, which were
heretics.

. 4.
Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ Colos. 2. 20. 21. 22,
from the ordinances of the world, why, as though ye lived in the world, are
ye burdened with traditions? As, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not. Which all
perrish with the using, and are after the commandments and doctrines of men.

Which things have indeed a show of Colos. 2. 23,
wisdom, in voluntary religion and humbleness of mind, and in not sparing
the body: neither have they it in any estimation to satisfy the flesh.

But] I know, and am persuaded through Romans 14, 14
the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self: but unto him that
judges any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

Unto the pure, all things are pure: but Titus. 1. 15.
to them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure: but even their
minds and consciences are defiled.

. 5.
Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that 1, Tim, 4, 1, 2. 3.
in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed
unto spirits of error, and doctrines of devils: which speak lies through
hypocrisy, and have their consciences burned with an hot iron; forbidding to
marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with giving thanks, of them which believe and know the truth.

For, every creature of God is good, and verse, 4, 5,
nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. For, it is
sanctified by the word of God, and prayer.

Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know 2. Pet. 3. 17,
these things before, beware; least ye be also plucked away with the error of
the wicked, and fall from your own steadfastness.

For, of this sort are they which creep 2. Tim. 3. 6. 7.
into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led with
diverse lusts. Which women are ever learning, and are never able to come to
the knowledge of the truth.

Against ouer-curious searching: and adding of any thing to the word of God.
. 1.
Seek not out (says Sirach) the things Ecclus, 3, 22.
that are too hard for thee: neither search the things rashly which are too
mighty for thee.

But what God has commanded thee, verse, 23.
think upon that with reverence, and be not curious in many of his works:
for it is not needful for thee, to see with thine eyes the things that are
secret.

Be not curious in superfluous matters, for verse, 24, 25,
many things are showed unto thee above the capacity of men. The meddling with
such, has beguiled many; and an evil opinion has deceived their judgment.

Thou can not see without eyes: profess verse, 26.
not the knowledge therefore which thou have not.

. 2.
I, through the grace that is given unto Rom, 12, 3,
me, (says the Apostle,) say to every one that is among you, that no man
presume to understand, above that which is meet to understand: but that he
understand according to sobriety; as GOD has dealt to every man the measure
of faith.

For, he is sufficiently rich in understanding, Hermes.
that knows how to do well: and he has power enough, that can refrain
from doing evil.

. 3.
Ye shall put nothing unto the word which Deuteronomy, 4, 2,
I command you, says Moises: neither shall ye take ought therefrom: that
ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your GOD, which I command you.

Therefore, what soever I command Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
you, take heed you do it.

Thou shall not turn away from it to the Joshua, 1, 7.
right hand, nor to the left: that thou may prosper whether soever thou go.

. 4.
Put nothing unto the word of God, says Prou. 30. 6.
Solomon, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.

For, I protest (says the holy Ghost) unto Reave. 22. 18
every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this book; If any man
shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues, that are
written in this Book.

And, if any man shall diminish of the Reave. 22, 19
words of the book of this prophecy God shall take away his part out of the
book of life; and out of the holy City, and from those things which are
written in this book.

Against foolish security.
. 1.
SAy not thou, I will hide my self from Ecclus. 16, 17
the Lord: for, who will think upon me from above? I shall not be known in so
great an heap of people: for, what is my soul, among such an infinite number
of creatures?

But rather remember what our Savior Christ says in Saint Mathewes Gospel:
namely, that one sparrow falls not to the ground, without the will of God our
heavenly Math. 10. 29. 30.
Father: and, that all the hairs of our head are numbered by him. How much
more then may we undoubtedly believe, that we our selves are known and
numbered of him? For, he only is the Creator and Preserver of men: and without
his permission* we are not able to draw our breath a minutes while.

. 2.
Besides, thus speaks the Lord himself Iere, 23, 23, 24.
interrogatiuelie, by the mouth of Jeremy, saying: Am I a GOD at hand, and not
a GOD far off? Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see
him, says the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord?

And, to this effect likewise, tends the speech of the Prophet David in the
139. psalm, where he says: O Lord, thou have Psalm, 139. 1. 2, 3, etc.
tried me, and known me: thou know my sitting, and my rising, thou
understand my thought a far off: thou compassest my paths, and my lying
down, and art accustomed to all my ways.

For, there is not a word in my tongue, but lo, thou know it wholy, o
lord. Thou hold me strait behind and before* and layest thy hand upon
me. Thy knowledge is too wonderful for me: it is so high that I cannot
attain unto it.

Whether shall I go from thy Spirit? or whether shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there: If I lie down in hell, thou
art there.

Let me take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
sea, yet thither shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me. If I
say, yet the darkness shall hide me, even the night shall be light about me.
Yea, the darkness hides not from thee: but the night shines as the day; and
the darkness and the light are both alike. For, thou have possessed my reins:
thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

Against the love of the world.
. 1.
Love not the world, (says Saint John,) 1, Ioh, 12, 15.
neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him.

For, all that is in the world, (as the lust verse, 16, 17
of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,) is not of the
Father, but is of the World. And, the world passes away, and the lust
thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides ever.

Ye adulterers, and adultresses, know ye James, 4, 4,
not, that the amity of the world, is the enimitie of God? Whosoever therefore
will be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God.

And, they that wait upon lying vanities, Jonas. 2. 8.
forsake their own mercy.

. 2.
What is there in the World, (says Seneca,) Seneca.
wherefore it should be loved? The flowers of this life, to wit, the lusts and
pleasures thereof, are all of them false shows, shadows, and vanities: the
fruits of it, are labor, care, sickness, and tediousness: the tree it self,
is corruption and frailety.

And, he that is enamored of the world, Seneca.
may well be likened to the man which voluntarily runs into the Sea: who if
he chance to escape the dangers thereof, men will say, he is greatly
fortunate; but if he perrish, they will say, he was wilfully deceived.

. 3.
The world, (says Socrates) has so many Socrates.
sundry changes in the vanity thereof, that it leads all men wandering in
unsteadfastness.

It is a special enemy to those whom it Crates.
has raised to honor.

It never paieth unto any man, that which Euripides.
it promises.

It endeavors daily, to draw the soul Aristotle.
from God, through fained delights.

And, whosoever busily seeks after the Hermes.
pleasures thereof, follows a shaddovve; which when he thinks he is surest
of, it speedily vanishes away, and turns to nothing.

Besides, if any man desire to read more largely of the delights of the world,
and the several falsehoods of them; let him look into the Book of
Ecclesiastes, and there he Ecclesi. cap. 1. 2, 3. etc.
shall find what the Preacher (through his own experience) speaks of them.
And how withal, after a long repetition of the trial of all the pleasures
under the sun, he at last, gives forth these words in their
discommendation; saying: * Vanity of Eccle, 12, 8,
vanities; all is vanity.

Put no confidence (therefore) in the mutable vanities of this euer-changing
world: Plotinus.
neither suffer thy self to be seduced by the deceits thereof: for, the
pleasures of the world, lead diverse men to perdition; and whosoever trusts
unto them, shall most certainly be deceived.

. 4.
A man may use this world indeed, (as Plato.
Plato says,) for necessities sake; but he that abuses it: that is, he that
wholly delights therein, loses thereby his love to God, and depriueth
himself of eternal salvation.

To prevent which danger, * Let him 1, Cor, 7, 31,
that uses this world, be as though he used it not.

For, the too much love of this World, was the only cause why the Noble men
of Jury could not resolve themselves to follow Christ. For, * they loved the
praise John, 12, 43
of men, more then the praise of God.

And, deceived themselves as unadvisedly 2, Tim, 4, 10
in their choice, as ever Demas did, when he forsook S. Paul, to embrace
vanity.

Against evil company-keeping.
. 1.
MY son, (says Solomon) if sinners Prou. 1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
do entise thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come with us, we will lay
wait for blood, and he privily for the innocent without a cause: we will
swallowe them up alive like a grave; even whole, as those that go down into
the pit: we shall find all precious riches, and fill our houses with spoil:
cast in thy lot among us, we will all have one purse.

My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their
Prou, 1, 15. 16.
path. For, their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood.

They cannot sleep except they have Prou, 4, 16, 17.
done evil; and their sleep departs, except they cause some to fall. For,
they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.

He that touches pitch, shall be defiled Ecclus, 13, 1,
with it; and he that is familiar with the proud, shall become like unto him.

For, it is a corrupting of the godly, to Gregory.
keep company with the wicked.

. 2.
Sh^nne the company of a liar as much Hermes.
as thou may: and beware least any one through flattery, persuade thee to
think otherwise of thy self, then thou art indeed.

But, if thou must needs keep company Thales.
with the man that uses to lie, in any wise believe him not: for, if thou
credit him to day, which tells thee a lie of another body, he will not
stick to morrow, to tell an untruth of thee to another man.

. 3.
Moreover; a man were better (says Plutarch.
Plutarch) to fall amongst a sort of Ravens, then to give entertainment to
flattering companions: for, Ravens never seek to eat a man till he be dead;
but flatterers will not spare to feed upon him while he is alive.

And like as a Camelion can change himself Hermes.
into al colors save white, so can a flatterer frame his tongue to any talk
whatsoever, save honesty.

. 4.
Take not thy pleasure in great voluptuousnes, Ecclus, 18, 32
neither entangle thy self with such company.

Become not a beggar by making bankets verse, 33,
of that which thou have borrowed; and so leave nothing in thy purse.

Keep not company with drunkards nor Prou, 23, 20
with gluttons.

For, the drunkard and the glutton shall verse, 21.
be poor: and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags.

. 5.
Use not the company of a woman that Ecclus, 9. 4,
is a singer and a dauncer; neither hear her, least thou be taken by her
craftines.

Cast not thy mind upon harlots in any Ecclus, 9, 6,
manner of thing, least thou destroy both thy self and thine heritage.

Meet not an harlot, least thou fall into Ecclus, 9, 3,
her snares.

Desire not her beauty in thy heart, neither Prou, 6, 25.
let her take thee with her eyelids.

For, the whoredom of a woman may be Ecclus. 26. 9,
known by the pride of her looks.

And, an harlot will make a man to beg Prou. 6. 26,
his bread.

. 6.
I have compassed about, says Solomon, Eccles, 7, 27. 28.
both I, and mine heart, to know, and to enquire, and to search wisdom, and
reason, and to know the wickedness of folly, and the foolishnes of madness: and I
find, more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and snares, and
her hands as bands: he that is good before God, shall be delivered from her,
but the sinner shall be taken by her.

The lips of a strange woman, (says Prou, 5, 3, 4, 5,
he) drop as an honny-combe, and her mouth is more soft then oil: but the
end of her is bitter as vvorme-wood, and sharp as a two edged sword. Her feet
go down to death, and her steps take hold on hell.

She weighs not the way of life: her verse, 6.
paths are moveable, thou can not know them.

Being foul by nature, she notwithstanding deceives the simple with her
Hermes.
painted face; and under fair white, and ruddie colors, she hides her
filthy and illfauoured visage.

She lies also in wait, as for a pray, and Prou, 23, 28
she increases the transgressors among men.

. 7.
Keep thy way far from her, and come Prou, 5, 8,
not near the door of her house.

For, a whore is as a deep ditch: and a Prou, 23, 27
strange woman is as a narrow pit.

Let not thy heart decline to her ways: Prou, 7, 25, 26,
neither wander thou in her paths: for she has caused many to fall down
wounded: and the strong men are all slain by her.

Her house is the way unto the grave, verse, 27.
which goes down unto the chambers of death:

Her mouth [likewise] is as a deep pit: Prou, 22, 14
and he with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall therein.

Surely, her house tends to death, and Prou, 2, 18, 19, 20.
her paths unto the dead. All they that go unto her, return not again;
neither take they hold of the ways of life. Therefore walk thou in the way
of good men, and keep the ways of the righteous.

For, the just shall dwell in the Land, and Prou, 2, 21, 22,
the upright men shall remain in it. But the wicked shall be cut off from the
earth: and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it.

A brief collection, of certain other godly preceps and counsels.
. 1.
THou shall not (says the Lord) rail upon Exodus, 22, 28
the Judges: neither speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: neither curse the rich in thy
bedchamber. Eccle. 10. 20
For, the foul of the heaven shall carry the voice, and that which has wings
shall declare the matter.

Beware therefore of murmuring, which Wisd, 1. 11.
profits nothing; and refrain your tunge from slander: for, there is no
word so secret, that shall go for naught, and the mouth that speaks lies,
slays the soul.

. 2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do Exodus, 23, 2,
evil; neither agree in a controversy to decline after many, and overthrow
the truth.

Be not carried about with every wind, Ecclus, 5, 9,
and go not into every way: for so does the sinner that has a double tongue.

Stand fast in thy sure understanding, and verse, 10.
in the way and knowledge of the Lord: and have but one manner of word, and
follow the word of peace and righteousness.

In no wise speak against the word of Ecclus, 4, 25,
truth; but be ashamed of the lies of thine own ignorance.

Be not disobedient to the fear of the Ecclus, 1, 33
Lord, and come not unto him with a double heart.

Be not an hypocrite, that men should verse, 34.
speak of thee, but take heed what thou speak.

Exalt not thy self, least thou fall, and Ecclus, 1, 35
bring thy soul to dishonor, and so God discover thy secrets, and cast thee
down in the mids of the congregation: because thou would not receive the
true fear of God: and because thine heart is full of deceit.

. 3.
My Son (says Solomon) fear the Lord, Prou, 24, 21 22,
and the King, and meddle not with them that are sedicious: for, their
destruction shall come suddenly.

Go not forth hastily to strife, least thou know not what to do in the end
thereof, Prou, 25, 8,
when thy neighbor has put thee to shame.

Strive not for a matter that thou have not to do with: and sit not down in
the Ecclus. 11, 9,
judgment of sinners.

For,] he that passes by, and medleth with the strife that belongs not unto
Prou, 26, 17
him, is as one that takes a dog by the ears.

. 4.
Grieve not (says the Apostle) the holy Ephe, 4, 30,
Spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.

But stand always in dread to do any thing, whereby thy conscience may be
Theophil.
wounded: for, the conscience is soon wounded; yea, sooner then thou art aware
of.

. 5.
Let none (says Moises,) be found among Deuteronomy, 18, 10 11.
you that makes his son or his daughter to go through the fire; or that
uses witchcraft; or a regarder of times; or a marker of the flying of fowls;
or a Sorcerer; or a Charmer; or that counsels with spirits; or a
Sooth-sayer; or that asks counsel at the dead.

For, all that do such things, are abomination Deuteronomy, 18, 12
unto the Lord.

. 6.
Give not that which is holy unto dogs, Math, 7, 6,
(says Christ,) neither cast ye your pearls before swine; least they tread
them under their feet; and turning again, all to rent you.

Seek not to reform him that will hear Hermes.
no reason; neither contend much with a fool, about matters of wisdom.

For, he that is obstinate in evil, will Socrates.
scorn to be reclaimed by any counsel.

And, doctrine unto a fool, is as fetters Ecclus, 21, 19
upon his feet, and manicles upon his right hand.

But] he that despises the word [of Prou, 13, 13
God,] he shall be destroyed.

And,] he that turns away his ear Prou, 28, 9
from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abominable.

. 7.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I James, 1, 13,
am tempted of God: for, God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts
he any man.

But every man is tempted, when he is James, 1. 14,
drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is intised.

Say not thou it is through the Lord that Ecclus, 15. 11
I turn back: for, thou ought not to do the things which he hates.

Do not say the Lord has caused me to verse, 12,
err: for he has no need of the sinful man.

Besides,] the Lord hates all abomination verse, 13,
of error: and they that fear GOD, love it not.

He made man from the beginning, and Ecclus, 15, 14 15, 16,
left him in the hand of his counsel, and gave him his commandments and
precepts. If thou will, thou shall observe the commandments, and testify thy
good will. He has set water and fire before thee: stretch out thine hand unto
which thou will.

He has commanded no man to do Ecclus, 15. 20
ungodly, neither has he given any man license to sin: for, he desires not
a multitude of infidels, and unprofitable children.

. 8.
Think not thy self to be that which Seneca.
thou art not; neither desire to seem in show, more rich then thou art in
substance.

Burden not thy self above thy power whilst thou live: neither keep
company Ecclus, 13, 2,
with one that is mightier and richer then thy self: for, how agree the
Kettle and the earthen pot^e together? for if the one be smitten against the
other, it shall be broken.

Say not, I have enough, and possess many Ecclus, 11, 24
things, and what evil can come unto me hereafter?

In thy good state remember adversity, Ecclus, 11, 25
and in adversity, forget not prosperity.

When thou have enough, remember the Ecclus, 18, 24. 25.
time of hunger; and when thou art rich, think upon poverty and need: from
the morning until the evening, the time is changed; and all such things are
soon done before the Lord.

. 9.
If thou have riches, spend them not too Plato.
prodigally, nor too sparingly: so shall thou neither be needy, nor in bondage
to thine own wealth.

If thou seem to be rich, when thou art Diogenes.
poor, it betokens that thy mind is proud, though thy wealth be weak: but
if thou seem to be poor, when thou art rich; it argues a covetous desire
with a full coffer.

. 10.
Be not careful for your life, (says Christ) Math, 6, 25, 26, 27, etc.
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye
shall put on.

Is not the life more worth then meat? and the body then raiment? Behold the
fowls of the heaven, for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry into the
Barnes: yet your heavenly father feeds them: Are ye not much better then
they?

Which of you by taking care, is able to add one cubite unto his stature? And
why care ye for raiment? Learn, how the Lillies of the field do grow: they
labor not, neither spinne: Yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
glory, was not arrayed like one of these.

Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which is to day, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not do much more unto you, o ye of
little faith?

Take no thought therefore, saying: what shall we eat? or what shall we drink?
or wherewith shall we be clothed? (For after all these things seek the
Gentiles,) for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof,
and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

. 11.
My son, says Sirach, lead not a beggars Ecclus, 40, 28,
life, for better it were to die, then to beg.

The life of him that depends on another verse, 29,
man's table, is not to be counted for a life: for he tormenteth himself after
other men's meat. But a wise man and well nurtured, will beware thereof.

It is not freedom to live licentiously: Alex. Seue.
neither is it liberty to live without labor.

To live idely, is to live wickedly: and to Crates.
depend upon other men's liberality, is the ready way to bring thee to misery.

But to labor, and to be content with Ecclus, 40, 18
that a man has, is a sweet life.

. 12.
Beware least thou say in thine heart: My Deuteronomy. 8. 17, 18,
power, and the strength of mine own hand, has prepared me this abundance.
But remember the Lord thy God, for it is he which gives thee power to get
substance.

And, it is an easy thing with him, suddenly Ecclus, 11, 21
to make a poor man rich.

. 13.
Say not thou, Why is it that the former Eccles. 7. 12,
days were better then these? for thou do not enquire wisely of this thing.

Say not, The time that our forefathers Jerome.
lived in, was better then this present age: for virtue and good life, make
good days; but abundance of vice corrupts the time.

. 14.
Many miseries and calamities, (says Esdras) 2, Esdr. 8. 50
remain for them that shall live in the latter time: because they shall walk
in great pride.

And, the weaker that the world is by 2. Esdr. 14. 16.
reason of age, the more shall the evils be increased upon them that dwell
therein.

This know also, that in the last days, 2. Tim, 3, 1,
shall come perrillous times.

For, men shall be lovers of their own verse, 2,
selves; covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy.

Without natural affection, truce breakers, verse, 3, 4,
false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of the^ that are good,
traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of GOD;
having a show of verse, 5,
godliness, but have denied the power thereof: turn away therefore from such.

. 15.
Ask no counsel for religion, (says Sirach,) Ecclus, 37, 11
of him that is without religion: nor of justice, of him that has no justice:
nor of a woman, touching her of whom she is jealous: nor of a coward, in
matters of war: nor of a Merchant, concerning exchange: nor of a buyer, for
the sale: nor of an envious man, touching thankfulness: nor of the
unmerciful, touching kindness: nor of an dishonest man, of honesty: nor of the
slothful for any labor: nor of an hireling for the finishing of a work: nor
of an idle servant for much business: harken not unto these in any matter of
counsel.

But be continually with a godly man, Ecclus, 37, 12, 13.
whom thou know to keep the commandments of the Lord: whose mind is
according to thy mind, and is sorry for thee when thou stumblest. And, hold
thy counsel fast in thine heart: for, there is no man more faithful to keep
it, then thou thy self.

. 16.
Despise not the exhortations of those Ecclus, 8, 8,
Elders that be wise, but acquaint thy self with their sentences: for, of the^
thou shall learn wisdom, and the doctrine of understanding: and how to
serve great men without complaint.

Stand with the multitude of the Elders that are wise, and join thy self to
him that Ecclus. 6, 35. 36,
has wisdom. Desire to hear all godly talk, and let not the grave
sentences of knowledge escape thee.

And, if thou see a man of understanding, verse, 37.
get thee soon unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his doors.

If thou doubt in any thing, ask counsel Socrates.
of such men as have knowledge; and be not angry if they chance to reprove
thee.

For, if when thou art reproved, thou depart Mar. Aurel.
immediately hating thy cou^seller, thou shall be like unto the sick man, which
so soon as his Surgion has cut his ulcer, goes his way; not tarrying till
his wound be dressed, and his grief assuaged.

. 17.
Lend not unto the man that is mightier Ecclus, 8, 12.
[or richer] then thy self: for, if thou lendest to such an one, count it but
lost.

Lend to thy neighbor in time of his Ecclus, 29, 2, 3.
need, and pay thou thy neighbor again in due season. Keep thy word, and
deal faithfully with him; and thou shall always find the thing that is
necessary for thee.

Many after a thing is once lent the^, reckon verse, 4,
it to be found, and thereby grieve him that has helped them.

Till they receive, they kiss his hands, and verse, 5,
for their neighbors good they humble their voice: but when they should pay
again, they prolong the term, and give a careless answer, and make excuses
by reason of the time.

And though he be able, yet gives he verse, 6,
scarce the half again, and reckons the other as a thing found: else, he
deceives him of his money, and makes him an enemy without a cause: he
pays him with cursing and rebuke, and gives him evil words for his good
deed.

There be many which refuse to lend because Ecclus, 29, 7,
of this inconvenience, fearing to be defrauded without cause.

Yet have thou patience with him that verse, 8, 9,
humbles himself, and defer not mercy from him. Help the poor for the
commandments sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty. Loose thy
money Ecclus, 29, 10
for thy brothers and neighbors sake, and let it not rust under a stone to thy
destruction.

. 18.
Be not surety above thy power, (says Ecclus, 8, 13
Sirach) for if thou be surety, think to pay it.

A man destitute of understanding, touches Prou, 17. 18
the hand, and becomes surety for his neighbor.

And, is thereby snared and taken, even Prou, 6, 1, 2,
with the words of his own mouth.

Beware therefore how thou pass thy Euripides.
word for another man; least he escape free, and thou fall into danger.

For, suretiship has destroyed many a Ecclus. 29. 20
rich man, and removed them as the waves of the sea: mighty men has it driven
away from their houses, and caused them to wander among strange Nations.

. 19.
My son (says Tobie) set our Lord Tob. 4. 6,
God always before thine eyes, and let not thy will be set to sin* or to
transgress the commandments of the Almighty: Do uprightly all thy life
long, and follow not the ways of unrighteousness: for if thou deal truly, thy
doings will prosperously succeed to thee, and to all them which live justly.

Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto Ecclus, 7, 12.
thee: depart from the thing that is wicked, and sin shall turn away from thee.

Resist the devil, and he will flee from James, 4, 7,
thee.

But if thou yield unto his desire in one Bullenger.
sin, he will presently seek to draw thee to another.

Sow not therefore upon the furrows Ecclus, 7, 3,
of iniq^itie, least thou reap them seauenfolde.

. 20.
Be not deceived; God is not mocked, Gala, 6, 7, 8,
for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. He that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

Now,] the works of the flesh are manifest; Gala, 5, 19, 20, 21.
which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry,
vvitchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation, wrath, contentions, seditions,
heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like: whereof I tell you
before, as I also have told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD.

But the fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, Gala, 5, 22, 23.
peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, [and] temperancie:
against such, there is no law.

. 21.
Look well to thy self, least the reyne Mar. Aurel.
of thy youth, and the liberty of thine own estate, cause thee to commit that
which is evil.

Follow not thy lusts, but turn thee from Ecclus, 8, 30, 31,
thine own appetites: for if thou give thy soul her desires, it shall make
thine enemies that envy thee, to laugh thee to scorn.

Do not what thou would, but what Hermes.
thou should: and the better to abstain from evil, keep thy self from
the company of those that are wicked.

. 22.
Suffer not thy hands to work, thy tunge Socrates.
to speak, or thine ears to hear, that which is evil, or wicked.

But beware of sin, as the serpent of the Plato.
soul, which spoyleth men of all their ornaments and seemly apparel in the
sight of God.

Bind not two sins together: for in Ecclus, 7, 8,
one sin shall thou not be unpunished.

. 23.
Be not secure, least want of care, procure Thales.
thy calamity, neither be thou too careful, least pensive thoughts oppress
thee with misery.

Be not too rash in words, nor too forward Crates.
and hasty in thy deeds.

But what-soeuer thou take in hand, remember Ecclus, 7, 36
the end, and thou shall never do amiss.

For, good respect, and due consideration Plato.
to the end of things, preserves both body and soul.

. 24.
Take good aduisement with thy self, Alex. Seue.
before thou begin any thing: but when thou have begun, dispatch it
speedily.

Attempt not two things at once, for the Crates.
one of them will hinder the other.

Begin nothing before thou first call for Hermes.
the help of God: for God, whose power is in all things, gives most
prosperous furtherance and happy success, unto all such good works as we do
begin in his name.

. 25.
Be not faint-hearted when thou make Ecclus, 7, 10,
thy prayer neither slack or negligent in giving of alms.

Let not thy hand be stretched out to receive, Ecclus, 4. 31,
and shut when thou should give.

For it is a more blessed thing to give, the^ Acts, 20, 35,
to receive.

. 26.
Be not hasty in thy tongue, neither slack Ecclus, 4, 29,
and negligent in thy works.

Desire not to be wise in words, but in Hermes.
works: for wisdom of speech wastes with the world; but works wrought by
wisdom, increase into the world to come.

Power not out words, where there is no Ecclus, 32, 4,
audience, and show not forth wisdom out of time.

For,] a wise man will hold his tongue till Ecclus, 20, 7,
he see opportunity: but a trifler and a fool, will regard no time.

Reprove not another man, for such evils Socrates.
as are found in thy self unreformed: but first learn to live well, then
teach others by thine own example.

For, he that teaches good, and does Plutarch.
evil, is like him which lights up a candle to other men, and goes darkling
himself.

. 27.
Comber not thy mind with worldly Seneca.
carefulnes, neither let the vain delights of this life, draw thy thoughts
from virtue, to follow the falsehoods of them.

But seek to enrich thy self with store of Zenoph^n.
wisdom and understanding: that thou may rather profit thy Country by thy
good instructions, then prove prejudicial to the people by thy bad example.

Let just men eat and drink with thee; Ecclus, 9, 18
and let thy rejoicing be in the fear of the Lord.

Be not proud in prosperity, neither despair Tully,
in adversity.

VVish not for those things that thou Crates.
may not obtain: neither praise any unworthy person because thou know him
wealthy.

Take not thy enemy for thy friend, nor Quintil.
thy friend for thine enemy.

Be not too hasty to meddle with matters Dion.
that are doubtful, neither let thy tongue run beyond thy wit.

. 28.
If thou talkest with any man, have respect Aristotle.
to keep a measure in thy communication: for, if thou be too brief, thou
shall not well be understood: and if thou be too long, thou shall not well be
borne in mind of him that hears thee.

Be not too hasty to give credit to another Demonax.
man's words, neither laugh his speeches to scorn that talks with thee: for,
the one is the property of a fool; the other, the conditions of a mad man.

Affirm nothing before thou know the Demosth.
truth: neither let thine own beauty, thy youth, or thy riches deceive thee.

Do good to other men, but harm not Sigismund.
thy self; be bountiful, but not prodigal: be ready to relieve him that is
in necessity, but let not thy gifts be above thine ability.

. 29.
Be not unthankful to him that has Protogenes.
done thee good.

Seek not to rule others before thou thy Pythagoras.
self have first learned to obey.

Speak no untruth of any man living, Plutarch.
neither suffer thy tongue to slander them that be dead.

Be always one to thy friend, as well in Mar. Aur.
adversity as in prosperity; and keep thy promise as truly as thou would
pay thy debt.

Use in all things, and toward all men, a Socrates.
simple verity; without fraud, deceit, or guile, either in word or deed.

And be not ashamed to do justice to every Boethius.
man, for, what-soeuer is done without justice, is tyranny.

. 30.
Do no secret thing before a stranger, Ecclus, 8, 18,
for thou can not tell what he goes about.

Neither tell the thoughts of thy heart Ecclus, 8, 19,
unto every man, least he be unthankful to thee, and put thee to reproof.

Dishonor no man in his old age: for, Ecclus, 8. 6,
they were as we which are not old.

Sit not at all with another man's wife, neither Ecclus, 9, 11,
lie with her upon the bed, nor banquet with her, least thine heart incline unto
her: and so through thy desire thou fall into destruction.

Be not glad of the death of thine enemy: Ecclus. 8, 7,
but remember that we must die all, and so enter into joy.

Be gentle and courteous to every one, but Theophras.
flatter no man, neither suffer thy self to be flattered of any.

Be familiar with few men, and beware Macrobius.
whom thou trustest.

Be patient and constant in the time of adversity; Arnobius.
and, in thy prosperity be of an humble spirit.

. 31.
If thy parents wexe poor, supply their Socrates.
want with thy wealth: if froward with age, bear patiently with their
imperfections.

And strive not with thy father and mother Anacharsis.
in words, although thou tell the truth.

If thou have sons, bring them up in Ecclus, 7, 23,
nurture and learning, and hold them in awe even from their youth.

Chasten thy child while there is hope, Prou. 19, 18
and let not thy soul spare for his murmuring.

For, it is better that thou should make Antisth.
thy son weep in his youth, then he should make thee mourn when thou art
old.

If thou have daughters, keep their body, Ecclus, 7, 24,
and show not thy face cheerful toward them.

Suffer not thy daughter to walk abroad Anaxag.
after her own will, for it is the ready way to bring her to wickedness.

If thy daughter be not shamefast, hold Ecclus, 26, 10
her straightly, least she abuse herself through overmuch liberty.

Take heed of her that has an unshamefast Ecclus, 26, 11
look: and marvel not if she trespass against thee.

For.] as one that goes by the way, and Ecclus, 26, 12
is thirsty, so shall she open her mouth and drink of every next water: by
every hedge shall she sit down, and open her quiver against every arrow.

. 32.
Let no covetous man have any rule over Aristotle.
thee, neither yield thy self subject unto covetousness: for the covetous man
will deceive thee of thy goods, and covetousness will defraude thee of thy life.

If thou intendest any thing whereof may Xenocrates.
grow any goodness, devise to proceed with all diligence; but if by thy works
may chance that which is evil, then be as forward to conquer thy will.

Sow good works, and thou shall reap Socrates.
the flowers of joy and gladness.

When thou risest in the morning, determine Pythagoras.
so to spend the day following, as though at night a grave should be thy bed.

Endeavor thy self at all times to do so Plato.
well, that the wicked may rather envy thee for thy virtuous life, then good
men pity thee for thy evil living.

So live, and so hope, as though thou Thales.
should die immediately.

Order thy self so, that thy soul may always Pythago.
be in good estate, what-soeuer become of thy body.

. 33.
Be not as a Lion in thine own house, Ecclus, 4, 30
neither beat thy servant for thy fantasy; nor oppress them that are under
thee.

Do nothing without aduisement, so Ecclus, 32, 20
shall it not repent thee after the deed.

Be not excessive toward any, and without Ecclus, 33, 28
discretion do nothing.

Let reason go before every enterprise, Ecclus, 37, 16
and counsel before every action.

Think first, then speak, and last of all Isocrates.
fulfill.

Live always with thine underlings, as Mar. Aurel.
thou would thy betters should live with thee, and do to all men, as thou
would be done by.

. 34.
Be not ashamed to hear the truth, of Socrates.
whomsoever it be: for truth is so noble of it self, that it makes them
honorable that pronounce it.

Be sober and chaste among young folks, Plato.
that they may learn of thee, and among old, that thou may learn of them.

Learn those things whilst thou art a Anaxag.
child, as may afterward profit thee by practice when thou art a man.

And let it not grieve thee in youth to Socrates.
follow virtue; for if thou defer it off till age, it will seem like a
heavy burden unpleasant to be borne.

. 35.
Hold friendship with many men: nevertheless, Ecclus, 6, 6,
have but one counselor of a thousand.

If thou get a friend, prove him first, and verse, 7, 8,
be not hasty to credit him. For, some man is a friend for is own occasion,
and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

Again, some friend is but a companion verse, 10.
at thy table, and in the day of thine affliction he continues not.

But in thy prosperity, he will be as thou verse. 11.
thy self, and will use liberty over thy servant.

If thou be brought low, he will be against verse, 12,
thee, and will hide himself from thy face.

Contrariwise,] a faithful freende is a verse, 14.
strong defense, and he that finds such an one, finds a treasure.

. 36.
Abide not thou in the error of the ungodly, Ecclus, 17, 27
but praise the Lord before death.

For,] thankfulness perrisheth from the verse, 28.
dead, as though he were not: but the living, and he that is sound of heart,
praises the Lord, and rejoices in his mercy.

Number not thy self in the multitude Ecclus, 7, 16 17,
of the wicked, but remember that vengeance will not be long in tarrying: and
that the reward of the ungodly is fire and worms.

Seek not death in the error of your life: Wisd, 1, 12, 13.
destroy not your selves, through the works of your own hands: for, GOD has
not made death; neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the living.

Righteousness is everlasting and immortal, Wisd. 1. 15,
but unrighteousness brings death.

To depart from evil, is a thankful thing Ecclus, 35, 3.
to the Lord; and to forsake unrighteousness, is a reconciling unto him.

Of trouble and affliction: whereby GOD tries the hearts of all such as
faithfully love him.
PROVERBS. 17. verse. 3. As is the sining pot for silver, and the furnace for
gold, so the Lord tries the hearts. Of trouble and affliction.
. 1.
MY son, (says Sirach,) if thou will Ecclus. 2. 1. 2
come into the service of GOD, stand fast in righteousness and fear, and
prepare thy soul to tentation. Settle thine heart and be patient, bow down
thine ear, and receive the words of understanding: and shrink not away when
thou art assailed, but wait upon GOD patiently.

Join thy self unto him, and depart not verse, 3, 4, 5,
away, that thou may be increased at thy last end. Whatsoever comes unto
thee, receive it patiently, and be patient in the change of thine affliction.
For, as gold and silver are tried in the fire, even so are men acceptable in
the furnace of adversity.

And, as the furnace proves the Potters Ecclus, 27, 5,
vessel, so does tentation try the thoughts of men.

. 2.
The Lord will try the righteous, (says Psalm. 11. 5,
David) but the wicked, and him that loves iniquity, does his soul hate.

He led the children of Israel (whom Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
he dearly loved,) forty years together in the Wilderness, before he
brought them to the Land of Promise; only to humble them, and to prove and
know what was in their hearts, whether they would keep his commandments, or
no.

. 3.
He commanded the Patriarch Abraham Gene. 22, 1, 2.
(as we read) to kill and offer up unto him, his true-borne and best-beloued
son Isaac; whom (not many years before) he had given him for the comfort of
his age; promising withal, that in that child, and in his seed, all the
Nations of the earth should be blessed: yet on the sudden, when Abraham least
thought of any such matter, he willed him to the performance hereof, and told
him also in what place he would have it done. All this it pleased him to do,
not for any desire he had to receive at his servant hand any such kind of
offering, or bloody sacrifice; but only to prove what faithful love was
harbored in the heart of Abraham toward him.

For, when he perceived the Patriarchs Gene. 22, 15, 16, 17, 18,
ready obedience hereunto, he speedily sent his Angel, and caused him to
forbear to do it: saying and swearing unto Abraham by himself, that because
he had been found faithful in his trial, and had not refused at his
commandment, to offer up his only son; his seed should surely be
multiplied as the stars of heaven, and the sand upon the Sea-shoare; and all
Nations should be blessed in him, according to his former promise.

. 4.
He proved likewise the love and patience Tobie, 2,
of old Tobias, by suffering him in his sleep to be deprived of his eyesight:
and after his trial, restored his sight again, with greater cause of comfort
and rejoicing then he had before.

How many troubles also the Prophet David sustained, (as several proofs and
trials of his virtue and patience) before he could peaceably possess the
kingdom which God had promised unto him, may be seen at large, in the sundry
conflicts 1, Sam. chap. 16. 17, 18, 19, 20, etc.
which he had with his hate-bearing enemy King Saul.

. 5.
But, among diverse other examples in the Book of God concerning this matter,
we find, that it pleased the Lord to proceed very far in proving the
constant love and patience of holy Job; when he gave satan leave to try him by
six several temptations, as namely thus. First, he maliciously brought the
Shabeans upon his Heardsmen Job. 1. 14. 15.
and other servant, as they were busy at their labor; who violently slew
the keepers of his cattle, and carried his Oxen and Asses away.

Secondly, he caused fire to fall from heaven Job. 1. 16.
upon his sheep and their sheepheards, which speedily burnt and consumed them,
leaving but one amongst many to bring him the bad news.

Thirdly, he procured the Chaldeans to set out three bands of men, who
likewise Job. 1. 17,
by violence overcame his servant, and carried his Camels away.

Fourthly, he caused a furious and tempestious Job, 1, 18, 19,
wind to ouer-turne the house wherein all his children were banqueting; and
suddenly, in the midst of their mirth, deprived them of their lives.

Not content with all this, (because Job still continued constant) he obtained
leave of God, to proceed with his fifth plague: which was, the afflicting of
Jobs own body Job, 2, 6, 7,
with grievous botches and boyles: not in one place or two, but all over, even
from the sole of his foot, to the crown of his head.

These five plagues being fully practiced to prove him, and satan
notwithstanding still prevented of his purpose: determined once more to try him
by a more terrible temptation then all the rest, namely, with the temper of his
wives tunge, which last plague, only of it self exceeded all the former, as
far as they in their degrees surpassed one another.

As for the first affliction, (Job being a man of such wonderful wealth as
the beginning of his book reports him to be,) Job, 1, 3.
it could surely of him be counted no more harm, but even as it were the sting
of a nettle, or a flea-byting. The second, was a shrewd pinch. The third, was a
sore bruze. The fourth, more grievous to be borne then all the former. The
fifth, exceeded them all; and went so near his heart, that it caused him more to
complain then any of the rest. But the sixth and last, went many degrees
beyond the whole number of the other, in that it leueld at his utter overthrow
and final destruction, both of body and soul.

For, after he had lost all his substance, and his children, and was brought
to such a miserable estate, (through the sundry sores upon his body,) that he
knew not where to rest himself, or by what means to find any ease; but was
constrained to forsake all company, and sitting upon a heap of ashes, or
dunghill, to scrape away the filthy matter Job, 2, 7, 8,
that issued from his flesh with a potshard: now, even now, in the midst of
all his anguish and sorrow; his wife, (which in all human reason should
have been his most kind comforter) forgetting both her own present state, and
her husbands future felicity, came upon him in railing manner, with an open
mouth, saying: * Do Job, 2, 9,
thou continue yet in thine uprightness? Curse God, and die.

But holy Job, (more regarding his souls good, then the pacifying of his
bodies pain, and also to make manifest to all men, how much in heart he
honored his Maker,) presently rebuked her for her folly, saying; Thou
speak like a foolish woman: Job, 2, 10,
What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil?

Also, in the thirteenth chapter of his Book, and, as it seems, even in the
extremest time of his fiery trial, he vehemently brake forth into this
confident and prayse-worthy resolution, saying: * Lo, Job, 13, 15,
though GOD kill me, yet will I trust in him.

And, after all his troubles were ended, and his virtuous patience thoroughly
proved, Job, 42, 12, 13, 14. etc.
we find in the latter end of his book, that it pleased God to bless him, not
only with twice so much riches as he lost, but also with as many sons and
daughters; and the length of an hundred and forty years life. So that before
he died, he saw his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations.

. 6.
Thus God, (as Solomon says) proves Wisd, 3, 5, 6.
the righteous, and finds them meet for himself. He tries them as the
gold in the furnace; and receives them as a perfect fruit offering.

He also, chasteneth them measurablie Wisd, 12, 2.
that go wrong; and vvarneth them, by putting the^ in remembrance of the
things wherein they have offended, that leaving their wickedness, they may
believe in him.

Yea;] whom-soeuer the Lord loves, Heb, 12, 6,
him he chasteneth; and he scourges every son that he receives.

If ye endure chastening, God offers verse, 7,
himself unto you, as unto Sons: for what son is it whom the Father
chasteneth not?

But if ye be without correction, whereof Hebr, 12, 8,
all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.

. 7.
My son, (says the wiseman,) refuse Prou, 3, 11, 12.
not the chastening of the Almighty, neither be thou grieved with his
correction: for the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father
does the child in whom he delights.

And, as a Father nurtureth his son, so Deuteronomy, 8, 5,
the Lord thy God nurtureth thee.

His rod or scourge of affliction, is no Fulgosius.
sign of his disfavor to those that bear it with patience; but rather a most
necessary mean to put a man in remembrance of his former iniquities; and to
cause him to live more godly ever after, for fear of some further chastisement.

It is a heavenly Herrald sent from God, Hermes.
to forewarne men to leave the love of transitory pleasures; and to seek after
such things as cause comfort in death.

It is a special benefit unto all the children Just. Mar,
of GOD; in that it reformeth them from unrighteousness, and makes them meet
to receive wisdom and understanding.

. 8.
Thus much in effect confesses David, in the 119. psalm, where he says: *
It is Psalm, 119, 71
good for me (o Lord) that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
statutes.

Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but Psalm. 119, 67
now (o Lord) I keep thy word.

Also, in the 94. psalm, he plainly pronounces those men to be blessed whom
it pleases the Lord to correct: saying; Blessed is the man whom thou
chastisest, o Psalm, 94, 12, 13.
Lord, and teach him in thy Law, that thou may give him rest from the
days of evil, whiles the pit is dug for the ungodly.

And, blessed likewise does holy Job account Job, 5, 17,
the man whom GOD corrects: therefore refuse not thou, the chastising of the
Almighty.

For, he makes the wound, and binds verse, 18, 19,
it up: he smites, and his hands make whole. He shall deliver thee in six
troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not touch thee.

He will not forsake for ever. But though Lam. 3, 31, 32,
he send affliction, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude
of his mercies.

For, he will not lay on man so much, Job, 34, 23,
that he should enter into judgment with God.

. 9.
We have had (says the Apostle) the Heb, 12, 9,
fathers of our bodies, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: should
we not much rather, be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, that we
might live?

For, they verily for a few days chastened verse, 10,
us after their own pleasure: but he chasteneth us for our profit, that we
might be partakers of his holiness.

If we would judge our selves, we should 1. Cor, 11, 31,
not be judged.

But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord; to the end we should not
1, Cor, 11, 32,
be condemned with the world.

. 10.
Let not [then] the force of any affliction Ignatius.
ouer-throw the virtue of thy patience.

(For, patience and perseverance in vveldooing, Tertullian.
are two special notes, whereby the children of God are truly discerned, from
hypocrites, counterfets, and dissemblers.)

But rather follow the counsel which S. James gives; saying: * If any man be
afflicted, James. 5, 13,
let him pray.

For, the Lord is near unto them that Psalm, 34, 18,
are of a contrite heart, and will save such as be afflicted in spirit.

Yea; the Lord [our God] is good, and Nahum, 1, 7
as a strong hold in the day of trouble: and he knows them that trust in him.

He is near unto all that call upon him. Psalm, 145, 18
Yea, to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfill the desire of them that verse, 19,
fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them: * Because they
trust in Psalm, 37. 40,
him.

For, he knows how to deliver the godly 2, Pet, 2, 9,
out of tentation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished.

. 11.
My brethren, (says the Apostle) count James, 1, 2, 3
it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse tentations, knowing that the trying
of your faith brings forth patience; and let patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing.

For this know, that trouble and affliction Eugeniu^.
is sent of God unto good men, not unjustly, or cruelly; but for a good
consideration, and most loving intent: like unto the doings of a kind and
discreet Father; who greatly desiring to bring his son who^ he loves, to
perpetual honor and dignity, by such manner of exercise, most aptly tries
his virtue, and proves his patience.

It is [also] very necessary, that the children Gueuara.
of God should be often tried in this life by trouble and affliction; that
thereby they may the better be brought to know their own weakness; and
thoroughly taught in all their conflicts, to lift up their eyes unto heaven for
help and succor.

Besides; as iron except it be sundry Pet. Lomb.
times scoured, will speedily corrupt, and wexe rustie; so, the unclean heart
and flesh of man, except it be often scoured with the whetstone of adversity,
it will quickly forget God, and soon be ouer-growne with the rust of all
filthiness and sin.

. 12.
Indeed, it cannot be, but that the minds Cicer^.
of men, are oftentimes through trouble and affliction, moved with vexations
and griefs, but yet a mean must be kept in all calamities what-soeuer: beyond
the which, no man that is wise ought of right to pass.

For, although no chastising for the present Heb, 12, 11,
time that it lasts, seems to be joyous, but grievous: yet afterward, it
brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are thereby
exercised.

And every man ought for his better comfort in this case, to lay sure hold on
the words of the Apostle, used unto the Corinthians, where he says: * There
has no 1, Cor, 10, 13.
tentation taken you, but such as appertains to man: and God is faithful,
which will not suffer you to be tempted above your strength; but will even give
the issue with the tentation, that ye may be able to bear the same.

His grace alone is sufficient for as many 2, Cor, 12, 9,
as shall unfeignedly put their confidence in him: and, his power is made
perfect through our weakness.

. 13.
And although, (as David affirms) the Psalm, 34, 19,
troubles of the righteous are great, yet this comfort, even by the self same
man's saying, presently follows; that the Lord delivers him out of them all.

He also, makes the afflictions of the Tertullian.
godly, serve as fit occasions to draw their minds wholly unto him: and in the
end, turns all the sufferings of his Saints, to their names eternal praise,
and their souls greater glory.

So that it is a surer sign of Gods love Gregory.
and favor toward us, when he gives us force and strength to bear
troubles, then it is when he takes the same temptations away from us.

And, no man deserves to be counted Bernard.
constant in his trial, except he arm himself with patience, and be renewed
with fresh courage, even in the midst of his afflictions.

Remembering, that all the miseries in man's life, can never be so sharp and
bitter, Erasmus.
as everlasting felicity will prove unto the godly sweet and pleasant.

. 14.
Hold fast therefore the virtue of patience Mar. Aurel.
in all thine adversity.

Sorrow truly for thy former sins, and Eug^nius.
practice to please GOD by thy virtuous amendment.

Let hope encourage thee to be constant, Euagoras.
though thy miseries be daily augmented.

And put always such faithful trust in the Rauisius.
promises of Gods mercy, as may keep thee from despair, and make less thy
calamity.

. 15.
Behold, we count them blessed which James. 5, 11*
endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have known what end the
Lord made. For, the Lord, [as has already been said,] is very pitiful and
merciful.

VVho-soeuer shall call upon his Name, Rom, 10, 13
shall be saved.

And he that trusts in the Almighty, Ecclus, 32, 24
shall take no hurt.

. 16.
Consider, (says Sirach) the old generations Ecclus, 2, 11
of men, and mark them well, was there ever any one confounded that put his
trust in the Lord? or who has continued in his fear, and was forsaken? or
whom did he ever despise, that called upon him?

I have been young, and now am old, Psalm, 37, 25,
(says the Psalmist,) yet never saw I the righteous forsaken; nor his seed
begging bread.

Wherefore; though the Lord seem for Ambrose.
a time to be angry with thee, and to turn away his face from beholding thine
affliction, yet be not thou any whit thereby discouraged; but rather endeavor
to be the more patient; and thou shall assuredly find, that he will not forget
thee.

For, he endures but a while in his anger, Psalm, 30, 5.
but in his favor is life: weeping may abide in the evening, but joy comes
in the morning.

He himself has commanded us to call upon him in the time of our trouble:
Psalm, 50, 15,
and with more then promise to hear, he has plainly said, that he will
deliver us, and we shall glorify him.

Doubtless, he is now no less powerful then heere-to-fore he has been;
for, he is still * God all-sufficient. Gene, 17, 1,


His hand is not shortened, that it cannot Esaias, 59, 1,
save; neither is his ear heavy, that it cannot hear.

But he delights in them that fear Psalm, 147, 11
him, and attend upon his mercy.

And, is theyrs only, that patiently abide Ecclus, 34, 19
him in the way of truth and righteousness.

Of trouble and persecution for the Gospells sake: whereunto every faithful
Christian is continually subject, during this life.
. 1.
IF any man will follow me, (says Christ) Math, 16, 24
let him forsake himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

Yea,] if any man will come after me, Luke, 9, 23,
let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

For,] whosoever bears not his cross, Luke, 14, 27
and comes after me, cannot be my disciple.

. 2.
Think not, (says he) that I am come Math, 10. 34
to send peace into the earth: I came not to send peace, but the sword.

For, from hence-foorth, there shall be Luke, 12, 52, 53.
five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three. The
Father shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father:
The mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother: the
mother in law, against the daughter in law, and the daughter in law, against
her mother in law.

And, who-soeuer will seek to save his Mark, 8, 35 Luk, 17, 3^,
life, he shall lose it; but who-soeuer shall lose his life for my sake, and
the Gospels, he shall save it.

. 3.
He that loves father or mother more Math, 10, 37
then me, is not worthy of me. And he that loves son or daughter more
then me, is not worthy of me.

If any man come to me, and hate not his Luk, 14. 26,
father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters; yea, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.

The disciple is not above his master, nor Math, 10, 24, 25,
the servant above his Lord. It is enough for the disciple to be as his
Master is, and the servant as his Lord.

And, who-soeuer will be a perfect disciple, Luke, 6, 40,
shall be as his Master is.

. 4.
Behold, (says our Savior unto his followers.) Math, 10, 16 17, 18.
I send you forth, as sheep in the mids of wolves, be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and innocent as Doves. But beware of men, for they will deliver you
up to the Counsels, and will scourge you in their Sinagogues; and ye shall be
brought to the Governors and Kings for my sake, in witness to them, and to the
Gentiles.

Yea; the brother shall deliver the brother Mark, 13, 12,
to death, and the father the son, and the children shall rise against their
parents, and shall cause them to die.

And ye shall be hated of all men for my verse, 13,
Names sake: but who-soeuer shall endure unto the end, he shall be saved.

If the world hate you, ye know that it John, 15, 18, 19,
hated me before you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own:
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you.

Remember that I said unto you; The verse, 20.
servant is not greater then his master. If they have persecuted me, they
will persecute you also.

If they have called the Master of the Math, 10, 25
house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

But all these things will they do unto John, 15, 21,
you for my Names sake; because they have not known him that sent me.

Yea, the time shall come, that whosoever John. 16. 2.
kills you, will think that he does God service.

Notwithstanding, blessed are ye, if you 1. Pet. 3. 14.
suffer for righteousness sake.

For, unto such appertains the kingdom Math, 5, 10,
of heaven.

Yea,] blessed are ye, when men revile Math. 5, 11, 12.
you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake,
falselie; rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven: for, so
persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

. 5.
Let not (says he) your hearts be troubled, John, 14. 1.
ye believe in God, believe also in me.

In the world ye shall have affliction; but John, 16, 33
be of good comfort: I have ouer-com the world.

And, fear not them which kill the body, Math. 10. 28 Luke 12, 4. 5,
and after that are not able to do any more: but rather fear him which is
able to destroy both body and soul in hell: yea, I say unto you, fear him.

For, what shall it profit a man, though Math, 16. 26
he should win the whole world, if he lose his own soul? or what shall a
man give for recompense of his soul?

VVho-soeuer therefore shall confess Math, 10, 32
me before men, him will I confess also before my Father, which is in heaven.

But vvho-soeuer shall deny me before verse, 33,
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

Who-soeuer [likewise] shall be ashamed Luke. 9. 26
of me, and of my words, of him shall the son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his glory* and in the glory of the Father, and of the holy Angels.

. 6.
Dearly beloved, (says S. Peter) think 1. Pet. 4, 12.
it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is among you, to prove you,
as though some strange thing were come unto you.

But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers verse, 13.
of Christ's sufferings: that when his glory shall appear, ye may be glad
and rejoice.

For, we must through many afflictions Acts, 14, 22*
enter into the kingdom of God.

And, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3. 12
shall suffer persecution.

. 7.
If ye be railed upon for the Name of 1. Pet, 4, 14.
Christ, blessed are you; for, the Spirit of glory, and of God rests upon
you: which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part, is glorified.

But, let none of you suffer as a murderer, 1. Pet, 4, 15.
or as a thief, or as an evil dooer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters.

But, if any man suffer as a Christian, let verse, 16.
him not be ashamed: but let him glorify God in that behalf.

For, it is better (if the will of God be so) 1, Pet, 3, 17.
that ye should suffer for well-doing, then for evil doing.

And, the less justice that a godly man Tremelius.
finds at the hands of the ungodly, the more comfort shall he receive in
conscience, at the merciful hand of God.

. 8.
My son, (says Sirach) submit not thy Ecclus, 4, 27, 28.
self unto a foolish man, neither accept thou the person of the mighty. But
strive for the truth unto death: and defend justice even to the loss of thine
own life: and the Lord thy God shall fight for thee against thine enemies.

Be favorable to all men; be likewise in Socrates.
subjection to al laws: but above al things, fulfill the will of God, rather
then the will of man.

For,] a righteous and godly man, having Pet. Ramus.
in him the spirit of zeal and constancy, never fears in his afflictions
the cruelty of any man: but will boldly to the death, stand unto the truth.

And, forasmuch as he knows that Rauisius.
almighty God is the truth, and that truth is GOD; he likewise wisely
considers, that he which departs from the one, departs from the other.

But, he that either for fear of punishment, Hemingius.
or else in hope of a Tyrants favor, forsakes the truth before men upon
earth, leaves the most certain promise of perpetual felicity, for an
uncertain assurance of short-lasting vanity: and by seeking to deliver his
body from danger, cloggeth his conscience with grief, and his soul with
sorrow.

. 9.
If then thou be desirous to live everlastingly, Gueuara.
faint not at any time under the burden of thine afflictions; neither be thou
moved from thy hope of heavens help, through the multitude of thy miseries:
but patiently put thy trust in the promises of Gods mercy, and pray often for
such perseverance, as may bring thee to eternal blessedness.

In all thy troubles stand unto the truth; Plotinus.
and commit thy self in thy greatest necessity, wholly and altogether to the
most high and mighty GOD; neither fearing them that threaten, nor believing
the^ that speak thee fair: but trust in him alone, that is most kind and
compassionate, true of his promise, and able to make both his word and work
good.

For, more wisdom is it, that a man for Hermes.
his souls sake should suffer death, then lose his souls happiness for the
love of this life.

Blessed [therfore] is the man that endures James, 1, 12,
tentation: for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which
the Lord has promised to them that love him.

. 10.
The peaceable and blessed life of the Bernard.
godly, (says S. Bernard) is in heaven: and is only to be attained unto by
faith, patience, and perseverance.

For, as without faith, it is impossible to Hilarious.
please God; so without patience and perseverance, no man shall see God.

And although indeed, the death of the Basil.
body, by diverse means, and for diverse causes, be unto many men very tedious
and bitter: yet the death thereof for the testimony of Gods truth, is unto the
godly man most easy, most joyful, most sweet, and most delectable: because
he sees (through the eye of faith) the present performance of all Gods
heavenly promises, made unto him in his holy word; if he zealously continue
constant in the verity of his Christian profession.

. 11.
Thou therefore my son, (says Paul unto Timothy,) suffer affliction as a
good 2. Tim. 2. 3. 4.
soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the
affairs of this life, because he would please him that has chosen him to be
a Soldier.

And, Christ being our Captain, has Rauisius.
called us by the voice of his Gospel, to a spiritual warfare. The foes
against whom we must continually fight, are fleshly assaults, worldly
wickedness, and the deceits of the devil. Our warre-weapons and armor, is the
shield of faith, the sword of the Spirit, the breast plate of righteousness,
and the helmet of salvation.

The reward of conquest, is a crown of Rauisius.
life to him that ouer-co^meth: which God himself has promised, to every man
that perseuereth in vvell-dooing to the end. But he that coward-like leaves
the battle and forsakes the field; shall be pursued, spoiled, and made a
pray to his infernal enemy.

For, no man that strives for a maisterie, 2, Tim, 2. 5,
shall be crowned, except he strive as he ought to do.

Neither is he that puts his hand to Luke. 9, 62.
the plowe, and afterward looks back, any meet member for the kingdom of
God.

. 12.
If we suffer with Christ, we shall also 2. Tim. 2. 12
reign with him: [but] if we deny him, he also will deny us.

And, look with what courage a Christian, Pet. Mar.
in the time of his trial shall confess the truth, and acknowledge Christ to
be his Captain: with as great consolation and inward joy, shall his conscience
be comforted, at the hour of death, when his soul is forsaking the prison of
his body.

For, this is thanke-worthy, if a man for 1. Pet, 2, 19.
conscience toward God, endure grief, and suffer wrong undeserved.

. 13.
Take, my brethren, the Prophets (says James, 5, 10.
Saint James) for an ensample of suffering adversity, and of long patience,
which have spoken in the Name of the Lord.

And, let likewise that general testimony, which the Writer to the Hebrews
gives, in commendation of all the Saints of the old Testament, sufficiently
move us, to be perfectly patient in all our tribulations, according to their
example: where he says: Some of them were tried by mockings Hebr, 11, 36 37,
38,
and scourging; some by bonds and imprisonment; some were stoned; some were
hewn in sunder; some were tempted; some were slain with the sword; some went
up and down in Sheep skins and Goates-skinnes, in great need, afflicted
and tormented: wandering in Wildernesses, in Mountains, in Dens, and in
hollow Caves of the earth: the World not being worthy of them.

Others, also were racked, and would not Hebr. 11, 35
be delivered: that they might receive a better resurrection.

. 14.
Besides these; we find also, that the Apostle S. Paul himself, and his
fellow servant under Christ, in the Newe-testament, are most worthy examples
to be remembered. For, in diverse places of his Epistles, he spares not to
speak both of his own, and the rest of the disciples sufferings: but for
himself only, in his Epistle to the Corinthians he says: I take pleasure 2.
Cor. 12. 10.
in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, and in anguish
for Christ's sake: for, when I am vveake, then am I strong:

Likewise in the Acts we read, that when he was foretold by a certain Prophet
named Acts, 21, 11, 12.
Agabus, what trouble should befall him at Jerusalem: he desisted not from his
journey thither, but rather reproved them that sought (with tears) to persuade
him to the contrary, saying: * What do you verse, 13,
weeping and breaking mine heart? For, I am ready, not to be bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

For, Christ is to me, both in life and in Philip, 1, 21,
death, advantage.

And, I count all things to be loss, and Phil. 3, 8, 9.
judge them to be dunge, that I may win Christ, and be found in him.

. 15.
Also; in the aforementioned Epistle to the Corinthians, (both in the behalf of
himself, and the rest of his fellow helpers,) he says: Brethren, we would
not have you 2. Cor. 1. 8. 9
ignorant of our affliction, which came unto us in Asia, how we were pressed
out of measure, passing strength, so that we altogether doubted, even of life.
Yea, we received the sentence of death in our selves, because we should not
trust in our selves, but in God, which raises the dead.

Again, in the 4. chapter of the same 2, Cor, 4, 8, 9
Epistle, he says: We are afflicted on every side, yet are we not in
distress: we are in doubt, but yet we despair not: we are persecuted, but
not forsaken: cast down, but we perrish not.

Every where we bear about in our body verse, 10, 11,
the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus might also be made
manifest in our bodies: for, we which live, are always delivered unto death
for Jesus sake; that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our
mortal flesh.

As it is written; For thy sake (o Lord) Rom, 8, 36.
are we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep appointed to be
slain.

Nevertheless, in all these things we are verse, 37,
more then conquerours, through him that loved us.

. 16.
Wherefore, let us also, seeing that we Heb, 12, 1, 2
are compassed with so great a cloud of witnesses, cast away every thing that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on: Let us run with patience
the race that is set before us; looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and
despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God.

Consider therefore him that endured such verse, 3,
speaking against of sinners; least ye should be wearied, and faint in your
minds.

Cast not away your confidence, which Heb, 10, 35. 36, 37.
has great recompense of reward: for we have need of patience, that after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise. For yet a very
little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

Be patient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the
husbandman James, 5, 7, 8
waits for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long patience for it,
until he receive both the former and the latter rain. Be ye also patient
therefore, and settle your hearts; for the coming of the Lord draws near.

And the GOD of all grace, which has 1, Pet, 5, 10,
called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have
suffered a little, make you perfect, confirm, strengthen, and stablish you.

For, if we live, we live unto the Lord, Rom, 14, 8,
and if we die, we die unto the Lord; so that whether we live or die, we are
the Lords.

And, none need to fear death, save Socrates,
those which have committed so much wickedness, as after death deserves
damnation.

. 17.
Wherefore, let them that suffer, according 1, Pet, 4, 19,
to the will of God, commit their souls unto him in well doing, as unto a
faithful Creator.

And, let all the troubles that can come Pet. Lomb.
upon thee for thy good conversation in Christ, be borne with boldness;
comforted with confidence; and vnder-propped with patience.

For, the necessary patience of him that Ecclus, 20, 31
follows the Lord, is better then he that governs his life without the
Lord.

And, our light affliction, which is but for 2. Cor. 4. 17.
a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight of glory;
while we look not on the things that are seen, but the things which are not
seen.

For, the things that are seen, are temporal; verse, 18,
but the things which are not seen, are eternal.

For, we are saved by hope: but hope Romans 8. 24. 25.
that is seen, is no hope: for how can a man hope for that which he sees?
But if we hope for that we see not, we do with patience abide for it.

Likewise, the Spirit [of God] also helps Rom, 8, 26.
our infirmities: for, we know not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it
self makes request for us with sighs, which cannot be expressed.

But he that searches the hearts, knows verse. 27.
what is the meaning of the Spirit: for he makes request for the Saints,
according to the will of God.

Also we know, that all things work verse, 28.
together for the best unto them that love GOD.

And I count, (says the Apostle) that the Rom, 8, 18,
afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory, which shall be
showed unto us.

Neither may the many years of this World, be any way comparable unto the
length of days in the life to come. * For, Eccl^s. 18, 9.
as drops of rain are unto the Sea, and as a gravel stone is in comparison of
the Sand, so are a thousand years to the days everlasting.

Of the manifold blessings and favors of Almighty God, extended unto the
godly here in this life: with the promises of their everlasting felicity in
the World to come.
PROVERBS. 21. verse. 21. He that follows after righteousness and mercy,
shall find life, righteousness, and glory.. 1.
BLessed is the man, (says David) that Psalm. 1. 1. 2.
does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sinners;
nor sit in the seat of the scornful: But has his delight in the law of the
Lord, and in that law does exercise himself both day and night.

For, he shall be like a tree planted by the verse, 3,
waters side, which will bring forth her fruit in due season; whose leaf
shall not wither, or fade away: and look what-soeuer he does, it shall
prosper.

Blessed, (says Jeremy,) is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope
is the Iere. 17. 7.
Lord himself. For, he shall be as a tree planted by the water, which
spreads out her roots by the river, and shall not feel verse, 8,
when the heat comes; but her leaf shall be green, and shall not care for
the year of drought; neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

Yea,] blessed is the man, (says Sirach,) Ecclus, 14, 21
that does meditate honest things by wisdom, and exercises himself in
justice, and reasons of holy things by his understanding:

Which considers in his heart the ways verse, 22. 23.
of Wisdom, and understands her secrets; and goes after her, and
continues in her ways.

For,] he shall look in at her windows, Ecclus. 14. 24 25,
and harken at her doors; he shall abide beside her house, and shall fasten a
stake in her walls.

He shall pitche his tent nie unto her verse, 26. 27.
hand; and in his lodging shall good things rest for evermore. He shall set
his children under her covering, and he shall dwell under her branches. By her
he shall be defended from the heat; and in her glory shall he rest.

For, life is in the way of righteousness, Prou, 12, 28
and in that pathway there is no death.

. 2.
Blessed [therefore] is the man, that fears Psalm. 112. 1.
the Lord, and delights greatly in his commandments.

Yea,] blessed is he that makes the Lord Psalm, 40, 4,
his trust: and regards not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.

For,] his seed shall be mighty upon earth, Psa. 112. 2, 3
and his generation shall be blessed. Riches and treasures shall be in his
house: and his righteousness shall endure for ever.

Though he fall, he shall not be cast off, Psalm. 37. 24,
for the Lord puts under his hand.

Surely, he shall never be moved, but Psalm. 112. 6.
shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

For, the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes Psalm. 37. 28.
not his Saints: they shall be preserved for euer-more.

. 3.
If, (says the Almighty unto Israel) ye Leuit. 26. 3. 4. 5.
walk in mine ordinances, and keep my commandments, and do them; I will
then send you rain in due season, and the Land shall yield her increase; and
the trees of the field shall give their fruit: and your threshing shall reach
unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and you
shall eat your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in your land safely.

For, I will have respect unto you, and Leuit, 26, 9,
make you increase, and multiply you, and establish my covenant [or promise]
with you.

Also, I will walk among you: and I will Leuit. 26. 12
be your God, and ye shall be my people.

. 4.
Yea,] all these [following] blessings, (o Deuteronomy. 28. 2.
Israel, says Moises,) shall come upon thee, and ouer-take thee, if thou shall
obey the voice of the Lord thy God.

Blessed shall thou be in the City, and verse, 3, 4,
blessed also in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the
fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle, the increase of thy Kine,
and the flocks of thy sheep.

Blessed shall be thy basket and thy dough. verse 5, 6,
Blessed shall thou be, when thou come in, and blessed also when thou go
out.

. 5.
The Lord [likewise,] shall cause thine Deu. 28. 7.
enemies that rise against thee, to fall before thy face: they shall come out
against thee one way, and shall flee before thee seven ways.

The Lord shall command the blessing to be with thee in thy storehouses, and
in Deuteronomy, 28, 8.
all that thou set thine hand unto, and will bless thee in the Land which
he gives thee.

The Lord shall make thee an holy people verse, 9,
unto himself, as he has sworn unto thee; if thou shall keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways.

Then all people of the earth shall see that verse, 10,
the Name of the Lord is called upon over thee; and they shall be afraid of
thee.

And the Lord shall make thee plenteous Deuteronomy, 28, 11
in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in
the fruit of thy ground; in the land which the Lord swear unto thy fathers to
give thee.

The Lord shall open unto thee his good verse, 12.
treasure, even the heaven to give rain to thy land in due season, and to
bless all the work of thine hands: and thou shall lend unto many Nations, but
shall not borrow thy self.

. 6.
With all these here rehearsed; and sundry other benefits, both corporal
and spiritual, did the Lord God (as we read,) promise to bless his then
peculiar people, the children of Israel, if they would faithfully believe in
him, and diligently endeavor to live uprightly in all their doings, according
to the meaning of his commandments.

By which protestation made unto them, we may very well be drawn undoubtedly
to believe, that he (whose power in time past; was sufficiently able, to
perform so many favors, to one special Nation that served him,) is now, as
well able as ever he was, not only to extend the like mercy to one Nation
alone, (because he is for ever the self same God,) but also to every Nation
under the sun, where soever his Name is called upon: and, to every private man,
(in what Province soever) that truly trusts in him; and unfeignedly frames
all his actions and will, according to his holy word.

For, what necessary benefit is it, (says Vincentius.
Vincentius,) that the Lord our God will deny to grant, unto any one of us
when we pray, if we religiously live after the rule of his law, and sincerely
seek to serve him, in the way of truth and righteousness?

Or, who is he that will harm you, (says 1. Pet, 3, 13.
S. Peter,) if ye follow that which is good?

. 7.
Blessed [therfore] is the man that finds Prou, 3, 13, 14.
wisdom, and the man that gets understanding: for, the merchandise
thereof, is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof, is
better then gold.

It is more precious then pearls, and all verse, 15,
things that thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her.

Length of days is in her right hand, and Prou. 3, 16.
in her left riches and glory.

Her ways are ways of pleasure, and all verse, 17, 18,
her paths prosperity. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her;
and blessed is the man that retains her.

. 8.
The word of GOD most high, is the Ecclus, 1, 5,
fountain of Wisdom, and the everlasting commandments are the entrance
unto her.

Wherefore,] if thou desire Wisdom, Ecclus, 1, 31,
keep the commandments, and the Lord God shall give her unto thee.

And she shall instruct and teach thee in Hermes.
the true path of his precepts, and lead thee the right way to life
everlasting.

By her, thou shall possess a peaceable Constantius.
and pleasant life: and through her, thou shall attain unto a happy end.

For, he that finds her, finds life, and Prou, 28, 34, 35,
shall obtain favor of the Lord: but he that sins against her, hurts
his own soul: and all that hate her, love death.

. 9.
If thou follow after righteousness, (says Ecclus, 27, 8,
Sirach,) thou shall get her, and put her on as a fair garment, and shall
dwell with her, and she shall defend thee for ever: and in the day of
knowledge, thou shall find stedfastnes.

Yea,] if thou call after knowledge, and Prou, 2, 3, 4, 5,
cryest for understanding: if thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her
as for treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find
the knowledge of God.

Then shall thou understand righteousness, Prou, 2, 9,
and judgment, and equity, and every good path.

. 10.
When wisdom (^aith Solomon) enters Prou, 2, 10, 11, 12, 13,
into thy heart, and knowledge delights thy soul, then shall counsel
preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee; and deliver thee from the
evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things: and from them that
leave the ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness.

It shall [likewise] deliver thee from the Prou. 2, 16, 17,
strange woman, even from the stranger that flattereth with her words. Which
forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God.

Thou shall [also] walk safely by thy Prou, 3, 23,
way, and thy foot shall not stumble.

If thou sleep, thou shall not be afraid, verse, 24,
and when-soeuer thou sleep, thy sleep shall be sweet.

Thou shall not fear for any sudden Prou, 3, 25.
fear: neither for the destruction of the wicked, when it comes.

For, the Lord shall be for thine assurance, verse, 26,
and he shall preserve thy foot from taking.

. 11.
Surely, he will deliver thee from the snare Psalm, 91, 3,
of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence.

He will cover thee under his wings, and verse, 4.
thou shall be safe under his feathers: his truth shall be thy shield and
buckler.

Thou shall not be afraid of the fear of verse, 5, 6,
the night, nor of the arrovve that flies by day: Nor of the pessilence that
walks in the darkness: nor of the plague that destroys at noone day.

A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten Psalm, 91, 7,
thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come near thee.

In famine, he shall deliver thee from Job, 5, 20, 21.
death, and in battle, from the power of the sword. Thou shall be hid from the
scourge of the tongue, and thou shall not be afraid of destruction when it
comes.

But thou shall laugh at destruction and Job, 5, 22, 23,
dearth, and shall not be afraid of the beasts of the earth. For, the stones of
the field shall be in league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall be
at peace with thee.

And thou shall know, that peace shall Job, 5, 24,
be in thy Tabernacle, and thou shall visit thine habitation, and shall not
sin.

There shall none evil come near thee, Psalm, 91, 10,
neither shall any plague come nie unto thy dwelling.

For, the Lord shall give his Angels charge verse, 11,
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.

And they shall bear thee in their hands, verse, 12,
that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone.

Thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Psalm, 91, 13.
Aspe: and the young Lion and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet.

Also;] when thou eatest the labors of Psalm. 128. 2.
thine hands thou shall be blessed, and it shall be well with thee.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful Vine verse, 3,
on the sides of thy house; and thy children like the Olive plants round about
thy table.

Thou shall perceive also, that thy seed Job, 5, 25,
shall be great, and thy posterity as the grass of the earth.

And, thou shall go to thy grave in a full verse, 26.
age; as a rick of corn which comes into the barn in due season.

Lo, thus have we enquired of it, and Job. 5, 27.
so it is.

Surely, thus shall the man be blessed that Psalm, 128, 4,
fears the Lord.

For, the Lord will bless the righteous; Psalm. 5. 12.
and with favor will compass him, as with a shield.

The wicked shall see the same and be angry: Psalm, 112. 10
he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away.

. 12.
Fear the Lord [therefore] ye that be Psalm. 34, 9.
his Saints: for nothing wants to them that fear him.

The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, Psalm, 34, 10.
but they that seek the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good.

Neither shall any evil happen unto the Ecclus. 33. 1.
man that fears him: but when he is in tentation, the Lord will deliver him,
and keep him from harm.

For, his eyes are over the righteous, and 1, Pet, 3, 12,
his ears are open unto their prayers.

He knows the days of upright men, Psalm, 37, 18,
and their inheritance shall be perpetual.

. 13.
He [also,] preserves the state of the Prou, 2, 7,
righteous, and is a shield to them that walk uprightly.

They shall not be confounded in the Psalm, 37, 19,
perrillous time: and in the days of famine they shall have enough.

For, his eye is upon them that fear him, Psalm, 33, 18, 19,
and upon them that trust in his mercy: to deliver their souls from death, and
to preserve them in the time of dearth.

Yea,] his eyes have respect unto them Ecclus. 34, 16
that love him: he is their mighty protection, and strong ground, a defense
from the heat, and a shadow for the noone day, a succor from stumbling, and a
help from falling.

. 14.
They that put their trust in him, shall Psalm. 125. 1.
be even as the mount Sion, which cannot be removed; but remains steadfast for
ever.

They shall flourish like a Palm tree, and Psalm. 92. 12.
shall spread abroad like a Cedar in Lebanon.

They shall inherit the land, and dwell Psalm, 37, 29,
therein for ever.

They shall still bring forth fruit in their Psalm, 92. 14.
age; and shall be fat and flourishing.

. 15.
The man that serves him, shall be accepted Ecclus, 35, 16
with favor, and his prayer shall reach unto the clouds.

His prayer shall pierce through the Mart. Bucer.
clouds; and prevail mightily in the presence of his Maker.

That which a wicked man fears, shall Prou, 10, 24
come upon him, but GOD will grant the desire of the godly.

For,] a good man gets favor of the Prou, 12, 2,
Lord, but a man of wicked imaginations will the Almighty condemn.

He respects not the speech of ungodly John, 9. 31,
persons, when they pray unto him: but if any man be a worshipper of him, and
obedient unto his will, him he will hear.

For, as he himself is all goodness, so loves Plato.
he all those that love goodness: and as he can have no evil in himself, so
can he not away with the workers of iniquity.

. 16.
They that trust in the Lord, shall understand Wisd. 3. 9.
the truth, and the faithful shall remain with him in love; for grace and
mercy is among his Saints, and he regards his elect.

His secret is revealed to them that fear Psalm. 25. 14,
him, and his covenant to give them understanding.

He is euer-more mindful of those men, Theophilact,
that make his Word the guide unto their ways; and never cease to succor
his servants which (through faith and confidence) continually cleave unto him.

For, he always loves them that love his Lyra.
law, and bestows many benefits on the man that makes his commandments
his daily meditation.

. 17.
He highly regards every one that believes Origin.
in him; and will in time perform what-soeuer he has promised unto the
faithful.

He will most certainly grant unto the Euagoras.
godly, all things that are needful for their life present.

And, at his pleasure, he will make the Virgilius.
penitent to rejoice greatly in his love and mercy.

He will [also] be favorable to the righteous, Eugenius.
in the time of their affliction.

And be ready to hear the cry of the confident Hilarious.
when-soeuer they call upon him.

Yea; before they call, he will answer; Esaias. 65. 24.
and whiles they speak, [or whiles they are thinking what to speake] he will
hear them.

By all which former speeches, most plainly (according to the saying of the
Psalmist) it appears, That * they which Psalm, 119. 165.
love the law of the Lord, shall have great prosperity; and shall have no
hurt.

That they which obey and serve him, Job. 36. 11.
shall end their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

And, that the man that is faithful, shall Prou. 28. 20
abound in blessings.

. 18.
Taste ye [then] and see, how gracious Psalm. 34, 8.
the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in him.

Yea,] blessed is the man, whose strength Psalm. 84. 5,
is in the Lord, and in whose heart are the vvayes of God.

Blessed is every one that fears the Psalm, 128, 1.
Lord, and walks in his ways.

For, to them that think on good things, Prou. 14. 22.
shall be mercy and truth.

And, as many as in this world, endeavor Phil. Mel.
to live uprightly, shall after death, be received of God into everlasting
glory.

. 19.
A book of remembrance, (says Malachie,) Mala. 3. 16.
is written before the Lord, for all them that fear him, and that think upon
his Name.

Many sorrows shall come unto the ungodly; Psalm, 32, 10,
but he that trusts in the Lord, shall be compassed with mercy.

He will honor them that honor him: 1. Sam, 2, 30
but whosoever despises him, shall of him be despised.

He has always a special respect unto Pet. Lomb.
the godly: and will never suffer any that serve him, to want their reward.

For, the righteous Lord, loves righteousness, Psalm, 11, 7,
his countenance does behold the just.

VVhen] they cry, he hears them; and Psalm, 34, 17,
delivers them out of all their troubles.

So that their hope shall never come to Gregory.
confusion; but prosper, even in the time of perrill; and lay sure hold on
heaven, as the cheifest harbor of their perfect happiness.

. 20.
He that walks in justice, (says Esaias,) Esaias, 33, 15,
and speaks righteous things, refusing gain of oppression, shaking his
hands from taking of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and
shutting his eyes from seeing evil:

He shall dwell on hie: his defense shall verse, 16.
be the munitions of Rocks; bread shall be given him; and his waters shall be
sure.

He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, Psalm, 24, 5,
and righteousness from the God of his salvation.

For, the Lord preserves all them that Psalm, 145. 20
love him.

He delights in them that fear him. Psalm. 147. 11


He cares for all those that have confidence 1. Pet. 5. 7,
in him.

And no good thing will he withold Psalm, 84, 11
from them that walk uprightly.

. 21.
He that walks in his integrity, is just, Prou, 20. 7,
(says Solomon,) and blessed shall his children be after him.

The path of the righteous, is to decline Prou, 16, 17
from evil; and he keeps his soul that keeps his way.

The way of the wicked is abomination Prou. 15. 9,
unto the Lord: but he loves him that follows righteousness.

And, better is the poor that walks in Prou. 28, 6.
his vprightnes, then he that peruerteth his ways, though he be rich.

For, there can be no greater gain, then Bullenger.
the good that comes by godliness; nor any sweeter comfort, then the inward
solace of an unpolluted soul.

. 22.
The way of the righteous shines as the Prou. 4. 18,
light: which shines more and more, unto the perfect day.

And, unto them arises light in darkness. Psalm. 112, 4,


Through his religious knowledge and Pacuuius.
understanding, the godly man shall diverse ways be helpful to others: and by
his own virtues, he shall be able to withstand many vices.

For, the righteousness of an upright man, Prou, 11, 5,
orders his way.

It preserves him in his life. * And causes Prou. 13. 6 Prou, 14, 32
him to have hope in his death.

It [also] delivers from death. Prou, 11, 4,


And defends the faithful from eternal Pet. Mar.
destruction.

For, he that walks [or continues to Prou, 28, 18
the end] in his vprightnes, shall be saved.

And there is no confusion unto them Dan, 3, 40,
that put their trust in God.

. 23.
Doubtless, (says Marlorate,) diverse are Marlorate.
the favors, and many the mercies, which almighty GOD shows unto the godly
here in this life: but most unspeakable are the sundry consolations, which
through faith they feel in conscience, at the very hour of their death.

Mark (as David says) the upright man, Psalm. 37, 37
and behold the just: for the end of that man is peace.

And the last hour of his life, is the first Cyrill.
hour of his souls entrance into endless felicity.

. 24.
Thus much (in effect,) Balaam the lucrelouing Prophet, could confess to be
true (unto the comfort of other men, though he himself walked in the way of
wickedness;) when he said: * Oh that my soul Number, 23, 10
might die the death of the righteous: and that my last end might be like his.

For, as many as in this life, believe in Christ, and keep his doctrine, *
they shall John, 8, 51.
never see death.

Nor come into condemnation: but have John, 5, 24,
[euen as it were alreadie] passed from death unto life.

They find by experience, that the true service of GOD, gives inward
testimony Mar. Bucer.
of eternal salvation unto their souls: vvhere-vnto all worldly wealth is not
worthy to be compared: and that the peace of conscience, excels al earthly
possessions.

Death unto them, is no death; but rather Erasmus.
a long-desired releasement from their many molestations in this life: and a
most pleasant passage into the Paradise of GOD. Where, with a number, more
then may be numbered, of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and holy
Martyrs, they shall be made partakers of euer-during happiness: and continue
always in the company of Christ Jesus, their most merciful Protector.

Wherefore, if thou desire to prosper in Origin.
thy life, and to speed well at thy death, bestow thy study in the law of
the Lord, and practice to please him according to his precepts.

For, it is a pleasure full of profit, and a solace Plotinus.
void of all sorrow, for a man to give his mind to godly meditation.

. 25.
Light, (says the Psalmist) is sown for Psalm. 97, 11
the righteous; and joy for the upright in heart.

To every man that does good, shall be Romans 2. 10.
glory, and honor, and peace.

And to the righteous, God will recompense Prou. 13, 21
good.

For, GOD greatly esteems virtuous Socrates.
people, though in this world they be little set by.

For them, are good things created from Ecclus, 39, 25
the beginning; and evil things for the wicked.

For them, is everlasting rest and glory 2. Esdr, 8, 59
made ready: but thirst and pain is [long since] prepared of God for the
ungodly.

Yea, the Lord himself has promised, 2. Esdr. 8. 39.
that he will rejoice in the ways of the righteous; and that he will remember
the pilgrimage, the salvation, and the revvard that they shall have.

(For, glorious is the fruit of good labors; Wisd. 3, 15,
and the root of wisdom shall never fade away.)

. 26.
Their first felicity after this life, is the Just. Mar.
sweet rest and quiet peace that their souls possess in Christ. But the
second, shall be the immortality and glory, both of their body and soul
together, at the day of general judgment: when, with triumphant joy, they
shall (in the sight of all their enemies) receive openly their portion, in the
kingdom of perpetual blessedness.

For, they shall live for ever: their reward Wisd. 5. 15.
also is with the Lord, and the most High has care of them.

Therefore shall they receive a glorious verse, 16.
kingdom, and a beautiful crown at the Lords hand: for with his right hand
shall he cover them, and with his arm shall he defend them.

Their recompense or reward, consists Constantiu^.
not only in Gods grace and favor toward them during this life; but also in
his most merciful receiving them into eternal felicity: and safe preserving
them, from the danger of damnation, which is the second death of the ungodly.

So that, heaven is not only the seat of Erasmus.
Gods glory, and the habitation of his holy Angels; but it is also the resting
place of the faithful, and the inheritance of all his Saints.

. 27.
The certain truth whereof, is further witnessed unto us, by the words of
Christ himself: where, among many other petitions made unto his Father, both
for himself and the faithful; in the end, he concludes his speech with this
saying: * Father, John, 17, 24
I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I am: that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me.

Also, in another place he says: * If any John, 12, 26,
man serve me, let him follow me: for, where I am, there shall also my
servant be: and who-soeuer serves me, him will my Father honor.

And, what honor received from any Tertullian.
Prince in this world, be it never so great; is worthy any way to be compared,
unto the least honor, which the servant of GOD shall receive from their
Creator in the kingdom of Heaven?

Where life shall not be limited unto Beda.
them by number of months or years: nor their pleasures appointed at certain
times and seasons: but as God himself is without any ending, so shall their
life be everlasting: And, as his power endures perpetually; so shall their
pleasures last continually.

. 28.
For, it is a thing agreeable to reason, that Mar. Aurel.
those men which be good, among so many evils in this life, should be greatly
honored with God, after their death.

And, assuredly it is to be believed, that Plato.
all they which in this world follow virtue, and live more godly then other
men, shall (after their soul is by the stroke of death departed from their
body) ascend up into a purer life; and dwell for ever in the presence of God.

Happy therefore are the righteous: yea, Gueuara.
double happy are the righteous. First, for that they shall in this life, be
blessed in their labors from GOD, with abundance of all things necessary for
them. Secondly, for that they shall be made partakers of Gods endless glory,
in the world to come.

. 29.
Where, among many other favors and inestimable delights, from the Maker
Hemingius.
of all things granted unto them; they shall be permitted, daily to behold, the
beauty of all beauties most to be rejoiced in: namely, the unmeasurable
majesty and amiable countenance of Almighty GOD, their Creator, Father, and
Preserver.

According to that sentence of our Savior in the Gospel, where he says: *
Blessed Math. 5. 8.
are the pure [or vpright] in heart; for they shall see GOD.

Not as we see now; for now we see 1. Cor. 12. 13.
through a glass darkly: but then shall we see face to face. Now we know
in part, but then shall we know, even as we are known.

. 30.
Then [also] shall the just men shine as Math. 13. 43
the Sun in the kingdom of their Father.

And they that [in this world] turn many Dan, 12, 3,
to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

They shall sit also with Christ himself Math. 19. 28
in his kingdom, upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

Yea,] they shall judge the Nations, and Wisd. 3, 8,
have dominion over the people: and their Lord shall reign for euer-more.

. 31.
Then shall the righteous stand in great Wisd. 5. 1.
boldness, before the face of such as have dealt extremely with them, and
taken away their labors.

And when the ungodly see them, they verse, 2,
shall be vexed with horrible fear, and shall stand amazed at their wonderful
deliverance.

And, changing then their minds, and verse, 3,
sighing through inward grief, they shall say within themselves: These are
they whom we some-time had in derision and iested upon.

We fools, thought their life to be Wisd, 5, 4,
madness, and their end to be without honor.

But lo, how they are counted among verse, 5,
the children of God, and their portion is among the Saints!

. 32.
Then, (as Anselmus says,) shall all the Anselmus.
whole company or number of the righteous, receive fully their reward together
from GOD; and they shall every one of them be blessed of him, with sundry
blessings both in body and soul.

They shall first and foremost, be blessed The several blessings that the
bodies of the faithful shall receive in the kingdom of heaven. According to
the saying of Anselmus.
in body, with such wonderful beauty, that they shall every way be equal to
the Sun in brightness and glory.

Secondly, they shall be endued with such agilitie or quicknes, that they shall
be like unto the Angels of GOD, in their speedy moving.

Thirdly, their fortitude shall be so sufficient, that no creature what-soeuer,
shall be able to withstand their strength.

Fourthly, their liberty shall be so free and secure; that nothing shall have
any power either to hinder or resist them.

Fifthly, they shall possess perfect health, without any manner of grief, or
infirmity.

Sixthly, they shall be thoroughly filled with an ineffable delight: and wholy
replenished, with an unspeakable abundance of inestimable joy. Yea, every
part and member of them, shall be filled with such wonderful sense and feeling
of incomparable pleasure and delight, that the whole man shall quaffe of the
river of Gods pleasure, and be made drunk with the plenty of joy which he
shall have in the House of the Lord.

Seauenthly, they shall be blessed with such length and perpetuity of life, as
shall never receive any end: but continue always in eternal joy and pleasure:
and endure therein even with GOD himself, so long as his life and power
lasts; which can never come to conclusion, nor at any time be diminished.

. 33.
And, as concerning the souls of the The several beatitudes of glorified
souls in the kingdom of God. According to the saving of Anselmus.
righteous, they shall then also, be enriched with as many favors from GOD as
each glorified body has. The first beatitude which shall be given them, is
perfect wisdom: for, there the soul of every simple Swain, shall possess
more knowledge and understanding, then ever did all the Philosophers or
greatest Clerks in this life.

The second beatitude or blessedness of the soul, shall be the true amity,
and unfeigned friendship of one righteous person to another, as members all of
one body, whose head is Christ Jesus the Lord. And in that blessed society,
shall never be any envy, hatred, or discord: but even as long and as well, as
any man in that kingdom does love himself, so long, and so well, shall he
love every one else, that rests in the same fellowship with him.

Their third beatitude, shall be the concord or agreement which then shall rest
between the body and the soul of every Saint that disagreed in this life; for
they shall then be at peace and unity: the body shall will as the soul
wills, and the soul shall desire as the body desires: so that in all points
there shall be perfect agreement between them. Besides, this concord shall not
only rest between the body and soul of every particular Saint, but also
between the whole congregation of the godly; for they shall will no
contrarieties, but all shall will as one wills, and one shall will as all
wills.

Their fourth beatitude, shall be honor: for, almighty GOD shall then fully
deliver all his Saints from the filthy ulcers of sin, many miseries, and
infinite infirmities and passions, whereunto the corruption of the flesh made
them in this world daily subject. He shall heal them, and restore them to
perfect health; and most mercifully adorn them, with the ornament of absolute
righteousness and immortality. He shall adopt them for his sons and children,
and shall make them inheritours of his heavenly kingdom, and coheires with his
best beloved and only begotten son Christ Jesus.

Their fifth beatitude, shall be power: for the righteous shall then be able to
do what they will: because they shall have the Creator of heaven and earth,
agreeable in all things to what-soeuer they desire.

Their sixth beatitude, shall be security: that is, they shall not only have
power to do what they will, and to enjoy what pleasure soever their heart
desires; but they shall also be without any fear or doubt of ever losing the
same: seeing God which is the giver thereof, will never alter his mind, nor
change his first determination.

Their seventh and last beatitude, shall be absolute or perfect joy: such as
no pen can express, nor any mortal heart be able to comprehend. For, there
shall be thousands of thousands, and more then ten thousand hundred of
thousands of the righteous, whom no tongue can number, which shall all enjoy
this heavenly happiness; and joy altogether in the same blessedness. And every
one of this blessed company, shall as much rejoice and give thanks unto GOD
for the felicity of others, as for himself.

They shall also above all this, [as has partly before by another Author
been expressed,] rejoice with an admirable joy at the only sight of almighty
GOD, in whose presence they shall continually abide, and whose glory they shall
always behold. They shall delight in him, more then in themselves: and they
shall for ever be beloved of him, more then they can love themselves. They
shall abound in all joy, and be filled therewith both within and without: they
shall have joy above them, and joy beneath them, and joy on every side, and
round about them: so that their rejoicing shall be incomparable, and their
felicity without measure or end.

For, as there is no end of Gods greatness, Augustine.
nor number of his wisdom, nor measure of his benignity: so is there neither
end, number, nor measure of his rewards, toward them that love him, and
continue constant in his truth unto the death.

. 34.
Now then, there is no condemnation to Rom, 8, 1.
them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.

For, as many as are led by the Spirit of Rom, 8, 14.
God, they are the sons of God.

And if we be sons, then are we also Rom, 8, 17,
heirs; even the heirs of God; and heirs annexed with Christ.

And shall, with all the righteous and elect of the Lord, (at the day of our
Saviors coming to judgment,) be called to the possession of that kingdom,
which Math, 25, 34
was prepared of God for the godly, from the beginning of the world.

Or, as Saint Paul says; * Before the Ephe, 1, 4,
foundations of the world were laid.

Where, the beloved and chosen of God, Eugenius.
shall never be crossed with any more calamities, nor combred with any more care
or grief: but dwell in everlasting delight, without dread of danger; and
reign in perpetual pleasures, without fear of pain.

Where also, they shall hunger no more, Reave. 7. 16. 17.
neither thirst any more: neither shall the Sun light on them; neither any
heat. For the Lamb [of GOD, Jesus Christ, their Mediator and Redeemer,
which sits in his kingdom of glory in the mids of his throne,] shall
govern them, and shall lead them unto the lively Fountains of waters; and
GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

And they shall see his face; and his Name Reave. 22. 4,
shall be in their foreheads.

And there shall be no more death, neither Reave. 21. 4,
sorrow, neither crying; neither shall there be any more pain: for, the first
things are passed away.

. 35.
Be glad [therefore,] o ye righteous, and Psalm, 32, 11
rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye that are upright in heart.

For, the things which eye has not seen, 1. Cor, 2, 9.
neither ear has heard, neither have entered into the heart of man to conceive,
are, which GOD has prepared for them that love him.

He that is righteous, let him be righteous Reave, 22, 11
still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

And behold, (says Christ,) I come verse, 12,
shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be.

Of the heavy wrath of GOD against the ungodly, here in this life: with his
threatenings, of their eternal torments in the world to come.
PROVERBS. 11. verse. 19. As righteousness leads unto life, so he that
follows evil, seeks his own death.. 1.
FRet not thy self, (says David,) because Psalm, 37, 1,
of the wicked, [or ungodly,] neither be thou envious against the evil
dooers.

For, they shall soon be cut down like verse, 2,
the grass, and shall wither away, as does the green herb.

They are exalted for a little; but shortly Job, 24, 24,
are they gone, and are brought low as all others: they are destroyed and cut
off, even as the top of an ear of corn.

Though they flourish in the world for a Cyprian.
season, yet is their safety in the same, always most uncertain: and, when
they persuade themselves to be farthest from perrill, then comes their
confusion speedily upon them.

They have (as the Prophet affirms,) Psalm. 17, 14,
their portion in this life.

They live for a time in most prosperous Basil.
estate; they enjoy wealth according to their wish, and have children at their
desire: they spend whole months in mirth and banqueting, and fill themselves
with all variety of delights: but at unawares, they end their days in sorrow;
and die without any hope of the felicity to come.

Therefore shall not the wicked be able Psalm, 1, 5, 6,
to stand in judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous: for the
Lord knows the way of the righteous: and the way of the wicked shall perrish.

His own iniquities shall take the wicked Prou, 5, 22, 23.
himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his own sin. He shall
die for fault of instruction, and go astray through his great folly.

Lewd things are in his heart: he imagines Prou, 6, 14, 15,
evil at al times, and raises up contentions. Therefore shall his destruction
come hastily upon him: and he shall be destroyed suddenly, without recovery.

. 2.
As for my self, (says David,) my feet Psalm, 73. 2,
were almost gone, my steps had wel-neere slipped. For, I fretted at the foolish,
when I Psalm, 73, 3,
saw the prosperity of the wicked.

For, there are no bands in their death, verse, 4, 5,
but they are lusty and strong. They come into no misfortune like other folk,
neither are they plagued like other men.

Therefore, pride is as a chain unto the^, verse, 6, 7,
and cruelty covers them as a garment. Their eyes stand out for fatnes: and
they have more then heart can wish.

They trust in their goods, and boast Psalm, 49, 6,
themselves in the multitude of their riches.

They see that wise men die, and also that Psalm, 49, 10, 11,
the ignorant and foolish perrish, and leave their riches for others: Yet they
think, their houses and their habitations shall continue for ever: even from
generation to generation, and call their lands by their names.

Their seed [also,] is established in their Job, 21, 8,
sight with them, and their generation before their eyes.

Their houses are peaceable without verse, 9.
fear, and the rod of God is not upon them.

Their Bullock gendereth, and fails verse, 10,
not: their Cow calueth, and casts not her calfe.

They send forth their children by Job, 21, 11, 12, 13,
flocks, and their sons lead the dance. They bear with them Tabrets and
Harps, and have instruments of music at their pleasure. They spend their
days in welthines, and suddenly they go down to the grave.

They say also unto God, Depart from Job, 21, 14, 15,
us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the Almighty, that
we should serve him? and, what profit should we have, if we should pray unto
him?

They are licentious, and presumptious Psalm, 73, 8, 9,
boasters. They set their mouth against heaven: and their tongue walks
through the earth.

Lo, these are the wicked: yet prosper Psalm, 73, 12,
they in the world, and have riches plentifully in possession.

. 3.
Then thought I, (says the Psalmist) to Psalm, 73, 16, 17,
know this; [or to understand the reason of this matter,] but it was to hard
for me* until I went into the Sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of
these men.

Namely, how the Lord has set them verse, 18,
in slipperie places, and casts them down into desolation.

Oh how suddenly do they consume, Psalm, 37, 19,
perrish, and come to a fearful end!

Even as a dream when one awaketh, so verse, 20.
shall God make their image to vanish out of the City.

. 4.
I my self (says he) have seen the ungodly Psalm. 37. 35, 36,
in great power, and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree. Yet he passed
away, and lo, he was gone; and I sought him, but he could not be found.

Therefore yet a little while, and the wicked Psalm. 37. 10.
shall not appear: and thou shall look after his place, and he shall not be
found.

Doubtless, with thine eyes, shall thou Psalm. 91. 8.
behold and see the reward of the wicked.

For, the Lord hates all them that work Psalm. 5. 5.
iniquity.

And his face is against them that do evil, Psalm, 34, 16,
to cut off their remembrance from the earth.

. 5.
The wicked (says David) practices against Psalm. 37. 12, 13, 14, 15,
the just; and gnasheth upon him with his teeth: but the Lord shall laugh him
to scorn; for he sees that his day is coming. Though he have drawn his
sword, and have bent his bow, to cast down, the poor and needy, and to slay
such as be of upright conversation; yet shall his sword go through his own
heart, and his bow shall be broken.

. 6.
My heart (says the Prophet) shows Psalm, 36, 1.
me the wickedness of the ungodly: that there is no fear of GOD before his
eyes.

For, he flattereth himself in his own verse, 3, 4,
eyes, till his abominable iniquity be found out. The words of his mouth are
unrighteous, and full of deceit: he has left off to understand and to do good.

He imagines mischief upon his bed: Psalm, 36, 5,
he sets himself upon a way, that is not good, and does not abhor to do
evil.

He is so proud that he seeks not for Psalm, 10, 4, 5,
GOD: he thinks always, There is no God. His ways always prosper; and the
judgments of the Lord are hie above his sight: therefore defieth he all his
enemies.

He says in his heart, I shall never be moved, Psalm, 10, 6, 7,
nor be in any danger. His mouth is full of cursing, deceit, and fraud: under
his tongue is misciefe and iniquity.

He sits lurking in the theeuish corners Psalm, 10, 8, 9,
of the streets; and in the secret places does he privily murder the
innocent. His eyes are bent against the poor. He lies in wait secretly:
even as a Lion, so lurketh he in his den, that he may spoil the poor.

And heaps of the^ do fall by his might. Psalm, 10, 10, 11.
He has [also,] said in his heart, Tush, God has forgotten: he hides away
his face, and will never see this.

Notwithstanding: God has seen al his Psalm, 10, 14,
doings. For he [from whose eyes no secret can be hid,] beholds mischief
and wrong: that he may take the matter into his hands.

And, when he makes inquisition for Psalm, 9, 12,
blood, he remembers it; and forgets not the complaint of the poor.

But will recompense the ungodly, according Psalm, 94, 23,
to their ungodliness; and destroy them in their own malice. Yea, the Lord our
God shall destroy them.

For it is a righteous thing with him, to 2, These. 1, 6,
recompense tribulation to them that trouble his servant.

. 7.
And though (as Solomon says,) hand Prou, 11, 21
join in hand, yet shall not the ungodly escape unpunished.

But] his mischief shall return upon his Psalm, 7, 16,
own head; and his cruelty shall fall upon his own pate.

For the right hand of the Lord, shall not 2. Esd. 15. 22
spare the wicked, neither shall the sword cease from them, that shed
innocent blood upon the earth.

. 8.
Know thou not this of old? and since Job, 20, 4, 5.
GOD placed man upon the earth, (says Job,) that the rejoicing of the wicked
is short, and that the joy of hypocrites is but a moment?

Though the excellency of the ungodly Job, 20, 6, 7,
man mount up to the heaven, and his head reach unto the clouds, yet shall he
perrish for ever, like his dung: and they which have seen him, shall say,
Where is he?

He shall flee away as a dream, and they verse, 8,
shall not find him: and shall pass away as a vision of the night.

So that the eye which saw before, shall Job, 20, 9,
have no more sight of him: neither shall his place know him any more.

His children shall be feign to agree with verse, 10. 11.
the poor: and his hands shall restore his substance. His bones are full of
the sin of his youth, and it shall lie down with him in the dust.

. 9.
The riches that he has devoured, he Job, 20. 15, 16, 17.
shall pa^brake again: for God shall draw them out of his belly. He shall suck
the gall of Aspes, and the Vipers tongue shall sley him: So that he shall no
more see the rivers and brooks of honey and butter.

The things that other men have labored verse, 18, 19,
for, he shall restore again: and shall not eat them up. Great travail shall
he make for riches, but he shall not enjoy them. And why? he has oppressed the
poor, and not helped them: houses has he spoiled, and not builded them.

Surely, he shall feel no quietness in his Job, 20, 20, 21. 22,
body: neither shall he reserve of that which he desired. There shall none of
his meat [or substance] be left: therefore none shall hope for his goods. When
he shall be filled with his abundance, he shall be in pain; and the hand of
all the wicked shall assail him.

(According to that sentence of Erasmus, Erasmus.
where he says: It pleases GOD many times, to make one wicked man his
instrument, to plague another for his iniquity.)

He shall be about to fill his belly, but God shall send upon him his fierce
wrath: Job. 20, 23, 24,
and shall cause his indignation to reign over him: so that if he flee from the
iron weapons, he shall be shot with the steel bow.

. 10.
Affliction and anguish shall make him Job, 15, 24,
afraid: they shall prevail against him as a King ready to the battle.

Fearefulnes shall make him afraid on every Job. 18. 11,
side, and shall drive him to his feet.

Though he dwell in desolate Cities, and Job. 15, 28, 29,
in the houses which no man inhabiteth, but are become heaps of stones, yet
shall he not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, or increase upon
the earth.

All darkness, [or, all fear and sorrow,] Job, 20, 26,
shall be hid in his secret places: the fire that is not blown shall devour
him, and that which remains in his Tabernacle, shall be destroyed.

He shall never come out of darkness: Job. 15, 30,
the flame [of Gods anger] shall dry up his branches: and with the blast of
Gods mouth he shall be taken away.

The heaven shall declare his wickedness, Job. 20, 27 28.
and the earth shall rise up against him. The increase [also] of his house shall
pass away: it shall even perrish and be consumed in the day of the Lords wrath.

. 11.
He believes not that he erreth in vanity, Job. 15, 31, 32,
therefore vanity shall be his recompense. He shall perrish before his time
be worn out; and his branch shall not be green.

God shall destroy him, as the Vine does verse, 33,
her sower grape: and shall cast him off, as the Olive does her flower.

His light shall be quenched, and the spark Job, 18, 5, 6.
of his fire shall not burn. The light shall be dark in his dwelling, and his
candle shall be put out with him.

The steps of his strength shall be restrained, verse. 7.
and his own counsel shall cast him down.

For, his feet are taken as it were in a Job. 18. 8. 9.
Net, and he walks upon dangerous snares. The grenne as he goes, shall
catch him by the heel: and ere he is aware, the thief shall come upon him.

. 12.
Hunger shall be his strength, and destruction Job, 18, 12, 13.
shall be ready at his side. It shall devour the inner parts of his skin, and
the first borne of death shall consume his strength.

His hope shall be rooted out of his dwelling; Job. 18. 14.
and shall cause him to go to the King of fear.

Fear shall dwell in his house because it is verse, 15. 16.
not his: and brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation. His roots
shall be dried up beneath, and above, all his branches shall be cut down.

His remembrance shall perrish from the Job. 18. 17, 18,
earth, and he shall have no name in the street. They shall drive him out of
the light unto darkness, and chase him clean out of the world.

He shall neither have son nor Nephew verse. 19.
among his people, nor any posterity left in his dwellings.

. 13.
If his children be in great number, the Job. 27. 14, 15,
sword shall destroy them: and his posterity shall not be satisfied with
bread. His remnant shall be buried in death, and his widows shall not weep.

Though he should heap up silver as verse, 16. 17.
the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay; he may prepare it, but the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.

His confidence also shall be cut off, and Job. 8, 14.
his trust shall be as the house of a Spyder.

He shall lean upon his house, but it shall Job, 8, 15,
not stand: he shall hold fast by it, yet shall it not endure.

He shall see with his eyes, his own destruction Job, 21, 20,
and misery approaching: and he shall be made to drink of the fearful
wrath of the Almighty.

Destruction shall take hold upon him, as Job, 27, 20, 21, 22,
a fierce water flood; and a tempest shall take him away by night. A vehement
Eastwinde shall carry him hence: and a mighty storm shall pluck him out of his
place. It shall rush upon him, and not spare him, though he would feign flee
from the force thereof.

This is the portion that the wicked man Job. 27, 13,
shall have from God, and the heritage that tyrants shall receive of the
Almighty.

For, the most High hates the wicked, Ecclus, 12, 6.
and will repay vengeance unto the ungodly: he also keeps them, against the
day of horrible vengeance.

. 14.
In the hand of the Lord, (says David,) Psalm, 75. 8.
there is a cup, and the wine therein is red; it is full mixed, and he powers
out of the same: Surely, all the wicked of the earth, shall wring out and
drink the dregs thereof.

God shall rain upon them snares, fire, Psalm, 11, 6,
and brimstone, and stormy tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup to
drink.

God shall bring them down, into the pit Psalm. 55. 23,
of corruption: the blood-thirsty and deceitful men, shall not live half
their days.

They shall be even as stubble before the Job, 21. 18.
wind: and as the chafe that the storm carries away.

They shall be as the grass growing upon Psalm, 129, 6,
the house tops, which withers before it comes forth.

And, as the whirle-winde that speedily Prou. 10, 25.
passes, so shall the ungodly be no more.

For, God will take vengeance on his adversaries: Nahu^. 1, 2,
and he reserueth wrath for his enemies.

He will surely wound the head of his Psalm. 68, 21,
enemies: and the hearie pate of him that walks in his sins.

So that the ungodly, shall have the years Prou. 10. 27
of their life diminished.

And all the workers of iniquity shall be Psalm 92. 9.
destroyed.

They shall be destroyed (as the Psalmist Psalm. 92, 7,
says) for ever.

And there shall be no end of plagues to the evil man.

. 15.
VVoe unto them [therfore] that sin, 2, Esdr. 15, 24, 25,
and keep not the commandments of GOD: for, the Lord himself has promised,
that he will not spare them.

VVoe unto them that imagine iniquity, Micah, 2, 1.
and devise wickedness upon their beds: thinking to perform the same when
it is daylight, because their hands have power.

VVoe unto them that join house to Esaias, 5, 8,
house; and lay field to field; till there be no place left by them, for the
poor to dwell in.

VVoe unto them that dravve iniquity Esaias, 5, 18,
with cords of vanity: and sin as with cart ropes.

VVoe unto them that are wise in their Esaias. 5, 21,
own eyes, and prudent in their own sight.

VVoe unto them that are bound with 2. Esd. 16, 68,
their sins, and covered with their iniquities, as a field is hedged in with
bushes, and the path thereof covered with thorns, whereby no man may travail.

VVoe unto them that speak good of Esaias, 5, 20,
evil, and evil of good: which put darkness for light, and light for
darkness: that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sower.

VVoe unto them that excel in gluttony Esaias, 5, 22, 23,
and drunkenness: which justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from them.

For, as the flame of fire deuoureth the Esaias. 5. 24.
stubble, and as the chafe is consumed of the flame, so shall their root be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall vanish away like dust: because they have
cast off the Law of the Lord of hosts, and contemned the word of the holy
one of Israel.

. 16.
There is a way (says Solomon,) which Prou. 14. 12 13.
seems right to a man: but the issues thereof are the ways of death: Even in
laughing the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness.

Doubtless, the Wiseman in this speech of his, means the way of worldly
pleasures. VVhere-into Euagoras.
the wicked being once entered, they are daily so led away with the vain
delights thereof: that they never regard godliness, till the deceits of
iniquity bring them to destruction.

For, the end of all worldly pleasure, is Theophilact.
sorrow and pain.

And, the stipend or revvard of sin, Rom, 6. 23,
is death.

Not the death of the body only, for that Rauisius.
(as all men knows) is natural and ordinary; but the death, both of body and
soul, which is endless and eternal.

. 17.
Through the sundry subtilties of sin, Origin.
and the contempt of Gods law, (says Origin,) many thousands in this world,
pass after death to perpetual perdition.

And, vvho-soeuer refuses to follow Virgilius.
righteousness, shall for his recompense, dwell with confusion.

For, destruction shall be to the workers Prou. 21. 15
of iniquity.

And the man that wandereth out of the Prou, 21, 16
way of wisdom, shall remain in the congregation of the dead.

. 18.
The heart that is obstinate, shall be laden Ecclus, 3. 29.
with sorrows: and the wicked man shall heap sin upon sin.

Because he has refused knowledge, he Hosea. 4. 6.
shall be refused of the Lord.

And, for that he has left the way of understanding Gueuara.
and life: he shall fall into diverse dangers, by the deceits of false doctrine.

For, error and darkness are appointed Ecclus. 11, 16
for sinners.

And they that work wickedness, shall be Ecclus, 27. 27
wrapped in evils.

. 19.
Inquisition, (says the Wiseman) shall be Wisd, 1, 9,
made for the thoughts of the ungodly, and the sound of his words shall come
unto God for the correction of his iniquities.

The wicked deeds which he has done, Bernard.
shall stand up to declare against him: and the reward of his unrighteousness,
shall be powered upon him.

His unquiet conscience shall be his chiefest Pet. Lomb.
accuser: and the sin of his own impiety, shall be most forward to convict
him.

. 20.
The ungodly shall be punished according Wisd. 3. 10.
to their imaginations for they have despised the righteous, and forsaken the
Lord.

They have thought evil in their hearts Wisd, 2, 21. 22.
against the godly, and have gone astray through their own folly: for their
own wickedness has blinded them: and they do not understand the mysteries
of God, neither hope they for the reward of righteousness: nor can discern the
honor of the souls that are faultlesse.

The way that they walk, is as the darkness: Prou. 4. 19,
they know not wherein they shall fall.

They meet with darkness, even in the Job. 5. 14.
day time: and grope at noone day, as in the night.

The hope that they have, is indignation. Prou. 11, 23 Prou, 13. 21 Psalm. 112.
10
* Affliction does follow them. * And their desire shall perrish.

Their hope is a false hope. Like unto the hope of * Siseras mother: who
pleasantly Judges. 5. 28 29. 30.
persuaded herself, that her Son was gorgiously attyred in roabes of needle
work; and very busy (after the battle) in dividing the spoils of Israel;
when he lay sencelesly sleeping in * Iaels tent, with Judges. 4. 21
a nail driven through his forehead.

Or, like the hope of Haman: * Who Ester* 6, 6, 7. 8. 9. etc.
proudly thought in his heart, that King Ahashuerosh would do honor to no man,
more then to him: when contrariwise, all the glory which he wished unto
himself, he was commanded to show unto Mordeca^; (the man, whom above all men
else he most hated,) and * the evil death, which he Ester. 7, 10.
prepared for the same man, was his own latter ending.

. 21.
All iniquity, (says Sirach) is as a double Ecclus. 21. 3.
edged sword, the wounds whereof cannot be healed.

Dishonor, shame, evil death, and damnation, Pa^^^ius.
wait upon pride, envy, murder, and such other like vices.

And, the match that kindles against Cicero.
ungodly people the fierce wrath of God, is their own wilful persisting in
sin and iniquity.

For, as their hearts wexe harder and harder, Arnobius.
through their custom in sinning, and daily more and more impenitent, so they
hourly heap up displeasure unto themselves, against the day of Gods wrath,
and the terrible appearing of his just judgment.

. 22.
Oh how unhappy then are the lives of Constantius.
all those men, that leave virtue to follow vice; and forsake wisdom, to
embrace wickedness!

For they thereby make their minds unapt Plotinu^.
to receive any goodness, and clog their consciences with many molestations.

They live always doubtful of their own Pet. Lomb.
safety in the day time: and their sleep is unquiet, and full of fears in
the night.

The morning is even to them, as the Job. 24. 17.
shadow of death.

And they buy hell, dearer then good Gregory.
men buy heaven.

. 23.
They are ready to flee, when none pursues Prou. 28, 1.
them.

And are very often dreading, that some P^t. Mart.
deserved danger will suddenly fall upon them.

The reason is, for that all wickedness in it Orosius.
self is full of fear.

And the conscience that is touched, does Wisd. 17, 10
always forecast cruel things.

For, there can be no greater trouble to Tremelius.
the ungodly in this life, then the inward vexations of their own guilty
conscience.

The testimony whereof, is as a thousand Marlorate.
witnesses against them: and the doom of it, is everlasting damnation.

Insomuch, that the consciences of the Mart. Bucer*
wicked, which are wounded and ouer-burdened with the weight of sin, do most
certainly feel, even in this world, part of hell torments.

And, many times the sting or gnawing Erasmus*
worm thereof, enforces the miserable offender, clean to remove all his
confidence from the comfort of Gods mercy, and wretchedly to end his days in
anguish and desperation.

For, salvation is far from the ungodly, Psalm. 119. 155,
because they seek not the statutes of the Almighty.

But ceaselesse sorrows, and perpetual Cyprian.
pains continually do attend them: as a just reward ordained of GOD for
their love of unrighteousness, and careless neglecting the knowledge of his
ways.

For, they that plow iniquity, and sow Job. 4. 8.
wickedness, shall reap the same.

And such as forsake the Lord, shall be Esaias. 1. 28.
consumed.

. 24.
These few, and many more such like speeches (to express the wrath of God
against the wicked) are set down, not only in the sacred Scriptures, but also
in the works of diverse worthy Writers: which being rightly considered, we may
well be moved at the remembrance thereof, to say with Origin: * Far better
were it for the ungodly, Origin.
that they had never been at all, then to be borne into the world, and not
live as they should do.

For, besides all the former places to this purpose already recited, we find
it further (to the terror of the unrighteous) by several sentences affirmed: *
That the ungodly Wisd. 14. 9.
man, and his ungodliness, are both alike hated of God.

And that a wicked man's life is his souls Chrysostom.
death.

That, he that commits sin, is of 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
the devil.

And the vengeance belonging to the Ecclus. 7. 17.
unrighteous, is fire and worms.

That, he which works wickedness, Ecclus. 27. 27
shall be wrapped in evils, and shall not know from whence they come unto him.

That, malice shall sley the ungodly man, Psalm. 34. 21.
and they that hate the righteous, shall perrish.

That, the congregation of the wicked, Ecclus. 21. 9.
is like towe wrapped together, and their end is a flame of sire to destroy
them.

That, the transgression of a wicked man, Prou. 29. 6.
is his snare.

And he that sows iniquity, shall reap Prou. 22. 8.
affliction.

That, he which diggeth a pit, shall fall Ecclus. 27. 26
therein: and he that lays a snare for another, shall be taken in it himself.

That, the way of the ungodly, is made Ecclus. 21, 10
plain with stones: but at the end thereof, is hell, darkness, and pains.

That, as the dry ground and heat consume Job. 24. 19,
the snow waters, so shall the grave the sinners.

That, when the ungodly man dies his Prou. 11. 7.
hope perrisheth, and the confidence of the wicked shall come to naught.

That, although men mourn for their Eccus. 41. 11.
body, yet shall the wicked name of the ungodly be put out.

That, their portion shall be cursed in the Job. 24. 18.
earth.

Their name shall rotte. Prou. 10, 7. Job. 8. 22. Prou. 24. 22 Prou. 14, 11
Job, 24. 20.


Their dwelling places shall not remain.

Their destruction shall come suddenly.

Their houses shall be destroyed.

And they themselves shall be no more remembered.

That, he that is wicked, shall fall in his Prou. 11. 5.
own wickedness.

And he that transgresses, shall be taken Prou. 11, 6.
in the sin of his transgression.

That, the curse of God, is in the habitation Prou, 3, 33.
of the ungodly.

And the unrighteous man's substance Ecclus, 40, 13
shall be dried up like a river.

That, wicked men, wanting the fear of Boethius.
GOD, are hunted of evil, to their own overthrow and destruction.

That, as unto the good, their goodness Hermes.
is a reward, so unto the wicked their own evil is a punishment.

That, the eyes of the wicked shall fail, Job, 11, 20,
their refuge shall perrish, and their hope shall be sorrow of mind.

That, such as seek to get wealth by any Plato.
wicked means, shall possess therewith more unquietness then profit: and the
substance that by sin is attained, shall by some misfortune be consumed.

That, the robbery of the unrighteous Prou. 21, 7,
shall destroy them.

And the riches of the ungodly, are laid Prou, 13, 22,
up for th(...)st.

That, ^^e Lord will be a swift witness Mala, 3, 5,
against the Southsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that wrongfully keep back the hyrelings wages,
and vex the widow, and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear
not to offend him.

That, the ungodly are kept unto the day Job, 20, 30,
of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.

That, for unrighteousness, and other mischievous Socrates.
deeds, the souls of the ungodly shall (after this life) be grievously
tormented in hell.

That, when the ungodly shall say, Peace, 1, These, 5, 3,
and safety: then shall come upon them sudden destruction; as the travail
upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape.

That, the wicked have no gain by the Cyprian.
death of Christ, but all the benefits (coming to mankind by his Passion,)
which they have despised: do most justly condemn them.

That, outwardly they receive the Sacrament Augustine.
of Christ's body and blood, but the thing it self, inwardly in their hearts,
they have not: and therefore they eat and drink thevr own judgment.

That, the wicked, [by reason of their unquiet Esaias, 57, 20,
conscience which always tormenteth them,] are like the raging Sea, that
cannot rest: whose waters cast up mire and dyrt.

And the Lord himself has said it, that Esaias. 48, 22,
there is no peace to the ungodly person.

That, the Lord has made all things for Prou, 16, 4,
his own sake: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.

And as] all that is of the earth, shall turn Ecclus, 41, 10
to earth again: so the ungodly go from the curse to destruction.

That, as GOD greatly delights in the Hilarious.
lovers of his Law; so he highly contemns the peticions of the disobedient.

That, the children of the ungodly, are Ecclus, 41, 5,
abominable children.

And the offspring of the unrighteous, Ecclus. 40. 15
shall not obtain many branches.

That, God will lay up the sorrow of the Job, 21, 19,
[wicked] father for his children.

And the posterity of the ungodly generation Ecclus. 41, 6.
shall have a perpetual shame.

That, if the unrighteous, happen to live Pet. Ramus.
long, their sorrows at their death shall be the greater.

And according to the number of their Mar. Bu^er.
sins here on earth, such shall be the quantity of their punishments in hell.

That, as GOD unto the godly is most Plotinus.
sweet, gentle, and loving: so unto the wicked, proud, and disobedient; he is
very severe, sharp, and rough: specially appearing and felt for ever upon
them, in the terrible day of damnation and vengeance.

That, as everlasting felicity does quickly Lactantius.
follovv the godly, after the short race of their ^orldly misery: so
everlasting wretchedness, speedily follows the ungodly, after the short race
of their earthly felicity.

That, all such as for the multitude of their sins and wickedness are
hopeless, Vincentius.
and such as have committed thefts, murders, adulteries; or any other the like
offenses: the justice of GOD, and their own deserts, damn them after this
life ended, unto everlasting destruction; from the which they shall never be
delivered.

. 25.
VVoe [therefore] be unto you, o ye Ecclus, 41, 8. 9.
ungodly, which have forsaken the Law of the most high God; for, though you
increase, yet shall you perrish. If ye be borne, ye shall be borne to cursing:
if ye die, the curse shall be your portion.

For, the fearful and unbelieving, the abominable and murderers, the
whoremongers, Reave, 21, 8,
and sorcerers, the idolaters and all liars; shall have their part in the Lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

Where, there shall be weeping and gna^ning Math, 25, 30
of teeth.

Where, their worm dies not, and Mark, 9, 44,
the fire never goes out.

For, the breath of the Lord, like a River Esaias, 30, 33,
of brimstone does kindle it.

And the smoke of their torment, shall Reave, 14, 11
ascend evermore: and they shall have no rest, day nor night.

. 26.
Good men, (says Lactantius,) have Lactantius.
their hell in this World, that they may know there is a heaven after death to
reward the virtuous: but wicked men escape torments in this life, because they
shall find there is a judgment to come, wherein all unrighteous people sha^ be
punished, according to the measure of their iniquities.

For, eternal death is the reward of all Gregory.
wickedness; and hell is the place of punishment, which God has appointed for
reprobates after this life.

So that, when the godly shall have their Pa^^^iu^.
full entrance and beginning to everlasting blessedness, and make their happy
change from mortality to immortality; and leave the corruptible dross of
this life, for treasures incorruptible: for gold, glory; for silver, solace
without end; for vain apparel, roabes royal; for earthly houses, eternal
palaces; with mirth immeasurable, pleasure without pain, and felicity
endless: then also shall the estate of the wicked be most lamentable; then
shall hastily come upon them their just reward of vengeance; then shall they,
with the end of this worlds vain felicity, enter into eternal damnation and
misery; then shall they cry, woe, woe, woe, unto themselves, with endless
sorrow, for their careless life, and worldly security.

. 27.
Then, (says the Lord,) shall they have 2, Esdr, 9, 9,
pity of themselves which now have abused my ways: and they that have cast
them out despightfully, shall dwell in pains.

For, such as in their life have received benefits and have not known me,
but 2, Esd, 9, 10, 11, 12,
have abhorred my laws, while they were yet in liberty, and when they had
yet leisure of amendment, and would not understand but despised it; they must
be taught it after death by pain.

. 28.
Then shall the wicked, [seeing the righteous, whom in this life they contemned,
received into Gods kingdom, and themselves kept out,] be enforced through
inward anguish, to break forth into this following complaint, saying: * We
have Wisd, 5. 6,
erred from the way of truth, the light of righteousness has not shined unto
us, and the sun of understanding rose not upon us. We have wearied our selves
in the way Wisd. 5. 7.
of wickedness and destruction, and we have gone through dangerous ways: but as
for the way of the Lord, we have not known it.

What good has our pride done unto Wisd, 5, 8, 9
us? or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? All those things are
passed away like a shadow, and as a messenger that rides post.

As a ship that passes over the waves of verse, 10.
the water, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found,
neither the path of it in the floods.

Or as a byrd that flies through the air, verse, 11,
and no man can see any token of her passage, but only hear the noise of her
wings, beating the light wind, parting the air through the vehemency of her
going, and flees on shaking her wings, whereas afterward no token of her way
can be found.

Or as when an arrowe is shot at a mark, verse, 12,
it parts the air, which immediately comes together again, so that a man
cannot know where it went through.

Even so we, as soon as we were borne, verse, 13,
we began to draw to our end, and have showed no token of virtue, but are
consumed in our own wickedness. Such words, (says Solomon) shall they that have
sinned, speak in hell.

Where, their complaints shall be bootelesse, Pet. Mar.
and their repentance unprofitable.

For, their punishment shall be endless, Phil. Mel.
and their pains vnceaseable.

. 29.
And, to the end (says S. Gregory,) that Gregory.
the damned wretches in hell, may be the more severely punished, for their
obstinacy and wicked deeds done in this world, there shall all the miseries and
torments that possibly may be devised, be heaped together upon them.

There shall be fire unquenchable, cold Gregory.
intolerable, the worm of conscience that cannot die, and a most horrible
stench that cannot be abidden. There shall be palpable darkness, whyps of
tormentors, visions of foul fiendes and ugly devils, confusion of sins, and
desperation of all goodness.

There, they shall have tears in their eyes, Fulgentius.
gnashing in their teeth, stinch in their nostrils, howling in their mouths,
mourning in their throats, terror in their ears, bonds and manicles upon their
hands and feet: and eternal fire burning all their parts and members.

Yea, such a fire, so stored with cruelty and torment, (through the wonderful
heat and vehement strength thereof,) that, as S. Augustine Augustine.
says, there is as much difference between natural fire, and the fire of
hell, as there is between painted fire on a wall, and the ordinary fire which
we daily use.

. 30.
Besides; the rigor of their pain in that Bullenger.
tormenting fire, shall be so great, that despising life, which all so dearly
love, they shall earnestly desire death, which all men hate, but it shall not
come at them, nor near them.

For, all help shall be wanting: the gate Cassianus.
of Gods mercy shall be shut against them: and the righteous, which then shall
behold them in their restless torments, shall never be moved thereat to any
pity or compassion; but rather rejoice the more at their destruction, and
greatly give thanks unto God, for his upright justice showed upon them.

Also; that they may be the more certainly Granado.
assured, that this horrible fire in hell, shall never be quenched, the devils
have always in charge to blow the same, and to keep it continually burning:
who, as they be immortal, so shall they never cease, or be weary of blowing
therein.

And though they should be weary, yet is Granado.
there the blast of the Almighty and everliving GOD to maintain it, which
shall never be weary.

. 31.
Rightly therefore is hell termed the hold ^rasmus.
of horror, distress, and misery: and the Cell of torment, grief, and
vexation.

Wherein, nothing else is to be heard, but Cassi^dorus.
only the furious raging of hellish tormentors, and the ruthful lamentations
of damned persons.

Where, all hope of ease and comfort, for Gregory.
ever is exempted; and no redemption from thence may be expected.

For, after the whole company of most Anselmus.
miserable damned vvretches, have there suffered torments both in soul and
body for their sins, as many thousand years, as there have been days since
the beginning of the world, or as there be drops of water in the deepest Sea,
yet shall they then (notwithstanding) have as far to the end of their
punishment, as they had the first day of their entrance into those grievous
calamities. And, as long as Almighty God shall be GOD, which is for ever and
ever, world without end, so long shall the wicked burn in the tormenting lake
of fire and brimstone, without mittigation of their miseries, hope of heavenly
favor, or likelihood of any releasement.

From the which pit of endless perdition, and stinking dungion of eternal
darkness, he that is the Father of mercies, and God of everlasting glory,
deliver all those that belong unto him, for his beloved Son Jesus Christ his
sake, our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.
Behold how I have not labored for my self only, but for all them that
seek wisdom. Ecclus. 24. 39. Unto God alone, be given all praise, honor,
and glory.



A necessary Table, of all the special matters contained in this Book.
The several matters handled in the first Discourse.
THat the Lord our God, is immortal, invisible, and everlasting. page. 1. 2.
3. 4. Of the mighty power of GOD. page. 6. 7. 8. 9. etc. That it belongs
only unto GOD to pardon our sins. page. 23. 24. 25. Of the wisdom of God.
page. 31. Of the knowledge of God. page, 38. That the Lord God knows both the
godly and ungodly. page. 40. 41. Of the great mercy and loving kindness of God.
page. 43. 44. That the mercy of God, is both general and special. page, 46.
Of the justice of God. page. 53. The justice of God, divided by S. Ambrose into
three parts. page, 56. Of three special causes, that daily move men to sin
against God. page, 57. Of the vvayes of God. page. 63. That the ways of God
are to be taken for all manner of his doings. page, 64. That the Lord is
righteous in all his ways. page, 65. That the ways of God, are not like unto
the ways of man. page, 66. Of the word of God. page, 68, The authority of
Gods word. page, 70, That Gods word contains in it al things needful for our
salvation. page, 72 That Gods word is easy to be understood. page, 74, 75,
Of the works of God. 76, 77, That of all the works of God, man is the
cheifest. page, 83, How man is said to be the Image of GOD. page, 83, 84 God
has created man, four several vvayes. page, 84,
The several matters handled in the second Discourse.
OF man, and of his natural inclination. page, 90, 91, 92, etc That, man has
no free will of himself, to do any thing that is good. page, 97, 98, 99, etc
That, man's natural free will, reaches only but to carnal and worldly
matters. page, 100. Of the shortness and uncertainty of man's life. page, 106,
Of the many miseries happening to man in this life. page, 113, The causes why God
suffers man to be so much subject to misery. page, 121 Of the parting of the
soul from the body, and of the immortality thereof. 125, Of the first
Judgment after death. page 132, 133, Of the last Judgment after death. page
135, 136 Of the uncertain time of the last Judgment. page, 142
The several matters handled in the third discourse.
OF Christ. page, 146. That, by him were all things created. page, 147 That,
Christ has all power given him, both in heaven and in earth. page, 148 That,
Christ is the way, the truth, and the life, unto the kingdom of heaven. page,
148, 149, That, Christ is both the power of God, and the wisdom of God. page,
150 That, Christ is our wisdom and righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. etc. page, 150, 151, The several causes of Christ's coming into
the world, and the necessity thereof. page, 152, 153, That, Christ came to
offer grace unto all men. page, 152. That, Christ came to fulfill the Law, and
to make satisfaction unto his Father for our offenses. page, 153 That, Christ
came into the world, both true God, and true man. page, 154 That, Christ came
down from heaven to us, that we might ascend up to heaven by him. page, 157
That, Christ came to loose, or destroy the works of the devil. page 157 That,
Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost. page. 157. Of the
Passion, Death, Burial, Resurrection, and ascension of our savior Christ,
according to the Scriptures. page, 158, 159, 160, 161, etc That, Christ was
delivered to death, by the determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God.
page, 165, 166 Of the several benefits which we have by the death,
resurrection, and ascension of our Savior Christ. page, 172, 173. etc That,
Christ by his death, gave himself a ransom for all men. page, 172 That,
Christ was clothed with death, that he might thereby kill death for us. page,
173 That, Christ by his death, has destroyed him that had the power of death.
173. That, Christ has taken on him our infirmities, and borne our pains.
page. 174 That, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, when he was
made a curse for us. page, 176, That, when Christ suffered death in his flesh
upon the Cross, the Godhead and manhood were together. page, 177, Of four
benefits that we receive by the death of Christ. page, 177 That, the means
of our salvation by the death of Christ, are twofold. 178 That, Christ by his
death, has put out the handwriting that was against us, contained in the Law
written. page, 178. That, like as Christ by his own power raised himself to
life, so by his own power he is able to raise up all them that are his
members. page* 183. That, the resurrection of Christ, was long since
prefigured in Adam. 184, That, Christ our Savior is ascended into heaven, and
sits for ever at the right hand of God. page, 185, That, although Christ be
absent from us, as concerning his humanity, yet he is always present with us
by the power of his divinity. page, 186 That, Christ by his ascension, has
taken sin, and satan prisoners. page, 187, That, Christ is ascended to
prepare a place for us in heaven. page, 187, That, Christ being in heaven at
the right hand of God, makes request unto his Father for us. page, 189 That,
although Christ be both GOD and man, yet does he not make intercession for us,
unto himself. page, 197, 198, That, in Christ, and through Christ, we have all
things. page, 198, 199.
The several matters handled in the fourth Discourse.
OF Faith. page, 200. What faith is. page, 200. The force of faith. page, 201,
202 Only believing is righteousness. 210. That, the doctrine of faith is the
ornament of the Law. page, 211, That, a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the Law. page, 213 Of good works. page, 213, 214 That, faith without
works, is vain, page 214, 215, The agreement of the two Apostles, S. Paul,
and S. James, concerning faith and works. page, 215, 216 Of Fear. page, 227,
That, there are two sorts of Fear. page, 217. 218, The difference between
servile fear, and filial fear. page, 218, 219 The worthiness of true fear.
page, 220, 221, 222. etc. Of Love. page, 227, That there are two sorts of Love.
page, 227. 228, The difference between Concupiscence and divine Love. page.
227. 228, The worthiness of divine love, and the sundry effects thereof. page,
228, 229,
The several matters handled in the fifth Discourse.
WHat the will and desire of GOD is concerning men. page. 240 That, it is the
will of God, that all men should be saved. page, 241, Gods desire and
willingness that sinners should repent and amend. page, 242. What true
repentance is, and the several parts thereof. page, 248. 249, That, in the
work of true repentance, satisfaction ought to be made three several ways.
page, 251, 252
The several matters handled in the sixth Discourse.
WHat service God requires of man, during this life. page, 264, The service
which God requires of us, is, that we keep his commandments. page, 264,
265, 266, 267, etc. Of compassion toward our brethren, and forgiving one
another. page, 280, 281. 282, 283, Of Prayer. page, 228. Of thanksgiving.
page, 293* Of Fasting. page, 295, Of Almes-deedes. page, 299, To beware that
the alms which we give, be of our own true-gotten goods. page, 306. 307. Of
Humility. page, 308, That, there be three degrees of humility. page, 308, Of
Obedience. page, 311. 312, A further Declaration, of our duty toward God and
our neighbor. 315. Against Images. page, 315, Against swearing. page, 319, Of
sanctifying the Sabbath day. 321. Of honoring our Parents. page, 322, Against
pride. page. 325. Against envy, hatred, malice, anger, wrath, and murder.
page, 330, Against sloth and idleness, page, 336. Against covetousness. page,
340, Against usury. page, 346, Against gluttony. page, 349, Against
drunkenness. page 353, Against adultery and fornication. page, 357, 358, 359,
Against stealing, lying, slaundering, falswitnes bearing, and coveting another
man's wealth. page, 363, 364, 365, 366. etc. Against injustice, wrongful
dealing, and oppressing the poor. page, 368, Against ouer-hastie and rash
judgment. page. 375. Against justifying our selves, foolish boasting, and
overmuch regarding of other men's faults. page. 378. etc Against the following
of false-teachers. page. 384 Against the choice of meats, and difference of
days. page. 387. Against ouer-curious searching, and adding of any thing to
the word of God. page. 392. Against foolish security. page. 394 Against the
love of the world. 396. Against evil company keeping. 399. A brief collection
of certain other godly precepts and counsels, from page 404. to page 429.
The several matters handled in the seventh Discourse.
OF trouble and affliction, whereby God tries his children. page, 429. The
trial of Abraham. page, 430. The trial of Tobie. page, 431, The trials of
David. page. 431. The trials of Job. page. 432, 433. 434, Of trouble and
persecution for the Gospels sake. page, 445, etc The example of S. Paul's
sufferings, and diverse other Saints of God. 455. 456, 457,
The several matters handled in the eight Discourse.
OF the many favors of God, toward the godly, here in this life. etc. page
462, 463, 464, etc. The several blessings of glorified bodies in the kingdom
of heaven. page, 488. The sundry beatitudes of the souls of Gods Saints, in
heaven. page, 489,
The several matters handled in the ninth Discourse.
OF the heavy wrath of God against the ungodly here in this life. etc. page,
495, 496, 497, etc. The prosperity of the wicked, and their sudden fall.
page, 498, 499. Their several practices against the godly, and the evil
success that follows them in the end. page, 499, 500, etc. The fearful
trouble of conscience that many times molesteth the unrighteous in this life.
page, 515, Of the several torments and perpetuity of the pains, that the
damned shall suffer after this life, in hell. page, 523, 524, 525, 526, 527,
etc.
FINIS. Nicholas Ling's device N L


