A RELATION OF THE SOLEMNETIE WHEREWITH THE CATHOLIC PRINCES K. PHILLIP THE
III. AND Queen Margaret were received in the Inglish College of Valladolid the
22. of August. 1600.

Written in spanish by Don Ant. Ortiz and translated by Frauncis Rivers and
dedicated to the right honorable the Lord Chamberlayne.



Printed at N. with License. Anno 1601.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD OF HVNSDEN. L. CHAMBERLAYN, AND OF HER Mt.
PRIVYE COUNCEL.
RIGHT honorable, I was drawn with no little curiosety and desire, to read
this book when it came to my hands in the Spanish tongue, therly to gather the
true causes, why the Spaniards favor so much our Inglish Catholic fugetiues,
and what hearts they carry to their country, even these which for Religion,
leave it, to live in Seminaries abroad. And for as much as the relacion of
these solemnityes written by a stranger, and published in printe, to be read
by so many gratie persons as had been present, must needs be written with all
truth and sincerity, It could not choose (giving notice of many particular
speches and actions) but discover unto us the secret affects, of both parts.
And therefore having seen it with attention, I was drawn with no less desire
to put it in Inglish, that it might be read by your honor and the rest of my
good lords of her M. Council. For if the good will of the King of Spain and
his people to our countrymen, and their correspondence to him and his, be
founded in these honorable respects of conformity in Religion on the one side,
and of piety and gratitude on the other, as by this relation may be gathered
(far different from the surmises which by other ways I have heard) me think
the assurance of good meaning, and known continuance of good will in them
that were wont to be our best friends, though of late provoked to be our
enemies, should encorage us much to Peace, and to renew the old confederations
which our forefathers with so great wisdom procured so many ages, with so
great benefit of the land, especially with those in whom yet (under the
profession of hostility and exercise of war, we find far better hearts and
more true affection to our Country and Countrymen, (as in this occasion may
besene) then in others, whom with great care and cost we labor (I fear in
vain) to make of old enemies, new friends. And this I beseeke your honor to
consider, and to be a mean that it may come to her M. Knowledge. And so I take
my leave from Paris the 2. of December. 1600.

Your L. ever at command Frauncis Rivers.

A RELATION OF THE SOLEMNITY VVHEREVVITH THE POTENT AND CATHOLIC PRINCES
KING PHILIPPE the third and Queen Margaret wear received in the English
College of Valladolid the 22 of August. 1600.
The Authors Epistle dedicatorie to the most gracious Lady Elisabeth Clara
Eugenia, Infanta of Spain.
HAVING undertaken at the request of the English College of this City and of
diverse their benefactors and friends, to write this Relation, of the
Intertaynment and good success of their Magesties coming to this College
whereat I was present: the same being to the great comfort of these banished
Catholics of the same nation, and of many other grave and noble personages of
this kingdom, who for the great affection and good will they bear to this
College, desire to have particular notice of all that passed: I thought my
labor herein should be the more approved and the Relation more grateful to
all sorts of people, both here and in England, if it passed first through your
highness hands, as well for the natural affection which this Kingdom bears
you, as also for the singular love your highness in many ocasions has showed in
times past to the Catholics of England, which no doubt by this late vicinetie
and neighborhood is much augmented, whereof this Relation shall be to them a
new record and testimony, and so I trust of your highness clemency, that
you will vouchsafe to make them partakers of this comfort, in confidence
whereof I have entered into many party cularities and taken ocasio^ to speak
of diverse circumstances which will not be tedious to your highness, nor to the
discreet reader with this respect. And al though I could have desired more
time and comoditie for the writing of any thing that should be presented to
your highness, yet considering that the grace and orname^t of this kind of
narration is the novelty and freshnes it bringes, I have rather chosen to
pack it up in haste, as my other businesses and obligations did permit, then
to delay it any longer, hoping that amongste the favors which your highness
has showed and does daily show to these Seminaries one shall be and not the
least, to accept the good will and intention of the writer and not look upon
the errors of the style or other faults that may be committed.

This whole City is greatly comforted with the good news that comes daily of
the discreet and Christian zeal and valor which your highness shows in all
occasions, and so does ernestly beseech our Savior (who gives you them) that
he will defend and prosper your highness for many happy years, and the Arch
duke in like manner, for the good of Christendom, to whom I suppose this
relation will not be ungrateful. So wishing your highnesses all fortunate
success I humbly take my leave from the English College in Valladolid the 15.
of September. 1600.

A RELATION OF THE COMING OF THE CATHOLIC PRINCES KING PHILIPPE THE THIRD AND
QVEENE Margaret to the English College of Valladolid, and of there receiving
their the 22. of August. 1600.
To the Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, Infant of Spain.
KING Philippe the third, Brother to your highness, and Queen Margaret his wife
entered this famous City of Valliadolid upon S. Margarets even, the 19. of
Iulij a day of great joy and solemnity, and of no less conforte to all this
City, as it is like your highness has been informed, and for that the weather
was then very hot in the Canicular days, and his Magesties Palace in the
farthest part of the City, a great way from the English College, they
deferred to desire their Magesties to favor this their College with their
Royal presence, for having received the like honor of his Magestie and of
your highness eight years ago with your presence, upon the invention of the
holly Protomartyre S. Stephen, which day is yet fresh in memory in this
College: it seamed they had the way open to expect and receive this new
favor of his Magestie.

At this very time there came a good number of scholars from the College of
S. Omers, of those your highness Estates, erected by the King his Magestie that
now is, eight years since (not without the special providence of God) wherein
the Catholic children of Englad might be brought up and instructed in virtue
from their tender years, and learn the Latin tongue, Poetry and
Rhetoric, and from thence be sent to the Seminaries of Spain to (...) other
more protounde sciences as your highness does know. Among these studientes
there came some to young in years, that it seemed they could scarce speak
latin, but being examined they wear found to be good Poets and
Rhetoricians, and two of the youngest were appointed to do obeisance and give to
their Magesties humble thanks in the name of their College: and so with six
others of their company were conducted to the Palace by their superior and
presently admitted to audience, where having made the reverence accustomed, one
of them of fourteen years of age with good grace and modest countenance
offered to speak: But for that he was so young and so lately arrived, and that
it might be feared least with the presence and Magestie of so great a king, he
might be dismayed and driven out of countenance, the father thought good to
prevent his Magestie, and so told him the youth had a word or two to speak in
the behalf of his College, but he feared his bashfulnes and that his heart
would not serve him to speak in presence of his Magestie. The King smiled and
willed him with such courtesy to speak, that the child took courage, and
delivered his Oration with so good a grace, so chearefully with so modest and
decent action and so good pronuntiation and voice that he was well understood,
and his speech very grateful to his Magestie, and to all that wear present
who much commended the liuelines and good courage of the child, and for that
his Oration was liked and commended of diverse grave and learned personnages
that heard it, I suppose it will be grateful to your highness that I set it
down in this place.

THE FIRST ORATION MADE TO THE KING, IN HIS PALACE AT VALLADOLID, BY ONE OF
THE STVDENTES OF THE ENglish Seminary, of fourteen years of age, in which he
gives him thanks for the favors done to the College in S. Omers.
GRatis and generosis animis natura hoc dedit (Rex Catholice and maxim) vt cum
a quo beneficijs affecti sunt, absentem videre vehementissime cupiant, and
praesentem non sine summa voluptate and gaudio intueantur. Nos enim ex
Audomarensi Seminario (clarissimo regiae liberalitatis tuae monumento) in
Hispaniam acciti, hodiernam laetitiam in pectoribus nostris gestientem
explicare satis non possumus, quam ex maiestatis vestrae iucundissimo conspectu
haurimus, cum liceat pectus illud regium sedem and fontem beneficentiae
intueri, and osculari illam inuictam dextram, cuius munificentiam
liberalitatemque prius pene sumus experti, quam huius lucis vsuram. Quod si
flumina subterraneis recessibus (naturae impetu) feruntur in mare, ex quo
originem hauserunt; nos quam alacres quam laetos recurrere oportebit ad
Maiestatem vestram (immensum benefice^tiae Oceanum) ex quo haec quam spiramus
vitae manauit, hic sanguis que^ aliquando pro Christo fundendum speramus,
effluxit.

Cyrus Persarum Rex, cum Lysandrum Lacedemonium deduxisset in hortum, and ille
copiam, pulchritudinem, ordinem consitarum arborum admiraretur; tunc glorians
Cyrus, has (inquit) omnes mea manuplantaui, cui Lysander; o beatum Persarum
Regem, cuius etiam in serendis arboribus peritiae fortuna coniuncta est. Nos
autem quanto verius and quanto iustius, o te foelicem and beatum orbis
Monarcham, qui cum summo fastigio and imperio summam pietatem and religionem
miscuisti; qui non terrenas and caducas, sed diuinas and aeternas arbores in
illo tuo Andomarensi horto seminasti; quae satis declarant quanta prouidentia
consilioque, a sapientissima Maiestate vestra sint consitae, cum nouis quotidie
in doctrina and pietate progressibus ad martyrium vegite^tur. Specta oculis hos
socios meos, and in illis animo intuere (maxim and potentissime Cyre) centum
and amplius alios nobiles pueros qui Audomaropoli remanserunt: hi nouelli fidei
flores, virentia haec germina religionis ex tuis hortis prodierunt; hae tenerae
pietatis plantae ex tuis Seminarijs profectae sunt; tui sunt hi fructus, tuae
arbores quas regiae manu and liberalitate plantasti, magnificis sumptibus
aluisti, largis beneficiorum fontibus irrigasti.

Alexander Magnus cum in amicos omnia liberalissime effunderet, interrogatus a
quodam quid sibi reseruaret, spem (inquit) non prodigis the sauros tuos, quos
in Catholicos Anglorum filios magnificentissime spargis, sed his beneficijs
acquiris certissimam spem consequendi maiora. Alis enim in his pueris spem
Angliae, spem publicae pacis, spem religionis and fidei recuperandae. Erimus
vbicunque locorum testes, and praecones tuarum laudum. Erimus liberalitatis
tuae non muta and mortua, sed viua and loquentia monumenta. Erimus veluti
canales, per quos traducti beneficiorum tuorum imbres obruent Angliam
vniuersam. Illi tui hosts, hac tua liberalitate, nobilissima,
christianissimaque and ab omnibus saeculis inandita vincentur. Venient ad te
colendum, non inuiti, sed volentes; non armis sed benesicijs superati.

Camillus clarissimus Romanorum Imperator cum Faliscos (populos Italiae)
obsidione premeret, omnesque nobilium virorum filij in eius potestatem proditi
fuissent, nihil in pueros atrox, aut hostile gessit, sed insigni iustitiae and
clementiae exemplo illaesos integrosque remisit ad parents. O te (Philippe
maxim) fortissimum and clementissimum Camillum, cuius potestati, nos, si non
hostium tuorum liberos certe ex hosiili regione proficiscentes, cum persecutio
prodidisset, benignissime recipis, liberalissime educas, and imbutos pietate,
auctos, ornatosque doctrinis, remittis ad miseram patriam subleuandam: and erit
illa tam ferrea, tam saxea, vt tam noua and inusitata clementia non moueatur?
Sane, si illa fuerit (quod non speramus) ingrata, tame^ nome^ tuum nulla
obliterabit obliuio, cuius dulcissimam memoriam in teneris puerorum pectoribus
beneficiorum immortalium litteris exarasti. Si Anglia in impietate scelereque
(quod absit) perstiterit, hic noster sanguis, quem profide (Deo volente)
fundemus, tantae illorum ingratitudini apud summum indicem debitum supplicium,
and Regiae tuae munificentiae iustum and sempiternum praemium postulabit and
obtinebit.

The same in English.
ALL Noble and grateful minds (most Catholic and mighty King) have this
inclination by nature, toward the person of whom they have received great
benefits, that they desire ernestly to see him if he be absent, and receive
singular joy and gladness with his presence: wherefore I and others my brethren
being come to Spain from the English Seminary of S. Omer, (that famous
monument of your Magesties liberality) we cannot suffitiently express the joy
we have conceived with the sight of your magestie, nor the exceeding comfort we
feel being admitted to behold that princely and Royal breast, the seat and
fountaiue of liberality, and to kiss that invincible right hand of
munificence which we have tried almost before we could breathe. And if the
waters, carried by their own natural force and inclination, find passage
through the earth by secret conductes and veins to the sea, from whence they
have their beginning: how gladly and with what joy and desire should we recurre
to your Magestie the fountain and Ocean sea of this great benefit, and
bounty, out of which has issued the spiritual life we live, and whence we
have receued the blood which we hope hereafter to shed for Christ.

Cyrus King of Persia having brought Lysander the Lacedemonian into his garden,
and he marueling much at the multitude, variety, and order of the trees there
planted: Cyrus began to glory, and said, all these I have planted with mine
own hands, to whom Lysander answered, O happy king of the Persia^s whose
wisdom fortune so much favors, that in the very planting of trees he has
prosperous success. But with how much more truth and reason may we say this
of your Magestie (most happy Monarche of the world) who has joined piety
with power, and so great zeal of Religion with so large Dominion of so many
kingdoms, and in fine (that the comparison may in all be like) has set in
this your garden of S. Omers, not earthly and fading, but celestial and
eternal trees, which of them selves sufficiently declare, with what wisdom and
providence they were planted by your Magestie, seeing they grow up and flourish
daily more and more in learning and virtue, and increase with incredible fruit
and desire of Martyrdom. Behold then (most mighty and fortunate Cyrus) these
my companions, and in them a hundred and more Noble and virtuous youths,
which remain yet at S. Omers: these young and fresh flowers of faith, these
green buddes of virtue come out of your garden, these tender plants of
Religion have sprung up in your Seminaries: these are the fruits, these the
trees which your Magestie has planted with your Royal and bountiful hand,
which you have nourished with so great cost, and watered with so abundant
streams of piety.

Alexander the great, when he had freely bestowed amongste his friends all he
had, being asked what he had kept for himself, answered, hope: So your Magestie
does not lose nor spend without purpose, that which so bountifully you bestow
upon the catholic children of England, for you nourishe in them, the hope of
England; the hope of public peace and quietness; the hope of Religion; and to
recover to Christ that country almost lost. And in what place soever we shall
come, we shall be witnesses and heraldes of your praises; and not dumme and
dead, but lively and speaking monuments of your liberality and bounty; we
shall be, as it were the veins and conductes, by which the sweet showers of
your benefits being derived, shall stop the mouths of your enemies and
vainquish, them, not with arms, but with this most rare and christian
charity, which you show to us strangers.

Camillus a Noble Emperor of the Romans, beseiging the Phaliscos a certain
people in Italy, and having in his hands all the noblemens sons delivered
to him by treason, he suffered no rigor nor hostility to be used with them,
but with notable demonstration of justice and clemency sent them back safe and
without hurt, to their parents.

Even so (O most mighty and courteous Prince) we being delivered to your
Magesties power and mercy by the rigor of the heresy of England, your
Magestie does as another Camillus receius us with the same courtesy, and bring
us up with far greater benignetie and love, and in fine, after we are endued
with piety, and sufficiently adorned with virtue and learning, you send us
backeagaine to healp our miserable country; and is it then possible that it
can be so hard and stony hearted, as not to be moved with this extraordinary
and unaccustomed clemency? Surely if our country could be so ungrateful, as
we think it cannot, yet notwithstanding no time nor forgetfullnes shall be able
to extinguish this your Magesties glory, whose memory and immortal benefits
are so deep graven and rooted in the tender hearts of these children. If
England should still persiste and persevere in heresy (which God forbid) yet in
that case this blood of ours which we have dedicated in testimony of the
catholic faith, will obtain without doubt at the hands of the Almighty,
just recompense and everlasting reward for this your Magesties most christian
piety and munificence.

The King was very much pleased with this Oration, and willed the father to
thank the students in his behalf, and told him he had done well to bring
them to him, that he was glad he had seen them, and that with the next
opportunity he would see the rest at home in their College, and willed him to
conduct them to the Queen. But for that she was not then well at ease, the
Oration which the second had provided for her Magestie was deferred.

Not long after the weather waxing more temperate, so as the king without
inconvenience might come to the College, for as much as it was erected by King
Philippe the second, father to your highness, and therefore so peculiarly his
own and the kings Magesties that now is, as no community in this City is
theirs with more particular obligation, it was thought convenient that the
Rector should kiss his Magesties hand, and acquaint him with some
particularities that might give him occasion of more comfort at his coming: and
so the 17. of August, after humble thanks for the special favors which in
all occasions he had showed to this holy work, he gave him account of some
things of no small edification, and glory of God, which had passed in space
of four years and more that he had been resident in the College, and
offering twice to break of his speech, least he might be tedious, both times
the king willed him to go forward, giving signs of contentment with that
which he told him, and in fine signified that shortly he would come to the
College, and cause warning to be given before his coming.

A few days following, the Duke of Lerma sent word that their Magesties
would be at the College upon S. Bernards day the 20. of August: and at the
self same time the Duchess of Lerma chief Chamberlain to the Queen, sent
word likewise that the other scholar, whose oration was deferred by reason of
her Magesties indisposition, might now come and have audieuce, and the next
morning a coche was sent from the Palace, where in the young Orator (with
seven others in his company) was carried, who both in stature and in years was
lesser then the former that spoke to the king, although in his behavior and
delivery of his speech he was nothing inferior nor less greatefull to the
hearers. He acknowledged humble duty to her Magestie in behalf of the College
from whence he came, desiring her protection and favor: and for that this
oration was to the same effect of the other above made to the king, though
different in words and sentences, I have thought best (for breueties sake) to
omit it.

The Queen showed herself very well contented with the Child and with that he
had said, and asked many particularities of the scholars there present, and of
the College, and of England, and having had full relation of all, answered
that she was very glad to see these young ones, and that before she had much
desired to see them. And the father that conducted them replying that the king
had insinuated, how the next day following he would be at the College, and
entreating likewise her Magestie to vouchsafe to do them the same favor, she
answered that in no case she would fail to come.

The preparation made to receive their Magisties in the English College.
THe Church and both the Chappells were dressed with fair and rich
orname^tes. On the high Altar stood a new tabernacle of carved work, with
three great Images of the same, in the midest stood S. Albane Patron of this
College, and Protomarrir of England, on the right hand S. Thomas Archbishop of
Canterbury, and on the left; the glorious Martyr S. Edmond King of England that
was shot with arrows to death; under these, stood two fair and large
caskettes full of precious Relics of Martyrs, upon the Altar was placed a
notable relic of S. Albans flesh set in gold and crystal, the foot
whereof is a precious stone of great value, this Relic was given by King
Philippe the second to father Persons for this College.

The Church, was hanged about with hanginges wherein were drawn the
imprisonmentes and ordinary Martyrdomes of the Catholics in England, set out
in their coulors, and the pauement of the chauncel covered with turkey
carpettes of curious work, whereupon were placed twoe seats for their
Magesties, covered with cloth of gold. I durst not presume to weary your
highness with the relation of these circumstances, if your affection to this
holy work, and the comfort that your neighbors the English Catholics will
receive to understand these particularities, did not excuse me.

The first court through which his Magestie was to enter into the College was
hanged all about with costly hanginges, and likewise all the rest of the way
which he was to pass, till he came to the great hall where your highness was
once received. Within the foresaid court, at the entrance of a gate and
broad passage newly made, that leads to the inner rooms, was written in
fair text hand in spanish. El para bicn de la venida a sus Magestades (that
is.) Their Magesties welcome. And both sides of the gate were coueted with
verses in sundry languages to the same effect. The Latin verses only I will
put down.

Ianua pande fores, vt solis, quem colit orbis.
Augustum angusto limine lumen eat.
Sit domus ista humilis, nec tanto digna Monarcha,
Nil spernit Pietas; ianua pande fores.
Here the King stayed and turned him self to the Queen, and smiling, said,
lo they bid thee welcome, and so passed on to the great hall, where they were
to be received which was more richly hung then the rest, and in the midst, on
the right side was placed a cloth of estate suitable to the hanginges, with twoe
embrodered chaires for their Magesties. Over the kings chair hung his picture
drawn all armed from the girdle upward, with his Helmet by him, and the Tuson,
about his neck, which is a chain and on it hanging the golden fleice: on his
arm a sheilde, and within it a lion; upon his breast was written Signaculum
super cor tuum, and upon his sheilde, Signaculum super brachium tuum, and under
his picture these Latin verses.

Mansuetum signat pectus mitissimus agnus,
Inuictum bello cincta leone manus.
Quondam fulgebant Agamemnonis arma leone,
Jason aurato vellere dives erat.
Vne Philippe geris vellus, fortcmque leonem,
Qui mundo Jason quique Agamemnon eris.
Clemens pace, potens armis, inuicte rebelli,
Mitis victo, animis agne, manuque leo.
Over the Queens chair hung likewise her picture in a robe of crimsen (which
happened very well, and gave contentement to many for that she came atyred in
the very same color) she was pictured at the window of a Castle (made after
the manner and form of the Arms of Castillia) with a pomegranate in the one
hand, and in the other the goulden fleece, with these verses under written.

Granatum signat foecundam, bellipotentem
Turris, in aurato vellere forma micat.
Praeses erat turri Pallas, granata gerebat
Juno tulit quondam vellera fulua Venus.
Juno granatum Venus aurum arcemque Minerua
Deserat, inque vnam gloria trina cadat.
Pallas, Juno, Venus, fortis foecunda decora,
Turrim Pomum aurum, Margaris vna tenes.
Between these two pictures were drawn the Kings arms, with a Metaphorical
application of their properties and excellencies, according to every several
coat, applied to their Magesties in the Manner following.

Quadrupedum indomitos reges (Philippe) leones,
Penningerumque duces Aquilas, Mauortia castra,
Arborumque decus Granata, and Lilia florum,
Et tanto auratum Vellus sudore petitum,
Mart domas solus solus pietate reseruas;
Aeternumque eadem quid ni quoque solus habebis,
Cum tibi quae pellant vim vectes, quaeque tuetur
Parta prius caeci famuletur numinis alea,
Quae vult Aeoirepetens sua lumina Phoebus,
Cuncta tuis radijs caelo moderaris ab alto.
Ergo cum Granata tibi, cum Castra, Leones,
Alea, prepes auis, cum Vellus, Lilia, Vectes,
Dant sua colla iugo vestro, pacemque reposcant,
Iure tibi flores, tibi fructus, bella, volucres,
Quadrupedes, fortuna tibi, tibi parta per vndas
Praeda satis, quaeque astra alto figuntur Olympo,
Qui terris Mars alter, and alter in aethera Phoebus,
Nata creas radijs, spolia acri Mart reseruas:
Sic tibi terra, Polus, Sors, Mauors, militat ether,
Et tua Neptunus pelago si cepta secundet,
Spargetur totum tandem tua fama per orbem.
On the left side of the cloth of estate was a place for the maids of honor,
and at the vper end of the hall hung a very lively picture of the Martyr father
Henry VValpole somety me Minister of this College, who five years ago was
cruelly put to death in England, he was pourtraied his whole stature, with his
left hand upon the rack, whereon he had been nine times tormented, with a rope
about his neck, and his breast opened with the knife wherewith he was
emboweled, and in his right hand he held his heart, which he offered up to
Christ, with so lively and affectuous a countenance that it moved all to
devotion that beheld it. Under the picture were twoe scochens with these
spanish verses.

Nueue vezes Valpolo atormentado
En eculeo, sale victorioso,
Por las publicas calls arrastrado,
^n un palo le cuelgan afrentoso,
Y el pecho abierto el coracon ^^cado
Viuo le desquartizan, y el gozoso
Sufre carcel, cadenas, sogasy grillos,
Eculeos, horcas, fuegos, y cuchillos.
Seminario Anglicano al alto cielo
Da gracias, por aver de ti salido
Quien con su sangre illustra el patrio suelo.
Y a ti dexa con ella ennoblecido,
Y muriendo en el campo del duelo
Al enemigo dexa en el vencido,
Ganando en tan inclita victoria
Fama en la tierra, y en el cielo gloria.
Under this picture was opened a great door to the schools of the College,
where the music stood. On both sides of the door were seats covered with
silk, and a set of violes, which the Earl of Fuensaldan^a bestowed some
years a go upon the College, with books of music, and between the twoe
seats a pair of Virginales of an excellent sound, that Don Francisco de
Reynoso Bishop of Cordoua gave to this Church to accompany the other
instruments which the scholars use with great dexterity in the solemnities of
Mass and Euensong upon feastiuall days, which they sing with no less
devotion and propriety of Ecclesiastical ceremonies, as the Institution and
statutes of these Seminaries ordain.

The hanginges of the before said hall were set round about with ingenious
hietogliphickes and verses in Latin, Spanish and other languages, whereof the
one half were composed in praise of the king, and the other of the Queen. In
the same manner was dressed all the way that the king was to pass from the
Church to the great hall with Emblemes, Epigrammes, Elegies and Lyricke verses,
and amongst the test was one famous Poem wherein Religion asked of God the
arms wherewith the Archangell S. Michaell conquered the dragon, that with the
same the king might also conquer him and banish him out of all his countries
and dominions. This Poem for the art and invention wherewith it was composed,
was much marvelled at, and much desired, but because it was so long containing
above fowerhundred verses it could not well be printed here. The rest of the
verses, were of the kings coming to the College, to give him thanks for the
favors which both he and his father had showed to this work, and to signify
the joy and comfort which the students conceived to see them selves in this
their banishment and solitude, visited and so much favored by so potent and
Catholic Princes. Among these verses there were but few in Spanish, because
the recollection wherewith the scholars live does not suffer them to have so
much use of the language as is required for verses, and because this feast
should be only theirs, as was intended by their Magesties, whose meaning was
to be received and feasted only by them. The Latin verses were many in number
and so full of variety and good invention, that diverse persons of the most
learned of this university, were importunate to have them all printed, but
because it is not meet to trouble your highness with a volume, and on the other
side, for as much as they were the principal part of the feast, and therefore
are not wholly to be omitted, I have chosen out some few of the shortest that
by them your highness may make judgment of the rest.

Some of the verses made in the English College of Valladolid to congratulate
their Magesties coming.
Hierogliphicks upon the kings arms.
THere was drawn in colors a castle, and in it were lodged certain Inglish
students in their collegial habit, one had in his hand a Pomegranat with this
posie Pastus, an other the goulden fleece with this posie Vestis. A lion (which
is also part of the arms) kept the castle gate, with this title; Custos, over
the castle an eagle (which is an other coat) soringe in the air, carried one
of the scholars, with this title, Dux in Caelum, and the whole picture was
compassed about with this posie, Philippus nobis omnia in omnibus.

Arx praebet tutam miseris fugientibus aedem,
Dant granata cibos, aurea lana tegit.
Custodit vigilatque leo, vehit ales ad astra
Quae phrygium puerum vexerat ante Ioui.
Dives hic est clipaeus, rerum the saurus abundans
Nilque deest miseros quod reuelare queat.
Arx recipit, vellus vestit, granataque pascunt,
Nos Leo custodit, ducit ad astra Aquila.
Viue diu Princeps fortunatissime nobis,
Arx, Vellus, granata, Leo, Iouis armiger ales,
Hospitium, vestis, pastus, vigil, author ad astra.
An other upon the same arms.
There was drawn an eagle in the air, and the birds doing her homage as to
there Queen, next was a Lion on the earth whom the other beasts acknowledged
for there king, then after a ship sailing in the sea which had in the
stern, in the flagges, and sails, painted the golden fleece, and fishes
gathered a bout it with these verses.

Ecce tibi Leo magnanimus, Regina volucrum,
Quaeque tulit Colcha vellus ab vrbe ratis.
Magnammum metuunt animalia cuncta Leonem,
Et volucres Aquilam, caecula turba ratem.
Ergo tibi parent volucres, animalia, pisces,
Omnia quae caelum, terra, salumque tenent.
Erige te Princeps, and regna immensa tuere,
Imperijs desunt sydera sola tuis.
An other upon the whole arms of Spain which these verses.
Haeres magnanimi patris, qui gentis Iberae
Sceptra per innumeros missa tueris Auos.
Quot titulos clipeo, tot iunge in pectore lauds,
Et noli a proauis degenerare tuis.
Religio turrim te sentiat, atra Leonem
Haeresis, and niueae Lilia pacis amae.
Lilia granatis coniunge salubribus, vt sic
Aspicias patriae crescere gentis opes.
Imbuat vltrices infidus Persa sagittas,
Et cadat ante tuos Turcia victa pedes.
More Aquilae terras contemn, and in aethera surge:
Sola decent pennas sydera celsa tuas.
Arx justice, Leo sacrilegis, Flos candido Iberis,
Terror Turcarum, numinis ales aue.
Harum virtutum accessu tua gloria crescet,
Vt silicum attritu feruida flamma micat.
Hae tibi sydeream texent super astra coronam,
Hae tibi and in teris vellera fulua dabunt.
The self same arms were in an other place in their colors, with this
explication.
Lilia, quidue Aquilae, Granatum, Castra, Leones,
Ostendunt? quis sit (clare Philippe) not ant.
Lilia spem, (speras dum spiras) candida signant
Quis decor internus exteriorque tibi.
Regia quid vastum scandens per inane volucris?
Quonam animus tend at (magne Philippe) not at.
Imperij regimen Granatuui iuraque monstrat,
Inclusos castrum nos tua dextra tegit.
Quid vigilans fortisque Leo? tua robora sentit
Hostis, and excubias sedula cura not at.
Upon the arms of the Kingdom of Castile.
There were painted the arms of Castile alone, with some English scholars in
the castles, and over them this posie hic hospitamur, and over the lions, hic
defendimur.

Hospitium nobis tua sunt castella Philippe,
His valet Angliaco viuere pulsus agro.
Tutus erit quem castra tegent: ni sufficit vnus,
Arcebit cunctas rex leo ab arceferas.
Ergo veni, Britanne veni, tibi tecta Philippus
Castellae tribuet castra, tegetque leo.
An other upon the same arms.
There was painted a castle of the arms of Castile, and upon one of the
pinacles a lion watching; and upon an other was the golden fleece: and in the
midst an eagle flying up to the clouds out of which came thunder and
lightning, with this posie. Turris inexpugnabilis, munita vigilantia, audacia,
opibus.

Nec timor aut error turtim nec perdet egestas,
Aurea quam seruat lana, leo, ac aquila.
Nam quid deesse potest turri cui pendeat aurum?
Cuique leo vigilat, prodier art nequit.
Et quis terrebit pansis quem protegit alis,
Quae ventos, imbres, flumina temnit auis?
O foelix turris vigili munit a leone,
Audacique aquila, vellere dives aue,
An other of the same.
There was painted a pomegranat tree, and under it, one dying his clothes which
the flowers: and an other eating the fruit: an other sleeping under the shade:
an other chasing away serpents with the bows as with weapons: an other curing
the inflammation of his eyes with the leaves: and about the tree this posie
Salus: quies.

Flos 1., fructus 2., radix 3., ramus 4., foliumque 5. Philippus
Granati, ornatus 1., pastus 2., sopar 3., arma 4., medela 5.,
Nudis 1., ieiunis 2., fessis 3., pugnantihus 4., aegris 5.,
Flore 1. ornat, fructu 2. pascit, radice 3. soporat,
Ramo 4. armat, folia 5. sanat, cuncta omnibus vnus.
In another place was painted a great laurel tree, and a crown of the same
laurel with this posie semper vire^s. On the one side were certain clouds
with description of thunder and lightning, and some Inglish scholars which
shrouded them selves under the tree, and about them was written, secura. On the
other side were swarms of waspes, which stung others, and they gathered the
bows to heal the stinging with this subscription salubris. Underneath the
tree were many books which with the laurel leaves wear preserved from mothes,
with this inscriptio^ tinea non comedet eos.

Ite sub Hispana iuuenes requiescite lauro,
Anglia quos diro fulmine saeua premit.
Ite, salutifera sanentur vulner a fronde,
Vulnera quae miseris impia vespa facit.
Diuinosque libros haec laurus sacra coronet,
Et tactum nullo verme volumen erit.
Ergo Phoebaea lauro te cinge Philippe,
Iustius in titulos conuenit illa tuos.
There was painted the Sun, and the Moon loosing her light with the Sun
shine: and a bordet of roses, which with the same Sun beams did grow and
flourish.

Haereticus luna est formas variandus in omnes,
Martyr purpureo tincta cruore rosa.
Lumine sic perit haereticus lunaticus isto,
Hoc vitam roseus lumine martyr habet.
Viue diu fulgens, vt condas lumine lunas,
Et vegetes multas (maxim Phoebe) rosas.
Alia eiusdem interpretatio.
Luna regit Turcas, rosaque est insigne Britannis:
Illos lucendo, hos non radiando premis.
Pande sacros radios, non fulget Turcica luna:
Subtrahe, et Angliacae iam periere rosae.
There was drawn a pillar and upon it a globe of the earth, with these verses.

Dum pater humanas moriendo linqueret oras,
Qui terrae ferres pondera, solus eras.
Herculea Athlantis suppleuit munera ceruix,
Qui caeli ferret pondera, solus erat.
Si perit Alcides, rursus gestabit olympum
Atlas, vel nullus grande leuabit onus.
Si moreris, terram valido qui robore portet,
Ni genitor redeat, non erit vllus Atlas.
Pondera fer validis princeps librata lacertis,
Astra tuis humeris non grave pondus erunt.
There was painted a lion roaring and other beasts falling upon the earth for
fear of his voice, with this posie. Leo rugit, quis non timebit?

Quid facies leo bellipotens? elapsa minaces
Fauces, in campis libera praeda fugit.
Vox tua rugitu diuinas personet aures
Emissasque pio pectore funde preces.
Rugitu hoc, hosts, vires animosque relinquent,
Et cadat ante tuos territa praeda pedes:
Sic Sampson, Dauidque olim vicere, quod armis
Nunquam fecissent, hoc potuere prece.
There was painted a rock, and upon it pomegranats, which being pressed gave
out there juice, with this posie. Dabo tibi mustum malorum granatorum meorum.
Martyribus sanctum quem possint inde eruorem,
Fundere, granatis (magne Philippe) foues.
Nam quae torcular torquet granata Britannum,
Sunt tua quae poenis gens inimic a premit.
Granatis expressa fluunt suauissima musta,
Sic magno praebes dulcia vina Deo.
There was painted two dragons flieng from a lion, which pursued them with
these verses under written.
Maius si Herculeis onus lacertis,
Hosts vincere praelio gemellos,
Mayor Thebigina es Philippe mayor,
Rex vincis, aquila vt duos dracones,
Bis binos poteras domare solus.
Alia eiusdem explicatio.
Pestiferi fugiunt aquila veniente dracones,
Hostivus intent at praelia dira suis.
Sic fugat haereticos generoso cord Philippus,
Seruat mundum aquila haec, haeresis hydranecat.
There was described a mountain with a fresh and plaisant meadow, wherein was
feeding a flock of lambs, the mountain was compassed about with the chain of
the golden fleece of Spain this chain resembles flintstones which striking
upon the steel cast out flames of fire, which this posie tua custodia:

Ne fera per medias crudelis funera caulas
Edat, and innocuas vulnere perdat oues,
Pinguia flammiuomis singuntur pascua saxis,
Namque fer as abigit quae micat ignis silex.
Quasque canum vigilans neque at depellere cura,
Raucaque pastorum murmura, flamma fugat.
Flamma fugat, lapidesque fugant, his cingere ceptis
Si rabidos morsus sallere preda cupis.
To the Catholic Princes protectors of the English Seminaries.
There was painted a ship tossed with a furisus tempest, and kept fast with two
anchers.

Anchora spes nautis, fragilis spes anchora cymbae:
Haec fultus, tumidas nauita temnit aquas.
Quos metues fluctus Anglorum cymba minaces?
Anchora dat firmam spem, geminata tibi.
A Hierogliphicke of the Inglish Seminaries in Spain.
There was painted the Ark of Noah, and in it the Inglish students with these
verses.

Noemo arca fuit salus, suisque
Natis, dum valido Deus feracem
Terram mergeret imbre mergit atrox
Fluctus haereseon solum Britannum,
Arcam quaerimus; est and arca nobis
Littus Hesperium, salus Britanno,
Foelix quod soueat, itaiste foelix
Taline pereat protectus arca,
An other of the city of Valladolid.
There were painted certain stagges carrying fire upon their horns taken from
the arms of this city of Valladolid, and with the same they set on fire
heaps of cinnamon, vnderwhich were gathered todes, serpents, battes, and
owls, all which with the light and fire fled a way, with these verses.

Cynnama diuinae pietatis rapta Britannis
Nicticolae volucres, hydraque saeua premit.
Ite domum celeres, quorum ardua cornua, cerui,
Armat odorifera Pincia sancta face.
Diffugite o angues, stygij properate colubri,
Ecce ferunt sacros cornua odora focos.
Vos quoque lucifuge procul hinc proculite volucres,
Lux vbi discussa fulgida nocte micat.
Sed tu laeta veni depulsis Anglia monstris.
Et fidei antiquae Cynnama sancta cape.
An other of the same.
There was painted the same arms of valladolid, and over against them the
arms of Ingland, which are three lio^s, flying from the fire: with this posie,
fugie^t a facie ignis.

Perdomat idomitos effraenatosque leones
Flamma ferus vincit, vincitur igne leo.
Angliaci saeuo lanient ne dente leones
Innocuas pecudes, innocuosque greges.
Ferte citi Hesperias Britanna ad littora flammas,
Indomitasque feras Pincia flamma domet.
Sic fugient timidi posita feritate leones,
Sic poterit tutum viuere mite pecus.
And other of the Inglish Seminaries.
There were painted three youths clothed with the barcke of trees, and
certain birds called, stimphalides, having there bills fastened in the same
barcke, wherein benig caught they dyed, with this posie: triumphus pacie^tia.

Gignit auem tellus Arabum, Stymphalida dicunt,
Aenea quae penetrat morsibus arma feris.
Sed tamen arboreo munitum cortice corpus
Perdere cum tentat, cortice fixa perit.
Cernite quam saeuas stymphalidas Anglia gignit,
Vt Christi lacerat soeda volucris oues.
O vos quos validis patientia viribus armat,
Cortice quos fidei Pincia silua tegit.
Porgite opem, si saeua petat vos haerefis vngue,
Si latus innocuum foeda cruentat auis:
Vulnera dum infigit se sacro in cortice figet,
Et capta haerebit morsibus ipsa suis.
There was painted a nightingal singing in a tree and a serpent deceitfully
creeping op to catch her.
Quam fouit sacris Philomelam Pincia siluis
Et docuit dulces ore ciere sonos
Dum canit Angligenis tectis illabitur anguis,
Et rapit innocuam, dum pia verba mouet.
Non perit, aut canere omittet, sed scandet Olympum,
Et canet aeternos suauius illa modos.
There was painted a tree caled Lothos which grows in Libra, whose leaves
close up toward night, and in the morning when the Sun begins to shine
they open a gain, showing them selves very fresh and fair: these leaves were
painted open looking toward the Sun rising, with this posie: O si perpetuo.

Lothos in Libicis virens
Arbos humida partibus,
Solis tacta coloribus
Pandit fulgida Ramos.
Grates reddit Apollini,
Cuius lumine splendido,
Frondes crescere flexiles,
Fructus sentit amenos:
Donec Hesperus vmbrifer
Noctem somniferam ferens,
Ramos contrahere arborem
Cogit, sydere dempto:
Lothi nos quoque pandimus
Palmas inclyte Rex tibi,
Dignas iureque debitas
Grates, reddimus Angli.
Per te viuimus (inclyte)
Per te crescimus in fide,
Virtutisque laboribus
Florent germina vestris:
Non noctis tenebrae graves
Nobis eripiant diem,
Nec te viuificum iubar
Rex lux maxima mundi.
There was painted an eagle feeding certain doves in her nest, with this
posie. Pietas supra naturam.

Mutauit natura vices, miracula cerno:
Et recipit leges terra beata nouas.
Regia pallantes volucris generosa columbas
Proteget, in nido datque alimenta suo.
Tutior in proprijs nec erat dum viueret agris,
Accipitres fugiens mitior illa feros.
Si requiem quaeris volucrumque euadere morsus,
Ad quae confugias tecta columba vides.
Non capit exiguas volucrum regina columbas,
Praeda illi cerui, praeda futura draco.
In praise of the sovereign and potent Princess Queen Margaret of Spain.
There was painted the new moon, and a number of Elephants, acknowledging her
for there benefactor: with this posie: Vis beneficentiae and virtutis.

Cum noua luna micat, magnorum turba Eleplantum
Fert teneros natos, lunam humilesque colunt.
Tu noua luna micas tenebroso Margaris orbi,
Iam sentit radios Anglia nostratuos.
Ergo Britannigenae linquentes tecta paterna,
Ecce tuum lumen Cynthia sancta colunt.
O salve rutilum sydus Regina, Britannis
In caeca miseris fulgida nocte mica.
There was painted a bird bred in Germany, which shines by night, flying over
the sea to Spain, with this posie. Nox sicut dies illuminabitur.

Quaenam haec quae toto spargens sua lumina ponto,
Littus ad Hesperium per mare currit auis?
Illane quam ignitis profert Germania pennis,
Quae tenebras noctis luce micante fugat?
Illa est: auratis collucens Margaris alis,
Huc noctis victrix, Austria fertur auis.
I propera Hesperio pulcherrima iungere soli,
Cumque illo rutilae divide lucis opus.
Sole, and auc hac ornata, dies noctesque micabis
Hesperia, haec noctes ignit, and ille dies.
There was painted a high ash tree with the leaves green and pleasant, and
many serpents flying from the shadow, with this posie. Non hac latet anguis in
herba.

Sacra Ioui quercus, laurus pulcherrima Phoebo,
Consecrat Austriacos Fraxinus alta duces.
Fraxineas metuit serpens perterritus vmbras,
Nec minus Austriacos haeresis hydra fugit.
Nae tu serpentum morsus Hispania temnas,
Austriacum dum te fraxinea vmbra tegit.
An Epigram to the Queens name.
M argaris aequoreas gemmas praeit inclita gemm A
A ustriaco prognata solo, quam vincere cult V
R arus and ipse adamas nescit, rutulansue pyropu S,
G ratius ista micat, radianteque lumine vinci T,
A mouet illius noctem and nigra nubila fulgo R
R esplendens sacra haec virtutis luce, profund I
I mpiaque hereseon facit orbem linquere monstr A
T erris restituens pietatis lumina, and illi C
A ustriaci noua gemma, freti nitet aurea stell A.
Virgils aenigma.
Dic quibus in terris inscripti nomina regum
Nascantur flores, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.
The answer.
Ecce Maro Hesperijs flores nascuntur in hortis,
Qui regum in folijs nomina scripta gerunt.
Margaris in^isos nomen nomenque Philippi,
Anglorum flores Pincia vallis habet.
Martyribus reges hi nutriuere cruorem,
Et se purpureis inseruere rosis.
Qui cruor effusus pro religione tuenda,
Scribet in aeternis nomina tanta libris.
In the Spanish Copy are diverse other Epigrams which for breuities sake I omit.

The coming of the Catholic Princes King Philippe the third, and Queen
Margaret to the Inglish College of Valladolid.
Their Magesties some few days before their coming to the Inglish College,
had visited the chief Religious houses of this City, and in all places were
received with so great preparation, specially in the university; four days
before; that after so Royal entertainmentes this College did fear and not
without reason, to appear in their Magesties presence, but that the little
gift of the widow so much esteemed and commended for the good will and
affection wherewith she gave it, did encorage the students to do the best
they could: and so all things were put in order as above has been said where
upon S. Bernards day (which fell upon a sunday) at two a clock in the
afternoon came to the College 24. of the Kings Guard, with their sargeant,
who presently divided the soldiars at the gates, with express order that none
should enter, because their Magesties would that day, enjoy the College alone,
and a little after came the lieutenant of the Guard, who placed likewise other
soldiars in all the rooms which were hung with verses, with charge to keep
them, as they did, that none were wanting.

The Steward of the kings house, and some other officiers, and gentlemen of the
Palace; understanding, that his M. would see the scholars chambers, and the
manner of their habitation, came before as the custom is, and were much
delited with the order and commodity, to see that neither there was want of
any thing necessary, nor any thing superfluous, but as the widow had provided
for the Prophet Elizeus a bed, a table, a chair, and a light, so they had
(every one) all that was commodious for his studies and rest, without want or
excess.

About five a clock, or a little after, came their Magesties to the College,
and in sign of more confidence and good will, without their accustomed guard,
notwithstanding they had diverse companyes both on foot and horse lodged in the
City which commonly wait upon them when they go abroad. The students
expected them in the Church in two ranks, from the door to the high altar,
and the Provincial of the Society being at the same time (by chance) in the
City accompanied with two Priests of the College, and reuested (as the
manner is in such solemn receiuinges) attended their Magesties at the Church
door, who at their entrance (having received holy water and kneeling down
upon two cushens of cloth of gold which their chaplens had there provided)
adoted the Crucifix which the father offered them, with so great reverence and
devotion, as the English students there present were much moved to see it, who
(as diverse of them afterward did confess) rejoiced exceedingly to see those
two Monarkes of the world prostate themselves and adore with so great piety
the Image of our Savior, for whose cause and Religion they see them selves in
banishment, their parents robbed and imprisoned, and many of their friends
persecuted and afflicted.

In the mean time others of the students above in the quire sang Te Deum
laudamus, in their accustomed Ecclesiastical Music which contented so much,
as the Duke of Lerma and other noble men that came with the king; thought the
singers had been procured from abroad, but understanding that it was the
ordenarie music of the College, and only the students, received double
contentment to hear it, and much more when at the entrance it was told them,
that nothing was borrowed that day to receive their Magesties but only the
hanginges. The King and the Queen coming to the high altar remained there
kneeling while the priest ended the versicles and prayer accustomed to be sung
in the like receiving of Princes; and after, they rose on foot, and viewed the
images of the three Inglish martyrs upon the high altar which I mentioned
before, and the Queen maruailing at the pictures which were in the hanginges
of the church, the king told her they were the torments wherewith the
heretics put to death the martyrs in England.

Before they departed, understanding that the Relic which stood upon the
Altar was flesh of the glorious Martyr S. Alban that had endured without
corruption above 12. hundred yeates, they both kneeled down again with great
reverence, and the Queen besides her cushen upon the ground to adore it, as
they did both with so particular affect and devotion, as I must needs confess
to your highness I was moved above measure to see it, and diverse others there
present (as after-wardes I understood) no less then I, with the same
consideration how king Hentie the 8. of England distroyed the holy Relics of
the glorious Martyr S. Thomas of Canterbury the honor of his kingdom and
nation, seeing the piety and reverence wherewithal our Catholic kings did
kiss and adore the Relic and flesh of this holy Martyr of a forrayne country
and kingdom.

As they passed out of the church, the scholars (who were all in order placed
round about the first court) made altogether a low reverence, and afterward by
two and two went forward into the hall prepared (as I have said above) for
their Magesties; who passing a long, veiwed with attention the Hietogliphicks
and pictures, and seamed to receive contentment with the variety and
invention: and passing on further, when the king saw them continue all the way
as he went, in such diversity and number (for they were above 270.) he
commanded they should all be kept and brought him to the Palace, for that he
would see them at leisure, as he did.

When he entered the hall, the Musicians in the other room adjoining, divided
only with a curtayn, began to play upon their vials and virginals a very
grave and pleasant song of eight parts, till their Magesties and those that
came in their company were set, the scholars stood between the cloth of
estate and the music in there ranks or companies, on the one side stood the
Poets and Rhetoricians: on the other, the Philosophers, and in the midst the
Priests and divines. And that they might be the better discerned, the first
rank was of the least, in the second were those of middle stature, and in the
third the tallest; and the modesty and composition of all was such as their
Magesties did particularly note it, and were not a little edified, to see
together so many young youths banished for their fidelity to God and their
Religion, who altedy had offered up their labors, studies and lives for the
conversion of their Country, living in collegial discipline with that example
which their very presence did declare, and with so great purity and
innocence of life, as strangers of different nations (continual witnesses of
all their actions do testify) and of so rare talents as the verses and
ingenious inventions a bout the walls of the College did show, and in five,
of so good education and parentage, as might be seen in their persons,
countenance and behavior in so much as diverse Noblemen there present moved
with this spectacle, did wish they could bring up their children in the same
manner, and therefore diverse principal persons of this real me have procured
very ernestly and with great offers to have their sons brought up in this
Seminaric, to learn the yertues which they see in the Inglish scholars, and
truly in my judgment there was nothing in all the solemnity comparable to this
sight: and so would that famous Matron Cornelia Mother to the Graccos have
said, if she had been present, who, when other Noble women of Rome gloried and
bosted in their riches, used to bring forth her children modest and well
nurtured, as the most precious iewelles and greatest riches that she bad.

When their Magesties were set, and the Musicians had ended, there came
forth from amongst the divines, one of the students, who for the manifold
gifts and graces which God has bestowed upon him might well appear in their
presence, and kneeling down upon the one knee before the King in the midst
of the hall, after his Magestie had given him sign to arise, standing on foot
said as follows in Latin.

The first Oration made to the Catholic King Philippe the third in the Inglish
College of Valladolid.
IN hoc hodierno conspectu vestro ornatissimo iucundissimoque (Rex Maxim,
Regina Serenissima) iure nobis foret optandum, quod Philosophus quidam optasse
dicitur, ut Deus fenestram aliquam in pectoribus nostris aperiret, vt haec quae
concepimus gaudia, non per angustas sensuum rimas emanarent, sed patentibus
pectorum portis prorumperent: and ipsi, gestientem latitiam sociorum meorum,
non ex hilari eorum front conijceretis, sed in intimo amoris font
spectaretis. Nec enim nobis solum praebuistis nouum singularis laetitiae
argumentum, verum etiam antiqui beneficij memoriam renouastis, meminimus enim
(Philippe Rex potentissime) nec vnquam obliuiscemur illius diei qui huic nostro
Seminarto omnium ornatissimus illuxit, non solis radijs, sed tuis, and Philippi
parentis tui, and clarissimae sororts, splendoribus illusiratus: cuius diei
adeo riuam imaginem hodierna presentia vestra animis nostris obijcit, vt iterum
intueri videmur Regem illum omnium saeculorum memoria maximum, in hoc ipso
loco, balbutientes puerulos tres integr as horas libentissime audientem. Iterum
cernimus quasi oculis, sanctissimum illum ac sapientissimum Monarcham aetate
longuidum, sed diuino amore feruidum alnmnos huius Collegij suauissimis
amplexibus and vitali sanctissimi pectoris spiritu, ad martyrium animantem.
Verum non fuit satis hnmanitati tuae (o magne Haeres non solum paternorum
Regnornm, sed etiam virtutum and laudum) non fuit satis, quod Princeps
Hispaniarum sub Parentis tui vmbra hoc Seminarium ornaueris, nisi etiam
hodierno die, in haec angusta tecta and inornatos parietes, regium nomen et
totum Maiestatis tuae lumen inferres: nisi Illustrissimum Austriacae Familiae
decus, sanctissimam coniugem Serenissimam Reginam adduceres, vt in vna exulum
domuncula geminum orbis Sydus arderet.

Moysem puerulum ematris gremie raptum and inclusum scirpea fiscella, A Egyptij
praecipitarunt in flumen, ex quo (diuino consilio) a Pharaonis filia ereptus,
Reginam habuit matrem, patrem Regem. Nos vero non A Egyptia, sed mayor haere
sum tyrannis e patrum sinu and matrum gremijs abstractos, praecipitauit in
Oceanum insanis fluctibus hauriendos. Nil proficis A Egypt saeua, nil
proficis; fluctuabit in freto haec scirpta cimba vsque ad Hispanum littus, and
ereptus inde puer, meliores inueniet parents, meliorem patrem. Intuemini
igitur Parents ama^tissimi (permittite Maximi Principes it a vos ab orbis and
exulibus vocari) intuemimi natos vestros, quos vobis non fortuna, sed voluntas,
non natura, sed pietas peperit. Cerne (Rex Maxim) hos tuos filios, qui non ex
materno vtero nati fuimus, sed ex aquis miseriarum natauimus in hunc tuum
paternum sinum.

Conijce serenissimos oculos (Potentissima Pharaonis filia) in hos tuos Moses,
quos ad ciues suos ex Egyptiacae seruitute liberandos, non inscia and inuita,
sed sciens and volens materna beneuolentia foues. Et quanquam quae accepimus
benefitia adeo sunt excellentia, vt ea vix opta re potuissemus; tamen vt a
vobis long praestantiora sperenius, eximia vestra pietas and virtus postulat.

Crescit enim quotidie (Inuicte Philippe) crescit ex nostra calamitate, materia
tuae beneficentiae seges tuae gloriae. Quid enim illustrius, quid dignius
Catholico nomine, magnitudine animi and fortunae tuae, quam collegisse
dispersas reliquias fidei; donasse patria, ciuitate, domicilio, quos haereses
fecit extorres? Multorum est profecto Regu^ ac Caesarum, hosts prostrasse
armis, bello superasse. Haec tua, and sanctissimi parentis tui singularis, and
omniu^ gloriosissima victoria, vicisse beneficijs. Hic hodiernus cleme^tiae
vestrae nouus and inauditus triumphus (clarissimi Reges) in quo (caelo terraque
applaudentibus) fulget gloria crucis, dum Religioms and amoris vinculis tracti
hi omnes socij mei ex remotissimis terris ad vestrum patrocimum confugerunt, vt
quorum alij potentiam metuunt, agnoscant and praedicent benignitatem. Haec vos
hominibus charos, haec Deoque simillimos redit, haec ampliora vobis Regna, haec
nobiliora sceptra dabit, in omnem aeternitatem possidenda.

The same in English.
AT this most glorious and most grateful sight of your Royal Magesties
(Mighty Monarcke, and most gracious Queen) justly should we wish that which a
certain philosopher is said to have wished, that God had opened windows in our
breasts, to the end your Magesties might see the abounda^t joy we have this day
received, and not only gather it by our conntenance and words through the
narrow chinckes of our exterior senses, but rather behold it in our very
hearts, as in the fountain where it springs, for your majesty's have not
only geeuen us this new occasion of present gladness, but also have renewed
the joyful memory of an other former favor. We do remember full well (most
pote^t king) neither shall we ever be able to forget, that most glorious and
shining day, the brightest that ever was seen in this our College, not with
the presence of the Sun and his beams, but of your royal Magesty, and of
the king your father of famous memory, to-gether with the renowned Lady the
Infanta your sister; which day, this your presence so renews, and in so
lively manner calls it to memory, that it seems we see again that most
glorious and pious king memorable to all ages, in this very place, giving ear
again to the stammering speeches of children, as then he did, with singular
curtesy and attention, for three hours together. We see again in your
Magestie, that most wise and potent monarch of the world, though then
languishing in years, yet young and flourishing in the love of god and zeal of
his glory, how most lovingly he embraced the scholars of this college, and
with the lively spirit of his pious and religious heart, encouraged them to
martyrdom. But all this seemed nothing to your Royal benignity (most worthy
inheritour not so much of your fathers kingdoms, as of his virtues and
praises) you thought it not sufficient to have honored this college with your
presence being then prince of Spain, unless you should this day again in
your greatest glory, straiten your self within these narrow walls, bringing
in your company her M. presenc the honor and ornament of the house of Austria,
that within this little college of banished men, might be seen shining the
Sun and Moon that give light to the world.

The child Moses, whom the tyrany of Egypt had violently drawn from his
mothers breasts almost the same hour he was borne, and cast him into the
river shut up in a wicker basket to seek his adventures, was by Gods especial
providence found and taken up by the daughter of Pharao, and so came to have a
Queen for his mother and his father a king. we in like manner, are violently
drawn and driven from our parents, not by the Egiptian tyrany, but by another
far greater and more cruel, by the heresy of our country, which has cast us
headlong into the Ocean sea to be drowned and deuowred by the waves. But all in
vain (cruel Egypt) all in vain, thy labor is lost: for this our wicker
boat, though tossed for a while with the waves and billows of the sea, yet at
last by the same providence, is cast on shore and aryued safe on the coast of
Spain, where the child is taken up, and has found a new father and mother
far more noble and better then those he lost. Behold then pious and loving
parents (give this leave most mighty princes to us Orphans banished for
Christ to call your Magesties by this title) Behold I say, these your
children, not given you by fortune, but adopted by your own choice; not yours
by nature, but by your piety and religion behold mighty king these your
sons, not borne to your Magesty out of our mothers wombes, but carried with
the waters and waves of tribulation out of which we have as if it were swomme
into this your fatherly bosom. Cast your gracious eyes (potent daughter of
Pharo) upon these your Moses, whom with motherly affection you bring up,
not as the other Queen did at unawares, but witting and willingly, to deliver
their country from the Egiptian servitude of heresy and sin, and although the
benifytes we have already received, be so many and so great, that we durst
scarce so metymes have wished the^; yet such is your Magesties piety and
bou^ty, that now it obliges us to hope for far greater at your hands, for
daily there increases (invincible Philippe) there increases daily by our
calametie more and more matter for your bou^ty: and the harvest grows every
hour whereby you are to reap immortal glory (for what can be more glorious,
or more agreeable, to the name and title of a Catholic king, and to the
greatness of your mind and fortune, then to have provided country City and
habitation, for those whom heresy has cast out in banishment. Many other
kings and Emperors, have overcome their enemies with arms, and vanquished
them in war: but this is your peculiar, and most glorious victory, and of the
king your father of holy memory to have ouercom with curtesy and good deeds.

This present day place and assembly is a triumph of your cleme^cy (most
renowned Princes) in which the glory of Christ crucefied, is seen, with joy of
heaven and earth, in these my brethren who drawn with cheines of love and
Religion, are come from far countries to live under your protection, that
they may acknowledge and testefy your bounty, whose greatness others do fear.
This meekness and clemency in so great power and Magestie, makes you amiable
to men and like to God almighty, and the same will bring you greater dominons
and far richer and more noble sceptors in heaven, then these which here you
hold upon earth, to be yours for all eternety.

The student that made this Oration delivered it with so good grace and action,
and with such modesty mixed with the affectes and feelinge of that he spoke, as
it was much lyked of all that were present and holden for a good beginning of
the rest that was to follow. At the end of this oration while the orator went
to kiss the king his hand, the curtain was drawn that covered the music,
and for that the voices in the quire, which I spoke of before and the music
of instruments, at there Majesty's entrance into the hall had caused curiosity
in them and the rest, and desire to see who they were that had song and
played, they were not a little contented when the curtayne was drawn, seeing as
before had been told them that they were only the stude^tes, without any other
help from a broad, who now in sight with there modesty and good presence, gave
double grace to that they did, and so with instruments and voices together,
begone an other song of those which they use in there high masses of excellent
music which begone Domine Deus virtutum, and ended Beatus homo qui sperat in
te, and toward the end of this music came forth from amongst the youngest
company a little youth that in semblance seemed a very angel, who with great
grace and making a low courtesy to there Majesty's, went up to the pulpet
which (as I said before) was prepared over against the cloth of estate. This
childs father seeing him ingenious and disposed to virtue, notwithstanding he
was his eldest son desired (as him self told me) that rather he should lose
his inheritance then his faith and Religion; and moreover seeing him of so
tender and delicate complexion, as it would be dangerous to send him a long
journey alone or not very well accompanied, he determined although it were with
danger of his living and life to bring him out of England him self to this
Seminary, as he did, and here in the Church upon his ariuall (like another
Abraham that had come to this hill to sacrifice his dearly beloved Isaac)
offered him up to our savior before the blessed sacrament, with so great zeal
and devotion that he edified all the College; to see the great force of the
grace of God, and how it ouercometh and subiecteth nature, and all humane
difficulties, as in this and many other heroical works of these faithful
Catholics of Ingland is evident. A few days after the father departid with
great comfort to leave his son in such security, and the child remained so
merry and contented and with so good lyking of the College, as if he had been
in his fathers house, and without going abroad in one year he learned the
Spanish tongue. And truly if to S. Jerome it seemed a thing worthy of
admiration, that a philosopher of whom he writes, undertook a long and
dangerous journey to hear Socrates: much more would he marvel if he lived
in these our days, to see not only philosophers and men of ripe age, but
children of so tender years as this and many others, to pass the seas, and in
so great and manifest labors and dangers as they do, to come to this and the
other Seminaries, only to learn and conserve the Catholic faith, and with so
difficult a purpose to return to teach it in there country where it must cost
them so dear, as the world knows, and all this without any temporal hope or
commodity to them selves: and therefore with a far more excellent and glorious
end, then was that of the Philosopher. This youth being in the pulpet, and
haueing made low reverence to there Majesty's, begone in Spanish this brief
speech or Preface that follows.

The Preface to the ten tongues.
THe holy ghost having (with singular providence) determined to bring the
whole world to the kingdom of Christ, and that his name and glory should he
published through-out the earth by the holy College of the Apostles; gave them
for this end diverse tongues and languages, that with them his greatness and
excellency might more easily be made known to all nations, according to
this, we fyndinge our selves most highly bound and obliged to your Majesty's,
and desiring to declare our gratitude to the whole world, have endeavored to
imitate this pattern and example of the holy ghost, with desire (if your
Majesty's give us leave) to signify in diverse tongues and in the best manner we
can that which we shall never be able sufficiently to express of our own
obligation, nor of your Majesty's greatness; both which the Prophet David has
combined in one, and most lively described in the twenteth Psalm: which Psalm
made by a king and meant of the king of kings, does in such manner lay before
us the benedictions which your Majesty's have received of God, and to Heroical
and Royal virtues wherewith you procure to imitare the sovereign king, the
Prophet and true pattern of kings, of whom the Psalm speaks that all that
in it is said may very fitly be applied to you, as shall appear in the
discourse which we will prosecute in ten different languages, observing the
brevity due to your Majesty's presence, and begin which the Spanish as the
most familiar and best known, that it may open the way and after serve to
enterpret the rest. The Queen and some other ladies of the court, by a
certain occasion had some days before heard of this little youth, and so were
desirous to see him, and heard him with extraordinary contentment and applause,
and the Psalm chosen in the opinion of all that were present, fitted
maruailously well the intent and obligation of the time and place, and so
presently, there went up to the pulpet another student, brought up in the
Seminaryes since he was six years old, who with all the rest that followed
observed the self same manner of curtesy, making first a low reverence down
to the bottom of the pulpet, and the like as often as they spoke to there
Majesty's, and so accompaning his speech (as the rest also did) with grave and
modest action, begone the first vearse of the Psalm and the explication in
Spanish that follows.

Domine in virtute tua laetabitur Rex and super salutare tuum exultabit
vehementer. Psalm. 20. The Inglish of the Spanish tongue.
The propet David in the beginning of this Psalm discovers two fountains,
from whence flows the true joy and comfort of all kings: the first is, in
virtute tua laetabitur Rex. The king which puts his trust and confidence not
in his own wisdom, nor in his treasures not in his forces and strength, but
in the power and protection of almighty God, finds him self so potent that no
contrary success can dismay him; so rich that he fealeth no want of gold or
silver: so armed that he fears not enimyes, though never so many: and so
strong that he lives always in prosperity, and comfort without fear. for
though the world, and all they that trust therein be subject to changes, and
that daily experience does show, yet he that trusts in God is sure to stand,
and to enjoy endless and unspeakable comfort.

A second and greater consolation which this our king may expect (and David
says issues from the same fountain) is, that he procuring the salvation of
souls, and to propagate not so much his own dominions as the kingdom of
Christ our savior, he gives him part of his own felicity and joy as to a
companion and partaker of his enterprise in the world; and so says the
prophet that this joy and consolation shall be most abundant, Es super salutare
tuum exaltabit vehementor. O how great things may your majesty's hope for at
gods hands since your trust in him and your holy zeal; to enlarge the
Catholic Religion is so great, that you have not put non plus vltra in Spain,
but extend it beyond the fardest seas, to the east and west and to the north
from whence we come to see and reverence this new Solomon, and find his
wisdom and virtues to be more then same did tell us. Enlarge then o happy and
fortunat Spain the foldes of thy heart, for thy joys shall increase like the
sea, and drown thearin the enemies of the Catholic church. These two
proprieties of the good king the prophet David follows in this Psalm, which
shall be declared brefly to your majesty's in ten tounges; where of some are
profesled in this Seminary and to the end that those which are not understood,
may notwithstanding be gratfull to the hearers, I shall declare them with the
brevity I can, and so I end the Spainsh, with these words of the holy
ghost, Beata terra cuius Rex nobilis est. Blessed is that country, and happy
art thou o Spain which have a king of so noble a mind and of so high and holy
cogitations.

This explication of the first verse being ended, the student went down and
placed him self below near the pulpit, over against there majesty's, to
declare the tou^ges that should need interpretation.

Here I could certify your highness of some circumstances of particular
contentment, and edification concerning the other nine students that followed;
but not to be tedious to your highness I will here pass in silence diverse
things worthy to be known, and come to the second that spoke in the Hebrew
tongue, who observing the natural guttural pronuntiation of that language
expounded the second verse of the Psalm which follows.

The Hebrew.
Desiderium cordis eius tribuisti ei, and voluntate labiorum eius non fraudasti
eum. Although the tongue in it self was so hard to be understood,
nevertheless with the convenient actions he gave it, and the reuerences he
made to there Majesty's when he spoke unto them, lifting up his eyes to heaven
when he mentioned God, and other actions which in part signified what he
spoke, but specially with hope of the interpretation promised: notwithstanding
it might be thought that these unknown tongues would be less grateful, yet
the event showed the contrary: at the end of every speech, the orator made low
curtesy to there Majesty's, and in the mean time the other that followed, was
ready to go up to the pulpit, and prepared him self to speak, whilst the
interpreter below declared that which had allreddy bin said as he did the
Hebrew in the sense following.

The Interpreter.
The Hebrew tongue has declared briefly the happy success which David
prophecieth to the good king: to wit, that he can ask nothing of God which he
shall not obtain, binding almighty God in obligation of promise to fulfill his
desires, as he in all things procures to do Gods holy will.

The Greek tongue.
The Greek tongue begun taking the third verse for his theme.

Quoniam praeuenisti cum in benedictionibus dulcedinis, posuisti in capite eius
coronam de lapide pretioso. When he and the rest in several tongues named
this king they did it with so proper and magnificent titles, accompanied with
such reverence, that it was graetfull to those that heard only the sound,
though they understood not the signification of the words.

The Interpreter.
He has said in Greek that God almighty does prenent such a king with
blessings of sweetness, giving him from his tender years such prudence,
valor, and disposition of nature, that his government is grateful and gives
contentment to all, and puts upon his head a crown of precious stones,
which Solomon in an other place Proverb. 12. declares in these words: Mulier
diligens, coronae est viro suo: so as the Margaret or jewel here present, does
not suffer us to doubt of what precious stone the Prophet meant.

The Latin tongue.
Vitam petijt ate, and tribuisti longitudinem dierum in saeculum saeculi. In
the fourth place went up a young man of honorable parents by blood, and much
more for their constant profession of the Catholyk faith, who came to this
Seminary through many dangers by sea; and enemies. By his countenance and
person he showed well who he was, and with a grateful voice and action spoke to
the king as follows.

ETiamsi videamus Maiestatem tuam (Rex potentissime) in ipso beatissimae vitae
flore versari, tamen cum Regij pectoris tui humana omnia despicientis
magnitudinem intuemur, adduci non possumus, vt credamus inuictum illum and
caelestem animum vitam caducam and fluxam a Deo optimo maximo petijsse. Illud
sane certum and exploratum habemus, te cum vastum imperium a Philippo parente,
velut a sanctissimo Dauide foelicissimus Solomon accepisses, impetrato a summo
Po^tifice and misso per omnes Hispanias plenissimo inbilaeo publicis and private
is tuis and aliorum precibus sapientiam qua populum tuum regeres postulasse:
audi igitur (Rex Catholice) Deum, optimum, maximum ijsdem verbis, quibus olim
Salomoni responsa dantem sanctissimis tuis postulatis. Quia, inquit, non
petijsti dies multos, nec diuitias, sed sapientiam ad discernendum iudicium;
ecce dedi tibi cor sapiens and intelligens in tantum, vt nullus ante te similis
tui fuerit, nec post surrecturus sit. Quantae enim pietatis sapientiaeque est
in summa rerum omnium potestate in adolescentiae flore non abripi ventis
licentiae, and aetatis, sed integras nationes locis disiunctissimas, moribus
dissimillimas, numero propemodum infinitas, veluti vnius corporis membra in
pace, and officio continere: sed pergit Deus; etiam, inquit, quae non
postulasti dedi tibi, diuitias scilicet and gloriam, vt nemo fuerit similis tui
in regibus cunctis retro diebus: quod quam recte ^onueniat in maiestatem tuam
ex eo sat is constat, quod ipsum Salomonem imperij magnitudine and opum
affluentia s^peraueris. Si autem, inquit, ambulaueris in vijs meis sicut David
pater tuus, longos faciam dies tuos. Quid m^gitur gratulemur maiestati tuae
dies longos, imperium faustum and diuturnum (foelicissime Solomon) qui
sanctissimi genitoris tui pietatem sic es aemulatus, vt senem iuuenis
quodammodo superasse videaris: Nec est quod de perpetuo foelicitatis tuae cursu
dubitemus, cum non possimus de pietatis tuae constantia dubitare. It aque de
Maiestate tua ad Deum conuersi vere pronunciamus: vit am petijt ate, and
tribuisti ei in hoc mundo vitam, sapientia, opibus, gloria abundantem, and
dabis in caelo, vt speremus vitam sempiternam, longitudinem dierum in saeculum
saeculi.

The same in Inglish.
ALthough (most mighty and potent King) we see your Majesty in the very prime
and flower of this your happy age, yet not-withstanding when we consider your
magnanimity. and the greatness of your Royal mind which dispiseth all humane
and earthly things, we cannot believe that you have asked of God almighty this
frail and unstable life, but that when you were to take the government of
your kingdoms from the renowned king your father, as an other Solomon from
king David, and procured from his holiness a Iubiley and sent it through all
your dominions, we are persuaded that both by public and private prayers by
your own and by the prayers of others. you asked of God as Solomon did,
wisdom, to gonerne this your people. Harken then most Catholic king the
answer of almighty God to your petition in the very same words wherewith he
answers king Solomon: because (says he) thou have not asked of me long life
or riches but wisdom to judge aright: behold therefore I have given the a
heart full of wisdom and understanding, so that none has bin before like unto
thee nor shall arise after thee how great a sign of piety and wisdom is it
in your Majesty to stand upon the hight of so great power and auctority in the
weakest and most vnco^stant part of ma^s age so steadfast and immovable, as
not to be overthrown with the greatest blasts of liberty and youth, but to
keep your self irreprehensible and so many nations as you govern so far a
sunder, and of so different disposition and manners so subject to you as they
be, and united amongst them selves in peace, and concord, as members of one
body. But God almighty passes on farther with your Majesty, and says; riches
and honor which thou have not asked those also I do give thee, that none shall
be like thee amongst all the kings of the earth: which promise how it is
fulfilled in your Majesty may well appear, in that you do far excel and
surpass king Solomon in greatness of dominion and abundance of riches: But
(says God) if thou shall walk in my commandments, as David thy father did, I
will multiply thy days upon the earth: why then may we not congratulate with
your Majesty a long and happy life, and a flourishing, prosperous, and permanent
reign (most fortunate Solomon) who so imitate your fathers virtues, as in
these young years you strive to excel him, neither can we fear the
continuance of your prosperity, which we so much desire and pray for, seeing the
constancy of your piety and religion. Therefore tuurning us to God we may very
well say of your Majesty, that which the Prophet has said in this verse; Vitam
petijt ate, and tribuisti ei longitudinem dierum in seculum saeculi, he has
asked life and thou have given it him abounding with wisdom riches and glory
in this world, and we hope your Majesty shall receive in heaven everlasting life
and length of days for ever and ever.

The Cornish tongue.
Magna est gloria eius in salutare tuo, gloriam and magnum decorem impones
super eum. In this tongue spoke a young man borne in that part of England,
which is toward Britanny, and the language is as far different from the English
as here in Spain the Biscay tongue from that of Castile, and has a certain
grace and reddynes of speech not unlike to that of the Biscaies, his speech was
short, and he delivered it very well.

The Interpreter.
He has said in his language that many men prete^de glory and honor, but few
do find it, because the most part of men seek it where it is not, in vain
ostentatio^, and in the deceitful show of the world and so at length, see them
selves deceived, for true honor is to be found only in virtue and true
religion, where your Catholic Majesty's seek it, and therefore it follows
you as the shadow follows the body of him that goes toward the Sun.

The English.
One of the students spoke in his natural language with great liuelynes,
eloquence, and propriety of action, and used so significant words, diverse of
them correspondent to the latin, as the most part of that he spoke was
understood, and for his theme he took the verse following.

Quoniam dabis ei in benedictionem in seculum seculi, laetificabis cum in
gaudio cum vultu tuo. The Interpreter.
He has said in Inglish that this eternal benediction which the Prophet David
foretells in this verse, and promises to a good king, is no other then to
defend, propagate, and increase the Christian religion, which is the greatest
dignity and honor that God almighty has bestowed upon your Majesty's. For the
other blessings you have received as the foyson of the earth, the treasure of
your kingdoms, and all other temporal commodities vanish a way as the dew
stricken with the Sun beams, but this other benediction is immovable and
permanent, like to the Sun it self.

The welsche tongue.
In this tongue spoke a Priest borne in that Province, who not long after was
to go into England, and had for his theme these two verses following.

Quoniam Rex sperat in Domino, and in misericordia altissimi non commouebitur.
Inueniatur manus tua omnibus inimicis tuis, dextera tua inueniet omnes qui te
oderunt. He delivered his speech so devoutly and confidently as if he had had
commission from heaven to promise the good success he foretold to there
Majesty's, and his presence countenance and action moved all to devotion, and
more those that knew him.

The Interpreter.
He has said in welsh that this king having for his arms and shield the
mercy of God, shall infallibly subdue all his enemies.

The Flemmish.
He that spoke in flemmish in his pronunciation and manner of speaking, seemed
a natural flemming and had for his theme this verse that follows.

Pones cos vt clibanum ignis in tempore vultus tui, dominus in ira sua
conturbabit eos and deuorabit eos ignis. The Interpreter.
He has said in flemmish that one great point of excellency and dignity of
this king is, that he has the same cause, the same enemies, and the self same
punishment for them which God has prepared for his enemies in hell.

The French tongue.
The French tongue was very well liked, partly for that the youth spoke it with
the natural pronunciation of the language, and partly because his Majesty
understands it well, and him self did interpret to the Queen the substance
of that which was said, and so there was no need of interpretter here, not
for the latin and Italian tongue.

The French had for this theme this verse following.
Fructum eorum de terra perdes, and semen eorum a filijs hominum. This verse of
the twenteth Psalm of the prophet David (most puisant Monarch of the world)
which at this time I have taken to discourse upon, may seem very fit for this
purpose, to declare and set forth your inexplicable diligence in withstanding,
subduing, and rooting out heresy, and this not only in your own kingdoms and
dominions, where no heretic dare appear or lift up his head: but also in the
countries about you; Fructum eorum de terra perdes and seme^ eorum a filijs
hominu^, you do extirpat and root out there fruit, that is, the vices and
discordes proceeding from there wicked doctrine, reducing there seed to the
Catholic faith by your care and solicitude; in testimony where-of may be
aleaged the peace concluded in france, the continual wars in Flanders, and
most of all our miserable country of England, toward the which your love and
affection always has bin, and now is, so great that no tongue is able to
declare it; for besides your great vigilance and care taken to conclude amity
and peace after so long war (which only heresy has caused and continued) who
can sufficiently admire your Majesty's favor more then human, in erecting
and maintayning not only two colleges here in Spain, this and that of Siuil,
but also two others in Flanders, the one at Doway, the other at S. Omers as it
were four spiritual bulwarks and fortresses to repress and subdue the malice
of the heretics, and as a wholesome herb calls Brittanica, to chase a way
and put to flight those venomous serpents, the infernal spitites that have
infected and poisoned England with heresy; wherefore very well may this verse be
applied to your majesty Fructum eorum de terra perdes and semen eorum a filijs
hominum.

The Italian tongue.
The Italian with the sweetness of the tongue it self, and the good grace that
the orator gave it, seemed well chose^ for the last verse of the Psalm, and
because it agrees with the Latin and Spanish, it was understood of all and
needed no interpreter his theme was this, Exalt are domine in virtute tua
cantabimus and psallemus virtutes tuas.

Although the rest of the Psalm fitteth so well the time and place as your
Majesty has heard, yet may it seem that this last verse makes not so much
for our purpose, seeing the Catholic Church our mother so afflicted, our most
dear country so ouerrun with heresies, that the wicked triumph and, the
faithful suffer, our parents and freindes robbed, imprisoned, tormented and
cruelly mattered. Who considering this, will not judge that we should rather
cry out with the Prophet Jeremy. Vide domine quoniam tribulor subuersum est cor
meum in memetipso, quonia^ amaritudine plenus sum. And so might we with all
reason if it were not (most noble and pious Prince) that your Catholic and
Royal heart is so reddy to help us, as all the world knows. But now what
marvel is it having here present your Majesty our most gracious protector and
refuge, that forgetting the tears and complaints which our banishment
requires, we rejoice and be glad for your Majesty's felicity praising God, and
giving him infinite thanks for the great favors and benefits he has
bestowed upon you and saying with the Prophet David. Exaltare domine in virtute
tua. Extol the powerful hand of the almighty that has placed your Royal
dignity as a strong forte against all the enemies of his holy Church, and a
refuge and comfort of all afflicted Catholics, in so much that where your
Majesty reigns, there Catholic religion, and the faith of Christ florisheth:
for this (most potent king) we are glad and rejoice for your power and greatness,
and can do no less but praise and thank the eternal Majesty of our savior,
that in so troublesome and dangerous a time has provided so sure a haven for
us, and for his Church, ending the Psalm with the words of the Prophet,
Cantabimus and psallemus virtutes tuas: At the end of this Psalm the Prophet
seems to inuit and oblige those that enjoy the favor and protection of the
good king, whom before he had described, to sing and show forth his excellency
and felicity and so the English students began a sweet and artificial song made
after their country manner of music and the ditty in Spanish to the purpose,
which one of them standing between the two settes of instruments sung in
sight of there Majesty's, and the Inglish music with the Spanish ditty gave
extraordinary contentment to all, and no less when on a soddaine they saw
appear in the pulpit the child that in the beginning made the introduction to
the tongues, and so all were silent, and attentive to hear him, and he
perceiving him self to be heard with favor took heart and spoke with much more
audacity and better grace then in the beginning.

The conclusion and thanks to there Majesty's.
In testimony of the singular love and affection which we do acknowledge and
most humbly reverence in your Majesty's, this shall suffice to all the world,
that a child dare presume and be so bold as to speak in presence of the
Monarch thereof nevertheless who would not take heart and be encoraged with so
especial favor and courtesy, seeing so great a Majesty and highness humble and
include him self with in the strait and lowly wales of this poor College of
banished Catholics, only to honor and comfort them with his Royal presence.
And if the Bishops and Prelates of the Nicene counsel who had suffered in the
defense of the same faith and religion that we profess, received so great
comfort with the love and estimation which the most Christian and religious
Emperor Constantine the great showed them for the same respect, not only
embraceing them, but most humbly kissing the marks and tooke^s of the
torments which they had suffered, what joy may your Majesty think that my
brethren and companions do receive, seeing them selves so highly favored and
honored with so many signs of your singular affection, and with the favorable
presence of the Queens Majesty, wherewith we find our selves much more
animated; then dismayed with the cruel persecutions of our country, and if the
like courtesy and love showed to these Seminaries by your fathers, and your
Majesty's Royal clemency in times past, did so confirm and encourage them
which received those favors that they feared not to shead most valerously
their blood in the flower of their youth, for testimony and defense of the
holy Catholic faith suffering cruel martyrdom as well-nygh two hundred of our
Priests have done for the same cause, and some of this Seminary since your
Majesty's last being here eight years ago: to what victories then, to what
triumphs do these new abundant favors call and inuit us (most courteous
and religious Princes?) me thinks I feel the blood boiling in my companions
hearts, offering it self to be shed for Jesus Christ, for whose sake we see our
selves this day so honored of your Majesty's: And if it shall please God to
give any of us so good fortune, our blood shall cry to heaven, asking crowns
of everlasting reward for your Majesty's, and in the earth proclaiming and
publishing the Christian zeal and piety of the Catholic Kings of Spain.

The Estrich is of so gross and cruel condition that she forsakes her young
ones before they come out of the shell, but (not without especial providence of
god) they are hatched and brought up with the heat of the Sun, what else is
our lamentable country but the same unkind Estrich (which the prophet Jeremy
lamenteth, saying the daughter of my people is cruel like the Estrich in the
wilderness that forsakes her young ones before they be hatched: so in this our
desolation and banishment he nourishes favors and fostereth us as a father
who by office and title is the Sun of Spain. And if Moses who after was to
be the captain of Gods people had good for tune (as before has bin said) when
he was a child that being cast into the water to perish, he was found by the
kings daughter of Egypt and by her adopted for her own, our good fortune is
no less but grater then his, to fall here into the hands of your Majesty's,
and in Flanders into the hands of the Infant of Spain. In times past England
was beholding to Spain for gold silver, pearls, oil, wine, and the like
fruits of the earth, but now for other fruits and riches much more precious
then gold or silver, the fruits of faith and Catholic religion and all kind
of virtues and ieuells of heaven. Oh that the glorious troop of martirs of
these Seminaries would come down to give your Majesty's thanks for the
favors, which in time of this so great necessity and persecution you show to
the Inglish Catholics, and bring you from heaven the ensigns and ornaments
of triumph which there are provided for your majesty's in recompense of the
education of so many martirs, and the honor done to them upon earth. Oh that
they would come and give up to your Majesty's hands the Palms of victory and
glory now in your life time, which shall be brought you when you depart out of
this world. I dare undertake you would remain contented, and we satisfied to
see our duty and obligation in part discharged. but seeing this my desire takes
not effect, I beseech most humbly the king of kings, in behalf of all my
companions present, and absent that he vouchsafe to receive your majesty's,
with as great love and liberality in his kingdom, as you have received and
favored us in yours for his sake.

The child pronounced this oration with so tender affectes, showing himself
to feel that which he spoke in such manner, that their Magesties and all that
were present were exceedinghly moved, and diverse could not forbear tears.
After the oration he came down from the pulpit, and having made his reverence
went to kiss the Kings hand, who with his accustomed cleme^ce embraced him,
showing in his countenance how well he had lyked his speech. After him followed
the rest of the students to whom also his Majesty showed such favor and
courtesy as well appeared that God almighty had brought them out of their
fathers houses and country in whose hand are the hearts of Catholic kings, to
incline them as he pleases to favor his works.

About the midst of the last oration entered the kings pages with torches
lighted which they had brought from the palace, because it was night, and when
their Majesty's arose to depart the father of the College went to the cloth
of estate to give them thanks, and besought the king that he would vouchsafe
to continue always his accoustumed favor and protection to this holy work,
whereunto he answered, that he had care to do it, and that he knew it was much
to Gods honor and service of the Church, and therefore could do no less.

The noble men and courtiers that went forth before their Majesty's could not
dissemble the contentment they had received, and in particular the Marquess of
Velada the kings great Steward affirmed that in all the progresses and iournies
he had accompanied him and his father, they had never bin in any place more
nobly received, and required copyes of all the orations, and of the
interpretations that had bin made upon the Psalm, and the Duke of Lerma
desirous to see the student which he maintayneth in the College, embraced him
in the kings presence with such tender affection, as if he had bin his own
father, and told there Majesty's that he adopted him for his Son, and that it
was reason the Queen should also take some number to her charge, whereunto she
answered, that already she had purposed to do it. Their Majesty's when they
came into the vtermost court, for that it was dark and the multitude of those
that accompanied them shadowed the students, who were placed in the way in the
same order, as when their Majesty's entered into the College, one of the
noble men seeing them, as the pages lifted up their torches said to the Duke
of Lerma, look (my lord) what a goodly company of Ecclesiastical men, and he
said to the king, will your Majesty see a quire of angels, whereat the king
and the Queen turning to the scholars with signification of a courteous
farewell, they altogether made reverence to thire Majesty's, and the Duke
much moved with the sight, wringing one of the fathers of the College that
went with him by the hand, said a loud, it is impossible that England should
miscary that brings forth such childeren.

All the nobility, maids of honor, and gentlemen of the court that had bin
present departed, commending greatly that which they had seen, and as the king
was to go out of the gate the Rector kissed his hand, craving pardon that he
had kept him so long, whereunto he auswered; that the time had not seemed long,
and that all had contented him exceedingly. There was gathered a great
multitude of gentlemen, and others of the city before the College, maruailing
much to see their Majesty's stay so long within, and so late in the night
without their guard, and much more when they saw the demonstration of
contentment in them, and all the rest at their coming forth, and so the same
night diverse principal persons that could not that day come into the College,
desired that nothing might be taken down, till the next day following, when
many learned men of the University, Religious, and others, and gentlemen of
the city, came to read the verses, and see how their Majesty's had bin
received, and seemed no less satisfied then the others the day before. Thanks
be given to almighty God, that can find means to comfort and honor those
that be persecuted, and dishonored for his holy name.

An advertisement to the Catholics of England, of the present state of their
children brought up in this College of Valladolid and of the comfort they may
worthily expect of them heer-after.
BEcause I assure my self that your highines has inhereted not the least part
of your fathers love and affection to the Catholics of England, and that you
desire to keep fresh his glorious memory with them no less gratfull then the
memory of the good king Josias was to the people of Israel, and because the
rigorous persecution they suffer causes in all good Catholics great
compassion and desire, to comfort so valorous and faithful people, and that
nothing can be more grateful to good parents then to hear news of their
childeren, hoping that this relation may come to their hands, translated into
Inglish by your highness comaundeme^t, I have thought good to add some
particular things of this Seminary, for their aduertisment of the state
thereof.

There is built a fayer house capable well-nigh of a 100 persons, for
habitation of the students, and it proves so commodious, pleasant, and
healthful that none have dyed since it was finished, and very few fallen sick,
in so much as the last year when there dyed in this city a boue 6000. persons
of the plage, only one scholar of this Seminary well sick of that desease, who
yet recovered: so as it was atributed to Gods special providence and
protection who as it seemed had marked the walls of this college with the
blood of the holy martyrs of Ingland, that the angel of revenge should not
touch the students. They live so merrily and contentedly as them selves affirm
they never lived with such hearty contentment in there own fathers houses. The
grace which God gives them, together with the glorious vocation whereunto he
calls the^ to live reddy to die for the conversion of there country, and the
daily use of prayer and other exercises of piety which they have, kept them
continually with fervor and devotion, notwithstanding the distraction of
their studyes, as well appeared (to omit other exampls) in the extraordenarie
preparation they made, and the recollection this last summer in meditation and
prayer for many days together, to dispose them selves to receive worthily the
lubely of the holy year, which was granted by especial privilege to the
Inglish Catholics, and in other occasions of late, wherein they have made
notable demonstration of their religion and piety especially in the procuring
and receiving a devout image of our blessed Lady de faced by the Inglish
heretics at Cadyz which no doubt, but God almighty has bestowed upon them
in reward of their special love and devotion to his blessed mother, which is
not a little stirred up and increased in this city by their example. They
profit notably in all kind of studyes, specially in philosophy, divinity, and
controuerses against hereses, wherein they defend their conclusions and
public acts with so great satisfaction and approbation of the whole
university, as they are loved and esteemed not only in this city, but of the
grave and learned persons of al these kingdoms, eclesiasticall, and temporal,
and diverse of them have adopted some one, some more of these stude^ts for their
childeren, providing them of maintenance and apparel, and comforting them with
gifts and lettrrs, and visiting them in person as they were their own
children, and the Bishops when they take holy orders, and whole cities in
occasions making demonstration of their good will and affection toward them,
in so much, as these two years past memorable for general famine, and plage,
when many families and co^munities that enjoy great livings and rents, found
them selves ouercharged, this College mayntened 60. or 70. persons without
want of any thing necessary, through Gods holy providence, who has care in
such occasions to sustain at his own expenses those that leave their parents
and country for his holy name, as at other times he has done with Daniel,
Elias, S. Athanasius, and many other of his servants. Finally this good will
and estimation is so much the more to be accounted, of, as it is more universal
and proceeds from persons of more judgment and authority, in which kind, may
be rekned the extraordinary demonstration of favor which the high counsayles
of these kingdoms have showed of late to this Inglish College moved thereunto
by the Earl of Ponion rostro, don Francisco Arias de Bouadilla who having bin
Coronel in Flandres many years, and seeing the rigorous persecution in Ingland
and the constancy of the Catholics, and after known the Inglish College of
Civil, the time he was gouerner of that city, has taken such affection to
this College, that he deals in their business with no less care then if
they were his own childeren, and so upon occasion of two and twenty students
that came this year almost altogether, he presented petitions to the
Counsayles in his own name, and with all gave them books of the history newly
published by the late kings Confessor of the persecution of Ingland, and a
paper co^tayning diverse reasons to move affection toward these Seminaries,
which he caused to be printed for the purpose, and is worthy to be set, (as it
shall be) down at the end of his relation, as well for testimony of this good
noblemans zeal and affection, as for your highness, who cannot chose to
receive contentment, seeing laid together, and well declared the grounds and
foundation of the favors, which your self and the most renowned kings, your
father, and your brother, have showed in sucouring this people that so much
deserves to be sucoured, and the same is no small testimony of the passion and
blindness which heresy has bred in those of England, which persecute even to
death these innocent lambs of their own country and blood, who one the other
side, strangers of a different nation are forced (only for the example of their
good life and virtue) to love so tenderly and with so general approbatio^ as
may be seen in the favors and benefits which daily they receive of their
Majesty's, and your highness, and so many other principal persons of these
kingdo^s, and now lately of these counsayles and communities which is the
greatest testimony that can be of the general affection that is borne them.
For notwithstanding the favor and affection which any Prince or Prelate
shows to a work of this quality does much commend and authorize it, yet
many times it may proceed of a particular devotion, and therefore is not so
great a testimony, nor so universal as his other approbation, but that so many
counsayls as have co^curred of late to favor this work and so many persons of
authority as be in them, in whose wisdom and discretion rests the gouerme^t
of so many kingdoms and countries, and which do not easylie concur in the
qualification and approbatio^ of any thing, wherein may be doubt, should so
unite and conioyne them selves in one mind and affection, not only to approve,
but to favor and succor an other nation and in a thing unaccustomed and
hitherto not seen in any other occasion, and where only one negative voice had
bin sufficient to hinder the grant, this I cannot see how any man can doubt to
be his disposition and handy work, by whom Reges regnant and legum conditores
iusta decernunt, Kings do reign and lawgiuers make just decrees, thereby to
give evident testimony to the world, that he will make famous, and ennoble this
his work, to the greater confusion of the heretics his enemies who seek by all
means possible to calumniat, overthrow, and destroy it.

Wherefore there is no reason that those whom God most merifully calls to
this holy work, no less hard then glorious, should be dismayed, or lose heart
with the troubles and new difficulties, which arise in it every day, by the
subtle means of the enemy of truth, seeing his divine Majesty one the other
side has such particular care to provide diligent workmen and labors for this
his beloved vineyard whose learning confounds the ignorance of their enemies,
there valor and virtue, the others malice, and there magnanimity and patience,
the others cruelty, upholding and mayntaining by these means, the Catholic
faith against all the power of the Prince of darkness. If then God has
effectuated the conversion of other countries, and of England also, at other
times by only one, or two, or by some small number of good men, what may we
hope for now of so many faithful servants and workmen of his, as be in that
country; and of the provident care which (as we see) he has to call so many
chosen youth as every day with singular and strange vocations come as a new
supply to the Seminaries, where being brought up trained and exercised in
virtue and learning (the arms where with they must fight against heresy) they
become as valiant Capitaines in this spiritual warfare of the Church, as were
Cyrus, Hannibal, Alexander, Augustus Caesar, and David in their temporal
wars, for that they began to exercise themselves in them betimes (as their
histories report) what may we then hope for, but a short and happy end of
this combat sithence they go to it, with the skill, courage, and fortitude that
becomes the soldiers of Christ, as there imperisonment, their disputations
with the heretics, their torments, and deaths do testify; so as justly we
may say, that these be of the number of the wise childeren, which (as the holy
ghost says) bring joy and comfort to their parents, and not only comfort,
but honor to them, and liberty to there country, and as God chose the
banished childeren of Babylon, for instruments to work and show forth his
glory, who rather chose to enter into the hot burning furnace, in testimony of
there true religion, then to adore the idol; where by the king came to know his
error, and acknowledged the true God: so by the very same means God is
glorified with the constancy of these Inglish youths, who break through so
many dangers and perils, because they will not adore and follow the Idol of
heresy erected in their country but rather labor to reduce it to the
knowledge and obedience of the true Catholic Church.

The reasons and motives which the Earl of Ponion Rostro, Don Francisco Arias
de Bouadilla, of the Kings Council, general gave to the counsel of the
inquisition, to the counsel Real of Castilla, to the counsels of Italy, the
Indies, and the crown of Aragon, and to the Iunta de Cortes de Castilla, which
in Spain is as the lower house of the parliament in Ingland, in behalf of the
English Seminary of Valladolid, in April 1600.
IT appears sufficiently how relgious and honorable a work the foundation of
the Inglish seminaries in these kingdoms has bin, and how worthy they are to
be favored as well by the great privileges which his holiness has given them, as
by the special favors which our sovereign the Catholic king that now is, and
the glorious memory of his father have done them, with more then heroical
liberality and piety, at the very times when by piracy and often invasions of
other Inglishmen their kingdoms, and subjects were most endamaged, declaring
therewith the excellency of this work, and that they had prudently considered
the important reasons, why it should be favored.

The same likewise may be confirmed by the testimony of Cardinal Baronius one
of the greatest and most learned writers of this age who, speaking of these
seminaries, says, that this age of ours is most fortunat in that it has
deserved to bring forth so many holy priests crowned (as he says) with more
noble crowns of martirdo^, the^ that of S. Thomas of Canterbury seeing they
died not only with the same constancy for the defense of the ecclesiastical
liberty, as that renowned martyr did, but also to co^serue and restore the
Catholic faith in their country, and concludes with these words, let my
soul depart (says he) in company of these just and glorious champions.

Botius also a learned and grave author in his book of the marks of the true
Church of God recounteth these Inglish Seminaries for a most evident testimony
and proof that our religion is founded in the truth, seeing it indueth those
that profess it with such courage, and invincible fortitude.

Boterus an other author no less grave and learned, commends this work, as
one of the most glorious that has bin in the church of God since the Apostles
time.

Lastly the Bishop of Tarazona that wrote the history of Ingland and other
prelates and men of authority and great numbers of wise and learned men of these
kingdoms, qualify this work for the most noble mark and blason in matter of
faith and religion that our kingdom of Spain this day enjoys.

Although any one of these testimonies were sufficient to declare the quality
of this holy work yet for that many principal persons have so great estimation
and desire of the continuance and increase thereof, as they persuade themselves
the want of suffice^t notice to be the only cause why it is not generaly
favored and furthered of all I have thought good to lay down, certain
particular reasons and motives where in is discovered the quality of the work
reducing them to three heads, the first of piety and religiou, the second of
Christian nobility and honor, and the third of commodity.

Motives of piety.
The first motive and the most general is that to help these seminaries, is to
sustain with temporal alms the faith of Christ and the spiritual good of a
kingdom which so depends of the labors and industry) of these Priests
brought up in these Seminaries that if they failed the utter ruin and decay of
Religion in that nation would follow. And therefore if it be an act of piety to
repare the ruins of material temples, and ransom any one Christian from the
captivity of infidels: it must needs be a far greater to build the Church of
Christ, and redeem from the tyranny of heretics these virtuous young men of
whose safety depends the salvation of so many souls in their country, as
after-ward by their means shall come to know and embrace the Catholic
Religion.

The second is that this kingdom which we succor, was the first that in the
whole world publicly professed the faith of Christ, and for this respect is
called the first child of the Church, and the dowry of our blessed lady, and
in it flowrished afterward the same faith for more then a 1000. years
togeither, in which time it brought forth many holy kings, Queens, Bishops,
and other glorious saints, and Martirs. And lost not the profession of this
faith so long kept by any fault of the people, or corruption of manners and
evil life as in other countries has happened, but by the miserable fall and
infortune of King Henry the 8. and some of his children as to the world is
evident, by the continual resistance which the Inglish Catholics have made so
many years to heresy never giving it one hour of peaceable possession though
it have cost them their blood which they have shed with so great constancy and
courage, as highy edifieth and astonisheth the whole Church of God to see it.

The third and more particular is, that the Catholics for whose succor and
comfort these Priests are brought up are on the one side the most afflicted
with so long and rigorous a persecution, and on the other the most approved
with patience and longanimity, and the people to whom the profession of their
religion costeth more dear them to any other nation in the world.

The fourth and not the least is, the purity and integrity of life of these
lawdable youngmen and the many tallents and graces wherewith God almighty
enricheth them, and the account and estimation which they have of the holy
dignity of preisthood, for which many of them renounce their inheritance, and
which is more to be admired, after they be Priests notwithstanding they know
that many of their companions sent from the Seminaries, and in particular from
this of Valladolid, are at this present in prison, and that others have bin
cruelly tormented, and others unmercifully put to death by the heretics, and
that the diligence which they use in their pursuit is incredible. Yet for all
this they are not a whit dismayed nor seek occasions to spend their time in
other countries more then is necessary to furnish them selves with learning,
but procure to hasten their mission to England as much as in them lies
departing after with so great alacrity courage, and comfort that they leave
their companions and those that send; them full of admiration and holy desirs
to bear them company in their glorious entreprise.

The first reason is, that the end and institution of these Seminaries is like
unto that which our Savior Christ Jesus purposed to him self, who (as himself
declares) principaly descended from heaven to recover the lost sheep of the
house of Israel his country where he was accused by the princes and elders of
his own people as a traitor and tumultuous person, that sowed sedition and
trobled the common wealth, and that according to their laws was guilty of
death. The same in proportion is the institution and end of these Seminaries,
and of the same crimes are the students and Priests wrongfully accused by the
Inglish heretics, who likewise have made unjust laws against them under
color whereof, they condemn them to death; and lastly, our Savior Jesus
Christ was apprehended, imprisoned, disgraced, crucified and put to death in
his own country, and by his own people, for having procurtd their salvation,
and for the like causes ar these Priests put in prison, slandred, tormented,
condemned, and put to death in Ingland, imitating that eminent and supreme
degree of charity to the which S. John exhorts us, Quoniam ille animam suam
posuit pro nobis and nos debemus pro fratribus animas ponere that as Christ
offered his life for our salvation: so should we according to his example spend
freely our blood to save our brethren.

The sixth is the great consolation which these Priests receive at their
return to Ingland, when they find many of their schoolefellowes and equales
brought up and infected with heresy only for want of the benefit of these
Seminaries, which they have enjoyed, whereby of force must increase in them
affects of gratitude to their benefactors, and their care dubbled, to
recommend them to almighty God, of whose names to this end they carry
particular memory when they depart in their missions, remaining their
perpetual chaplains during their lives, and if they die in defense of the
faith, their blood will ask reward for them that brought them up with so
greath charity, as the blood of Abel cried vengance at Gods hands against his
Brother Caine that violently shed it.

Motives of honor and Christian nobility.
The first motive is that this work discovers and commends greatly to all
the world the true and Christian nobility of Spain, and of the Catholics of
Ingland whereof these Seminaries shall be perpetual witnesses to al ages
following seeing the very walls of the College testify to our posterity,
this new and straing example of piety and religion, that being actual exercise
of war between these two nations, these of Ingland send their children with
so great confidence and no less peril and dainger to be brought up in Spain,
and that here they are received so lovingly and entreated so honorably as if
they were our own children a thing so vnsual amongst other nations in like
cases that neither the memories of men nor histories record the like, and is an
evident argument of the great opinion which Ingland has conceived of the
Heroycal sincerity and Christianity of Spain, seeing the heretics fear us so
much and the Catholics so confidently rely upon us in their necessities,
which if no other respect were, does oblige us in honor to maintain,
conserve, and increase this holy work, and to commend to al eternity the
glorious memory thereof.

The second is, that this favor and succor is done to persons of good
patentage (for such they are that ordinarily come to these Seminaries) who to
conserve their faith have left their country, freindes, and temporal
commodities, and in the flower of their age, when others carlesly neglect
their salvation, labor not only to save their own but also otherme^s souls
taking upon the^ in their youth the same entreprise, which in riper years the
holy Apostles undertook and others their followers. which first planted the
says in these and other kingdoms of Christendom, and here in the Seminaries
these bind them selves by solemn oath to reduce their country to the Catholic
Church or to loose their lives in the action, which they accomplish so
faithfully that in these few years almost 200. Priests have bin put to death
for defense of this glorious quarrel, and so their adversaries are more afraid
of this spiritual war, then of any enemy how powerful so ever, and they have
reason, for here Christ is the Captain, and the war is not against the bodies,
but against the understandings and corrupted wills of the deceived, and so as
we see they go for-ward conquering, distroying, and making hauock of hetesy,
and putting to flight the enemies of truth which no way are able to resist
them, and the great solicitude and extraordinary diligence wherewith their
followers and instruments procure to aprehended these Priests, serving rather
for a sign then for a remidy of their fear, discovers the infinite wisdom
of God, who with a few children wageth such irresistible war against the
Princes and powers of darkness.

The third is, that if it were great reputation and honor for us and our nation
by force of arms to deliver the realm of England from heresy, it will be more
honorable to reduce it to the catholck church by these other means of
spiritual soldiers whom we bring up for this purpose.

The fourth is, that if heretics for a vain imagination of infernal honor,
ioyn hands; and succor one an other as has bin seen in the Hugonots of
France, the Protestants of Almany, and the continual supply both of money and
men, which these of Ingland for many years together have sent to the heretics
of Scotland, and France, and to the rebels of Flanders, sparing no cost nor
labor by which the wicked estate of heresy might be vpholde^, it is most just
that the kingdoms of Spain (which God has blessed and renowned above all
other naions with purity and integrity of faith) should have far greater
respect of this most Christian honor, and esteem it more in procuring to
maintain, healp, and conserve the Catholic faith where it is alreddy, or to
restor it in those countries where it has perished, and specially in Ingland,
which has suffered with so great constancy, so long and grecuous a persecution
for defense of their faith.

Motives of temporal commodity.
The infinite wisdom of god has so disposed the affairs of Spain, and knit
them so together, with the procedinges of Ingland that the tranquillity,
security, and weal public of the one wholly depends of the others conversion
for as long as heresy shall bear sway in England so long will continue the
insole^t desperate and dangerous practices wherewith they molest us and our
countries, and this conversion it seems God will have brought to pass by the
ordinary means of preaching his holy gospel, to the end, all the glory may be
his, seeing these Priests of the Seminaries have so prosperous success and
reaped so abundant fruit in their missions with the example of their patience
and constancy in their prisons, torments, and death it self, and with their
zeal, care and diligence in the administration of the holy Sacraments, and
propagation of the truth, of which plentiful harvest, and continual increase of
faith and religion, we need no other testimony, then the great co^fiscations
and sums of money which the Catholic recusantes pay every year to the Queen
to be delivered from going to the heretical service, and the many young
gentlemen of not able talents which co^tinualy come to the Seminaries, as
sparkles of fire that fly out of that furnace of faith, which God has
miraculously kindled in that kingdom, where so great a number of Priests ar
allredy employed and others enter of fresh every day, and yet the Catholics
are not content but continualy cry out for more, in so much that if we could
send as many as they desire and have need of, we should see in few years the
conversion of that country, and withal enjoy the security and prosperity of
these kingdoms, and the rest of our dominous that we enjoyed before the
breach of Ingland which joined again with us in peace and concord (which will
never be durable without conformity of religion) we may expect the ancient
trafick again and good correspondence so profitable to both parts, as the want
thereof these years past does declare, and to renew and establish again this
confederation and freindshippe, there cannot be found any other agents or
solicitours so fit as these Priests brought up in the Seminaries, who as they
cannot lose the natural love to their country, so can they not but carry
allwaies most tender and gratfull affection to that which nourished and brought
them up in their tender years, so as the fruit of their labors infallibly
will be in fine the conclusion of true and stable peace, so much desired of both
parts, wherewith we shall possess security in our coasts, and excuse the
infinite charges spent every year in the conuoy of our Indian fleetes. The
rebels of Flandres will be forced to yield, seeing that without the succor of
England they have neither courage nor force to maintain their rebellion. The
necessity and charges of Armados will be ended, and finally the spiritual good
of that kingdom would redowne both to the spiritual and temporal commmodity of
this.

These be the reasons and motives which this good noble man set down and gave
to the Counsels above said in behalf of the Inglish Seminaries and those
which are brought up in them, with so laudable example as the world sees, and
partly may be gathered by these relations. And the memory of these so good
children must needs comfort and encorage (in their absence) so Catholic
parents which not only suffer for the same faith with patient emprisonment and
loss of their goods, but also deprive them selves of the joy and comfort,
which parents receive by the presence and sight of their children for the
glory of Christ, and good of their country, the memory therefore, of so noble
parents and children shall always flowish in the Church, and gives us great
hope that this long and rigourous winter of their persecution shall soon have
an end, and a peaceable and pleasant springtime arise, and that after this
dark night of heresy and sin that has covered the ancient bewty and glory
of that country, the bright Sun of Catholic Religion shall return again:
which our Lord Jesus of his infinite mercy bring to speedy effect. Amen.


