The Seventh Book of the Myrrour of Knighthood.

Being The Second of the third Part. Englished out of the Spanish language.

Siendo la Dama sin par:
Soy sin segundo^ en amar.


LONDON Printed by Thomas Purfoot for Cuthbert Burby, and are to be sold at
his shop near the Royal Exchange. 1598.

To the Worshipful, in all virtues accomplished, and his especial Friend M.
William Willoughby of Grayes Inn Gentleman.
IT is recorded in holy writ (most worthy Sir) how that mighty Emperor and
Co^mander of 127 Provinces, being by deserts of a stranger subject, bound to
deeds of gratitude, the which as the^, having no occasion to express, and
fearing to drown them in oblivion, caused it to be enrolled in the Annals of
his acts, that the reading thereof might after remember him, how those merits
being by him left unrecompensed, he still ought to guerdon. So fell it out that
turning over the Chronicles of his age, and calling to memory his debt, he did
with magnifike honor sufficiently discharge it. This consideration many ways
well pondered, whether, o whether may I fly for refuge? For not content to have
transgrest against the sacred virtue of thankefulnes, due for your benefits in
number infinite, I have (but unwilling) sinned against your love, and wronged
your kindness, by violating my willing promise made to your request (yet due by
duty) to visit you this last vacation in the country: which fault I greatly
fear has, (I must needs say) deservedly incurred your disfavor. But as the
incensed heavens are by true contritio^ and unfeigned penitence appeased of
their wrath: So do I not doubt but my lawful excuse, and this cause thereof
shall purchase an extenuatio^ of your displeasure, and my offense, which first
of all by confession, I hope will be lessened, and the^ your pardon washing away
my sin, in sign of a thankful debtor for all your bounties, I sacrifize my
self and this motive of my transgression on the Altar of your acceptance,
where the fire of my penitent heart, consuming the oblation, it may clear my
passage to your reconciled grace from all obsticles of your anger. I must of
force confess it is an idle toy, hacht and brought forth at idle times, and
therefore neither worthy your countenance, nor yet to be interposed among the
exercises of your vaca^t hours: yet if at any you will vouchsafe to look
thereon, think that the Persian Monarch, did not refuse to drink out of a
sheapherds greasy bottle, and therwithall waighing the love and heart of the
presenter, I shall hope your favor, and no more fear to be rejected from your
grace.

Evermore devoted to your service. L. A.

To the Friendly and Courteous Readers.
AT length, on the uncertain surges of your gentleness I do adventure, of all
necessaries my unfurnished bark, having none other confidence but the general
acceptance of the History, safely to let me Anchor my desires on your
conte^tments. This only did imboulden me to satisfy the requests of many, and
not the will to publish my own folly, and disgrace: whose harsh and unpleasing
Method the sequel amply shows. In which I have in many places addressed my
speech, and directed the History as it were particulerly to one or to more
Ladies or Gentlewomen; wherein I must advertise you, It is meant by no especial
Mistres, save only an immitation of my Author, and the rather because in love
discourses (and this story treating nothing else) they have the sole
prehemine^ce, as also hoping for their sakes (to whom every Mothers Son that
moves is adicted) to find a more kinder intertainement: whose memory I trust
will impetrate it. My faults by the Printer omitted and aggrauated gently
amend, and though you do dislike, do not (for my good will deserves it not)
condemn me, so shall I never cease to cry (Amen) to your own wishes, and will
ere long gratefie your favors with another part, Mean while.

Cum desint vires, nostr' est laudanda voluntas. THE SECOND BOOK OF The third
part of the Myrrour of Knighthood, containing the high and mighty deeds of
the Sons and Nephews of the Emperor Trebatio, with the worthy acts of
other Princes and Knights. Together with the haughty deeds of warlike Ladies,
with the love of Claridiano and Archisilora, Don Eleno of Dacia and his
Rosamond.
The marvelous adventure that happened unto the Dacian Prince Don Eleno in
Calidonia. Cap. I.
THE Imaginary thoughts of swift desire, warring twixt Hope and Victory,
within the aspyring resolution of those adue^turous youths of Greece, plowing
the furious Ocean in a well rigged Ship toward the Cholchian Isle, to
immortalize their Fames, and with eternal glory, to guild ye Trophes of their
Conquests, with the laborious winning of the golden fleece, posted thither with
less celeritie, then the enchanted bark of Don Eleno guided by the wise
Nabato, furrowed the inhospitable Regions of Neptunes watrie Kingdom, who at
what time he assailed the inchaunted Portrature of self murdered Brutus, was
by his learned friend commanded straight to Sea, on whose shore he should find
his Boat provided for his voyage. The which he obaying, no sooner had entered
it, but with such a tempestuous fury it rent from the land, as does a mighty
rock, oreturn'd with boisterous winds, tumble from aloft into the deepest
seas, keeping so admirable speed, that in few days he past more waters then
did Ulysses (toste on the angry waves) in all his ten years pilgrimage,
which made him think he never should anchor in any harbor. For as the great
Magician Lirgandeo does record, he first out-stript the Italian Seas, entering
into the Affrican, and leaving on the one side the Cateonian Promontorie he
took his course, through the Caspian and Percian Seas, and in the end of eight
days, he fell into the nauigable Indian Ocean, coasting along the Famous Isle
of Tylos, celebrated of all men for her great temperature, whose Summer never
knew extremity of heat, nor Winter any excess of cold, but keeping a
moderate mean of both, her fields were never disrobed of their flowered
green, nor springing trees of growing fruit: for scarce were some ripe ready
for the gathering (such was their speed in growth) when others gloryed with
colored blossoms, and the rest bragd of their verdure liueries. Great and
incredible was the pleasure that the Dacian Prince conceived, beholding from
the hatches the delightful prospect of this soule-pleasing Country, where
willingly he would have struck his sails, accepting the kind welcome of the
chirping birds, whose cheerful notes according with the soft bubbling of the
running streams of little Riuerets, passing twixt the trees, made such a
melodious consort of a natural Music, that it had almost ravished his
senses, and drowned his intended voyage in obliuio^. But wrapped in contemplation
of these wonders, he past along, and shortly discovered the Christaline waters
of Thermodons clear River, upon whose borders the warlike Amazons sometime
held their memorable Empire. He also in this navigations saw the fruitful
country of Beotia famosed by the Thespian land, only mentioned through her
bordering on the Helliconian Mount, the habitation of those sacred tryple
Trinity of Sisters, the divine Muses, Ioues-brayne-bred daughters, Mothers of
all learned Arts. To be short, with incredible speed and delight, he compassed
the most part of the orbed earth: for being acquitted of Loves tributarie
duties, his quiet mind had the more scope to subiugate his thoughts to
admiration of these things. So that now weary of ease, he wished an end unto
his travail, that he might again exercise his often tried forces, to augment
the perpetuity of his glories, which he thought were ecclipsed in the obscure
cabin of his honor-smothering bark, yet he still persuaded himself some great
adventure could not but awayt the end of this Nauigable toil. At length
passing the Islands Sygares, in ancient times called Sydromades, (whose coasts
to unskillful passengers is pitilesse death) some five days after, he sailed
through the Mediterranean Sea, where upon a morn, when glittering Phoebus
mounted his fiery Carre, the boat ran ashoare to the Princes great
contentment, who was almost tired with this long navigations. Wherefore arming
himself in his rich armor, he leaped on land, and mounting on his swift
Tyrio, accompanied only with his good squier Fabio, he took a narrow beaten
path, through which he went with great desire, to know in what air he
breathed. So with an easy pace they travailed not long that way, but it
brought them into a great wood, whose unknown passage somewhat amazed the
Dacian Lord. Yet was it no part to expel the great delight he did conceive
with the soft whistling murmr of the pleasant winds, that seemed to dance
upon the moving of the shaken leaves, on whom the whistling birds warbled
their ditties in such accordant manner, that agreeing in one consort of an
inartificiall harmony, it arrested the amazed conceit of the wandering Prince,
that continued his journey along a Crystal Riueret whose bending turnings
brought him at last unto his springing head, whose purling brook from a rockie
quarie traced his continual current through a pibble paued channel, that
gathering in one a many runnings, that from the natural rock did issue,
seemed so many spouts proceeding from an artificial fount, making the stream
more great, whose sweet noise could not but remove the Mellancholiest heart
(though never so much tormented with loue-oppressing passions) even from his
deepest dispairing thoughts. This pleasant spring was all encompassed with high
cressend trees, proud Cedars, and lofty Pynes, whose height seemed to control
the firmament aloft, and scorn the lower plants beneath; whose humble growth
was accompanied with green Palms, fresh Olives, and odoriferous Orange trees,
that ever flourishes with springing habits. Through these (upon the dyaperd
ground, with flowered tapestrie) ran the sportful wanton young Dear, that in
abundance increased the pleasure of this wooddie fount: for some scudded along
to outstrip the others in running: others, nibled the tender growing
sapplings, and others together butted in wrangling pastime their horned
foreheads. The Dacian wrapped in a suddein admiration with the unhoped sight of
such miracles, rested confounded in pleasant imaginations that persuaded him in
a land so wonderful of Natures wonders he should not but expect some unlooked,
vnconceaued, and unmerited happiness. Here to ease himself awhile, he
alighted, and washed his sweatie face and hands in those cool refreshing
waters, and then sitting on the grass, satisfied his hungry stomach with such
provision as Fabio his page had brought with him from his ship. The collation
ended, they discoursed of many matters (to beguyle the time withal)
especially, touching the Roman Ladies, whose affection toward him shown by
the Princess Roselia, was not of mean respect: whereupon Fabio took occasion
thus to begin.

I cannot (dear Lord) sufficiently conceive the hidden reasons of your strange
proceedings in Love. For when I remember your extreme passions for the first
robber of your heart Florisdama, your second doting on Lidea, and your last
affection toward Roselia, with the manner of your sudden departure from her
without a farewell in recompense of her many favors, which her accepting you
for hers, condemns you in the highest degree of ingratitude in Love besides
her many other merits (which I list not now memorate) deserved no such slight
esteem. The consideration of which things drownes my wits in uncertain
thoughts. Do you think when she shall record her courtesies and your
discourtesies, she will not call you a dissembling Dacian? a flattering friend?
and a wavering changing Lover? Will she not complain of her ill aboading
stars? exclame on fortune? and banne your remembrance? Nay, how can she
otherwise having so great cause thereto. For shame (my Lord) awake your
slumbring senses, and rayze up again the broken ruynes of your decaying
credit, let not the honor of your birth be tainted? nor the royal blood of
Dacia stained with an infamous blott of thanklesse ingratitude? Let not Rooms
quarrel begun in the fathers, continue in the children, and be ended (God
knows) in what posterity. But pardon me (my Lord) for thus passing the limits
of duty and the duty of a servant, which only love and zeal to your
reputation has moved me unto. In deed Fabio (replied the Prince,) first
thanking thee for thy care, I must confess in some respect I stand guilty in
Roselias sight, for departing without her consent. But yet God knows it was
not either by negligent forgetting, or unthankfully rejecting her deserved
merits, or the slight regard of her kindness, for which, and for her
infinite favors, I ever shall rest debtor. But leaving this, I am persuaded,
the heavens in their just doom have not allotted her to me (although her
perfection a greater Monarche do deserve then me) which I do the more believe
because my trusty friend Nabato did assure me, it touched me as near as my
life, not to speak to her at my departure: which I (with some unwillingness)
agreed unto, hoping the Princess (knowing my power to be yoked under her
command) would not take any serious conceit at so slight a trespass. Yea but
(quoth Fabio) women are so grieved by every small occasion, that little
offenses wayghed in their feminine scales, are found to be excuses of
inconstancy and self wavering affection, and therefore are taken in the
worste part: For commonly women conceive whatsoever is done for them, must (for
so reason requires) proceed of duty: chiefly if moved by any amorous
inclination: and hers was not little, if I may believe her exterior motions,
when you were fiercest in your combat. For by no better means does a lover
express his love toward the thing loved, then when it is seen in any
peril, how small soever, which things add such credit to my doubt, that I
certainly believe she has uttered a thousand complaints against you, moved
with that inward and entyre affection she bears you. And to conclude, her
rare beawtie deserves more then I can or am able to express.

This conference was here abruptly broke off with the pleasant cry (that
stopped the Dacian lords reply) of a kenell of wel-mouthed hounds, whose noise
ecchoing through the wood, gave him warning of some hunting sport, whose game
should already be on foot. As he was thus harkening, he saw coming toward
him with impetous fury, a mighty white Heart, with the whole troop of his
pursuing enemies at his heels, who weary and faint with chase, came to
refresh him in that brook. This course highly pleasing the Prince (having been
in his youth brought up with such exersise, snatched his lance, and as the
Heart passed by, threw it at him, and pierced his body side through side, and
yet not brake his spear, and as a cunning huntsman he hearted the hounds upon
their pray, expecting for the hunters coming. But from these dumps he was
quickly put with the sudden view of a most beauteous Lady, that mounted on a
gallant courser, galloped after the Heart: her habit was of green cut upon
white, imbrodered with so many Pearls and stones, that it dazzled the beholders
eyes when the bright beams of Apollos face reuerberated thereon, her amber
hair in golden tramels hung about her shoulders, and on her head she wore a
corronet of Roses that defended her against the offending heat of Phoebus
rays. And as she came in have, her dangling tresses wauered in the air, that
he assured him self that this was Cupids war, seeing his ensign of her hair
borne by such beauty, and defended with a Boar-speare, which she carried in
her hand: who in this manner approached our Dacian Knight, that with this first
and sole sight became the little blind triumphing gods sighes-tributary
subject, and by immagination lost the pleasure of his former liberty by gazing
on so gallant a Lady, that he acknowledged himself Loves captive thrall,
vowing in his heart such firmness, that his thoughts drouned in conceits,
struck him with such a fearful hope, that he almost lost his breathing
senses, whereby the vnextinguishing flames of true loves fire so penetrated his
free heart, that none but death could be the Physic to cure so deep a wound.
The engyne of his speech so ceast his motion, that in steed thereof, he wished
all his moving powers, were then transformed to so many piercing instruments
of sight thoroughly to view her rarities, and yet did he think them
insufficient to note all her perfections, because something would still remain
unseen. Gladly would he have changed his present state for hundred eied Argos
fortunes (though he should pay as dearly for his watching) if he might at his
contented leisure, suruay all the excellencies, that glorious Nature in her
prodigality had bestowed on her. For in his pensive cogitations, he judged
this was she the just heavens had ordained to predominate his heart, his life,
soul and will, and to whom he should acknowledge all soueraignetie over his
due obeisance, already esteeming his nauigable toiles well employed, since
they brought him to so rich a land, to anchorage his weary mind within the
harbor of so brave a Road. To be short, the haughty invincible courage of his
free thoughts, were so amazed with this admirable gallantnesse, that it could
by no means resist so strong encounter, but without farther combat, (for
Fortitude is too weak to withstand the darts of beauty) presently yielded
her his soul as a trophie of her victory, and yet rested sorrowful, he had
no richer pryzes to glorify her triumphs, because her merits deserved a
greater conquest. So much amazed rested this valiant Dacian, as if altogether
he were converted to ye Lady, on whom his gazing eyes were fixed, and so
greatly, that being nigh her, he could neither move the organs of his voice,
nor ought else, but by signs signify, his awful duty at her command, being
all in all hers. With no less admiration did the valiant Lady with her eyes
coat his wonders, because her troubled thoughts told her (that from her
infancy) she had never seen a more brauer Knight. And as Ladies commonly in
such accide^ts of amorous traunces have a freer power of their speech: so she
perceiving the suddeine alteration of his colour-changing countenance, faining
some displeasure (that in like cases follows all Ladies of her beauty and
valor) she awaked him with these words.

I know not (Knight) what moved you so rashly to kill this Heart, bereauing me
of the pleasure that awayted my coming: and he expected by receiving his death
at my hands: whereof your presumption by doing it, has dispossessed us both of.
Don Eleno, drawing strength from his vanquished soul, replied: My poor heart
(most excellent Lady) does already suffer his deserved penance, for so
sinning against your content. Yet do I hope this offense, confessing the fault,
shall be absolved of your displeasure, having been through a wel-meaning
ignorance committed. For supposing none would except against me, or take
displeasure at it, incitated me thereto. But good has been his exchange: for
in steed of the death he received (being ordained thereto) with no less a
wound have your (divine excelle^cies) pierced my soul because the impartial
fates (I fear) will sooner cut my thread of life, then you will daygne the
cure, to salve the wound wounded by your self. Far more have you now
aggrauated my discontent (answered the Lady) receiving greater displeasure at
your bold words, then did the poor Heart with death by your Lance. Answer
would ye amorous Dacian, but that he saw a Knight well armed and mounted on a
mighty horse, issue from among the trees, who having over heard part of Don
Elenos speech, cried out unto him.

Knight more bold then valiant, take up thy weapons, for so great a presumption
may not pass unpunished. The valiant Dacian was so captiuated with the beauty
of that Lady, that his deep affection (seeing that Knight in so gallant
armor and so bravely Horst) made him think he was his Loves competitor.
Whereat a sudden thought of Jealousy rapt at his breast, that without any word,
taking up his shield, he laced on his healme: and with more speed then the
Heart came thither, he drew his Lance out of his dead body, leaping therewith
into his Tyrios saddle, and in his hand brandishing the spear, he turned to
his adversary with these words: Discourteous Knight, coragious in nothing but
in words: now shall thou see how I use to thank those that with like pride
entertain others as you have me. Sorrowful became the beauteous Lady, to see
them so eager against each other, greatly fearing the success of the fight,
because she thought the stranger would have the better: but seeing them so
fierce, withdrew her self, praying for both their victories: For if she
affects the one as her brother, the other she loves, as her lives co^mander.
And as she was a nouice new admitted in Cupids School, with such willingness
she yielded to his deceipts, that with one and the like fear he forced her to
be Judge of that combat. Courageous was the Knight of the forest, but he
has before him the Dacian Prince with such haughty thoughts, that Mars
himself would have feared him. With fury at length they met in middle of
their course with most strong incounters: But the Dacians Horse being the best
in the world, meeting with his adversaries, tumbled him on the ground, and with
a mighty fall made his Master measure his length on the earth, himself
stumbling at a spears struchon. Whereat the Prince fearing some mischance,
seeing him so stagger, leapte from him with such nimblenesse, that his
gallantnesse as much delighted the Lady, as it grieved her to see her brothers
disgrace, who fearing a sudden death, with his sword drawn, and his shield well
buckled about his arm, made toward our Knight, that in like manner expected
him, desirous to prove the cutting of his Roman blade, wherewith he laid
upon the top of his enemies shield entering it with such might, that all that
quarter with a piece of his helm he threw to the ground. He seconded another
not so dangerous, yet more fearful, because lighting on his breast, it gave
him a wide wound. Trembling stood the Lady at her brothers chance, though he
like a valiant warrior setting his right foot forward so struck him on the
legs, that had his sword been like the Dacians, he hadd greatly hazarded his
victory. Forward he stepped with his other foot, to make a stronger blow, and
so thrusting at him with his point, it chanced between the buckles of his
skirts, that had he not turned aside, he had there been slain outright,
notwithstanding it made him a little wound, whereout issued some blood.

The Dacian thinking it to be greater, like a furious Lion, before he was able
to withdraw him, upon the little left him of his shield gave him such a blow,
that parting it from one end to the other, and the point slycing all the armor
of his arm, he threw his shield on the ground leaving all that side without
defense. With the fear of death rested the Knight amazed, but encouraging
himself, with his sword in both hands, he made against his adversary
discharging on his shield so brave a blow, that falling on his head, he forced
him to retire back, with staggering stepps, which seeing, he followed the
advantage, and with a point had almost overthrown him. But our new Lover
firmly stayed himself, raising aloft his Romain murdering sword, at such
time as the Lady getting to her Horse cried out. Knights withdraw your selves,
for this is no combat, any farther to proceed? But she came too late, for ere
she mounted, her brother groaned his last falling on the earth with his head
parted in two, which sudden death grieved even the very soul of the vanguisht
victorious Dacian: But what the sorrowful Lady did, admits no comparion: for
casting her self from her Horse, all the moving motions of her breathing
senses left her so disposest of Life, as they had the Prince with this
unlooked for accident. He unlaced his helm, and sitting on the blood-dewd
grass, he took the amazed Ladies head between his hands, (which he durst do
because the weapons of her excellencies through a pale ashie trance had left
her beauty without defensive arms) and began to use those means for her
recovery, that his brave heart did never study, and with bitter exclaimes he
said. Oh cruel fortune may it be, thou should so soon temper with so sower
a chance, the first time thou would a little favor me? Oh wise Nabato my
professed friend, why did thou tell me thy care should always be to cure my
woes, if all things now conspire against me to overthrow my content? In his
own helm he caused some water to be brought him, and sprinkled it upon the
Ladies fair face, till with a sighe proceeding from her oppressed soul she
returned unto her self: yet for all this did she remember the pitiful
lamentes that the Knight had uttered, and that the force of Love did only
force him to: But seeing the brother that she most affected, lie before her
besmeared with his own blood, so cruelly slain, she stepte from the Prince
saying. Let me go (rude and discourteous Knight) for the wrongs you have
against me committed, cannot be satisfied with less then the heart blood of
your dearest life. And casting her self on the dead carcass with such pitiful
compassion, that it would have drawn tears from a Tigers eyes, she wailed her
brothers loss, and drowning his head and face, with a pearled shower of water
distilling from her two clowdie founts, she thus began her plaintes. May it be
(dear brother) that the angrye Heavens should so oppose their happy
reuolutions against our youth, suffering the cruel fates to persecute thee and
me with so lamentable a chance kept in store by that constant Lady of
inconsta^cie, giving the world so great a loss through thy untimely death? who
shall dare carye the unlucky news of thy unhappy end unto our Parents? Oh
Princes of Callidonia, now must you take new weapons, and put on armor of
revenge, and build an alter to Rhamnusia, offering thereon the cruel
sacrifizes of Nemesis bloody rites, that she may further your revenging
thoughts to take so just a vengance. For you have this day lost a Prince of the
best, the brauest. Ah tender youth so suddenly bereaft, and ill enjoyed? Oh
pitiless inhumane death, with what extremes do thou perform thy
cruelties? having without mercy or respect of innocence, with such barbarous
savageness snacht from hence my poor Larsyno, on whom the envious world had
placed all her hopes? And if impartial destinies, inexorable Sisters, you had
determined this partial doom, within the consistory of your counsel house,
why suffered you not (stern goddesses) my brothers mortal wound, also to fall
on me and end in my heart, and not leave me thus with life to feel so many
deaths? Thus did that beauteous Lady pour forth her sorrows, for her dear
Larsyno. But the enraged passions yt did possess Don Eleno, when he understood
yt he had slain her brother, whom he loved more then his own soul, had
almost forced him with his own dagger to draw his own hearts blood, to
pacify her rage, if he had not feared eternal damnacion, for so great a
sin, yet esteemed he that a profitable death, where nothing was hoped but
what should be more cruel. For all this he animated his drooping heart, and
turning to the weepyng Lady, said. Seeing my more then unhappy fortune (divine
Lady) has permitted he should displease you, and in this sort, that was only
borne to adore you, soly desiring life to please you, bethink what
satisfaction you will have, (though it be with the dearest blood chambred in my
soul) and at your command, these hands shall sluice it forth, because with such
a death, my life will end with joy, if something it may extenuate part of your
discontent conceived. Any revenge (most cruel Knight, replied the sorrowful
Lady) will be but little, in recompense of the high wrong I have received by
those murdering hands, guilty of my proper blood. But for this time I will
no other revenge but your departure from my company, leaving me sufficiently
assured of your cruelty to my cost: and I will live (for my misfortune will
have it so) with the only desire of a more full revenge. Wherefore from
henceforth I straight do banish you my sight, for I will have it so. If I
shall depart in your disgrace (most beauteous Lady) I will not have my life
with your disfavor to torment me (replied the Prince) but since you desire to
be revenged on him that only would live to admire you, take it with this sword
cawser of your woes, and my misfortune, and therewith strike of my sacrifized
head to appease your wrath, for I willingly offer it on your pities altar, with
all I else possess already subject to your will, and only this do pray that
after you have done it, you would rent forth my heart (for none shall witness
your cruelty but your self) and there shall you see your self engraven,
though not so naturally, yet with rarer perfections: reasons suffcient to force
me to elect you sole patroness thereof: The which remaining in your hands,
(being loves thrall) may move clemency toward his Lord, to stir your anger
to pity your captive, even with his own relics.

Wherewith prostrated on his knees before her, with his eyes closed with water,
holding the sword by the point, again thus said. If only in my death (great
Lady) there rests any small comfort, for me it will be the greatest that I
may imagine, receiving it with this blade by your hands, for Guerdon of my
rash attempts: although, if I had known what this dead increaser of your
griefs did concern you, my self had only been the procurer of his life with
far greater care, then for my own, which will be hateful to me, if still you
will insist in your conceived wrath. Knight (said she) more barbarous, then the
Savages of Hircania, and the cruellest that ere my eyes beheld, thus I will not
execute my revenge, for it will not be so called, performed with the offenders
liking: and because you said, it is life and the sweetest, to bereave you
thereof with my hands, neither will I therein so much content you, but expect
and solicit the heavens, to order my revenge after some other sort. The
afflicted Prince hearing so sower and bitter answer conceived such extreme
grief, which with sobbes and sighs so besieged his heart, that it berest him
of his senses, falling at his Ladies feet, which was another new kind of
torment to afflict her, for abandoning all cruelty, she took him in her
arms, and sitting on the ground she laid his head on her lap (which had the
grieved Dacian felt, he would not so soon recover himself) and bewailed this
lamentable spectacle with new laments, that moved the tender Lady to break
into these exclaymes.

Oh blind despightfull Fortune, enemy to my rest, how well have thou manifested
thy mutabilities, having so well pleaded for the greatest enemy I had, that I
am forced to co^miserate his woes, and pity his distress? Oh Goddess, who
might certainly know if with my death she would end her rigorous changing
courses? execute at once against my tenderness the whole power of thy
despite? for ye wrongs past having been the greatest that might befall me, or
thou do me, will I with joy accept, because I know they come from thee, for
she that was borne to no good, can receive no harm to hurt her, and with this
deceit may she pass her life, that in the beginning has felt the utmost of
thy cruel power? Oh cruel Goddess unworthy of a better name, because in all
thy actions thou performest the deeds of an Hircanian Tiger. And being unable
to do otherwise, she commanded Fabio to bring her some water, wherewith the
distressed youth obtained his lost senses, and with a sighe that seemed to
burst his weak heart, he said.

Unhappy stars that governed my nativity, and more unhappy I to live to see
my woes to conquer death, that dares not approach where he is only wished,
with his cruelty to end a life oppressed with cares? Oh unfortunate hap who
would have thought so long and tedious a navigations should anchor in so
unlucky a Port? Oh valiant friends, now must I for ever in absence with ayrie
words take my latest leave, for my fates say, he shall never see you more that
only lived with your dear sights. Oh valiant Princes of Grecia, what balefull
news will it be, when you shall hear of my death, whose life always and
content, soly delighted ye? And seeing himself in the Ladies lap, a little
lifting up his eyes (with so many sighs, and throbbing sobbs, that might have
moved a Lions fiercenes to relent, but to the extremest point was this Ladies
fury come, that it would admit no Impression of any mercy, unless it should
altogether yield to pity, which she thought was yet too soon to do) he
said. Since no piety, noe pity, nor no mercy, (that are the virtues which
glorifies all your sex) may sturr a little compassion in your obdurate breast,
then at once (cruel Lady) end the tormenting of my poor soul, with so long
prolonging a despised life, and take what revenge you will on this weeping heart
subject to your Imanitie. Knight (answered the Lady) ill would it beseem me,
if by yielding to your request, and in that manner to work your content, I
should become cruel against my self: I will not take any revenge that may
rather redowne to my dishonor, then honor: But for this time, only I will
have you grant me two things.

Being all in all yours (replied he) there is no cause why by promise you
should seek to win my will, which so truly does acknowiedge your
souerainetie.

Why then (said she) my first demand is, you give me the order of Chiualry
and as for my other request you shall after know it. I do (said he) esteem my
happiness far greater now, then a little before I esteemed my self unhappy,
in that (dear Soueraign of my soul) you have deygned to imploye me, and in
affairs more difficult far, would I have had you hazarded my life: but
seeing this is your will, I am content to obaie, and because I perceive you
want armor, I do beseech you to accept these, which were given me for good,
and I shall be more glad thereof because they shall obtain a worthier owner. I
thank you for your offer (replied she.) But these of Semyramis nothing
inferior to those, I had not long since on yonder vallie given me, and that
with them I should end the greatest adventure of the world.

And so casting off her hunting garments, she discovered the rarest arms that
the whole earth could afford, for they were all of Pearls and Dyamonds, with
such art united, that it made them far stronger then if they were of fine
tempered steel: on one side they bare a painted heart, but made of inestimable
orient Rubies, whose glister alyenated the beholders fight, and untying a
slender under garment, like to a pair of Bases, she remained the best
accomplished, and in armor the absolutest that could be desired. In his sight
she seemed the haughty Knight of the Sun, when he withdrew him from his
Country rusticke life. He gazed on her, with a pensive admiration, and thought
the longest time too short for his contemplation, altogether forgetting his
promise past. Well did the Lady perceive his amazement, (for she of no less
rare excellency did account him) wherewith, a new motion with her little
experience learned at that time, engendered a firm love with more glories to
dignifie her eternity, but dissembling her inward passions, she put him out of
his dumps with these words.

The time Sir knight, begins to ware too late, for you to perform your
promise. He started as one suddenly awaked from a slumber, and with a sigh
replied, your will ( Heroicke Lady) be accomplished: though yet in this the
heavens be opposed against my fortune. And so lacing on her helm (that at her
saddle bow did hang) whose riches does exceed compare, with the sword, that
under one Monarchy did once reduce with servile yoke the greatest part of the
Orbed earth, he struck her a little blow on the shoulders, whose scant heard
sound, put him in so cold a trembling, with fear whether he had struck too
hard. And done, thus spoke* Now (Sovereign Lady) may you let the world know,
that as you are the only Phoenix in beauty, so you are the sole Myrror in
arms. And the sword guird, with the wondering purity of your own hands, for I
will defend (mauger the strongest strength) they be the absolutest on this
earth, she straight closed the visor of her helm with admirable gallantnesse,
new snares to intrappe his captive heart, and especially, if any thing else
were left with liberty. But somewhat moved, she turned her to him thus.

The second thing you must for me do, is to take your weapons presently, for
now like a Knight will I revenge my self, not like a tender woman, but a
ravening Wolf. Trembling like an Aspen leaf, with a chill timorous fear
stood Don Eleno, seeing her so determined in resolution, and trying whether
with mild words he could diswade her from that resolution, said. I know not
what greater content you do pretend (most beauteous Lady) then to accept my
disgraced life, which I with such liberality do offer, most willingly to
dispossess my self thereof, by your hands, that at one instant you may
counterpoyze your beauty with your cruelty. I will in nothing (bloody Knight)
replied she) so please you: But you shall now feel whom my brother has left
to take his revenge, and therefore you have no more to do but to put on your
arms, for otherwise you shall force me to some fellonious outrage, killing you
without them. With Millions of tears did he beseech her to desist from her
purpose, but seeing nothing would prevail he buckled on his helm, swearing
only to defend himself and not offend her, for rather he would suffer
himself peece-meale joint by joint to be torn asunder. So soon as she did
see him ready, more swifter then a hungry Eagle bent to her pray, she flang
against the yiedling youth, and flourishing that so renowned sword, she
discharged so furious a blow upon his helm, that though through his fine
temper it was impenitrable, yet it fell so heavy, that his head was forced to
receive it with that humble duty, which her high state merited, bending both
his knees on the earth, with such astonishment, that she seconded another
that made the blood gush through his Visor. Never in all his life did he feel
the valor of one Knight hand to hand so greatly to torment him: For neither in
the cruel battle with the brave Teffereo brother to the King of Cerdena, did
he receive any such blow: nor yet about the liberty of the angry Garrofilea
Queen of Tynacria, was he so ouermatched, as this Lady now did tire him. For
at his rizing, taking him somewhat amazed, she stepped to him with her left foot
foreward, with two thrustes one after another, that he was forced backwardes,
and flourishing her sword aloft, she struck him so fierce a blow on the side
of his shield, that she had almost feld him. The Lady, seeing her enemy would
not offend her, burned in kindled coals of enraged fury against her love
conquered adversary: though more aptly they might be called messengers of the
winged Lord, sent with so great have to demand the Tribute due to his
domination, that at such time they arrived, when altogether they could subiugate
her will, and dispossess her of her free liberty, that now her Combat was
more through duty she ought her dead brother, then for any desire to offend the
Knight, that so truly seemed to be hers.

Notwithstanding, she had so wearied him, that a Thousand times he doubted to
escape well ye danger. But resolved rather to die then offer violent hands on
whom he had chosen to command his thoughts, and as such a one acknoledging her,
using his dexterity, he began to show himself more nimble, then a light-foot
hare pursued by a troop of hou^ds leaping on al sides, making the Lady loose
her blows, yet to his no small discontent, because he supposed, he therein
displeased her. Well did the galla^t Lady perceive his intent, which was but
adding of more fuel to the fire, wherein she burned for him. But returning her
eyes on the bloodlesse carcas of her murdered brother, she straight forgot
all conceived affection, with the new grief she received, making her redouble
her blows with more fierceness, insomuch that now altogether unable longer to
hold out, he thought it better at length to close with her, and try whether
by that means he might move her adamantine heart to some co^miseration: so
receiving one blow that made him set his hands on the ground, and quickly
arysing, he threw his shield a toe-side, and running within her, he cast about
her sholders his amorous and strong arms, with such happy content, (that he wished
such success might happen to him, as befell unto ye son of Venus and Mercury,
with the beauteous Nymphs, Salmacis, when she embraced him in the clear fount of
her name whose transformation of two Natures in one shape, was the beginning of
Hermaphrodites feigned fable) that he might fearelesse to his content enjoy
what, fortune then made doubtful, and houlding her, yet not to hard because he
would not hurt her, he said.

Give not occasion (most valerous Lady) that it be blazoned through the
world, how the Mirror of the new miracle of your divine beauty, is taynted
with an ignominious blot of barbarous cruelty, the only enemy to those
perfections that the almighty careful Apelles of Natures rarest coulors has
bestowed on you: For if my death will advance your content, I do receive it
with more anguish and pains, by living, to live pyning away in woes, in your
service. Let it be so: for this way shall you tread the path that will lead
you to a satisfied revenge. Oh suffer not (remorcelesse Lady) that it be said
of you, what is written of that inhumane and hellish sorceresse Medea, whom
with a savage desire of revenge, most cruelly murdered her own children?
consider (oh wonder of admiration) it will scandalize the glory of your
excellencies, and you shall, (if you will do it) offend the rareness of your
beauty: for never any could boast of it, or worthily be nominated beautiful
though she excel the brightness of ye brightest Sun, unless she do abandone
the cruelty of an hardened heart, the sole dishonor of all honored Ladies? in
steed whereof admit the pity of a mollified breast, pity the splendour of your
name, pity the tryu^ph of your victory, pity the Trophy of your virtues,
this, oh let this shine through your clouded cleme^cy, whose beams shall
stellify your chiualries, imortalize your fame, and infuze new life in me,
whose blod is already almost utterly defused, unless your pity gather it
again, restoring it to him ye will only keep, as a memorial statue of this your
eternal conquest, else otherwise the unhappy death of your hapless brother,
will never by other means be suffitiently revenged. With so many tears, and
sighs did the woeful Dacian utter these words, that they would have melted
a flintie rock, to distilling dropps of water, much more her obduracie, that
was assured his true love passions forced him to it, and as she had already
given him the principal command over her will, these his new speeches made
her thus reply.

Seeing my stars, (brave Knight) have brought me to such pass, that I must
consent to what you will, I acquit you of this combat, because I think the
conquest thereof, the mighty God of war has only reserved to himself as a
particular honor due to his deity. Moreover if we should stay till my
Knights come, there is no doubt but you shall incur some great danger, for
the loss you have given them by the timelesse end of my dear brother, or that
I should carry them the news, would be no less, then if they had seen the
manner of his pitilesse death. So I will neither consent to the one, nor do the
other, but am determined to depart in your company, (though it be troublesome
unto you) until by others this unfortunate chance be known. So joyful became
the afflicted Prince with the Ladies words, that like a man ouer-ioyed, he
replied.

I cannot (most excellent Lady) for so high a favor bind me anew, more then I
am already: for since my happy destinies (though with so many adverse
accidents) brought me to the place where I might enjoy your Celestial sight, I
have no power over my will more the^ to obey what ever you shall command as the
sole Goddess of my earthly devotion, having to your behests for ever vowed
devoted duty, as a true seruitor: And as such a one humbly prostrated on ye
lowly earth, I beg I may be accepted, in token of which grant with like
humility, I crave that you would deigne to give me your victorious hands, on
whose purity I may pay what all the world should do. She replied, I would not
(sir Knight) you should so soon demand the cure of your distress: but because
you shall not altogether despair of my pity, I will accomplish your request,
were it only but to fulfill the first command, entreated by a Knight so great
an enemy to my content. And so she raised him, and intertayned him as her
Knight, giving him her beauteous hands, which made the gallant Dacian think,
there was no other happiness to be wished in the circled Orb: and seeing
himself so favored by that excellent Lady, he said, Make me at once divinely
happy (divine Goddess of my heart) with the discovery of the Royal progeny of
your Sovereign stock, and the Kingly parentage of your high descent. The same
(answered she) was I determined to require of you (sir Knight) but me thinks
you are so armed with asking, that you admit no leave for my command. Which
seeing it is so, I am content in all things to content you, but first let us
from hence, least we be here taken by an elder brother of mine, with whom it
cannot be but you should run into some imminent peril, for he is reputed no
less valiant then any of the Greek Princes, and by the way I will discourse
my birth and parentage: first entreating you to direct our course to Grecia,
for I greatly desire to know those Princes so highly famozed through ye worlds
spacious continents, as also because I would be resolved whether they be your
kinsfolks, for I much suspect it.

And in great have beginning to mount a horseback, with far swifter speed,
out of the Forest, there issued the Lady that was wont to come to the Prince
Don Eleno. Straight did the Dacian Lord know her, to whom with a chereful
countenance he thus said: How now dear friend? tell me, have you any need of
my person? Speak: for you know my debt, therefore, I shall hazard nothing, if
for your sake, I indaunger my self. Your loves Sir Knight have so much
disquieted me, as not long since I was for your friend Torismundo: But because
I have taken part of your griefs, there is no reason but you should let me
enjoy some of the glory and content you have obtained by the admirable bounty
of this excellent Lady, whose beauty far excels her, for whose sake Troy
was subverted. But because your departure cannot be excused, my Uncle Lirgandeo
sends you this shield, that you may present it to this Lady, that in such great
danger did put your valor, giving her new arms, that she may altogether
conquer you. This said, she drew forth a shield of the like color of the
armor, with so many precious stones, that it well denoted the workmanship of
so rare a workman, it had the like devise that Don Elenos had, which was a
Cupid with two faces: for in that he greatly delighted, saying: that both in
peace and war, it was just to acknowledge him the tribute that over all
things he claims. And to you (brave lady) he bid me say, you should not a
little account of this Knight: for it were life to many to see him as you now
do: and of your brother, he wills you to loose your care, leaving it only to
him, for he has it, and will hereafter, so regard al your affairs as his own.
She awaited no answer, but with the turning of her Palfrey, she made the
Forest make so great a noise, as if it had been overwhelmed. They looking what
it might be, saw at the foot of a tree a rich tomb, admirable for curious
works, and so transparant, that the Princes running to it, they saw the Ladies
brother, as he fell with the cruel wound, with certain redd letters, which
the Prince thus read: Here shall the wounded Larsino abide, until his cruel
murderer shall make satisfaction with his proper life, satisfying those two
that dearest in the world did love.

They could not conceive the meaning of those words, though ye understanding
he remained inchaunted, somewhat comforted them, and seeing it waxed late, the
Lady said: Let us go (Sir Knight,) for I believe I shall one day see what I
have thought impossible: for as I think, my brother remains in this
inchauntment. So they began to take their way toward the Sea coast. When the
valiant Astorildo the Ladies eldest brother, seeing she was not to be found,
and finding his brother inchaunted, caused all his Knights to return home,
commanding them to tell his Father, he was gone to seek his sister, and taking
with him but one Squire, he shipped himself toward Graecia, in which voyage we
leave him, returning to the adventures that happened the new Lovers.

CHAP. II. The dangerous adventures that the Princes met, nauigating toward
Liguria, and the maruailous end thereof.
WIth incredible joy, more then well may be expressed, and thankfully accepting
the happy Fortune that ye pleased heavens powered into their lapps, at length
they arrived to the inchaunted bark, at such time, as ye glory of bright Tytans
rays would their splendour in the waterie Ocean of Hesperia, leaving the earth
unto her nightly silence, that to his better content, the venturous Dacian
might know of his Lady, what she was, and in what reputation his yielded soul
was esteemed. Arryuing at the shore, he straight lept from his horse, holding
the styrrop that his Lady might do the like: but not admitting it, with a smyle
(alighting by the other side) she said, you shall not think (Sir Knight) with
so small a service to satisfy the great wrong you have done me, and embracing
him, they stayed til Fabio had shipped their horses, the gladdest man alive, to
see what good Fortune had happened to his Lord and master, because he thought
her beauty exceeded all compare, wherein he nothing did deceive himself. For
in deed the world contained few like unto her. Both which entered the Bark,
that launched from the sands, with such vellocitie, as do the inhabitants of
Maiorica fling a stone with their steeled sling, or with like vehemency that
the lightning flasheth through the air, with such or more speed did the
inchaunted Bark cut the salt waves of Neptunes bosom, having withing it so
great provision, and diversity of cates, as if those Princes were served with
the greatest royalty of Dacia. And after supper, (having unarmed themselves)
they sat them on the hatches of their Bark, to take the coolness of a fresh
air, that softly blewe on their faces, as also to behold the clearness of the
pale resplending Moon, that then showed the utmost pride of her waterie shine,
that with more joy they might enjoy each others beauty, waying in the balance
of true affection, the perfections of the same, resting so envious of one
another, as amorous of eithers excellencies. For she thought that Knight was he
to whom her beauty was due: and he that her merits deserved his true faith,
till death, sacrifized with the fire of her valor. But to break off eithers
silent imaginations, he began: Now is the time (divine Lady) seeing the Heavens
and the Seas inuit us with their calm quietness) that you would tell me whom
I must acknowledge, for the sovereign Princess of my soul, paying the awful
fealty of my due tribute, as a true liege man to his sworn Prince. I will not
have you think (Sir Knight) that with your great praising of my small beauty,
you do pay me the much good that I wish you. And because in all things I will
have you know, that Ladies do commit greater sin in being pitiful, then in
being austere in denying the requests of their amorous gallants, I will
satisfy your demand. Know therefore I am called Rosamond, (yet know I not
why? since all things joy in crossing me. I am daughter unto the King of
Callidonia, which is the country from whence we come, and being brought up
together with my brothers, seeing them so greatly affected and given to
hunting, I determined also to keep them company, refusing no danger that might
be offered me, until our more years enabled us, to presume to mount on
horses, and with Boar spears follow the cruellest beasts that we met. My
brothers attaining to the age of xvi. years, were by my Father knighted, who
denied me that honor, supposing I would absent my self from him, because he
heard me diverse times say, how greatly I desired to pass unto Graecia to
visit the Empress Claridiana, whose fame through all the world, especially in
these kingdoms, glorifies her with the name of a sole Paragon of beauty, and
only Myrrour of chivalry. I could not but grieve with my Fathers denial (yet
I dissembled it) still following the chase, until this day two months, there
befell me what I will now tell you.

We came, my brothers and I a hunting to this Forest, (called of the fair
Fountain,) and parting from them in pursuit of that Heart, on the top of a
mountain, on the sudden a beauteous Lady set her self before me, crying,
stay: for without armor, you cannot well pass forwards: and vnbynding a
little packet she there had, she gave me this armor, saying they were them
wherewith Semyramis did win Babylon, and that with them I should overcome one
of the best Knights of the world, and in whom with most honor flourished a
firm constancy, although it should cost rivers of blood, and with them she
gave me the sword, wherewith she received the order of knighthood at the hands
of Artyne Emperor of Persia, and that I should make peace with him, that in the
same honor should install me: for that would be the sweetest. This (Sir Knight)
is the answer of your demand, the which seeing I have with such liberal
willingness performed, be not you too nyce to let me know, who the murderer
of my brother is.

Magnificent Princess (replied the Dacian) my soul rejoices to satisfy your
request, because you may know I am he that with most faith do procure only
firmly ever to obey you, although I would not to you manifest the obscurity
of my low Fortunes. Notwithstanding, know my name is Don Eleno of Dacia,
Nephew to the Emperor of Greece, and the only son of his sole brother. And
believe me, no less signs have befell me in the course of my life, then to
you, that I should come to this you have said: For winning this armor in
Rome, having my heart as free as now captive, a wise man, my dear friend,
commanded me to depart thence, without speaking to any woman until I should
yield the Sovereign command over me, unto the greatest Feminine enemy that
in the whole earth I might procure: for therein consisted the only quiet of my
felicity: wherein I think the wiseman has not erred, because his sayings
have been accomplished to the full: For maugre the liberty of my heart, and the
content I ioyed therewith, together with all my former successes through your
means, the happy sight of your first approach, so alienated my self from my
self, that I was feign to submit my soul to hope some redress for so great a
change, and yet thereby loosing the same hope of remedy through the unhappy
death of your dear brother, though now I have not altogether lost if of his
life, because that learned man that sent us this shield, has undertaken the
care of his safety. But because I am and will be yours, until the fatal
Sisters of life and death shall abridge my soul of her breathing sacrifices. I
beseech you by the firmness of our sincere love, you will assure my hopes,
confirm my desires, and set an end to my painful longings.

With the end of which words with more boldness the^ his fear required, he
kissed her on the cheek, which done, he dyed his own, with such a bashful
tincture, yt it altogether stopped the passage of his speech. Well did the Lady
perceive his alteration, who with some show of anger replied. I would not
(Prince of Dacia) that the committing of my honors purity, and my Maidens
fame into your hands, should be occasion of your little regard unto the great
respect due to the confidence I have in you reposed: wherein if you neglect the
duty you owe thereto, I will rather cast my self into these devouring waters,
then the glory of my chaste thoughts shall endure any stayne. And the receiving
you for my Knight has not been so small a favor, but might sufficiently so
content you: that my keeping you company, and thus alone to trust you, with my
immaculate, and unstained imaginations, should be no cause to move you to this
discourtesie. And offering to go from the hatches, ye Prince with Millions of
sighs proceeding from his soul, stayed her by the arm with these words.

That I have displeased you (Imperious Princess) so torments me, that I know
not how to satisfy your discontent conceived, unless you now will take a full
revenge, for my many trangressions, though it be with effusion of my dearest,
dearest life: and yet what I did was forced by the motion of a pure sincere
love, and not of any lascivious thoughts. So assured was the beauteous Rosamond
thereof, that she thus made answer.

Since my happy stars (brave Prince) have put me in your hands, they have
driven me to that necessity, that I must forget and forgive any offense
whatsoever: but if you shall pass these lymits, my self will execute on my
own life the cruellest death ere heard of. With incredidle joy ye amorous
Prince, kissed her hands for the favor, and being warned by the palenesse of
Cinthias shine, that it was time to withdraw themselves, they returned to
their several cabbins, comparable to any Monarchs chamber: where they past
the night with such conformable thoughts, that hadd they durst either to visit
the other at that season, it is doubtful whether they would have differred the
glory attending on such attempts.

A little before the Messenger of morn began to lace the Heavens with her
goulden hair, the Princely youth, seeing himself so true a seruitor unto ye
God of love, and so derely to be loved, raised himself on the bed and leaving
on his pillowe, took his Lute in hand, and making it sound the repetition of
his joys, he sung the felicity that the heavens gave him in the possession of
so rare a Lady: in these verses.

Let th'happiest dye with envy of my state,
And as unhappy have a speedy fall:
If soul and thoughts tormented were of late,
It Was to obtain the soueraygnest good of all:
In whom deuyne Apelles with his art,
For beauties sake drew forth her better part.
Dye fair Adonis, and Apollo perish,
Pyramus and Leander, breath no more:
Endimion eake that did with favors flourish,
Well knows the world my love the heavens adore.
And as their estimation passed mine,
So in content let them so much declyne.
He ended with a sigh, saying. Oh love, with how great reason art thou
honored? and like a God adored? seeing thou can cherish him that has not felt
thy churlishness, and on whom thou have not extended the intolerable weight
of thy rygorous power. Well did the Princess hear him, ouer-ioyed to be loved
by so brave a Prince, imagening she could not hope for more, having so great a
good there present. Notwithstanding, she determined yet to dissemble her
affection, until the time did counsel her what she should do: and because
the Sun had begun his rising in the East, she made her ready, putting on her
white and most rich armor, and went directly to the Princes cabbyn, who with
his new care, had it not, to clothe himself, yet seeing his Lady come, he would
rise, but she staying him said, I would have had you done it before (Sir Knight)
for he that lives so careless, should not belike doubt of his Mistres favors,
and with my soul I would be glad to know her, that I might ask her if she
joys in so careless a lover. Deuinest Princess, (replied ye joyful Prince)
with nothing do I more express my poor souls pensiveness, then with such
carelesnes, which being well noted, it will be judged a careful confidence,
for it cannot be more seen, nor better deserved in any, then in whom true
love has rooted his conceits, for without care of any thing else, he does
only busy himself, in the sweet imaginations of his own alienation.

Notwithstanding (answered the Lady) I do condemn so great confidence almost
grounded upon an extremity, and in most respcts, little respecting the Lady
loved, for the ouerielous lover did never, but die, confounded in his own
expects. A care magnanimous and honorable, is to be allowed, excused, and worthy
of estimation, but utterly to be ouer-whelmed in pensive suspense, and make
you seem nothing but a lover, befits you not, nor yet becoms it one bound, to
accomplish so many things as you.

I do joy so much (dear Mistres of my heart) to love and wholly to employ my
self therein, that I would show no sign that I can any thing otherwise, and
although I should do so, I do not requite the worth of my employment, for if I
had a Thousand souls, al were to few, compared to ye content of my
imaginatio^s where al ye good is decyphered, ye otherwise I might expect, and I
find that being not this way, if would be more then troublesome. Sir Knight
(replied she) you do so highly account the thing loved, that I do wish I were
she, to obtain that glory that never Venus did enjoy, though in beauty a
Goddess, and it should be for no longer then I might know, whether it be true
all that you publish. Thereof (excellent Princess replied he,) crave no better
testimonfe, the^ the pain that I conceived with your sight. Then (answered
she) you cannot deny me, that to love, is more to fear, then any other
thing, seeing you say, that the first sight left you so wounded: whereby I
infer, your pain proceeded of your sight. All that you have said (brave
Lady, answered he) is armor to defend my cause, seeing none could never love,
unless he lived with fear: for he that does not fear his loss with thousand
sighs and Ielousies, is to make the world know, he is not truly esteamed,
because jealousy is the abundance of the soul that loves, and with that he
fears to loose the object loved. Whereunto she answered, In all things will you
remain sole co^querour ( Heroyke Prince) and herein will I witness your true
faith, making it known unto your Lady, that according thereunto she may reward
you with favors, or disfauors, and for the first there is no reason they should
be ymployed on any that less loves then you.

If (dear Lady of my life said he) I might live assured thereof, who like me
should triumph over Fortune? who should force strength out of a drooping heart
to love, but I? or who would fear a tempestuous storm, having the assurance
of so sweet a calm? That, and what else you will brave Prince (said she) is
in your hands quietly to possess, only admitting no new change, for if you
do, you shall receive no wrong, to be deprived of the favors, that your love
deserves. But make you ready for I perceive a well rygged ship make toward
us, and I will in the mean while go know who it is. Like to a nimble Dear
leapt ye galiant youth out of his bed, extreme ioyed of his Ladies promise,
and with his Squiers help he armed him with the most rich armor of the great
Roman Brutus, and mounting on the hatches, where his Lady did expect him,
with a low amorous congie, he said to her. Happy is the Knight, that
(immerited) has obtained who with such care supplieth the faults of my
carelessness. It has not been so little (said she) but it might need all:
and look yonder, for I think I see a Tower built upon the Sea, unless her
bygnesse do deceive me. Their bark quickly joined to it, that they well
perceived it was as the Lady said. So soon as they aryued to the foot thereof,
(for it was the same, where Rosabell was inchaunted,) they saw certain green
Emerald letters, to this effect.

No less courage and valor then good Fortune requires the entrance of the
marvelous Tower: for regarding what is in it, demanding this nothing is
required. For first the unjustly loved of the two Sisters, shall loose his
fortunute armor, ere so much as hope be got, to liberate from hence the
treasure of Niquea. Long did the two Lovers stand guessing to understand ye
dark inscriptio^, purposing to try the adventure, even at the time that to
them arrived in another bark two Knights, of no less disposition then any they
ever saw, attyred with most rich abillements of war, who no less admired
their gallantnes, and having their visors open and showing their divine faces,
yet they could not imagine who so brave Knights should be. They that aryued
after a solemn courtesy said, sir Knights, we greatly desire to know, what
adventure this is, and the manner how we might prove it. It is so little since
we aryued, (replied the loved Dacian) that we cannot certify you of any
thing. For if we had known how to have entered it, we had not stayed for you.
Somewhat abashed were the new comers, and he that read the Inscription, thus
spoke. Unless I be deceived Knights considering the conditions demanded,
although you had found means to prove it, it would be too difficult for you.
Promising so much as it does (answered the Dacian) though more troublesome, we
had tried it: for without a thing be proved, it cannot be called difficult.
But you that such confidence do repose in your valor, tell me in how many
dangers have you hazarded your person, for a man that fears, is an evident
sign, he has been in some action, whose end should seem to have been
difficult, although here a promised hope does lessen any fear, and therefore
do desire that I and you might try our Fortunes in this attempt.

That were (answered the Knight) for you to expect, and receive help and aid
from my arm, if you needed, the Dacian was not of such patience, and therefore
his rashness was condemned) as to suffer so broad ataunt, and so replied.
Truly (Knight) I never thought that the offering you my person should have
moved you to such presumption: But prepare your self, for I will show you I
have no need of your help. Wherewith he closed his Beuer, and drew forth his
sword, finding his adversary in no less readiness, being no less then the
gallant Don Argante of Phenicia, and his companion was the valiant Torisiano,
who having set from the defended Island, were driven thither by the tempestuous
waves, and with his armor and valor, did imagine quickly to terminate that
business. But he met with him that admits no comparison but with the Grecian
Peers, who with the murdering sword of Brutus, with a flourish in his first
assault, kept it aloft till he spyed occasion which offered (no knight like he
could never with more speed or in time better take it) he crossed his good sword,
and settling himself for the blow, underneath his shield he laid it on so
fiercely, that he forced his adversary to staggar three or four stepts
backward. He had scarce executed this blow, when with an Eagles swiftnes, he
leapt into his boat, encountering him with his shield in his entrance so
strongly, that ouerbearing him a little of one side he had quite ouerthrown him.

There wanted none with shrill voices to solemnize the valor of the Russet
Knight: for with the opening of certain windows on the top of the Tower,
the Heavens seemed to unlock their casements, setting their Celestial
dwellers to the view: for all ye Ladies yt there were enchanted, being the
Princess Lyriana and her Couzens, settled themselves to behold the battle, for
only this liberty hadd they to recreate themselves, although they were not
suffered to know any, because of their great grief, they might conceive by the
sight of some, not enjoying their lovers company, for so did the Magician order
that made that enchantment. Nothing was the brave Phenician amazed to see his
aduersarye in his bark, but rejoiced, because he thought, he might so better
make his battle. And with this, as also with seeing such beauteous Ladies did
behold their fight, he turned upon his enemy, and with his Tellamonian blade,
discharged so brave a blow upon his head, that it made him bend his knees, in
recompense of his bold entrance. Nymble was the youth and so would second
another, but the Dacian frustrated it with his celeritie: for with a thrust, he
forced him back with as much speed as ever he came. And so at length settling
themselves firmly on their feet, they began the brauest combat that ever was
fought upon those Seas: for unable to penetrate their sure arms, all the force
of their fight consisted on their valor, and nimblenes, which was their sole
avail. Not a little did the gallant Rosamond grieve to see her dear Prince in
the battle, not for the danger thereof: for she well saw the advantage he
had over his enemy: but the true lover does only weigh the present ill of the
thing loved, admitting no entrance to the hope of any future good. So resolved
to accompany him in all things cloasing her Beuer with the best sword that the
world contained, she went toward Torisiano with these words.

It ill beseemes us, to see our friends in such egar war, and our selves in
peace. Never did the gallant youth see a more accomplished Knight then the Lady
did represent, being armed: for which in many places she was reputed to be
Claridiano. Notwithstanding, accepting the combat, (for with Jove he would not
have refused it) he began to prepare himself. Easily did the Dacian Prince,
hear the sweet name of friend: which augmented such courage in his amorous
breast, that he began with fresh strength to bestow such, him self receiving
mighty blows, that the Lady clearly saw his advantage. But quickly were
they put from this, turning to gaze upon the Knight with the white armor, on
whom his excellent disposition, did draw their affection. This was our
Knightly Lady, that meeting with her enemy together, they laid on each other
so puissant blows, that with their hands they were feign to sustain
themselves. Of greater strength was the Lady, for which cause she rose
soonest, and with her good sword she gave him such a blow on the Helm, that
she made him see millions of stars: she seconded it somewhat lower, which
had it been in the same place, he could not but have incurred mighty danger,
yet made she the blood fly through his eyes, and nostrels, which was but
making the youth more furious, who going toward her, seemed to awaight her
stroke which she with eagerness to bestow, regarded not his intent. For in
the discharge, he stepped to his left side, fustrating her blow, at which time,
having opportunity: for taking her without shield there, under her right arm,
he struck with such strength, that the Lady greatly felt the weight of her
adverse sword: for it made her give back with such a stagger, that she had
almost fell ouerboard. And the haughty Torisiano seeing her amaze, would have
lept after her: but she returned with such speed, that she incountred him in
his leaping, and so thrust him, that it was an admirable wonder, how he fell
not in the Sea (yet he fell with a sore fall in the middle of his Bark. Gladly
would the Lady have done what her Lord did, but she thought it would only
hinder him, because the ship was little. So she stayed for his coming, who
returned like a ravenous Tiger, renewing so fiercely their fight, that it seemed
of an hundred Knights together, so great was their noise. For the Lady reputed
it to be dishonor to her reputation, that her adversary should endure so long
against her, specially in her Princes sight, that being her first battle.
With like immagination was her enemy troubled, and so agreeing in one desire,
discharged on each other the mighty strength of their furious arms, with such
puisance, that the Echo of their sounding blows, made the valleys in the
firm land many miles off seem to tremble with the shrill noyze. By ye force
of the blow, ye royal Lady lost her Helm covering her white armor, with
thousand tressed tramels of hairie gold, resting with some alteration, through
a little blood that issued from her mouth. But hers in a more lamentable sort
had put the gallant Torisiano, for with a great fall with blood bursting
through his eyes, she tumbled him at the enemies feet of her dear Knight, who
at the noise, with more care then the Princely Eagle gardeth her yonglings,
turned about, and seeing his souls life, in that amazment, and without Helm,
thought her to be sore wounded, that with a rigorous blow, driving his enemy
from him, with a leap he returned to his own ship, to know what danger she
was in. With great applause was this care of Don Eleno celebrated by the towred
Ladies, highly estimating the doubtful regard he showed of his Lady. Well did
the lovers hear it, and so she received him with these words. It is no time
now (brave Prince) to lose, what with so much blood you have won. And seeing
my danger has been the cause thereof, I will put on no Helm, until my arm
has again assured you what you valor had obtained. So ending her speech,
more nimbler then an Ounce, she lept into her adversaries shipp, at what time
they had recovered them selves, with more fury then angry Lions hunted by
their foes. Between them, fearelesse of her head, did the Lady cast her self,
and in her entrance meeting first with Don Argante, upon his shoulder she
grounded the weight of her furious rage, whose pain was so extreme, that he
thought that side was opened to his middle, and reaching Torisiano with a
thrust, she made his shield join with his breast, and himself almost loose his
breath.

But this time was the enraged Dacian entered the bark flourishing his rich
sword, whereby they could not but incur great perrill: had not the most
beauteous Princess of Nyquea foreseen it, who much pitying the two
companions, thus spoke.

So admirable is the loss that this spacious Orb will receive, with any of
your deaths (valiant and courageous Knights) that it constraynes me to
entreat you (if in you there be so much courtesy as courage) for this time to
give over this combat, for which these Ladies and I will worthily extol your
bounties. The Princess Rosamond envious of so rich a sight, quickly thus
replied: first admyred Lady, yt does so advance the honor of wa^dring knights,
that none can be more greater, then to obey the commanded service of all
Ladies, insomuch that they account it a divine felicity, to have such
occasions to show it. Wherefore I say, that for the incredidle desire, and
inexplicable will I have to serve them, I do on my behalf give over the fight,
not only for this time but for ever, because ye Knight does leave so waued (to
my cost) by this, that I think it best to crave an assurance against all
future accidents. All the Princes greatly smyled at her speech, because they
knew her to be a woman by her hair, when she lost her helm, whereupon
Lyriano replied. Bravely have you defended your beauty (most valerous Lady)
bynding thereby all Knights to your perpetual service. And we wish we were
them, that you might know, if we can entreat, it is because we only endeavored
to be your dutyfull seruitors. Notwithstanding we hope, and so I do believe,
there is no Knight but will do it, soly to pleasure you, and to obtain your
favor, though our entreaties ceased in that case. With no less courtesy
then valor were the Princes indewed, and so the Phenician replied when on our
side the victory were most sure (divine Ladies) we would leave it to gain
some part of your favors: much more, being constrained to loose by this, what
by the other we obtained. Nevertheless, my companion and I, are contented to
obey you, yielding the trophie of the conquest to these triumphing Knights.
Yours is the victory (Heroike warriors) answered the Dacian, not only of
this battle, but of all honor in the universe. Hereupon they embraced one
another, craving pardon of their last attempt, and so the Princes returned to
their inchaunted Bark: which no sooner had they entered, when swifter then an
arrowe shot from a steeled bow, it departed from the inchaunted Tower, leaving
the beholders so amazed, that they could not beliue it, loosing their sight
when they entered the Persian Sea, shaping their course toward Lguria: what
there befell them, in the next Chapter shall be related.

CHAP. III. How the two Princes Don Eleno and Rosamond arrived at Lyguria, and
what adventure they there found.
SO many, and so certain are the inconveniences that happens to an amorous
lover, so great his crosses, and so sure his misaduentures, that if among
millions of misfortunes he obtaines one good Fortune, he may justly say, it
happened by chance, and so lawfully may it be accounted a miracle, esteeming
it of no less rarietie then the Phaenix, whose nature never admitted any
plurality, which being so, with reason should all men rejoice at another
happiness therein, because it is a deserved merit after so many pains. This
thus considered, I cannot but with joy exult, when I see another by his
mistress favored, and much more, if he obtain the glorious end of his
wishes, which gladness, has possessed me with so suddein a pleasure, that I
have purposed to follow the Dacian Prince, who now among Venus chiefest
fauourits may be named, and of them the happiest, because beloved of Rosamond.
And in so much that for the least hope of her dear favors, Apollo willingly
would have changed his eternal deity for his decaying mortality. With her did
Don Eleno merrily discourse, and amongst other chat, demanded her how she felt
her self of the last combat, with her strong adversary? How could I but do
well (replied she) and be better (brave Prince) having on my side the valor of
the Dacian Lord. That were (dear Lady, said she) because it was done in
company of your Fortitude, whence redoundeth the courage for greater
adventures? I will not so soon (answered she) purpose to believe it so, till
once again (for nothing) you loose what your valor got. For it argues no
less Fortitude to maintain it, then to regaine it. And in my soul I would
rejoice to know what those Ladies be, that in the Tower do remain. For in my
iudgemrnt, the beauty so greatly esteemed through the world, and so rarely
honored elsewhere, is but the shadow of that substance we left enclosed
there. And never believe me, but their liberty will dearly cost, to him
shall concern, because the trophie of their gained honor, will counteruaile
the greatest toil. And no little pleasure should I also conceive with the
knowledge of those Knights, who surely cannot but be of high descent,
considering with what courtesy they left the combat. Who is he that dares
longer maintain it (said he) the Princess of Callidonia being his enemy, if
he will fear to displease her, seeing they that live in peace, (because they
will not do it) also tremble at her name.

If it be so (replied she) the Prince of Dacia need not fear my arms. If my
Fortune (answered the Prince) had given me that good that yet she has not, I
needed not then expect greater hopes? and therefore she does reserve this
happiness, that he may still be craving, that lives with such fear. All that
shall little avail you (replied the Lady) to defend you from mine anger, if
once you fall into it. Ay me (said the amorous youth with a sigh, a new snare
to entrap the captive Lady) how well can my soul auerre it, since that little
instant that my life was prolonged to hope a perpetual eternity. I would not
Sir Knight (faid she) you should so soon assure your self to live in my
favor, were it only, because you are so reputed by the Ladies of the
inchaunted Tower, and so I will dissemble my former anger.

Thus went the loved youth, enjoying of these favors, when one morning when
Aurora first showed the brigthnes of her face, armed with their rich arms,
they entered the broad clear river Achelous that deriues his name from Tethis
famous son, that combated with Hercules about ye maraiage of Deianira
daughter to Oneio King of Etolea until the warrelike Theban, by dispossessing
him of his life, gave that river his name, which he christened with his blood.
Within sight had they the mountain Pindus, whence it springes. And had they
known what there befell unto their ancestors, there is no doubt but with more
delight they had gazd on it, and with more pleasure ponderated his hight, But
with the stream, through the currrent of the river, they were driusu with such
velocitie, that within three days they entered the Italian seas, and in the
fourth, coasting along the Tuscane land, cutting twixt Vero, and Macra, two
mighty rivers proud of their streams, ye when the Sun mounted on the highest
promontory tops, they ran aland in Moneco, the haue^ port of Liguria now
called Ienua) not far from the populous City Sauona, where then the court
lay.

With great content landed the two valiant lovers, with the only company of
Fabio, and leaving the charge of their Bark to him that guided it, they took
the broadest trodden path they could find, because they would the sooner meet
with whom might tell them the land they iournied in. They travailed with their
armor for that they took most felicity therein. In this manner went they in
sweet chatt. (for none is like to that of two, if they entirely love) til it
was toward noone: at which time they spied a damsel come toward them as fast
as her palfrey could run, crying aloud after she saw them. Hay me (Sir
Knights) now is the time, that you must make known the valor of your parsons,
by redressing the greatest disgrace that might befall. And if you be determined
to return with me, by the way I will tell it you. We are content fair
damozell (replied the Prince) to accomplish what you will, having for such
purposes, received the order of Knighthood. So she turned her palfray, they
all set forwards in great haste, while the damozel thus said: you now (Sir
Knights) are within the kingdom of Lyguria, nigh the city of Sauona, where
the King keeps his Court. And because this country is so fresh, temperate
and pleasant, the Princess Orsyna walked abroad this morning unto this Wood to
recreate her self with other Ladies, not far from the temple of Hercules:
and sitting all together about a pleasant Fountain, from one side of a grove
there issued a most savage monster, like unto a big horse, and hurting none
of us, through a sudden trance that surprised us, he had time to carry away
all the Ladies two by two, and among them the Princess, except me and two
other, that are gone to bear these heavy news unto the city.

Consider (Sir Knights) my distress, and whether I have not reason to bewail
it. You have it (fair Lady, answered Rosamond) and so great, that it had
moved me to such compassion (that setting aside the duty that al Knights are
bound to, in procuring her liberty,) I do here offer my person to ransom her
from bondage, promising to be foremost therein. She vttred it so quickly, that
the Prince could not show his willingness in that case. Yet did he hope that
his Lady would command it him. Within short time they arrived at the Temple,
which in their sights seemed no less gorgious then any they ever saw. For the
stones so shined, that they seemed of burnisht gold: and so many Pyramides it
had, that the view thereof ravished the senses with pleasure. So soon as the
damzell saw it, with tears she said: That (Sir Knights) is the place that
harbors him that stole the Princess my Mistress and her Ladies. In a tryce
dismounted the two gallant lovers, and leaving their horses to Fabio, with
their naked swords they went to the Temple, which was with brazen barred gates
fast shut, on whom they read this inscription.

The entrance of the ancient Temple of Hercules, is granted but to one: First
swearing, that he loves, and with a faith inuyolate, for a house so amorous as
this, may not be allowed to any, but such a one. Forwards stepped the Lady, with
whom nothing prevailed the Princes entreaties, to make her leave that
dangerous enterprise, but swearing what the entrance required, and that so
loud, that the Prince might hear, it so rejoiced him, that his senses with
pleasure were bereft him: For before she knocked, she said: If my being in
love, may any thing avail, then will I not loose what my constancy assures.
For I vow by my high thoughts, that I live by only being so, envying none
therein, because I believe I am the best bestowed of any that ever loved, since
it was known what love did mean. And so with a seld seen gallantnesse (able
to entrap the God of Love) she rapt at the gates, which were opened with no
less noise, then when Theseus was entertained in hell, bent to the rape of
fair Proserpine.

She could perceive nothing about the gates but flames of fire, to defend them,
whose timorous sight, was sufficient to affright the stoutest heart. But she
that was borne to live without it (unless it proceeded from a true love)
entered wiihout fear of the fire. Where not a little did she try the virtue of
het Babylonian arms, whose inestimable stones did mittigate that heat.
Nevertheless, that which entered through her Beuer, was so extreme, that it
almost smoothered her. Yet valiantly suffering it, with much toil she passed
forward, till she came before an Altar, whereon they used to sacrifice to
Hercules, and leaving that, she went into a large yard, (free of the flames)
though not of the discontent she conceived, when there she saw upon the
tarras of the same many Ladies lamentably bewailing over a Knight, that she
supposed to be her dear Dacian, who by four was carried on a Hearse, pearsed
with many wounds) saying, O poor Prince, how quickly have the Fates conspired
the overthrow of thy content, with so cruel death: and turning to the Lady
that in the yard stood dead with grief, they said: What avails thee
Princess of Callidonia, to have protested thou thou did love, if so soon
thou should loose thy lover? They gave her no time to demand the cause and
manner of that sight. For from a corner of the yard, there issued a most
fierce Centaure,, bigger then the greatest horse, who knowing her, swifter then
the Wind, made toward the Lady with these words:

Stay captive wretch, and straight thou shall know the gains of thy
presumption, having undertaken this enterprise (accompting it an honorable act)
that Ioues-borne Hercules my greatest foe durst never imagine. In his course,
he was an Eagle, and so incountred her so mightily with his hayrie breast, that
with a grievous fall he overthrew her on her back. Return upon her he
desired, but the fury that conducted him, so far did lead him, that when he
turned, the Lady was already on her feet. But here was she in the hands of
death. For the savage monster brought with him four mighty trees, which he
threw in steed of darts, whose force, were able topsiturnie to overthrow a
well built edificie. The Lady was driven to open her visar, the better to see
how to defend herself from the unequal fight, wherein she did nothing
amiss. For the furious Centaure, taking one, with such puisance like to a
small darte he hurled it. Her nimblenesse saved her from it, which lighting on
a stone of the wall in ye yard, it ran up to the middle, overthrowing a great
piece thereof. So speedy was he in throwing, that though she freed her self
of the second: yet the third took her on the side of her shield, that it
turned her three or four times about, that she was like to fall, and so in
this amaze he struck her on the Helm with the last, that he laid her on the
earth, voiding much blood through her mouth and nostrels. And herein is she
not to be blamed: for the whole strength of all the Grecian Princes united,
hadd not withstoode this fury.

In midst was his last tree broken: so was he constrained, to use the strength
of his arms and nails, that were longer then a spanne, wherewith he embraced
the tender Lady. And because he could not penetrate her sure armor, (for that
saved her life) he tumbled her up and down with such force, that she
recovered her self, in no small wonder, to see her self in her enemies
claws. She would not strive with him, till she took him at advantage, and so
staying till he turned her on her right side, she strained her self with
such strength, that she scapte his nails. And not omitting that occasion
before she stepped from him, she wounded him on the breast so mightily with her
so famous sword, that the blood like spoutes burst from his veins, wherewith
he stained the white paued yard.

Hereat the Centaure began to rore so fiercely, that the noise was heard of
ye Prince that was left without, which so tormented him with fear of his
Ladies danger, that without longer stay, he cast himself through those fiery
flames, following the Echo of the noise that still increased: for ye the
Heroyeke Lady, had so wounded him on the leg, that almost she had cut it
clean asunder. Admiration would the sight of this battle breed: for the
nimblenesse and dexterity that awayted on Rosamond cannot be imagined, which
had so tired the Centaure, as it had her self: which he not able to suffer,
seeing his blood so fast to run, cloased with the Lady, crushing her so
strongly, that she could not fetch her breath: Yet not so much, but she could
find force to use her dagger, which then she thought would most assist her,
with which, aiming at the monsters breast, she stuck it therein up to the
hilts, that he was forced to let her go. But feeling himself so wounded, he
took up the remainder of his Oak, and with it, began to stryke the Lady with
such strength, that her flesh and bones he bruised, and so after staggering her,
that it was a wonder she sustained her self so long. But considering the
honor rising by that adventure, and how she had left her dear Lord without,
she so animated her self with an invincible resolution, either to end that
perrilous attempt, or else to leave her life, as a trophie of her valor.
Whereupon she made, as if she would receive a blow upon her shield, holding
her sword with the point against him, it happened as she desired: For he
discharged it as if he meant to cleave a rock: but escaping it, stepped under his
arms, bearing her point forward, thrusting it to the hiltes, which made him
loose his blow, yet not his closing her betwixt his arms, so sorely crushing
her with the pangs of death, that both as dead, fell down on the ground,
wherewith the heavens were darkened with clouds and foggie mistes, with
lightening and thundering, as if then the utter desolation of the world were
come: which past, there appeared in the middle of the yard, a most sumptuous
Table, whereon were set Pyramides like massiue gold: under it lay the Centaure
and the Lady, both pearsed through the bodies, which sight was able to draw
pity from a Rock. At this time entered the Prince of Dacia, in quest of his
dear Lady: But seeing the Tomb, he went to it, whereon he read these words:
The life of Rosamond depends on him, that through compassion will give his,
to redeem hers, contenting rather to dye himself, then that the world should
so soon loose her.

Here would not Lirgandeo express the grief, nor set down the extremity
of discontent, that Don Eleno did conceive, suppossing her dead, whom dearer
then his soul he tendered, his tongue ceast her moving, his lips cleaft
together, and all the motions of his breathing senses so lost their powers,
that to complain him he wanted strength, his eyes he Metamorphosed in his
Lady as she lay. In this manner did he beweepe the greatest loss until his
breath gave leave to publish his sorrow, beginning with a deep sighe bitterly
to exclaim aloude, whose noise refreshing the memory of his woes, made him to
burst to these exclaimes: Ah cruel Goddess of inconstant happiness, how well
have thou manifested the extremes of thy mutabilities? on whom did thou ever
show the power of so monstrous tyranny: that ere I could enjoy so rich a
good, mine eyes should behold so disastrous an evil? but indeed it was a
happiness to perfect to continue? Oh deceiptfull deceit, how soon have thou
taken the full possession of my heart assuring me, there is nothing in ye world
to be trusted, specially if managed by her hands, that never did assure any
thing but for a greater loss. Oh dyuine Princess, life of that body whom
thou leauest behind, eternally to bewail thy timelesse end: wherein did thy
Eleno so offend thee that he may not follow thee in so sower a storm, which
to him were more pleasant then the passage through the starry Firmament? Oh you
Sisters of Phaeton Mistres of sorrow, and you distressed Nymphs that daily
wail the pitious hap of Niobes stony change, come and unite your woes in one,
and help me to lament that loss, whose greatness so exceeds, that if I
should melt in distilled showers of brinish tears, it were too little for so
dear a want.

Now tyrannous Goddess may thou rest content, having bereft the world of
his true ornament, his richest Jewel. Now remains there nothing, whereon to
extend the imanitie of thy power, with greater honor, unless thou will still
offend hers that thou have slain. Pardon me (sacred Lady, for the offense
against thy beauty by me committed, is not small, by lingering thus long in the
world, thy self being out of it. None with more reason ought to love but I,
which I shall not seem to do, a Minute proroging an abortiue, and despised
life. But of more force is the effect which forces, then the cause that gave
occasion of my death? Here ending, resolved to approve his firm loyalty with
his heart blood, remembering nothing but his Rosamond, he snatched the dagger
out of her hands, and lifting the skirt of his armor, he stabbd it directly
to his heart, saying: It is perpetual death, (not life, while she has it not,
that was wont to give it to the Prince of Dacia.

But he had scarce began that bloody sacrifice, when with more horror, and
fearful noise then the Cyclops make with their pouderous hammers in Vulcans
Forge, the Theater, Toombe, and Battlements, with the yard did vanish, only
the Temple did remain, in midst wherrof, lay the two faithful lovers hard
by the monstrous Centaure, which outright was slain by that renowned sword of
Semiramis: (and this was not the last adventure that it ended with immortal
honor, and no small labor of the Lady, who with the greatest content that may
be immagined, went to her true Knight, and casting her amorous arms about his
neck, embracing him she said: Who with a wish (most valarous Prince) might
desire, at this instant, ali the forepast hanghtie attempts, and also they that
with labor infinite to their immortal glories, did accomplish them, that they
might now see them comprehended, and for aye portrayed in this sole one by you
atchiued. For there can be none more greater, nor more illustrous the^ to
subiugate a propper will, the which you have so manifested, that in eternal I
shall rest bound, remaining all in all suffitiently satisfied of my brothers
death, for if the^, one you gave me, you have now restored it with a joyful
life, which I accept only to employ it in your content, paying thereby the
comptlesss debt that I do owe. Of your valor (sovereign Princess) would I
have all the world to witness, that it might be known with what felicity, you
gloriously did terminate the most difficult. Oh blisfull death since thence
redownded the possebilitie to enjoy your glorious victory: and happy proof,
that by showing the firmness of my constant heart, has given me assurance of
the most impossible? But oh most happy Prince, that has been eye witness of
such acts. Now leave this (replied ye glad Lady) and again embracing her dear
lover said. Neither my victory nor your proof can any wit augment the great
love that I before did bear you or that she could wish, or you your self
desire of her that did put her self in your hands. Dear Lady, (answered the
beloved youth) yt shall be as you please, but let us go from hence lest the
company of this hellish beast annoy us. It has not so much hurt me as you
think (said she) and what it has done I forgive, because it was the occasion
that I saw your high valor. And so they began to view the deformity of ye
monster, whose like was never thitherto seen: Lyrgandeo says he was begotten
and bred in Thessalie, where more Centaures did inhabit the^ in any other
place, his name was Monicho and was general over those in ye cruel war against
ye Lapithes on ye foot of the mountain Othrys ye greatest in all Thesalie, whom
the great Magician Nuranto Hercules special friend had their brought to guarde
his Temple, where he performed many cruelties. and one of them was the
imprisonment of the Princess and her Ladies, who then appeared in sight
coming from a chamber where the Centaure had put them: the which being before
the Knights, it were to tedious to dylate the courteous ceremonies between them,
the one in receiving them, and they in thanking them for the timely aid. Then
arrived the King being advertised what did happen, who with incredible joy
embraced the Knights, and his dear Daughter, (that one of the worlds chief
beauties was) humbly requesting the knights to repose the^ a while in his
Court, where they should be entertained as their merits had deserved. They
would not accept it, kindly excusing themselves, how they could not do it,
because it greatly did avail them to take to Sea through the extreme
necessity of an adventure that expected their persons in another place.

The Dacian told ye King who he was, which greatly gladded him, which occasion
kindled in him a perfect fire of true friendship, which one day he made it
known unto him. And in his Daughter the vnconsuming flames of a true love, for
the Princess Rosamond, supposing her a man, in whose absence she suffered the
most grieved life with tormenting passions that ever lover did abide, until
she past to Grecia, where the truth extinguished the effect of her deceipte, and
in recompense thereof she received at Rosomonds hands, a husband meriting her
beauty with whom she acknowledged her self suffitiently satisfied for the
pains she for her endured. Hereupon the King and his train departed to the
City, leaving the Princes in the Temple gazing on the pictures of the
Chapel, whose admiration did astonish them.

They saw al his labors that he suffered, most lively portrayed, and the
wars against the warlike Amazones, and in the end thereof they saw the cruel
sacrifice made of himself on Oeta mount in Thessalie, with the blod poysned
shirt, which Ness^s with his venomde gore imbrued, and by Deianyra his wife
sent him. It greatly delighted the Lady to behold the haughty deeds of so
brave a man, because she deryued her pedigree from him. And at length leaving
the Temple they entered their bark taking their course to Greece, in which
voyage the wise man remains doubtful whether the happy lover did seal the
assurance of his hopes: only the heavens were witness to it, vnyting together
their happy influences with especial care in ye forming one of ye worthyest
infants yt his age did know. With this new and most sweet content on the
eight day of their navigations they anchored on the Gretian shores not far
from Constantinople to the Princes great Joy. Having taken forth their horses
they began to travel through an intricate grove of trees whose end began the
entrance into a hunting park: But scarce had they set their feet on the sand
when their Bark vanyshed, whereby they understood they should not so soon
leave Grecia. Their vysors they closed for fear of being known: and with
their lances in their hands they set forward on their way. Many steps they
had not gone, but they hard a noise like to the clange of armor, and in their
entrance into the plain, they might see a little before them three Knights
spur away amain with like celeritie, but as his Tirios was the greatest of
any Horse known, and he thirsting with desire to know the matter he gallopt so
fast, that he left his beauteous Rosamond behind, who like a furious Bazeliske
spurred her Horse to overtake her lover. What befell them worthily deserves a
new Chapter.

CHAP. IIII. The adventure that in Gretia befell Don Eleno with the Greek
Princes, that in mortal battle were combating with other strange Knights,
which is that controversy begun in the last Chapter of the second Book of the
second part being the fifth of this History.
WIth a more swifter course then does Latonus son pace to the Antipodes, did
the warlike Dacian post through the Greekish Forrestes, until the second hour
after midday, that he saw the fiercest, and the most brauest battle that
ever, he either heard or saw, of four knights alone. Some of them he knew by
the devises of their armor, and through the fame that with them they had
atchiued, and who best seemed was he in the purple armor that combated against
a Knight that on the top of his healme ware a branch of silver. Of both he
had heard wounders. The third knight (that fought with another of strong
timberd members, and in stature almost high as a giant) had on Ruset armor
with stripes of black amell, and graven with gould, on his sheeld his devise
was a branch half gould, and half silver.

This knight he hard say to equal the valiantest in the vni^erus. Of no less
disposition did he Judge his adversary, that in his sight did greatly vex
him. While he thus gazed on them, arrived the three knights: and the best
disposed of them approached where they were in combat as if he wuld have it with
the great knight. But first know these 3 knights were the valiant warriors,
Rosicler, Meridian, and Oristides, that from the kingdom of Lacedemonia
departed with great grief for the loss of Rosabel, and no less grieved was
the offspring of Priams destroyed race for ye gallant Sarmatia, for whose love,
he felt mortal pains, especially for his sword that he had given as a pledge
thereof. So soon as Rosicler arrived, and narrowly viewing the great knight he
perceived him to have on the rich armor of that famous Bramarante, that with
his own hands sacrificed his life's blood, because he would give none the
glory of his death. And seeing his arms that Brufaldoro had taken to poor
Zoylos cost, as in the second part is mentioned: with the greatest fury of the
world, he went against him, stepping betwixt him and the Knight of the Branche,
that was his brother Poliphebo of Tinacria (as in the last Chapter of the fifth
part of this History was related) and defied him to mortal battle.

Thus far have I past treading without fear on the sharp pykes of a bold
presumption, but no further dare I proceed without the implored aid of some
immortal help: of your deuinest beauties, (perfect perfections of Natures
pure rarieties) whose honor shall with reading this simple story, guild it
with your worth, do I pray that favor, without which I cannot prosecute the
praises of your unstained purities. Infuse (sweet Ladies) part of your sacred
helps, to sharpen my dull senses, that from your power they may take power
with a bold reuyued spirit, to unfold a work more intricate and difficult,
then ye vntreading of the Laborinthian Maze. Grant it (O ye powers, that
alienate my thoughts from their due obedience) though with a fained smyle: yet
vouchsafe it, and with it I will deceive my heart, that trembling does await
the uncertain doom of your decreeing sentence, and yet but for a little
help, which if I shall lack, without joy I must go forward, wanting the
Whetstone of your favors to sharpen the blunt style of a rude Wit, because it
wanders in the shades of your disgrace. But deluding my pensive immaginations,
with my effect-obtayned prayers. The courageous Dacian, at length approached
where they thus contended for the combat already begun, and stepping to them
thus said: Withhold awhile brave Knights, for it does not belong to those that
glories in that name, to assalt any with advantage.

The utmost of extrrame rage did possess the true lover of Oliuia, that not
regarding the devise of his cosen, answered him with turning his swift horse,
and with an vnimmagined speed, the flower of the worlds chivalry, encountered
in the middle of that spacious field, with no less terror, the^ if two well
rigged Galleys had met. Good were the Knight of Cupids armor, yet Don Elenos
admittes no compare, whereby their Lances could not take hold, but in shiuers
mounted in ye air, where in the fourth Sphere they were received as
messengers from so valiant warriors that without alteration in their saddles,
returned with their swords in hand. The Dacian had the best blade in the earth
(except his Ladies) and against it no enchantment prevailed. Together they
discharged ye strength of their puisant arms upon eithers head, making them
bow to the saddles pummels, with such reverence, as befitted two such Princes.
And so they began one of the brauest battles in the world, with more noise
and fury, then if it were between twenty Knights. Mighty and invincible was
Don Elenos power, but here he met his equal in the Prince of Grecia (that
against Milo would maintain the field) making him glowe like a kindled cole of
fire. Yet for all that, did not he behave himself best: for no blow did light
on him, but mangled his flesh, bruzed his bones, and rent his armor: whereof
the lookers on were not a little amazed, knowing Rosicler, seeing him so busy
in the combat of one Knight: and he being therewith vexed to the heart, took
his sword twixt both his hands, and went to his enemy, giving him so fierce a
blow on the side of his Helm, that it made him loose his feeling, falling on
his horses neck, he doubled another somewhat higher, and such a one as his
armor then gave him his life. Nevertheless, the blood gusht out at his Beuer.
Oh who would not now fear to see Don Eleno that recovering him self more
furious then a savage Lion possessed with a raging Fever spurd against his Cosen,
and with both his hands not missing his Helm, it little auailed him, for the
sword and the strength that did guide it, snatched away the top with his
plume of feathers, and with Mars his puisance desce^ding on his right shoulder,
he laid him on his horse crupper, the which setting his knees on the earth,
through the strength of the blow stood still. The loved Dacian was no Knight
to omit so good occasion and chifely with such a horse: pricking him with the
spurs, he made him run against the Greeks. It is doubtful and not yet
determined, whether ye Prince of Dacia got any honor by the deed: for with so
brave a horse, it was no marvel if he had overthrown the Greek and his, who
in a tryce lept from him. But this custom had the Dacians Tyrio, that in sight
he pardoned none on foot, and so returned upon the Greek, striking him with
his breast, yt he was forced back, with much ado, saving himself from falling.
He past forwards, and like a furious Tygre said, knight: either let me take my
horse, or a light from thine, unless thou will have me pass the limits of
Chivalry, or break the laws of a good Knight. Mount upon yours (Sir Knight)
said the Dacian to the Greek: for with him may you maintain what your valor
does assure you. So he lept on his, rayning him about at such time, as there
arrived a great troop of Knights from Grecia: and looking on them he knew they
were his father, brother, and the rest of his friends, that not a little did
rejoice to see him, and he with them, who knew him by the devise of his shield.
And yet left they him (and with reason) to applaud with more then admiration
the mortal battle twixt the other four.

Somewhat did the Tinacrian know his advantage, yet was it so little, that a
thousand times the Pagan made him doubt his victory: For like a ravenous
Wolf that wanted his pray, did he combat. Without trembling fear I dare
not approach unto the wonder of valor and beauty, that with Claridiano made
her battle, with such fury, that well she blazoned her self to be no less
then Archisilora Sovereign Queen of Lyra, who more furious then a hungry
Vulture, had so wearyed the Knight (and her self no less tired) that it was
admirable.

And he in the Purple, gave the Lady a blow, that taking her on the top of
the shield, it joined it with her Helm, and somewhat it astonished her, and
quickly with a side thrust upon it, he had almost tumbled her to the ground.
The Lady recovered her self, and with both hands laid on the Purple Knight,
and had it been at full, it could not but have endangered him: for it made him
with the pain shrink even to his saddle pummell, with a sudden leap she
stepped to him with two thrusts one after an other, which not only raised him,
but laid him along upon his Coursers back, and as he lay she gave him a down
right blow, that it almost drove him out of all feeling. He returned to
himself with the last stroke, and settling himself in his saddle, and crushing
one tooth with another, he went against the Lady, whose sight would have
feared the mighty God of War even in his own sphere: yet in her it moved no
spark thereof: perhaps she was sure, with that blow to conquer her enemy,
although she received it. She awaited it, which was such, (ah who might here
advertise thee free youth, first to break thy sword then to execute it: For
without conquest, thereby thou loosest thy liberty, and more, the very hope
of Remedy: for the Ladies chaste gravity does farther extend it self then
so) that lighting on the top of her helm backwardes, he tumbled it to the
earth, and with a little more she had done the like, for the strength of the
blow did drive her much backwards. And returning to her self, she spread her
armor with tramels of more yellow hair, than Apollo's in his most pride, and
showed the beawtie of her face more glorious than the spangled covert of the
heaven, yet hers shined with more excellency, because adorned with the
splendour of two goulden Suns. Astonished with a sudden admiration stood the
Greek, resting so far hers, that the mortal stroke of all conquering death
was not able to bereave him of the glory that there he won. Well did the
Lady note it, at that instant recording the remembrance of the Knight she did
see portrayed in the Castle where she obtained the silver branch, yet she let
it pass, though not without infinite rapping alterations, at the gates of her
all wondering breast. But possessed with rage, she closed with the Greek, that
was prepared to receive accomptlesse account of such favors, and catching at
his helm, she plucked it off, discovering a more fairer face than Alexanders,
causer of the deadly discordes between the Greeks and the destroyed Trojans.
There had she killed him with the dagger that in her hands she had, if the
Prince had not embraced her with more strength then does the Iuie incompasse
the straight towering Elm, and staying her hand, said. Soft (sovereign Lady)
do not at once express so many extremes: having soly with that of your more
than divine beauty, carried away the palm of a triumphing victory from the
battle of an ever conquering mind, and as a trophie of so memorable a
conquest: I present to you my sword, as the spoils of my subjection: let it
suffice, for it is no true Nobility to require more of a vanquished Captive
that willingly submits to your command: to the which, not only I, but all
that in the circled Orb do breath, ought to acknowledge, I will mainetaine
against them all, if you vouchsafe my life, the which can be but short, longer
continuing in your disgrace. Well conceived the Lady to what end his speeches
were directed, whereat she nothing grieved, because in her pensive thoughts she
judged him one of the fairest and strongest Knights under the compass of
Phoebus daily shining course. And so letting him go (to the Princes no small
grief) she said, sir Knight I would not by so many ways rest vanquished, it
suffices me to have known ye valor that the heavens have adorned you with,
to acquit you of this combat. The Emperor stopped his reply, running in have
unto the warlike Queen (for every one did know her) saying: why how now
(Heroicke Queen?) I never had thought, that your arms were bent against this
your Gretian Empire? and especially to bereave me of my Nephew, whom I more
tender then my soul? I will crave the amends of Claridiana, because she may
take it, for her son. Most mighty Emperor (replied the amorous Matrone) the
honor of a distressed Lady is well defended in Grecia that it makes me think
I have most cause of complainte, and thereof will I entreat one of these
Princes present (poynting to the Knight of the Sun) the care to defend my
reputation on my behalf. We are all yours (great Lady answered he) and
chiefly to obey your command, by how much the more, the glory is so great,
which at your hands Claridiano has received, that he for himself and us,
shall acknowledge the duty that we all do owe you. There did the Tynacrian
well know his father, and brothers, and perceiving that he in the Purple was
his cosen, highly rejoiced to have such kindred. Notwithstanding, seeing what
little honor he had gotten in that battle, he said unto the Moore: Thou
see King of Mauritania, that these Knights have known each other, whereby it
is impossible we should end our combat, and because the night approaches, as
also for that among them I have such kinsfolks that knowing me would disturb
us, therefore while they be thus busy take up thy Lady behind thee, and stay
for me in the forest whither I will follow thee, and their only death shall
part our fight, the which, for many causes I do: For no less do thou
grieve me wearing that armor, then the Grecian Princes, that demands them of
thee. Be it as thou will have it, replied the furious Pagan. And so with ye
swiftest running of their horses, taking the Lady, they thrust themselves
through ye woods. But with the nights approach, the Tynacrian lost his way,
wandering far from the place the Pagan did expect him. To each of them befell
things worthy the rehersall, as shall be mentioned in his due time. For now the
battle between Rosicler and Eleno must not be forgotten, which seemed but
then to begin. For either had rather dye then in that presence to show want of
valor. Well did ye Greek Alphebo know both devises, and therefore did he
cast himself between them, saying: Give over brave Knights, for twixt cosens
there is no reason to terminate so fierce a sight. Both withdrewe together, and
perceiving their deceit, they unlaced their Helmes, and the Dacian having his
beard well grown, they remained so like, that by their face none could
distinguish them. They went to kiss the Emperors hands, who with a Fathers
love embraced them with these words.

Oh happy day, wherein my son and dear cosen are come to me. By the change
of your armor, I know not which is Rosicler, yet nevertheless shall not
Fortune make me think but that I have Don Eleno of Dacia between my arms, to
whom I will now satisfy the displeasure I did him in the City of Cymarra. It
is I (replied he) that there fell in the greatest error that ever Knight
committed: And therefore I do beseech your Sovereign Majesty, to pardon it
me, and in sign you have done so, grant me license to part: For the first
(brave Cousin) answered the Emperor, you have you wish, for I dare not think
my self secure within Constantinople, Don Eleno being displeased: But touching
the last, there is no excuse must serve, for now I have you in my power, I will
not let you so depart. I promise your Majesty (replied the Prince) by the
faith of a Knight, it is in my power to do no otherwise, having left my
company behind: and so it will be discourtesie, if I do not return: But I
pawn mine Honor to your Highness, not to depart your Empire til I have done my
duty both to your self, and to my Lady Aunt the Empress. On that Condition I
let you go (answered the Emperor) though I shall not be mercy till you
accomplish it. Thereuppon demanding a Lance, and taking his leave of his
Cousins, he returned with more fury then does a Comet blaze through the air,
leaving them all contented with his gallant disposition, who with grief for
want of his Lady, tormented bravely his inchaunted horse, in such sort loozing
his way, that before he met her he shed many tears, meeting with no small
dangers: what they were shall ere long be specified: For now Meridian and the
Trojan expecting this time, unbuckled their helmes, and went to speak unto the
Emperor, who entertained them with that Majesty that the highest God above
all others had given him, and so said, Let us go (brave Princes) back to the
City, for the Empress must enjoy with us these joyful tidings. Galtenor
would be first that should tell it them, who thus spoke: In satisfaction of the
discontent I gave you (great Princes) by taking away the Princes my dear
Children, receive this small service, I mean the glad news of the coming of
the Princes Rosicler, Meridian, and Oristides with the mighty Queen of Lyra,
who are coming to the City, after the finishing of a mortal battle between
my son Claridiano, and her, wherein both were conquerers of each other, a
greater fault then this should have been forgiven you. Mighty King replied
the Empres, for the joyful news you have given these Princesses. In faith the least shall not be the Princess Oliuias (said Claridiana) for we all have
taken part of her greefes, and with reason, wanting no less then Rosicler.

And so when they all arrived, they received one another with the greatest
content in the world. I here (fair Ladies) shun a tedious trouble-some
prolixitie, referring to your thoughts ye consideration of such courtesies that
between such states, in such occasions is required. He that worst sped was
poor Claridiano that could speak never a word unto his Lady: for she was so
free and grave, that it made her dissemble what her heart sufferd, keeping the
Prince thereby in wonderful torments. But to the purpose: Triumphs and
feasts are these that are ordained to drown in oblivion the most memorablest
that ever in the world were seen.

The Ladies appointed for chalengers, and their defenders (of certain Iustes
to be solemnyzed twenty days after) the valiant Trojan Oristides, the hawghty
Bransineano son unto the puisant Prince Brandezell of Percia, and of the
Princess Clarinea a Knight no doubt of the brauest in the universe, whom a
little before the Emperor had Knighted. And the third with them was the
coragious Clarindo (then also Knighted) son unto Lindaraza and the Prince of
France. Such were these Knights that every one said, that the honor of the
Greek Ladies would be well defended. All the court began to prepare their
armor, horses and best abilliments of war and the gallant amorous youths to
solicit their Ladies for favors against that day. The Emperor commanded
again, that proclamation with safe conduct should be published throughout all
his Empire, for all Nations and Knights whatsoever. Whereby the city, both
within and without was so filled with multitudes of armed Knights, as if it
were on the point of war. Where we must leave them, returning to our loved
and dispairing Rosabell, that with his great friend Oristoldo of Antioche,
returned to Niquea, because they would there discharge their promise.

CHAP. V. What in Nyquea befell unto the Princess Rosabell and Oristoldo about
the liberty of the three Kings.
WIth greater grief then may be imagined, they took their leaves of their four
friends, having lost the gallantest Lady under the starrie Canapie of Heaven,
and knowing no certainty where she might be, the poor Knight traueld the most
afflicted in the world, thinking that he should never see her more, to assuage
which sorrows nothing prevailed the comfort of his dear Oristoldo, that more
felt his pain then if it were his own.

It is proper unto lovers, to fear the thing loved, though having it present,
then how much the more, seeing it absent, and so doubtful, and not knowing
where it was. At length, (dear Mistress of a rejected soul) they arrived at
the spring of a clear fountain, where sitting down they eat of such meat,
as the discreet Allirio had provided, not without infinite sighs of the
Heroike lover Rosabell, to whom the gallant Prince of Antioche thus spoke.

If all the adventures of the world (magnanimous Prince) might happen to the
content and sort to every ones desire, then never had any arrived unto the topp
of true Immortality, by rejecting of cross successes only to know a
transitory good.

The touchstone of valiantnes it is, wherewith their honor to eternity is
purified, as also to have mighty and cruel foes, that obteyning a hard
victory, the triumph may be more sweet, then that atchiued without blood.
Never did Alexander the mighty Macedonian conqueror your Predecessor more
esteem of any Kingdom, then of the Pertians, because none cost him so much
blood. And that for which apparently he was seen to prefer all perils was
for the famous Asia, because the very desire of the same would rejoice him,
especially, when upon the borders of the river Sale he mustered all his well
furnished host, receiving a pleasure exceading measure, with ye wavering of his
displaied ensigns in ye air, the neighing noice of his barbed steeds, and the
sound of innumerable military instruments for war: But what most did delight
him was, his marching against Asia. And so being demanded the cause of it, this
was his answer to every one. Because I know it will cost much, and that is ye
cause it is worth so much. He never did conceive, a thought of care for the
bridge that so many years was in building, nor yet for the toil in making
firm land in middle of the furious Sea, and why? for his perpetual fames
immortality, that thereby he hoped.

This have I said (magnanimous Prince) because conforming your self with his
will that has it so appointed, you should not loose the glory of a valiant
sufferance, by giving exterior signs of feeling this business thus
grievously. I well know the weight thereof, and what reason there is to wail so
great a loss, with eternal tears of living lukewarm hearts blood: But I
find it a stayne to your honor, a blemish to your Nobility, and a weakening
of your valor, in not showing it, sufficient to resist, a more vnhappier
chance. for she cannot be in place so secret but it will be known, and once
found, who will dare without death to hinder what soly is due unto your
virtues? And living assured that Liriana is yours, and you her dear espouse,
what evil may happen that this consideration, will not make gentle and
pleasant, and her absence tolerable? Glad and in truth very glad, became the
fair youth Rosabell, with his tender hearted friends discourse, because he
knew he had reason, and so he thus replied. Valiant Prince and my souls
treasurer, now rest I fully satisfied, and more assured that we shall happily
terminate all our affairs, since fortune had reserud me so good a woes
comforter, and griefs diminisher with your dear company: and because it is
no virtue utterly to despair, I will hope, and expect how the heavens will
dispose of Lyriana, to both our everlasting joys, for fortune will not so
far prosecute her rigor against me, as at least not to show me the place of
her abode, that with the favor of your mighty arm, I may recover that
felicity, that my tears and your valor shall purchase. I would it were no
more but so (dear Rosabell replied the Prince of Antioch) for it should more
easier be accomplished then the business we go about: And because I think it
fit we return to the Kings that so well aided us, we may set forwards in our
way: and let me not see you no more so passionate, for you will but grieve me:
And more torments and more pains endured your father in his loving pilgrimage,
yet never had the like favor that yesterday you possessed, nevertheless, he did
not desist with content to prosecute his Chiualries: let therefore his
magnanimity no less shine in the Sun, nor in me no less love and true
amity, then my Fathers toward yours, till in your behalf I sacrifice my
souls life, to win your happiness.

But let us go, for now your sorrow will be iniust, having one so to mittigate
it: and let us take all advantage in these affairs, admitting no battle one
without another, and though we both demand it, we must suffer so many to
undertake yt on their part. For this Souldan is very subtle, and having many
Giants his friends, certainly it is like he will to some of them commit that
battle, so his intent might be accomplished, supposing that none will dare to
attempt it. For the Kings through fear of them. Thus discoursed these two
dear friends, till they approached so nigh ye city of Nyquea, that her gates
winked upon them, on the bank of whose river they alighted to pass the
tediousness of the night in pleasing chat of that peerless Lady, and of the
great desire they had to pass into Grecia. There he recompted the battle he
had with his Father in Lacedemonia unknown, whereby he understood he was his
son. In this prattle continued they, till it was time to sleep, and so
departing one a little from the other, they made their shields their pillowes,
and so rested the greatest part of the night. When they awaked together, either
full of careful thoughts, for the others grief. For therein is ciphered the
true pattern of perfect friendship. And seeing thus pensiuely they heard the
groans of some Knight that complained: together they rose, and taking their
shieldes and Helmes without any word they went softly to hear what he said.
And being nigh him, they saw by ye reflecting light of Cinthias beams, a well
proportioned Knight, clad all in black armor, who lying under a bigg grown
Oak, complained against the skies, love and Fortune. Oh heavens (said the
afflicted More) how long will you suffer him to live, from whom death does
fly? Why give ye me life, yt nothing thank you for it, because it is hateful to
me? Why permitted ye my offspring to be from thence, if on the earth I shall
live dying? Oh suffer not Bembo Prince of Achaya, to live with so many
passions, when you may end it with one gentle death, yt never better welcome
may come then now? Oh sovereign Princess of Niquea, how justly may thou
complain of me, that loving thee so dearly, have been so remiss to visit
thee? Oh forgetful lover, if thou did live in Achaya loving, why did thou
then so long proroge thy coming, knowing yt Liriana was in Niquea whereby thy
delay is ye cause, thou must dye, not seeing her, being thy only desire, as the
most happiest life? and now (Prince of misfortune) behooues it thee to
pilgrimage throughout ye worlds vast continents, to know her habitation? which
thou had saved coming in time, and then who would have been able or so much
as presumed to think in his trembling heart to take her from thy hands? Oh
hawtie and presumptuous Knight, who may know what thou art, yt I might make
thee acknowledge ye wrong thou have done me? taking what only to my worthiness
was due? How may I call my self Nephew to that mighty Bembo, ye scourge and
terror of all Greece suffering another to enjoy whom thou do love? never
more would I have put on armor if I did not make him confess this foul
injury? And yet there is no reason why? for seeing Liriana was of beauty
Angelical, it was like, others would love her: and if fortune did favor him to
carry her away, I have no cause to lament, and bewail, but my slow heart, and
sluggish thoughts, yt spurd me not before this to visit her.

Oh my friend Nicandro, how may I complain of thee because it is thy fault?
for had thou by thy skill aduertized me of this success, who would have
deferd such a voyage, though it had cost him a thousand lives? and come, were
it only but to see her, whom to me thou did canonize for beauty, as the sole
meritor of my faith. So pensive rested the brave greek Rosabell, seeing what
that Knight did, and hearing what he said against his reputation, affecting
that Lady that more then his proper life he loved, that he knew not how to
resolve himself, till Oristoldo perceauing his alteration stepped to him,
saying. Valiant Prince, seeing by delaie the Kings do incur so great danger,
it is not lawful you should procure now new battles: and especially he knowing
they are prisoners about ye stealing of ye Princes, it cannot be but he will
offer himself in that demand, and the^ in their defense will your combat be
more justified, the^ at this instant: for though he loves whom you do, ye
extremity of contrary passions may excuse you: but being assured of her love
toward you, great reason have you to forgive him. Great is the wrong herein I
do my Lade (replied Rosabell, but your will be fulfilled, for I am determined
altogether to follow your counsel. All that Oristoldo had said, was true: for
Bembo was then thither come for no other purpose, but to maintain, that the
prisoners were consenting to ye Princess stealing. And had not Rosabell and
Oristoldo stayed to defend it, there had been none able from him to bear away
the victory, because he was one of the worthies of the world, and he that most
persecuted Greece in ye great wars. He was very young, and the most courteous
of all his Nation. He would not suffer his subjects to crown him King, till he
had traueld the world, and so created he governors over his kingdom, and
accompanied with his valor only he departed from Achaya, with that mornfull
devise, that many thought it signified more then it did. He was the amorousest
that ever woman brought forth, and he that was most loyal to Liriana: for
after he knew her to be married, he still doted on her, alleging, that he did
love, and had referd the guerdon of his loyalty to the graciousnes of his
Lady: but if she rejected his true love passions, yet he would not forget her:
for it were to injury his faith, that from the beginning he had consecrated to
her beauty. And had fortune but a little favored him he had been one of the
famous Princes of the world, but seeing himself so cruelly by love
persecuted, did often make him loose part of his high valor. From him departed
the two friends, returning where they had left their horses, expecting the
mornings approach, which scarce appeared, saluting the brightness of the Suns
vprising, when mounted on their coursers, they had not galloped far, but the
glittering of Nyqueas gates reflected on their armours. Not long after did the
valiant competitor do the like upon a great and mighty Bay Courser, without
any spot, and of the best brood that ever was seen: for as such a one it was
given him by his loving friend the wise Nycandro. So soon as he saw the two
Knights before him, with a little more then ordinary speed he ouertooke
them, and being nigh them, he demanded in the Arabian tongue, (ye better to
dissemble) what country that was. It is so little (sir Knight) since we arrived
here (answered Rosabell) that we are altogether ignorant of your demand,
having not met any of whom we might know, what you desire. The ariuing of
another Knight of as brave apparances as any of them, interrupted his reply:
This was Don Clarisell, that guyded by Lupercio, Gellasios master, was come in
the Souldans behalf, though he arrived too late, for he had already sent to
that purpose for a subject of his the fiercest of many Giants that he knew,
being come to them, with great courtesy he requested what Bembo had done
before. But as every one dissembled their knowledge, they stayde till they
might meet with some of whom they might learn their doubt: Long stayed they
not but they saw a Page in great have come weeping from the City, and meeting
with the four Princes said. Ah me, brave Knights if in you there be what your
gallantnes does manifest, now you may approve it, by succouring of three
Kings, that unjustly are accused of ye rape made of the Princess and her
cousen, by the deformedst giant in the universe: and I am sure they are in no
fault. Lead the way good Page, (said ye courageous Rosabell) for I will for
them hazard my person in any danger, and I will mine if it be needful said
Oristoldo. The Assirian that was somewhat bold, would no longer forbear, but
said, I would not have on my part Knights so resolute. Then be you of the
other said Oristoldo, and you shall see that our resolution is grounded on our
arms and not on our tongues, and without more stay they rayned about their
Horses, and with their swiftest pace they straight went to the City. The like
did the other two, remaining with great desire to combat with such confident
Knights, specially he in the black, whom Rosabells behavior highly pleased,
he had reason for on horseback few were like him. At length the first two
arrived at the pallaice after the Souldan had Dyned, being accompanied with his
chief Nobility, because he would have the King of Garamantes cause tried
before them, for he would not believe but he had consented to the rape. And
that he might be more sure of his revenge, he had called the proud Grantel^rio
Lord of the Altana Isles, and subject unto him, though like a friend he used
him, because of his power. There were no 20 Knights so hardy as one hour to
withstand him in the field.

This Giant was also in the great hall, for the Souldan to honor him more had
invited him. And straight he commanded the three Kings to be brought with
suffitient guard, to whom the Souldan said. Knights you see what all my
subjects do object against you, that you were confederates in my dear
Daughters rape, but I because I would in some respect believe the contrary,
have put it to the trial of a battle: and so within four days may you
present your Champion to combat against him that my counsel has assigned,
who is the King of the Altana Isles, that is here, The King of Garamantes thus
replied.

Greatly are we wronged (mighty Lord) to have this battle taken from our arms;
knowing none in thy Kingdom on whom we might repose so weighty a charge, I
have already urged that (said the Giant) and entreated ye Souldan that you
three might be admitted thereunto: but seeing he says there is a law
inuiolate that forbids it, take no care for that, for I give leave, and will
admit Ten Knights in your behalf, against all whom together, I alone will
maintain you were confederates in the rape of the gracious Liriana Princess
of Niquea. As the fearful King was about to answer, the courageous Greeks,
stopped forth (back with his friend Oristoldo) who doing his humble obeisance
unto the Souldan, said unto him in the Assirian tongue, the which he knew he
could well speak. In the entering of thy great City (great Monarch of this
fair Empire) coming to seek for the King of Garamantes my Lord and
sovereign, I understood what on thy behalf was against his honor objected:
And my self being assured of his virtues, relying thereon, I am resolved to
undertake the battle for him, and for the rest, to the extremest hazard of my
life, because I am certain of his right. Greatly rejoiced the imprisoned
Princes seeing him come in such opportunity, for they straight knew him by
his azure devise, to whom the Souldan replied. The trial (sir Knight) is
already remitted to be arbitrated by combat, and so there remains no more
then that these Kings do grant it, and then may you straight perform it.

Brave cousen (said the King of Garamantes to Rosabell) I for my part give you
all my power thereto, resting not a little assured, of the good success,
having so great justice on my side, and so brave a knight to defend it. We
grant the like, said the other Kings. Seeing this is done (said the Greek
humbling himself for the imposed charg) command mighty Souldan (turned to
him) the appearance of the chalenger, and I beseech you that the prisoners may
be set in place, that the battle ended, they may without impediment depart.
Like a deuillish fury did the furious Pagan step forth saying. Why how now
Knight, so sure art thou of the end, that before thou see me thou dare
demand the prize of the battle? But now consider, knowing what thou have to
do, and against whom, whether thou will yet affirm thy speeches. Not only do
I it, said the (hawghty youth) but said it waxes late till it be done. Then I
advise thee Knight (replied the Giant) that if thou will thou may, chose to
aid thee besides thy companion eight knights more, for to that number have I
challenged. Giant (replied ye courageous Greek) all your brood, thinks yt with
soly ye outward show, you may end any adventure, and therefore presume you to
utter such blasphemies, not understanding that he which esteems himself a
knight, will admit nothing with advantage. And so may thou go arm thy self,
for only with these armor and weapons yt I have, and the justice of my cause I
expect thy coming to the place, with the hoarse sound of a deuillish voice the
Pagan cried. Oh Mars what mighty wrong is this to thy beloved Grantelmio,
permitting that one Knight may look me in the face, much more stay for me in
the field, away Captive as thou art, thou shall not think to have so honorable
a death as to die alone, for never shall the heavens suffer it to be said, that
thou did singly combat with me in open listes. Discourteous Giant far more
proud tha^ valiant (said the bold Britanian) take thy arms, for I alone
will give thee so much work, that I will make thee wonder at the drops of
thy lives blood, that I will make thee sweat. O hellish furies answered the
ravenous Tiger, is it possible such words should be spoken, without suffitie^t
revenge? And not respecting the Souldan, but his infernal rage, he stopped to
the gallant youth with his fifth raised aloft saying, stay, for without armor I
will terminate thy demand. Nothing did Rosabell fear him, but as he was
striking, he parted aside, and with his hand he stroke him on the left cheek
so brave a buffet, that he tumbled at the Souldans feet at such time as the
valiant Bembo, and the gallant Assirian entered the hall, where seeing the
hurlyburly went on forwards, to know the cause, and seeing the Giant casting
blood through his mouth, and fire from his eyes, going against his adversary,
the Achayan with his courageous mind stepped between the^ having his sword
drawn, and said keep forth Knights, for before the Souldan this is
unseemly. He was already risen, and commanded the Giant to arm himself to
end the battle, who went to do it more to revenge himself, than to obey a
Lord whom he never acknowledged. And so was the amorous Bembo left between the
Souldan, and the Greek, who being infourmed of the matter, more guided with
desire to fight with any of them, than by reason, said that the strangers had
been over bold before the King. The gallant Oristoldo could not endure it and
therefore said. Truly (Knight) if of so great experience you are in arms, as
rash in judging that you know not, it were not much I refused your battle.
Nevertheless I affirm yt not only we have committed no misdemeanor before ye
King, but also yt the gia^t and you are dis^o^all, in ouer-boldly prating
before the King, and hereupon accept my gage. He did accept it, for on the
earth he had not refused it to any, and so all of them being armed, they
straight went to the field, where there assembled so much people, that they
hindered the earth from the Suns warmth. The Kings were set by themselves,
whereof the Greek rejoiced hoping to give them liberty, and so he sent his
discreet Squire to advertise the forreners to be in readiness as the cause
required, wherein he used such diligence, that he quickly gathered above six
Thousand men, that settled themselves, where easilye they might repair to the
Ladies scaffold, because the kings were not far from them, and that way could
they better rescue them being requisite. Sraight commanded the Souldan that
two Thousand men should guard the field, and that upon pain of death none
should aid, or favor any of the combatantes. The first that entered the
listes was the valiant King of Achaya, mounted on his mighty Courser, and
being a Knight of so brave disposition, and armed in such mourning armor, many
at the sight did fear him, and chiefly when with more Majesty then the Sun
in his fiery carre, he traced round about the place, in the air shaking his
lance in Thousand shiuers, straight was he presented with another, leaving the
assembly admired with his gallantnes. Presently entered the two gracious youths,
Rosabell and Oristoldo, with as much bravery as the world contained. They were
attended with infinite foreign Nobles that because they were the Kings
Champions would needs accompany him. But the entrance of the Giant,
(considering the pride that ledd him) a new volume rather then a Chapter does
require.

CHAP. VI. The end of the dangerous battle between the four Knights, about
the liberty of the three Kings.
WIth nothing so great an honorable train did the mighty Emperor Titus pass
through the streets of Room (natures rarest beauty) when he triumphed over
that sarced land, wherein the work of our salvation was wrought, as that
which attended on the proud King Grantelmio: That of Alexander the great when
he entered Bab^lon, was not comparable to this: and because he had taken ye
Souldans part, there was no Prince nor Lord but did accompany him, so
gorgiously attired, as it seemed only an immaginarie vision: More people came
with him, then did guard the listes. He himself came last in the middle of two
youths Nephews to the Souldan, yet neither carried his arms, because he
would delay no time in taking them, thinking every minute a year. He was
mounted on the mightiest horse for strength yt was known, of color he was
roane, and called Bollador, because of his swiftnes, that was such as he might
pass his carries along the edge of a sharp sword, he came prauncing up and
down with such grace, that a man's heart could desire no more: for though the
Giants heaviness were extreme, yet his strength sufficed for his weight, had
it been far greater. His armor was of a sky color with many srarres, in
an azure field, in his shield four Giants head-lesse, and himself in the
midst without arms, saving his sword, representing him that ended that
adventure, as the true conqueror thereof: for one day being without armor,
those four Giants would have stolen away his wife, and he with his sword
alone rescued her from their villainies, striking off their heads for recompense
of their madness.

So soon as he entered the listes he closed his Beauer, and said to the
Knights, for he supposed they had been all three against him: why now
discourteous Knights come, and you shall see, how far better it had been not to
have angered me: yet notwithstanding the^ I had pardoned your lives, which now
the heavens shall no way save from my hands, and cruel sword. On his part
stepped the valiant Bembo, and mildely to pacify him, said: Most puissant King,
seeing this matter concerns another, and not our selves, do not refuse to
fight with a single knight, for it is well known, this whole assembly is
unable otherwise to resist your mighty strength: and so I am of your side
against the Knight of the Lions in the russet armor, somewhat did the valerous
Bembo quiet him with his gentle words, nevertheless he uttered the vaunts
that such infernal fiends accustom, which being heard of the Greek to anger
him said, that all the place heard. O savage Monster, why do thou spend the
time in such proud boasting, when thou may better employ it in deeds? No
longer stayed the furious Pagan, but together with his companion turned the
best horses on the earth, and al of the^ with their lances well rested, they
set themselves one against another. Oh, who might in stead of so harsh a quill,
and dull blunted spirit, use the sharpnes of that Roman orators rare
eloquence, and if not his, then that of ye Queens of learning dwellers on the
Thespian mount, to declare in an Heroycke style the famosest battle of two to
two, yt any mortal memory may comprehend. At length (oh ye glories of beauties
purest workma^ship) in middle of their courses they met, the courageous Bembo,
and ye gallant Oristoldo of Antioch, with such puisa^t incounters, yt the
farthest spectators were left blodlesse, stolen from the^ by ye fury of ye
combatants. With so brave a horse as under him ye Achayan had it was much to
see him pass by his enemy, without alteration making him lose both his stirrops,
which he so soon recouerd, ye few spied it, strait he turned not a little
enraged, and with his sword in hand he made against his adversary, with such
strength that he forced him to let fall the bridle out of his hands: he was
not slow in seconding another on the side under his left arm, that it made
him shake therewith, and helping him, with a strong thrust struck against his
breast, with such force, as had not his armor been forged by so cunning an
Artificer it had pierst his body from side to side. It made him somewhat loose
his breath, yet not so, but that he turned upon him like a praying vulture,
giving him his answer so highly to his praise, that he thought himself
suffitiently satisfied, for discharging his blow on his helm, even to his
coursers head, he made him bend his, shedding much blood through his visor, he
would have given another, but the swiftness of his horse made him loose it,
passing so far forward that, as he would, he could not wound him.

Somewhat astonished did Sacridoros dear son recover himself, beginning
between them so equal a fight, that if added admiration to the wondering
senses of the beholders. The which was without measure increased with the sight
of that incomparable fury, wherewith the two worthies met in the middle of
that large place, on whom the millions of many gazing eyes were so fixed, that
wink they durst not, fearing in the mean time they would encounter.

Unto the God of his Father did the amorous youth recommend himself, which was
of such effect, that meeting with more horror then do the angrye billows of a
tempestuous Sea with the fury of contrarious winds, beat on the immovable
Rocks, the Pagan hit Lyrianas lover in ye midst of his strong shield, that
he lost his bridle and his stirroppes, with most part of his saddle, casting
him backewardes on the horses crooper, in such a trance, yt he knew not
whether on horseback he were left or no, the which by the force of the
encounter broke his back, that falling to the ground Rosabell had no other
shift but to set his hand on ye saddle pummell, and leap of with great
ligeritie, leaving ye place amazed at the encounter he had made, for hitting
the gyante in the middle of his great shield, it clearly pierst it, and
striking him a little below his left breast, (as there the wounds are most
perilous, to hinder the passage of his breath it was of such effect, that
making him a little wou^d, it thrust him with such mightiness: that bearing
him clean over saddle and horse back: it tumbled him headlong on the earth,
making all the place and people tremble with the fall. All the beholders, in
spite of the Souldans command, and guard, with a general voice applauded to
the heavens the mightiness of the jealous Knight, for so they called the
Greek because of his devise. Scarce fell the Giant, when (though with great
pain) he rose, and drawing forth a mighty Courtelaxe, he went toward the
warrelike Lover, that like a politic Knight prepared to proceed in that
battle. But first he looked how his friend did whom he saw maintaining his
fight, with no less then the worlds strength. It grieved him because he saw
him in the black longer winded, and quicker in his strokes, though therefore
the gallant Oristoldo lost no ground: for no less then one of the worlds
worthies he was reputed.

But a while leaving them, together met the Active Greek with the fierce
Giant, discharging at once such several strokes, that the farthest remoted
towers of the City shook with the blow. His knees on the ground did the
fair Lover of Liriana set in such amazeme^t, that he knew not where he was:
But he had given the Giant a more venturous blow, for not reaching him on the
head, he struck with his point close to his throat, with such strength that
renting all the thickness of his helm, with his neck-peece, it made him along
wound, from whence issued great abundance of blood. A gelded Bull was never
seen more fierce, then with his wound the Pagan did become furious, for roaring
against heaven, and with thousand injuries reuyling his Gods, he began to
brandish his Courtelaxe with such mightiness, that therewith he never reached the
youth, but he made him tremble like an Aspen leaf, shaken by a Northren wind.
Among the many that he gave him, he rested one to his content upon his shield,
that the finest of the te^per unable to resist that strength, it was cut quite
asunder, and so tormented the youths strong arm, that through the pain he
thought it lost. His shield fell on the ground, and his arm so hung down,
that every one judged it cut. Aside stepped the courageous Greek, for the pain
admitted nothing else.

Well did the valiant Oristoldo perceive it which grieved him to the soul,
doubting the success of the fight being confronted with such cruel enemies.
But desirous to help his friend, because the Giant perceived the effect of his
blow, followed him with a strong thrust, bravely pusht him in the back from
him, and spurring his good horse, (then which none in the world mounted a
better beast) he sideling incou^tred the Giant in so good a time, that he
tumbled him at Rosabels feet, who lost not that opportunity: for as he fell
(helping himself a little with his painful arm) he gave him on the shoulders
such a blow, that he pearst it to the bone, leaving him somewhat breathless.
For the want of blood that from his wounds ran. Neither was the Achayan so
slow, but with his bay he arrived upon ye Greek faster then immagination, and
taking him somewhat busied with the Giant, he struck him backwards so fierce a
blow, that he sent him forwards even where the Giant was, and so their
meeting was the cause he fell not, though he rested sore bruised. Already was
Oristoldo come, who with such fury laid on his Helm, that the sparks of fire
which from it he struck, cinged all his yeallow feathered plumes, that like a
despairer he did wear. He scapte not without recompense, for reaching at him
with eager desire to execute his blow, he closed so nigh him that he could not,
save only cast his strong arms about him, and with his dagger, ere he could
help himself or be succored, gave him a troublesome wound upon his left
arm: with one leap was Rosabell with them, and so struck a down right blow
on the furious Bembo, that cutting away all his skirt on that side, he
grievously wounded him on the right thigh, which forced him to let his
adversary go: and though it so well fell out, yet it grieved the hawghtie
Greek to see the evil proceeding in that battle, and with what shameful
disorder. Greatly did he desire that his were on horseback ye better to
succor his friend, whom he knew to be in some distress: but yet he resolved
to hazard it at once. So he went unto the Pagan, that like a bayted Bull did
roar and warding a mighty blow, he stepped in with his right foot forward
striking him on the outward side, ye almost he cut his thigh clean asunder.
Great was the noise throughout the place, and greater the doubt of the
victory: five wounds, and all very dangerous has the Pagan, two on his
breast, one in his throat, another on his shoulder, and the last on his thighe.
All the field does he bedewe with blood, and hadd for all that wounded Rosabell
in three places, and so tired him that he was scarce able to stir. He closed
with the Giant on such a sudden, that amazedly he had very near thrown him
down, for as he had forethought it, he entered somewhat low, and taking him
between his legs, he had almost raised aloft, but against his own
shoulders, did the Giant stay himself, and so both so long striued that both
fell down together. They were not on ye ground when the valiant youth with his
poniard, would terminate that war: But the Pagan, with all his strength
suddenly snatched it out of his hand, wherewith he had there slain him had not
he drawn the Giant, with which either procured to end the others life. A
happy star did here defend the Prince, for casting himself aside he escaped
the danger of the blow, having his armor but a little scracht therewith. But he
happening on a better place thrust his to the middle into his belly, whereat with
a fearful groan he loosed his adversary, and both stepped to their swords, but
the Giant being so weak could not move about: which being noted by ye youth
seming to fear him gave back, suffering ye Paga^ to follow him, who was scarce
wtin his reach, but drawing strength from weakness, he gave him such a thrust yt
had it bin with more advise, he had outright killed him: yet rested he not without
wounding, or receiving the greatest blow that in all that day he had felt,
which falling on the top of his Helm, where not able to penetrate, it slyste
away all the brimme unto the shoulder, where staying with mighty force, it
made him set his knees on the earth. Follow the blow would the Giant, but the
youth knowing his danger, set his sword long-wayes between them, which made
him stay, till he well recovered his feet. Already was the Pagan through
wearied, and so he would end that long lasting fight, with one blow, which at
his adversary he cast: who assured of the peril, with a leap made him loose
it, together with his life: for he fell upon his own sword, following the
fury of his arms. The which no sooner did Rosabell perceive, but with both
hands he laid upon his left side (and as there commonly the armor is weakest,
he opened it even to his entrails, where he likewise parted his heart, and
giving passage for his life, to receive a deserved death, he flang him dead at
his feet. He was not slow in taking of Bollador that famous horse belonging
to the dead Giant, and mounted thereon at such time as senseless he saw his
good friend, carried about the field upon his steed. Immeasurable was the
grief that he conceived, supposing him dead: and so he set himself before the
stout More (that followed him) saying: Stay Knight, for to strike him that
cannot defend himself, rather diminishes then augmenteth the fighters honor.

Mylde, and one of the courteoust in the world, was the incomparable Lover,
but he then was so choleric, that stumbling on him, the answer he gave him
was a heavy blow, which the Greek so felt, that like an Aspicke, he turned,
seeing the discourtesie of his enemy, that with both hands he discharged on
his inchaunted Helm so brave a blow, that it sounded like a bell, casting him
in a trance along his horse back, shedding an infinite quantity of blood
through his mouth. Which when the Souldan saw, and supposing, by his behavior
he should be his son, he cast down his golden Scepter (fearing his life)
saying, Knight have done: for I yield the battle for this Knight, and also
adiudge you both free thereof,

Mighty Lord (answered the Prince) I do rejoice in my very soul, to have
this occasion, that I may show part of the great desire I have to serve you,
being by duty bound thereto. And seeing there restes no more to do, as also
because I and my companion (that already was there) have much to do in
another place, where we be expected. Command my cosen the King of Garamantes,
and his friends to be delivered unto me: for we can no longer stay.

That (replied the Souldan) though you have obtained, the victory of the fight
remains to my disposing, because their fault was against my state and Crown,
and so I will see it corrected. Great is the wrong offered us (said Rosabell)
and far greater is it done unto your own person by vyolating your royal
word, which the meanest and basest Knight would to his utmost strength procure
to keep. Your irreverence Knight is so great (replied the Souldan) that it
deserves no other answer, but the sharp punishment that against such as you
the law in my kingdom does allow. If that law agrees with the first, touching
your promise (said Oristoldo) you may glory to be a wise Legislator.

Not far was the royal guard, that seeing the Knights arrogance, began to
lay about them, determinng to imprison them. Between them stepped the valiant
Bembo, desyring the Souldan to liberate the prisoners, the like did Don
Clarisell, that rested greatly affectionate to Rosabell. And seeing that not
only they would not deliver the prisoners, but also offered violence unto the
Knights, which their nobleness not permitting, drew forth their swords to
help them: Which then was needelesse, for in the field were already alone
twenty thousand disguised, who going where the Kings were, had cast them
weapons, who were not slack in arming themselves, for the tumult began greatly
to increase. Whereupon Oristoldo set him self at the staire foot executing
wounders in their defense, giving never a blow, but was mortal, till the
Kings descended, and were mounted, which being done, the furious Greek said.
It is no time now to fight valiant Princes, but only procure to follow me, for
I being well acquainted with all the ways in the City, will without danger
safe conduct you through it. As you will have it (Sir Knight said they) so be
it done, though willingly we would let the Souldan know what injustice he had
done us, another time will serve for that said Rosabell. And so loosing the
reigns of his Bollador, with both hands he cut his passage through those
troops in such sort, that he which could faster fly thought himself most
valiant. It was admiration to see how higher then his own elbowes over horse
and all he was besmeard with blood. With no less courage followed Oristoldo in
some peril which was lessened by the kings company. In this order did they
issue out of the City leaving in it eternal memory of their valor. The
Souldan would have had them followed: but the two Knights so handled the
matter, that they pacified him, commanding the tumult to cease, and persuaded
him to forget his displeasure against the Kings: which he the sooner did
because Don Clarisell gave him a letter from Lupercio to thss effect.

High and mighty Monarch, Emperor and puisant Sultan of Nyqueas vast Empire,
thy friend Lupercio wishes thee eternal happiness with Immortal quietness
and end of troubles. Having by my art and skill foreknowen all the success
happened, together with the event of this present combat, have thought it
meet to aduertize thee, that those Kings are innocent having committed no
fault against thee: but they that the victory have got by ending the
battle, are those that have dishonored thy mightiness stealing away thy
daughter and her cosens, though both the one and the others were left without
them, because with my skill I have helped thee, inchaunting them in such a
place, where they live with such Roialty as if they were within thy pallaice:
and for their liberty I cannot yet find when or how it must be, for that it
is of such difficulty. Of the success thereof, as of other things will I in
due time advertise thee, all in all wishing the fullness of thy content, the
which the immortal Gods grant thee, as they can, and I do procure.

The wise Lupercio.


Some what pleased rested the Souldan with the wise man's letter, seeing thereby
that his Daughter was not in his enemies power. Greatly did he honor the two
Knights, knowing them to be so great Princes and so valiant of their hands,
where leaving them we must a while return to Rosabell.

CHAP. VII. How the Kings departed from the Princes resting eternally bound
unto them, and what happened unto them with a Knight.
WIth incomparable joy, did the two Princely friends issue out of the City
of Nyquea after they had to their everliving Fames terminated their business.
They ceast not till they came to the Seaside where the Kings had their fleetes
staying for them: for the governors of their kingdoms, being advertised of
their being there, had made that provision to fetch them. So soon as from
their horses they had dismounted the king of Garamantes ran to embrace the
Princes, and said, while the others did the like. Magnificent and illustrious
Knights, the worthiest that ever buckled on armor, how may we in part show
the thankfulness due for so many great perils, that for our sakes you have
undergone? We can find no satisfaction sufficient to equalize your merits,
but that ye will employ and command our persons, and states in any your
service, as patrons and defenders thereof, which to us will be immortal
happiness, and yet shall we remain indebted, considering your deserts and our
benefits received. But to make our joys complete, let these Kings and my
self obtain the favor to know by whom we have our honors and our lives
regained. It has (most mighty Princes) been so little (replied Rosabell) what
this Knight and my self for you have done, that (respecting your many merits)
no occasion may thereby be taken to favor us. But if you will do it, you do
perform the honor that shall enlarge your fames, because the aid that my
companions and I received, was of power enough to bind our lives to your
lasting command: and so may you use us as the only procurors of your content.

Touching your last request, we are of such remoted countries, that though we
should reveal our names, you cannot know us. This Knight is of Antioche,
called the Knight of Fortune, and my self the Knight of the grove of Love,
because I did begin so soon, that I cannot remember when I was mine own. It
pleased his Fortune so to favor me, as to minister occasion for our meeting,
whereby many years since we contracted a firm league of inuiolated amity,
which hitherto we have maintained: and because I made him partaker of my woes,
and how the cause of them was the Princess of Niquea, he promised me his aid
together with my other four companions my great friends with whose united
valor, and of your persons we brought her away: But (oh despightfull fortune
(said he with his eyes full of water) that scarcely did let me see, much less
enjoy the happiness she gave me, because with the extremest cruelty she could
devise, she did bereave me of her.

Whereupon he told them the manner of her taking away, as is set down in the
end of the first book of this third part. Greatly grieved the Kings for the
Ladies loss, chiefly for the Knights sorrow, but being unable to redress it,
they comforted them as became true friends of their qualities. And seeing that
the Kings longer staying in that land would be dangerous, they counseled
them to depart unto their own countries. From whence they might obtain a
peace from the Souldan. They all liked well thereof, and so they took their
leaves of their friends, taking their right course to their kingdoms, where
they got ye Souldans favor, which proved not a little costly to Grecia: For
these Kings were they that most persecuted her in her general wars, as in
the Fourth part at large shall be related.

Somewhat from the Haven did the two valiant Princes lie themselves down to
pass away the lingering passage of of the sullen night, making their supper of
such provision as Allirio had brought with him, which done, after a little chat
they parted a sunder to sleep under the shadows of pleasant smelling trees. A
little more toward the Sea did Rosabell cast himself, who one while thinking
on his Lady, and another on his voyage unto Greece, not letting himself to be
known until his deeds might declare the Royalty of his descent, lay
tumbling on ye grass, till he fell a sleep, which was so little that the
Ecchoe of sighing groans proceeding from some that complained, were of force
to waken him, who being of nature bold, and of novelties desirous, quickly set
himself on foot, and with his sword in hand, went strait to the place whence
he heard the plaintes: and so going into a little Meddowe, under the spreading
of a towering Caedar he saw a Knight in azure armor all over cross barred with
Gold. He was tall of personage, and of well knit sinnewes betokning excess of
strength, who was without helm, with a hat upon his head and lay pitiously
lamenting, to know the cause he stood still. Straight did the other give it
him which being the disease of love, none can hide it, for with Millions of
broken sighs that his soul sent forth, he began to sing as follows.

Fair spreading Caedars that do grow so high:
That you do seem to touch the vaultie sky,
Mount ye aloft, and look if you epsy:
Prince Lindoriano in his own tears lie.
Whose tears that trickle down his lovely face:
Your roots will moysten, and will do them grace.
When heavens weat dew Appollos heat shall dry:
Upon your bows i will grave my misery.
And on your barks in Carracters i will write:
My souls great grief, procurer of my spite.
My dangers cause, my constancy procures:
With which I love, and will, while life indures.
Though that it do her cruelty increase:
Pyne may my heart, till she my heart release.
For publishing my love and her rare beauty.
To whom all knees may bow to do her duty.
I well do know by'xperience to my cost:
The weighty grief wherewith my soul is tossed.
Which makes me think the nights for to seem day:
And days seem night, thus care with care I pay.
But yet in midst of my great grief and pain:
This for my comfort only does remain.
When as I think how sweet this war will be:
Where yielding, I sustain no infamy.
Happy Tynacria it is thou that do contain:
Lindorianos bliss and chiefest gain.
The Sun of Heaven, the comfort of this earth:
In whom I joy, for whom I draw my breath.
Oh suffer not this Goddess, Natures joy:
To be disgrast, by being over coye.
To his complaints, that living her adore:
Constant and firm by faith, what would you more.
Love her I will until I truly know:
From whence the cause of her disdain does grow.
Which love (after my death) let her requite:
Not with like love, for that, I never might.
But with her knowing that I hapless die:
Refused of comfort, from me that did fly.
The extremity of passions were such and so many which surprised the lover,
that not only hindered his song, but stopped his breath, accompanied with a
sudden fainting, that in a trance leaft him speechless leaving against the
Caedar but being past, he returned with a sighe, (that I know not whose heart
it would not mollefie,) but hers (oh pardon me) that is the sweet insulting
enemy of my life, and said. Oh love, how do thou spare none from burning
with thy vnconsuming fire? Oh you mighty Princes, by fortune exalted on the
highest top of honor, I nothing envy your estates if once it be touched with
love? Oh Gods, how far happier (by enioyning a contented life) where I, if I
had the office of a laboring Countreyman, and not the title of so great a
Prince, that my stars have given me? But oh cruel passions, and more
intolerable grief, what, Oh yes, thither would you follow me having as great
a power in a poor cottage, as in a Princes Court? And therefore seeing I must
love, and must live thereby, I will admit no comfort: but what shall come from
Rosaluyra, for the sweetest otherwise is but hateful, sower and abortiue? Oh
despightfull chance, Oh hap unhappy, and unheard of that I should love, and
not manifest it to the Empress of beauty: and of my Idolatry the sole
Goddess, and that I thus must languish without her knowledge? Well it must be
so, she will have her will deservedly accomplished, and I will remain adoring,
her more then ever was Lady loved? But in recompense to demand a thing so
small as Trebatios head, is a diminishing of the high deserts of her
incomparable merits. By this way (oh Gods) to procure my content, I am resolved
to do because hers consists therein: But yet if by my loving, and weeping
experience she would be assured of my faith, my death in this enterprise were
eternal felicity.

But oh slow lover, and more bashful wooer, why do thou linger knowing
there is no other means for thy happiness? Intolerable and more then may be
imagined is ye wrong against thy Lady thou co^mittest, in this delay? whereupon,
with a sudden have that in such cases happens, he laced on his helm, had
took up his weapons, calling to his Squire for his horse: But ere it was
brought him Rosabell issued out of his ambush: For knowing the Knight to be
son unto the Souldan of Niquea, and brother to his dear Lady, it grieved
him because he had undertaken such an enterprise against his Grandfather. The
occasion and ye cause thereof he had told Oristoldo as has been largly
discoursed in the first of the second part.

And approaching to the Knight, with a gallant audacitie he said. By that I have
heard (sir Knight) I have understood you are Lindoriano Prince of Niquea, the
Knight that I as my soul do love, and even to the same it grieves me you
have undertaken a demand so perrilous as that against ye Emperor Trebatio:
for you must consider how that Lady and her Mother rather proceed through hate
then with reason that binds them to dissemble it: And if Garrofilea complains
of the Emperor, her self was the cause thereof, procuring to her honors cost
the accomplishing of her content. And seeing the Emperor did do it, he might
no farther pass because the sacred law of marriage did forbid yt: whereof she
was aduertized when she had him in prison, and so she might content he self
with the children she has of so mighty a Prince, and not topsey turuie turn
and offend the world with her vanity, and mere folly, as to hope for his
head for her revenge? and well do we know that a woman's revenge is but ye
abounda^ce of fervent desire of things and things. None more then she I am sure
would grieve with his death? because with reason the loss of such a person
might justly be lamented by his Daughter Rosaluira, and so she should cast her
fame and honor on the dice, being causer of so many deaths as have already
happened: for the world does well know there is none therein, that (against his
will) is able to make that Prince leave the listes. A greater honor were it
for her to dissemble her angry love, as does her son Polliphebo who is
reputed the flower Chivalry, glorying in nothing more then of such a Father,
and not promise her self his head, at whose countenance the very heavens
tremble.

And so (sir Knight) the great love I bear you has forced me to this
discourse: because with more immortal honor, by loving and by your haughty
deeds shall you sooner obtain your Ladies love, then by so doubtful and
uncertain a means that can nothing yield then a blot to your reputation.
Attentively did the Prince of Niquea hear him thinking he should know him, and
well noting his speeches, and perceauing he grounded them upon suffitient
reason, was yielding to his counsel: but surprised with the memory of his
Ladies command, he did reject those persuasions, because he would be
obedient, and so showing some anger, replied thus.

Truly (sir Knight) I know not what you have seen in me, nor in what
distress you have succored me, that now suruiuing, you should with so large
a discourse strive to persuade me that there is difficulty, and the greatest
possible, to behead the Emperor of Constantinople, did I not respect that thou
did say thou did, and do love me, I would make thee know, what twere
to counsel him that requires it not? I well perceive (answered Rosabell) thou
speak with affection: but because thou shall know what thou had to do,
I defye thee from hence until the Suns approach upon thy unlawful
enterprise, that he which shall first loose his saddle or any piece of his
armor, shall be vanquished, promising to perform what the Conqueror shall
command, and so shall you revenge your self. I am contented (said the stout
youth) that thou may know I am able to terminate this deed. Then let this
Knight that here comes be the Judge (answered Rosabell) poynting to
Oristoldo that came with Allirio that led the horses to seek for the Prince.
Be it as you will have it (said Lindoriano: For he that can love such a Lady,
knows how to answer for her.

Presently did they declare the challenge unto the gallant Prince of Antioche,
who thereof was glad, because otherwise the Niquean should not scandalize the
Emperor his Graundfather. On the best horses that the universe did know,
mounted the two Heroicke warriors, and in middle of the Meadowe, turned either
against the other, and both together with an assured hope of victory, though
one must of necessity be vanquished. A thing worthy admiration was it, to see
that scarce they had turned their fyerie coursers, when through the Oaks,
Elmes, and Ceaders, issued from the woods, Siluanus, attended with all his
troop of Faunes and siluan dwellers, consorted with all the desert and Forest
Nymphs: Glaucus with his Trytones left his waterie habitation: and all with
one desire to see that memorable combat had left their earth and water
Cauernes. The heavens cleared their light more brighter then at such times was
their custom, and in the air appeared Mars in his throne, and in another a
little higher sat Cupid, for both Gods might learn principles in both
sciences, of the Warriors: because if one is so, it is because he loves:
Whereof no experience can better approve it, then by a bloody Combat: and
both gallants in those Arts, are as skillful as Mars and Cupid: and therefore
was it no wonder they should sit as Judges of so famous a battle. For the one
leaving on the steeled shield forged by Vulcan, and the other on the Coat of
wise Mynerua, they expected the success thereof: when with more fury then the
lightening passes, they met in the midst of the flowered Meadow, with such
an impetous noise, as if the two Thrones of both the Gods had fallen to the
earth. Neither failed of their encounter, which were such, and of such
strength, that though then there no star did twinckle in the Firmament, yet
filled they the ground with them. They past one by another with as much Majesty,
as the God of war their heavenly Judge could have done. The Nyquean lost one
stirroppe, but ere he stayed it was recovered, turning upon his adversary with
his sword, at one time giving each other such blows that they humbled them
selves according to the friendship, yt was between the^ did require. Fully
rested they assured of eythers valor, beginning one of the brauest Battles
of the woorld, themselves being of the valiantest thereof. It greatly auailes
the Nyquean to be Lirianas brother, for the Greek immagining thereon seems
slow in his execution, expecting some occasion to close with him, trusting on
the strength of his Bollador. This did not his adversary perceive, being more
furious than a hunted Lion, and through the carelessness he saw in his enemy,
attributing it to weakness, he had time (desirous to end the war) to strike
him inwards so troublesome a blow, that he could enter with his quick horse
to wound him with two thrustes one after another, that either of them (had he
not been Rosabell) had slain him outright: Nevertheless he cast him along
his Coursers crooper, and as with fury he past, he could but weakelie strike
him sidelong upon the brimme of his helm, that it cut asunder two buckles, and
had he a little more stretched forth his arm he had chopped of his head. Now is
there no time for courtesies, now does he forget himself, and in this agony
in great rage he recovered his saddle, staying for the Prince that returned in
quest of his pray. He let him come within him because he would not loose his
blow, but it was so much that he could hit him no otherwise then close to his
hilts with such strength that from without, and within his helm he fecht many
a Thousand squadrons of fiery sparks that through the air went cracking like
squibbes. He would have cast his arms about his neck, but he was so nimble
that spurring his horse he made him miss of his purpose, almost tumbling
down carried by the force of his arms, yet fell he upon his horse pummell.

Well did Lindoriano note his amaze, and so followed with a flourishing blow upon
his shoulders that he grievously felt it: But it was to his evil for returning
more fiercer then a Bazeliske, casting his shield behind his back with hoth his
hands he laid upon his adversaries, that parted in two he cast it to the
ground, together with a piece of his breast plate, he trembled tike a shakened
leaf, so did the Judges, fearing at the sight of so brave a blow. He seconded
another, (for now is he governed by rage, and not with the grief that
Liriana might conceive hearing of her brothers cruel usage) which was in such
manner that casting blood through his mouth, his horse carried him about the
field, follow him would not the galla^t Britania^, when himself calling
himself to account, how that was Lindoriano with whom he fought.

Grievously began to chide himself for his offense, so greetly becoming
penitent for the fault that while he stood only imagining thereon, yt had
like to have cost him his life, for the Nyquean returning to himself, twixt
both hands raised his sword aloft, making the hard earth tremble under the
passage of his horse hoofes, and so at his pleasure laid him on the helm that
it dryued it down, stryking away all the circuit thereof, it was not so
weighty that senseless his steed bore him about the field he would not then
use with him any courtesies, but sturring his horse followed him amain, and
with his sword rayzed he thought at that blow to end that business.

The sight of this pittefull spectacle gauld the hawghtie Oristoldo to the
heart, yet durst he not help his friend, being appointed Judge. Notwithstanding
was Lindoreanos dashed in his intent for ere he arrived the brave Greek had
recouerd himself, and seeing his adversary run toward him gordged with
desire of the blow, he stayed for him, and as he closed a little stepped aside
with his good courser that he was struck but on the side of his shoulder and
all that quarter was bruised. Three hours is it since the battle begune and yet
no advantage between them was known. The field was strewed with pieces of
their armor that their blows did tare. By this the streakes of light laced the
vaullie heavens, as messengers of the approaching morn: whereat Rosabell seeing
the little he had done, and how much it concerned him, being a matter that so
nearly towched his Grandfather, a quarter of an hour before the sun
principiated his dyurnall course, Judging it weakness to let a battle so
long endure, he warded a heavy blow the youth let fly at him: closed within
him, where might there besene one of the branest wrasles that the world ever
saw: for their horses more firmly fixing their hoofes on the ground then the
rooted roots of strong oaks within ye earth, gave leave unto the combatants,
to gain advantage in the lofty air.

New manner of war was this for the two that in one day were instalde in the
honored order of arms and chiualrous desynes. But the dexterity, the strong
sallyes, the brave closures, and furious moouings, made appearance of more
experience then they had. For both their ages co-united, amounted not to xl.
years: and notwithstanding showed they ensamples of learning arms for Mars
that on them gazed, and documents for the proudest to emulate. In kindled wroth
was our amorous Champion on fire, thinking his own side had the worst of that
wrasling. So feigned he a new policy that altogether suffitiently contented
the lover of Venus, Vulcans competitor which was, he made show to let him go,
that he might do the like, his hopes were effected, for the Nyquean seeing
that way he got a little advantage, loosd him: but scarcely had he done it, when
with the strength of his legs he set spurs to his fiery Courser, and
taking hold of him with greater strength then before, he snatched him from his
saddle bearing him in his arms to the grieved Judge Oristoldo, who the
ioyfullest alive, adjudged the Prince of Nyquea vanquished. Under ye title,
I^le not accept him (said Rosabell) but as a dear and my souls friend.

Let it suffice sir Knight (replied Lindoriano) to have conquered me in the
battle of swoordes, and not to require a more conquest otherwise, by bearing
away the trophies of knightly courtesy, which though it be due unto you, yet
will I not so slightly let it go: but seeing I am by you vanquished, command
me according to our agreement for I will perform it. The first that I entreat
(not command) is that you receive me as a friend which I will truly be unto
the extremest passage of my breath. And the next that you continue still to
love your Lady with the firmness of an immovable heart: for there is no Lion
so fierce but will be moved with the good done him. But this will I have
performed without prejudice to the Greek Emperor, for otherwise it will be
rather an impouerishing then enriching of your honor. And in sign that you
do so, I must have you show it in prohibiting any whatsoever that you shall
meet with such an unjust demand.

Moreover, if for the gayning of your love there is any need of our
companieit, and our persons we offer henceforth to be by you ymployed, the
which we will better do by deeds, then we speak it in words. Magnanimous
Knight (replied the Prince of Nyquea) I am exceeding glad that since this
chance was allotted me that it fell out by your hands being a Knight, so well
accomplished in all virtues, and so I think you have counseled me what most
befitted mine honor. And seeing we have no more to do, I promise by the faith
and honor of a Knight, and Prince to accomplish it: (which he full-well did
execute to ye cost of some ones life as shall be remembered: For no mean
adventures befell this Prince about his loves which were notable,) and that
fully I may depart contented (said he) I beseech you tell me whom ye be. We
are of such remoted countries, that if we should declare it, you cannot know
us. At this time only are we named the Knights of Fortune: And this (said
Rosabell) we account the worthyest yt these many days has happened us.
Thereupon they took their leaves and parted, the two friends taking their way
to Grecia in which navigations they met with many adventures that the wise man
here omitted, which not a little grieves me, for so famous a thing as the
winning of Hectors arms, wherewith he did desie Achilles challenging him unto
the fight, and Oristoldos getting those of Aeneas, should not only distinctly
be set down, but at large particularized in a sole History. He referres it
unto the Greek Annals, where Rosabells life is more copiously memorated.

There may these adventures be seen, for at this time is only said that with
the best armor in the universe, they landed in the Port of Hircambella one of
the chief cities of the Grecian Empire, where they went a shore only with
Allirios company, and seeing so many multitudes of strange Nations there
arrived, and every minute still ariue, they supposed some general war, had
been against it moved, until they were certified of the cause, to the Princes
great contentment, specially when they knew their dear Fathers were in Greece.

In this manner mounted on the mightiest horses that the earth affoorded,
surpassing those that daily drew the burning Chariot of the Sun they
approached Constantinople walls where we must leave them through certain
adventures which in that season did befall.

CHAP. VIII. What happened in Grecia to Don Celindo, and the beauteous
Floraliza his sister, with a Knight.
I Have with such delight been carried away with the hawghtie deeds of
Rosabell, that had I not remembered what affection (dear Saints and Venus
votresses) you showed to the Scithian Princess I had ouerpast them with
oblivion, did I not fear the rod of your displeasure. But now with your
favors (for without them I dare not) I do enter in the relation of their
famous acts which were so memorable that Lirgandeo at large does set them
forth: the which having left their inchaunted habitation, and entering within
the Sea of Greece, they had in sight the worthy Zasinthus Isle situated right
opposite to the Corinthian gulffe, where they learned how many travailed to the
Grecian Empire, against the solemnity of the brave tryumphes, that should be
made in the famous City of Constantinople. In millitarie actions greatly
delighted the two brothers, and thinking there better then in any other place
they would be found by reason of the triumphs, commanded their ship to be
guided to Arrissa, a haven some thing remote from the City, where the eight
day they arrived, and taking land, they entered through ye grene Forestes,
taking the next way to Constantinople, but first determined to linger
thereaboutes the time that wanted for the feasts, which might be some vii. or
viii. days. So their Fortune led them to pass away the night, hard by the
place where the jealous Sarmatia bewailed her woes. For after she had parted
from Brandafidell, she cast her self from her horse lamenting her misfortuns
supposing that her beloved Oristides, had forsaken her to Love Floralinda, wife
to the Prince, Meridean. And they arrived at such time that forced by a Ielous
spleen she said. Oh rauning experience that before I can begin to Love, I must
with Jealousy be tormented? Oh Cupid if this be one of thy blows established
in all hearts, how is it possible thou should be honored? or to thee appeal,
why should any as to ye Sovereign Prince and Judge of the earth? how will thou
have, that Ladies shall worship and adore thee, if with such extremes thou
plaguest their tender hearts? Apparent signs did I see in that valiant Prince
to love me, but more certainer have I met in Greece that he abhorrs, me. Oh
happy Land only to me vnappie, I blame not thee but curse my stars that do
oppose their influences to ruinate my glory? who would have told me thou
should be a sepulcher to her that to thee came to seek her life? O Gods how
far better had I done to split my heart in Lacedemon with my dear friends
sword, then to come to so great misery in Greece? mighty will be the wrong I
do to Ladies when my death shall be published to have been because I was not
beloved. But wretch that I am, why impute I in him ye sin of disloyalty having
to his own cost assured me by military deeds his soul to be soly thine,
then, rather procuring thy victory then the conquest for himself? And seeing
it is yet doubtful, I will cherish my self till I know it, and finding it so,
not that I loved him without hope of like, but for the dishonor I did thereby
commit against my purity, I will upon my life execute the cruellest death yt
ere the world was guilty of in recompense of my rash foolishnes, and affection
so ill repaied. So somewhat quieted she could not so continue long, remembering
what the Lady had told her, whereupon a little to prorogue her griefs, she
tuned her voice with this Dittie, to her Lute with a more melodious harmony,
than Mercury did sound when Jupiter did send him to bewitch with music the
hundred eyes of watching Argos charge.

Persuaded still may be,
My soul and pensive heart,
That If I live in smart:
It is by loving thee.
His life was never sweet,
That ever learnt to love,
Unless his mind did meet,
With what his Love did move.
There does he strive to live,
Both with his soul and heart,
That If he die with smart,
His death his love might give.
The act that most is praised,
And worthy of most renown:
Is, I, Loves heavenly crown,
That makes despair amazed:
Which when it shall assure:
The soul and amorous heart,
Then is a life no smart:
To Love if it endure.
With so short a winded, hay me ended the warrelicke Dame, that the Princess
which over hard it could not but greatly pity her, having begun to tread the^
inextricable maze of Love, not a little wondering to see how general that
passion was where with they cheefely lived. So afflicted remained the beauteous
Sarmacia, that she could pass no farther, giving occasion to the Brother and
Sister (their beuers closed because they would not be known to go to her) and
the Lady (being naturally more tender) to the other said What have you felt
(Sir Knight) to express part of your hearts abundance to the air, and part
to these hard and senseless Oaks, which is but to increase your smart, the
which, if in any thing we may diminish, we will effectually accomplish it.

At the noise did the Lady start, for being drowned in imagination, she did
not remember her self, and having her thoughts dispearsed abroad, had given no
ear to the Princess words: and so seeing those Knights in that place she
said: Greatly may you favor me (Sir Knight) to leave me to my solitude: for
that only has the power to ease my pain, and strengthen my mind to suffer
it, add greater, if greater may be imagined. And this I entreat, unless any
necessity requires my person, which I will use most willingly in either of
your behalfes.

Brave Knight (replied Floraliza) the sight of your present state so penetrated
our hearts, that it caused this Knight and my self to come and demand the
reason of it: offering our persons at your need, I do highly esteem your
offer, renowned Knight (answered Sarmacia) which could not proceed but from
you. But my infirmity is of such condition, that the remedy on your parts
will augment it, and for me to relate it, were a grief past grief, and a
new kind of torment: For I have no leave to publish it to any, (much more to
you) because it will but serve to refresh the memory of passed griefs and
present evils. And therefore, I pray you either to go from me, or give me
leave, that I may do it: For the very sight of company is to me troublesome.

I never saw a Knight (said Floraliza) so deeply possessed with Love, but
would delight to communicate his pains and joys: For the one he mittigates by
communication, and the other he increases by relation. And so I think you are
a Nouice in Love, seeing you know not, there is no grief how great so ever,
but will by company be assuaged. Rather (replied the Lacedemon Lady) this
proves you a fresh Scholar in Cupids school, seeing you ignorant what wrong
is offered to the Lady loved, publishing her secrets: For to immagine them is
secret treason, committed against her. And now I say, I would not keep
company with a Knight that so quickly desires to blabbe the thoughts cloased
in an amourous soul, being soly to be imagined, and not made common to every
voice. Oh how brave a lover would you make gyuing place in your heart, for
every love tale? Oh that I knew your Mistres, be assured she should not longer
live deceived in her hopes, although I think she does not, if this be not to
her unknown, you speak more then befits you (said the hasty Floraliza) and
with more boldness then you should, which belike our simple and well meaning
speeches did cause, that rather is (answered Sarmacia) the truest testimony
that any can have of his Fortitude, and not the vaunting beasts that many use,
and commonly brag of. And seeing this way you have brought it about, restore
me the honor I did you esteeming you in the degree of a good Knight,
attributing due glory to your seming merits: and when you have so done then
do what you will, for I give you leave. What I will have (said the angry Lady)
is to let you understand the discourtesie you have committed, which is greater
then the strength you boast of. Then stay (replied Oristides Lady) and you
shall see how well I can show the one, when the other dependes thereof, and so
leaping on her light horse, he turned him about, defying her to mortal battle.

In matters of war would not the Macedonian Princess dissemble with her
brother, much more with whom she knew not, and did challenge her. Oh Appollo
the desire to see so brave a combat made thee hasten Auroras splendour to her
wonted light, because without thy presence none could witness their hawghtie
deeds: or was it, because forgetful of thy Alcestes love thou would
surfeite on this beauty.

Which seeing it so, why do thou not dippe my dull pen in the Nectar of
thy Diuinetie, for if they each other wouunde, this and my tongue must memorize
it: Now is the season thy liberal influence to impart with me, when the whole
worlds beauty is here like to perish.

There was left no City in the first Heaven to guard their habitations, only
to be spectators, of so rich a fight, for every of them would willingly loose
their lives, to be wounded by such beauty. They met by the swiftnes of their
nimble Coursers in such manner, that the strength of their incounters made the
Brother shrink at the view. No harm happened between the Ladies most
gallantly passing by each other: and their meetings served but in sheeuers to
send their lances through the empty air to Phoebus middle Mantion. At once
drew they the two admirable swords the one of Camilla, and the second of
Pyrrhus by succession. Come to Oristides, who gave it to his dear Sarmacia in
Lacedemon, as the president book reported. With them hoysted on high together
did they ground them on their helms, resting either alike assured of the others
strength, for the Heavens had in fortitude and beauty in every respect equald
them. They began one of the fiercest battles that the world did ever record,
for being Ladies increasing in wrath, their blows were able to dissolve a
Rock: But such were their strong armours, that it assured them from all
perils. Nevertheless with such furious strength they laid upon each other,
that the flesh more fairer then Venus in her chief pride, they mangled. The
desperate Sarmacia gave her gallant enemy a dangerous blow a little below her
Beuer: it was to no small effect, for it made her bend her head below her Horse
maine. She would not omit the advantage, for sieldome like to this there
happens none, and so with both hands she laid on the circuit of her helm,
that she struck her from all feeling, made her blood run through her visor and
mouth, loosing the guiding of her horse, which senseless bare her about the
field a good while, till, recovering her self, (the rage that with fury
joined to settle her firmly again in her saddle is not set down) for casting
her Roman shield at her fair back, she let fly at her helm with such
strength, that had she carried her arm stiff, that blow had terminated the
controversy. Notwithstanding the blad unable to penetrate the magic temper,
it went slyding down the same falling on the shoulder, lighting so heavily
that she thought all that quarter had been beat asunder. She fell with her
breast on her saddle pummell, and with ye weight of the stroke, the horse set
both his knees on the earth.

Scarce had she executed this blow, when (worthy with admiration to be
celebrated) at the wounded Sarmacias rising, she helped her with two thrustes
one after the other, with such force that her own hands trembled therewith,
casting her adversaries head upon the horse croopper, she would close with her
to overthrow her with her Steed, but with this desire she spurd hers with
more force then needed, for it made him furiously pass further then she would,
that stumbling on her adversary, she had like to fall which to prevent, she
nimbly leapt from her own to the ground. It was advisedly done: for the
Lacedemon Lady arrived with a stroke in such blind fury, that had she met
her she could not but have incurred certain danger: For not meeting her the
blow fell in middle of the saddle dividing it, and the horse in two. Tremble
did the Prince with the sight of this blow, judging the Knight of mighty
valor, in no less reputation did the adverse Lady account him, that seeing
him in some amaze, lying along the horse neck following the wind of the
blow, with a leap she stepped thither, and casting her strong arms on her,
she snatched her from the saddle, and seeing her in some confusion thereby
because one foot hung in the stirrope, which she could not take forth, she
so striued that she plucked her dagger from her back.

Hereat the hawghtie dame seeing her disgrace feared a sudden death
dishonorable, and so she had no other remedy, but loosing her sword with
all her strength to draw her to her, and strongly settling her self on one
foot she did in sight of her adversaries brother a thing worthy her beauty,
for casting her arm at Floralizas dagger, she drew it out of the sheath and
with it hadd slain Alicandros unknown Niece, if she had not stepped away with
fear seeing her own weapons in her adversaries hands: It was no little good
fortune, for the valerous Sarmacia, having thereby time to draw her foot out
of the stirrope, and with hard plucking she had almost disioynted: which
found to her grief, for going to follow her enemy she could not tread
thereon, which was the cause she had almost fallen on her. She dissembling yt
as much as possible she might, expecting her enemies coming: which was not
long, for like a chaffed Lioness (seeing that was her first battle, and what
little honor unless she speedily did finish it she should get) she flung
against Sarmacia, and with both hands she laid on her so thick, and so
quick that breathless she had almost tired her, and yet she hawghtlie
defended her self, often making Floralindas daughter rest on the ground both
with hands and feet, till the pain of her foot was paste, and then she
seemed but newly to begin the combat, for the ligeritie wherewith she entered
and salyed deserved admiration.

With a flourish they crossed aloft their putting swords procuring that way to
conclude their war: But it lasted not long, for Alicandros Niece, thrusting
her somewhat more inwards, stepping in with her right foot, and with imagined
swiftnes she gave her a venturous blow, for taking her under the skirt it
wounded her though little on the thigh. It was no new matter for the Lady, to
receive such blows, it made her loose her patience, and like a ravenous
Vulture did she become with the sight of her own blood.

Now seek they no slyght no ward, nor no agilitie to defend and offend, but
only commit the hazard of their Life or Death to the strength of their
arms, and with the uttermost force that Sarmacia hadd possessed with Pyrrhus
blade twixt both hands, she laid on the adverse helm, making her with the
force of the stroke to set her hands on the ground, which she had not done
when another was redoubled with no less fury, lighting on her shoulders,,
which she extremely felt. More nimble far, and more used to toil then was
Horaliza, was the Lacedemon Lady, and so loosing her shield and sword stayed
till she rose, and ere she settled her self, closed with her, casting her right
arm with such force twixt her legs, that ketching her something suddenly, she
raised her from the ground, and with a great fall cast her on the earth: But as
it often happens among the wrestling challengers at the Olympicke games, so
fell it out between these Ladies: For by how great the fall is, by so much the
more it strengneth the under lying to recover his lost advantage, by amendment
of his foil: even so was it here, because as she cast her on the ground,
and both fell on their sides, the Macedonian Lady found opportunity by a
sudden escape to ketch warlike Sarmacia under.

There perceived Horaliza that she had occasion by the front through so
venturous a fall, and so she set her knees upon her, and because she had no
dagger, for it had been taken from her, she cast her strong arms about her, for
it was all she could. The Ladies were so tired with ye former toil yt this
present labor left the^ breathless: for after they had thus contended a long
hour, without sense they stretched themselves upon the earth, to Celindos
great sorrow, who alinghting from his horse went to his dear Sister, and
unlacing her helm found all her face besmeared with blood, and pale like ashie
Death. His heart trembled when so he saw her lie, and leaving her that the air
might breath on her, he went to see what Knight the other should be, that had
the power so to use his Sister: and when he also saw she was a Lady, with a
shaking cold sweat was all his body covered: But this was not through any
new passion, but for the remembrance of Rosiluera, which he saw portrayed in
his inchaunted habitation, and seeing her greatly to resemble Alphebos daughter,
no fear was equal unto his, thinking they were dead. The which straight
vanished, for beginning to stur, they showed happy news of their lives. He
would not so leave them, for it might be occasion of new quarrels, and so
taking his Sister before him, (because he would not leave so valiant a Lady
without a horse) he carried her within the Forest to see if he could find any
place where she might have the roots of her hair cured on her head. For
else, wounds had she none because her armor did defend it. And meeting with
no place they were feign to alight there, bringing water from a clear spring
(whose current that way ran into the Sea, paying his Tribute to the Ocean) he
cast it on her face, till she recovered her senses: And seeing her self in
that manner she thought she had been by her adversary vanquished.

The consideration of the caused grief through these imaginatio^s, I leave to
you kind Ladies to suppose: the which because I have so much to do, only
wandering but under ye shaddowe of your favors, I do not explicate. No less
was the valerous Sarmacias: who not able there to remedy it, she rose and
mounted on her Co^rser, determined to take her next way to the City, because
the next day the Tryumphes there began, whose adventures do not immerited
require a new Chapter.

CHAP. IX. How the Tryumphes began in Constantinople, the wounders that in the
Iustes did happen.
COme is the day (most beauteous Nymphs of the chaste Goddess) so celebrated
throughout the world, when ye Christians with praises, and the Pagans with
superstitious ceremonies do solemnize the Nativity of the glorious St. John
Baptist, on which the famous Tryumphs were begun with the noise of so many
millions of millitarie instruments, as if the City were at the point of war.

Nothing was heard nor seen but what apertained to Martial discipline, nor
through ye city no vesture appeared but might be shown before their Princes.
Every one would so adorn themselves as well in servants liueries, as on their
own persons. Round about the place where ye Iustes should be made were set
great and big pillars, with fine chains of steel, that the battles might
better be deserved, and upon them were painted all the haughty deeds and
chiualries of all the Greek Princes, with so natural and lively coulors that
they wanted nothing but speaking. At this time came the Emperor from his
palace with such majesty as he seemed a God on earth: For their horses, coches,
chariots and attendants were numberless. In one yt was drawn with four white
Unicorns, road three Ladies, whose beauty darkened the shepherds brightness,
that for love left the golden eye of heaven. They were the most excellent
Princesses Claridiana, Oliuia, and Rosiluera, with the fair Artemisa Princes
of England, that more divine then a humane creature seemed. The resple^ding
miror of beauty, and Fortitude, Archisilora Queen of Lyra, would not be seen
but on horseback, with Capparizons with so rich imbroderie of stones and
pearls, that scarce her excellencies could be deserved through their
reuerberating rays. By the bridle was she lead by the Emperor Alphebo Knight
of the Sun, and his mother, that on the upper hand accompanied her, did
Sacridoro lead, yt knowing of these feasts had sent for his dear wife
Orisilua, who went in company of Lindaraza and Archirosa of Portugal, that
already with Don Siluerio was arrived. Al these were attyred in murry vestures,
cut upon Green, with diversity of curious works. More excellency of perfect
beauty and gallantnes, never did ye worlds vast territories behold. The three
Princess Oliuea, Roseluera and Artemisa, were clad in green robes, imbrodeed
over with whit roses set with infenitt stones of enestimable valor. The
Empress Clarideana came al in whit, laid we goulden twist, we Jewels shining
like the sun. In this Maiesticke equypage arrived they unto ye proud
stupendous theater that for their sight was built, and round about the place
were scaffolds infenit set up.

And after that with their presences it was Metamorphized unto a brighter sky
then the white Crystal Heaven with their appearing out of the windows, ye
chale^gers pauillio^ was set up all of green with like roses the Ladies woare,
it was of no less wonder then any thing in ye place. Through the which entered
the Imperial ensign with twelve thousand men of guard, the which did set it
on ye Pauillions top, with such sound of trumpets, as if that were ye general
sessions of the world: the which the ships and Gallyes anchorde in the road,
replied with many thousand pieces of discharged Ordinance. So soon as the
place was something quieted, there entered at one coruer of it the courageous
Troyan with 50 pages clothed in Carnation, and an 100 godfathers in long
roabes, imbrodered on them his battle in Lacedemo^ and all full of red S. whose
curiousness ioyed the sight to behold. Himself was armed in a rose color
armor, graven with many hearts parted in two. In the middle of his shield was
figured a Lady with a naked sword, and he showing her his heart, that she
might stryke there, but she aimed higher at his head, with this note: If any
stranger heart,
But mine my wound received,
His death he had deserved.


Next to him entered the gracious Prince of France Clarindo, that his affection
toward Artemisa would needs show by the pompeous train that accompanied him:
for all his pages were in green, and in steed of Roses which his Lady woare,
he had many A. with such Art interlaced, that it every one highly contented.
His godfathers were in like manner apparelled with such majesty, that it
seemed no less then Trebatios Nephewe came there, who appeared in such rich
Armor, that nothing was in them seen but great green Emeraldes with
wonderful art set in the hard paste of the tempered steel on his shield was
portraied the Image of faith with this inscription.

This only may deserve,
Loves recompense in the end:
Though I no more contend.
Well did the English dame understand the poesy, greatly rejoicing it was
directed to her beauty, for she disdained not her lovers affection, especial
being so great a Prince. Every one applauded this devise, and chiefly her
Parents were not a little glad knowing the intent. Wherefore the gallant
Portuguese could not but say, I am sure (sweet Lindaraza) that if you would
yield the favor, this Knight would not rest sorrowful. So contented was his
Mother, that she could not deny him any thing she might, having a Son so
fair and valiant. The wise that was heard brake of every ones conversation,
for the free Persian, with the mightines of his Persians, would needs make more
show thereof, then of a lover. For Cupid thitherto had forgotten him, he
entered with a Hundred pages in Red and Russet, with many knots of goulden
twists, of like liuerie 2000 attended on him, who at the ceasing of the
instruments proclaimed Persia and Grecia. With this train he entered the
place, and letting fall a certain devise in manner of a Cloud, he seemed of a
burning flame of fire, till the substance that caused it, was consumed, then
did he appear one of the gallantest Knights of the universe: he was not so
big as his Father but of equal forces, armor were of color like to his
Pages, with many Roses of gold about them: in ye middle of his shield was
portrayed a starry Heaven, and in midst of it, himself looking at it, with
this poesy at his feet.

None can never perish,
Though most he should desire:
From whence his hope retire.
He past the place with gallant disposition, brandishing his lance in a
thousand pieces, and coming to the theater where the Ladies were, he said.
Divine Ladies these Knights and my self must in your be half mantaine these
Iustes which being a thing so difficult, none dares enter the listes, unless
he be assured of your favorable license. With a maiestik grace replied Oliuea.
Were it (Sir Knight) but only to enjoy the sight of your haughty chiualries you
have it as you please being requested there to by all these Ladies, but I fear
it will be to loose much and adventure nothing. Who has your favor Princess
Oliuia (said the beauteous Archisilora may with assurance undertake a more
harder enterprise, then what his proper valor does assure. Nay the^ (said the
gallant Rosiluera) letts not delaie in giving it, least if any disgrace befall
them, they attribute it, to that we showed. Great reason have you in it (said
the English Artemisa) and so brave knight may you begin to show what every one
already knows of your high persons courage. Lower then his saddle pummel
bended the Persian, a sign that the Instruments might sound, which Ecchoed
forth such mellodie that every one was amazed.

Mounted on a mighty courser the Trojan was the first that entered the listes.
There wanted none to make him game, desirous to win some of ye rewards
proposed which were many, and of great value, against him came the mighty
Alpyno reputed one of the valiantest in the kingdom, but he met with Priames
kinsman, who swifter the^ imagination joined with him, by the encounter the
Trojan lost his stirropes, and Alpyno his saddle, whereat the people shouted
highly esteeming the Trojan. Next came forth those two valiant Princess
Rodamont, and Rodafeo, with whom he was in no little peril, but at last they
measured their lengths on ye earth. And as the rest that Iusted were not of
name, he made such havoc of them that in short time he overthrew above an
hundredth.

Toward one a clock it was when ye two strong brothers of Spain presented
them selves within the place, wherein was hard a great rumor because the
Spaniards were reputed of high valor the which entering ye lists first
incountred with the Trojan that both lost their stirrops. At the second
carrier, which was with more fury breaking their lances in many pieces, they
met with horses, shieldes, and Helmes so furiously, that the Spaniards horse
tumbled on the ground with his Master, and the Trojan by the force of the
blow lost both his stirrops, and was so shaken, that not fynding on what to
stay his legs, he also came to the ground. Great was the noise that in the
place was made, and greater the joy, that the Ladies conceived, seeing how well
their Knights performed it. Whereupon the Queen of Lyra took occasion thus:
It is well seen (fair Ladies) how your favors work, seeing how well the
challengers thereby maintains their credits. It was given so willingly
(replied Rosaluira) that I marvel not at it. This talk was broken off by the
coming forth of ye haughty Frenchman upon a mighty Gennet, who with such
fury met with the other Spanyard, that he threw him from his saddle, him self
loosing his stirrops and his raynes, holding by the horse neck for fear of
falling. If this encounter gladded the Princess you need not doubt since she
loved him: For the lover always wishes the thing loved as much good as to it
self.

To him intred Lireamandro and Bariandell. Every one judged they would win
the tent, and pryzes, for Lireamandro incountring with the frenchman so
strongly, they made their incounters that the aduenturer lost his saddle, and
the challenger paste forwards so amazedly that he knew not where he was he had
scarce returned when Bariandell presented himself before him, and with Mars
his puisance they met, ye Frenchman lost his saddle falling upon ye horse
back ever yt hinder saddle how, and not by his valor did he recover it again
but through ye which proceeded from the galant English lady who with a new favor
favored her lover.

The courageous Bariandell with his saddle between his legs, with all his
gyrtes broken, went to the ground, and drawing forth his sword, demanded
battle therewith.

I desire not (Sir Knight, said Clarindo) with you to have new quarrels, this
that Fortune has given me fully contenteth me. I am not vanquished (answered
Bariandell) and so may require my battle with the sword. That must be (said
the other) as the Judges please, who seeing the controversy, went to them, and
adjudged the aduenturer vanquished. Whereupon the shrill sound of Trumpets was
so great, that the one could not hear the other. The smoke that issued from
the Ordinance darkened the splendor of the Suns brightness, that in the
midst of his course stood to behold the Ioustes. The pleasure of the Ladies
cannot be expressed, to see how bravely the Frenchman behaved himself. To him
went the Persian, and entreated him awhile to give him leave, which courteously
he did. For between them was such friendship as among their fathers. The
gallant youth prepared himself greatly contenting the Ladies with his
presence, judging he would continue to the end, as his friends had happily
begun, yet found they themselves agreeued, with his liberty, esteming
themselves of little worth, that any one should enter the listes without the
name of alienated. The which the great Matrone of Trabisound well noted, and
therefore said: In faith (brave Ladies) it greeues me to see the liberty of
yonder Knight, ye look to this window will not, much less to your beauties:
Considering our nyce conditions, and stra^genesse (replied the beauteous
Archisilora) I do not marvel at yonder Knights. Not far from her was
Claridiano the afflictedst youth in the world, seeing with what rigor his
Lady used him, depriving him of that, which by no means almost she could
deny: for which cause he was so passionate and pensatiue, that none in the
universe could be more. And seeing ye good occasion to speak unto his Lady, he
said:

I am glad (sovereign Queen of Lyra) that you have granted what my Lady
mother has noted, which is no small comfort to those that pyne, to know that
all the fault is not in the gallants, but some also in their Ladies disfavors
or disgrace. It is not so great (replied the sharp Queen) as it is just
toward those Knights, that without consideration place their hopes, on that
which yields soonest cause of despair. And then this is rather a favor for
which Ladies ought to be gratified, when so plainly they leave their lover
hopeless, that after they call it not a deceit, seeing their faith, love, and
loyalty so ill repaide, and so ought their complaints to be pitied and
excused, had not our strangeness at first diswaded them. Wherefore (courageous
Prince) if any Lady has had more power over you, then all we on the Prince of
Percia, think that your disfavors proceeds from this: The woeful lover had
not the strength to answer her, seeing how openly she would not show him no
hope of favor. From thence he went to his chamber, ad uttering a thousand
exclaims he cast him self upon his bed, cursing his Fortune that so was
opposed against his content. He durst not tarry long, because he knew his
mother would send for him, so he returned and placed himself next to Oliuea,
that loved him as her self, and this was at such time, as through the place
entered two Knights armed in Russet, with bars of black, that every one enuyed
their disposition, but seeing they loved, and according to their devises, that
it was in some high place, it grieved them to know they lived vnbeloued. Yet
that was not the cause thereof, but the loss of their dear Ladies: For these
were the valiant Princes of Celandia, that having taken their leaves of
Rosabell took their way toward Grecia. Their devise was a fiery Chariot,
wherein their Ladies were carried away, and they looking after them with this
Motto: For such a famous loss,
Still may we burn in fire,
Equal to our desire.


With great grace they passed forward, but yet their strength was not so great
as ye Persians, who taking a bigg lance, incounted the one so rigorously, that
though on his feet he made him touch the ground, he lost his stirrops: for
few blows like that he had received and passed forwards. Against him settled
himself the elder brother. This Knight was of more strength, and so with more
might they incountred, shiuering their Lances in a thousand pieces. The
aduenturer lost one stirrope, yet was it scarce discerned. With new Lances
they returned, but in this second carrier, the Celandian got but little, for
his length on the earth he left with the fall. The Persian lost his raynes, and
the horse with the force of the encounter struck his buttockes on the ground:
but spurring him, he made him pass forwards prawnsing as he went. The
Instruments began their accustomed Music, with such harmony, that it seemed
sent from heaven. The Galleys discharged their ordinance with such noyes, that
ye rebounding Echo made all the City quake.

What say you now (dear Lady) said Rosaluira to our Knights high deeds? I
believe our favors given so willingly, is that which so animates them? Rightly
have you spoken (said the Queen of Lyra) but in the listes to show the
freeness of his heart, this Knight deserved not so manifest a favor. She spoke
it, to let Claridiano understand that she desired to have him Ioust: but not
seeing him there, she straight supposed that her sharp answer had driven him
thence. It grieved her, for she loved him dearer then her self: But her
gravity was so great, that she would by no means have him imagine any such
thing of her: yet if to dissemble were to love, this Lady may be eternized for
a famous lover, and the greatest that ever was. But at this time there entered
some to prove themselves against ye Persian, to their cost: for in short space
he overthrew above 50 Knights. None durst enter within the listes, seeing how
little there was to be got. So that toward the hour of four, through ye
place past two Knights of good semblance, cladd in yallow, that no small
laughter caused the Ladies to see their dispayring devise on their sheeldes had
they a thousand distrustes all making against them: and they there pictured
with this inscription.

It Is a virtue to distrust:
To him that will not Love:
For fear of Joys remove.
The Motto the ladies entertained as was their custom, when therein they will
show their disdain equal to the cruelty that they show unto their gallants.
The one of the yellow knights set him self right against the courageous
Persian, who with his incountre laid him on the ground, the like he did by ye
second, resting so bruised by their strokes that he could scarce keep a horse
back for those were the strongest incounters he had all that day received.
The Knights abashed returned the way they came leaving the place merrye, for
the Ladies alowd did say. Well befall so amorous Knights, for it is Just that
such as they do loose their right to make the Ladies sport. In this manner
iested they when through one side of the place appeared a Knight, of haughty
disposicion, for besides the riches of his armor, his gallant behavior and
brave constitution, all the beholders admyred his arms were tauny of color
with many green Emeraldes that they seemed there to groe, all the Joints were
of a silver color, and every one Judged him of valor, on his sheeld in a
tauny field was figured ye picture of a Lady whose beauty drew all eyes unto
her. Before her stood a Knight yt gave her his heart, with this motto.

The Lady being so fair,
Why do I count it smart:
When that my pensive heart:
Will killing grief outdare.
It is not credible how the coming of the amorous venturer pleased, who giving
his horse the spurs, made him swiftly pass even to the Ladies Theater, where
curuetting made him bend his head between his legs, and himself bowed his
own lower then his saddle pumell, in such brave manner, that no heart could more
desire. Some courtesy did the Ladies show him, resting very fearful that he
would win the prizes: With fresh horse issued from the pauillion the
courageous Persian, and departing one against the other, in ye midst of their
carrier they met with more power then ever Mars was master of. The adue^turers
armor was of a Magic temper, and therefore was the blow he received nothing
seen, but that which he gave the Maintainer was such, that piercing his shield
and arms, with a little wound he thrust him so hard, that he cast him behind
the saddle, and plucking the Lance to him, with the fury thereof the horse
elevated himself, which was the cause (though on feet) that he went to the
ground. Great was the rumor in ye place with the sight of the adventurers
brave blow, raging like a furious Lion, the iniuried French man entered the
listes, assured to revenge his friend, which issued otherwise then he thought:
for the Tawnie Knight in power exceeded him. And so ending their course within
their Spears length, so mighty was the encounter that the French Prince and
his horse with his Helm broken, tumbled to the earth. The aduenturer in the
beginning seeing his stumbled forwards like to fall, very nimbly leapt from
him, and being quieted with like ligeritie remounted on his back. Oh God (said
the Empress Claridiana) what valor is this of yonder knight, believe me not,
if the prizes are not like to be his? I think no less (replied the gallant
Meridian) that hard by her satt: for in the managing of his courser, I have not
seen a more brauer Knight.

From this talk were they driven by the coming forth of Troylus Nephew,
whose encounter was not of ye worst: for over along the saddle it laid the
head of the valorous Lindoriano Prince of Nyquea which was he ye Iusted, who
having heard of ye Tryumphs ordained in Grecia, came thither being departed
from Rosabell Princes of Great Britanie, and with that device of Rosiluira to
whom in Tinacria he had yielded his soul, he there arrived winning eternal
honor by ending that which seemed most hardest, for that the valiant Trojan,
although his legs were locked, was forced to ye ground, with the greatest
clamours that ever yet the beholders made. The challengers left their
pauillion, though sore against their wills. But the haughty lover went to them
saying.

I entreat you (Heroyick Knights) to return unto your standing, for I shall
esteem it a high and undeserved favor to be received, as your companion and
friend. Brave knight the valiantest in arms that we have tried (said the
courteous Prince of Persia) since it has pleased the gyddie blind
commaundresse of chance to show her mutabilities on us, we will not
otherwise, but that you enjoy the merits of your valor, which considered well,
all this and far much more you deserve. We did maintain the beauty, and
gallantnes of the Greek Dames, now having vanquished us, you may alter the
conditions of the Iustes. In a matter that every one ought to acknowledge
(answered the gallant Lindoriano) there rests nothing more then to prosecute
it. And since it must be done with the Ladies consent and leave, there is no
more but to crave it. Thereuppon, he went unto the heavenly windows where they
were and lifting up his Beuer showing the admiration of his face, he said doing
his humble duty.

Sovereign and divine Ladies, although my pretended demand is more then
audacious, yet trusting more to the Nobility and bounty of your courtesy
then any valor of mine, unless proceeding from you, I beseech that since
these Knights have labored in your services, you will be pleased under the
same title to suffer me to proceed forward. All the Ladies kept silence,
astonished at the Knights request. But the great Emperor Trebatio that was not
far of, said. It is both honorable and just what this knight entreats, and
therefore shall it be granted him. We have seen how little our favors have
pruailed (replied the free Rosiluera,) and therefore we would not have him
loose with the^ what he has without them won: but since your Majesty will
have it so, there is none here that will gain say it. Pleased rested every one
with the Ladies answer, but specially the Nyquean, that on her all the while
did gaze, thinking that he saw his Mistres, whom she did highly resemble, as
low as his knee he bowed his head in sign of thankfulness for ye exceeding
favor, returning unto the listes, where it was pity to see how he used the
Knights, for he gave no encounter, which was not either of Death, or of a
mortal wou^d. Already would Apollo end his course beginning it with our
Antipodes, when through the place there entered a Knight in purple armor with
many red Roses of fine orient rubies which admirably showed, no less did he
himself. In his shield was portrayed the picture of liberty, placed upon a
world, and a Knight that gave her his hand, saying. None this way may arrive,
Except his heart be free:
Of loves sweet tyranny.


Few Ladies there, but desired the Knights overthrow, for thinking there was
no pleasure and content where love reigned, with this desire they stayed, for
every one judged ye Iustes would be admirable: so thought the Emperor Alphebo,
for the disposition of the Knight was no less then of the new maintayner.
Every one called him so, knowing what he had required of the Ladies. Who
judging his adversary of great valor, with his own hand choosed a bigg
lance. Seeing him do so, the Princess Oliuia said, I believe that according
to the will wherewith our Knight chooses his lance, he means no good
toward the aduenturer, who with all the strength that he posseste made
against his enemy, incountring with such furious blows, that the farthest of
thought not himself secure. None seemed to have any color, for the mighty
stroke had su^moned all the blood unto their fearful trembling heart. Two
well furnished Galleys met not with such horror as did the warriors: for
breaking their lances without farther motion, they gallantly past by each
other, the like did they by the second: but at the third, either of them weary
of delay, with more fury then bayted Bulls, they met in midst of the
place. The maintainers blow was venturous, and that which gave him the
victory, which otherwise more deerer it hadd cost him, for he chanced on the
others visor, which though it was not dangerous, yet did it cause that the
others was not as yt might have been. Notwithstanding, they m^^t with their
shields and helmes that their horses iogging one another, the maintayners fell
down dead, and as he was in better sense having received no hurtful blow,
ere he fell he cast himself aside from him, falling on his hands so amazed
that on feet he knew not where he was, worse befell unto the disgraced
Astorildo of Callidonia, that in search of his Sister Rosamond did go, as is
before mentioned, who fell over his horse through the pain of his forehead.
Such noise and clamours of Instruments and people was heard, that none knew
what the other said. Sorrowful departed the Prince of Callidonia thinking
that the unlucky blow had made him loose the Just. Little stayed the maintayner
on foot, for the Ladies sent him twenty Pages with so many horses bravely
furnished, and a message that a weak cripple with it would have become more
fierce then a hunted Lion: for one said. The Greek Princesses (brave Knight)
co^mends the^ to you, entreating you since you labor in their services you
would accept these horses, which you shall not want requiring more, seeing your
valor and deeds far more do merit. Good page tell those Ladies that on this
message sent you (replied the Prince) that it well seems they will attribute
the good fortune of the Iustes only to their beauties, which seeing they
deserve, so they may triumph in their own wishes, and that it may be so, I
will loose my life, and a thousand, if so many I had. A retraite they were
about to sound when in the place there entered a Knight of body big and
great, and well proportioned, armed in green armor with many strawberries
about the^, his on shield there was an imperial head cut off, as if it freshly
bleeded, with this Motto.

Her beauty does deserve it,
Though Mauors head it were:
And more if it were more dear.
Very few Knights were there in the place but by the devise knew for what the
Knight came. The Prine of Nyquea did not ignore it, for remembering what he had
promised Rosabell, seeing him approach unto the Theater, knowing his demand
left his pauillion, and went thither. And the other being there come lifting up
his Beuer demanded that every one might hear. Who is here the Emperor
Tribatio, for among so many no marvel if I know him not? I am he sir Knight
(replied the Emperor) therefore say on what you require? For what I come,
(Emperor) I am sure will greatly grieve thee, for only thy head has brought me
hither from far countries, which I must have, because thou well know how thou
have wronged Garrofilea Queen of Tynacria, the which being so notorious, thou
have no more to stay, but fetch thy armor, for here in her behalf to mortal
battle I defy thee. Truly knight thou say well (answered the Emperor) for
thy demand does grieve me, and very, very much, not to refuse the battle,
(for that shall straight be performed) but because it is in time of such
pleasures. He that has so many enemies (replied the proud Pagan) ought with
fear to look for none other.

Before him stepte the most courageous Lyndoriano, who praying lycense of the
Emperor, and obtained, turned to the Pagan with these words. It ill beseemes
thee Knight, were it only for the Ladies sakes at this time to come with such
a demand, which cannot but greatly discontent them. And so in their names I
say you have ill done, and that you are unworthy of what you do procure, upon
all which I do defy you. Like to an Hircanian Tiger the forayner replied.
Were I not so sure of reueng I could not but rest displeased with thy
discourteous words. Thy battle I accept having finished the Emperors. Why how
now proud and insolent Knight (said Lindoriano) think thou to vanquish him,
whom Jupiter dares not in Heaven confront? our battle must be straight, for
after thou shall have time for that, unless that hateful of thy own life
wilt presently loose it. Be it as thou will (answered the fierce Pagan) for
being so near the field we may eschew vain ayrie words. Return they would
into the listes, but the Emperor commanded the combat should be left till
the morrow. So they all departed leading their maintayner out of the place with
great honor, and no less train, who seeing it to be time, returned to his
pauillion, expecting the Suns vprise, where what happened, the next Chapter
shall recompt.

CHAP. X. The cruel battle that past between the Prince Linderiano and
Asmaell King of Norwege.
THe dawning of the peeping day, began the Royal Galleys on the Sea to
welcome, and the chirping birds to celebrate the approach of bright Auroras
shining, when in the middle of the great place of Constantinople, the most
valiant Prince of Nyquea Lindoriano presented himself, clad in his rich
glittering armor upon his swift light Steed, expecting ye Emperors coming,
who about Ten of the Clock issued from his Royal palace, with all those
Sovereign Princesses and Ladies, which no less seemed then a troop of so
many heavenly Angels, marching on the earth. For those that yesterday were
seen in green, this day to assure their gallants hopes appeared all in red,
and the rest of the Ladies were so gorgiously attyred, with so many
inestimable Jewels adorned that with reason it might well be called the
Paradise of divine rarieties. The warlike Queen of Lyra came all armed,
desirous to break some Lances, and so would not mount on the Theater. Her
armor was no less wonderful, then her beauty adorned with many Carnation
flowers of gold, that so well seemed as every one blessed her with many millions
of benedictions, so did the afflicted Claridiano, that ye sorrowfullest in the
world, did set himself where none might see him the better to ponder on the
immaginarie causes of his grief, occasioned by her that ouer-ruled his
desires. There stayed he in silence sighing forth his passions, while his
Lady did the like, but her fear was so great that it made her forget both her
comforts, by not succoring, ye distressed amorous youth with a pityfull
remedy. There was no Lady in the place but desired a famous victory unto the
Princesses Knight, so was he called by them all, and yet not without great and
exceeding fear thereof, because they saw the Moore at this instant appear in
place with innumerable tokens of incomparable valor, which made many hold the
conquest in suspense, not knowing on whether to decline. But the Pagan being
arrived said.

Now Knight seeing the time for deeds is come, there is no reason to delay it,
but in naming of the Judge. Since the one of us, must of necessity remain for
ever breathless in this field, that question was needelesse (replied the
Nyquean Prince,) nevertheless I nominate that Lady, whom thou procurest to
content with a head so honorable. I had not thought thy pride so great (said
the King of Norwege,) but seeing the matter is in this estate, I name the same
Lady, for presenting her with thy head and the Emperors, she shall be assured of
the great reason she had to ymploy me in her service. Answer would not the
furious youth thinking thereby he should too long prorogue the war, so they
turned their horses, which swifter then two light Galleys borne with the fury of
their full wind blown sails, met in the end of their course breaking in
pieces their lances, whose shiuers mounted higher then the raging region of
the air. Of stupendous strengtht were the warriors and so their lances no
more moved them then had they incountred several rocks, either returned to
themselves swelling with poison, and like ravening Lions against their
adversary, and drawing forth their glittering blades at once they gave each
other such blows, yt every one thought they were ye last. Great abundance of
blood issued through Lindorianos mouth, which he thought would be a hinderance
unto his battle, he laid the Pagan on the top of the helm, that he made him
and his horse staggar above Ten paces back from him: Never was there seen a
devouring Harpie mory swift then did ye lover of Rosaluira follow the amazed
King, giving him three blows one after another, that at every one he made him
see more stars then the Firmament contained. The best sword of the field
was the youths, for it belonged to Artarax the first Souldan of Nyquea, he
that in one day would wyn three general pitched battles, for which cause he
gave no blow, but threw armor, and sometimes flesh unto the ground. The
better of the fight had not he, for though ye fynest of his armor defended his
flesh from wou^ding, yet was his body so tired and bruised, that with great pain
he stayed himself wtin wis saddle. The Pagan feared to bleed away, and
therefore set he his spurs to his horse thrusting at the Nyquean with a point,
that as he ran with the strength of his courser he laid him along upon his
saddle, with such fury joining his shield with a great knock unto his breast, yt
almost he left him brethlesse. Scarce was he thus cast when with Marses power
he struck him al along upon the belly, yt it caused him extreme pain. With
more ravening fury turns not ye raging Tygre upon his foe the^ now did
Lindoriano, for casting his shield at his back, with both hands he discharged a
blow on his adversaries yt from the top quite asunder it was cleft, cutting
away a great piece of his skirt he would close with him, and with like desire did
ye Pagan with his spurs animate his horse, and in such manner met yt all four
tumbled to ye ground, yet had they not fallen when they rose on foot, either
setting aside all fear that for such a battle was unfit. With fresh breath
entered ye Moore, and crossing aloft his sword more quicker then imagination, he
thrust him with a point so strongly, that a little he drove him from him, yet
not so much but he could reach him with a counterbuffe upon the knee that it
fetched blod, tremble did the blow make him, but abandoning all fear, as also
of his life, he reclosed with him, and as his sword had no fault, he laid on
his left shoulder, and sliding from thence, it cut away al his elbow armor with
his male sleeue drawing much blood. Quick was ye youth and so would he second
it, but it was to his cost, for ye More was skillful, and letting him enter, he
stepped aside, laying upon his shield ye tormenting his arm he was glad to let
it fall. Oh who hadd at that instant seen ye two warriors without shields,
receiving their furious blows without warding. They began with cunning to
proceed, for the Pagan as from death shunning the cutting blade, would against
it show his nymblens, so, well firming his legs, assaulted his enemy, but his
standing did not continue, for the Nyquean entering with both his, driued him from
it, yet not so, but ye other might give him so grievous a stroke, yt it made
him set his hands on the earth. This contented not ye Pagan yt with both hands
giving him another (it was a miracle it killed him not outright) for taking him
on ye waff where ye armor is buckled it cut his skirt, even to the flesh, and a
little more strengthening his arm that place being the weakest he had slain
him, without payment would he go his ways, but it was not possible, for the
Nyquean already inflamed with rage, as he past (desirous to make himself ame^ds)
thrust at him with his point: he could not miss him, for lighting on his right
thigh, he ma^de him stagger four or five paces back, he could not give it
with force, for otherwise he had cut it. They returned as they but the^ began
the fight, with such admition of the behoulders, that as a dream they judged it,
for four hours continued their combat without any rest. Affectionated to
the Knight of the Ladies were they themselves, and therefore greater was their
fear of him. Always the thing loved (Beauties miracles) is respected with most
care. They parted a little to breath, and the Nyquean having time, began to
recompt with how many things he discharged the duty yt his honor had bound
him, to ending well that battle, and thinking that he had the worst, he looked
toward the Theater, confirming his doubt by the pitiful sorrow that the
Princesses showed, and calling himself coward that a battle should so long
last him, not respecting how little he had breathed, furiously he resaulted him
at the instant that the other left his standing to do the like, and together
through the mightines of their arms, the one laid his hands, and the other
his knees on ye ground. They were so nighe that they could not but cast their
arms about their bodies, pressing them with such force that they came to the
earth, where who up, and who down, they striued a good while in a strong and
dangerous wrestle. The King nothing gained thereby, for he was wounded mortally
in many places, and so lost much blood, whereby his faintness was plainly
perceived, the which was not in Lindoriano, for though he was bruised and weak,
yet was it not for want of blood. They returned unto their swords, but
evidently was the maintayners advantage known, which made the spectators begin
a new joy, for the Pagans demand had angered them all.

The acknowledgment of his advantage was not so great but that the other might
recover it, to the lovers dear cost, wearying him with assaulting, avoiding,
warding and offending. The people in the place celebrated every blow with
promises above the skies. But the impatient Moore blaspheming against his gods,
as thinking that his disgrace from them proceeded, went to his enemy, and with
both hands let fly at him such a blow, that lighting on the side of his
Helm, he cut away all the buckles of the right side, which had he spyed, no
doubt but he had made an end of him by again recharging there. But he
withheld so long that the gallant Lover recovered himself, and with both
arms aloft marched against his enemy, who in like sort met him, and with
more horror then the furious waves beat upon the flintie rocks, they
discharged their blows upon their Helmes with such puissance, that both
senseless fell on the ground: the Nyquean without his Helm, but the Pagan
with his head, scull, and brains broken, and scattered within his own. The
people would have gone to them, had not the guard stayed them, till they saw
what became of the Knights trance. But straight was the victory proclaimed:
for the valiant Lindoriano, returned and seeing him self in that manner, flung
to his weapons, to assault his foe: but seeing him so lie, went to him and
unlaced his Helm, saw his head broken in three or four pieces, it grieved
him, for he was but young, scarce having any beard. But seeing he could not do
withal, demanded the Judges, if he had accomplished to his honor. And in
such manner (replied they) most valiant Knight, that for ever shall your
memory here endure. Already came the Emperor, and all the Kings that were
with him, to receive the Knight, who knowing which he was, prostrated himself
upon his knees, requiring his royal hands to kiss them, he would not do it,
saying: He that has them so good (Sir Knight) with more reason ought his to be
demanded, then ours given, and raising him from the ground very kindly
embraced him, demanding, who he was: he replied, excusing himself the best
that he could: saying that, for that time he was called Venus Knight The
Emperor would not suffer him to stay in the Tent, but that he should be cured
in court. Where the Empres Bryana in company of all the Ladies (in recompense
of what for the Emperor he had done) visited him which from death revived him,
to give it him more sweeter with their hands. The Ioustes ceased (by the
Emperors commandment) for eight days while the Knight was in cure, where he
was so much made of, as if they knew him in estate to be one of the greatest
Princes of the world. So many things happened in these few days that some of
them may not be omitted: what they were the next Chapter memorateth.

CHAP. XI. What happened to Don Eleno of Dacia, after he departed from the
Emperor, in search of his dear Lady Rosamond of Callidonia.
I Cannot (sweet Ladies) but intermingle some pleasing matter, among the
turbulent hurleburlies of bloody Mars, showing thereby in part ye thankfulness
of my mind due for your willing patience hitherto showen, for which your
beauties admiration shall while these lines endure eternally remain, the which
if the world as a strange and new rarytie adoreth, my self by loving (though
unregarded) cannot but esteem it: And while the reward proceeds from some
danger: harken fair Ladies what befell unto the warrelike Lover. Who departing
from the Emperor and the other Princes with the swiftness of his Tyrio
returned the way that he came thinking to meet with his Lady, it otherwise
happened, for loosing himself within the woodie thickets of that forest,
wandering many days hearing no news of his soul. So great were the torments
he endured, and his exclaimes unto the skies, that his voice was hoarce with
plaints. With his dagger on every tree he met he engraued this.

When Don Eleno shall forget thee,
May fortune then reject me.
And under it to explain more the efficacy of his grief, and how that way
he sought Rosamond, he thus added.

Since Rosamond is Life,
And soul of him that seeks her:
T'obtaine it without strife,
Why should I cease to seek her.
In this manner did the Datian Lord acquaint the buzing winds with ye secrets of
his pensive heart, regestring it on the hard oaks as if they were able to
redress his woes: but it is alouers comfort to co^municat his greefs unto the
air. Angry with this fortune he past 4 days, in ye end whereof hard by ye sea
side finding himself alone, and seeing his misfortune, he thus began to sing,
thinking that none did hear him.

Deuinest Nymphs that in your shadie bowers,
Do lead your Lives contentedly in Love,
And you that free do daily spend your hours:
Recording those, that yours will never move.
Harken to his that his poor heart deuowrse,
And pines in woes, and does in torments live:
Bereft of Joys, of glory and of fame:
By loosing her in beauty, cheifest dame.
See how on me Loves tyranny is shown,
By which the Heavens and cruel fates torment me:
My love refused my constancy for sworn:
Through which my Joys in love I once did see.
To show some pity now were some renoune:
When life when hope, when Joys rejected be.
This may you do, by telling her, I seek:
That I would meet, her, ere the sun do peep.
For pitties sake this favor dain to do me:
For whilst I grieve, she greeues, except you tell her,
Because our souls in woes coparteners be,
And absence is a scourge, and faithes abayter:
The which you know, and well I woot does she,
That lost our Joys by absence, loves afflicter.
Once I did love and was again beloved:
Now I must weep, seeing my love removed.
Of both I am a scholar to experience:
Insample to of aforgotten lover:
And though I live proclaimed was the sentence,
That me condemnd to sorrow, hearts tormenter.
Yet all I sufferd, but this plage of absence,
I cannot, being my Joys remouer.
I pine, she weeps, and we would feign now meet:
Except you help we never shall regreet.
None of all the forest Goddesses, and Nymphs that in their shadie Celles
were ending of their taskes, but gave it over, and in such sort pitied the
complaints of the woeful Lover, that the gentle Datian saw himself
encompassed, with a more then celestial company, all of them offering him
their helps, assuring him the happiness that his constancy had obtained, and
that he which can so well suffer the hard crosses of absence, should not loose
the hope of his future good. They all promised him to advertise his Lady of the
intolerable passions, that for her sake he sustained. They brought him to the
next straight way, and departing, returned with matter enough to talk off,
concerning the amorous Prince, that with unaccustomed pace began to trace the
intricate ways of the gloomie woods, calling himself a thousand times
unfortunate: for that the displeased heavens, for some offense of his, berest
him of the sweet presence of his dear Lady, when he had most need thereof.
Of nothing did he more complain, then of Love, attributing his loss to the
envy of his good, that with proper tears he had gained, and that therefore he
was enjoined to so unpleasant a journey. Great comfort was it to him, the
remembrance of the Nymphs promise: for that was only what nourished his life,
which else he had him self from himself bereft. None loved as he, and
therefore was his reward admirable. In this manner traueld he, til the second
hour in the afternoon, that he saw coming toward him a Lady in company
of one of the best proportioned Knights that he had seen. He was so laden with
fearful weapons, that he judged him of great valor. And ye be remembered, this
is our affectionated Brandafidell, that hearing how the feasts were begun,
was going toward the City. So soon as they confronted each other, raising
his Beuer, he said: If you come from Constantinople Sir Knight, can you tell me
who maintains the Ioustes, and whether they be begun. I only know (replied
Don Eleno) that certainly they are begun, and as for the rest, I have heard the
maintainers are the Prince of Persia and Babylon, in company of him of
France, and the Troyan Oristides. Then belike (said the Giant) assured are
the Greek Dames to loose no part of their beauties. Famoused they are for
valor (replied the Dacian) Nevertheless, there will go to the Ioustes those
that in no less reputation account their Ladies, from whom they will draw
strength to try their Fortune. And seeing I have satisfied your demand, you
should do me a great favor, to tell me news of a Knight in white Armor, and
on his shield a Sanguine heart, with the like devise that I have? Yesterday
about this time (replied the Giant) we met him in greatest haste of his mighty
horse, and to me the speaking to him was costly: for being about to offer him
my person to aid him, if he had need, he went very Choleric: for sharply
he answered me. Well did I note it. Yet notwithstanding, I set my self in
middle of the way to stay him with his encounter he did not overthrow me, but
it was the greatest, that in all my life I received. The heat of the Sun
somewhat annoyed the gallant Lover, and therefore he raised his Beuer. It was
not so soon done, but the Giant thought verily it was his dear Rosicler. (For
as it is said, he so much resembled him, as the one scarce was known from the
other,) and crying out alowde, he leapte from his beast, and flinging at the
Prince said: Oh, my dear Lord, what good Fortune has awayted thy faithful
Brandafidell, bringing him to see you. Thither was the beauteous Floralinda
come and said: Why, how now Sovereign Prince, is it possible that in your
own country you will not know us? Deeds are those that Floralinda has
received, that byndes her to your knowledge: but you are so changed, that I
will complain unto the Princess Oliuia of your disquietnesse.

Don Eleno was so amazed at what the Lady and Giant did, that he could not
answer, till he perceived their deceit, taking him for his cousin Rosicler,
so altogether listing up his Beuer replied. Most beauteous Lady, to enjoy so
great favor, as to that famous Prince you do, I wish I were in deed him
whom I do so much resemble. I am not that Prince you know, though you may
account me for your friend, as I think he is. I am his cousin Don Eleno of
Dacia, and account it my good Fortune, to have met with your company, and have
understood of that Knight, that some few days has made me seek him about
these desert Woods. And seeing I have no more to do, I commit you to God. For
every Minute that I stay, I am in great fault with yonder Knight. So he took
his leave, departing swifter then any thought, that way which the courteous
Giant directed him. Somewhat abashed, rested the Lady at her chance with the
Dacian, but knowing who he was, it did not green her. I do entreat your
Ladyship, to follow me softly (said the courageous Giant.) For doubtless,
some of those Knights may have some need, and in ayding them, will Rosicler
be pleased.

And turning the raynes of his Alfana, he took Don Elenos way, and as he
bestryded the worlds best horse, he could neither see nor overtake him, and
with fear to loose the Lady, went but leasurely: Yet Don Eleno judged stowe
the swiftness of his Tirio. For having crossed most part of the Forest, when
the Sun would end his course, hard by the Sea side he spyed one of the
brauest battles that he ever saw. It was one sole Knight among many, and some
Giants, with less fury follows a towering Hawke on his praying game, then
did the Dacian descend those Mountains, till he arrived hard by them, where he
saw a damozell bound, that greatly exclaimed on her outrage, so he perceived
that about her liberty the battle was. He remembered not to have seen a
brauer Knight then he that fought: for they were some twenty Knights and three
Giants, and six of them he had laid at his feet with one Giant, so bravely
he behaved himself among them, that the Dacian thought him to be the Emperor
Alphebo of Trebisound.

No longer stayed the courageous Lover, but giving a hallow to his horse (a
sign that he should not leave the battle, till the end) he strongly settled
himself in his styrrops, and with Mars his strength he threw his Lance, it
could not light but hitting one of the Giants, that it pearst him side through
side. He cast his shield at his back, and with Brutus famous sword, he began
such havoc among them, that ere they could perceive their danger, five he
had slain. The son of angry Garrofilla (for that was he) greatly esteemed
the Dacian, seeing his valor to be so great, that none durst withstand him.

First, he would rid himself of that vylde peeple, before he assaulted the
Giants: he did so, when two Knights of haughty disposition arrived, the one
knew Polliphebo, as one that in her soul had him imprinted, being the
beauteous Floraliza, who without further stay with her sword in both hands
arrived almost as soon as Don Eleno. Never was there seen more fiercer
blows, for both with the utmost of their strength, not regarding that the
other did ye like, they discharged the^ al upon him, dividing him in three. for
every one had his quarter. Envious of the same, the Tinaerian casting his
sheeld away bravely firming his feet in his stirropes raised his self on them,
and with his sword in both hands with incredible strength he discharged his
blow on the others left shoulder that to his saddle he cleaft him, and as if he
had nothing done, he went to the Knights with these words. Had I been assured
of so good helps Sir Knights, with more hope had I performed my combat. Small
need had you of our aid (brave Knights) said the amorous dame, and if we came
it was only to know you and the cause of your battle. That was soly to right
this Damsel (answered Trebarios son) ye came in my demand for certain
business, and so was she taken by these giants, that like vyllanes do nothing
else but rob in the high ways, whose fame now your valor has liberated.
Touching ye rest, there is no reason I should disobey you, I am called the
Knight of ye golden Branch, and no other thing do I know of my stock. Every
one had heard wounders of him, and so the lady to bind him to as much a lighted
from her horse saying, dismou^t (brave warriors that we may rest. To content
her, Don Celindo having some feeling of his sisters affection did so, as much
did the Tinacrian. But the Dacian rather desiring to seek his Rosamond,
excused him self the best that he could, alleging the necessity he had to
part away* but ere he went, he took the vallorous Tinacrian aside and thus
said.

I am sure (Sovereign Prince) that you know me not, but many days a go have
I had perfect knowledge of your hauty deeds, and since our kindred binds me
to tell you whom I am, know that my name is Don Eleno of Dacia your loving
cosen, he that for the liberty of your native soil employed the utmost of his
power. Immeasurable joy received the Prince to know him, and rendering him
many thancks for it, replied. In faith none with more reason ought to live
contented but I, seeing my happy stars so highly blessed me as to create me
kinsman unto so mighty Princes, though great is my bond to procure by desert
in something to resemble them, and for this would not be known of the Emperor,
until my deeds might make me worthy to be esteemed his Son. Those are already
so well known, (most valiant Prince) replied the Dacian, that you may
deservedly be called the Son of such a Father: and because it behooues me
presently to depart, I must commit you to God, in me while life indures shall
you be assured of a perpetual friend, his company desired the Tynacrian, but
thinking it discourtesie so to leave ye knights that tarried for him, would not
admit it, but taking his leave of all he entered through the thickest of the
Forest, leaving them in love with his valor and gentleness, dismount did the
Tynacrian, and lifting up his Beuer, he went to the Lady that trembling
expected him, to whom she said, I think sir Knight of the branch, that
yonder Knight in the Russet did know you considering how he used you and I
wonder not, for some I know that only by hearing of your valor, bear you no
small good will, having left their far remoted countries, soly to enjoy your
sight.

That's the condition of true magnanimety (valiant knight) replied he that
becoming affectionate, in nothing do they better show the noblenes wherewith
the Heavens have enriched them, then in honoring those in reputation inferior,
and in credit. And therefore do not I marvel, that more to ingreten your
fame, then for any my deserts, you have undertaken so great a toil: wherefore
if gratefulnes there may be any for so great and vnderserued favor, or if
the employment of my person in your service be part of any payment I will do
it, even with my very soul, for of much more do I judge your worthiness
worthy of. No less was hoped of you (sir Knight of the branch) answered the
Lady, and you live not deceived in what is desired you. This opportunity
looked Don Cellindo for, to leave his Sister alone, who gave him a Thousand
blessings for it, for taking occasion to stall their Horses, went away from
them, with such content of Floraliza to see her self so nere him she loved
that she could not speak. The gallant Tynacrian altogether took of his helm,
for ye Knights conversation greatly pleased him, but with such quicknes she put
of hers, that when he regazed on her the seemed to disgrace Venus in her pride,
a blow was it for the Tynacrian which he so sone forgot not, for first it cost
him much blood: he was amazed and I marvel not, for with more experience the
like had befallen Apollo that did to ye unwary youth. Well did the Lady note
it, and was not sorry for it, but the ioyfullest in the world, seeing that
occasion said, what have you felt (sir knight) for as I think by your exterior
signs you should not judge amiss of the sight of Ladies. Nay rather (replied
the wounded youth) so great is the joy it gives me, that the good was part to
interrupt my senses as the thing that exceeded their dull conceits. More does
that astonish me (sir Knight of ye Branch) replied the Lady that you should
make me believe so difficult a thing, yet I would credit it (lived I not
vndeceaued) that the grievous shows of gallants, many times proves but
conceits, by which they would obtain their Ladies favors, only due to those
that truly love. Such as the former (valyant Lady replied he) do not with
reason ponder, how great good it is to live alienated, and for that cause
fayning their loss, demand a costly remedy. And for them would I have no
other punishment then what a distrust does cause them, seeing what favors the
true lovers do enjoy. Nay then (sir Knight said the Lady) the experience that
you seem to have makes you condemn what others take for good. A little is for
that needful (said the son of Garrofilea) having at hand the reason that
shall confirm it. Nevertheless (sir Knight answered she) you cannot persuade
me, but the thought of your good imployme^t makes you have that opinion.

Never (said he) would fortune make me happy with so rich a favor most
sovereign Lady, as to let me taste of some good that by loving is obtained,
and so think I long for the hour to employ my self, that I may judge
thereof. I say (replied she) I would not have for my galla^t a knight ye only
procures his own pleasure. As that must proceed from the Ladies hands
(answered he) first should I measure my affection by her will, and according to
that proceed to her content, and not mine. Your purposes be not so ill (said
Floraliza) but that if your deeds were correspondent to the^, you might find
her that would love you. The Lady could speak no plainer nor he see euidenter
tokens to be beloved, but her beauty was so excellent that he thought all past
but as chat to drive away ye time. Nevertheless he would once try the fortune
of his desire, saying.

In these matters of love (most excellent Lady) I have often heard that Ladies
are always sharp and coye toward their gallants, and so this fear has
sometimes driven me from my bouldnes. It is reason (sir Knight said she) that
Ladies should be rather loved and wooed, then gallants by the^ sued too: for so
they should disparage their fame, (though not with desire) they show oftentimes
some disfavor: but for that cause must the lover be discreet, (which is what
in him is first required) that he may note the one, and take the other in good
part, attributing it to her fear, and not to her desire, and this
consideration sweetness what is most sower.

Thus spunne they the web of their amorous lives when the Damsel here cut
off their discourse, saying with some anger, You (Knight of the branch) seem
to have forgotten your promise, and seeing the night approaches there is no more
to do but straight with me you enter in your Bark: without any company it
behooues us to go. Understanding (sweet damsel said Polliphebo) that we
should so many days together Nauigate by Sea, thought you would let me
enjoy, some on land, but seeing it must be so, letts away though great is the
wrong you do me. Greater is that which is suffered by whom needs and sent
me for your person, having power to request others that with more willingness
would have done it, for though our stay here has been but little, not so small
is the stayne that thereby your fame receaueth, and my necessity increases,
with a sorrowful look the Prince turned to the Lady saying. You see (dear
Lady) my unhappy chance, expelling me from inioying your sweet conversation,
for which all my life I shall lead in grief, having not some assurance of hope
to resee you again, for till the^ ye anguish I shall suffer will be so great, as
to debar me from alpleasure, for I only have, and shall have in being yours.
Valiant Knight (replied she,) no less do I feel it seeing you thus to depart
from me and my brother (which is yonder Knight) and as for the rest you may
live assured, I tender you as my own soul. And if this picture may be any
cause of your co^te^t take it, for I will have your cou^terfeite for ye same.
The gladdest on the earth he took it, and falling on his knees a Thousand
times kissing her hands, he entreated her to take him for her Knight. The
Lady denied it not, for love had made her liberal, and none did it ever
touch, but made him become an Alexander, upon pain of not knowing how to love,
seeing that one of the chiefest condition that if requires is (Magnanimetie.)
And so seeing with how great the Lady had favored him, he again kissed her
hands and taking his leave of them knowing who they were they entered the
Bark, which swifter then a towering. Eagle, ingulffed it self in the swelling
Ocean. Straight did they loose his sight leaving Floraliza greatly
discontented, the which her brother nothing demanded the cause, and relating
it she ended with a sigh saying.

I greatly fear dear brother that this Knight will put me in mortal dangers,
for I judge his liberty to be great: and being Son and Brother to our deadly
foes, it will be difficult for him to consider if any pyne for him. Let not ye
grieve you (good Sister replied Don Cellindo) for if he loves he will easily
do it, how much the more in my judgment he departed captive enough. So
thought I (answered she) but here is my unhappiness, that traveling through
strange countries, he may see some one fayrer, and being touched with this
infirmity, he will be apt to decline and so must be feign to wander in his
search. Let the feasts first pass (said Don Cellindo) and so I hope will this
humor chang into content. Thus determined they stayed till the next mornings
Suns vprising, who knowing that Rosamond and the Dacian should meet, hastened
his shining presence to see what happened in the next, related.

CHAP. XII. How the Prince Don Eleno of Dacia met with his dear Rosamond and
what more befell them in their way toward the City.
WIth as many tears as have departed ye Dacian lover from his beloved cozen of
Tynacria, entering within the Forest, where overtaken with the night, he past
it with extreme anguish of his soul, seeing the ympossibilitie of his
content, having it only with the presence of his Lady. His food was soly the
fruit of those wild trees, and some of what Fabio had provided, but his
conversation was it which most pleased this woeful lover. For memorating the
troubles he had undergone, and the passions, and violent sorrows he had
resisted, animated him to tolerate this present accident. Most part of the
night spent they in this, intermingling it with diversity of matter, to make
him divert from his pensiveness till if was time to rest, which made either
part aside to sleep, yet small was the while that the Prince reposed. Never
yielded this infirmity any quiet till thoroughly possessed. Well may many speak
it by experience, though with a new estate they be removed from it, with a
Thousand sighs began the Dacian Lord to sing, for only in that he thought he
found pleasure. And I my self never found him otherwise while alone he
traveled with this passion.

If a remedy for love;
be daily to live instrife,
come death and end my life,
by my sweet joys remove.
My pain and hard mischance,
makes fearelesse any death,
so I might loose my breath:
vntreading my woes dance.
Whilst a remedy for love,
is daily to live in strife:
come death and end my life:
from this my joys remove.
The soul with pain oppressed,
can nere obtain renown,
come love and tread it down,
while it is in woes unrest.
I tell thee it is no love,
which daily lives in strife,
come death and end his life:
that sees his joys remove.
With some small comfort ended the Prince, caused with his song, and being day
broad, mounting upon the earths best horse, he began to leave that thicket,
delighting his ears with Philomelas complaints, making him a witness of Tereus
rape and cruelty against her committed no less ioyed he with the others
conceits, for though the Musitions were natural yet kept they a wonderful
harmony, of an unnatural consort. In this manner wondered he till about Nine a
clock of the Morning, at the end of the grove he saw a Knight come toward
him bravely mounted, he could not see his armor for over the^ he wore a
blewe coat, and over his shield a case of the same coulor. Presently ye
disguised knight knew Don Eleno, and having purposed what he meant to do,
unbuckled, (but took not of) his helm, with extreme joy to see him, for no
less had he suffered in his looking him, arriving said. Sir knight my Lady
has taken my oath, ye meeting in Grecia with any Knight that should deny her
beauty to be the greatest in the universe, I should defy him to the battle,
but this provided that you be in love, though your devise shows the
contrary, and therefore to mortal fight I challenge you, for with less then
with your honor or life, I cannot satisfy the duty that I owe unto my
Lady. Nay be it presently (said Eleno) insolent Knight, for if my fortune had
not been so adverse, few days since, I had a Lady in my company, that
Apollos light had darkened, for whose sake against the mighty God of war, I
would have maintained what thou have uttered, being so great an untroth: But
here is Don Eleno that being hers is suffitient to chastise thy folly. And
without further speech with such grace he turned his horse, that a Thousand
souls if so many she had, she would have given him. And turning hers in a
trice, she took of her helm, glorifyng her armor with fine tresses of Gould,
chains wherein Apollo would give his deity to be fettered in.

In that manner she stayde for him, having in like sort before vanquished him
so. Like to a furious thunderbolt came the fiery Tireo, till approaching the
rays of that new discovered Sun, with such brightness they penetrated his
Beuer, that it was a wonder they did not altogether blind him.

He stayde his Courser, and without a word stood still thinking a vision what
he saw, unable to believe so great a good could redounde from so strange and
vehement torments.

To him stepped the joyful Lady and putting of his helm, joining her mouth to
ye princes said. I never imagined soueraign Prince ye Don Eleno (...) arms
against his Rosamond, for though the Prince of Dacia be displeased with the
Princess of Callidonia, he ought not so soon show it, whereto he replied. I
am indebted to Rosamond, for her aid, else, no doubt but the Princess had
incurred some peril (dearest Lady of my soul) but I am so highly bound to
Rosamond, that it made me break with all on pain of defending her rare
beauty, although thereby the Callidonian Lady might rest grieved. But if the
Prince of Dacia have offended, here stands Don Eleno to render his amends.
(She answered) for the love that Rosamond bears him, ye Callidonian Princess
will not suffer him to take any wrong. And letting him go they entered to
pass the heat under the braunching trees in the thicket with the greatest joy
in the world, discoursing what to either had happened. Greatly she rested
content that her Lord had spoken to the Emperor and other Princes, but that
which most ioyed her was the news of the Tynacrian, whom she greatly desired
to know, through the fame that in Callidonia she heard of him. In conversation
past they till the hour of three, that they took ye next way to the City,
for they heard that three days after the Iustes would begin, ioying to see
what multitudes thither resorted, hoping for the day that they might approve
before that sinode of Majesty the valor of their arms. In this and in other
pleasing chat, (but most of love for they were his slaves) continued the
lovers, and the ioyfullest that ever Cupid knew, when the same way they had
taken, they saw toward them come two Knights of the best constitution, and in
as rich armor as either of them had seen, accompanied with only two Pages.
They quickly met, and as among such their chiefest ornament is courtesy, the
biggest of them said.

Brave Knights can you tell us any thing of the triumphs in Constantinople? We
(sir Knight replied the Dacian) have not been there, but have heard, they are
begun with great solemnity, and it was yesterday told me the Emperor had
commanded them to cease for eight days: and this is all we know whilst he
replied he attentively gazed on his companion that spoke to him, that he espied
his sword and looking well on it, he knew it having many years before been
his, and seeing it in a strangers hands, he straight remembered he had lost it
in Rome that night that he delivered the Princesses from the Giants, as is in
the former part recited, so expecting no answer again said. And you Knight who
gave you that sword, which cost me no little blood in winning it? and therefore
must you either give it me or prepare to defend, for I will not part without it
though it cost me my life: Scarce had he said so when the esquiers knew him,
for ye two Knights were the one Lisarte King of Tarsis, and the other his son
Florisarte Prince of Argentaria, and the pages those that before have been named
to be the Princess Roselea of Rome, and Arbolinda Infant of Scotland.

The Lover was so much astonished as the Ladies to see him, for the other said,
I do not deny but it may be yours Knight, but the party that me it gave would
with reason greatly be offended, if I should so easily let it go, not showing
first that the parting from it is by force and not for that it was so willingly
given me, which animates me rather to dye then loose it. Why then (replied the
Dacian) defend thy self for by no means must I leave it.

The Lover answered not, but turned his horse with such gallantnesse, that
Rosamond did greatly admire him, The like did the valiant Dacian and with the
lightness of his horse he incountred the Argentarian so mightily, that without
any manner of motion he made him loose his stirrops, getting hold by his horse
maine for fear of falling while Eleno past like the wind. And with like
celerity he returned upon his enemy with his sword in hand finding him in like
preparation. In Greece was never seen a more fiercer battle, nor with more
affection admired, for the blow that Florisarte receaues on his helm, does
A^bolinda take it on her soul, and that which Don Eleno on his sheeld does
Rosamond overthrown him, and with the fury of his Tyrio he ran to the
Tharsian, and as he past, with a flourish he gave him a blow that on his horse
neck he threw him. He returned upon him and because he could not strike him
with his sword he incountred him with his horse breasts so mightily, that both
him and his horse he tumbled to the ground, and leaping after him with more
ligeritie then a nimble Hare, ere he could prepare himself, he closed with
him, and as his strength was greater, he raised him aloft, but holding him so
strongly for fear of falling with him, he was feign to set him down, and
with a thrust made him staggering give back three paces, and ere he could open
his eyes, was again upon him. There had he wounded him, if his son had not
come, and sydewayes gave him so mighty a blow, that maugre all his strength,
he went four paces back. Follow him would the haughty Prince of Argentarie,
when the Lady set her self before him, with more wrath then a trodden Serpent,
and with both hands laid on the youths shield, which like to a piece of Wood
she cleft clean in two, and myraculously he escaped his hand, which remained
with such pain that he could not stir it. Both the one and the other, Father
and Son, incurred mighty danger, having such strong enemies. The gallant of
Argentaria, returned her his answer with such strength, that he made her see
more stars then in the heavens were.

But who bewailed ye blows in their souls with sighs and pearled tears,
were the two woeful Ladies, seeing their lovers in such danger. For Artimio
already bewailed Florisartes death, already calls the Heavens unjust,
already complains on Love, calling him a tyrant, that lived by honoring
Cupid a pitiful God. If this way there is such excess of grief, what shall
the beautiful Princess of Rome do, seeing her Don Eleno with Lisarte: For
though he had the better, her love disliked it, making her believe what easily
she credited. But her sorrow helped not, nor her loving with such intiernes
auailed to assuage her passions. They could not devise no means to make the
battle cease, for as they were flesht in it, they thought it impossible, that
any thing less then the death of some should part them, for at this time it
seemed that with more fiercenes it increased. The Tharsians dexterity was it
that defended him against ye angry Dacian, and yet was it not so much, but
being reached every time he set both hands and knees on the earth, he passed
not much better, for his adversary never gave him blow but bruised and
tormented his body, so that if he gave he received. In no less danger was
Rosamond, for only her armor was it that in this battle saved her life. Even
when the Sun would set widdowing the earth of his light, there arrived the
valiant Mauritanian Brufaldoro, that following the search of the Tynacrian, and
not finding, he came thither judging yt for fear he had hidden himself. And
seeing the cruelty of that fight, he could not but say. Oh Jupiter what
Knightly valor is this? The fierce Pagan was gentle and affable of condition,
and so pitied the fair Pages that weeping stood speaking thus.

Can you tell me pretty Pages the cause of this battle, which should not be
little considering the fierceness thereof. It is so small sir Knight (replied
Artimio) that it is great pity it should be continued to the end for so slight
a thing, ye cause being only that this Knight (pointing to Florisarte) wears
asword which he in the Russet challenges for his, saying he would not part
without it, unless it cost him his life. No longer stayed the mighty youth,
but drawing forth his sword put himself between them that were on foot
saying. Hear me (sir Knights) that seeing ye have no other reason, then what
these Squiers have told me, it were to be reaso^lesse to leave the world
Orphant for so small a cause of your valor, and for a sword? The undertaken
battles, (all discreet Knights) should be ground upon some suffitie^t
reason, for that is it which assures the victory, making him more famous that
prosecutes it with Justice, and not with passion to procure to maintain their
fame until death: well did the Dacian know him, judging him of great valor
seeing he sustained himself to his honor against his Cosen Pollephebo and so
replied. It is not so small Sir Knight as you think it for that knights sword
is mine, and I requested it with much courtesy, which was enough for him to
give it me he not only denied it but also threatened me till death if I more
demanded it, which you see is sufficient for a-thousand battles: and I knew
that in no cause you would have left it. That were (answered the beauteous
Arbolinda with many tears) had not you given it willingly unconstrained, and
with it leave to be given to any, having no action to require it, and if like a
Knight you gave it, you should no more have rememberd it. The Dacian thought he
should know that voice to be of the Princess of Scotland and so with some a
maze answered: how know you good page that I did give this sword. I was brougt
up in Rome (replied ye disguised Artimio sure enough to be unknown) where I
saw that in recompense of an inprisonme^t, by the gentlest Jailer in the world
you gave it. All this while the most beauteous Roselea did nothing but weep
currents of sault tears, unable to speak on word: yet thus replied Don Eleno.
So many requires a peace valiant Sir that he should not deserve to enjoy any
that would deny it, and so for this time I remit the battle so pleases these
Knights. They will (say the woeful distressed Roman) were it but to be more
pitiful then you, that forgetful of your own honor and what you are bound
to do, wander up and down, challanging battles of whom you know not, and
without any reason.

More a mazed then at first with these things remained the Datian for by their
voices he thought he knew them both, and thinking long till he spoke with them
said to Rosamond in her language, that it behooves him to leave that battle.

She that was borne to love him would not therein discontent him. And so
stepping apart left the battle, leaving the Princes so bruised that they could
scarce stand. The king of Mauritania seeing the matter ended, demanded for the
Knight of the Branch, of whom Don Eleno gave him the news he knew, not
knowing he was shipped to Sea after he departed from him. No longer stayed the
Moore, but in all have possible with his wife took the way that the Dacian
directed him, and no sooner was he departed but Rosamonds lover mounting on his
Tirio went to ye Pages saying, your speeches (gentle pages have so confounded
one, that I would give over a Thousand battles, so I might entreat you to tell
me whether you know me or if my name in Rome be known. Whereto Artimio
answered, you have no reason (prince of Dacia) to conceal your name, and yet
we wish we had not known you, were it but because we would not have had a
Prince so great an as you renowned, have erred against such excellent Ladies as
the Princesses Roselia and Arbolinda, for the former, is with reason wronged,
with ye discourtesie, and ingratitude (or rather cruelty) wherewith you
departed from Court, she having showed you so many favors which were
suffitient for one that had a clearer judgment then you to make him lead all
his life with content: but I fear you were only borne to mock poor Ladies:
Then consider the blot of your fame, and reputatio^s stain, and the greatness
that in Rome you are loved, and moreover the toil and labourous travail that
I and my companyon have suffered in our tedious voyage to seek you, all which
well pondered may be some cause, that leaving the present state of all things
you return where by minutes you are expected by them that fill the air with
sighs.

And that you may see it signed, receive this her better, whose tenor I know
not whose obdurate heart it would not mollefie but Don Elenos Prince of Dacia,
who took it, not to be moved to Love for therein he had not where with all
being possessed by Rosamond (notwithstanding he replied). In faith (good squiers)
it greatly greeues me for the sorrow the Princess does sustain and of your
trouble in seeking me: Although all might have been remedyed, considering with
what vyolence I was drawn away to leave Rome, so much against my will, seeing
therein I offended those Ladies, yet I could do no otherwise, and so have I not
herein any cause to satisfy them in any thing. In the rest, that my Lady the
Princess has done me favors, there is no satisfaction may come near, nor so
much as be thought a little parcel upon accoumpt, in part for so many, and
manifould benefits, which she of her mere bounty and magnanimity exte^ded on
me, enriching with them a poor forlorn Knight exiled from all content. And so
since at this time there is no leisure to write, and we all intending to visit
Constantinople, there will I give you my answer. And mean while if in any
thing I may pleasure you, command me for I will do it. Valiant Prince (replied
Artimio) what at this time will most content us is your answer, for thereon
dependes Roseleas life, and we will abide in Constantinople while the Tryumphes
last.

Hereupon they took their leaves not without many tears of both the Ladies,
and he finding the Knights with Rosamond leaving them, returned to their
intended Iourny, till very nere the city the night ouertooke them, and being
in the summer they resolved to pass it in that wood, among the trees and
Odoriferous flowers, upon which they took their way. Having supt, the Lady
demanded him, how he knew the pages? and so much she importuned him that he
told her, she nothing suspecting his faith being assured she was of him dearly
Loved, and therefore said.

So that Don Eleno you have been in prison, and in such a place, where no doubt
but you paid for so sweet a jail, he supposed she spoke in earnest (it is
usual in lovers) wherefore he replied. It is true dear lady ye there I received
favors binding me to spend my life for those Ladies (a general debt due to al
Dames) but as my happy stars had predestined me to be yours appointing
the particularity of my soul for your service, I could not stay there,
seeking only your Heaven where my glory is enclosed. And that you may no
longer doubt, what I once would have assured with my life's dearest blood: lets
read this letter which the Roman Ladies have sent me, so Rosamond read it
thus.

TO the forgetful, and excellent unmindful Prince of Dacia the forgotten
Roselia health. So much has the anger of thy careless regard (unkind and
more ungrateful Prince) prevailed with me, that the note wherewith the world
may mark me for having fixed mine eyes with some affection on thy person could
no way let me from doing this. Notwithstanding, I resolved to break with my
fame, so I might let thee know, the unkindness, and unkind dealing thou
shewdst me, which the meanest Lady in the world without revenge would not
have endured. I expect no remedy, nor thy coming, for he that so soon
departed and ioyeth therein, his return should seem to be impossible,
although the law of Knighthood binds thee to be a prisoner. My grief, not
the continnance of my tears gives leave to be no longer being confounded with
a Thousand contrarieties, among which (thou being the cause) I rest, wishing
thou may yet acknowledge it.


The beauteous Rosamo^d could not otherwise do, but show some feeling with the
amorous letter: but as the others disco^tent might not be remedied but to her
cost, that quickly was ouerblowen, remaining nothing penitent for it. None
enjoying a good would ever loose it, to please another, and so she said.

In faith no reason has this Lady to complain of Don Eleno, since he is not
bound to love, but her that first challenged him. It Is so (most beauteous
Princess replied he) for many days after, I had enough to weep, remembering I
looked on her with any affection, seeing the happiness the Heavens had in store
kept for me. In like discourse did these lovers drive away the night, where
we must leave them preparing for the Iusts to record the matter in ye next
Chapter remembered.

CHAP. XIII. The adventure that the warlike Rosabell and his friend Oristoldo
Prince of Antioche found in the woods of Grecia, and how they disinchanted
the gallant Tartarian Zoylo.
HOw greatly the Magician Selagio procured a dyre revenge upon the Princes of
Greece (the course of this large History amply me^tioneth) for the desolation
they had made of his whole progeny beginning with the mighty Mandroco, whom
Rosicler (called the Knight of Cupid) slew in the Empire of Greece, as was
expreste in the second of the first part, which desire he still prosecuting,
he busied himself daily in no other thing the^ the instant procurement, of
the vilde execution of his damned intent, and being so great a Nygromant, he
found by his art there should be in Greece a most cruel war, wherewith it
should be at the point of an utter overthrow. Also he found that the Souldan
of Nyquea, should be an ayder to the Greeks, the which to prevent he stole
away Rosabell so soon as he was borne, from Oliuias arms, and carrying him
away he set him in Nyquea in the Souldans pallaice to be brought up with two
little children of his, a Son and a Daughter, foreseing that loving, and
stealing her thence, might be the cause to move him with all his power to
procure his revenge for so gread a wrong. This plot was not in vain, as has
and shall be showed, for by this means he disappointed Greece of this help. So
not pawsing here he made his coniurations and exorcismes, wherewith he took
those five Princes, which he educated in his Castle (as the president part
records) having long before prohibited that the valiant Tartare might not
enjoy his beloved Tigliaffa, because he knew that by that Conjunction (at the
time that Lirgandeo succored him) should be engendered ye might Knight in the
world, and he that should most be-friend the Grecians. A great hinderance did
he Judge this for his pretense, and therefore ordered that, (having drunk the
amorous water which Lirgandeo in the Forest gave him as in the first book of
the second part is expressed) he should meet with the mighty Brufaldoro,
making with him that cruel battle, wherein he wished not his death, but only
that he should not join with his Lady that came to seek him, finding him in
manner already recited, till she supposing he had been dead, he built him that
admirable monument; where he set the Lady, understanding she should many years
there remain. And though Lirgandeo hadd placed there for the Dame, that keeper
which the Emperor Alphebo slew traveling that way in company of the valiant
King of Cerdenna, within there was others so strong that the inchanter Selagio
rested sure that none would have the power to disinchant him, having been
therein aided by the great Lupercio his tutor. Twice a day came the Lady forth
of her lodging to lament over her Lords dead body. Which bitter and continual
laments penetrating the Ten-fold Heavens ascended to the high tribunal of the
omnipotent and merciful creator, who with pity admitted them, sending
Rosabell the haughty Prince of great Britain that way in company of his
dear friend Oristoldo Prince of Antioch were going toward the City of
Constantinople, because he heard the Tpyumphes were the next day to begin. They
traveled with some comfort, knowing he should again recover Lyriana, hoping
also to see his dear Fathers which they heard in Greece. Their way they
continued through that Forest till (to ouerpasse the Suns heat) they went
along the bancks of a Christaline clear brook, which brought them to a
stupendous and Magesticke building: they would not go thither (though they
were nighe them) but while Alerio prepared their collacion they walked among
the trees gazing on the green freshnes of that grove, vnti^l their fortune
leaded them unto the pines whereon the Knight of the Sun and Rosicler had
graven their Epitaphes upon the arms of the mighty Bramarante. Greatly ioyed
the two Princes to see with what magnanimity the Greeks had proceeded with
that stout Moore whose fame had filled the world with deeds. They also desired
to know what was within the proud building, they left it till after their
repast, and so returned unto Alirio, with whom they eat of the little he had,
having done they went a foot with all their weapons unto the stately edifice
commanding Alirio softly to follow them with their Horses. Great delight did
they receive to see the beauty thereof, for as the sun shined vyon the
stones wherewith it was builded, they so glittered that it rebounded back the
eyes of the behoulders, the form of it was like to a Pyramides ending with a
point on the top, engraven with so many works that the Princes said, they
never had seen a more fayrer thing.

They approached with desire to know what might be within a Palace so
pontifical: but for all they compassed it, they could find no entrance
thereto, more then through a lane of Briars and Thorns they discryed a most
stately gate. That (as indeed it was) the Princes supposed to be the entry.
They found it shutt, and on them certain Letters so fresh, that they seemed
but then made, the which the courageous Greek to this effect did read.

The Inscription on the Gate.

This is the Purgatory of the Tartarian Zoylo whose entrance to none is
permitted, but to the truest lover, that his loialty may prevail: but with
this courage, for it, and being amorous, must deliver from torment the
remorcelesse Tartare, though in his end he seemed not as he was wont.

No longer did Lirianas gallant lover stay, but taking his leave of his dear
friend he knocked at the gate, but it nothing auailed, he saw a horn hang on
it with this inscription: Sound me and thou shall enter. He did it with such an
ecchoe, that the sound was heard a far off. No less horror made the gates in
opening, none issued forth: but within the Prince saw four Arches in a row,
in either of them his keeper: For in the first there was a most ugly deformed
Giant, with a mighty heavy mace on his shoulder, who at each side brought two
most fierce beasts shaped like Gryffens. A sudaine fear this unequal fight
caused the prince: but rememdring whose son he was, his courage increased,
thinking that if he overcame the keepers of that Castle, he might justly
discover himself unto his Father and friends, and in this desire he moved
against them recomme^ding his protection unto the God of the Greeks. Scarce
had he done it when the Giant with furious paces came toward him letting
loose the beasts that bellowing flung at the valyant youth, he let them come,
yet they approached (according to their swiftnes more then he would. The one
snatched away his shield breaking the handles, which not a little auailed the
youth. The other took hold of his left side with teeth and nails, he could
not penetrate it, because for more then yt his armor had been made at Venus
suite, but they so much crushed them, that he could not stir.

Already arrived the Giant, he was affrayde of death, for he joined with him
with his mace aloft, and discharging his blow, the Prince had no other remedy
to escape it, but to close under under the Griffen, that held him, he executed
his blow, but upon a pillar of stones, the which it all broke. The other beast
was not idle for not able to break the shield, left it leaping upon the
Knight, houlding bim by the other side. Never stood a Heart more stiff held
by the force of hounds, then they made this new Mars stand. For these hungry
Griffyns (not suffering him to be Master of himself) tumbled him as they
list, which made him so impatient that he raued like a mad man seeing the
danger he was in: till the sweet remembrance of Liriana, adding courage to
his strength, made him escape from them, and stepping aside he expected them
with his sword twixt both his hands. They returned so hu^gerly unto their pray
but with a mighty blow he parted the one in two, dead, falling to ye ground:
yet was it impossible for him to defend himself from ye furirious gya^t, who
seeing his beast dead, let fly at his head, aduenturously did the Britanicke
youth a little stepped aside, so that it fully did not hit him, only it fell
upon the shoulder leaving all that part without armor, making him set that
knee on the ground. Again would the other fearful beast close with him, and
was so nere that he could not rise, nor do any more then set the point of his
sword against him, upon which the Gryffen ran up to the midst, and with ye
pangs of death would help himself with his wings. So somewhat parting from
Oliuias offspring, descending struck him with his wings and bill that he
almost wearied him, laboring also to defend himself from the cruel giant,
that striued to give him one blow at his pleasure, with which he made account
to end the battle with the Princes life, which at this time was admirable to
see with what dexterity he defended himself against the giant, and with what
audacitie he expected ye ravenous beast, al besmeared with blood ye from his own
belly issued no more descending with his accustomed impetousity, for his want
of blood had greatly weakened him, plainly did the amorous warrior perceive it,
so warding the blow from the Giant, on the one side firmly set on his feet
expected the coming of the beast, which with horrible bellowing descended. It
approached, and seeing he could not shun his blow with the utmost of his power
he thrust at him so mightily under the wing that it pared it all away, falling
to the earth where it scant lighted when he seconded another, that almost in
two pieces divided, he fell upon the paued floor. At what time the Giant came,
foming through his Beuer like a chafed boar, and raising his horrible mace
would execute his blow, with his lightness ye lover shunned it, arriving with
a happy stroke, for it cut his mace and his left hand, whose pain made the
giant roar like a Bull, whereat Oristoldo that was without also feared, he
gave back, yet not before the Prince hadd entered with a mortal thrust
pitifully wounding him on the breast.

By this had he drawn a strong axe wherewith he marched against the Greek
Hercules, giving so many, and so mighty blows that he needed all his skill
to free himself from them, and at length one reached him with such puissance
that falling on his rich helm, it made him set hands and knees on the ground,
he followed with another which made him think he was in Heaven, so near him
he saw the starrie Firmament, he lost much blood through his Beuer which was
the cause altogether to inrage him. And ere he gave him another, he rose
laying on his leg as he past so brave a blow that it cut it clean off.

This was the blow that gave him the victory, for following him, as he wanted
his leg, he stumbled with his head at the Princes feet, who received him with a
blow with both hands on his helm, whose two fingers thicknes was cut,
wounding him on the head that the blood issued in great abundance, though with
trouble, yet he raised himself standing upon one foot, which little auailed
him, for want of the excess of blod he had lost by his 4 wounds, which had
brought him to ye pass that he could no longer stand on foot. This noted the
Britannicke Lord, and warding his last blow, he closed with him giving another
which he felt no less then the others. No other remedy had the diuilish
Giant but to cast his arms about him, crushing him so strongly that he often
lost his breath. To end this war, Rosabell drew forth Hectors dagger, and
twice stabbing it within his infernal body, at the last he drew it forth
with the Giants life and soul, remaining so weary that he could not stir,
but seeing what he wanted to do, he stayed for Oristoldo, to buckle on his
Gauntlet, which in the beginning he had lost, who did it with exceeding joy to
see what he had done. He straight took his leave of him, and taking his
sheeld marched toward the second Arch, where was a big proportioned Knight,
armed all in azuce armor, with bars of green ammell, who came to Rosabell,
and saying never a word, drew forth a most rich sword, the like did the Greek
and at once discharged the weight of eythers arms, that both field and Castle
did resound. The Knight of the Arche took him upon his Helm, and made no
impression there, through the finesse thereof, yet it made him set hands and
knees upon the ground. He scapte not better, for the sword being incomparable,
reaching him on a side, it pared away half the helm, and with but a little
more strength taking him full it hadd done the like of his head, yet the
furious blow past forwards throwing down a piece of his shield. Like an aspen
leaf the sight of his enemies blows made him tremble, seeing that every time
he reached him both armor and flesh he cut, his lightness and not his
enchantments here auayled him, for his adversaries sword was of more
antiquity, and so he was feign with nimblenes to defend himself, entering and
sallying to Rosabels cost. So sidelong he gave such a blow that he made him
give back so much that he almost fell, he was so quick that with a
counter-buffe he helped him to it and iustling him with his sholders, he almost
ouerthrewe him if he had not fallen on his hands. The occasion would not the
enchanted youth omit, for with both hands he gave him such a blow upon his
shoulders, that the pain made him roar a loud: but as he ended so great was
the enraged kindled wrath which in the Greeks breast burnt, that the hunted
Lion by the furious ounce was inferior to it, and meeting with his enemy he
gave him a mighty wound on his breast, which very near did cut the bone.
This contented not the angry youth, for he gave him another upon his helm,
leaving him their pitiously wounded.

The gallant lover considering how much he had to do hastened the end of the
battle, and therefore, they assaulted with their swords cross, and with a
speedy trauesse the Greek voyded his adversaries stroke, and like an Eagle
on the left-side he entered with a down right blow that his thigh was cut
away. It caused the enchanted Knight intolerable grief, but it was no time
for pity, with a point he pierst his arm, and followed it with such desire
that he of the Castle procured to cut away his cushes. It was no ill devise
for giving him a mighty blow on the legs, he so tormented them that had he
at that instant closed, he had obtained the victory, but he staid himself
with another that at his waste he let fly, which wounded him though but
little. Till then was never seen a more crueller battle, for the Greek is
almost tired, and with many blows that bruised his flesh, and thought his
enemy far more nimbler the^ at first, though besmeared with his own blood,
that from his wounds issued. It was an admirable thing to see the horror that
their swords made, which exceeded the gyanticke noise in Vulcans worke-house,
when those arms were forged which the Greek woare, who putting his trust in
them, letting fall his shield with both hands he went to his enemy (that
being already resolved to die, killing or be killed) in like manner came against
him, and together they discharged such blows, that the Greek Prince fell
down, voyding blood from his eyes, nostrels, and mouth, he recovered himself a
while after, and loking for his enemy he found him on the earth for though
the blow was not on ye head, lighting on his shoulder it cut him down unto ye
bone, casting him dead upon the ground. He rejoiced to have obtained the
victory, though he remained so bruised, that he was feign to sit down, and
take of his helm to wipe away the blood of from his face. Oristoldo and
Allirio then came, for as he won the arches they past forwards which they
could not do till the end of every battle. They demanded how he felt
himself? weary (replied he) though glad, to have ended so dangerous a battle
as with the Knight in the azure armor, he would no longer abide but taking his
weapons went to the third arche, where walked a Knight nothing inferior to the
former, armed all in yellow armor barred with azure. This thus said. Knight I
esteem and honor thee as thy merits do deserve, for the haughty deeds thou
have done, which none else in the universe could atchiue, I counsel thee to
return back, making no battle with me, for of it thou shall get nothing but
a cruel death. I am beholding to thee (answered the Greek) for thy courteous
admonition, but in no case will I leave this battle, for it will be my
everlasting infamy, why then (said the keeper) take this lance and horse for
so thou must make thy battle. This pleases me best (replied the Prince) and so
took the lance. Already was his enemy prepared, and very near to do what
the Greek imagined not, for he had scarce got into the saddle, when the other
spurring his horse, (which had bin taught to that) so bravely he incountred the
Prince, that he overthrew him with a great fall, the not having gotten his
stirrops saved the Greek from being conquered, and so though bruised he rose with
the lance in his hands which he had not lost. But he was not well set on foot
when behind him came another Knight, with an Iron mace and backwards gave him
such a blow upon his helm, that it filled it within with blood, casting him
forwards again upon the ground.

The Prince that set himself so assaulted (fearful of death) set himself on
foot avoiding a blow of him with the mace, but he could not escape from hlm on
horseback, with Jove's strength raising himself on his stirrops flung his
lance at the Prince which lighted on his shield, and resounding like a bell it
bounded back as if it had struck upon a flint, making the Greek stagger two
steps backwards. A hungry Tygre of Hyrcania ravening for his pray, was not more
fierce then Rosabell now became, for brandishing his cruel lance, he darted
it to the knight lighting in the middle of his shield. It fetched him from his
saddle clean over his horse back tumbling him to the earth. More sooner upon
her game is not a swift wingd Fawlcon then now was ye Prince, for ere the
Knight could rise to make himself ready, or he with ye mace come, he gave him
on the helm so cruel a blow that all the brym he cut with a piece of his
front. The blood blinded him, and so neither did he see, nor could help his
companion that with his mace came after ye Greek, and before he parted from the
wounded one, he thrust at him with a point which shrewdly wounded him, the
other came so much side-long upon him that he could not but cast his arms upon
him, he gained little, for the Britanicke lover being of geater forces then he,
breathless did cast him to the ground. He striued so long with him till he
drew his dagger, with which he ended his life, striking it to his heart. It
had like to had cost him no less then his life, for the other, though sore
wounded was come upon him, and with his dagger would backwardes have stabde it
in his breast, wearing Hectors armor none but, Venus wounds could make any
impression, nevertheless he felt excessive pain every time he struck him he
was ashamed of himself, that one Knight should alone so long, so handle him,
and well firming himself, in spite of him he rose up, and finding him within
his reach, with one kind of death he equald them. This battle had most tired
him, for the fall, and blow had sorely bruised all his body, with joy he
received his dear friend Oristoldo, that with admiration of his deeds did wipe
away the blood. Greatly should that be esteemed (said Rosabell) that with such
keepers is defended. That is not so much most valiant Prince (replied
Oristoldo) as the fear wherewith they were set, suspecting that you would
come and fetch it forth: he would not answer him but with double corrage he
set toward the last arch, which was not far from him. To meet him there
came a well proportioned Knight in hose and doublet saying. Sir Knight within
this habitation are those arms of Hector so feared that I am commanded in this
manner to end this battle: and if you be pleased there with you have no more to
do then to put of your armor. It is a thing unaccustomed among Knights
(replied the Prince) nevertheless I will do it. The^ he straight put of al his
armor, resting with only his sword and dagger. Those too must you lay aside
(said he of the Castle) for with these weapons that I shall give you and with
no other must our battle be.

So many conditions do you propound, (answered the Prince (that I dare almost
say it proceeds from cowardice. Now shall you see that (said the keeper) and
so gave him two rapiers, keeping two for him self.

A gallant spectacle was this for he of the Castle was all in yellow and
black, which so well became him that the Prince much commended him, and he him
self was all in redd: his age acknowledge not a more accomplished youth. It is
doubtful if Venus would dote again in Love, she would with more affection
choose the Prince, then when she did elect the happelesse Adonis. Having taken
the rapiers, they marched either against the other, with such warynesse as the
necessity of so dangerous a fight required, for there the strength of the
Knights prevail not. They joined (those I mean that were borne for the fight)
with more grace then Mars did when on the behalf of Juno he challenged her
Father Saturn to a single combat, in presence of all the Gods and goddesses,
with somewhat more good hap entered the Greek with his left rapier for he aimed
it inwardes, and striking down his enemies right one he thrust a handful of
it under his arm pit, and as he drew forth ye blody rapier with it he beat
down the adverse point, and with the other he wounded him a little above the
knee: from both there issued much blood, and fearing to bleed away,
respecting no dexterity he entered within the Prince, who doubted some
mischance seeing him come so carelessly he commended himself to the God of his
Father, promising to renownce ye vanetie af his Gods, and so stayed for the
keeper of the Castle, that without advise with one arm, thrust at him twice
outward: houlding his other point stiff, with both he wounded him, though but
little. He stood with such desire to execute the other, that the Prince with
his left arm thrust at him so fiercely yt he cut all the bone, that the other
letting fall his rapie: from his hand, would have stooped for it: but it had
cost him his life, for the Prince thrust at him on the head, yt he mortally
wounded him, with the pain he felt he forgot to take up his rapier, and so
with the one he defended himself, fearing another wound. The Heroyck Greek
would not vanquish him with any advantage, for seeing him sore wounded and but
with one rapier, he cast away one of his, far off. And act was this to have
made his enemy yield, had he not been forced either to kill or die, and so not
respecting the courtesy he entered so quickly, that ere he could defend
himself, with a furious thrust he pierced his left arm. This wound greatly
grieved Trebarios Nephewe, and so with the pain he would enter upon his
enemy, who being skillful set his rapyer against him, that if he had not spied
it, he had run himself upon it, notwithstanding it wounded him sorely upon
the breast. With his left hand he beat away his adversaries rapier, and with
the utmost of his strength he thrust at him on the side of his head and bearing
his rapier downwards, half of his head he threw at his feet, ending one of
the difficultest adventures that then the world contained. He sat him down
staying the coming of his friend Oristoldo, who with his Squire stanched the
blood ^f his wounds, binding his arm which caused him extreme pain, he was
again armed, and so great was his desire to end that adventure, that without
any words they entered into the great yard whose admirable workmanship greatly
amazed them, for the pillars about it seemed of rich precious stones, all
inameld with gould and blew, which ioyed every sight. One the floor of the
same yard beneath were engraven many Histories, with all ye famous Knights most
lively figured. They saw the battle which the Tartarian Zoylo had made with the
hawty Mauritanian Brufaldoro, and his doleful departure from his dear
Tigliaffa, who supposing he was dead, was by Lupersios order with drawn within
that palace. Greatly did the true Lover pity her, seeing how intyrely she
had loved the Tartare, and how ill her faith had been repaid. In the middle of
the yard they saw a great alter like to a Piramides made for the death of some
great Potentate: and round about the galleryes of the same were burning many
tapers, and two servants clad down to the heel in mourning that did nothing
but look to them, and the lamps of silver and finest gould. As they were about
to go to them and inquire where the Prince was, they heard within one of the
galleryes a door open from whence came forth two and two to the number of 12
Ladies all in black velvet with their faces masked, Through away hung all of
the same livery they past unto the Tomb, where they began a most lamentable
music whose time the Ladies would break with many sudden sighs whose echo
was recorded with in ye sepulcher with some doleful sounds of funeral
instruments, which in the Princes caused some woeful fear when they had done:
a dame that seemed Lady of the others, (whereby the Princess judged her to be
the Princess Tigliaffa) somewhat high that they might hear thus said. How
long dear Lord will my cruel fortune suffer her to live, that with thy want,
accoumpts it but a mortal torment? what life may I live, that only lived by
seeing thee? ay me poor Tartare, how have they offended heavens propagated my
happlesse life for my greater pain, that while thou art wanting (the glass
wherein I did behold my self) I might bewail the good that from me they
bereft? have done thou cruel death by one to rid me of so many, as I suffer,
seeing (dear Lord) that my lucklesse fates have appointed me a new kind of
torment, that when all ye course of thy life being toward me without love
(unto the cost of my content) thou should show such greatness of unexpected
affection in that short momentarie space, yt I enjoyed thee twixt mine arms.
Oh if I knew my life would do thee good now thou art gone, whom should I make
ye executioner, but her that more loved then she did her self. As she was
performing certain ceremonies she did espy the Princes, that with their Beuers
up gazed on her beauty, which they reputed to be the greatest they had seen,
when she knew they were none of her new keepers, she ended her lamentations,
in great have entering from whence she came, with mighty noise shutting the gates
after her. No longer stayed ye lover, but like an Eagle mounted the stairs,
and coming to ye doors he found them so fast as he thought it impossible to
open them, he compassed all the cloister to see if he could find any other
entrance but he saw it all built of impenetrable marble, he returned to break
them open with his sword but found them to be made as he thought all of brass,
on the one side he read these letters.

He that by the strength of his arm and weapons helper has arrived,
vanquishing the keepers of my Castle: let him leave his armor, for only to be
and to have been a faithful lover, must end this adventure. Straight did the
courageous youth put them all off, setting his sword upon them, and so went to
the gates, at such time as Oristoldo came. As Soon as he arrived they opened,
seeing no body saving that within he heard some noise which the Ladies made,
without any fear he entered within the hall, which he hardly had done, when
two strong Knights set upon him, they took him so suddenly that they raised
him from the ground, and had very nere overthrown him.

But the youth whose forces admitted no compare, recovered himself winning his
lost advantage, and settled himself far better for he got an entrance for his
arms. All helps did he need, for ye two were there set only to wrestle,
which at this time was admirable, for they had somewhat wearied the Greek.
They came tumbling at length to the gates, which occasion unwilling to let
pass, with great strength he drove the one from him, and in spite of his
valor threw him out of the enchanted hall, he had scarce done it, when the
Heavens were darkened with black fogges and mistie clouds, with horrible
thu^dering and lightning, which fearful tempest continued for a little space,
with whose end all the Castle vanished, leaving no memory thereof, more then
the dead beasts which in the beginning the Princes had slain, he found
himself unarmed with his friend and page in the open field, he quickly armed
him, for they heard new cries, which was, that ye distressed Lady wept over her
lover, not to see him dead, but because he was wounded. Straight she remembered
how she and he had been enchanted being liberated by a Knight that had slain
the keepers which the wise man had toulde her did guard the Castle.

Then arrived the Prince, presenly she knew to whom she was so much bound,
and rising leaving the wounded Tartare with her damsells, she went to the
Prince that with his Beuer up was going toward her and embracing him said.
Most valiant Knight the best that ever guerded sword, I cannot suffitiently
thank nor enough memorize, your deserved praises for the good work you have
done me and the Tartare my Lord, both which I leave, and only say that in doing
what you did, you did perform the duty which your self did owe unto your
self, by succouring the most distressedst Lady on the earth: Nevertheless if
in part of satisfaction for so great a debt, my life may be any employed in
your content the same shall be my chiefest felicity. Sovereign Princess
(replied the Prince) so greatly were you wronged by being here detained that
what I did, ought not to be esteemed any thing: for your constancy deserved
far more. I want ability (most excellent Knight answered she) to express my
thankfulness, more then to remain perpetually at your command: only now I
must entreat you that since you have restored unto my hands the thing that I
most hoped for in this world, that you would help me to cure his wounds, for
though we have been enchanted, yet they seem now, as fresh as when they were
made by that most barbarous Knight. In have they went al unto him, and taking
of his armor, with the air that breathed in his face he returned from the
trance he fell in between his Ladies arms, when she thought it was his lastly
gasp, he opened his eyes, and seeing himself in her hands he once did hate,
and now excessiuely did love, with great faintness said.

May it be (dear Lady) that the power of a constant love has so rooted it
self within your breast, that not respecting my savageness, my more then
barbarous sauadgnesse committed against your loyalty, you should still love
me, you should now pity me, you should feel my deep wounds in your soul,
having made them so great in yours with my life? Ingratitude has been mine
worthy of your disgrace, deserving to have left comfortless the most
rebellious body that ere the earth did foster, leave we this (answered the
amorous Lady) my most dearest Lord, for seeing I was borne only to love, by
doing so I discharged my duty, together with what my loue-afflicted soul
instructed me to. It never grieved me to be vnloued, but it only tormented
me (as in reason it should) that the first time so famous a Prince should
shrink from his word, it should be from me. This and nothing but this, has
made me wander through the world, as it best can witness, so greatly to my
fames cost, and honors blemish: but since it has pleased the heavens to
pity my pains, mollifying your flint obdurate heart, in recompense to see my
self beloved of my dear Zoylo, I account my discontent my greatest content,
if I any did pass: And now lets give order for your wounds cure, for yet you
are more bound then you are aware of, depart they would, unto the next village,
when through the Forest they spyed a damsel coming toward them, more
swifter then the raging wind, and arriving said. Away brave sirs, for the
Tartars life has been reserved by the Author thereof only for my coming. And
so going to him, she drew forth a glass with a most Odoriferous licour, whose
fragrant smell comforted all the circumstants the which she set unto his mouth.
Oh divine thing, for scarce she had set it, and he tasted what it contained,
when he remained whole of his wounds, though weak through the much blod he
had lost, his due thanks would he render for that great good deed, but she
was vanished vn-seene of any. To this famous Knight (said Tigliaffa) must you
give them for it is he that his mighty arm has freede both you and me, from
whence the world else had not been able to do, delivering us from the cruel
torment we both iniustly suffered, for these wounds, for all they seemed so
freshly to bleed, you received them above 6. years ago, in presence of the
unhappy Tigliaffa, that seeing it received them no less. Thereupon did the
beloved Prince remember that about the arms of of Bramarante a Knight had
given him them. He turned to the gallant Rosabell that exceedinly ioyed to see
him well, and casting his arms about his neck, seeing him so young said. Oh
most mighty Knight, is it possible that from your hands has proceeded such a
benefit? there is no recompense can equal my received favor, I will not bind
my self for it, (though eternally I will acknowledge my debt) because I fear
that being of such weight my short life will not suffer me in part to show my
gratitude: but oh God what greater comfort may I now enjoy then to behold
between my arms him that so much resembles Rosicler the Prince of Grecia my
greatest friend: and if in any thing he touches you (sir Knight) I entreat you
by the thing you must love and hope to enjoy in this world you would not deny
it me: for if you are Son unto my Lady the Princess Oliuia, much did the
king Sacridoro in her rape, yet cost it me no less wounds, and had I lost my
life it had been pleasing, so he obtained her his desired pryze to his valor
only due. Excellent Prince (replied Rosabell) your valor was suffitient
without your merits on the Greek Princes behalf deserved, to bind all the
world to your service. In the rest touching himself, I know no more then
that to this Prince of Antioch, son unto that King you named, and to me
there has happened so many things, (since my Fortune caused us to meet, in
me to knitte a league of inviolable friendship) besides what before befell me,
even before that Greek Lord, that we dare presume to say, I am son to those
so much behoulding unto you, and with like deceipte was prince Rosicler by a
strange adventure parted from me in Lacedemon: More then this I assure you I
know not.

This is enough most excellent Princes (answered the Tartare) and for me, the
greatest comfort that now Fortune could give me to set me with the Son of
those in whose amity I esteem my greatest felicity. Anewe they embraced each
other: for greater friends the earth never knew. Exceeding glad was the
gallant Lady to see her self in company of such hawghtie knights, but more
to be beloved of him that once lived by hating her.

So well did the two friends handle this matter, that they altogether assured
the Jealous Lady of her hopes procuring the Tartare to espowse her seeing her
faith did meryt more then that. The gracious Zoylo did not refuse it, but
rather expressed it was the greatest good he might receive.

There ye branches towering trees would bend to make them arbours to spend the
nights in pleasure till they arrived at Constantinople.

Many times would the two lovers willingly loose themselves among the thickets,
where they might enjoy what ye cursed Selagio pretended with his arts to
avoid: and it was no small benefit unto them for the Lady remained with child
of a Son that in arms was called Mars, and a daughter, that in beauty
excelled all those of her age: for whose love one of the Greek Princes doted
till the death, as the fourth part records: where a while we must leave them
returning to Constantinople, for already were the Triumphs begun, with far
greater solemnity.

CHAP. XIIII. How the Tryumphes were again begun, and what admirable battles
happened in them.
WIth such very great affection has ye wise Lirgandeo (fair Ladies) showed
him in the description of the Tartarian Zoylos affairs enlarging himself out
of measure in them, that it has made me more labor in the abreuiation of this
enchantment then if my self had newely built it, indeed fearing, that though
the matter of it self be pleasing, yet the tediousnes of a harshe style might
prove displeasing. The discreet brevity with it brings the content, so it
arrive not to a point of extremity, for then with the new name turns it to
discontent by loosing that good, which by a safe mediocritie it had obtained.
Procuring this in all things I dare almost say, that (your beauties) have taken
some delight in reading it, which by the other way had not been so: for though
the Iusts that past in Constantines great City deserved a large admiration,
yet will I strive to fly a delightlesse prolixitie procurer (in some respect)
of heavy Melancholy, rather sinning by being short, then offending with a
little superfluous length. So at length the term appointed for them being come
(deuynest purities of Natures treasury) scarce had the gallant sheapheard of
the Heavens, displayde his goulden Tresses over the earth in company of his
chaste Sister, when the courageous Prince of Niquea, with his bright
Sunne-shining armor presented himself in the place, to no small joy of ye
Princesses seeing how well the stranger maintained their beauties. Need he had
to inure his hands in toil, for he had no sooner leapt into the listes, when
against him did present himself a well proportioned Knight, clad all in green
armor, with so many precious stones that it dazzled the beeholders sight: in
the place a more brauer thing there was not seen. In his shield was pictured
the face of a beauteous Lady, closing her eyes to a Prince that gave her his
soul with these words.

What auailes it to be strange,
My true-loue to disdain:
When neither faith nor it, does range:
But will for aye remain.
There was none but fixed his eyes on his gallantnes, having it as he that was
no less then the valiant Don Clarisel Prince of Assiria, who departing from
Nyquea had taken his way toward Grecia, where it had been better he had not
arrived, for by the swiftnes of their horses, at length meeting, they gave one
another such fierce incounters, that the Greek Ladies greatly feared the
miscarying of their knight, who was incountred so strongly, that he lost both
bridle and stirrops, and also was it marvel he did not forgo his saddle too,
if warily he had not got hold of his horse neck. But with it, he did a little
prolong his honor, making his horse pass forwards. At this time the Assarian
got the worst, for being hit on his enchanted shield, he was so hard thrust,
that he was thrown out of his saddle, it was his good fortune to fall on his
feet, and so with incredible speed recovering his lost saddle, he went out of
the place leaving it glad to see the valor of the Ladies knight. A rumor
arose in the place with the coming of another, for with the bravery that he
crossed it, no marvel if Mars had feared: he was apparelled all in clear
bright steel, more blacker than the finest Iet, of the same color was his
Courser, saving that he had some roane spots, which greatly beautified him: the
plumes of his head, on his own Crest were all yellow, agreeing best to his
grieved thoughts. In the middle of his shield (which was like his arms) was
portrayed a Heart, inco^pased about with many flames of fire that seemed to
burn it: beneath was this Motto.

Whilst in Loves burning fire.
My heart finds no relief:
Why should it prove a liar?
Not showing forth his grief.
A brauer Knight was not seen in Greece, nor that better managed his horse, he
entered the Lists, and being exceeding courteous, he first did his duty to the
Ladies, a thing that in every one is highly to be commended. What thinks your
Majesty (said the Prince Meridian to the Emperor Trebatio) of the adventures
gallantnes, I doubt the Ladies Knight will incur some disgrace, for such
disposition few obtain. Of the like opinion was the Emperor and the most of
the Court, it was not much, for more deserved ye knight who with admiring
puissance spurred against Lindoriano, that doubting some mischance had taken
fresh horse: but it prevailed not, for he in the Black encountering him in the
midst of his shield, did clearly pierce it, and staying in his breast plate,
he thrust him so mightily that clean over his horseback he fetched him to
the ground with the saddle between his legs, for yet in that would Fortune
seem to favor him, that some partial fauorits he had might attribute his fall
to his horses fourniture, and not for want of strength which was so well known
to the cost of so many. His stirrops lost the distressed aduenturer, but he
recovered them so soon that few noted it not, he returned with such bravery
that most were affected to him, except the Ladies, that extremely sorrowed for
their Knights disgrace. It no less grieved Rosicler, who fayning some
indisposition went to arm himself, for he would not have it said, that in
Greece the strangers had got the best, and putting on his enchanted armor he
cast over them a russet coat, that he might not be known. And in this manner
upon a mighty horse, he went forth of the City determined to enter in the
listes, in Ladies behalf, astonished at the Knights valor unable to imagine
who it should be, bethinking himself it might be the Mauritanian Brufaldoro,
having heard him highly praised. Hereupon he stayed to let the day be farther
past, that the Knight might get more honor, who like a fleshed Lion with the
anguish that for his Lady he sustained, it was pity to behold his lamentable
blows, for either slain, or sorely wounded none escaped his hands.

Well did the Mirror of Chivalry Claridiano see it, and had the like desire
that his Uncle: but he so despaired to see the strangeness wherewith his Lady
used him* that he would not arm himself unless he were commanded. And to
move it, he stepped to the Princess Oliuia (for with her the Queen of Lyra
Archisilora still accompanied) and to her he said, I believe most excellent
Princess, that he in the black will so well he have himself, that he will
force many to try their fortune, although some are so without it that not
going with some particular favor, they are like to meet with some greater
misfortune.

Well did she perceive with what affection he hadd eyed the Queen, and as
she was skillful in that art, by the cause she spyed the effect, and desirous
to speak for him, she said. Great reason have you brave Prince to require
so just a thing, and if mine may in any thing prevail, from henceforth I give
it you though seeing what is between us, it should be attributed only to
Rosicler: But here is the Queen of Lyra, that will give it, if it be by
commanding you, for otherwise against her is ye wrong committed, and it is well
she may have such a defender. The haughty dame hereby suspected somewhat: and
so gloryfiing her beauty with a heavenly tincture she replied. Little can a
Ladies granted favor avail, for the valor of the Prince of the Greece most
(excellent Lady) and rather there are some so happilesse in commanding, that
they put in doubt what the gallants with their fortitude have assured. Among
these I account my self, and in so much that I know not when I could call my
self happy. And this is the cause I dare not require any to go forth in my
name, but being driven to that necessitye, being able to do it my self, I
need not entreat it of any. And because she would not be more importuned
she turned to him in the black, that more furious then a hungry Bear ran up
and down. It was no small virtue in the Prince to endure with patience this
bitter answer, a Thousand cries would he have given publishing the injustice
done to his faith, using it with such cruelty, he departed from thence, for his
sighs gave him not leave not so much as to take leave of the sweet enemy of
his tormented soul. Who with atte^tion gazed on the amorous Knight, that at
this time with his own hand had chosen a strong lance, for at a corner of ye
place, there entered two Knights no less to be wondered at then the former, at
the same instant, entered two other no less gallant then the first. These last
were armed in Murrey armor, with bars of azure and gold, on their shieldes he
that seemed bigger of body had a Sun, in middle of a clear heaven, with
these words.

Not any though never favored,
And in his proofs having done:
But ioyeth in the Sun.
His companion that a better disposition showed, had another Sun ecclipsed,
with this Motto about it.

It changes effect in me,
For gazing on his fire.
It augments grief and desire.
These two Knights posies greatly delighted every one, for if ye be
remembered they be none other but Lysarte the mighty King of Tarsis, and his
son Florisarte Prince of Argentaria, that came accompanied with ye two
disguised Princesses, they past the place with more grace then Achilles had
done. The like did the two first, for both were armed in most rich armor, he
on the right hand that was Don Argante of Fenicia, had a silver armor, full of
Lillies: on his shield a Pyne tree, and he himself leaving against it, with
this posie.

In sollitude delights
He that on love does dote:
But most, he that is remote.
That Knight is not like to want battles, that to ympeach the Ladies worthes
shows himself so free: for as every one lives by being alienated, they will
presently put it to trial. Now am I very glad (said the beauteous Lindaraza)
that so free a Knight may meet with him in the black, that is so constant in
his alienation. No less did his companion show himself vn-yoaked (being the
gallant Torisiano, who was all in Carnation armor, quartered with gold and
azure, a brauer temper was not seen in ye place. In the middle of his shield
was set a knight languishing in love, accompanied with all his troubles, with
these words.

How sweet is that same sight,
That gazeth on his woes:
It does his heart delight,
Though it with grief undoes.
Having approached they entered the Listes. None of the behoulders durst take
their eyes from them thinking in the mean time they should loose them so
furiously they past forward. The first that in Greece met with ill fortune was
he of Phenicia, that quicker then an Eagle spurerd against him in black, he got
little for the sorrowful lover incountred him with the utmost of his strength,
(which only merited comparison with the Greek Princes) lightly fetching him
from his saddle threw him to the ground, he received no small encounter, for
Don Argante was one of the strongest in the world, he made him loose his
raynes, and forwards pass more slowly then he would. Great was the noise that
rose in the place, as also among the Ladies, that celebrated the fall with
accustomed disdain, which well may be called death: And that's but little
considering how it is taken, (I almost speak by experience.) I marvel not at
the Knights disgraces (dear Ladies said the old King of Bohemia,) entering with
your disfavor. Your highness speaks with great reason (answered the Princess
Oliuia) to supplye which want, I entreated the Queen of Lyra that (to show
how she loves me) she would have bestowed one favor upon a gallant that from
it he might have drawn valor to assure our business that so goes to wrack,
he replied. There is no reason any thing should be denied to so just a
demand, the which if my age did not disturb, I would have been he that should
have craved it.

A Thousand should your highness have obtained (replied Archisilora.) But there
wants not them that without any may return the Grecian honor to their owners.
Their that was broken off by the peoples rumor: for the mourning Knight, with
more strength the^ Hector had, did overthrow the brave Torisiano which
displeased the Ladies. Many suppositions past there who the black knight
should be, for some Ladies were affected to him. And so with some pity the
Empress Claridiana said to them that were with her. Greatly do I
commisserate this Knight to see with what cruelty his love his repayd: And if
his favors were equal to his strength none might more brag of valor then
he. Those that on a sudden begin to love, (answered the beauteous Rosiluera
that in the secret of her soul, had portrayed the knight with such coulors
that none but death could wipe away) any little occasion ministers unto the^
cause of Love: but lets see what shall become of the Knights of the Suns,
that seem of a valiant disposition, his Carrier had ye brave King Lisarte
taken, incountring with the black knight, so fiercely that he thought he had
been broken in pieces, either past by the other without any moving. Of the
valiantest was the Tarsian, but he there met with Bembo, then whom the Pagan
nation never knew more hawghtier, and courageous knight: who taking another
lance incountred him so mightily, that he brought him to the ground, and
himself had almost accompanied him, for loosing bridle and stirrops was feign
to stay himself by his horse neck. Like to a fiery Dragon his amorous son
ran with him three lances, unable to move either of them from the saddle, to
both their extreme griefs, that like to bloody Lions, they with their own
hands choosed their lances, and with ye excessiveness of their forces
incountred so puissantly that the believed Argentaria^ came to the ground with
his horse slain between his legs, he leapt from him for fear of some
disgrace. The Achayan with the strong shocke staggering backwards lost his
saddle, falling on his feet, but with so small feeling, that though the
courageous youth stepped to him with his sword, drawn, he so soon saw him not.

Almost was the whole place in an vproare, for Florisarte required a battle
alleging he was not overcome. So far paste this matter, that of necessity
it was carried to be decyded by the Emperor and other Kings there, who
adjudged that the Knight of the Sun, could not return to the Iustes nor
demand farther battle, because he had lost his saddle, he held his peace
seeing who had ordered it, and so on foot he stood looking on the Iustes,
talking to the timorous Squires. Long stood he not so, for ye Emperor sent him
a Courser nothing inferior to that he hadd lost. Both Father and Son imputed
it to Sovereign magnanimity.

At what time matters past to Bembos immortal praise, together there entered the
yard two Knights, on whose disposition all the lookers on fixed their wondering
eyes. The one ye best became his saddle, was in yellow armor full of half
Moons ouercast with a Russet coat, at his saddle pummell there hung a mighty
mace of steel. On his shield (that of fine skill seemed) was a Lady in lively
coulors figured, and hard by her a Phoenix with this Motto.

It is a quection hard,
And ever was most hardest:
Whether the Dam or byrd be fairest.
The Knight seemed so brave a horseman and showed so rare a constitution, that
many suspected who he was, no less bravery adorned the second, that on a
strong and mighty Roane Courser was mounted, his warlike abillements were of a
sad red coulor with green bars, and golden grauings. On his shield was a
beauteous Lady, lying along in a meadowe, and hard by her four Giants, among
whom stood he with his sword all bloody, for about her liberty he had cut off
their heads, and having done he seemed to approach the Lady, that stretching
forth one of her hands, seemed to accept that service, also on the shield were
these words.

Thryce happy is that death.
Which does assure his hope:
That lies not in loves scope.
For a just guerdon judged the Princesses, and she that was figured
meritorious of much praise for intertayning a knight, that in the beginning of
his loves performed so honored a fact. This Knight first arrived at the
beginning of the listes, whose hawghtines well shows him to be ye mighty
Brufaldoro, that not finding the Tynacrian, hoping to meet him in those
Feasts changing his armor, came thither at the instant that the other Knight
did the like, disguised in the habit of an Affrican. Who coming with so great
desire to Just, without farther advise would have entered the listes, had it not
been that the furious Mauritanian said, you Knight, because of your new attire
will not only commit a discourtesie, but think it should be tolerated, keep
you out for others have first arrived, and with more reason to Just then you.
Courteous was the Knight: for if I be not deceived it is the gallant Greek
Rosicler. So he replied. So greatly has yonder Knight angered me, that I
think too late every minute that my revenge is deferd.

Nay the^ stay (answered the Pagan) for great is thy forgetfulness so much to
long to meet with him in the black, and therefore to deal with me the large
field will affoorde us ampler room. To make thee know and confess thy rude
vnciuilnesse I am content (replied Oliuias husband) and without more repetition
of words with the Judges leave they went unto the field. The whole world would
I have present (most beauteous S^^nts of Venus Temple) to view the most
valiantest that it contained. Now does my want cry out for help, entreating
with incessant prayers, that Thalia or the recordresse of memorable acts unto
eternitye, Clio (I mean) would dippe my slow pen in their brook of
euer-flowing eloquence, for thereof it has no little need, and without it dares
not, daunted with fear, of insuffitient skill to distinguish the
particularities of a war so admirable. There was none but with attention turned
their wondering eyes upon the battle.

The furious Bembo would not loose it, but rather raising his Beuer upon his
fiery Courser, leaving on his lance stood to behold it. With more horror
then a Tempestuous Sea met the two most mighty warriors, in the middle of
their strong shieldes, with their strenghts clearly piercing them. The fury
of each adversary was stayed on their breast plate, from whence the shiuers of
their broken lau^ces mounted into the highest regio^ of the air, whose
altitude might have bereaved Argos of his hundred eied sight. Forwards they
past without receiving any more tormenting grief then either did conceive to
see the other on horseback. So with this ravening wrath which possessed both
alike, they returned either upon the other. On ye earth there was not seen
(then the Greek) a more skilfuller knight of the weapon that at his saddle
hung.

And so at once with the strength of such mighty arms they discharged so
puissant blows, that every one (considering their fury) thought them the
last. All the top of his Burgonet lost the Greek, and voyding blood he was
cast along his horse back. Worse sped the Pagan for Rosicler reaching him fully
with the heavy mace, had almost tumbled him from his horse, notwithstanding it
so fell, that he fell senseless upon his Coursers neck, shedding much blod
through his nose and eyes. Many with fear of those fearful strokes wished
themselves far off: but they that were borne to it quickly joined. It was
well for ye Pagan to have entered with his sword for under his shield about his
left side between the closing of a buckle he wonded him. It is not a fierce or
dangerous blow that can daunt ye hawghty Greek: but to see his own blood
spilte, madded him, yet that conted not the Moore, but as he stepped forth with a
counter buffe he struck him on the helm. This blow dazzled his sight, and
therefore he could not execute his to any purpose, for taking him on the
outward side with the mace, the Moore turned away (for few were nimbler then
he) making him not only loose the blow, but hazarded the condition of his
victory: because the strength thereof with the wayght of the Clubbe so
disturbed him, drawing him after, that the Pagan might at his pleasure give him
two thrustes at one of his sides. Either of them hadd pierced him, if he had
not put on that precious armor, that with such curiosity of art the wise
Artynidoro had forged. Nevertheless he felt such pain that hardly he could
draw his breath, he returned altogether like an Hyrcanian Tygre, and with his
steel Mace he gave him such a blow (through anger of revenge he somewhat mist
his aim) that the Pagan thought himself wrapped in foam cloud, so nigh he
imagined to be to Heaven: seeing such multitudes of Stars about his head, he
arose, and began so fierce a battle, that the Princes which beheld them
rested amazed.

What think you brave Prince (said the Emperor Alphebo to Meridian) of the
valor of these Knights? for in my opinion I have not seen the like: and he
of the devise with the Giants, greatly resembles a Pagan that I knighted, who
after (about the armor of Bramarante) bereft of life our dear friend the
Tartarian Zoylo: for by his sudden assayling, and the liberal domination he
has over himself in the battle, I judge him to be he: he will need all
helps (replied the Scythian Prince) for his adversary differs not in show
from that youth we met in Lacedemon, whom we left with opinion to be your
cousin: and if it be he the victory will be his, for the Prince Rosicler (as
he himself said) was with two blows by him feld.

The noise that in the place did suddenly arise, broke off their talk, (for if
any of them obtained any advantage straight some favorite of his would
celebrate the blow of his affected) as now, some the Greek, and some the
Mauritanian, would praise above the heavens.

Somewhat a weary were they, and seeing the suns declining with the nights
beginning to approach, with the utmost of their forces they discharged their
fury in such sort that they struck each other from their horses, to ye
astonishment of all the beholders. His Mace did the Greek loose out of his
hands, first executing a brave blow, which wrunge his adversaries helm about
his head, greatly blinding his sight: they had not fallen when quicker then
immagination they rose. The Greek drew forth that good sword, which
Brandafidell did give him, when he lost his of Queen Iulias: and with it
before the Pagan settled himself, he struck him about the top of his shield:
he cut away a piece thereof with all the brimme of his helm on that side, he
made him stand trembling like a leaf shaken by a Northren blast: he well noted
his amaze, and so lost not the occasion, for with a lofty flourish ouer-head
he made him there repair his ward, leaving his legs without defense.
Whereupon the Prince stepped more in with his left foot, and standing strongly
thereon, withdrawing his sword, with both hands executed his blow, on his
left thigh cutting it to the bone. This wound was it that gave him some
advantage over the Mauritanian, and also the victory, if the battle to the
end continued: For the Pagan began to loose much blood, and to shrincke through
faintness on that side every time he was there charged. They parted to breath,
for four hours without rest had they combated since they began. The Greek as
he walked cast up his eyes toward the windows, where he spied his dear
Oliuia: and with a sighe breaking from the midst of his heart he began: I
know not why thou should esteem thy self Prince of Grecia: to have obtained
thy Lady by force of arms? Thou art wronged and not in the least degree so to
be praised for it, having no reason for it seeing that before al thy Parents,
friends and kinsfolks, their presence must bear witness of all thy former
honors wrack in this sole battle. Where, in this particular Combat with a
single knight thou loosest in one minute all the glory in so many years with
dear experience and loss of thy dearest blood, thou did atchiue. No less
exclaimes did the furious Pagan, breath into ye air, blaspheming against his
Gods, saying. Why now none need fear the name of Brufaldoro? nor is there any
cause his Lady should esteem him since before his greatest enemies, so ill he
does defend her beauty: reason have thou to complain (dear Lady) of thy
Gallant, that in sight of thy rare perfections, he has not the power to beat
his adversary from the field, but see himself to be brought unto the point of
a shameful overthrow: he ended turning to his enemy that like a raging
whirlewind, marched against him. To meet him went the haughty Pagan, being the
first that executed such a blow upon the Greek that he made him set one knee
to the earth, discharge he would another: but Rosicler being more active, in
that Art, before the Pagan struck, settling himself on his right leg, he
stepped aside, not making him loose his blow, but staggering seem to fall, with
a thrust did the lover of Oliuia reach him, it pierst his armor, and he felt it
within his flesh: like to the wind he rose, and with both hands, did strike at
him. Little prevailed the defense of ye strong shield, for from the one end to
the other it was clean cut, and so ouer-charged him that both hands he set
on the ground. He thought to surprise him as he fell, and so entered within him
more then he should, insomuch that he could not wound him: For the Pagan cast
his mighty arms about him, beginning with advise, an admirable wrestle. He
raised him from the ground, and had almost cast him down, if the Greek, had
not withal his power held him fast, and in that occasion with a trip got from
him, and strongly swinging him about, he hurled him well nighe four paces
from him, both falling down. But scarce had they fallen, when with such
courage they rose that all the behoulders were amazed to see so cruel a battle.

Nine wounds has the Pagan, and the one exceeding troublesome on the thigh.
The Greek has four all about the buckling of his armor, two of them
dangerous and his body bruised and tired that his legs could scant sustain
him. A windy noise began to sound throughout the place who the Moore of the
Moons was, judging him the valiantest that ere was seen in Greece: for by this
time the Pagan began to faint by reason of his wounded Thighe, whereby his
adversary knew his advantage over him. So long it was argued who it might
be, that every one happened rightly on whom in deed it was: For the Emperor
Trebatio himself commanded all the Pages to tell the truth. At last it was
known that the valiant Moore was Rosicler. It could not be kept so close but it
came to Oliuias hearing who (living by loving him) began to bewail ye battle
with millions of pearled tears, that ran down the current of her rosed cheeks
seeing in what cruel combat her dear Lord had put himself and so besmeared
with blood. With many outcries she had descended but that the Ladies stayed
her. As much grief for it tormented the good Trebatio, that no longer able to
with-hould took his horse, when Phoebus light was altogether drencht wtin the
Cauers of ye western Ocean: at what time the two famous warriors cried out for
lights. From out the Tent were presently brought above 1000 torches: so weary
were either of the adversaries, that scarcely they were able to stand on their
feet. Never a step made the Moore but with his blood he left it printed on
the grass: and the Greek, sturd not but he felt a bloody sweat over all his
body. Great was the advantage he had over the Pagan, because of the
troublesome wound of his thigh. At length disparing of the long fight ye Moore
closed with his enemy. The Greek well noted it and so entered to the wrestle
with more advise then strength: for ere his enemy had took hold of him, he
had stabd his dagger into his left shoulder. Out of his hand did the
Mauritanian snatch it, and with it would have had recovered what he did loose:
But the courageous Greek that saw himself in such manifest danger had no
other remedy, but with his left hand strongly to stay it, and with his right to
take his, from the Moors back wherewith he had ended his life, if ye Emperor
with all those Princes had not then arrived saying.

Withold I say brave Knights, for this is no battle to be ended with such
cruelty about a matter of so small consequence. Then came the beauteous Oliuia
like an angry Lioness. The Greek seeing such Nobility before him, could do
no less then withdraw apart, through the great ymportunitie of his friends.
They entreated the Mauritanian King to go with them to Palace, where he should
be cured, but reputing them all his enemies refused it: and rather with extreme
fayntnes mounting upon his horse, he went out of the City, with the greatest
need of cure that ever knight had, and never persuading himself otherwise,
the^ that his adversary was one of the Greek Princes. In the first village he
arrived at, he stayed, where his wounds were bound, and by his Lady cured, with
such care as lovers still have in such cases: there he continued till he was
able to travel which he did until he arrived in his own Kingdom, intending
fully to be revenged on Constantinople: where there was much grief by reason
of the wounded Prince. None would his Mother suffer to speak with him: So they
dressed him expecting the ensuing day, wherein happened no less battles then
in the last.

CHAP. XV. The end of the Tryumphes and how Brandafidell arrived to them,
bringing with him the beauteous Floralinda.
WIth a kind of new content by the rising splendour, the next day of the
all-comforting Sun, did the whole Cittye of Constantinople seem to rejoice,
when through it was published ye good amendme^t of Rosicler, whose indisposition
most proceeded from a weary brusement of his body, the which was no cause (the
day being as it were somewhat spent) to keep him from coming forth to
behold the battles of the same, which he thought would be worth the sight.
In his gown he took his place between his dear Oliuia, Oriselua and her
Sacridoro, whose sweet friendship forced them as often as they could to meet,
delighting to discourse what either had done for the other, in the dangerous
adventures, for the obtaining of their Ladies.

Already was the furious Bembo entered the listes, for at one side of the
place, appeared two Knights in the richest armor, and of the gallantest
disposition of any that thitherto had Iusted. The warlike abillements of him
on the right hand were all white, garnished with many inestimable stones, and
on the breast a heart of Rubies: his grace attracted the beholders affection.
Upon the shield that was no less rich then his armor, was portrayed his
companion yt accompanied him. At his feet a most fair hand that held a
scrowle, with these words.

This heart that love has wounded,
In it finds his relief,
In rich exchange for grief,
For loving it is again beloved.
This coming so sure denotes that he in the white, is Rosamond the hawghtie
Princess of Callidonia, that came with her dear Don Eleno, who was clad with
his precious arms he won in Room, excepting, that on the shield which his
friend Nabato had sent him, he bare the portrature of his Lady drawn in that
manner when with his own hand, he guirded on, her sword with this Rotullo.

The cross of cruel absence,
Eternizeth his fame,
Being assured of his dame.
They past their course with such gallantnesse that every one judged that he
in the black was like to sustain some disgrace. The vulgar sort with a shrill
noise began to publish it. The Princesses and Grecian Ladies were amazed to
see so many lovers in the place, and every one with such firm hopes, as
rather they would loose their lives, the^ leave to Love.

Another thing they did see which made them not a little suspect what they
might be, for they saw him in the Russet with wonderful courtesy stepped to him
in the white armor and demanded his shield for the Iustes. The Lady gave it
him, wishing that her favor might not hazard, what the Dacians valor did
assure. Notwithstanding with sovereign Majesty he turned the best Horse that
the world contained, and with his strong lance he spurred against his
adversary. Be a while attentive to me (sweet Mistres of Natures perfect
beauty.) Surcease your common asking, whether of the^ was most gallantest, or
with whom the Heavens communicated more bravery: For considering ye swiftnes
that conducts the flower of Chiualry the least winking with your eyes (how
much more so Jealous a demand) may loose the sight of a memorable encounter.
The terrible noise of two roaring Cannons belching forth the fury of their
powder fiered bowels, caused not more horror, then did rebound from their
fierce encounter. It was no marvel to see the Dacian here get the best, with
so brave a horse.

So he met him with all the power his strength affoorded, that clean over his
horse back he made him leave the measure of his length imprinted on the earth,
but quickly leaping on his feet, he had recovered his saddle before the Dacian
did return unto himself. Who in all his life before had not received a more
stronger encounter, for he lost his his bridle, and his stirropps, and had not
his Lady been present that in such extremities, with new favors did revive
him, he had also lost his saddle: but valiantly he sustained himself, for the
loss of his life in that presence were more honorable, then the leaving of his
horse, he returned praunsing with maiestike gate, till he approached his Lady,
and with exceeding joy demanded his shield, with a thousand thousand
imbracements she would have given it, for she loved him as her soul: but she
contented her self be saying. Courage dear Prince for with so sure a faith
it is easy to bare away the victory. With the noise of many Instruments, and
high praises wherewith the popularity celebrated the russett Knight Don Eleno
with both sheeldes went where the famous Bembo had hung up his, (in whose
place) taking away that he set his Ladies, leaving the Greek Nobility of
Lords, and Ladies pensive in guessing who both they might be. The angry
Achayan at this time, cursing his unhappy stars, pricked through the
multitude: more then one derely did abie his rage. By this time a gallant
knight had leapt into the Lists, yet in more despayring colors of any that day
seen: for he was all in yellow, and black with some bars of a sad russet,
on his shield he had a Lady at whose feet himself lay all alonge, with this
motto.

Did ever any see,
The Lady that does delight:
To equal her despite,
With that fire which burns me.
Unto the Iousts there entered not a Knight of whom a more general
commiseration was had. The Prince of Hyberia did deserve it, who for the love
of the Armenian Kings Daughter that bordered in this Confynes, extremely
languished, being therefore constrained to tread the steps of Pilgrimage,
through foreign lands, arryuing at length at Constantinople: he was of high
valor, and one of them that showed himself a capital enemy to Greece: his
name was the unfortunate Lindelfo. They met with the puissance of their arms:
but what auailes it though the Dacian loose his raines, and hold by his horse
neck, if at his turning he saw his adversary on the ground, though quickly he
leapt into his saddle: he pitied him remembering the time, when comfortless
accompanied with naught but despair to ease his torments, he wandered through
the world in that manner. So he craved his pardon requesting him to accept him
for a friend. Generally was the yellowe Knight esteamed for the brave encounter
he had made, and to overthrow him was alredie judged impossible, so furious
and so lucky did the Lover raunge about the yard.

A sudden rumor, buz'd through the place, with the entering into it of one of
the gallantest Giants in the universe, and so laden with fearful weapons,
that the farthest of yet thought himself within his arms. This was the
courteous Brandafidell, bringing with him the beauteous Floralinda being
himself clad in rich armor of a mingled Red and Green, and garnished with
many Lillies.

On his shield he had figured a Tower, wherein a fair Lady seemed to be
enclosed, himself standing at the Gate with that huge Mace: and about this
devise were these words inrowled.

Being committed to my trust,
None ever past this way:
Nor Love, in proud array.
There was no ^ady in all the place but with great laughter applauded the giants
devise, seeing the inequality between the Lady and him. She was attired all in
gro^^, cut upon Red, blackt in such curious manner, as if it were some
workemanshipp of Heaven. A thin sendall masked her face except the sparkling
light of her two Suns, whose beams exceeded Phoebus rays: Every one longed
with desire to know what foolish Lady that might be that so bestowed her
beauty on so deformed a Giant. Forwards stepped the courteous Pagan, and knowing
him in the Russet to be Cousin to him he highly honored, was unwilling in any
thing to move him, and so said, your admired valor (Sir knight) is so highly
known that none dares hazard his reputation on the breaking of a Lance
against you: If I may entreat, suffer me to run on with your Companion,
rather to show I am all in all yours, then otherwise to offend you. Well did
the haughty Matrone understand it, and also the whole place heard what the
Giant had said, thereby more esteaming the Russet Knight. The Ioust did the
Lady demand of her beloved Lord, with fear enough did he give it her, and
his shield with his soul. None in all the place did mis-imagine of the knights
hardiness in the white though his companion seemed of a stronger constitution:
But she that fetched her Pedigree from Hercules, for a greater matter did
encourage her self, and so turning her Courser with no less grace then her
lover, they encountered with as much fury as the god of war could have done.
It Was well for the Lady to hit the Giant on the Beuer, and bearing her lance
with the utmost of her strength (which was equal to any) she struck of his
helm, from his head, the pain whereof made him loose his own blow: no sooner
had it fallen, but presently the three Princes knew him.

There no longer lingered the gallant Brandafidell, but taking his leave of the
Lady (leaving her in opinion of valiant) he went straight to the Theater, and
leaping from his beast, he alighted the Lady twixt his arms, most joyful to
see her self before her lord Meridian all her dear Father. By her hand did
the courteous Giant lead her up stairs, til every one knowing who they were,
seeing Rosicler rise (though very weak of his last battle) they did the like
to accompany him. Along past the gentle Brandafidell saying I am sorry (most
excellent Princess) that bringing such company with me, to her will all the
content be attributed, wherewith I am received: but I am glad of it, to be in
recompense thereof discharged of my guaridng my Lady the Princess Floralinda,
delivering her unto ye Scythian prince, for if he be the Meridian, I believe he
will not be displeased with the gift. By this time had she unmasked her face,
discovering a more fayrer one, then Apollos in the month of May. The Prince
embraced his espowse, using between them such ceremonies as is accustomed
among those that like joys expected. With such fury behaueth her self, the
Calidonian Matrone in the listes (sweet sollaces of Melancholy hearts) that I
cannot stand to rehearse these welcomes on all parts, I remit it to your sober
considerations, for to repeat the manners of ye gentle Brandafidell, what with
every one he did, and to every one did say were to enlarge with superfluous
courtesies the brevity of the History, and fall into that error I have
already condemned.

To be short, every one returned to their places, except the old King of
Macedonia who with the Emperors leave, went thence with his Daughter to know what
had befallen her in so long an absence. Only (sweet Ladies comforts of
comfortless souls) pity Claridiano burning in the vnconsuming fire of love,
that with his Ladies coyness added the fuel of discontent unto the self
norishing flames of ye reasonlesse war of rude confused thoughts. The favor
of some smyling chance lightly in such accidents as these does sometime leave
his contrarious maleuolence, and so fortune at this instant brought him to meet
with the Queen of Lyra, yt returned from speaking to the Macedonian lady, and
no doubt but to see him so pensive and for her sake she became more mild.

She showed it by these words, but with such a hanging down of her eyes, that
I know not what heart of Adamant could have endured it. Very gladly would I
have you tell me (Prince of Grecia) the cause of your sorrow, For I fear
your evil does proceed of Love, if so? and the Lady be among us, and my
self able in any thing to favor you, may I but know he, and I will do it
in respect, I am so much indebted to your uncle Rosicler.

Most excellent Queen (answered the afflicted Lord) my infirmity is of such
equality, that I know no remedy for it, for to nominate the cause thereof, is
a new torment to augment it. For that to do so is certainelye to offend.
This only do I know that I feel the approaching of a long lingering death,
and would yt make an end to come, Oh happy it, and I far happyer: For to
whom his life is a grief, his death is a sweet remedy. I do not doubt but
the torments of paynefull passions which I suffer is well known to whom
gouernes the powers of my alienated soul from my self, but the unworthiness
of my merits does withhold immerited favor.

She replied never a word for she was so free, that for the world she would
not have had him been more playner in what she already knew: yet she remained
glad to see her self so ungrateful and to be more entirely loved, and so she
spoke: why then go with your Father to behold the Iustes, for I will tarry
here with these our newe-come friends. Never did Lover receive such a blow
nor on any was such Iniunction imposed: swell did his heart beyond his limits
with so rygorous an answer that he could not replye, nor knew he where he
was, imagining that her parting him from her with so strange a disdain, was
the shutting of the door against all comfort. With no such imaginations did
the Lady sit to look on the Iustes, and with no less glory did Rosamond
mayntaine them. So returning to the listes she saw before her a Knight in azure
armor, cross bard with yellowe, his devise was iealously in her natural
lyname^ts, with this Motto.

Is It not pity to behold,
That no faith now prevails,
Whilst true love is controld:
By jealousy that most avails.
Every one well noted the Jealous devise of the Knight, and the grace wherewith
he past forwards, till the theater where he did his duty with more Majesty
then joy: It not a little auailed her toward the Iustes (for this was
Sarmacia ye Trojans love) to look aloft to the windows, for there she spyed
her well-beloved Lord sitting next to the Emperor Alphebo, and on the farther
side the beauteous Floralinda in pleasing conversation discoursing with her
Meridian. She straight knew that was the Lady which had been cause of her
grief, her big heart could not endure it, but she must ask the first she
met, whom that Lady and Knight were. She was answered the truth, whereat
she conceived exceeding joy, becoming now penitent, for her rash mideeming,
and opprobrious exclaimes, against her Oristides. She could not imagine the
hour when to speak with him to crave his pardon of what against him she had
breathed. She returned to the listes the ioyfullest alive. I fear the gallant
Rosamond will be in some danger with her, for her purefied thoughts had to such
manner incoraged her that all the place seemed too little to mayntaine her. At
her approaching the Calidonian Matrone with some seeming choler said.

In faith Sir Knight if from the sight of Ladies, you do attract your strength
you may already assure your self the victory: though having so little day,
for the much that is to be done, you might for this present have deferd your
sight, by shortening the beholders hopes.

There is not so little time (replied the gallant Sarmacia) but will suffice to
make you know the great deceipte that does possess you. She answered not
(for her anger would not permit it) save with turning of her horse she went
where the lances were, and chose her self a strong and knottie one, and more
swifter then any Autumn wind, loosing the raynes of her Courser she ran
against her adversary, who to meet her did the like. Five lances brake the
Heroyke Ladies, ere advantage was between them known.

At the Sixth (for the Judges told them they might run no more) with new
forces they seemed to encounter with such fury that their blows made all the
scaffoldes in the place tremble with the noise. Her stirroppes and bridle lost
our Rosamond, and was feign with the utmost of her strength to hold by her
horse neck, which was a heinous matter to commit that fault before her dear
Lord, and so she thought it, yet was she glad, when turning about her
Courser, she saw her adversary on the ground, who though she had with some
advantage fallen yet her horse eleuating himself made her altogether loose the
recovery of her seat. The other celebrated her victory with admired Majesty
prawnsing up and down her furious Steed.

The hawghtie Lyrian Queen was out of patience to endure it, so fayning some
sudden quame, went to her lodging, and secretly arming her self, in a
disguised habit and without company went out of the City. She had not gone
far, when she spyed coming toward her three Knights of gallant
disposition, mightily mounted with them also came some Ladies. The manner of
their travel denoted them to be of Royal courage. The warlike Lady
Archisilora with great courtesy stepped to them with these words.

Sir Knights I shall accept it as no mean favor that seeing they are two
which mayntaines the Iustes, you would take me in your company, and though in
me there be no merits to deserve it, your proper valors may counteruaile my
wants. Brave sir (replied one of them whose courtesy knew no superior in the
universe) your gallant presence binds us to grant your request, for rather
thereby we are they that receive special honor with your society. This kind
reply highly pleased the Lady more then before esteeming the Knights for it.
Then this, nothing more illustrateth a Prince. Thus this mess of choice
warriors began to approach unto the City, they delighting exceedingly in the
disguised Ladies conversation, and she most joyful, of their brave company.
She discourst to the^ the accidents befallen in the Iustes, and how it was
thought ye two present maintayners would win the prizes, for their shewe^
valor witnessed no less, being thitherto, by none deprived of ye hope.
Memorable matters about this time happened. For to the place ware arrived two
Knights whose hawghty semblance drew on themselves the spectators eyes. He on
the right hand was all in a sanguine armor of finest rubies, intermingled with
some green Emeraldes ye magnificentlye it adorned him. His devise on his
shield was a Knight and a Lady, that seemed to give her portrayture unto her
gallant, in whose exchange she received his. A fayrer thing was never seen,
for being set with stones of inestimable value, and the Sun reuerberating
thereon it dazzled every eye. Between the two Lovers was this poesy which
seemed to proceed from the Lady.

No faith was ere so sure,
But fortune it might cross:
By some unhoped loss.
Every one praised the Knights inscription judging him for a perfect Lover,
that for all he was assured of his Lady yet he assigned himself to live
amongst all the ioalousest. The arms of his companion were to his in show and
estimation nothing inferior. They were of a deep red flourished all over with
many green enameld flowers set with invaluable stones: on his shield that was
no less rich then the rest, in a green field, was pictured the face of a
most beauteous Lady, in such manner as if through certain trees he gazed on
her, yiedling his liberty to her captivity at that sight, his word was.

Well may the heavens change,
But my Love nere shall range,
Though all my hopes forsake me.
Together past they their course till they came to the windows, where they
made their horses bend their knees to the ground, and they their heads lower
then their saddle bows.

None of all those Princesses but answered them with like courtesy, judging
the Knights worthy of it. After they raised themselves, the first they met was
with the beauteous Floralinda, and Brandafidell that then newly came to her
where they were and said, I would not (Sovereign Princess of Macedonia) now
you see the carriage of your thoughts anchored in a quiet harbor secure from
any more unquiet storms, have it be any cause to banish Brandafidell out of
your remembrance: for as the service done to Ladies, brings with it on the
perfourmance his recompense, so straight they shake him off, thinking they
wrong themselves with the very memory of it. So evil was not your company
brave Brandafidell replied the Princess, that I should forget how well you
executed the function of a Ladies keeper, binding not only my self but my Lord
the Prince for it. In their souls rejoiced her reputed Children to hear their
chatte, yet they doubted that it was not so, supposing that being so their wise
friend, Lupercio would have suffitientlye resolved them of it, and not suffer
that so openly they should publish themselves mortal foes unto the Greeks, with
this imagination they terminated all their desires rather to remain enemies to
Greece, then sons to Miridian: As in truth both they were being Don Celyndo
and Floraliza, that parting from the hawghtie Tynacrian they arrived in the
City to make known their valor. They turned their horses to the listes
against the maintayners, and the furious Lady thus said. The time is so short
sir Knight to Just considering how many expectes it, that I have thought it
good that in the open field (seeing we are four, two to two, we try the
favor of the changing Goddess. For that matter as you please sir Knight
(replied ye fair Rosamond) for we are only here to perform what ere is
demanded us. Now you see (sir Knight said Don Celindo) that our Iusting being
without the listes our battle of the swords is not prohibited. Not far from
thence was the gallant Eleno that not a little ioying thereat replied. I
perceive (sir Knights) how by little and little you have expressed to us your
minds challenging us with so many Circumstances, which indeed were
needelesse, for by plainly asking we had made answered with going into the
field. Great is the confidence you have of your valor (said Don Celindo.) Not
so much (replied Don Eleno) as is your presumption, to demand in triu^phs what
none else has done. Nere them stood the brave Astorildo of Calidonia brother
to Rosamond with Hercules shield, for only four were so good in the place.
The Lady knew him well, for the heat had made him lift up his Beuer. And
so because she would not take hers from whence it was, she demanded the Judges
if according to the Greek laws, she might require a shield before the
beginning of any particular quarrel? who answering she might, made no more a
do but went to her brother and in her language said. May it please you brave
Prince to lend me your shield, for with such a favor I do not doubt, but my
enterprise will have a happy end. As he spoke it in her language and
somewhat high, the gallant Astorildo thought it was his sister, and in this
doubt with great liberality he gave it her saying. All my armor weapons and my
self Sir knight are for ever at your command, for your voice binds me to
more then this: and in faith it gets immortal honor by the change: without
more ceremonies the Lady humbled her self, yet said that after the Iusts she
would speak with him which was a verefying of his doubt. From him went the
beauteous Lady redeliuering to her Lord his own shield. If at any time
(fair Mistress, to whom my soul has vowed perpetual obedience) I had
extreme need of your favors, it is the present wherein my Fortune has put
me in to describe such famous Iusts as in Constantines great City happened.
None stirred, with dumb silence every one expected the end of the swift
Carrier of the Four Worthies. Here Fortune seemed to favor Don Celindo, that
seeing he should loose by the match it might be at Rosamonds hands that with
more fury then the fiery Comet renteth the clouds she met him. In the place
was not thetherto heard a greater noise then in their closure they made,
breaking their lances with such ease as if they were of Canes, and so knocked
each other with their shieldes and helmes. On the ground out of his saddle did
Don Cellindo find himself with the bridle in his hand, with more
remembrance, (though on foot) then the Lady had on horse back: for houlding
by his neck having lost both raynes and stirrops, he past forward with such
fury, that it was a wonder he did not leap out of the Lists: she recovered
her self astonished at the mighty blow, a greater than it was not given in
all the Iusts. Every one agreed in the strength of the adventurers: But the
praises wherewith the popularitie exalted the two Lovers, may not easily be
credited: For the brave Dacian with incomparable strength encountered the Lady
in the midst of her amorous breast: he did not wound her, for that honor was
only reserved for Cupid to triumph over her captive life: yet he met her with
such rigor, that he fetched her from her seat clean over her Coursers back,
which guided by the bridle threw her on the earth, with slow paces did the
Prince of Dacia pass along without stirroppes: And Lirgandeo says that till
he well returned to himself, he did not recover them. There was nothing could
be heard in all the place, for the noise of millitarie Instruments: till the
coming of a company of Ladies and Knights ye gave occasion to enjoy the
sight of their gallant presence. They were to ye number of 12 Ladies all
apparelled in green Velvet, ymbroydered with gold twist upon red Taffata,
bravely mounted on white palfraies, and their faces masked. In the middle of
them came a Lady whose disposition denoted her to be commandresse of the
others, as the rest, she had with a veil covered her Angelical face, her habit
was of Crimson with many Hartechokes imbost with stones of infinite estimation,
her attire was of the Egiptian manner with many foldes concluding in two ends,
which fell over either shoulder. A mantle of Purple ueluet she wore lived with
Salamander skins, whose facing was imbroydered with many Thousand rich Orient
pearls. With them came 4 Knights whose constitution admired the beholders.
Arryuing, two by two they past their course with such Majesty, that there was
none but wished them the prizes of the Iusts. Of the first two he on the right
hand, that seemed of more strength, was all in armor quartered in green and
azure with many stones that marueilously adorned it. In ye middle of his shield
was set the picture of Amity, as in ancient times she was painted in form of
three Ladies, her in the middle all naked, and she on the right side, half
covered, and the other altogether, with this word.

Against this sacred trinity,
No death did ere prevail:
To massaker this dietie.
To be no less gallant, then amiable did the Knight manifest himself, for he
was that Gracious Oristoldo Prince of Annoch: the other was the valiant
Tartarian Zoylo whose arms were of an Indian color with stars of gold and
on his shield the Image of distrust with this Motto.

After a tedious grief,
Comes a sweet relief,
That all distrust abandones.
They went unto the Ladies standing, giving the lysts to the flower of arms
and beauty, Rosabell and the fair Archisilora Queen of Lyra. The hawghtie
youth had on the best armor of the world of clean fine tempered steel, graven
with flowers of diverse colors made with precious stones in such artificial
manner that no heart could more desire. In azure field upon his shield was
portrayed a fiery Chariot, and within it a Lady, who carried away perforce
stretched forth her arm unto a Knight that stood on a bancke upon the Sea
Coast, that he should succor her, with this inscription on his behalf.

Only fortune may remove thee,
From this heart that thee adores,
which in darkness now still o^es:
Wanting the Sunshine of thy beauty.
The warlyke Matrone was in Carnation and green armor with many gallant
works. In the middle of her shield was only a fair white hand wrapped in this
word.

This only can discover,
The cause of loves remouer,
And when it listes give favor:
To the poor distressed lover.
They turned about prawnsing till they came under the windows where the Prince
Rosicler with his dear Oliuia sat: to whom (at what time they bewailed the
loss of their Son) they made a low obeisance, and the Son to his Father
thus began. So little it is since our company has arrived in his Country
(most excellent Prince) that it knows not the conditions of the Iustes: And so
for that I have far from hence seen you, and so long acknowledged you for my
Lord unto the death I do beseech you to tell us what herein is won or lost.
The voice that was impressed in his soul the Greek seemed to remember, and
therefore with some alteration he made answer. These tryumphes (gracious
Knight) are to please ye Ladies, for their gallants do delight to hazard
their lives in of celebrating their gallantnesse: And so may you Just, though I
am sure your valor will want matter to extend it self upon entreating you
that ere you depart, you will speak unto me, for I believe we have in some
place been alone with some content. He bowed his head, sign that he would
obey, and so returned with his companion, leaving the Prince telling his Lady
what had happened with him: who with infinite sobs and sighs prayed God he
might be their lost Son. What befell, the next Chapter shall relate, for I
fear in this I shall be condemned of prolixitie.

CHAP. XVI. The cruel battle between Rosabell and Archisilora with the two
hawghtie Lovers. The end thereof with the knowledge of them all.
ALthough ye Rodiant heavenly harnest teeme, had almost ended his daily golden
progress in the West: yet to enjoy the battle of the four most famousest in
arms, he stayed his fiery horses turning their proud unbridled heads toward
ye place of Greece, which at this time according to the ecchoing noise therein
it seemed some general battle was fought, for the vulgar comunalty affecting ye
new adue^turers with confused voices made doubtful the combats success. I
shall not need (sweet Ladies) to pray your attentio^, for this war being for
beauty, I should not persuade you to it: yet being needy in wit, and having
none, but with laborious toil. What Is drawn from the flowing current of your
favors I must still implore it, without which in a sweet and pleasant style ill
can I paynt forthwith words, such amorous, (though rigorous) blows as here
were given. The two warlike lovers opposed themselves in their Carrier while
the Mirror of beauty and her companion did the like. They pricked forth swifter
then an aierie thought. None mist the incounters, for rather they were made
with more horror, then the roaring Baseliskes do make. They pass (shiuering
their lances in a thousand pieces) by each other, with such grace, that love
himself they inamored; setting down also principles of war, for ye mighty God
of battles, which he seemed not to disdain even in his fifth throne. They turned
about, but with such fury that the farthest removed looker on trembled at the
view. They drew forth the best blades in the world, and the two lovers closed
to wound each other, but there swords from their armor rebou^ded upwards. Their
dexterity inwards disliked them, supposing it impaired their valor, so they
seconded their blows with such wrath that their heads kissed their saddle bows.
Longer had ye Dacian used his weapons, and was by nature courageous: but the
gallant Britanian youth admits no comparatiue, for all ye place admired his
ligeritie. Again they joined, astonished that their swords did not cut. Aloft
offered the Greek his blow having an eye still at his aim, and as his
strength was exceeding in the midst of his race he stayed, turning it
inwards, and discharging it, he made him see a number numberless of stars
doubling him upon his horse back. At large on his breast he gave him another,
that had not Brutus armor defended him he had enlarged his imprisoned soul. A
ravening Tygre nor angered Lion deprived of his pray, was never seen more
furious then the Dacian did become, and finding his enemy near he let fly
at him two thrustes one after another that they left him breathless, they
guyrded him so sorylie he had not executed them, when casting aside his
shield, on the side of his helm he gave him such a counterbuffe, that it
made him turn his head more then he willingly would have done. Of a long time
had not Greece been witness to a fiercer combat, for the hastening of their
blows, their warding, assaulting, and retires, a larger Chapter do require.
Give me leave (sweet Ladies) to tell you what passed between the two
Matrones who like mountain Lyonesses the one against the other returned with
their raised swords. Little gets the Queen of Lyra, for Rosamond wears ye
best arms and weapons in ye universe, for which cause she cut away al her
plumed top, with half of her steeled circuit, and a piece of her shield.
Better did she not speed, with the blow she received, for voyding much blood
through her visor she cast her over her horse crooper: she seconded another
when she would rise with no less force, she had no other remedy but outward
to put forth her shield whereon it lighted, being a wonder she let it not fall
so tormented remained her arm. She entered again with a point, which Rosamond
extremely felt, so sure was her revenge that ere she retired, she struck her
on the side of the helm, she somewhat slackned her arm, for else she had
mortally wounded her, but to the cruel sword the hardest steel seems
softest wax. The imperious guider of the highest Orbs protected them to be
instruments of his miracles in defense of his afflicted people, for else with
athrust the Gallidonian let fly, she had ended that business. On the out side
she cut away all the harness under the arm making the furious blade appear
on the other part. All the place had thought her to be slain, the like
imagined Rosamond: whereupon spurring her Courser, she would have parted
without payment, but she thought it too late: for the Queen seeing her chance,
and amazed at the cutting edge of her adversaries sword, with all her strength
she gave her a blow that made her make a thousand signs of falling, and
altogether she had overthrown her but that she feared the cruel slicing
blade. She procured to help her self with her dexterity: but it little
auailes her, for though the Calidonian Lady be short winded, and her face
within her helm besmeared with blood: yet every time she reached her, she cut
both the armor and the most fairest skin that the world did know. O
Claridiano, who should approach thee with such news, that the blood which thou
most adorest does enamell the smallest grass? Overwhelmed in the study of
confused thoughts was the Loue-burning youth, to see with what cruelty he was
entreated by his Lady, that he neither heard, nor saw what in the field was
done. Hard by him sat the beauteous English Artemisa, who seeing him in such
pensiuenes plucked him by the arm with these words, why how now (excellent
Prince) is it possible there should be any love should so estrange you? if you
please to participate your grief with me, receiving it to ease you thereof, it
will be my content: and in faith it is no small pain what I conceive to see
you in these passions. As from a sleep newly awaked, did the afflicted youth
look up, and hearing what that beauteous Lady had offered, made this reply. I
do most humbly kiss your Sovereign hands (most Sovereign Princess) for
the favor done me, in pitying what I endure, yet is it but a small comfort:
for in the strangest manner has cruelty plaste it self (to my more plague) in
our place, and my thoughts in another labored in their striving duty (setting
apart all other things) to procure at once one death, a momentarie remedy for
a long and pain^full life. Why then be assured (said the Lady) that this
frenzy of Love is made gentle being tolerated, and communicated with one that
will, like my self rid you of it. In all things (replied the woeful Lover,
has Fortune favored me, animating my weakness by so on high sublimating my
hopes: only it has given me as a Cross to this glory the greatest evil that
could be, seeing I am commanded and bound by a constant faith, to reveal my
griefs to none. I feel it though well considered, it is my peace: For
discovering the cause thereof, the present answer can be no other, then that
my torments are too easy waighed with her merits. So have I chose in my
bargain, to suffer and be silent although your noble offer shall not want his
due regard in the duties of my love: why then (said the Lady) I shall not any
more need to importune you about the proceeder of your griefs. But for this
time leave we it to look on the battle of you four Knights, for valianter
ye earth does not contain. Your highness has reason for it (replied he) for
they that are new come especially he of the flowers is the soonest in
assaulting, that I have seen, and it behooues him combating with a Knight that
so warylie maks his battle, as he in the Russet: And believe me I would gladly
know his companion whose armor does assure him what the others strenghth
cannot loose. From this were they interrupted: for Rosabell thinking it
towardise that a battle should so long last in presence of his Fathers, like
storms of hayle threw his blows upon his adversary, which breathless made
him almost go up and down. A wrestling would the Dacian very feign have been
at, thinking thereby to get more advantage: but the Greek that perceived his
intent suffered him to enter, and in his closing, with all his strength thrust
at him between the joints of his arms harness, he wounded him, and with a
little more he had touched the hearts side, but turning about he cast it outward,
and becoming more fierce then a Bazeliske, casting his shield at his back,
with his hands he mounted his sword and discharged it on the Burgonet of
Lirianas gallant lover, it struck him senseless upon his horse, filling his
helm full of blood which ran from his Beuer and nostrels. A better blow was
not given in all ye battle. Well was it noted by ye gallant Queen, that not a
little affected ye knight of the Flowers both for his valor and courtesy. She
would needs help him, so driving Rosamond with a point apart sideling with
her horse she assaulted Don Eleno to wound him. She got little by it, for the
Dacian was nimbler, and stronger than she, and mounted on that Courser, it was
nothing to make her bow unto his breast with the blow he gave her at her
entering: and as she arose (he still having the sword between his hands) did let
it fly at her: the powers of heaven defended her, for else (so rigorous was
the blow) she had been parted in two. All the corner of the sheeld was struck
away, he wounded her on the shoulder, and cut the great band of her helm, with
part of her neck piece, and made her tremble like an aspen leaf. Then arrived
the Callidonian Lady, and between them they had surely slain her: but she
stayed her sword thinking it cowardice to offend any with advantage. By this
was the furious youth come to himself making against them. Before him stepped
the Lady, but with him she could get nothing, for in all things they were
unequal: he let fly at the top of her burgonet such a blow, that she
thought she saw the starrie firmament. Like to a ravening Tygre she raised her
ancient sword, whose inchauntment being made long before any other, there is no
defense in Hectors shield, for a piece thereof she cast to the earth. She came
with another at his head, he warded it fearing the sword, else had he fared
ill, nevertheless it extremely oppressed him. In himself was not the amorous
Lord seeing so mighty enemies: impatient is he of delaie, his shield he
hurles at his back, and with both hands he reached her, (though not at full)
upon her rich helm, it, next to the divine powers saved her life, for to the
saddle bows it had otherwise divided her: without sense or feeling it cast her
upon them, voyding infinite abundance of blood through her helm, and was
carried away about the field on her horse. O Don Eleno what did thou feel,
seeing the thing thou most louedst in the world in such danger? Against Oliuias
son he cast himself who trusting to his Bollador stayed to receive him, but
he met with the Dacians Tyrio that almost had overthrown them both, he made
him set his buttocks on the ground. The valor and admirable bounty of the
warriors had suspended the judgment of every one, not knowing on whether part
to decline, not daring so much as mutter, fearing to loose the sight of some
notable blow that might be given. When ye furious Callidonian Dame, recovered
her self she would have confronted him that had endangered her. She left yt
doubting to displease her beloved Lord. And therefore she turned all her
wrathful fury on the famous Queen of Lyra: who seeing her come, did not leave
to expect her with some doubt of her accursed blade. She came with such eagernes
that her blow was not worthy the giving, but rather the Queen unwilling to
loose that occasion, as she past with both hands laid at her shoulder. It Was
a good blow for the end, because it cut all the buckles of her helm on ye
side. She returned ashamed to have mist her stroke, and withal her force with
more advise struck at her shield. It Is no defense against the cutting sword,
for clean a sunder yt was dyuided, doing the like with the point on her
breast, a little wounding her arm. From her did ye warlike Queen cast the
remaynder of her shield, and discharged the fury of her arms on her helm
which at one side loose. So much it wayghed down on the other, that she
struck it, from her head covering the white armor, of her more whiter
shoulders with goulden tramells of Amber hair. More fayrer looks not Apollo
when he beautifies the world with the Eastern vprise in ye morn, or in his
pride within his midday course, the^ did ye lady seem without her precious
helm. All the field was in an vproare to see so fair a Lady and so valiant.

It not grieved her to be without helm, for with both hands she struck the
Queen on her visor. It made her a small wound, but the pain was greater,
which gave Rosamond leave as swift as an Eagle to close with her and with great
strength and speed snatched at hers, that when she awaked she was without it,
amazed to see themselves in that manner. Every one applauded with praises the
Ladies battle who afeard to hurt one another held themselves fast embraced
with their arms, that I know not what heart would not joy to be bound with
such gyues. The Combatants were astonished at the success, but Rosabell most
of all with the sight of Rosamond, thinking he looked on his dear Liriana:
either of them would go to aid his partener, but the Dacian that was assured
of his Ladies strength, disturbed him from it by casting his arms about his
neck: every one that was looking from the windows, descended. O Claridiano
from the top of the scaffold to the ground did thou think it a long
journey? with a sudden amazement did the sight of his Lady assault him, and
seeing her in that danger, the swiftnes of a towering Faulcon is slow to his, for
not knowing what he did, with a leap he iumpt down to the ground, making no
kind of sinister motion thereat, which admired both Ladies and beholders, and
went straight to the warlike Matrones. Well did Rosabell note it, judging it
for a strange act. By this was the Nobility coming to them, so the Queen of
Lyra seeing the Emperor, said, for this time fair Lady, can we not end our
battle: but we shall not want another time to do it. When you will (replied
Rosamond) for it is no reason we should thus longer continue, you being known
in Court: so they demanded their helmes of some that were by, and went to the
Knights entreating them to give over, which they presently accorded to. The
Emperor then arrived: for Claridiano, having bethought him on what he had
done, was rather sorey for it, and that it should not be noted he went to Don
Eleno, his beauty both the Dacian and Rosabell admired, whom he entreated to
leave the battle. Seeing our friends have so done (brave Sir replied Rosabell)
we cannot but here make an end.

They went straight to the Emperor that embraced Archisilora with such
words. In faith (gallant Lady) I shall never cease my complaints of you,
seeing in my presence you hazarded your dear person in such manifest perrill.

There is none (most mighty Monarch replied she) Combating with so haughty a
Dame, whose blows proceeding from her hands, were easy to be suffered. Let
us know who she is (said the Emperor,) for I hope she will not so wrong us,
as to go away without speakinge. By that time all the rest came thither
accompaning of Claridiano: Being near together Don Eleno putting off his Helm
went to the Emperor, and on his knees prostrated said.

I have (most mighty Monarch) so feared to fall into your disgrace, that I
must (ere I am commanded) beseech your pardon, and also entreat your Highness
to accept and command me as one of your own Sons: presently did the Grand
Trebatio know him, and tenderly with more than an Uncles love embracing and
taking him up, said: Considering how you angered me (good Couze) in the
Kingdom of Cimarra, it were not much I should continue so still: But you have
so well salued it, with honoring at this time our Court, both you and your
companion, that a far greater fault then that should be forgiven you.

I beseech your Majesty (said he) to speak unto the Princess of
Callidonia, that is here present. So soon as he had so said she had unlaced
her helm, kneeling before him to require the kissing of his hands. The
Emperor would not consent it, but doing her like courtesy said.

She that has them so admirable (Sovereign Lady) ought of duty require this
of all the earth: For this honor that my Court receaueth could not come from
no other. A content has this been so great, which (for it will be) I would
have Fortune water it but with some small discontent, though I fear she will
not respect it. But let us to the Empress, for she must not loose what the
Heavens have sent us. Even where you will I in all things obey your command.
So they began to march toward the Theater, where by the way the two Ladies,
received each other as befitted their Royalties, and hand in hand without their
helmes they followed the Emperor. Great varyaunce was among the popularitie
whether of the Dames were fairest. Many inclined to Rosamond, for being
something younger a natural white and red seemed more to flourish on her, but
the Queens grave perfections bewitched every understanding. Thitherto had not
Rosabell put of his helm, though exceeding glad to see that great Emperor,
whom he accounted his Grande-father. By that was Rosicler come, yet somewhat
weak, who thinking him to be his dear Son thus said.

Now is the time (sir Knight) you must perform the promise you made me, to
speak to us ere you departed, I am (answered he) and will be always most
ready to obey you (most excellent Prince) but yonder stands the Knight
(pointing to the Tartare ouer-ioyed to se his friends) to whom I gave my word
not to unlace my helm, unless it be in presence of all the Court, for he will
have it so to do the like. Be it so (replied the Father of the supposed Son)
for here will we all only procure your content. Straight went they to the
Royal palace that stood not far from thence, first agreeing that the
prizes of the Iustes should remain at the two Ladies disposing. They for
Rosilueras sake, bestowed them on the Ladies that in the beginning were
favorers of the Tryumphes they were Claridiana, Oliuia, Rosiluera, and Artemisa.

This decree was with admiration applauded, and with the noise of all sorts of
Music they were all co^uayde out of the place. Being arrived in the great
Hall their receauinges began anewe whose prolixitie does not Lirgandeo set
down nor what past among the Ladies with their new come guest, most of whom
remained envious of her beauty. So when they were all quiet, the three new
and faithful friends, Rosabell the Tartare, and Oristoldo with the beauteous
Tigliaffa, went toward the Emperor, and their duties done, Lirianas
courageous lover thus began.

Coming some few days since (most mighty Monarch) unto thy Court through
fame of her greatness, From far Countries, my Fortune brought me unto an
inchaunment where the Lady, and Knight (meaning the Tartare) were, bereaved of
their natural powers, I indeauored with the utmost of my power, (though in the
venture I should loose my self) to procure his liberty. In the end it
pleased the Gods, that I (yet with some labor) should enfranchize them, having
done, I entreated the^ to tell me who they were. They answered, that if they
should, I being of such remoted parts could not know them, nevertheless they
promised to do it here in thy presence. In recompense whereof I offered them
my company: and seeing we are arrived to this pass, may it please thy
mightiness I may (by thy command) know them, for I must without delay
depart. Here the gallant youth ended together with his awefull duty,
expecting the Emperors answer, who contented with the Knights behavior,
replied. He that has received so great good work at your hands (sir Knight)
will not so ill satisfy you as deny you who he is.

No in faith (answered the Tartare) for he that so greatly is indebted as my
self, with hazarding my life I do desire to acknowledge the beginning of my
gratitude. Already was the Lady unmasked, and the three valiant warriors
without helmes: Besides himself was the Emperor seeing the Tartare loving him
as any of his sonns, he embraced him shedding some tears of joy, and said,
Brave Prince the Traitor that kept you so long from us, did nothing love you as
I do. The Emperor was not suffered to speak any more for all the rest rose
to welcome the Tartare. Oh who might express without some note of
tediousness, what Oliuia did with Rosabell. It Was long since she saw him even
since she was delivered of him: but scarce he had doft his helm when she knew
him rising swifter then an Eagle to embrace him, and spoke without respect of
her grauetie.

Oh dear, dear Son the proceeder of my most dear hearts blood, may it be
that on this day such happiness was allotted me: Every one thereat were
amazed till Rosicler declared it to them. Again began their kindness, which
were no less with Oristoldo. The Greek Emperor that saw such a Nephewe,
cloyde with joy took him about the neck and kissed him on the right cheek,
he was not more glad when he knew Claridiano. Their content was greatly
increased, by the hawghtie Lysarte and his Sons discovering of themselves to
the three Princes, that wonderfully ioyed to see them, without were the two
disguised Ladies. And Roselia seeing Don Eleno in company of so brave a Dame
presently dispayred of her hope, and would return unto her Fathers Court. But
a better means then this did Nabato ordain, as shall be said. By reason of
these new guestes the woeful Prince Claridiano had occasion thus to speak to
his Mistres.

Nothing amiss did your sovereign beauty, most excellent Queen, seeing the
cowardice of the Knights, to maintain your own beauty: but being so sure of
the advantage you had no need to take your weapons. She replied. I would not
(Prince of Greece) have you take that for an excuse, to cover the remissenes of
the gallantes of this Court, that have shown it so great, and since they have
done it it is well, for the Ladies may live without care to redress their woes
suffering them to languish, seeing they are content to be so negligent and
forgetful, especially in business that so greatly concerned them. They cannot
choose (divine Princess) but by their carelessenes incur^e some fault and
thereby merit some disfavor: answered the fearful Prince: Nevertheless, had
any of them been commanded to it, no doubt but some would have ioyed to spill
their dearest life under that behest. That (said she) had not been
meritorious, For the Lady requiring it she should buy it at too high a rate.
The haughty Archisilora saw him amazed, so she went to chat with Rosamond,
whom she greatly affected, leaving the Prince in an obscure darkness, whose
malady seemed daily more and more to increase, by the fading of his hopes. In
his pensiues leave we him a while, to give some ease unto an easelesse spirit,
that with fresh courage it may set down in ye next Chapter what farther
happened.

CHAP. XVII. What happened in Court among the Princes: and how Don Eleno
departed, with other successes.
WIth some content it may be, (your perfections sweet beauties Mirrors) have
with patience borne the bloody Iustes of Grecia: And the cause of them being a
jealous passion, there is none, that knowing how good it is to be estranged
from himself, should rest discontented: For that affection fixed in a constant
breast, cannot be called Love, unless dispising all other fayrenesse, it only
accompteth of his employment, imagining that if there be any happiness on
earth, it is that he soly does adore.

This conceipte had bereft the Greek Prince of his best senses, seeing the
coyness and with what disdain Archisilora used him, intertayning all other
gallantes in the Court with far greater signs of affection, then him.

This was occasion to put him in no other state the^ that he was in, for as his
thoughts were his only comforters, and they employed in such high
contemplations, he brought the fortunes of his love to that pass, that he
manifested apparent tokens of the same, loosing the roseat color of his face,
shunning the conversation of all his friends and kinsfolks, who in nothing
more than in pastimes busied themselves. All the Court did note it, and some
that would show themselves his friends, required of him the cause of his
discontent: he denied it to them all, for none loved with more secrecy. A
deed most meritorious for his Lady to favor him: But she was so free, that
to continue it, (for all she loved him as her self) she would never let him
know it, and so thence forwards, the opportunity that occasion appointed him
she would disappoint, by choosing forth some other company, which was a new
kind of tormenting martyrdom for the afflicted Prince. He took counsel,
(unable longer to dissemble) with the County of Acantos son, a youth witty
and discreet called Palisandro, to whom he disclosed his griefs, whose
repetition seemed to increase them: his squire comforted him the best he could,
saying how in that age it was so common to be alienated that to be so, means
was found therein to suffer any cross, and willed him to consider, with what
troubles his Father had loved not noly to his cost, but of al Greeces, and that
he should know there could be no pleasure, with a desired end, unless the means
thereto were difficult and unpleasant, for they are the reward of the thing
procured, making the end to be esteamed according to their value. It Is true good
Palisandro (answered the Prince) yet thou know with what sincerity my
Father was beloved: And being the cause of such bloody and cruel wars in
Grecia, yet knew he not what it was to be in the Empress my mothers disgrace:
And I am sure, should I demand her for my wife, my Lord the Emperor being a
mediator, I should not be denied her: But there are a thousand inco^ueniences
and all to defame my Fame, and stayne the honor and reputation of my hopes, for
it will presently be said, that the fear to attain unto the winter of my
deeds to recoumpt an harvest of honorable acts, and accomplished adue^tures,
has dau^ted ye nonage of my glory, and mixed the springing of my years with
ignoble slothfulness: and therefore since I must love give me some remedy to
quiet my thoughts be it but in disguise or feigned.

I find none other (said the Page) but that you write, for when she sees by
experience how constantly she is loved, she cannot be so cruel, but will be
moved, reading under so firm a firm, what the soul has most firm. Oh
Palisandro (replied he) who may write, being thus with woes tormented, unless
he should set down he knows not what. It Is that (said the Page (which must
with effect speak in your behalf, besides there is no carelessenes between
lovers but proceeds of care, well, seeing it is so (spoke the Greek) how will thou convey it to her? I shall (said he) want no good occasion for the
delivery in the Court. So they went to write, with more fear in the lover then
if he went to combat with his father. The page took the letter promising to
deliver it in her own hands, though he inda^gered his life thereby, fortune
gave him leave to do it (oh if she would effect as she gives occasion none
would ever complain of her:) For Rosamond and she being at a window that
looked to the Sea discoursing of love, (though Don Elenos were already known:)
yet the Queen delighted with the new manner of woing in Calidonia. Sometimes
in their talk would they stumble on the gallant Prince, whose qualities the
Princess praised above the skies without suspicion of any thing else, and
said. I do not doubt (sweet Queen) but some absent loves, do make him thus
to languish, for his sudden change in so few days, cannot come from any thing
else. Every time (dear Princess replied the Queen) that gallants will seem
so, their Ladies are not bound to favor them to their honors costs, though
they greatly love. Then Rosamond, never did any live by loving that would not
remedy the thing loved seeing it languish in pain: for herein is the trial of
love, not to consent the languishing of the thing loved, although the lover in
that remedy do a Thousand times endanger his life. And considering your
highness words, I now esteem the Greek Ladies as cruel as they are
beautiful, for on that ground they built their cruelty, a thing, that so
much blemisheth the nobleness ye adornes them. It Is not so much (answered the
Queen) as is their small sufferance to dissemble their Ladies coyness. Then
the wary Palisandro caused to pass that way, with slow paces because he
might be seen, who straight knowing him they called, to whom Rosamond spoke..

Come hither gentle Page, it has been told us that your Lord Prince Claridiano
will absent himself from Court, because he cannot brook so long absence: and
truly he does well, if he think the sight of his Lady will add more content
unto his thoughts, then now he shows here, flying from us all, publishing he
lives best in solitude. Of his departure I know nothing (answered Palisandro)
saving of his woes, as he that daily receaueth them no less to see how he
pines away: and I dare well affirm no Knight ever loved with a more constant
faith, nor none entreated with more cruelty a thing that would have moved a
Tygre to pity: and so I think, if the Lady continue in her rygor, we shall
very shortly see him dead.

Oh God forfend it (said the dissembling Queen) but tell me, has not he
manifested to his Lady the sorrow and pain that norishes him. His eyes
(replied he) are they that speak by signs. Why then (said Rosamond) she is
in Greece that is cause of his malady. So far as I have spoke (replied he)
know I of his departure, life and loves: for he would not wrong his Lady as
to tell me her name, or who she is. In faith (answered the Princess) if his
loves agree with his outward effects he is iniustly used.

There is no doubt thereof (said he) for what the face expresses, proceeds
from the abundance that is enclosed in a little corner of his breast, that
yeildes assurance of the overmuch the soul indures. Thy Lord will loose
nothing (said the Queen) by aggravating the little he does suffer. Then he, I
am so fearful (most excellent Queen) of his life, yt I cannot but acquaint
every one with his discontent, which has not been to small effect since it is
a means to move his Sovereign Princess to pity him.

They could no longer talk for the Empress Briana called the^. As they past
they being so nigh, the bold Page thrust ye letter into the Queens hand. She
could not choose but take it, least the Princess should perceive it seeing her
somewhat moved. She presently procured to withdraw into her Chamber, not to
read it, for a Thousand times she was about to rent it, without seeing the
contents: but considering it was no salve for the evil done, she opened it,
whose effect was thus.

Claridianos Letter to Archisilora.
TO the Sovereign Archisilora, excellent Queen of Lyra, Claridiano of Grecia,
health. A thousand means most hawghtie Queen have I sought, by some one to
make known part of my cares, but seeing with what certainty hourly swanlike, I
singe the approaching coming of my death, and that the malady which mine eyes
express would not assure thee, thou only art the cause of my danger, I
resolved to imboulden my self to my hearts dear cost, to this whose
imagination, and she thought it must come to those mighty and all-wondring
hands, my soul fears to have thus presumed to speak for the hearts, and it,
trembles with doubt of remedy, not obtaining it in life, which admitting no
mittigation of grief, will be short. I entreat you not (divine Lady) to
love me, this merits not so mean deserts: I only crave, if a remorcelesse
cruelty is not altogether possessed of that rarest beauty, you will be pleased to
admit me as a knight atte^da^t on your service, suffering my la^guishment. I
require no pardon for loving thee, since thou by wou^ding the body, gave the
soul leave to idolatrize the Instrument: but if thou will altogether seem
displeased in kindled wrath, my self will be the executioner of the
punishment I merit, killing that life the heavens gave me, to adore thee until
death, the which is sure in me shutting the gates of pity and cleme^cie
whereto thou art bound.

As many tears as the distressed Greek had shed writing of the Letter
did the Lady pour down when she read it, for she extremely loved him:
but her liberty so rested her, and imagining it diminisht her Fame not showing
her self grieved, she so not only determined it but also to write it, lest
her silence might give him occasion to think the glory of his high thoughts
was allowed. She writ her answer not without many tears, and taking it with
her, put it twixt her breasts, a place where Phoebus wished to rest, and so
without any show of alteration she went unto the hall, for one of her Damozels
had told her, how an adue^turre was come to the Pallaice: which in deed was
so. For when they were all in pleasing conversation one with another, there
entered a Dwarf through the hall so little that he was scarce seen, because
he brought a shield bigger then himself, and the richest in the world, he
went directly to Don Eleno and kissing his hands he gave him a letter from
Nabato, with his commendations, bydding him straight read that Letter for it
behooued him to depart, with some alteration the Dacian took it and read it
thus.


Nabatos Letter to Don Eleno of Dacia.
TO the excellent Prince of Dacia, Nabato his faithful friend and in the
Magic arts most skillful, health. As all my study, is directed for thy
content, I have found, that it behooues thee for the reasons I shall give,
presently to depart from that Court least thy delay be the cause of the dear
Lions death: It must be only with thy Page, and that my servant, that shall
guide thee, leaving thy be trothed Love in pallaice where she shall be well
entreated, until the heavens shall otherwise appoint: The like must the King of
Argentaria do, with the Kings of Antioche, France, and Hungary, and the
valiant Persian, for after so great pleasures and on the neck of such
Tryumphes, no marvel if there happens the most cruellest war, that ever
mortals heard off, for the envious Basiliske with all his skill does procure
it. The Gods preserve and protect thee, as thy faith deserves.


This Letter amazed every one, for Don Eleno told the^ who he was, and seeing
with what speed he was commanded away he went to his chamber, where his Lady
helped him on with his rich armor with many millions of sighs bewayling her
Loves departure: she told him softly she was with Child, which news nothing
discontented the Dacian, but rather said it therefore befitted her to stay in
his Uncles Court. They brought him his swift Tirio, and the Dwarf gave him his
shield bidding him take none other, he would suffer none to go with him out of
the City: he entreated the Emperor to ear for his Rosamond, who esteamed her
as his daughter, for the great love he bare to the Dacian. Arryuing at the sea
he found his enchanted Bark, whereinto he leapt, which with his accustomed
velocitie began to rent the waves. where we must leave him to show what
happened in Constantinople.

CHAP. XVIII. How one night the Greek Prince diguised, absented himself from
the Court: and what else happened.
WIth great care (sweet Mistres of beauty) leaft we the fair Queen of Lyra,
to deliver her angry Letter to him she most loves. Presently shall she bewail
with eternal tears, (and yet shall it be no comfort to her) the rash
resolution she had to write so severely, being assured with what faith she was
beloved. She mist not occasion, for the careful Palisandro quickly crossed the
hall: she called him saying. Good Squire I believe you erred in delivering
your letter, for it was written to some other Lady: So I bring it you again,
that she may not loose what from the same does proceed, he well perceived the
drift, and therefore answered. Why then most excellent Queen, I have committed
the greatest fault in the world, publishing the secrets of my Lord the Prince.
There is no such fault for though I know his loves I will keep them secret:
and as for the rest neither thou nor he have lost any thing with me, for it is
very common in his youth to ymploy it in some Ladies service.

She would stay no longer, because of them that too and fro did pass, which
pleased the Page thinking he carried good news unto his Lord: he found him
in his Chamber for he went not from him, and said. That you may know with what
affection your matters are handled, read this Letter, written with your Ladies
hand, he took it, and while he ouerpast the fear of reading a thing so
doubtful with attention heard all that happened between ye two Ladies: at
length he rent open the seals, and a Thousand times kissing the firm, the
contents were these.

Archisiloras Letter to Claridiano.
ARchisilora of Lyra to the Prince Claridiano, health. If the anger and grief
I did receive with thy Letter, (bold Prince) I should express in this, I
should rather want paper for it, then reason to complain me of thy
presumption, behauing thy self, not as a Knight, but as one that lives, by
insinuating, and deluding those Ladies, that altogether think not of thee.
With my own hands I will not procure my reue^g for that were to work thy
content, but I advise thee to do so again thou do not so much as imagine it,
for that be the cause to drive me to my kingdom, (only to depart from the
Knight, that has to the death wronged me) where I will spend my life, in
wishing thine, that thou may confess thy fault, and acknowledge my much
wrong.


Out of his hand did the woeful Prince let the Letter fail: with a thousand
cries would he publish his grief, but he feared to be heard: he would not
suppe, but lay tossing on his bed till the middle of the night were past,
which he wasted with tears, and then called he for Palisandro to help him on
with his armor, and to make his horse ready: he did it, not demanding him
the cause thereof, because he saw him so disconte^ted, he requested him to stay
in Constantinople with his Father, for he would guerdon his good service
toward him: to no other thing then this would the Prince be persuaded. So he
took his Journey through those desert woods, Complaining to the heavens, with
what cruelty he was entreated, and not knowing whether nor which way to go,
he travailed all night, until by the appearing of the day he could decerue his
armor, whose sight amazed him, seeing their murrey color turned to yellow and
black, with many red flames, which (though it were a pitiful devise) yet
made it a gallant show. In the midst of his shield was the picture of
Cruelty, as the Achayans were wont to paint her, with four punniards sharp
edged on all sides, and a Knight lying at her feet with many wounds. The word
this.

Oh happy one among so many,
That would his poor heart pierse,
In stead of joy that craves his hearse.
He straight imagined that his father ye wise Galtenor had been doing there,
which was some comfort to ye sorrowful youth for he thought ye since he knew his
griefs, and the cause of the^, yt he would procure their remedies, with that
good will he had thitherto wished his welfare, he came to ye seaside, where he
shipped himself for Alexandria, not remembering how his father and kinsfolks would
lament his departure: who knowing he was not there, commanded him to be looked
for: but his page came declaring the manner of his going, not suffering him to
go in his company, alleging he went in search of his Uncle Don Eleno. This
somewhat quieted them, yet not in such manner that being known unto the Queen
of Lyra, and how through her means he was absented, but that her sorrow
exceeded the bounds of comfort. A thousand times was she about to follow him,
had she not feared to have been noted for it. She left it for another time,
passing her life in continual laments deservedly, seeing she would not (only to
show her self cruel) live a sweet and pleasant life, in her Lovers company.
She could not so close cover her grief, but Rosamond at length plainly
perceived it, and seeing she knew it, did confess it. She would requite it,
disclosing unto her, that she was great with child, which something grieved
specially with her Dacians absence: That day in the afternoon, to sport
themselves and expel that heaviness, the Emperor with all his Court went a
hunting, for every one desired it. On the beginning of the game the gallant
Rosabell, and his friend Oristoldo, straied so far that they came to the Sea
coast, by the way rowsing a Heart which they in ye plain killed: they alighted
to gaze on the calmenes of the quiet waves of the still sea. They had not long
stayed there when they saw come toward them a little boat more swifter then
the racking clouds, even to the place where they sat talking of Lirianas
loss. Out of it there came forth a woman of strange behavior, all clad in
mourning weeds accompanied with an old man: so soon as she saw them of such
gallant disposition, she went to the^, and doing her duty, in the woefullest
manner she could with many tears, said. Brave Knights, so the divine powers
comfort you, tell me if lately you have seen the knight that last of all
entered the Iusts in Grecia, or else where I might find him, for it concerns
me to meet with him no less then my life, and others that iniustly are like
to loose them? Well perceived the Prince of great Britain that she enquired
for him, so he made himself known, saying, Gallant Lady, I am he you seek.
She suffered him to speak no more, but falling at his feet proceeded.

Oh most excellent Knight, now is the time you must show your valor, for
thereon depends the life of the fairest Princess living, who against all
equity is like to perish. And if thou will not loose thy propagated Fame
blazoned through the worlds vast regions, then enter my bark for my time
limited is short. I am content, replied ye resolute youth, the like said
Oristoldo, but to him the Lady said, how without company it behooved ye Knight
to go alone, for in ye secretnesse of one alone consisted the good event of
her business. It grieved the two friends to part, yet being necessary they
embraced one another. The Greek entreated him to excuse him with his Parents
and kindred, that he departed without their leave. And entering the bark, it cut
away with incredible celeritie. Greatly desired Rosabell to have his own
armor and horse, but seeing it could not be, he contented himself with his
good sword he had with him. Oristoldo returned where he had left the Ladies,
that were ready to go back to the Pallaice, being all there saving Rosabell
and the Troyan Oristides. They demanded for them, whereupon Oristoldo declared
the adventure that befell his friend. It greatly grieved Oliuia, but the
wisemen did comfort her, entreating her not to think on him, for fortune did
lead him where he should be the most esteemed (though to the cost of his
constancy) of any in the whole universe. Thereupon they went to the City,
whence every one ordered his departure to their own Kingdoms. So did the
Emperor and Empress of Trebizound taking with the^ their daughter Rosiluera
with the beauteous English Artemisa, and every one advertised of what the wise
man had writ unto Don Eleno. Only was left in Court the Gracious Tartarian
Zoylo with his loving Tigliaffa, to whom they told how the mighty Andronio
his cousen did come to seek him, and knowing he was dead returned, whom the
Tartares hadd Crowned their King. A better thing could not they have done
(answered Zoylo) then that. And so because I will not take from them the Prince
the Heavens has given them, I am contented, with what my dear wife has. For
Andronios valor a far greater recompense deserves, with sovereign praises
every one applauded that haughty deed of the Tartares, proceeding from the
magnanimity of a Noble mind, where we leave them, having much to dilate.

CHAP. XIX. What in the woods of Grecia happened to the valiant Sarmacia with
her beloved Oristides, and how she stayed there.
SO small is not the faith, and beautye of the fair Sarmacia (sweet Ladies)
but her particular affection may deserve a particular Chapter: who though she
had won little in the Iustes, yet esteemed she more to be rid of her
jealous fear, since she was assured who the Lady was that hadd so daunted
her, making her rather become jealous then amorous. With millions of Loves
sighs she left the City, penitent of what unwittingly she had breathed
against her gallant. She put her self among those thick woods, resolved to
wander thereabouts till the Court were more quieter, for she was sure Oristides
would not absent himself thence, being greatly esteemed of the Emperors of
Trebizound, and of Greece, who determined to give him an honorable charge in
his Kingdom of Thessalie, giving him the Title thereof. This not a little ioyed
her thinking she might so, well marry him, obtaining thereby such mighty
friends.

She alighted from her horse, letting him feed on ye green grass, and she
put off her helm, washing her face, and drinking of the water of a clear
spring whose brook ran all along that way: passing the night in pleasant
imaginations, foulded in the good and evil of Love. None in so short time
loved so dearly, nor none with more occasion became so jealous, as she with
that little she conceived by Floralinda. She arrived to that point, that
Lirgandeo says she attained the name of a firm Lover, among those that most
deserved to be so called. She was affected to the Harmony of concordant voices
having special grace in that virtue. So leaning against a Myrtle tree she
began, raising her voice unto the Clouds, in this manner.

That grief which love does yield,
If he can love that has it,
Accounts it his food mite:
To make his pain more mild.
None ere that truly loved,
Resting on it his life,
Though love he calls his strife:
From it would be removed.
He is not a true lover,
That cannot endure his pain,
And knowing it is no disdain:
That takes't not for a favor.
This is a lover rare,
That thinks his pain no smart,
Then knows not his good heart:
The meaning of despair.
For if he live by loving,
The grief his soul sustaines,
He calls it his true gains:
Joy to his pain still yielding.
With a thousand amorous laments did the warlike Matrone bedewe the springing
hopes of her concluding song, ioying to be so well employed. She that had
lately band, and cursed love, did now with Thousand Benedictions bless him,
now without constraynt did the humble her self, that had lived by denying him
his Tribute, to whom the whole world acknowledged awful duty, who did ever
Love (said the Lady) that did not think it a most pleasant life? There is on
the earth no greater content then to love, to acknowledge an owner, to have him
impressed in the middle of the heart. No discommoditie in true love was ever
seen to breed discontent, since in saying, I am not mine own, is included
the glory of sincere affection. So, may I perish, when I live without it, for
if the earth affoordes any pleasure, it is inserted on it as on the surest
foundation, to uphold such felicity. Not far from whence she was with such
content publishing her faith, arrived a Knight to ouerpasse the gloomie
melancholy night intending to go to the Iustes, assured to obtain the
victory and prizes. So she thought he heard her love reasons, but it was not
so, for the grief that possessed him, had so amazed his senses, that he not so
much as heard his own speeches.

By this time would the Jealous lover of the Heavens, display his fiery
tresses over the world, when the Knight yt in ye woods did lie began to
express his firmenes with no less testimony then the Lady had done: for to
the mellodious discord of the chirping birds that celebrated the coming of
the lusty Sheapherd, he tuned his voice with this Sonnet.

Fair Lisiana if in so long an absence,
May any glory drown my discontent,
It Is by the thought of that most sweet content:
That makes my foul more richer by thy presence.
I do not speak sweet Goddess by experience,
Wanting deserts to move thee to lament,
Though I deserve to suffer any torment:
Yet might thou mittigate thy cruel sentence.
And since thou art assured to my cost,
The pure sincerity of my true love,
What can thou get to show thy self too rigorous,
Against him that his content has lest:
Ioying to see his true hearts joy remove,
It Is but in vain to be thus tyrannous.
With a sigh seeming with it to send forth his soul ended the More, the
famousest in all the Province of Peloponesus now called Morea whereof he was
Prince: he had obtained high Fame through a Thousand valiant deeds he had
done in the service of Lisiana Princess of Lituania, whose beauty was
accounted the greatest in ye whole Paganism: which in deed was so, for it did
not a little cost Greece. Having ended his Sonnet the Lady would see who he
was ye showed himself so true a Lover, and closing her Beuer she went toward
the place from whence she heard the voice where she saw a Knight tall of
body, well proportioned and young, armed in Rose color armor, with a half
Moon in the midst of his shield, something Ecclipsed by the rays that
proceeded from a Ladies eyes, that gazed on it, the Motto this.

If the Sunn becomes dark,
She being in beauty one.
Then may she eclipse the Moon.
So soon as the valiant Epirabio saw her (so was the Pagan called) he said,
What is it you seek sir Knight? nothing (replied the Lady) but to know the
Knight that publishes himself so amorous: for if his outward signs may be
credyted, I think you are unjustly wronged in rejecting of your woes. You have
(sir Knight very ill) understood my affection (said the Lover) for though the
pains I suffer be greater then I make them, the beauty of her that causes
them is such, that if every one were ten times trebled, it were nothing
comparable to her merits: and therefore, have I sought the difficultest
means, to make the Lady sure, how greatly she is loved: Whereupon I left my
country, to come to Grecia, to give her the prizes of the Iusts I have heard
held in Constantinople. In ye imagination of such glorious thoughts, a more
harder enterprise (if any be) might be happily accomplished: but as for the
Iusts of Grecia they are ended, and were the famousest, that any memory can
comprehend, and I am sure you had got little there, in respect of the valiant
Knights that there miscarried, that reputed themselves no less then you.
Discourteous thou art (said the angry Moore) to judge of another strength,
not knowing it by experience: and that thou may not altogether be deceived,
prepare thy self for the fight, else it were a shame for Epirabio loving
Lisiana, to suffer any thing spoken to her praises extenuation. If she be so
fair (replied the Lady) as thou art bold, it were not much if I esteamed her
as thou do and as her beauty deserves. More furious then the Sun, roze
the Pagan, and lacing on his helm, with his sword drawn marched against the
Lady, that with enraged steps did the like, and together they discharged
twoe such blows, that they agreed to that, they professed, bending their heads
below their breasts, a better blade then his was the Ladies (having belonged to
the Sacrificer of Polixena in revenge of his murdered father Achilles)
wherewith she never struck him but she cut away both armor and flesh. Never
had the the Pagan met with so fierce and mighty a Knight, which amazed him to
be so handled: he crossed his sword, thinking to close with her, but she that
on her breast would entertain none other but Oristides, stepped aside, and as he
past, she laid so mightily upon his head, that she struck him in amaze, she
seconded another on his shield, it cut a piece, with another of his helm. It Was
but more to anger the Pagan who fiercer then a leopard in ye desert sandy
Libia, discharged the strength of his arms on her rich helm. It sounded like
a bell, slyding to the shoulder, carried away the brimme with a piece of the
elbow armor. It was so heavy that she was feign to set her knees upon the
ground, with a point entered the More, thinking to ouerturne her, but the Lady
seeing it come voided it with a turn, making him following his own strength
tumble headlong at her feet. The Lady seeing him so, thought she held the
victory by the hand: so she assaulted him, and to be another but he, it had
not been much had she slain him, but ye lover (few of whose like the world
contained) setting al his strength to rise at last (though it cost him a wound
on the back,) he cast his strong arms about her, and being lustier and bigger
then she he extremely tired her, yet showed she no sign of disadua^tage in ye
wrestle. Little got either that way (so the Lady with a swing did cast him from
her, setting her own hands through the force thereof upon the ground. She rose
swifter the^ an Eagle, for that occasion was not to be omitted, by any weakness.
Already came the Pagan against her. She stayed for him, perceauing her
advantage thereby, and as he would execute his blow, she entered with a thrust
under his arms, making him not only loose his blow, but return back
quicker then he came, with desire of such another did the beauteous Sarmacia
follow him, and warding a myghtie blow that she greatly felt, struck at his
legs, quick was the lover, so drawing back his left leg, he made her loose
the blow, and almost the battle, for carried with the fury of her arms,
she turned twice about, that she had been like to fall, he helped her with a
strong stroke on the shoulder which wounded her and bounding upwards it fell on
her throat. The valiant Matrone thought it had been mortal. She became of ye
color of a red burning cole, and casting her shield to her back, with both
hands she struck him, his shield is no defense, for the furious sword
beginning at one end, it ceast not till it came out at another a little
wounding him on the breast. Now does the time admit no dexterity, nor the life
of neither is esteemed or desired so much as the death of one another
adversary. Three hours has the battle lasted, and on neither side appears
no show of advantage. At the noise they made, did the hawghty Bembo arryue to
the battle. Straight was he known by the Lady through the wounders he had done
in Constantinople, which made her greatly affect him. Meek and gentle was the
mighty Achayan, and in him all courtesy did flourish: he never suffered any
battle to proceed unless he knew the cause: so leaping from his horse, he
put himself between them, saying.

With-hould awhile brave Knights, and in courtesy tell me the cause of so
fierce a fight, which should not be small. Those that are proud and haughty
in conceit (replied ye Lady) judge every occasion suffitient to maintain an
erroneous and false opinion: So this Knight, persuaded himself the prizes of
the Grecian Iusts were due to him, sorrowing he had not come in time to them: I
told him it had been no small honor to have won them, for many had to
their costs procured it, being as good as he, yet lost them, he grieved at
this truth, and about it is our battle. Therefore with-drawe you sir Knight,
for it were a shame to let him return to his country with such vain thoughts.
It had well pleased the gallant Lord of Achaya, and also to take the battle on
himself, as one being particularly wro^ged therein, yet would he not suffer
it, seeing them so sorely wounded, and that thereby nothing was expected but
the death of one or both. So he replied, thanking her for her courteous
relation.

Suffitient was the occasion (sir Knight) for many more battles then this:
Nevertheless I shall receive special favor, that for my sake you would give
it over. In more then this (replied she) do I desire (sir Knight) to show yt
you, and if this Knight be pleased, I am content to leave. He will he will said
Bembo: do not so rashly judge (replied the enraged Pagan) and for all the
Greek Empire will I not leave this battle: therefore get you from us, for it
would be my lasting dishonor to give over the first battle I undertake for
my Lady: you will not so discontent us (said Bembo) chiefly I entreating you,
it will be to assault you both (said he) if you leave me not, and so made as if
he would strike him: more furious was not Hercules among the Centaures, then
the Achayan being angered, so sparkling fire from his eyes, he said. I would I
had found thee at more ease discourteous Knight, to teach thee how to
accomplish the entreaty of thy betters: let not that grieve thee, (said he)
for in me there is suffitient mettle for an hardier enterprise: and not
regarding any thing gave him a mighty blow upon his helm. Jove's sword drew
he forth that descended from him, and with the strength the heavens had given
him, he discharged his fury on his helm, he cut away a piece, and with a
dangerous wound he struck him senseless at his feet. He left him and turning
to the Lady, said, forgive me valiant Knight, for his discourtesie toward us
far worse deserved: better hands then yours could not he have met (answered
she) to be assured of his own folly, and let us from hence, for his being
alone may be occasion to drive him from his deceit. They went where the Lady
had her horse, going from thence by reason of the swift current of water that
ran that way, till they came to a fresh meade where the brook did spring,
there they alighted, letting their horses feed on the green grass. The Lady
was something weary, and with her face somewhat blody, which made her put of
her helm to wash it of in the spring. The valiant Bembo had not noted her to
be a woman, so did the sight suddenly surprise him, that had he not been so
yoked to the beauteous Liriana, surely some other had cured him: for this Lady
was of the fairest in the world, and having seen her valor, might have moved
any ones affection, yet was he a little amazed, and though applied Physic
does not altogether heal, yet at lest it takes away some hurting quames.
Remembering himself with a cheerful look, he said. In faith valiant Lady, I
must needs confess, I wro^ged your beauty, in taking the battle from yonder
Knight, since by the one, and by the other your honor was so great. She
answered. I would not sir Knight have you so soon show your self against me,
jesting at that little the heavens have on you imparted, the which my good will
to work your content deserves not, specially since I saw you at the Iusts in
Constantinople: where I had been glad you had stayed to see the end of them,
that you might not be deceived with my little beauty, in that against so many
Knights as thither came, two Ladies won the prizes, whose rare beauties made
Cinthia pale, and Venus black, and I think Mars reserved not for himself
more valor then he gave them, either was accompanied with a Knight, no less
then they adorned with grace, and Fortitude, who after were known to be, the
one for Nephewe, and the other being Don Eleno Prince of Dacia, cousen to the
Emperor Trebatio. The ladies were Archisilora Queen of Lyra, and the other
Rosamond Princess of Callidonia. These be they brave knight whom the world
should justly serve, and acknowledge for Sovereigns thereof, for their beauties
does deserve it. You have highly favored me fair Lady (said he) telling me
such famous Tryumphes as the Greeks have had, and you shall make it complete
binding me to your service to make me partaker of your name and Eountrey, I am
content (answered the Dame) for in all things I desire to pleasure you, my
name is Sarmacia Princess of Lacedemon, and through a certain adventure in
quest of a Knight I came to Greece, which has not a little contented me,
having enjoyed the sight of your valor. With the greatest joy in the world did
Bembo rise, and said.

Oh Sovereign Princess, I beseech you give me your Royal hands, for only
to me is this favor due, as to your cousen Bembo being the Knight that stands
before you. In her Country had the Lady heard admirable report of that
Princes valor, and how near of kin they were, his Mother being her Fathers
Sister. In her soul did she rejoice to be acquainted with him, so she
embraced him using many kindness between them confirming the Consanguinitie
among them, with their pleasant couersation: which was not to so small effect,
but after it greatly auayled toward the concluding of the geneall peace. In
their discourse he could not but discover to her his Loves, and loss of
Liriana, which so tormented him with repetition thereof, that he could not but
watter them with many tears, more like a tender Lover, then a warlike Knight,
whose enemies they be. His fair cousen did comfort him with these words.
Courage brave Knight for only it must set your Lady in your hands, and be
not amazed nor wonder at Loves proceeding. For his vnconsuming fire pardons
none, but rather shows it self most furious against them that are with less
care, only that it may be known, if there be any plague worse then other
in the world it is subject to his more fiercer torments, and that he is whom
ought to be acknowledged for sole Supreme Lord of the universe. A mallady is
yours so common, that having many to be companions in it, it may be some cause
to lessen ye pain that particulerly is received. And it is not possible the
place where your Lady is inchaunted should be so secret as not to be known,
and being, for what shall your valerous arm serve but to fetch her forth,
though in the enterprise we loose our lives, and my self from this time offer
mine to be employed in any thing you shall need.

That's not it (sweet couze) that grieves me (replied the amorous youth) but to
have heard ye in her house and company, a knight was brought up, whom it was told
me she loved as her soul and it is suspected this was he yt stole her from
Nyquea though I was there assured that he had also lost her, why that's an
easy remedy (said she) by taking away ye Knights life from between you. And if
altogether fortune will persecute us with barbarous cruelty, there are other
Ladies on whom you may employ your thoughts, that may be no less beautiful
then the Princess of Nyquea, though hers be so matchless as you say, whereto
he replied Only that do I fear (excellent Lady,) that love will bring me to
that pass, that I shall not love what I do now. And in faith believe me to a
true lover nothing but this is odious: For he that loves only in this
procures to propagate his Fame, leaving in hand of inconstant fortune the
remedy from: ye party loved: who seeing how she is loved, and for her sake
what is suffered, she may bestow her guerdon not as this deserves, but
according to the liberal favors that lovers use. In this that were these
amorous Princes, when along the same meadowe they spyed a Knight coming in
rich white armor with many knots of gold and green about them, on his shield
in the middle of many flames was set a fair City. Straight did she know him,
and it was not a little she did in not manifesting her love, with the joy she
conceived to see her dear Oristides, who was he that came. At that instant she
laced on her helm saying to Bembo. Behold yonder dear cousen the whole
remaynder of destroyed Troy, and believe me the world has not a better Knight:
I am glad you are in such an occasion present, for I have a combat to perform
against him agreede upon in Lacedemon, where we had a certain controversy.
But that arrived the gallant Troyan, very glad to see them so well armed, he
saluted them and said.

Can you tell me (sir Knights) any news of a Knight in Indian color armor,
with seven stars upon his shield who maks me seek him with more care about
these wods, then I have reason for? The Lady made answer, we have not seen
him sir Knight: but according to the care you say you have to seek him, no
marvel if you be careless of a battle you appointed at Lacedemon: for it is an
ignominious wrong you offer to your person, not to perform your promise,
having given as a pledge of your word and faith, some of your armor. In quiet
did not the Lover live after he departed from her he had present, lamenting her
absence with continual tears a true token of his alienation, yet could not
he think that his Lady should depart from her Country to seek him. So he
replied. Truly sir Knight you do me wrong to charge me with what I never
imagined. I am more soryer for that (replied she) then for any other thing you
should have committed: For there nothing is more offensive to their Fames that
has it like you, then forgetfulness of that which so much concerns them: and
because I think I speak with ye Troyan Oristides, see here his sword which
was given me there yt I might come to seek him here, and make you know it had
been better you had showed your self careful in returning thither, then to
wander through these wods in search of other Knights. She spoke it so high
that he presently knew it was she his heart had choosen for his sovereign. He
leapt from his horse with more Majesty then Mars could, and said. So evil
entreated did I remain of that battle (sir Knight) that I have no strength to
end it now: so is it my surest way to render the glory of the victory to
your all-conquering hand. Then he put off his helm showing his fair face, and
holding the sword by the point he kneeled before the Lady. She could not
suffer it, for she loved him as her life. She also put of hers resting more
fair then Apollo, and with that love, as lovers receive the loved object, she
embraced him saying. Seeing your forgetfulness brave Oristides, it was not much
yt I ventured my life to seek you. He answered. Deeds are these (most
Sovereign Princess) nothing differing from your magnanimity: and I entreat
you if any offense your beauty has received on my behalf, which cannot be
little, you will with your own hand take your revenge, then replied the Lady.
There is no such offense (gallant Lord) but thinking I remained indebted for
your coming to Lacedemon only to combat with me. I thought to require it by
coming to Grecia, not with war, but to crave peace of the Knight that
vanquished me. I am, and ever will be yours vanquished (said the Troyan) most
beauteous Lady as one that only winnes therein. Leave this (replied the
amorous Lady) and speak to the Prince of Achaya that is this Knight which
comes with me, who is not a little affected to you: whereto the Trojan spoke.
All the world dear Lady knowing how dearly I love you, is bound to do me
favor. Thereupon they received one another as befitted their Royalties. In
their that he understood he was Cousin to his Lady, for with no small
alteration was he till then supposing he loved her: well did the haughty Moore
perceive the affection that his Cousin bare to that Knight (this passion can
never be enclosed where it is well rooted.) It came to be so manifest, that Bembo
would win the gallant Oristides by merrits assuring his glory, betrothing
them there in his presence to all their high contents. The two warriors
contracted perpetual ametie, which in particular they solemnly observed, for
in general in the Greek wars, Oristides could not forsake the great
Trebatio having received so mamany favors at his hands. The new betrothed
lovers entreated the Prince of Achaya to go and be acquainted with the Greek
Emperor, but as he lived in continual woes he could not condescend to their
entreaties, answering there would not want occasion to do it another time, he
took his leave of them to all their griefs. And mounting on his fiery
Courser he spurd through the thickest of the Forest till he came to the Sea
coast, where he shipped himself not directing his journey to any certain place
more the^ where fortune and the waves would conduct him. The two lovers
desirous to see themselves alone, past all the day in ye Forest, which they
thought but a minute, where if ye Troyan were courageous he would not defer
the end of their amorous desires. It was not known for the trees kept silence:
but her time being expyred, the Lady was delivered of a Daughter whose beauty
was imcomparable.

They named her Polixena at the Troyans request desirous to leave some memory
of his ancient stock. Less discords then the first did not this cause, as the
Fourth part does record, for a Greek did love her to the death. They returned
to Constantinople where the Emperor received them with great joy esteeming the
Troyan as one of his children: and knowing they were betrothed he gave them
the Title, and Crowned him King of Thessalie, an Act that through the world
was applauded with high praises. All the Lords and Ladies celebrated his
Coronation, and Festiualles, with stately shows and reuealings. And the time
of her delivery being come, she and Rosamond were delivered both in one day,
Sarmacias being public, but the beauteous Rosamond was delivered in the
hands of Archisilora (to whom she disclosed this secret) of a Boy the fairest
that his age did know. Both Ladies gave his name according to his beauty: he
was borne with a most bright Star in the middle of his breast, they called him
Roselindo.

A little they enjoyed him, for through the wall there entered a grave wise man
that toulde them that the life of the Child consisted to be delivered in his
hands: the Mother would by no means do it. But the Queen would, and so
persuaded her to it. They charged the wise man to instruct him in all things
belonging to a good Christian.

This traitor Lupercio promised but did not accomplish it, and rather conuayed
him to the Kingdoms of Prusia far remoted from Greece, where he was brought
up with the Kings Daughter, she from that time loving him as her life. It
shall be hereafter declared, for Lyrgandeo is nothing brief in describing the
acts of this haughty Prince equal in valor to all his kindered, and a
horseback he excelled them, for a better Gennet never did the world contain,
where we must leave these on the land, returning to Bembo on the Seas.

CHAP. XX. What befell to Warlike Bembo Prince of Achaya with a Knight upon the
Sea, at the Tower where Lyriana was inchaunted.
WIth some consolation did the Heroyck Bembo Prince of Achaya depart from his
dear cozen Sarmacia Princess of Lacedemon thinking he wronged his hawghty
courage, not to show the magnanimity of his mind against the rigorous causes of
blind Fortune: with this desire he entered the first bark he found on the Sea
shore, desirous a while to Nauigate by sea, seeing how he languished on land.
The Master and all the Mariners, received him with great content judging him
of high account, and deseruer of far more courtesy. He put of his helm,
discovering his fair and sturdy visage, which more astonished them binding the^
more unto more kindness. His hairs were of a dark yellow color very thick
curled, a manifest token of his approved strength. His color was white: and
his face full flesht and well proportioned: his eyes seemed cherefull, but
being enraged, they amazed the looker on with trembling fear, he was double
brested, insomuch that no armor except purposely made would fit him, he was
an enemy to effeminate men. Never did fighting weary him, nor never began
battle, but assuredly thought the Justice on his side. Being Conqueror, he
would more plainly show the generositie of his mind, attracting the wills of
the conquered with singular clemency, saying, that so rare a virtue ought not
to be extinguished by the honor of a bloody victory, and so would take the
conquest on himself, as the conquered. Finally Lirgandeo says that exceping
his Competitors, the world had not a better Prince: his loves distracted him of
his best senses, for imagining that another loved his Lady and was of her
beloved, he lost the reigns of patience, with sighs publishing what his soul
endured, urged thereto by the abundance of his swelling heart, as now he did
with in the ship he went. For the fourth day of his Navigations, seeing
himself more overwhelmed in his imaginary thoughts then in the waters whose
furious billows his bark plowed, he rose about midnight, sitting on the
hatches, to ease his moanes, he sighed forth, these loose rymes.

Heart without joy, and woes with woes oppressed,
The power of love is with more force adrest:
To make me slave to vylde captivity:
Loosing all hope, of hoped liberty.
There is no sweet unless from her it comes:
That Lillies white, and Roses red still shames.
What joy without Liriana can be pleasant:
In absence of her beauty nothing's decent.
But if she send the joy, it is past joy:
A buckler against all pains, and dyre annoy.
It yeeldes in torment pleasure and content:
And when it is worst, it is void of discontent.
I must nor, not I dare not hope for any:
Since love my woes procures by ways so many.
Bereauing me (by stealing her) of rest:
Changing my joy to pain, my peace t'vnrest.
Oh thou vast sea, through which was no man driven:
Oh watrie waves, clear sky, and brightest heaven.
If any pity you on earth bestow:
Show it on me, that am by love trodde low.
Maistred with woes, inchain'd without all pity:
Made poor in hope, but rich in misery.
Acknowledging content in discontent:
Calling that joy where no joy ere was meant.
She Is fair, but coy, excuse me in despair:
For all my joy is in desire made bare.
There wanted no loving sighs wherewith the valyant youth bemoaned his pains,
and the glory that from them he conceived, calling the Sea Gods and Goddesses
to witness his passions, who hearing what the gentle Lover published, could not
but pity him. So past he the night till about the bright lacing of the high
heavens, he saw a bark more swifter then the wind pass by his, along
thereon lay a Knight all armed, no less lamenting his griefs then he, and yet
with more reason, he went saying.

Oh love, may it be thou should by all means seek to ruinate my only
hopes being so long since assured, that if I live it is but to love, yiedling to
thee the awefull tribute of my tributarie self as liege man to thy deity,
and that for all these spoils, having my heart as hostage of my faith thou
should delight to permit the enemy of my death to use me thus, giving me
life to live in such distress? No more could the amorous Pagan hear, by
reason of the celeritie it carried, though by it he understood the wrong he
suffered, and seeing how general it was, said. Oh woeful Prince, what little
remedy is there left thee, seeing it is denied to every one, there is no hoping
for it by living? Oh pestiferous plague, how much art thou wrapped within the
poison of thy torments, and yet how wished is it to the dire cost of lovers
poor souls, that with such bitter lame^ts do celebrate their sweet woes. By
this did he see that the bark was stayed not far from the foot of a stately
edefice, builded upon the sea. The Achayan Lord rested amazed with the sight:
and to know what it was commanded his to be dirrected thither: he entered by
the side of the inscriptions, in sight of ye Knight, that was already ryzen,
resembling Mars himself, by his magnificence: with ye first scrowle that Bembo
met with, was this.

The entrance of the marvelous Tower is granted to none, not bringing the
armor of the ingratest Lover of the earth. Naturally bold was the furious
youth, and not respecting the contents of the scrowle, he flunge at one of the
pillars, thinking that way was the ascending to the Tower. But he had scarce
taken it with his hands, when suddenly there arose so much fire that the
Knight seemed all of a kindled coal, and certainly he had incurred mighty
danger of his life, had he not had on the arms of Saturn whose nature
resisted that element. Notwithstanding he parted from it, almost stifled with
the heat that entered through his visor. Well did the other Knight see it that
not far from thence, gazed on those that looked toward the occident, and
seeing the fire that had risen, (though more ready he seemed for his grave,
then to smile) yet he laughed so high that the fierce Pagan heard it, that not
a little was abashed thereat, and not able to dissemble it, said. I would
gladly know (sir Knight) the cause of your content, since with such exterior
signs you have shown it. None other (replied he in the yellowe of this
color was his armor,) but to have seen (sir Knight) with what vehemency
that flame would have imbrast you within your armor. It cannot be expressed
what rage entered within the Pagan, by the answer, he turned to the dispayrer,
saying. It had been far better, since you have seen armor to have tried the
savor of the fire of the pillars, in that the scorching flames of Love, you
have already published along the sea in your Navigations: and now I dare affirm
you are with reason thus suffered to live, considering how much you fly from
labor.

Wise and advised is the Lady, that from so cowarde a Knight detaines her
favors: But since you have seen with what audacitie I embrace yonder fire,
prepare your self, for to your cost will I make you know, how I can defend ye
enclosed in my heart. There was no need to advise him thereof, for with Mars would
he have fought touching what Bembo there had urged. Never upon the doubtful
seas, nor on the certain Land was there ever seen of a single fight a more
fiercer co^bate: For ye warriors are the flower of Christendom, and Paganism,
and the dispayrer was no less then the Greek Prince Claridiano, who out of
hope in love, as Lirgandeo has related departed from Grecia. None of the
waterie Gods would loose such a battle, for neither Faune nor Nymphe but came
to behold it: And not so much but the amorous Trytones lifted up their heads to
look on the two sole rare in the world. In sight did ye angry swelling waves
never seem more mild then now. Peace did Eolus and Neptune make together
with all their several attending traynes raynging along the green azured
waters till they came to the place where the battle was to be fought. The
gentle Dolphins Friends to Humane kind with sportiue leapes began to
solemnize the fight. In the air appeared ye mighty God of battles, in the
same form that he became Venus Champion to approve her fairest. The windows
of the wondrous Tower were opened at the which appeared all the enclosed
Ladies, whose presence beautified the deep, and made the lofty heavens far
more fair. All the Ladies, and sea Goddesses with Marses consent ordained
Judge of the fight, the most beauteous Lyriana, that fayrer them the causer of
the Grecian discordes, appeared all in white. Every one above and beneath made
her a solemn coursie. Mars descending low with his Celestial throne invited
her into his seat. The gallant dame would not admit it, but rather set her
breasts, (chief purities of chiefest pureness) to lean over the windows, at
what time, the enraged Pagan turned his eyes and saw her whose Image in his
soul was stamped. He was amazed with the new sight. Every thing slipped out of
his memory, and with the greatest forgetfulness of the world, he cast
himself upon the pummell of his sword, and loosing the raygnes of all his
imaginations, he so occupied himself in the good he viewed, that he thought
there was no more to be hoped, ioying to have found where she was inchaunted,
that so had inchaunted his desires.

There was never seen a more quicker distraction then that. Wherein Bembo was
only gazing on the excellency of his Lady. Well did Claridiano note the Mores
amaze, but thinking he did it, in little esteeming him, he leant into his
ship; and therefore was the battle more fiercer, and stepping to him, shaking
him by the arm, said.

It should seem (Knight) you have forgot the proud words you gave me, seeing
how carelessly you stand looking on Ladies. As one wakened out of a sweet
dream returned ye Pagan unto himself, replying. I was not so forgetful of
thy discourtesie, but I have it well in remembrance, and glad that none is here
to disturb me from revenging it. That was no time of ceremonious courtesies,
for ere he ended his reply, our new baptized Knight had assaulted the Pagan
with more puissance then he that beheld him. Upon his rich helm he gave him
such a blow, that it made him set one hand upon the ground. This was the
greatest blow the Pagan did receive since he put on armor. Before he rose he
had given him another on his Beuer, that squadrons of sparkles flew about his
head. Abashed was the Moore at such mighty strokes; unable to imagine whom so
strong a Knight might he; but altogether being recovered to the top of the
Greeks sheelde he let fly a pity less blow, which made him give back with
two or three unseemly stepps.

To help him downewardes did he enter with one, and another thrust with the
utmost strength of his arm: either of them had stuck him, but his sure armor
rebounded the^ back, notwithstanding they put him to great pain. The Pagan
followed with vehemence thinking to overthrow him: but Archisiloras Lover that
perceived it, houlding his own sword hard, turning away let him go by him,
and as he past, on the top of his plumed helm did Claridiano discharge the
fury of his strength, that he made his mouth a conduit of his lukewarm
blood. Ere he recovered himself, he gave him on that side a furious thrust, it
was well for the Pagan to give back at the strength thereof, yet it happened
betwixt a joint, cutting his flesh, and leaving him sore wounded. The warmest
blood within the Pagan freezed to see it on his adversaries blade, his shield
he cast at his back, and with both hands at Claridianos he let fly, it
yeildes him no defense, for from the one to the other end it was divided, and
it was a miracle he did not the like by his arm, with the swords point he
descended, cutting a great piece of his skirt, also falling on his Cushes which
being pierst it wounded him a little on the thigh. They that were borne to be
feared, feared not each other, but setting their left feet forwards, and
swoords in both hands, began to change their practice to that used among the
Cyclopes in Vulcans Aetnean worke-house: the seas resounded with the furious
noise of their battle. The heavens racking clouds were driven with amazement
from their standings, posting one through the other at the sight thereof. So
did they that gazed thereon, sometimes ducking their heads under the water
because they would not see the remorcelesse blows of so pitiless a combat.
Three hours have they sought, yet no advantage could be decerned: they were so
tired, that with one self will they wtdrew apart to breath. It was worse for the
Moore, because the Bark being narrow he had no room to walk, and so the wound
in his side being great, began exceedingly to grieve him. In a thousand
imaginations was he in, calling himself coward, that in presence of his Lady
one sole Knight should put him in that state. In faith with reason (said the
Pagan) may the world blame me, since so little courage I do show, where, from
whence I ought to draw it out of weakness: what justice can I have to crave
redress, and remedy for my pain, putting the first battle in my Goddess
presence on such a danger? how may I be trusted with any rendering so ill an
account of this? next to this a thousand blasphemies breathed the Moore against
his Gods, whose fury with such devotion he had procured: but seeing it is come
to this (continued he) I will reverence ye as your carelessness deserves.

But Claridiano insenced with ire, uttered many things against himself being
by one Knight so bayted. Iniustly (said the furious Greek) may I be called the
son of such a Father: for he had by this ended two such Combats, but I that
am his Son, have hazarded the loss of one that is presented to me. I cannot
be he that is the Lover of Ar^silor* for he that tributaried his heart to her in
the woods of Greece, had before this obtained a glorious victory. His fury so
increased, that he took his sword twixt both his hands, and made toward
the Pagan, that more courageous than a Lion stayed for him? Together they met,
and with such blows regreeted each other, that Mars in his supreme throane
did tremble. One knee to the ground did the Greek set, but the Pagan his right
hand, he arose as swift as a towering Faulcon: and crossing his sword with the
Greeks, entering on a sudden with his left foot, with more celeritie then the
quick mind he let sly at his legs. It was a wonder he did not unlace them,
but it so tormented with pain the one of them, that he could not stir it,
and Lirgandeo says the smart thereof lasted all the while the fight endured.

Well did the More see the good blow he hadd made and therefore would he
close with him, and the Greek could not refuse it, being taken with some
advantage, he was almost overthrown, so fiercely he entered to the wrestle:
but making of one foot two, he stood so strongly, that the Pagan thought he
had encompassed a Rock. So long they stryued that they fell on the hatches,
not daring to loosen, fearing to loose thereby. By this means did the Achayan
loose so much blood that it was marvel how he could hold out, for all the
bark was stained with the hew, tumbling up and down the boat, the Greek
went so nighe the boorde thereof, that taking houlde thereat with more strength
then may be imagined, in despite of the Moore with a swinge he flung him to
the farther side, and with admirable lightness he set himself on foot. Slow was
not ye Pagan in doing the like, though in this second battle was plainly
seen what advantage the yellow Knight had over his adversary, and the Combat
continuing to the end, the More could not but be overcome. The Lady would not
suffer it, for only to that intent had she her perfect judgment, by means of
the perverse Lupercio: so she spoke, here me sir Knights? Hearing the Ladies
voice, neither stirred their swoords, for the gallantnesse wherewith both were
adorned, bound them to it: she proceeded. May this testimony (brave Knights)
suffice which you have given to the deep seas, that for my sake making no
longer battle, ye leave it in this estate. They could not do otherwise then
the Lady entreated: it benefited the Moore therein, and so replied. So long
has my will obayed the supreme command of yours most Excellent Lady, that I
cannot do more then what is your content: and seeing herein you do receive it,
I am content, so pleases this Knight. She said, he will, for it is the
Gallants sole honor to accomplish a Ladies behest, much more her kind request.
She did not so dislike the Greek, that he should not obey her, and therefore
made answer. In faith most Sovereign Lady, I am glad occasion is offered,
that I may be obedient to your service, and since herein it is shown, I am
content, and so remit this knights battle, beseeching you to give me leave to
depart, for I have much to do in another place. To do so you have it sir
Knight answered the Lady. He took his farewell of her and the Pagan; leaving
with him enough to talk of his valor many years after. He leapt into his
boat, which began to sail, with such velocitie, that the Ladies straight lost
the sight thereof; so did Bembo, that stood amazed at his Goddess view, not
knowing whether he was in heaven or on earth. With greater courage then at any
time he said. If the Faith (sweet Lady) which I owe you, may be any means
somewhat to assure me the entrance, I entreat your sovereign beawtie, to
show me which way I may thither ascend, and take her from so inhumane a
Jail, that has perpetually imprisoned my heart. The Lady answered never a
word, for she neither knew her self nor any other, only might she disturb
any battle when any of Lupercios faction sustained the worst. She returned
away with her Ladies leaving the Prince in obscure darkness. He lost all the
moving powers of his body, and stood gazing at the place where he had seen
his glory. In that vision would he have dyed, thinking he departed in quiet:
but having ouer-past that amorous care, with a sigh, he burst into these
speeches.

Oh cruel Lady, scourge of the Achayan house, may it be such inhumane cruelty
should be enclosed within so fair a Lady? what law permits thou should
know I dye, I joy therein, that it is my life to suffer many deaths for thy
sake, and that thou have never been pleased to say I am pleased to admit it?
This is a tirannie that admits no comparatiue, for if my death will avail thee,
or that thou will not love let me know it, and my self will be the cruel
executioner, of a most cruel death if therein consistes thy content? But
unfortunate mishhap, it is enough it comes from me, and that Bembo does desire
it, to be denied by Lyriana? If any should be cherished in life for well
loving, is there any on ye earth that better then my self has done it? Is
there any that with more purity does Idolatrize thy affairs then I? Is there
any that omitting his own pleasure will procure thine, but I? If then (fairest
of all Fayres, beauteous Liriana) thou art of this assured, why do thou thus
prolong my remedy? why becomest thou deaffe to my exclaymes? Thine I am, and
thine will I die? let fortune still be opposite even to my hopes, and may the
heavens evermore conspire against Bembo, my heart has patience to endure all.
First began I to pyne, ere I knew whom I loved, and since from all aspects I
am dissuaded, (and should believe it) will I only in thoughts end my days.
So much blood lost he, that the Master pitying him said. Sir Knight be not
such an enemy to your self, for it may cost you your life, the differring of
your cure. My hap will not be so good (replied the Prince) as to meet with
death for it, does my pain expect and desire anchorage of the grief it
sustaines. Nevertheless (said the Master) it is a kind of despair to suffer a
death by the heavens vnappointed, for it is a blemish to any ones honor. Such
persuasions he used, that he put of his armor, and laid him on a bed within
the Masters cabin. They dressed him with great care, yet greater was his of
his Lady. They would not suffer him to rise in four days which he continued
the thinking to see his Goddess, and seeing it was but in vain, he commanded to
direct to Achaya intending to demand of his friend Lupercio what armor and
weapons the entrance to that Tower required. The Mariners to please him would
have done it, but there arose a sudden tempest, that it was impossible to arryue
there, so were they carried backwards up and down ye Grecian Ocean, until the
eight day they arrived in a most abundant land full of many trees and woods.
It gladded the Prince, for the Sea had tired him. So he commanded his furious
Courser to be landed, and armed in all his armor, he leapt on shore,
commanding the rest to stay for him eight days, while he learned what
country that was. He took the most use path he could see till the
afternoon that the Suns mydday heat was somewhat cool, he alighted to
rest close to a Fountain, eating such provision as his pages had brought from
the ship. So eating was the Pagan there, but his pylgrim thoughts wandered on
Lyriana, when to the same fountain where he was, arrived a damozell no less
beauteous then well attired, who not (for all the Prince was there) alighted
with rare gallantnes, to refresh her fair face in the pearled spring, where
she reassured her self she was beautiful, having dried her face with a
semely wantonness, she stepped to the Prince with these words. Sir Knight, ye
heat, and the commodiousnes of the place have forced me to bear you company,
although respecting the sorrow your armor does express, I believe it will
discontent you, delighting in solitude, a means that love has invented to
lovers costs to ease their pains and incorage their pensiveness. Amorous was
the Pagan, and used to say he merited not the to be named a Knight that
would not in a Ladies behalf adventure his life, hazarding his own affairs
to do them service: and so answered.

In faith (fair Damozell) though all humane conversation were troublesome unto
me, yet yours shall not be so, because I think you are a little schooled in
the good of solitude, a manifest token that he that spares none, has pleased
to make you his tributarie: these discourses being those the soul conuerseth
al alone, to have now one to answer me, will make my pains more
tolerable, persuading my self of good luck in all things in his land,
where my fortune has cast me, being welcomed by such a good beginning, where
she replied.

It well seems (sir Knight) you be in love, seeing with your reasons you
would so soon launche into the deep of beautye, a common thing among
Knights that only love for the present, and there is no cause you should
assure me of my beautye, for with it the Fountain restes more gladded, then
that wherein Narcissus gazed: So that Sir Knight you must seek other means
then these to Court the Dames of Trebizound (which is the Land you now are
in) for this here is too common, and they know it very well that presume so
on their beautyes, for telling them of it, is to increase their rygor against
them that in this land so woo.

I am much bound unto your service pleasant Lady (replied Bembo glad to
hear the chatte of the riggish Dame) for this advise, for as a Nouice in this
land not knowing the manners thereof, I talked according to ye practizes of
other Nations at this time, since there is no content to Ladies equal to the
calling of them beautiful, receiving grief by the contrary, and not ye least
in compting them not fair although the heavens have toward them been niggards
in their influences, making them not of ye absolutest. She answered. They do
so that will not believe what they are, contrary to us in Trebizound, and
therefore be they pleased to be termed by what they are not, giving their
lovers favors though faygned for it: who more by insinuating then a firm faith
procure the content of being beloved. Not for all the Ladies so saying to
their gallantes, (sweet damozell answered the Pagan.) Cease they to be
liberal, careful, and for their Mistres good most ready. The damozell
replied, with that, it is so: for it does more evidently show how the heart loves:
and on the last, grou^ding what abroad is used, I say, that Lady is
ungrateful that will not show her pity being assured she may, by a
Thousand new favors that her gallant may be animated, knowing if he lives by
loving that his faith is also repayd by love. This is that which best assures
the hoped good between lovers, and on ye Ladies behalf their glory of being
beloved. Other manner of courting use you here (fair damozell said Bembo) the^
in those places I have travailed: for the galla^ts in my country, only
procure by loving to assure their Ladies thereof, that they may be pleased to
condescend thereto, making their wills known unto them.

In respect of the intolerable pains suffered, do they never require any
guerdo^, but only procure to propagate that magnanimity wherewith they
sacrifize themselves unto their Ladies, setting in their hands their hearts and
souls, expecting nothing hereby but the glorious surname of their amorous
knights. Strange things have you told me sir knight said she, and gladly would
I know whom you love, to be certified whether it be so or no: but persuaded it
is so, I know not what the Trebizound Ladies mean, so much to debase their
beauties. And far more the^ to receive a jewel of great prize would I esteem
to have longer time to discourse with a knight so grande a seruitor to Cupid:
but the have that calls me away constraines me to depart, for my Lady the
Princess expects an answer of some business by my return who to rest a while
remained not far hence in a house of pleasure, and with her is the Princess
Artemisa of England, and to my thinking not so free as were convenient: So (sir
knight) I pray you pardon me, for fortune may appoint better occasion that I
may enjoy your amorous conversation, which has not a little attracted me. At
all times (fair Lady replied the Moore) that you will so favor me, will I
account past my deserts reputing it according to your many merits, and the
discretion of so fair a dame. And if my power may any way procure your
content, command me, for with all diligence necessary will I accomplish it.
With this she departed leauinst the amorous Pagan affected to her witty
wantonness. And mounting on his horse he continued on his way wherein befell
him, what the next recounteth.

CHAP. XXI. What in the Forest happened to the courageous Bembo, with the
Princess of Trebizound and her guard: with other adventures.
MOunted on a brauer horse then any they which drawing the goulden eye of
heaven compass about the Terrene Orb, somewhat after his meridionall decline
traveled the mighty Bembo, with his pilgrim thoughts only on his Lady, that
to drive him from them was the wanton damozels pretty chat no means, desirous
ere he left that Empire to see that Court so famoused throughout the world, by
reason of the excellent Princes that governed there. On this ranged his pensive
imaginations, with some ease, which the pleasant sound of the chirping birds
moved, seeing that to, among them love has his command: For if they will
strive either to excel other in their notes, it is because he reigns among
the^, that makes the rusticke country swayne more excellenter then Demostenes
in eloquence of speech, so he be touched with love. What tongue or pen has he
subingated, that has been poor in skill, and not rich in wit? who could ever
utter the abou^dance of a copious and artificial tongue, unless moved by the
son of his moother Venus? The Sarracine Prince did not call himself deceived
for yiedling of his faith, but considering he had past any time without Love,
he termed it lost: and that life worse the^ death that is not troubled with
Cupids amorous passions. In this and in a thousand complots which Love
propounded him was he occupied, when from out a fragant thicket he saw coming
a company of Knights richly armed: not far after them there came three
attending on a sumptuous Carre, wherein he thought he saw some Ladies, till
approaching more nigh, he was assured it was so ouer-viewing the riches of the
knights: Two of them were of one devise, all green with the spanish arms upon
their shields, whereby he knew them to be Spaniards, as indeed they were, being
those two valiant brothers that went to the Grecian wars, for the Emperor
Alphebo would not suffer them to return accoumpting greatly of them, so they
were entertayened with name and Charge of Captains of the Empire. The other
(that seemed of a bigger constitution although so well proportioned, that the
Prince highly reputed him) was that warlike and gallant Teferreo, great friend
to the Emperor and Don Eleno: his armor was russet set with many rich
stones, which with curious knots wonderfully adorned his strong brestplate.
Never did the Prince see so big and comely a knight, and though he himself
was not much less than ix. feet in height, yet with his hand could he not
reach the others head. So soon as they saw the Prince, with so lamentable a
devise, they did with admiration view him, seeing his Majesty on horseback,
only by this in many places when he would not, he was known. The Ladies being
very young entertained his devise with some smiles, which made the English
Lady thus say, I am besides my self when I consider what power a Ladies
disfauoure has over any Knight, for presentlye as if they were slain, they
bewail in mourning the life they live, judging it ten times worse then
death. It is common among Knights (answered Rosiluera) to express the pain of
the soul, caused by the sight of the ordresse. And believe me not if our
keepers be not like to incur some disgrace with him in the black, for he
seems valiant. Where Teferreo is (said Artemisa) there is no reason to fear
that. Nevertheless (answered the Princess) shall you see I speak true. She
already began to speak partially, for in Greece did she see the woonders of
Bembos deeds, imprinting his portraiture so truly in her heart that seeing
him, she knew to whom she had given entrance to the most secret, and dearest
lodging of the same.

The Knights sent to the Pagan a Page with this message. Sir Knight. In yonder
Chariot rydes the Princess of Trebizound Rosiluera, and to work her
content, the three Knights are determined to demand the Iustes of al they
shall meet by the way, and thinking under such devise there cannot want any
love, they send me to entreat you, that in service of yonder Lady you would
Just with every one of them, and your guerdon (if you vanquish) shall be the
greatest that can be, for you must accompany them as their keeper, defending
them against all adventures that shall happen: and they themselves to loose what
the Ladies to favor them had granted. This demand gladded the furious youth,
and so replied.

Good page I had rather in any other thing then by Iustes serve those Ladies,
for always by them redounds perpetual enmity. Notwithsta^nding if therewt
they be pleased, barbarous and rude were I to disobay the^, and so tell those
knights I am content to do it, but that I will admit no more then the Iusts.
With this answer returned the Page unto the Ladies, which greatly pleased them
to see him so courteous: for the Iusts the chollerick Spanyard prepared
himself, but here got he little, for Lirianas lover encountered him so
strongly, that he threw him from his saddle, he lost one stirrup but he
recovered it so quick that none perceived it. To revenge his brother pricked
forth ye elder, finding like gain, although this encounter was stronger, yet
not to let him from passing forwards on his swift Courser, until the Ladies
Chariot, who to enjoy better of his sight had commanded it to be opened on
all sides: he had not seen out of Grecia greater nor rarer beauty then there
was. Some alteration in his breast did it cause, remedies are they, that though
they do not altogether salve, yet dispose of cure for the deceit of his
blindness, placing his love, where hope of redress was mere despair. To
gaze on them he stood still, to whom Rosiluera said: we know not wherein we
have offended you sir Knight, that with such cruelty you should deprive us of
our keepers: he replied. Most excellent Ladies, as I was requested be them to
do it, I presumed so to do your pleasure: since that, have matters happened
so to my Honor, that I know not whereto I should attribute it, save that Fortune
alredie weary in persecuting me, would begin to show some favor.
Nevertheless if I have displeased, I am ready to make satisfaction, rendering
the victory unto these knights, and leave the Iusts with him that expects me.
So let he his lance fall to the ground, we will not accept this excuse (said
the Princess) but will have you follow the auspiousnesse of your fortune. Not I
fair Lady (answered he) except your beauty do command me: suffices we are
pleased thereby (replied Artemisa) that you may fearelesse do it sir knight,
and as for the other that does remain against your winning of the three
knights place, to adventure my life for it is nothing (answered the gallant
lover:) and therefore will I try whether my Fortune be changed or no. He
humbled himself to them with such gallantnesse, that both Ladies wished him
victory, he took up his lance himself, more quicker then a bird returning
to his Carrier. To the Just spurd the courageous Giant, with more horror then
a flashe of Lightning renteth through the Clouds vanishing in them. The
shieuers of their Lances mounted so high that they were never more seen: Five
lances did they break without known loss. Abashed was Teferreo thereat,
seeing his hap before the Princesses, therefore he said. Sir Knight if you
think good lets end the battle at all adventures, seeing we cannot be
unhorsed. The Prince feared to displease the Ladies, so made this answer. I
would (sir Knight) gladly content you herein, but that I come with such have,
that I may not stay so long but I accept it, to be performed this day four
months in Achaya. It pleases me (replied the Giant) and bearing this devise
you shall not now need to tell your name. With such cruelty (replied he) does
fortune persecute me, that I intend all my life to wear this empreze, so
wheresoever you shall seek me, demanding in Achaya for the unfortunate knight
shall you hear news of me. They turned their horses with more fury then Mars
had done, and with an unthought speed they met with such force that all the
Forest ecchoed. Out of the saddle did Teferreo find himself, news to him
since Don Elenos battle, yet was his fall good by carrying his raygnes in his
hand, though the Horse helped him little for eleuating himself made him that
he could not recover his seat. The valerous Bembo that stronger bare his
legs, remained on horseback, but with such disorder, without bridle and
stirropps, that to shun some disgrace, he was feign to leap from his
Courser. Courteous was the giant, so he said.

Yours is the prize of the Iustes sir Knight, having with such honor obtained
it, so may you take our place in guard of the Princess, whose advantage in not
small by the exchange. None in kindness went beyond Bembo, and therefore made
this reply. Most Heroyke Knight, the Gods defend that through my means you
loose the merits deserved by your person, and worthy to these Knights, for if I
must attend on the Ladies it shall be as your friend in your company, or
otherwise I will return the way I came. We will not have you (said one of the
Spaniards) to vanquish us in all things, and since the condition was ours,
there is no cause why we should not suffer it, and so lets speak to ye Ladies
for it is time they were going. Be it as you will have it sir Knight answered
Bembo, seeing I must not diobay. Already approached the Charriote with the
Princesses, who in respect of the Knights seemed sorrowful, though the
beauteous Rosiluera was the ioyfullest in the world, seeing how well the Knight
in the black had defended himself, so she spoke. I believe (Knights) we must
impute to our small merits, and less good fortune, the cause of our changing
new guard, which being so, henceforth (sir Knight) begin to execute your new
charge which I fear you will think painful, procuring better luck now then
our keepers had before. Abashed were the vanquished with Rosilueras words who
accounted him in the black the sole owner of her heart, who made her this
reply. I do rather remain so fearful of my Cross fortune (most excellent
Princess) that seeing how adverse she has still shown her self, will now
with new pains discharge her self of this my present (so I fear momentary)
good, which last, if it be equal to the former, no heart is able to endure the
grief, though mine has had the power to promise it self to be yours until
the latest minute.

O God, how great was the joy the Lady received with ye answer thinking (it is
common amongst them that love) he uttered it with the firmness of his souls
truth, and not as words, of course, tending on the ceremonious duty that her
kindness bound him too. They took their way to the purling of a clear bubling
brook that sprung somewhat more within the thicket, minding there to pass the
heat of the afternoon, where the Princess seemed the ioyfullest in ye world,
seeing him go close to her stirrup whom she had pictured in her heart, whose
silence she thus brake. How fare you Sir Knight with your new office, I am in
doubt, it makes you already repent, to have it undertaken? Twere so (most
sovereign Lady) replied the gallant Achayan. Did I not consider the supremacy
of the high glory wherein my thoughts have placed me combinde thereto, stopping
al passage to my imagination of hoping other happiness, loosing the present I do
enjoy. Hereupon (the beauteous Artemisa took occasion thus.) We would not (sir
Knight) you should so soon have acknowledgd it, only passing with the imagined
glory of the Princess command: he made answer. As my heart (beauteous Lady)
has always been full of continual miseries and torments, now feling it self
discharged of his heavy oppressing load, it straight judged that fortune
prepared, greater pains yiedling me this present extenuation, in midst of
which thought, to expel ye worse from remembrance made me break into that
passion, I call it so, for though I seem (being not continual) as such a one
but little to feel it, publishing it with such rudeness, how should I do were
it perpetual: but oh inconstant chance, why name I a perpetuity, when I know
this good more then felicity, is but ye prologue to an vnterminate end of
greater pains, by bringing me to the acco^plishing of your command whose
greatness exceeds all worth of happiness compared? here Artemisa replied. Why
(sir Knight) we required not to know more the^ the princess demanded, for
whosoever does guard our chariot, must have his heart so exempt of imaginary
thoughts, that his care may be only busied on the present object of his eye:
with these and such like speeches they arrived to the fount where the ladies
descended, ioying to refresh their heated beauties in ye coolenes of the water,
or to speak more aptly to purify it with their presence. The like did the four
Princes, the Achayan discovering his lovely countenance. New amorous lances
to pierce the tender breast of the all wounded Lady, though (not knowing who he
was) she would not disclose it to any, willing rather to suffer and live with her
maide^ honor (but with pain) then to blemish it by other means, yet the eyes
wherewith she gazed on him with such particular care, were evident enough of
her affection had the Prince noted it. Together hand in hand the two Ladies
walked into the thicket alone, to enjoy the freshnes of the air, which was so
pleasant that it made them go further then they would, and being thick, and
without paths, they could not when they would return which not a little
grieved the^. Whereupon ye Princess said. What shall become of us Lady, if we
should remain in this remoted place? great has been our carelessenes to part
so far without the company of our Knights, for we might unhappily miscarrie if
any wild beast should issue out of these woods. I may go secure (replied
Artemisa) for seeing you I shall be left, to repair unto the fairest. Hay me
(said she) I pray thee say not so, for my flesh trembles to hear it. In these
Feminine fears were they busied, when from the wood there came a mighty big
Knight in bigness, like a giant, all in armor, with four Knights with him, of
no less force then ye Master, who was Lord of ye famous Isle of Rhodes
situate in the Carpatian Sea, not far disioynd from the Fro^tiers of Egypt and
Lycia, he was called Valdanio ye strong, who inamored by hear say of
Rosiluera, came to Trebizou^d with 16 Knights, whom he dispersed four
several ways for this intent, which was by any means to steal her away,
for once in safety set in his Isle against all the universe he would defend her.
In seeing the Ladies, he knew whom he loved, and with extreme joy he cried
out. Oh Jove may it be thou have kept for me such good fortune? I will
acknowledge it with rich sacrifices until the death. He would not defer it,
supposing there might be thereabouts her attendance: so went he to ye Ladies
that seemed more like dead coarses then living creatures. She whom he loved,
did she barbarous Giant take in his arms: a better prize never any made, had
Fortune favored him to the end. The English Lady had more courage so she ran
into the thicket: whether the Knights would not follow her, but seeing their
good occasion spurring with greatest speed their horses, took their way to the
Sea coast where their Galley expected the^ with her sails ready spread. This
while had Artemisa time to send her clamors, through the empty air keeping on
her slight, whose echo, brought her where their knights expected, the^, to
whom, in most pitiful manner she recounted ye Princess misfortune. Which
thing exceedingly grieved every one, with sudden amazement, except it were the
furious Bembo knowing which way she went, more swifter then ye passage of the
racking Clouds, upon his fiery Courser (the^ which the world yielded not two
better) he followed ye villainous Giant with the Princess: who in a trance was
carried till having run the space of some two miles, in ye myddle of a spacious
field, at the foot of a spreading Caedar she saw a knight lie, clad all in
armor, that with ye noise was risen, to know the reason of it. So soon as the
Lady saw him, with great lamentation she said. So the heavens in all your
actions bless you (sir Knight) suffer not this most unjust outrage to be
done me. Straight did the Knight know her for many days since, had he made
her the proper love of his own soul, tributarie to hers. For this was the
haughty Don Cellindo of the hidden grove, where he had seen the portrature
of that Lady, who by chance was sundered from his Sister, nothing sorrowing for
it, to go to Trebizound and see that Princess that so had captiuated him.
Nothing slow was Alicandros Nephew for swifter then an Eagle he joined with the
Giant thus. Set down thy burden vntutred beast, for less then thy head it
shall not cost thee, he durst not run against him, for hitting of the Lady, but
being more nigher said again.

Stay villainous Knight for so easilye is not the fairest Flower of Trebizound
to be carried away, in whose defense first will I loose my life then see her
sustain the least injury. Otherwise then set her down could not the Rhodian
Lord do, sure to remove that block out of his way, and glad to, that his
Knights as he thought would not stay long, but himself being better mounted
they lost their way in the wood, where they paid full dearly for their
presumption, for the furious Teferreo committing Artemisa to the Spaniards
keeping, committed his fortunes to the running of his horse til he met with
the^ as shall be expressed: returning now to Don Cellindo, woe seeing himself
before his Lady, and that battle to be for her liberty, he couched his lance
with such gallantnes, that the Pagan somewhat feared, they encountered with more
noise the^ the meeting of two Rocks: mighty was the Moore, yet notwithstanding
received he a dangerous wound on his left breast, from whence issued much
blood. The gallant Cellindo past forward with loss only of his stirroppes: ere
the horse turned again he recovered them, and drawing forth Queen Iulias
famous blade marched against his adversary, beginning between them one of the
fiercest and best fought combat ever made in Trebizou^d. For the warriors
being mighty, strong and of lusty courage, gave and received puissant blows,
the one cutting both armor and flesh of the other, and he brusing and
tormenting the body of his adversary within his enchanted armor, which though
it tired him, yet he had made the Moore almost faint with loss of blood from
his many wounds, receiving the last, and dangerousest on his breast, with such
horror that it awakened the Lady (which all that while did lie senseless and
without feeling) who seeing how bravely her knight behaved himself, with more
ease she sat gazing on the battle, persuading her self hers would be the
victory: but to the unfortunate, every little thing is a let to their pretense:
For Don Cellindo imagining it would not meanly benefit his loves to bind the
Ladies kindness, by vanquishing that Gigantine knight, made all the have
possible for the Conquest, and in faith for greater matters was his valor
suffitient, had not the Goddess of indirect proceedings diricted the therward
ye Tygrian Bembo setting him in midst of that fair plain, when ye Prince
ended his stroke. Through the velocity of his Courser he quickly joined with
the^, and his lance above hand he acted a deed worthy of the Achayan Lord,
for settling himself strongly on his stirrops, he darted it to ye mighty Pagan
taking him full in ye middle of his side, had it been twice thicker it had pirest
him, a third part thereof appeared on ye other side. There is no asking whether
the blow pleased ye lady, loving ye black dearer the^ her own soul. He yt to
ye death grieved thereat was Don Cellindo, and not able to smother his anger
said. It ill besemed thee (bold knight) seeing me in fight with ye other, to
proceed as thou have done because to liberate the Princess my arm was
suffitient, needing not ye aid of thy pride. Mild and courteous was Be^bo
before he was angered, but being he made his hearers tremble. So somewhat with a
hoase voice he replied. The offense if any has been committed is in thee
audacious knight, for doing another business, we should not stay one for ye
other, either procuring ye liberty of one Lady. And yt thou may know how I
use to guerdon those yt are discourteously arrogant and lavish of their tongue.
Defend thy self, for ye ones head shall be witness of the others right: whereupon
with that celerity he in all things used, he drew forth his magic tempered blade,
better the^ which the earth contained not. It Is requisite that with new courage ye
Prince fortify himself, whose armor not a little auailes ye defense of his
body, for else in ten thousand pieces with his Herculean arm had Be^bo cut him.
Like Lions, Bazalisks, or ravening wolfs did they make their battle. Of courage
invincible were they both, and every blow of power to divide a rock, for all
their armor was enchanted, yet their strength guiding their sharp swords
ma^gled it, cut it away, bruised their flesh, and wounded it in many places
with dangerous wounds: with ye crimson blood that issued from them was the
grass inamelde their armor died, and their horses all be-sprinkled. Their
nimblenes in avoiding, and quicknes in assaulting, with their skill shown in
every blow was admirable. The worst of ye 2 sped Meridians son, and so much
that being continued to ye end, either he should suffer a valiant death, or
escape with eternal dishonor: for with a blow that Be^bo gave him on his visor, he
struck him all along upon his horse, without sight and feeling: he followed the
chase where he had surely slain him, had he not heard a voice that stayed him,
It was the Ladies, that considering what the knight had done for her, would not
be ungrateful for it, but in sign thereof, caused the battle to cease:
thinking (as indeed it was her Bembo) had the better. She roze from whence she
came, and in great have ran to him in the black with these words. For my
sake sir Knight leave this battle, whose victory will yield but little
profit, and it were ill to repay his good will so, that with such liberality
offered to free me from the dead knight: he saw (though he was angry) that the
Lady had reason in her words, and so replied. Sovereign Princess of
Trebizound, although this Knight had greatly wronged me, I am content to leave
it in this estate so he will: he will, he will: (answered she) if he will
leave me debtor, for that he has done for me. In what manner the voice
surpised him, in the same he stood a good while, having his power subject to
no more then to obey the beauteous Lady, to whom he replied. My advantage
being hereby the greatest (most fair Princess) I wish, it had been commanded
me before (not now, this knight has got the best) that your sovereign beauty
might have been assured of my will, which is with my life to be employed in
your service until the death. In what manner soever you do it, I accoumpt it
no small favor sir knight (did Rosiluera answer) since the cause to be
respected is the will that perfourms it, and till some of my attendants come I
pray you alight, that with some thing we may bind your wounds. Both from
their horses leapt, and being Lovers set all their felicity in obeying Ladies.
They put of their helmes, fair was the gallant youth Don Cellindo, more white
then brown, and of so brave a constitution, that no Lady (being in love) but
would desire to be of him. She bound his wounds with more gentleness then
Venus did her Adonis when she thought he had not been slain. These three, the
famousest Lovers that ever Cupids amorous host did know, sat them down
together under the covert of a spreading myrtle. Where, oh love, who may have a
tongue so exquisite sharpened in skill to accord thy discordes and order thy
disorders? In what do thou delight thou scourge of humane lives. To see the
youthful Don Cellindo fix his eyes, and thoughts on the beauteous Lady,
making it norishment to his heart, and all other things, but to be hers, to
account, a death, a plague, a torment? or to behold the Lady free of his pain,
to explicate with her two earthly Suns the cause that does augment hers,
within her self suffering a Thousand torments all of love proceeding of
loving the Achayan Bembo? to draw ye pleasure for her soul from him, to Don
Cellindos cost? who noting with his Judicial eyes with what affection the
Princess would cast hers upon his adversary, it was more then eternal pain
which he suffered, then which the hell of Love wherein he lived, he Judged
could yield no greater. Ioyest thou destroier of the universe (not sparing the
little, little corner of my iniuried heart) to see the ungrateful More jest at
Rosiluera, having his thoughts there, but his soul with Liriana, in this
living with joy, but of the other having only of all his powers, his body
there on the plain, casting his eyes aloft upon the towering Cypresses, and
odoriferous mirtles? Some comfort was this to Meridians Son, for to himself
he said. It was not possible he should love where his sight did not gaze
thereon. Oh valiant Princes who might please you, displeasing neither, pardon,
oh pardon me sweet Ladies, for my long progressing through ye paths of loves
sincere purity, for Don Cellindo gazing on her he loves, and she on him, she
had before her on the other side, made ye last viewing her beauty, judge it but
a parcel, or an abstract drawn from the perfect model of Lirianas
perfections on whom his imagination did feed, accompting the greatest evil
for her sake to be his chiefest joy.

The Lady spoke (for in love discourses they have greater power in this war of
Venus, then Hector among Mars his troops) sir Knight (looking at Don
Cellindo) I do greatly desire you would communicate your name to us, that
Trebizound may know her creditor for my liberty: nothing more then to obey her
can the gallant: so he replied. Most Sovereign Princess the certainest thing
that I can tell of my name, is to know nothing of the same. In company of a
Sister of mine a wise man brought me up, not telling us who we are, but that I
was called the hidden Don Cellyndo, though now the fortunate Knight I am
termed. It should seem they suspected this would befall me, wherein I might do
you some service, although it may be more aptly attributed to the valor of
this Knight. Any other thing I know not of my self, nor have I ye heart to
declare it. The last understood the Lady as one wounded with that disease, and
because she would not give him farther occasion for that argument she thanked
him for that he had done, and turning to her soul said. Seeing sir Knight
that by your valor you have obtained to be my keeper, I must now have you also
declare your name unto me. In all things (sovereign Princess) am I bound to
your service, although of your demand I know less the^ this Knight: only can I
tell, that from my minority I have acknowledged another sovereignty over
me, and for all my life dependes thereon, yet was my name given me contrary
to this Knights, calling me the unfortunate. I am sure she will now be weary
of pains, having reserved for me in Trebizound such supreme good. As the
Lady was about to answer appeared Teferreo, with signs that he had fought,
for all his armor was dashed with fresh blood of others. It Was so for not far
there had he met with the 4 Knights, whose vanquishment cost him no little
trouble, but in the end their heads paid for their bouldnes. He took up the
Lady behind him on the horse, and (shu^ning ye prolixitie of their greetings)
took their way where the brothers of Spain and Artermisa were, with whom after
the passing of some jests between them about her flight, they altogether went
to the house of pleasure where the Emperor bravely welcomed them, and the
better knowing what had befallen them. What intertaynement, or with what
pleasure they should intertaine the two Princes, they knew not. The one knew
no more of himself then what he had said. The other never declared his name to
any but Liriana. There staid he eight days, which was but a momentary instant
for the Lady, that by a thousand means would have made him know her
affection: but his was so great toward another that it would not so much as
let him mark hers, thinking he had been stayed a whole age in Trebizound. He
craved leave for his departure to every ones grief for he was loving who felt
it worse then death, was Rosiluera, though she dissembled it: in this she
excelled all Ladies of her time. He returned to Achaya, where his friend Lupercio
expected him, who to expel his love of Lyriana from his mind toulde him how
she was betrothed to one of the valiantest Knights of ye world, and of the
house of Grecia. It grieved him so extremely, that he fell into many
infirmities, although the wise man with hopes deluded him which was the cause
of his recovery: where we must leave him, and Don Cellindo, feasting in vain
the gallantnesse of his Lady Rosiluera: because we must treat a while of
Claridiano, whom with oblivion we have greatly wronged.

CHAP. XXII. How Prince Claridiano arrived in the Kingdom of Esclauonia, and
what adventures there befell him.
AFfectionate to the valor of the Black Knight departed the Greek Prince,
unable to imagine whom so fair a Lady should be which he judged to remain
within that tower enchanted, but as he in sorrow progrest, he would with
nothing joy, nor in any delight thinking he wronged his Lady, to converse with
pleasing thoughts, having forsaken Grecia in her disgrace. He crossed all the
Macedonian Sea, and sailed alonge the Coast of Panonia Four days, and on the
fifth his incha^ted bark furrowed the raging billows of the Illyrium Sea, till
the Tenth day that it ran alande in an unknown port, where he leapt on shore,
having nor meeting any of whom he might demand where he was arrived. Upon his
Zephirus he mounted that horse which he with such immortal honor won at the
Nabatran Feasts as the second part rezited. His Heroyke carriage better denoted
him to be the Son of Mars, then Claridianas offspring, his shield he carried
at his back, and his lance on his shoulder, with his Beuer up. In this manner
laden with Millions of grievous passions, he took in have, the most used path;
through which he had not far gone, when the same way he saw a knight coming,
as fast as his horse could run. He stepped before him, demanding the cause
thereof, but he was so grieved, yt he could, or would not tell it. Whereat the
afflicted Prince being abashed with the Knights discourtesie having his
lance above hand struck him with it from his horse, saying. Now discourteous
Knight shall you perforce tell me what I entreated you, or else I will let
forth your life. So did he set the pike of his lance at his breast, threatening
him with death if he told not, who fearing it replied.

Pardon me (sir Knight) for the grief I had, made me thus forget my self:
but know, you are in ye kingdom Esclauonia very nere the ancient City
Zantho, where at this time the King keeps his Court, accounted one of the
famosest in the world. He has a Daughter for her beauty called the second
Venus, whose excellencies are said to surpass the Mother of Loves. Of this
Lady the Son of ye Siconian Sophi became amorous, who has with him four
Brothers no less mighty then himself, he has shown himself so affectionate
toward the second Venus, that he demanded Lycense to keep a bridge in her
name, maintayning that he alone deserves to be beloved of her, and none like
him to love her. It is known she nothing respects him as he would, for which
cause many do adventure against him: but most unequal, and unjust is the
fight, in that if any overthrows them all with ye lance, they altogether
assault the Conqueror with their swords, and they being so valiant many in the
enterprise have lost their lives, and others their Fame, among the last was a
cousen of the Prince of Croatia, that at the third encounter was overthrown:
So I was going to aduertize the Prince my Lord thereof, that no less then the
Siconian doteth on the beauteous Venus, who by a certain adventure was stayed
at the Sea coast where we all landed, with two fierce Giants to guard him: him
went I to call to revenge the misfortune of his cousen. This sir Knight is all
I know of this Country, in which I have not been four days. The Prince
greatly thanked him for his relation, and parting from him, entered to pass
the heat of the day among those braunched trees, from whence there rose a
spring, wherein he washed his face and drunk of the water, vnbrydling his horse
that he might feed on the grass. For himself, would he no other food, but
the glory of his thoughts. Upon the grass he lay himself alonge breathing
forth his soul in sighs, which still with every no thing seemed to increase
to the Lovers good, where he began to extend the eyes of his imaginations,
through ye vast Sea of passions, wherein he was overwhelmed, thinking yt by
little and little his life consumed, remembering how disdainfully ye Queen of
Lyra had rejected him, loving her more then himself, and not able to conceive,
wherein he had offended her. He had no other comfort then to exclaim on love,
not because he was his vassayle, but that he had made him so unfortunate, as
that although he had admitted the greatest pain for his special consolation,
yet it was prohibited from her knowledge: which consideration bereft him of his
wits, but that he set his hopes on Galtenor, to procure all possible means for
his redress. A while to ease his sorrow, he would communicate it, to the
gentle buzing wind, and flowred field, with more grace and sweetness, then the
famoused Thracian Poet. To strengthen his voice, and help his thoughts, he
sat him down under a Beech, not far from the spring, singing thus.

Suspicious doubts that in my amorous mind;
Do still make war against my good opposed:
Sometimes I happy victory do find:
Over the mortal evil me enclosed.
Sometimes you immitate the angry Dame:
To banish me my Joy, from her sweet name.
Yet happy be my thoughts, more happy I:
Thinking her present in my misery.
Who has not joyed in woes, and smilde in pain?
Seeing his Lady, causer of his grief?
Who is it of any sorrow does complain?
Having his Love at hand to yield relief.
Who has not been preserved? who ere destroyed?
The title of true Love that ere enjoyed?
Having to witness of his mortal pain:
She that can only rich him by her gain.
There is no good compared to her presence,
Without her, sorrow sollace does confound:
In whom we well know by experience:
The Lover finds a salve for his deep wound.
As by her presence heavy hearts are eased:
So by her absence hearts sores are increased.
Since none may therefore live an absent life:
Pity, oh pity love, and end this strife.
Here brake of ye Greek with many sobs, and pitiful groans, giving a beginning
to his lame^ts in this manner. O tender years, to to much tried on ye tuch-stone
of my ladies coins? O cruelty, shewe^ against none but him yt lives by loving,
ioying in nothing but to be another? wherefore sovereign Queen, leftst thou
me with life, if should I live dying, tutord in nothing but thy love, and in my
soul to adore thy perfections? What honor have thou (sweet Lady) got to
banish me from thy sight with such cruelty? what did thou loose admitting my
pain caused by the effect of thy beauty? I did not procure, manifesting the
same, thou should love me, or comiserate my harm, but I prayed leave, to
love, and languish till ye death, aco^pting that a sweet life employed in this?
But to forbid me yet alone to worshipp thee? who will rejoice in such cruelty,
but Achisilora, whose disdain I have and do feel to equal her perfectio^s
more the^ humane? A noise he heard among the bushes, brake of his exclaimes: he
rose to see what it was and saw his dear squire Palisandro, yt in great have
came toward him, who leapt from his horse and said. Did you think (souerainge
Prince) that you should wander alone, so la^guishing in pain through parts so
remoted from your Country, Parents and friends without company, and of whom does
feel thy grief far more the^ his proper sorrow? These causes are ye
tuch-stones to try your valor, showing it against fortunes disorders, who to
change her lowering countenance, requires nothing but the resistance of her
frowns, seming more coragious when she is most fiercest. Far more out of
favor was your Father, yet never did he loose the reigns of his patience,
which has not a little grieved your Tutor Galtenor, who brought me hither to
wait upon you which was the thing I only desired, commanding me to tell you,
you should not for any thing diminish ye haughtines of your mind, for all would
be ye more to eternize your glory. Such hopes were never given to any lover,
and therefore I will but anger him, longer to continue in these extremes: for it is
good, since Archisilora must be yours, you should obtain ye happiness of having
her, with a more rigorous harm, the^ any you have suffered, yt according to your
pains, you should after esteem your glorious tryu^phs. And with no less grief
takes she your abse^ce the^ you hers: for nothing else procured I to know but
this while I was there, until your tutor saw how necessary my coming to you
was. Is it possible friend Palisandro (said the Prince) that my lady greeues to
see me absent? I cannot believe it, for so great a good brings with it an
incredulity. He imbrast him, for never had any Prince a more discreeter
squyre, except Allirio, that was borne according to Rosabells humor. A thousand
things demanded he of the Court, whose presence did adorn it. Some grief was
to him hearing that all his kinsfolks were there missing, not knowing the
cause thereof. Great comfort did he conceive by seeing him, he had made the
Consistory, within whose secrecy he recorded his souls thoughts: imagining
his company would be a lessening of his pains, but that, which most did
mittigate it, was the care his Foster-father Galtenor had to succor him. By
this it was time to travail, so getting a horseback, took their next way to
the famous City of Zantho, aduertising Palisandro he should by no means
discover what they were, more then that he was called the persecuted knight,
discourse they did of many things, and the most of Archisilora, when about two
of the clock after midday the rays of the reuerberating sun upon the stony
walls of the City, gilded their plumed tops, whose stupendous buildings
made them amazed with admiration. On the north side it has Panonia: on the
west Istria, on the East Mysia the greater, and on the south the Adriaticke
sea. The wall was round moted with an arm of the famous Gersian river, where
(it is believed) that Jupiter first fell in Love, and therefore did the Kings
here never want most beautiful daughters, as this now was, accoumpted the
worlds machlesse Paragon for gallantnes and beauty.

The path which they had taken brought them unto the bridge, whose passage
the Siconians Son with his brethren did defend. It was admirable in
workmanshippe, for in ye midst thereof was edified a stately pallaice, where
ye prince and his brothers lodged. It reached unto the City wall, ending with
a large and great plain, payled in for the battles, which the Siconian had
commanded there to be made, because that way stood the Kings pallaice, from
whose windows might the second Venus behold all the co^bates, though not with
such affection as the warlike Lindauro (so was the Prince named) could wish
because he was of himself proud and insolent being so mighty, which is the
chiefest thing ye Ladies do abhor. A tumult there was in the place, for ye
Greek heard the noise of blows, he hastened his horse, so did his Page, to
arrive in time to see the cause. Which was for that the Prince of Croatia with
his two giants had entered the bridge (before him) desirous to revenge his
Couzens disgrace, with such fury did Claridiano cross the same, that every one
beholding the fight was moved to laughter seeing him with so mornefull devise.
Three of the brothers had Pollidolpho Prince of Croatia overthrown and
returning against the fourth, he encountered him so bravely, yt the lance
slyding from his shield to the right side, which being of a knotty Oak ere
it broke, three pats thereof appeared at the other side, tumbling his enemy
dead at his feet to his Brothers extreme grief. There was none there but
commended the azure knight, for of this color was his devise: who like an
angry Lion made toward the haughty Lindauro. They met with more ferrocity then
the roaring of raging waters beating within the cauers of hollow rocks. Valiant
were the lovers, but both were unhorsed. Of the two falls the better was the
Croatians, because he held the bridle in his hands. Recover would he his seat
to end the rest of the battles but the Judges on Lindauros behalf, did put him
from it, saying he was vanquished. Not I (replied the youth) since we both fell
on our feet. That's al one (said they) for you, to win, were bound not to leave
your saddle, though your adversary did loose his. To that pass came the matter
that the Prince of Croatias giants stepped among them, saying that he in ye azure
was not overcome, but that he might prosecute his battle, and that they would
maintain it against all the world. Least any dangerous tumult should happen the
King descended, to whom the Judgment of the combat was remitted: very near
approached the Greek determined to take the Croatians part thought it should
cost him his life, for his valor shown in the Iustes had drawn his affection.
So did the King greatly affect Lindauro, and because he was so great a Prince,
and so near neighbor to him, it had moved him in secret to give him hope of
his Daughter Venus that none but he should have her, although ye lady one day
her father talked with her about it made answer contrary to her sires
expectations. Nevertheless he would not openly disgrace the stranger, but
only that he could not proceed farther in fight, loosing his horse and
shield. Forward came the angry Greek with furious rage shaking like an aspen
leaf, and lifting up his Beuer said. Notwithstanding yt against what so wise a
king has decreede nothing ought to be said, nevertheless (saving ye respect,
and honor due to your imperial Crown and state) in my opinion the knight may
continue his battles to the end, for this being ye last, it is certain it
went at al adventure, either procuring the maintenance of his own fame. If
there any wanted to Just yet were there in this difficulty, resting in ye three
knights choice to assault him on foot or otherwise, but to remain vanquished
at least without his horse, your majesty has judged it, and it may be the best,
yet in my country it is not used. This highly gladded the beauteous Venus who
seeing Pollidolphos haughty deeds was visited by ye Ambassadors of the blind
God. There stood a Knight yt was accounted the strongest in all Slauonia, a
kinseman of ye kings, who hearing the Greeks speeches, stepped forth with these
words. It ill beseemes thee knight to repugne what my Lord ye King has
judged. Encompassed round about with knights and others was ye mighty Alphebos
son, which was some cause that he replied with more meekenes then he would,
and so answered. What the king has decreede (sir Knight) I approve and allow
for good, but if upon thy proud and arrogant words spoken thou dare accept
this my gage, I Will teach thee that strangers coming to serve kings ought to be
entreated with more courtesy. In this kingdom (said the third Brother and she
valiantest) must not be admitted so unjust a battle as you demand, but rather
such as you ought to be punished as troublers of the Court. The limits of
patience did ye Prince pass, he presumed on more then Mars or Jupiter durst,
answering. Discourteous insolent art thou knight, and thereupon that thou may
know, how little I esteem thee, thou may enter to the battle with this
knight, in company of thy brethren, for the proud words uttered cannot be
amended with less the^ all your heads. The haughty challeng admired eury one
judging it a mere madness, and in faith any other undertaking it but the
Greek prince, it could not but be called wil-ful temeritie, for either of the
4 might have copt with Milo. The king allowed the challeng, greatly desyring to
be revenged on the knight, but the 4 Knights would not accompting it cowardice
to assault one, and rather every one for himself, would undertake the battle,
thinking (not knowing the challenger) it was suffitient. But he to disgrace
them said. Knights it befits you not with effeminated reasons to refuse the
battle, seeming thereby more cowardlyke then valiant. This altogether blinded
the^ so all 4 upon mighty horses, set themselves against the Grecian Mars. Now
Mercury would I feign see thee here to draw ye perfect lineaments of this brave
battle. Orpheus tongue in this effect were but blunt, for either is abashed of
ye other to have help against one sole adversary: with greater horror pricked
forth the five warriors then the racking clouds rent with a fiery
Thunderbolt.

The earth never saw a stronger, nor fiercer encounter, for every one thinking
to end the battle with his blow met him with such fiercenes, yt none mist his
stroke. To be hit by so many was a help to stay him in his saddle. They
torme^nted his body with the strength of their several lances, for few greater
incounters had he received. He held himself valiantly, and without making any
shameful motion in his seat he met ye first brother with such puissance, yt he
made him fly from his saddle, with his proud breast pierced side, through side:
he turned upon the three that with some fear staid for him, seeing how mighty
he had shewe^ himself against the^. All in the place were struck as in a
trance with admiration, especially when they saw him in ye yellow, how with his
sword in one hand, and shield in another, he thrust himself among his enemies,
with far greater courage then if he had to do but with one. In his charge with
that good sword that Galtenor had given him he struck the Kings cousen upon
his helm. All his plumes he cut away, with the top thereof, wounding him most
dangerously on the head: he could not defend himself of them all, for the
brothers at once, laid upon his impenetrable helm, the which although they
could not raze, yet forced they him to make an unpleasing music with his teeth,
bowing his head below his breast. Through rage ye Elclauonian conceived to be
wounded he discharged on the Greeks left shoulder al his strength, it so
tormented him yt he could scarce hold his shield. The other two second it with
several thrusts. It Was their advantage for the second brother quickly repaired
again stryking him under the right arm. The sword chanst to light outwardly
else it had mortally wounded him, for it fell between the buckling of the armor
nere the breast. It wounded him, though but little, yet altogether to set the
Greek on the spurs of fury. Being once at this point ( Galtenor says being
he ye Cronicled his acts) he was fearful to be beheld. He manifested it, for
not regarding the other thrust (which put him to great pain) he flourished his
sword among the three. He could not miss the Kings cousen, cutting away al
his armor on ye side with a piece of ye shield: forward past the blow lighting
on the second brothers Beuer, wou^ding him there very da^gerously, and also the
blod ye issued hindered his eie-sight. He turned with a counterbuffe upon the
third (this was the strongest of them) it beat him upon his horse without
feeling. The king seeing it cried out amazedly. O Saturn (what haughty courage
is this of one knight) wherein oh mighty Jove have I offended thee, that thou
should send him hithirto shame, and disgrace my Court? for all that no jot of
fayntnes showed the other two, beating on his helm like an anuell, which
seemed to be of a light fire so many sparks flue from it. Seeing with what
valor that knight defended the azures part, the second Venus showed her self
more fair then did the first, when she Courted young Adonis in the wood, from
the window she looked, glad that ye azure knight withdrew not his eyes from her
casement, persuading her self she might be sure of his faith. In a wonderful
fight were the twoe with the Greek lover, when ye third brother, recovering
himself, and casting his shield at his back went to him. He assailed him on
the sudden, and therefore stryking him at his pleasure, executing ye brauest
blow he did in all his life: for he took him on the very top of his helm
with such strength that he fell on his horse neck. All of the^ followed the
chase, laying on him most cruel blows. The new-come would feign have closed
within the Greek, and so offered it. It had been very ill for Claridiano
because of ye others, so he avoided it, by spurring his swift Courser making
him leap from them. After him followed the two reaching him together on his
swords arm. It Was a venturous blow, for it so paind it that he could not stir
it. There was none in the place but perceived it, nor any but exceedingly
grieved thereat, especially Pollidolpho in his soul, who gazed on the battle
with such affection as if he were his brother. Their good fortune did his
enemies embrace, without fear entering, and salying, hammering his soul more
then his body, so great was ye wrath kindled in his furious breast. By little
and little he felt the pain diminish: As Well as he might he defended himself,
not without mighty blows of the three, that to make an end drew strength from
their fainting, for he had wounded the^ dangerously. At length feeling himself
free of the danger, faining nevertheless the contrary, he suffered the second
brother to enter for he was most eager. When he was so near he could not escape
him, he raised aloft his revenging arm, with more strength, then with wheels
the mightiest burdens are crayned up, and with as much rage as courage he
discharged it on his helm, the which down to the shoulders with his head was
cloven. Great was the noise that suddenly aroze in the place with the knights
death, thinking the like would happen to the rest. The like presumed ye king so
did Lindauro, that bloody tears did shed for the loss of the brothers.
Redoubled was their grief, for Archisiloras lover imagining he too long
deferred ye end: flung at the Kings Cousen wounding him with such a blow, that
senseless he cast him forwards on his horse neck, he ran against him with his
Coursers breast, tumbling him and his horse on the stony pauement more dead the^
alive. The third brother would defend himself, but the Prince thinking it
unmeet to assault him, did close casting his strong arms about him wherewith
he pluct him from his saddle, and spurring his horse went to ye bridge side
offering to cast him into the river over the railes: whereat the King cried out
to him he should not do it, for he gave him the victory of the fight,
accompting him the best knight upon the earth. To do your Majesty some service
which is my sole desire (answered the Prince) I am content to do it, although
his rude inciuilitie deserves a far greater punishment. Thanks for the same
did the king give, receiving him with better countenance then will, for he
would have given any great prize so he had miscarried in the battle. To him
went the courageous Prince Pollidolpho, saying.

Jove Guerdon you for me (sir Knight) what this day you have on my behalf
performed, which is so much, yt I know not how I may seem grateful for the
least of the same, but if in any thing my life and my companions be needful
in your service, dispose of them, for we will offer and ymploye them with as
great willingness as you this day have done yours for us, having not deseured
it at your hands. The Greek replied knowing him to be whom the Knight had
said. This and far much more then I have done is due to your gentleness, and
bounty (great Prince) for there is none (knowing what it is) but remains
engaged thereto, and therefore may you account me as one of your true, sure,
and unfeigned friends. The Prince acknowledged the kindness resting so
affectionate unto him that in all things he showed it. They accompanied the
King, who though he bare them no good will more then what he ought, would not
but honor them, inuiting them unto his Court, where there befell the^, what
the next Chapter mentions.

CHAP. XXIII. What befell unto the Greek Prince being with the King in his
great Hall.
ALthough the cankered Rancor of ill will within the breast of the Esclauonian
King, pleaded against the merits of the Greek Prince by reason of his
challenge in prejudice of his decree, yet so loving, and worthy of respect is
the very and sole opinion of virtue and good parts (by how much ye more the^ ye
trial, and knowledge of ye same) (bright saints of idolatrized beauty) yt he
almost forgot it, inclining so much unto him through the sight of his valor
shown, and honor obtained against his four enemies, that he regarded, and in
the common Judgments did affect him. On ye other side extreme was the grief
Lindauro did conceive, wanting the three brothers, and himself disgrast,
attributing thereto the beauteous Venus disdain toward him, whose beauty ye
greek admired esteaming it equal to his Ladies the Queen of Lyra. No less
admiration caused his in Court, that there was no Dame but envied his fairenes,
judging he yet was fairer then Venus (he was there a Novelty. As he, so
reputed they the Croatian Pollidolpho, whose truly affectionate the Princess
was become, desiring nothing more then to speak with him, that he might know
her will and the place his heart had obtained within her breast, glad in her
soul of the amity he had co^tracted with ye desparing knight (so called they
ye Greek) imagining she might securely put her self in his hands, then suffer
any wrong by her Father on Lindauros behafe, which would be no less then her
death: For she never had thought well of the pride, werewith he had, and did
procure to win her goodwill. A thousand times was she about to write it to ye
Greek, that as a Lover (every one accounted him so, seeing his cruel devise)
he might seek means to avoid so great an evil as she expected by the
marriage: But she was as modest as beautiful (for in this she excelled ye first
of her name.) So durst she not write, believing it would blemish her honor, and
stain ye reputation, they of her kind are bound to maintain in all their
actions, rather enduring a thousand deaths, then by their doings, to give the
popularitie occasion to misiudge of their lives, when they ought to be the
presidents, for others to model out ye course of theirs. This withheld her,
suffering every day many importunities, till that her Father seeing her
obstinacy, commanded her plainly to arm herself with patience, for he
would force her against her will to that, whereto all his counsel entreated
him. This so put her to her shifts that she had none other but to write unto
the Knight in yellow, trusting the matter to a Lady whom she thought would
keep it secret. She vowed it acknowledging great duty, for the reposing on
her a thing of such consequence. All the Knights lodged within the Pallaice
excepting Pollidolphos two Giants, that disguised kept aloof of, carefully
watching what would befall their Prince in those affairs, For they knew how
entirely he loved the fair Venus: Wherefore the Damozell had opprtunitie (so
soon as it was dark yt she might leave her lodging) to go unto ye Knights
that kept together, and demanding who, and where the knight in yellow was:
Palizandro being there conducted her unto them, to whom with a pleasant
countenance (after salutations she said.) Sir Knights assured of your valors
that you will not deny it unto distressed Ladies that have need thereof, I am
boulde to come on the behalf of one, whose name this Letter does contain,
directed to the despairing Knight, glad, that being able, he will not permit
her in endure any outrage. So with great courtesy she delivered ye letter unto
the Greek, saying, she would the next morrow return for an answer. And
staying no longer kindly took her leave and departed. It Is scarce possible to
express the alteration that surprised the Prince of Croatia imagining the
letter came from Venus, that seeing the haughty deeds which he had done, and
also his fair constitution, she was enamored of him, certifying him thereof by
that means. The Greek put him from those dumpes, calling him saying. In the
end he was wounded with another hand. Lets see (brave Prince) what this Lady
requires, that should have no small need of our succor, strengthening her
necessity with our weak helps, binding us thereby to loose our live in her
defense? Twill be an act proceeding of your magnanimity (haughty dispayring
knight) to procure that none suffer any injury, (replied Pollidolpho) and from
this time do I offer my person. The like did the Greek, and opening the
Letter were amazed to see the name: nevertheless he read it thus.

The Princess Venus Letter to Claridiano.
IMagining, valiant dispairing Knight (to whom that name and devise is iniustly
permitted) thou art come to know the power of love, rooted in a true heart, and
how it only repaires unto the harm, acknowledging the causer: unable to do
otherwise I write (yet assured that my Letter will denote me of some immodest
wantonness) for the laws of Love, frees every one of pain excepting that
which from it does proceed. By this shall thou know the wrong my Father
intendes to do me marrying me against my will to a husband of his choice. But
oh what death is it to see, that Fortune should bring me to the estate, that I
must rather loose my life, then obey his co^mande, though a daughters obedience
binds me thereto: but doing it, it is an offense and capital crime which I do
commit against my immaculate faith, and also to whom I have sacrificed it, I
am sure, since thou have received the order of arms to protect and defend the
unblemished honor of distressed Ladies, thou will le^d me thy aid, as she that
has most need thereof: And so shall I draw strength out of my Faeminine
fear, to execute what ere thou shall ordain. It is suffitiently known of all
who it is that procures me, of al things I express a Resolution by thy answer,
which will be the incourager of my breast. The Gods have thee in their keeping,
and give thee more joy then either I have, or thy devise does betoken.

The Princess Venus.


Wonderful greatly did the Princes (having read ye Letter) esteem the
confidence reposed in them of so weighty a matter, whose issue they could not
avoid without great adventure and danger of their lives: well had the Greek
vnvnderstoode the Princes affection, and thinking he that way might bind him,
said. Exceedingly does Fortune favor you (great Prince) having by such means
ordered the putting in your hands so fair a Lady: And I vow never to put on
armor more if I perform it not, although more perrils depend thereon, he made
answer. Most excellent knight, I do confess the Gods had appointed me to
meet you that seeing my great necessity, you should take pity of the same. I
will not again rebinde my self, for these magnanimous offers, but only set
my life and state in your hands, to govern, and dispose of them to your
pleasure, for that will be mine, in nothing derogating from your direction.
Why the^ (said ye Greek) I find no better remedy, the^ to remove from between
you ye knight yt has shown himself your co^petitor in love: and that it may
be effected, it will be good we advertise the Lady to yield to her Fathers
request, and I with unknown arms will challenge him, procuring his, or taking
my death to quiet your life. Afterward it will be easy to take the Lady from
the Pallaice: but for this it will be requisite you have some number of men,
for it is impossible but we shall have some conflict with the kings people:
whereto he replied. That is already provided: for my cousen (I being with only
my twoe Giants departed from my Kingdom) came to seek me with twelve
Thousand men, well armed and courageous for any dangerous exployte. It Is enough
(answered the Greek) to set her on the Seas, where we will defend her maugre
all their strength. With this agreement they concluded their dyscourse,
wherewith Pollidolpho remained the gladdest in the world, seeing how well his
affairs were ordered toward the procurement of his joys. The warlike
Greek, writ his answer, delivering it to the Damozell yt mist not to come for
it, carrying it straight to her Lady, that with many pitiful lame^tations
beseeched the Gods they would not permit so unjust a marriage, but rather to
end her sorrowful days which should be her greatest good, that lived exempt
of all content. Though she received it exceeding with ye Greek Princes letter,
whose seals having rent open, it contained this effect.

Claridianos Letter to the Princess Venus.
SO great is the wrong (most excellent Princess) done unto thy beauty and so
much the duty I acknowledge unto Ladies (that having not written, but only
giving me the least notice of thy care) both things had put me in the greatest
that I ever conceived, to procure, (venturing, therein the hazard of my life)
that in nothing thou should sustain injury and thereof live secure, that
whylst this thy affl^cted Knight does live, so unequal a Marriage shall not
be effected. And the better to perform it, it is needful you give your
grant unto your Father; do it without any fear: For either I will loose my
life, or Lindauro shall not one day enjoy the name (he does not deserve it)
to be thine. The Gods have thee always in their keeping, and with good
success end these affairs.

The despayring Knight.


The tears of joy ran down the Ladies eyes in great abundance with her soul
thanking ye knight for what he undertook on her he half, calling that Lady
unworthy of any good, that ioyed in the sorrow of so valiant a Knight, with
whose love any might account her self happy, and had she not known he had on
another bestowed himself, he had been the first whom the second Venus had
made Patron other heart, with more loyalty then Cupids mother did yield her self
unto her lover. Almost with the letter in her hand did her Father take her, for
the Syconian Prince would not let him rest with his imrortunities: he required
her to obey his behest, regarding how well it became her to marry him, one of
the greatest Princes of the world, being his near neighbor, which might move
her to do it more willingly, she answered. Dear Father nothing can be told
me of the Syconian Prince, more then I know, and have considered, it exceeded
my deserts to receive him for my Lord and husband: but so tender is my age,
and my years so few in their vnripenes, that I thought I should nippe the
springing hopes of the same, by vnder-going the heavy yoke of Matrimony.
Neueerthelesse seeing both you and he so much desire it, your will be done, for
now, nor never will I more disobay it. The Father imbrast her with extreme joy
seeing the thing effected which he thought impossible. Presently was it
published through the City, where many tryumphes were ordained by the
Citizens. The next day the King would have it solemnized and invited the
chiefest of the City, rejoicing in his heart to have (as he thought) the
marriage sure, and also to have the despairing Knight in his Court, to glad it
with his haughty deeds. He did it but with death and bitter lamentations of
many. The King would needs have them all Dine in his great hall that
ouer-looked the river: but the Ladies apart. At once together in that palace
was there never seen more nobility, for besides the King, there was Eleauen
Princes, some disguised and some wounded with love were come to see the
beauteous Venus, imagining in their Countries that she which had such a name
could not, but in beauty be Venus her self. This Lady bride came forth al in
white, of which coulor was the Prince also attired, with all his pages, with so
costly and rich ornaments yt it was well seen love was his instructor. After
dinner (having sat to it something long, yet ere their revealing began) they
Co^menst discourse of several matters. Very nere Lindauro sat ye Greek prince
only with his sword, and dagger, clothed in yellow and black, a devise which
wonderfully became him. About that quarter, being all youths, and in ye May of
their years, and Ladies seruitors yt chose their argument every one to praise
ye beauty he had seen or most affected. The Prince Pallidolpho knowing who the
Greek was, and assured that ye Greekish beauty admitted no comparatiue with the
world beside, set a foot (praising ye Ladies of Grecia) ye gretest tumult yt
ever there was seen: for Lindauro with his accustomed pride, thinking he might
there safest speak, answered: That may b^ to them that knows not ye good of
Esclauonia, nor cannot conceive it: but to them yt live without partial
affection, there is nothing fair on the earth nor absolute but here. The
amorous Greek with the only sight of Venus was so transported in ye
contemplation of his Lady, that he had scarce understood what had bin
discoursed, but rather gave occasion of a farther mischief, by a sigh that
burst from his heart, which made every one note ye grief yt possessed him. Well
did Lindauro perceive it, and having the death of ye brothers sticking in midst
of his heart thought yt with so many as there was to take his part, he could
by no means escape his hands, said to him. What have you felt despairing
Knight, for in such a place as this, more like a Knight, the^ otherwise must
the faith sacrificed to the Lady be approved. The Prince had already understood
what had been ventilated, and hearing himself so plainly taunted with
cowardice, was mightily incensed with wrath: he refraynd it, yet not so, but he
was forced to this reply. My thoughts ending the imaginary consideration of my
Ladies perfections, and seeing the wrong the world commits against her, not
yiedling to her the supremacy of all excellencies, I acknowledged it with a
sigh: But least you should think I have no hands, or dare not mainetaine my
words, I here defy thee to mortal battle, where thou shall see, that if I
now here show my self mild through the gallantnes of the loved object, in
field I am fiercer then an angered Lion, being touched with her beauty. Near
him was the Brother who with like confidence of being there, spoke thus.

In these parts, and chiefly in this Kingdom any challenge is prohibited, in
time of peace, and he is worthy of severe punishment, that led by an
inordinate passion of self pride does disturb it. The most in the hall agreed
with him therein, being also approved by the kings Nephew, a king, that but the
night before was come thither. The King himself did ratefie it, whose Guard
expected no more to lay violent hands on the two Princes to imprison them: but
it was to their evil, for the Greek like an Hyrcanean Tigre, leapt from his
place, and drawing forth his sword wounded Lindauro the Bridegroom most
dangerously on the head: he would have made an end of him, but that the Brother
stepped between, wounding the Prince a little on the arm, but he thrust at his
shoulder so furiously, that senseless he threw him at his feet. At this time
was not the Croatian idle, having on the ground before him two of those
Princes, although himself were wounded: well did the Greek perceive it,
banning his fortune, to be without armor, for in spite of them all he had
scapte them: he had no other remedy but taking his friend behind him, betook
himself to the door that went unto the Ladies chamber. They all succored
them, especially the beauteous Venus, that with tears of blood celebrated the
wonders which the Prince performed at the door, backed by her gallant Lover. So
great was the increased multitude which encompassed the Prince, that his life
was in extreme danger though at his feet there lay 10 dead. All were not
suffitient to defend Trebatios Nephews life: had not an Uncle of the Ladies,
her Mothers brother, (who greatly grieved at the marryage, although he
dissembled it by reason of the King) that being affectionated to the Greek,
(seeing his gallantnesse and valor) thinking that with him (though he were worth
but one horse and armor) his cozen might with greater honor match then with
the proud Lindauro. He arose and went straight to the King, that in all have
cried for more aid. In all things did the King credit this his brother, who
thus spoke.

Thy fame for Justice (most mighty King) is spread over all the earth, and
therefore have the Gods magnified thee, making thee happy with such a Daughter
as thou have, and Emperor of so large a Monarchy: Let not then the conceit of
rash wrath (which by other means may be revenged) be at this time the occasion
of the wrack of thy supreme honor till now ever increased, for which thou art
bound by Justice to give every one his due: and therefore suffer not yonder
Knight to be slain with such unequal advantage, having given no cause for it,
and thou ought to maintain his right. These words took such impression in
the King, that without more ado he cast his warder in the hall, that every one
might withdraw: and taking his brother in law by the hand, went toward the
Greek that was wounded in many places whose pain he felt not, so great was his
conconceaued rage: but seeing the King coming, he withheld his sword saying. I
had not thought (mighty Prince) in thy Palace he should be suffered to endure
any wrong, that wished nothing more then to serve thee, soly expecting this
day to do it. It behooued him to say so, seeing his manifest danger, and
being in place where he could not use his own valor. Come with me knight (said
the King) and I will do you right, for it has not a little grieved me, this
tumult should have befallen on this day, which I hoped for my gretest content:
under your royal word, I will do it (replied Claridiano) trusting that if I
have any excuse it shall avail me. Fear not yt (sir knight said Venus Uncle)
for on my peril here shall you not receive any more wrong. To him commanded the
King, he and Pollidolpho should deliver their swords, who through his wounds
was not able to stir. Of him had the Kings brother in law charge, to the
Princes extreme sorrow thinking his sundring from the Greek would be his
untimely death. He was deceived, for the Lady had as much care of him as if
he were in her chamber showing her Uncle manifest tokens that she loved the
Croatian which nothing displeased him, thinking he was a knight of great
account, and exceedingly rejoiced when afterward he knew how great a Prince
he was. The Greek they committed to a strong tower not far from the Ladies
lodging, whose custody a Cousen of the Kings had, that like a good knight
caused him to be well cured though he was so weak of his lost blood, that he
could not arize from his bed, yet his anger and rage more tormented him then
his wounds, arryuing a thousand times at the point of death only for that he
could not come to be revenged on the treacherous Lindauro. Who for all he was
wounded, thought it well employed, imagining they could not from thence escape
without death or everlasting infamy. For which intent he one day secretly sent
for the King of the Cremonian Isle, the mightiest Pagan that was known on the
earth, for with one son whom a little before he had knighted, he had
vanquished two great Hoasts. He was in peace and had contracted league with
them: and aduertising them the necessity he had of their helps, with four
Knights of their kindred they came thither in poast, and sending Lindauro word
of their arryuall, they did what the ensuing Chapter does relate.

CHAP. XXIIII. How the Princes were by some strange Knights challenged to the
battle, and what about it happened.
SVch is the power (sole wonders of heavens beauties, and only admirations of
earthly miracles) of an amorous passion rooted in ye tender soul of a blind
lover, that it forces him, respecting no respect of proper honor, to attempt
those things manifestly against it: for once fully possessed of the lover, it
tramples with disdain on the government of reason, guiding the affection with
the loose reigns of a self-will, the which having obtained an uncontrolled
regiment, does command as absolute Empress of the mind: this is that which
only guides Lindauro, who because he was a lover, and in presence of his Lady
to see himself wounded, and his three Brothers slain, and yet unrevenged,
conceived so great a passionate desire of vengeance, that not regarding the
laws of Knighthood, he procured against the^ and his Royal reputation an
unjust revenge upon the Greek lover, a thing that redounded to his everlasting
shame, and dishonor eternal. He conferred it with the King, who being
determined to observe, and by Justice and right to determine that controversy,
inclyned to his indiscreete son in laws persuasions, animated thereto by the
arryuall of the two Giants, on whose valor the prince so firmly builded
because he thought none would dare to enter combat with them. Being thus
determined, one day (dissembling his knowledge) they entered the great hall,
clad in resplending rich abilliments of war. There was none but only with
their sight did tremble: for though they were not of deformed proportion, yet
were they of so strong composed joints, and big timbered sinews, that
plainly they demonstrated the strength of their arms.

The Father raising his visor with a hollow voice thus said. Mighty Potentate
of Esclauonia, in our Land of Syconia we heard of some brawles thou have had
with certain strange Knights, and this day was it toulde us their insolence
committed in thy presence, killing some of thy Nobility and wounding our
Prince Lindauro, and moreover how thou have promised to deal with them by
law: against offenders to Princes states no such respect is due, but to
execute the power of consuming wrath upon them. And so upon the one, and the
other we defy two Knights whatsoever that will undertake the battle, by the
same will I defend they worthily deserve a cruel death: He made them sit
down knowing who they were, saying. I would not (brave Giants) for any thing
have it said, that in my Court Justice is less observed then in any other of
the universe, and therefore did I refer this cause unto my Counsel: but
seeing you have challenged them, there is no more but to admit your
challenge, aduertising them thereof.

Well did Alanio the Princess Uncle understood the drift, and by whom that
complotte was ordained, greeuing that so great injustice should be permitted.
The beauteous Venus did nothing but weep, purposing with her own hands
rather to sacrifice her life then to wedde so false a Knight. At length came
the two Princes so weak and faint, that they were not able to stand, very
few there were in the Hall, but greatly did pity them. Straight was it
toulde them the cause why they were sent for, and what those Knights demanded.

Somewhat was the Prince moved with their sight, but that being past as long
it lasted not, he said with his accustomed animositie, that it pleased him
straight without any further delay to enter the battle, affying only on
his Justice. That may not be (answered the Kings counsel, who all were
agreed against him) for there is an inuiolate law in this Kingdom (since
Xantho the first King thereof was challenged) that none challenged may combat
his propper cause, but present his Champion, within the limited time prefixed
to find him, that he, for him, may right him or else failing in either, or in
both, to remain subject to the Laws inflicting punishment. But we being
strangers of such remoted Countries (said the enraged Greek) and the finding
a friend to hazard for us his life being so difficult, great is the wrong
herein you do us, and on both I will enter the battle. Before him stepped the
furious King of Cremania with these words.

Well do thou know Knight how impossible it is for thy sake to vyolate the
laws for the common good established, and so because thou shall not be
permitted to it, makes thee so vehemently insist in thy request. That mooues
me not to it (replied the angry Greek,) but only to see the insole^t pride
that hither has brought thee, not like a Knight, but a barking ravening Curre
of Assyria, that live by howling against the splendour of the bright Moon. So
furious was the Pagan that he would have flung at him, which had not grieved
the Prince, for he so spoke purposelye to vex him. Between the^ stepped the
King, commanding them to be conuayed to prison, first lymiting them a Month to
seek their defendors. So furious rested the Pagan, that through his mouth he
foamed like a Boar, a thousand times entreating the King to permit the
battle to the Knight, but he so feared the Prince that by no means he
would agree thereto, persuading himself he had his revenge more surer that
way.

Never was gelded Bull nor mountain Lioness nor he himself in all his life
more mad, then Claridiano was at that instant, to see himself enclosed
within a stonye wall, which made him roar like a chaffed Bear. Lirgandeo
says that as he had before been a Pagan, he so let his tongue pass the
limittes of reason, that forgetting his profession he let slip some
blasphemies. Galtenor no other mentions save that he would not that night
sup, nor go to bed, for all what the Physicians, and Chirurgions urged it so
behooued for his health. All the night walked he imagining what remedy he
might devise to issue forth to be revenged on those villains: he was about to
cast himself down the Tower, but it was timeritie, considering the height.
In no less anguish was Pollidolpho, yet something more comforted with Alanios
kindness that reputed him a person both of valor and high esteem. In nothing
could he better show it then in that extremity. But the beauteous Venus a
thousand plottes devised (moved with pure love) to see if any would
prevail. None was good, nothing pleased her, save solitude that was her
comfort, and if merrily she looked on her Father it was with dissembling her
inward grief, which was the greatest that ever Lady did endure. With Fausta
her gentlewoman she disburdened her heart, for Thousand doubts persuaded her
she should suffer some danger which she thought could be but little, how great
soever, happening for remedy and release of those Princes, for whom she would
hazard life and honor. Six days of the thirty were past, and no Knight
appeared to accept the battle, nor none in the Court durst do it, judging
madness to undertake it against the Father and Son.

Very few were in the Court but lamented the lamentable certain death of the
Knights, and above all Alanio, not knowing what means to devise to eschew
it, because the King still insisted in his rygorous obstinacy, urged thereto
with continual persuasions of that treacherous Lindauro of Syconia. Her grief
did the fair Venus smother outwardly, but alone she shed more tears the^ ye
first of yt name did when she bewailed the obsequies of her dear Adonis. One
afternoon with her discreet Fausta she walked into a Garden, (where none
but she and her Damozells used to sport them in time of solace) to give her
thoughts the liberty of their unbridled pensiveness, which by so many ways
was assailed.

It was their good Fortune, (by the Fates appointed that those Princes should
not so iniustly dye) to lead them to a place where they satte down hard by
certain thick grown bushes, and as Fausta plucked up some of the rooted
branches to sit upon, she spyed a great hole like to a Caves mouth. She was
astonished thereat, supposing some beast or Adder to be in it that might hurt
them: the cause thereof demanded the afflicted Venus, and being told yt, the
amorous Lady said.

Oh I would to love it were so, that by taking away my life, it would end so
many deaths which I endure, for there is no heart longer able to tolerate so
much. She rose with more courage then her tenderness allowed, and taking away
the bushes to see what it was, they espied a Cave that toward the Palace
bended, of such widenes that two armed men might easily pass through it. She
expected no other resolution, for courageously, and with great bouldnes (for in
the end she was in Love) she entered it, commanding Fausta to follow her, for
though she lost her life she would know what was in it, and find the end
thereof: your beauty will undergo too great a bouldnes (said she) and I would
not for any thing we should be spied.

There is no danger to be feared nor yet that we should be seen said Venus)
for considering the safety of the Garden it is impossible that any should have
come hither. They had not gone Fiftiepaces, when they found themselves at the
foot of a stone wall, yt was so dark that very little light they could see,
but yet they felt what it was. They went about (hand in hand, for let go they
durst not) to see if they could find any steps or stayres in the wall because
ye Cave there ended. At length they met with their desire, but it was so
narrow that one could scarce go up. They put of their Pantoffles to do it
better, and the Princess began to mount trembling like an Aspen leaf so did
Fausta, who though she held her Mistres be her sleeue, yet was not able to go
up a step, which were above Forty, and with extreme fear having ascended
them, when they came to the top, they were so weary they could not stir.
They sat the^ down awhile to breath, speaking so softly, that they themselves
could not almost hear one another: what shall we do (fair Princess said
Fausta) if in the Pallaice our absence shall be found, no doubt but it will be
noted, and judged I fear for wanto^nesse? That the Cave would bring us
(replied Venus) to ye tower of the despairing knight, then would I not care
what the world should say, for he being set at liberty, the same would he
procure to us all? Such goodness will not our hap abode us (said Fausta) to let
it be so, for then who with a more just title could brag of felicity? let us
rize (said Venus) for my heart is passing light, and let us see where we shall
arrive. They went softly feeling (fearing to be heard) till they met of the
same stone, one of the fashion of a door, that arteficially was set in the
wall: they were not able to stir it because it was to be opened on the inside
of the tower, though many hundred years it was it had not bin opened, and ye was
the reason none of the Court, neither knew it, nor any such thing ever
imagined. Lirgandeo says it was made by a Persian king, that fell in love with
Licida daughter of Xa^tho, who being lodged in the tower, and seeing her walk
in that garden, with the force of his arms brake down the wall till he came
to the earth, where with more facility he prosecuted his amorous intent,
making then that Cave as they found it, by which means he obtained the Ladies
will, bringing her that way unto his chamber, till he found time to steal her
and convey her to his Kingdom. To this rape does Astildo attribute the cause
of Persias desolation, by the Father of the stolen Lady. This was the door
that now the Ladies found where attentively hearkening (because it was very
nigh to the bed of the despayring knight) they might hear him with Millions
of sighs complain him in this manner.

O Queen of Lyra (said the Prince of Gretia) how may thou now live
contented, seeing thy cruelty has absented me from my country. and thy
divine presence, which was the thing whose power might nourish an abhorred
life, that now does keep me enclosed within a stony limmit, wounded, sick
and weak, and where none with help can prevail to liberate him from a cruel
and shameful death, that only wishes a tormented life to adore thy beauty? O
dear Father Galtenor, this is the time wherein thou should show thy love
toward thy Son, on whom thou sometime did put thy glory, and the
recovery of thy whole Kingdom. Regard with what will I hazarded my life for
thy content. I only require thee to set me at liberty, that I may be
revenged on these villainous Traitors: which if I might obtain, I would not
then grieve at any thing that I have sustained so I might make them know, and
also teach them how they should entertain valiant Knights.

O Emperor Trebatio my Lord and Grandsire, knew you my anguish and grief, I
know you would revenge it. O Claridiana my sovereign Lady Mother, who would
tell you that your beloved Son has but xxiiij. days of life limmited by a
mortal man, with like affection would you put on your armor to rescue me, as
when you went to seek the great Alphebo my loving Father, The Prince supposed
that none did hear him, which in deed might very well be, for that Tower
was higher then any of the rest. Great joy conceived the Ladies with the
fynding out of so brave an adventure, and seeing how that way they might free
him, that he might so do by the Prince Pollidolpho: yet most woundered, that
understanding he was so high a Prince, Nephewe and Son to those that with
their haughty deeds had illustrated the spacious world.

Of him (being so young) they had not heard, but what they had seen was
suffitient reason for to move them to esteame him for the best and most
worthiest Knight that ever guirded sword. Return we now my Fausta (said the
gallant Venus) for so happy an adventure as this, could not but be kept for so
great a necessity as ours, and we will give order that (unknown to the
Prince) the door may be opened us by his squyre, for he is witty, and will do
it, being entreated: but go we softly least we be heard. Then let us be gone
(said she) and I know not what it is that Knights can seek, since your
beauteous self has discovered an adventure so hard and difficult, and of such
peril. There is none now (said the Lady) giving the despairer armor, for when
I see him with the^ against all the world I live assured, though it would
injury me. Come let us away, (replied the Damozell) for that confidence has
in Love most force. And if so we might liberate the despayring knight we need
not harbor the least fear. A good success I do not doubt, for fortune has
reserved for this business (answered Venus) since it pleased her with so good a
beginning to discover unto us the way unto so sure a hope. They came away, and
that no Lady walking that way might find the Cave, they covered it again with
those bushes and briers the best that they could. No body had mist the^ because
they thought they walked according to their custom about those green arbors.
That afternoon procured the Damozell to speak with Palisandro, which happened
as she desired, for she spied him cross by the tower where his Master lay.
She made him signs to come to her, which he did, and because she would not
prolong their conversation, least they might be espied, she said. Good squire
it has so grieved us the Princess my Lady and my self, to see the
imprisonment of thy Lord that we cannot express it, and therefore we have
procured a means to free him from it, so our good hap was to show us to day a
Cave, that from my Ladies garden reaches to thy Lords chamber, which we could
not open, though we heard him complain of many things, and we already know how
great a Prince he is: and that he may perform what to my Lady Mistres he
promised, she will set him at liberty, that he may procure it for the other
Knight. Of neither advertise him, but only open the door which in the same
wall you shall see of stone, that we may on the sodian enter, for it will so
greatly please my Lady Venus. And because this matter requires a secret
brevity no more, but, that this night after ye Chirurgions be gone, stay you
with a light, to do what I tell, for we will not fail you. The discreet
Palisandro took his leave, pondering that matter in his mind, as the waighte
thereof required. In the end he resolved to do yt, unable to imagine that in
so great a Princess there should be any thing meant contrary to what she
said. After the Prince was dressed Palizandro shut the doors very fast, to
execute his appointment, and he found their tale to be true which not a
little gladded him, seeing that his Master might that way go forth: he
opened the wall, and set a taper by his Masters bed side, that ye Ladies might
see him, and was about himself to go meet them, but he feared to displease
them. They stayed not long, for the household being withdrawn, with Summer
garments, they descended to the garden, making fast the door after them. The
Princess Venus woare a Damask mantle imbroydered with gold, cast over a
peticoate of russet Satin laid about with golden lace, upon her hair she had
a Lawne of curled Cypers, which so reuerberated the beams of her own beauty
upon her self, that no Knight (not loving Archisilora) could have the heart to
forget her. In beauty only three contained ye world to equal her, and yet
they knew not any advantage over her, the first ye rezited Lady, Rosamond and
Liriana. They went more nymbler by reason of their light garments, which made
the^ easier mount to the staire head whence through the tapestry that hung
before the door, they spyed the light. With a thousand imaginations were the
Prince and Palisandro expecting what might fall out. At the entering they
started as it were with fear in such sort that they made not so little noise
but the Prince might hear it, he feared some treason, and though he had no
armor at the time that he would leap out of his bed, entered with her damozell
that excellent Lady who with a joyful countenance able to revive a dying man,
said. Did you think (sir Knight) to pass so sorrowful a life, and we not
come to receive part of your grief, the which if it might be divided there
should not want one, so you might be ryd thereof, to take the greatest part.
Rise would the Prince admired not only of her beauty, but of the means she
had to come thither. The Lady would not suffer him, nor give him her hands,
which the Greek instantly required, supposing he was before his dear Queen
of Lyra, he replied. Much am I behoulding to my grief (most excellent
Princess) since it is the cause that causes me to acknowledge an eternal
duty to your high service, for this kind remembrance, the which being
immerited by a Knight so unfortunate as my self, stopps me from binding my
self any more then that I heretofore do owe, nor can I believe there should be
strength to advance me in any thing, more then I have promised: Nevertheless
of my life may your beauteous self dispose, which to lose will be a happiness
perpetual, procuring yours thereby to your content, the which to me would be
exceeding to know what way you found hither to bring you: No other has it
been replied she, but the desire I was to see you at liberty, joined with the
grief I conceived, imagining how greatly yours would be with my Fathers
offerred wrongs: For this day walking to take the air into my Garden with
this my Damsel, among certain bushes we found a Cave, that hitherto
arriues. I lost all fear with the will I had to have you from hence, that I
past the same till we met with this door, deferring our coming against this
time, and we heard you so bitterly complain, that I know not what to say of
the Queen of Lyra, whether she be in fault or the Prince of Grecia. It joys
me to see you so well bestowed, though to ill repayd: Storms are they to the
Laberithian Seas of Lovers incident, still pretending a more happy calm.

If therefore in the mean time that your content is absent you will receive
it, by hearing to whom these wrongs are done we will, tell it. Greatly
disconted rested the Prince hearing that the Lady knew him but he dissembled
it replying. Well do you express the greatness of your Nobility (most
gracious Princess) having procured life to him that incertaine had it, your
own affairs have you therein done, for it shall not less be employed then in
your service, though to deserve so great an adventure as you this day have
discovered, a higher person should have been known, to celebrate with her due
honor that it merits. Touching the rest highlye shall I rest satisfied, in
revealing my name and estate to none, the which I have told only to my
friend the Prince Pollidolpho of Croatia, which is he that is in prison, and
yet that were pleasant, had he but promise of some remedy, not of liberty,
but of comfort, patiently to bear the bonds wherein your perfections have
inthrald him.

More liuelyer colors then the blushing Rose possessed in her chief pride,
be-paynted the divine heaven of the beauteous Lady hearing what the Prince had
said, she would not displease him through want of hope, and therefore thus
replied. I would not have had you (despayring Knight) that with such despair,
and to my cost, tell me the ametie twixt you and that Prince: But because you
shall not say that in Esclauonia there reigns cruelty equal to that in
Greece, let us order your liberty, for after it shall not want for your
friend, for I will neither now nor at any time gaine-saie what you shall
appoint me, because a Knight of your valor and quality will not procure but
what may most glorify my honor. The ioyfullest in the world would the Prince
kiss her hands, accompting Pollidolpho the happyest in the universe, having
with so few souls torments and heart oppressing passions of a despayring
Melancholy love, obtained the most rarest Jewel on the earth, the purest
fairest, and most immaculte.

You see valyant Prince (fayde the Ladies) what the King my Father has
ordained, and the danger that your life incurres, if for all the weakness and
debilitie you now are in you will undertake the battle, to morrow at this time
I will provide you with the best armor that my Fathers whole Kingdom does
contain, never of any seen, and the rest I refer to your discretion: and that
you may not be mist, I had imagined that Fausta my damozell should remain in
bed in your steed, (for in more then this does she desire to pleasure you,
and we will give forth that you lie at the point of death, because the King my
Father may not send for you, neither for the challenge nor to see the battle.
Now consider whether this counsel likes you, if not, we will seek some other
better. There is none (dear Princess) answered the Prince, far more
esteeming her for her wit and discretion: why then (said she) take rest and
courage, for to morrow we will be with you, and command your Squire to
publish what I said of your infirmity, for I have understood that by your
valor you have obtained many friends in Court, that will help you with the
utmost of their powers, and I will procure that your friend shall commit his
title and right of the battle to your good fortune. And thereupon she imbrast
him, (which Jove had thought a happier life had it been done to him then to
be God of Gods) and returned with her belooued Fausta to her Chamber, where
they past the night, with repetition of Knights qualities and courtesies.

The next day Palizandro published with many tears (though feigned) the great
infirmity of his Master the despairing Knight, and how he would not be spoken
to by any by reason he was on the exteamest moment of his life. Some there were
that greatly bewailed his supposed end. Others blinded with a fawning flattery,
at every slight occasion to show it, seemed then to insinuate with the King by
joining with his unjust act, cause of the others ruin. But ye Heroyke Prince
(reserved to accomplish more difficult atte^ps) rejoiced at their follies, when
he knew what credit was given to his counterfeiting squire, never
suffitiently praising the excellent perfections of the Princess Venus, judging
ye Fate to none other but to her self due. Who with the greatest care possible
past the day imagining in what imminent perrill she had put the Prince, though
the confidence she reposed in his valor, made her more assured then the cause
required. When they saw time the two Ladies by little and little, conuayed
the armor into the Garden, that the Prince might there arm him, and also his
sword which she had demanded of her Uncle, only that she desired to behold
the brightness, that being drawn it yielded: he gave it her not thinking on
the good he did, for had it been with any other he could not but hardly
escape in ye battle. They ascended to the top of the tower, where the
lusty youth expected them in his apparel, and so strong that in all his life
he knew not when better he felt himself, so great was his desire he had to be
revenged on those Traitors. The Lady embraced him with these words.

Sir Knight I so feared yeaster-days combat, because I was armour-lesse, that
I durst not come unto the second without them, though in your presence mine will
but little prevail: Wherefore I will give you your sword, for it was not
lawful it should come to another Master having been ye Greek Princes,
because it were so to wrong him. Greater is that it now receaues (divine Lady
answered he) that having been in your beauteous hands, it should come to ye
most vnfortunatest in ye worlds wide continent. Name no more that fearful
Epetithe (said she) for you make me think you are ill conditioned to love,
one of the worst parts incident in any gallant, for he, that the power of
disfavor forces to deny ye acknowledgme^t of his fortune in his good
employment is the apparent witnessing, he not so much esteems his Lady as
he ought, for if she lives beloved, a disfavor at their hands must be
accounted a great favor.

Your excellent beautye (replied the Prince) has great reason, and I confess
my fault, for all it proceeded from an amorus passion. Whatsoever how great
soever, (said the Lady) proceeding from Love, is worthy of pardon, for none
that truly loves is subject to any on the earth but to the thing loved, which
is esteamed for life, reputed for a law, honored as a King, and obayed as a
Lord: and since in love nothing is required but a perpetual acknowledgement
thereof, here let us no longer stay, but instruct Fausta in what she has to
do. Palisandro shall do that (replied the Prince) who must stay with her,
suffering none to come in with any light, and when the challenge is known,
then publish my extremity to be most.

Heereuppon descended the two chief Beauties of the world into the garden,
where (O Archysilora who should have told thee so, with what grief would
thou have heard it?) is it possible thou should be so careless, as not to
respect the loyalty of the Greek Prince, who being alone with her that
challenged equality of thee, remembered nothing but the battle, armor, and
horse chiefly? She gave him a steeled temper one of the best that the earth
possessed, saying. This (brave Prince) was his that raised the buildings of this
City, of which a wise man told me, that it should come to the hands of the
famousest Knight, and greatest Lover of the world, and with it he should
terminate many haughty adventures, and I think in all things he did lie,
except in this, for coming to your hands the earthes glory does ingraten
them. It is a gift (most sovereign Lady said he) to end any enterprise,
having been obtained, by the woonderfullest hap ever recorded. The Lady had in
that nothing missaide, for that (next to the Creator) in a thousand places it
did save his life, the first being in the battle against the fearful
Ballurdano, for so was the diuilish Giant called. The Prince did put it on
having never as he thought seen a better in all his life, and she closed the
buckles with more grace then strength. He made an end of arming, and his
armor being of a rose color graue^ with green ameld flowers, he rested the
best accomplished knight that might be seen. The beauteous Venus could not but
embrace him, saying.

In this do I now wrong Archisilora, but so I may with truth say I had the
flower of Knighthood twixt mine arms, I am bold to do it, vowing hereafter
to amend it with my utmost power.

With whatsoever gracious Princess your Highness shall unto me do (replied he)
I am the man that only thereby gains, though I wish my friend were in my
place. For among such there must be nothing, but ought to be participated twixt
both.

Now am I sorrowful that I did it, for (said she) it is the greatest wrong my
favors could receive, seeing you tell me, that not loving your friend, I am the
looser, being, before I am entreated, used with such disdain: and till another
time I will defer my revenge for this injury. When it shall please you
(gallant Lady replied he) will I receive the pain of your inflicted
punishment, though seeing it must proceed from these hands I wrong it with
that name: here ending, she led him to a wicket that to the fields did open,
made with bars of strongest steel: and opening it with a kiss, she said.

I would to God (renowned Prince) I were a Knight in this Journey to accompanye
you, the better to joy your haughtye Cheualries. It suffizeth, for my glory
and the happy success of them, Heavenly Venus (answered he) that in your
name I undergo them: Yet if that were so (replied the Lady) more ioyfuller
should I remain. So here departing she gave him a Thousand imbracemenets
suffitient to Metamorphize the weakest Lamb, into the strongest Lion.

He took his leave of her entering through a wood, where what did happen unto
him the ensuing Chapter shall memorize.

CHAP. XXV. What happened to the Prince Claridiano with a Knight, with whom he
went to the City to combat against the Giants.
BOund in his soul till death (sweet Ladies) did the mighty Nephew of
Trebatio leave the famous City of Xantho, seeing with what careful kindness
the beauteous Venus had procured his liberty, and so he fully resolved, either
to loose his life, were it ten times ten thousand times more precious, or else
to take her thence, espowsing her unto his friend (if so she would) and that
she meant it he had received some hopes thereof from her in the tower the first
night. The imagination of his undertaken enterprise (though of such
consequence) could not divert him finding himself alone, amongst those big
branching oaks, from remembering the tira^nie, wherewith he was used forgetting
his promise of Patience, that the same night he past unto the Princess, (but
there can be none being in his estate.) He sat him down at the foot of a
spreading Beech, making the Echo of his voice reiterate the repetition of his
woes, and tempering them with the favors the Princess Venus had done him, he
warbled forth this Dittie.

What auailes it me to joy,
Or for to renew my love:
Since my Queen is nice and coy,
And my favors does reprove.
She is angry, full of ire:
Though her favor I desire.
What rests then, since joy and hope is spent:
In these extremes but to be patient.
Who is it that lives content?
And does lead an absent life?
Who does love, that is exempt?
From endless pain, and bitter strife,
As her presence brings Joy:
So her absence breeds annoy.
He ended saying, what does it avail (Sacred Venus) so have set me at liberty
by those divine hands of thine with hope that I might be the means to free him
from prison that is wronged to be kept therein, if thou should leave me in a
perpetual Jail, and where it is impossible, either for my self to free my
self, or any else to aid me in distress. I will embrace my death? and my
Lady does procure it, why therefore comes there to me so great a good going to
crave a license to end my ill ioyed life, unless she do reply me with a no?
Turbulent storms are these, which only a heart with passions unacquainted may
distinguish, and he shall see the reason he has, not to complain for that
were to wrong the Lady, but to publish his grief, and his unlucky hap to
see himself, his loves and hopes disgraste? I know not (divine Lady) wherein
I have offended, unless it were in making thee sovereign Dominatrix of my
soul: And if because this Monarchy is too small I do deserve so cruel an
exile: In that I did presume to acknowledge it, I now languish in eternal
punishment for that offense, and do not behold those two celestial suns
of thine, the lodestarres of mine affects, the guiders of my actions, and the
light to lighten my eternity. Now banish from my friends society, I wander
through unknown groves and desert wildernesses, co^uersing with huge big
oaks, complaining to them under their shadye couertures the anguish of my
soul, the which a fresh blowing gentle Zephirus conuayes among a company of
straight towering Cypresses, who with funeral obsequies in tombs it in the
air.

Not far from him was there a Knight with different thoughts, for he only
sorrowed for not hearing from his Lady, having assurance by his good fortune
that he might co^tentedly travel amiddest his greatest absence: he rose for
through like tempests he had recovered the quiet harbor of a delightful love:
He closed his visor and went were he ouer-heard the knight, and having done in
his going made some noise which was a warning to ye lover yt clasping his beuer
started up, and by the brightness of the Moon they could ouerviewe each other.
Either admired the others disposition. Straight did the Greek know the Knight
by his armor, rejoicing to meet him there in such time, attributing thereby a
happy conquest to his adventure: for he that he saw was no less then the
gallant lover Don Eleno Prince of Dacia, who by order of Nabato that foresaw
Claridianos necessity would help his cousen by sending him thither, wherein
he nothing erred, for few else with honor could have terminated that battle.
What is it you require (sir knight demanded the glad Prince) for if of my
person there be any need, I will employ it in any danger to do you good? I
was only hither moved to come (replied he) by hearing thy lame^tations (brave
Knight) and the recompting of thy griefs to these senseless trees resolved to
loose my life, or to my power redress thy woes. For such a knight less could
not be hoped (answered the Greek) although the infirmity that possess me
cannot be cured but by my death. To despair was yet in such cases never good
said the Dacian he spoke by experience,) for sometimes the Lady gives a
Thousand disfauors, only better to prove her lover, specially if he be a
person whom the Vulgar sort admireth, and so ought they to be taken as favors.
Never were any I have received (sir Knight replied he) which have been infinite
called by yt name. For the^ in midst of them would my grieved life find
content, but so plainly she told me, how little she respected my actions,
that I thought it was to wrong her longer to abide in her presence, coming to
live in this country many miles removed from my own. I greatly desire to know
in what kingdom we are, for this is the first night that I arrived in the
land, and after we will trace some plot for your remedy. In all things I wish
to satisfy you (sir Knight) replied the Prince because I judge your person
worthy of much more obedience. And therefore know you are now in ye kingdom of
Esclauonia and very nere the famous City of Xantho, where wtin these few days
there has happened many things among ye which was the coming of a knight
called ye Despayrer, who va^quisht four brothers that the Princess beauty
defended, and from thence he told him all ye the former Chapters have rezited.
So that sir Knight the worthy in the yellow with his Cha^pion must die through
the greatest injustice of ye world, And imbouldened with his Justice not my
valor, I left this night the City, resolved to return upon the mornings
rising, to demand the combat, though I greatly doubted ye success
considering the adversaries fiercenes. But my misfortune that never is weary to
persecute me, ordained that in my coming forth (having occasion to alight, and
tie my horse unto a tree) certain thieves did take him from me, and would not
stay my just revenge I would have taken, having at such a time bereft me of
my steed, not giving them occasion for it. Truly (sir knight answered the
Dacian) you accomplish the valor of your bou^ty, in hazarding your life in so
just a cause: and though my deserts contains not what so haughty an enterprise
requires, I offer nevertheless my person, to accompany you till death,
defending any from receiving outrage, or wrong, and want, I hope you shall not
a horse by some means or other. I do not doubt it (replied Claridiano) for we
have time enough, and so he thanked him with sovereign praises his bounteous
offer, which could by no less degree be correspondent to his gallant
disposition. But little rested the two kinsmen, with diversity of thoughts: And
therefore scarce had ye golden shepherd regent of the worlds splendour shown
his light but they ryzed, ye valiant Dacian prese^ting the Greek the best
horse that ever the world knew. Mount thereon (valiant Knight said Claridianos
Son) for I am used to gooe a foot and traveling softly, it may be we shall
meet with some to help us.

They had scarce gone out of the wood when from the City they spyed a Knight
coming horst on a mighty Courser and seeming of great valor: Lets return
into the thicket (said the Greek) sir knight, for if any thing befall me with
this Knight, none may witness it but these trees, for sometimes for a man to
do such tricks, it is no infamy. The Dacian turned his horse highly pleased
with the Knights behavior. Already approached the Knight, careless of that
which happened: before him did Claridiano set himself saying. A favor should
I receive (sir Knight) if you would tell me whither you travel. No further
(said he) but to walk into these fields and run my horse, because for a good
one it was given me. I am very glad thereof (replied the Prince) for now to a
man that has such need of one and of a shield as my self, and going to so
difficult a business, entreating you to lend it him you shall nothing loose
thereby, but it will rather be a liberality that will more advance your person,
for I must combat with this Knight, and he only stays till I get one. I
would gladly pleasure you therein (replied ye Knight) but truly you demand a
thing that never was seen, and I had rather take the battle for you. That may
not be (answered the Greek) for he has challenged me, and I must defend my
own honor: If he must stay for you (said the Knight) you shall not want
occasion, to get one by some other means, for this is impossible. My patience
(replied the Prince) cannot brook so long a stay, and therefore you shall give
it me, or your life upon it. With the point of his lance would the knight have
struck him, but ere he could turn it the Prince had taken it out of his hand,
and casting his strong arms about him, he plucked him from his saddle, his
shield falling from him to the ground: what the Greek did was an act worthy
of Claridiano, for houlding him between his arms with a swinge, he flunge him
above 20 paces from him falling with a heavy fall among certain thorns and
briars, that before he rose, the Greek was got within ye City, for quicker
then an Eagle taking the shield he leapt a horseback, saying. Lets go sir
Knight, and pardon me if in any thing I have disparedged your estate by my
devise, for believe me my present extremetie urged me to no less. The Dacian
could not answer him for laughing: but his Dwarf said. In faith (sir Knight)
you are so nimble in it, yt I dare say you have used this office above once.
Thereby (answered he) may thou gather in what necessities I have bin, for in
them there is nothing several to one alone, and so as much was this horse mine,
as his that brought him: I am sure he curses ye Law that any such thing does
allow said ye dwarf. If he do so (answered the Prince) that of a good man
might have moved him of courtesy to have done it, seeing yt my present want
requested it. And because (sir knight) we are so nigh the City, lets not
loose our selves, or unadvisedly cast our selves away, by reason I am so
greatly known here and therefore it behooues you to speak, if you do not
ignore the language, demanding battle for the ymprisoned Knights, the one
called ye Despayrer, and the other ye Suspicious. As you (sir Knight answered
Don Eleno) will have it, so shall it be, and believe me, I never delighted I
in any knights company more the^ with yours. That is proper to good men
(replied Claridiano) that with their virtues adorn him whose parts deserve but
mean regard. Thus arrived they at the palace about Ten of of the Clock, when
the King was in the great Hall, showing some exterior extraordinary discontent
for the new infirmity of the dispairing Knight. Then entered the two most
graciousest Princes of the earth, who with a Sovereign behavior having made
their due obeisance, with an audible voice the Dacian thus began. It is so
little since we arrived in thy kingdom, (Might king of Esclauonia) this knight
and my self, that we more desired thy high service, (by reason of ye great
fame that of thee the wast orb does publish) then by other means to procure
thy displeasure. But having vndestoode the imprisonment of two Knights, we are
constrained, they being challenged, and their own persons from the fight
prohibited, to undertake it for the^, only relying on their Justice (if any
they have) and not on our weak valors. I am behoulding to you Knights
(replied the King) for the kindness you offer me, the which I shall not want
will to gratify having occasion to show it. As for the rest the battle
cannot be denied to any that for them will undertake it, if they please to give
their consent, for which let them be sent for. Straight went they that had
charge of the Prisoners to advertise them: But the discreet Palisandro made the
Kings Nephew believe that the Greek was at the point of death, who stepped to
the bedside without light telling him what did happen. With no little fear did
Fausta answer, that seeing he could not go, he rezined his power to the
suspicious knight, admitting whatsoever he should do. With this reply returned
the young man the which the King allowed, and it highly contented the Lady
Venus that in her face till then had changed to more colors then the Raynebow
ever had, awaighting for the answer, wherewith she rejoiced, together with the
sight of her freed knight, who had brought another with him in her judgment of
no less valor then himself. Presently came the Prince of Croatia, that was
advised without fear to grant the battle to any that should demand it: he
greatly thanked the^ for what they did, saying. So strange (Brave Knights) is
this countries law, that it constrayneth us in necessity, to trouble those
whom most we should desire to serve. It is not any for us (Sir knight) said
the Dacian, for contentedly we shall die in your service loosing our lives my
companion and I, and seeing we need no more delay be our battle straight. This
could not Balurdano disse^ble ye sitting by the King said. Make not such have
(knights) to seek your deaths, for you shall have time enough, and yet now
knowing you must have it against me, I fear you do repent your foolish
hardines. Considering ye desire we have (replied the Greek counterfeiting his
voice more furious then a Lion) to chastise thy mad insolence we stay to long.
A mighty shrike gave ye Giant, going to fly at ye knights though to his lives
cost had not ye king and Lindauro stayed him by his arms, whom with the fury
yt possessed him, a pretty way had dragged them after him. Take thy armor and
weapons infernal beast (said the angry Greek the more to inspense him,) for
with them the very ffeldes shall thou judge to little to contain thee, such
work we will employe thee in. The king commanded them to silence, and to go
unto the field to stay for ye giants. At their going forth as ye Greek saw the
beauteous Venus, he could not but make a courteous signal unto her with his
gauntlet, she answered it we a kind nod most glad to see the two stout
warriors, ye more furious then a thunderbolt past forwards. They commanded
Fabio to go forth of the City least that vild people (should at ye battles
end) offend them, and for the^ stay at their meeting place, for all this had
the dwarf made provision, because to ye purpose only he was come with Don
Eleno, who on his horse ran round about the listes, expecting the combat,
whose strange accidents deserves (being the last) a large new Chapter.

CHAP. XXVI. The cruel battle that past between the two Princes and the
Giants, with the end thereof.
THere remained none (Deuinest Ladies) able to come in all the City of
Xantho, but in multytudes flocked to see the famous battle of the four rare in
valor. The little children left their Schools, to gorge their desires with
the skillful blows of ye haughty warriors. The galla^t gentlemen forsook their
other pastimes, and delights, to learn new wards, and new manner of defe^ces,
yt the^ by their experie^ces they better (judged) might learn the^ in any
school of ye wide world besides. The young amorous youths, for ye time (oh
admiring thirst of arms) to forget their loves, only to witness the memory of
so brave a co^bate thither came. The old men ioyed to see what their age
prohibited.

The beauteous Dames and rarest Ladies to see by example the power of their
working beauty, came glad, unto the field (making that more brighter then the
imperial heaven, because glorified with ye radiant splendour of more dazeling
Suns) with admiration to eternize that war. And once again with more
attention and silence awayted the gallant lovers, the discharging of every
blow, for every one ye was worthy note proceeded from the force of love. And
all in general greatly argued which of the two Knights should be most
valerous, for both so well pleased with their gallantnesse the spectators that
most with a partial voice expected the combat. Of those^ that least feared
was the Princess Venus none who at that instant accompanied with many Ladies,
more glorious then Apollos shine, had set her self at her window that over
the Knights looked, all apparelled in green to let the dispayrer know how much
she relied on his valor. On her head a Coronet of her own hair she had set,
remaining with such a natural true perfect beauty, that I know not who at ye
very sight would not have made her Sovereign of his soul.

Is this the Lady (demanded the Dacian) against whom the wrong is done and we
seek to right? And I think it a happy life to loose it in the service that
shall advance her content: For her beauty does deserve it, and few or none there
is that may compare with hers. It is so? Brave Knight (answered the Prince)
that you may know what favor we have on her behalf. The noise that ye
common people made with the coming of the Gyantes, interrupted their talk
from farther proceeding. Many Knights and Nobles to please the King, and the
Prince Lindauro accompanied them, yet none would they trust with their heavy
weapons, but their own timbered shoulders. Both had one devise on their Indian
coulord armor, graven with many Lillies on ye same, and were mounted on mighty
horses, for such they had need be to support their hugenes. Having marshalled
the field with the usual rites they set the Knights each opposite against the
other, and the Judges took their places. Balurdano was by nature so insolent,
that seeing they somewhat ouer-long did stay, said: have done with your new
invented folish ceremonies, for longer you are about them, then I use in the
winning of a pitched field? Peace proud hellish beast (said the Greek him
having sorted and required for his enemy) for now thou art in place, where
deeds must more help thee then arrogant vain boasting words. He would not
answer, for he could not his rage so choked him. He turned his horse with
such a curuet that above four tre^bled, borne to arms and valor. All of them
placed themselves to fling against his enemy, thinking the fearful signal
ouer-long was kept. But (O ye Angels of chastity, Vesta's only virgins, and
Ladies of all rarieties) you that hitherto disquieted with desire have expected
this instant: now settled before the sacred sinode of your perfections, in
presence of your celestial beauties, they beseech that with all intention
possible you make them Victors, with your conquering looks: For considering
the ligeritie of the foaming Tyrio champing on his bit, no marvel if by a
little diuerting your sunny eyes, you loose the enjoying of so brave an
encounter as the Dacian made, who being mounted on the earths best horse was
first in meeting of his enemies. They encountered with more terror then the
noise of two discharged filled Cannons. That happened to the Son which the
Father would not have believed, for the big lances shiuered in thousand
pieces, they met so furiously with their horses, that the Giant with his
tumbled to ye ground sore bruised with the fall. The lusty Tyrio, by the force
of the shocke was driven backwards three or four steps so disorderly, that the
Dacian to avoid occasion of some disgrace, leapt from him like to a long wingd
hawke, leaving the behoulders not a little affectionated to him, and no less
the beauteous Venus that in her heart rejoiced with the brave encounter that the
Knihgt had made. All the spectators commended him with loud voices not
regarding the grief that the King and the Sophy might conceive with that
success, imagining that the Knights would bear away the victory of the
fight, since the one began to show it by so gallant an encounter. But stay a
while and you shall see what our Greek does, that backing his stolen horse
representing Mars on earth but far more angry, took his Carrier somewhat long,
to take surer aim with his lance. They met, like the incountring in the wide
vast Ocean of two well furnished ships carried with the furye of contrarious
winds. Timorous in sight seemed the ugly giant mounted on so great a Courser:
but he that was borne without fear, stronglye resting his lance stayed it in
the middle of his shield that in fouldes exceeded Ajax: yet cannot it resist
the strength of that Herculean arm yt easily pierced it with his breast,
casting a brace of lances on the other side under his arm. All the spectators
thought he had slain him, but it was not so, for it only past twixt his
armor and coat of male, yet he thrust him so hard, that he threw him from his
saddle, tumbling like a Rock upon the ground. And the Greek guirded his
horse so strongly with his legs for fear of falling, that, with the strong
encounter, he made his Courser burst under him. He would not so long stay, but
in sight of all the place, setting his hand on the pummell, with such lightness he
leapt forwards over his neck and head, that on his feet with his sword in hand
he stu^bled very near where the Giant, with great pain was rising. He helped
him with a lofty flourish, that finding him something careless yt struck away
all the helm top and part of his armed scull, wou^ding him a little on the
head: he returned with another before he could be settled on his feet that
almosted had laid him again alo^g, which lighting on his visor, upon his
front, it made him a long and dangerous wound.

Never was the like before seen in that place, which made the beholders seek
new means of praises for the knight, saying aloude, it was impossible for
Mars to do, with what such facility the Greek had done. The gallant Venus
alone celebrated in her soul the Greeks haughty Chiualries, having there none
with whom she might communicate them. Of higher estimation, (seeing what he did)
was the Knight reputed then the Dacian. Who emulating the sound of those high
lawdes, with his inchaunted Roman blade made against the Giant, and in his
first assault he struck the more to mayme him upon his sword arm.

That was not a place strong enough to resist the blow, and therefore was it to
some effect, for it took away all his defe^siue armor, with a great piece of
the maled sleeue. To his defense came yt Giant entering with his left foot
forwards. It was what the Dacian desired: For by his nimblenesse avoiding the
blow, (for on foot his companion hadd no advantage over him) he gave him
another on the top of his helm. He stretched not forth his arm to much
fearing his adversaries lightness, and therefore was not his blow mortal,
nevertheless it cut away all the Collet of his plumes, and with them, a great
piece of the Burgonet with some of his scull. Yt descended to his shoulder
bearing away a piece of the fine steeled Targe, that in stead of a shield he
used. It did not a little avail him to leave ye pursuit of his assault,
because ye Giant turning his heavy Semiter, discharged it in midst of his
sheelde. It did not cut it, but it joined yt with such strength to his head,
as if a Tower had fallen thereon.

It made him stagger two steps backward. He followed him close thinking he had
him sure with a mighty thrust of his sharp sword. Advised was the Dacian, and
so expected him opening his legs to stand more firmer: all was little
enough, for a Thousand signs of falling did he make: He was so abashed
heereat, that like a Lion he turned upon his enemy. At once they discharged
such mighty blows, that at the noise all the field left seeing of the Greeks
combat to gaze on this.

His knees bended Don Eleno, thinking yt the latest moment of his life he so
felt the blow: the blood that through his Beuer issued witnesses as much. He
so remained, for so soon to rise he had not power. The Giant did the like,
with his sword hand upon the ground, wanting all that part of his helm, with a
most dangerous wound on his right side, and the sword descending to the breast,
though three fold double it was it cut it down right unto his thighs, with all
his coat of male. Trembling like a shaken sappling with Boreas breath stood the
knight Judging ye battle lost, the like did Lindauro with the sight of such
blows, who sitttng next the King was animated by him saying, he should not
grieve thereat, for he purposed to deny the prisoners. Hereuppon they turned to
wonder at the Greek, for the earth contained not a better sight, then to
behold, the ligeritie, and strength wherewith he combated and had covered the
giant with his own blood, he stayed for him, for he well saw his amazednes, so
did the Giant (who in that science was most skillful) perceauing the Greeks
intent, whereby both stood forewarned. The furious Giant would execute his
blow which was the Greeks desire, the which he had scarce intended, when
swifter then a bird he closed, letting fly at his knees to make him forsake his
standing: but his nimbles issued too costly, for the Pagan being Master of his
arm stayed ye blow till then, discharging it with his strength upon his helm.
Miraculously here God defended him, (for his head he had struck clean off,
bearing aloft his blade) yet was it such a one, that it cut away part of his
burgonet wounding him a little on the head, it made him fall on his face, a
thing that all the place hung the head to see, especially ye beauteous Venus
that in heart shed tears of blood, seeing the disgrace of her Princely Champion.
Here the Nephewe of great Trebatio was not slow nor remiss (for it is
dangerous in war) quickly setting himself on foot, not losing his blow
prepared. It was venturous, and that which to his little cost did assure ye
victory, for it cut him to the bone, making a fount whence proceeded more blood
then had an Ox been there killed. Forth stepped the Greek, saying. Now shall thou
see (infernal beast) that here do deeds more avail then insolent proud words,
and that thou may know against whom thou fightest, I am the Despayring Knight.
Some fear conceived he at the name seeing himself so sore wounded: But his
pride was so great yt he salued that saying. Then stay base Knight, and thou
shall see how neither heaven, nor earth are able to keep thee from my hands,
by which I will disioynt thee bone by bone. Whereupon he would have flung after
him (which had bin his death) for his knee unable to support him, he staggred
that he almost fell with his head forwards. The Greek seeing it, thought
himself sure of ye victory, and so desirous to terminate ye war, he took his
sword with both hands, letting it fly at his head, with all the strength that
he could fetch. He mist his blow, which caused in many great grief, striking
his sword upon the earth that therein it ran to the middle, himself falling
upon the pummell. Very near him was his Uncle that in his soul did sorrow
for it, and so desirous to succor him with a point thrust the Giant from him,
and at two steps was with the Greek at such time as the mighty Ballurdano
with both his hands raised his heavy semiter. He had slain him, had he not
arrived, who at his arms let fly yt venturousest blow of the world, for it was
with such strength that his left arm from the elbow it snatched away, leaving
the other so tormented yt his sword fell from it, loosing the execution of his
own stroke. Great was the content himself and the field received at the good
aid he had given his companion. But specially the gallant Venus, that almost
swonded with joy, not knowing who the knight in the Russet might be, that more
furyous seemed then the Sun in his hastye course. Who having that good
occasion, hearing the Son side-waies coming in his Fathers defense went
toward him, seeing the Greek already dangerlesse, and as both went with
mighty strength and have, they could not choose but meet with more horror,
then a blazing Comett renteth through the Clouds. Both went to the ground
breathless, to the admiring wonder of all that beheld the battle. The
furious Giant for all he was maimed, would go to help his son: but
Claridiano stepped before him saying. Stay vilde beast for ere he return unto
himself, thy head shall thou leave with me. He warded a strong blow which
made him see more stars then did the Heavens contain: yet was it no part to
drive him from casting his Herculean arms about him. The like did the Pagan,
but wanting one arm, and his mortal wound on the knee, with a trippe he fell
with the Lover upon him, that not forgetting his dagger, three times he stabd
it in his body drawing it forth with his heart blood, Concluding that war
with the fiercest Pagan of all Syconia, himself remaining so weary that not
able to stand he made a seat of the Giants tronke, making all the spectators
laugh to see what stool he had found. The Dacian was already risen, exceeding
glad to see that the knight had ended his battle. He continued not long with
his, for having his adversary mortally wounded with two blows he laid him on
the ground, and following that advantage with like kind of death that the
Father suffered, he was bereft of life. Which Don Eleno made clean his sword
and dagger praising him that deserves all praises, from whom proceeds
strength and victory. He mounted upon his light horse that straigght came to
him, giving cause of no less admiration at that, then what the Greek did do,
for finding hard by him Ballurdanos steed, that was both mighty and strong,
not setting foot in stirrup, he nimbly leapt into his saddle as if that day he
had done nothing, which every one amazedly admired seeing him so sore wounded.
They demanded of ye Judges if about the Prisoners liberty there remained any
more to do: They replied. No more valiant Warriors, for what is done is more
the^ suffitient, the memory of whose fame while ye world does last, shall
evermore endure. From thence as they were they rode unto the window where ye
King was, to whom they made a low obeisance unworthy of his imagination. To
him the Dacian thus spoke.

Though in our souls (most mighty King) we grieve to have discontented thee,
yet considering by thy command and consent we were admitted to this
battle, we may stand excused: And so your Royal Majesty we beseech that
(because we have have of business that in another place does sumon us) you
will command the prisoners to be delivered us, which to us will be new
favors. Knight (answered the King) though to your honor you have accomplished
the performance of the challenge: the offense was committed against my Royal
Crown and state, and so it remaynes to be determined by my Counsel: wherefore
to stay a few days will be no great matter. For all (said the Dacian) was the
battle made and you commanded the prisoners to be sent for, that they might
give us their consent, so that by this means all is cleared, nothing remaining
to be remitted to any Counsel.

It is true (replied the King) but the kinsfolks of those dead, anew demand
of me Justice against them, which must be observed, especially required by
this valerous Prince. With his person it were more honorable for him to do it
(said the Greek a Thousand times about to follow them up stayres) and not in
this manner, which is more for a woman then a Knight and a Prince. Be not so
bold (replied Lindauro) before my Lord the King, for else I will have you
well chastised, according to your insole^ce: For what I will procure by my
self, I have arms and ffrength to do it, which I have not because I knew it
was to base and dishonorable for my person, and so I leave it in the Kings
hands, for he will maintain Justice law, and right. Well did the Dacian note
his alteration, and perceauing with what rage his Companion me^t to answer, he
stayed him, because he would not give occcasion of new brawles, and said.

In faith (Prince) I never saw a knight, yt while he might obtayn fame and
reputation by his own sword, would procure it by another hand. But seeing it is
thus used in Esclauonia we shall not want means more cruel and rygorous ere
long, to liberate the Prisoners. Having thus said, the two courageous
Warriors turned about their horses and went their ways, leaving behind them
enough for many years to be talked off. Where breathless, and of senses
tired, I am forced to cast anchor in an uncertain Port, till the joyful calm
of new expected favors (having dispersed the boisterous tempest of contrarious
thoughts) shall increase strength by adding courage to a faynting mind, to
gratefie your kind acceptances with another part.

-- Dum lumen solari tenebo,
Seruiet officio spiritus iste tuo.

FINIS.

