NEWS SENT to the Lady Princess of Orange.

Translated out of French into English by I. E.

VBIQVE FLORET


LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1589.

NEWS SENT TO THE Lady Princess of Orange.
MOnsieur de Diguiers, and Monsieur de la Valette, have concluded a league
between themselves in December last, and have been since oftentimes together,
and have entered Valentia, Romans, Tulet, and diverse other places in Daulphine.

This league concluded, the Lord de Diguiers marched his army into the
field, and with his cannons laid siege to, and battered the fortress of
Auxonne, situate on the river of Rosne, right over against Mont-de-limart and
took the same by assault, the fifth of January. The Captain of the said fort
was slain, and all his men who were within the fort with him. By these
surprises the forces of the Lord of Esambaud, Governor for those of the
reformed religion, in Viuares, followed and marched after the forces of the
Lord de Diguiers, which before was not possible for him to do.

From thence the Lord of Diguiers went to lay siege to the hold of
Coullonselles in the the County of Grignan, which hold he took by assault.
The governor of the hold he hanged, and put all his men to the edge of the
sword, one only saved upon condition, that he should pay all the expenses that
the whole army had been at in the same place.

Departing from thence, he took his way straight to the County of Veyascin: he
was no sooner there, but the holds of Bannyes, of Transsy, le Bouschel,
Racherinchez, and Rocheguardes yielded, before the canon ever played upon them.

Going on further, he went to besiege Camaret, a place very well fortified in
the said county distant some two miles from Orange, the which yielded, never
staying till the assault was made, upon condition that the sould^ours and
inhabitants thereof should have their lives granted.

From thence he came to Vacqueyras, which was yielded up also to him by
composition. After that he went to the hold of Aubignan, which likewise
yielded seeing the cannon. The whole camp soiourned there ten days to
refresh the soldiers. Thither came the deputies of the Country to demand a
truce, but could do no good in the matter.

The Lord de Diguiers departing from thence went to besiege another hold,
called Cayranne, which was taken by assault. The governor thereof being an
Italian was hanged, and all his men were put to the sword or hanged every one.
And by and by from every place of the Country came the governors, and brought
unto him their keys, that is to say, from Raestel, S. Romans, Ville di^u,
Boisson, Mirabel, le P^ymerat, and S. Romanet, and my Lord went to besiege
Molans, a place very well fortified, where are also Castles that are very
strong. The cannon played 300. times against their walls, and yet still they held
out, defending the assault. The deputies of the said county were present at
the same time, when the said place was taken by assault, 250. men being slain
in the combat. The Lord of the said place had his life saved paying 1000.
French crowns for ra^some: yet his house and all the town was sacked besides.

The Lord of Diguiers straitely commanded by the Lord Alphonsus, Collonell and
commander general for the King in Daulpine, to draw near to Grenoble, whether
he was looked for to come, to conclude a truce for the said Province, lodged
his army in the towns of the said county, that he had taken in, and went to
Nyons, where the Deputies of the said County did entreat with him to accord a
truce for 25000. French crowns to be paid at one payment, and 2000. Franks of
contribution to be paid every month to the Lord of Blacons, for the
entertaining of the garrison of Orange. And that all the holds that the Lord
of the said County had taken in, should be yielded up, sacked, and the walls
beaten down to the ground. All was fully agreed upon, but the battering of
the walls down to the ground, the which the said deputies said they had not in
charge to accord. By this means peace for a month was concluded, at the end
whereof the said Lord came to this City, either to prosecute his victory, or
else fully to conclude a truce for altogeth^r.

The said Lord de Diguieres departed from Nions to come to Bogencie, which is a
fortress that he caused to be made some two miles from Grenoble, where the
assignation was given to meet the eighth of March, to conclude the truce for
Daulphine, about the entreating whereof he staide three weeks, at the last
sell to agreement, they signed and confirmed it with great solemnytie in the
suburbs of Grenoble.

It was agreed of in the said truce, that those of the league that entered the
Country, and were revolted to the King, should pay unto Monsieur de
Diguieres 18000. French crowns, for the entertayning of his companyes, and the
one half of all tolles, that was gessed to amount to fifty crowns a day.

Moreover, they agreed to pay him 8000. French crowns, for the entertaining
of certain Ministers and other works of piety in the said Province. The
fortress of Bogencie and diverse other holds that the Leaguers held, being
beaten down to the ground. The Prince dome of Orange being comprised within
the said truce. This truce was proclaimed in the said town upon Easter day, and
the publishing of the truce of the said cou^tie was prorogued, until the time
that it was agreed upon. For the Province of Languedoc the assembly was
holden at Nysmes and Lunel, to conclude the said truce, and there is good hope
they will confirm it for four years.

Monsieur de Mont-morencie has bin reestablished, and confirmed by the King in
his government of Languedoc, and has published his authority in the said
Country: yet those of the reformed religion would not permit the said
proclamation to be made in any places that they hold, without absolute
commandment from the King of Navarre. The King permits him to remove the
Parliament of Toulouse to Carcassone, for that those of Toulouse are Leaguers.
It is reported that the Citizens of Narbone have shut their gates against
Monsieur de Ioyeuse, and have sent for Monsieur de Mont-morencie to come, and
they will receive him, seeing that it has pleased the King to reestablish him
in his government. As for the City of the Holy Ghost, the Lord Colonnel
Alphonsus is looked for every day to thrust out the companies de Cor^es which
are within it, and to yield it up into the hands of my Lord de Mont-morencie.

As for the Country of Prouence, the Lord of Vins holds for the Court of
Parliament, and so for those of the League. The Lord de la Valette, who holds
for the King, is very strong, and has the greatest part of the said Country
and of the fortresses there. He caused an assembly of the states to be
holden lately, where it was agreed, that they should take arms, and war
against the said court of Parliament, and the Lord de Vins: and for that
purpose they delivered 10000. French crowns to the Lord de la Valette.

The Lord de Mont-brun confederate to the said Lord de la Valette has of
late surprised two very strong fortes in the said Country. Monsieur de
Diguieres so soon as he shall have confirmed the truce in this Country, shall
bring down the whole camp into Prouence.

My Lady de Mont-morencie in the beginning of this month passed over the
territories of this City to go to the Court, and Monsieur des Diguieres
brought her two miles onward of her way.

Of late we had here the Declaration in print that the town of Lions has
made, how it reserueth and holds it self toward and against all, under the
name and authority of the King.

My Lady the Princess of Lorraine came down this way upon the river of Rosne,
accompanied with fifty Barges, and kept her Easter at Auignon, from whence she
is departed this present day to embarke her self at Marseille with four
galleies, which stay there waiting for her, to conduct her to the Duke of
Florence with whom she shall now be married. Monsieur de Mont-morency stayed
for her 15. days at Beauquaire, but was forced to depart before her coming
without seeing her, for that he was sent for away to Narbona, whither he is gone
from Orange in all have. This 24. of March. 1589.

These news came to London the 20. of May. 1589.

