THE SECOND part of the first Book of the Myrrour of Knighthood: IN WHICH IS
PROSECVTED THE ILLUSTRIOUS deeds of the knight of the Sun, and his brother
Rosicleer, Sons unto the Emperor Trebatio of Greece: With the valiant deeds
of arms of sundry worthy Knights, very delightful to be read, and nothing
hurtful to be regarded.

NOW NEWLY TRANSLAted out of Spanish into our vulgar tongue by R. P.



LONDON

Printed by Thomas Este. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Thomas Powle Esquire, Clarke of the Crown in
her Majesty's high Court of Chauncerie
COnsidering (right Worshipful) that such men as have excelled others in virtue
or any excellent quallitie, do shine through perpetual fame all abroad, and
are like the bright Sun beams, surmounting (without comparison) the small
and speedy decaying candles of the rude and ignoble: and seeing that this
brightness of fame has, and does not only shine in men by virtuous studies
and contemplative exercises, but also in most worthy feats of chiualrv and
martial prowess (the knowledge and practice whereof Cicero, that most wise
and learned Senator, deemed as necessary as learning and other good gifts of
the mind, to maintain an orderly common weal.) Considering also that as
well the spirit of God has by the hands of Moses, and of many good men since,
published, and that greatly commending them, the valiant acts and puissant
exploits of sundry both good and mighty men at arms, as did Homere, Titus
Liuius, Salust, with many mo, the right martial and ever memorable acts of the
Greeks, the Romans, etc. All which records of Chivalry ^ending to animate
others unto imitating the like, and being ^s a spur to instigate and prick us
forwards unto prowess, who ^lse would be idle and lie in obscurity: I have
thought it ^ot fruitless to publish this Mirror of Knighthood also, in^ented
and set forth rather to encourage dastards and to teach ^he ready minded what
excellency is in puissant and inuinci^le minds, passing common judgment,
then to feed the reader with an untruth. Now, since custom has made it to
be as a law in men's hearts observed, that they account books published not to
have sufficient warrant, except they be dedicated to some worthy personage of
authority, I am bold to present unto your Worship this Book, entitled* The
second part of the Mirror of Knighthood, done out of Spanish, and now newly
printed: beeseeching your Worship rather to accept of my good will showed, than
to respect the simpleness of the gift. Thus ceasing to be tedious, I commit
you to the tuition of the Almighty, who bless you and all yours.

Your Worships most assured: T. E.

To the Reader.
I Have (good Reader) according to my forepassed promise, prosecuted the Second
part of the first Book of the Mirror of Knighthood: after which likewise
(before the second part already Printed) follows another book, which is
entitled in the Spanish work, The third part of the first Book. etc. Which,
with as much expedition as may be, shall be published: whereby both the quaint
beginning, and the quoy abruption, shall be brought to a concord, though no
conclusion: Yet shall the whole story be concluded with diligent speed, if
thou accept with thy wonted courtesy, these passed impressions. Desiring thee
not to think the fullness of the history to be deferred of malice, but by
evil luck: wherefore good Reader, I beseech thee, bear with the abruptness
of the translation, the errors of the impression, and the good meaning of the
Author: and thinck not every Actor a right Grecian Lord, no more then every
Chremes, a Corinthian churl: but contrary, that as Terence showed the figure
that then was, so our Author shadoweth the form that should be in all
Nobility, to wit, Chivalry, and courtesy. Committing therefore the
consideration of this work to thy acceptance, I conclude*

Thine to use. T. E.

G. G. To the Reader.
IF learned Maro merited such praise, for penning down Aeneas trauayles
strange:
Or if to heaven they Nasoes name do raise, that writ of men and beasts trans
formed by change:
Then shall our Spaniards toil I trust obtain, Though no such praise, yet
pardon for his pain.
For as their pens did paint the rare events, of things succeeding, fitting for
their time:
Even so does he declare in his contents, the very means to Honors top to
clime.
Accept his will, do not disdain his work, In simplest show does truest
meaning lurk.
FINIS.
THE SECOND PART of the first book of the Mirror of Knighthoode, in which is
prosecuted the illustrious deeds of the Knight of the Sun, and his brother
Rosicleer, sons to the Emperor Trebatio of Greece.
OF ALL THAT HAPPEned unto the Emperor Trebatio and the Princess Briana in
their way unto the Grecian Empire. CHAPTER. I.
WIth great joy and contentment, the Emperor Trebatio and the Princess Briana
travailed toward the Grecian Empire, as well for the fruition of her
contented joy, as the pleasure and ease which she hoped to have, at such time
as she should come unto the Empire. And if it had fallen out that their
departure should have been known, yet at their ease they could not follow
them, for that most of their travail was by deserts and uninhabited places,
and not by peopled towns and vilages: and this was the occasion that they
could not come so seen unto Grecia as they might, if they had taken the
frequented way. And so in great peace and quietness they travailed certain
days without any accident happaning that is worth the noting, till such time
as they had passed through ye kingdom of Hungaria, and entered among certain
mountains which were very craggie and troublesome to travail in, where they
chanced upon the skirt of the mountain Sarpedo, which is very great, and was
inhabited with very furious and uncivil people. This was the cause which made
them to travail by the lowest part of the mountain, where they continued on
their journey till the third day, at such time as the Sun was in the
extremest of his parching heat, which caused them to have an earnest and
great desire to drink, for that they were thyrstie, by reason that all that
day, and the other day past, they could find no water, nor any other thing to
drink.

And because the great thirst which the Empress sustained was more grief
unto the Emperor then his own, he diligently searched in every place where
he came, to see if he could by any means find any Town, Uilage, or
Fountain, where they might have water to quench their thirst.

And he as trauayled in this care and sorrow, within a while after he
discovered a certain valley which entered in by the one side of the Mountain,
and in the midst thereof there was as it were a sluice which proceeded out of
the Mountain: and it seemed unto him, that it could not he without water, for
that the ground about it was very fresh and pleasant.

And presentlye leaving their way that they then followed, they took the next
way which lead them unto the valley, and with great travail they came thither,
in the end whereof they found sufficient of that whereof they had such need.
For that out of the foot of a high and mighty Rock, the principal beginning
of that mountain, there was a small valley like unto a meadow, being very
green and fresh, and on the one side it was enclosed with that mighty Rock,
and on the other side environed with great and thick trees of all sorts, both
delectable and pleasant.

This valley was very plain, and out of the cliftes of that rock, there
issued a sweet and a christalline fountain of most excellent clear water,
which ran into the midst of that valley, whereas it made a stange: being
very pleasant to behold. Likewise they saw in that high Rock, certain
steps cut out of the hard stone like unto stayres, which assended up unto a
door which was in the said Rock, and it seemed to be above fifteen ^adome
high.

And they saw that by the door there was cut out of the same Rock, holes like
unto windows, which made them think there should be some habitacion or
dwelling in the same. And for that the place was very delightful, it did in a
manner inuit them to refresh themselves. There the Emperor alighted from his
horse, and made him fast unto a Tree, and took the Empress in his arms from
her paulfrie, the like did he to all the Ladies and Damosells, and they went
unto the Fountain whereas they did satisfy themselves of their desire,
thinking all their travail well beestowed, to come unto that pleasant and
delightful place.

Then they sat themselves down, by the head of that spring, and did eat of
such meat as Clandestria had brought with her: and this mighty Emperor had
for his table the lap of the Empress, which he did more esteem then all the
great abundance of silver and gold and other furniture in his royal and
princely court. Also they received wonderful great pleasure and contentment at
the sweet and pittering noise which the running water made, which by reason of
the swiftness of his course seemed to be a Fountain of crystal, for the
great clearenesse thereof.

And when they had eaten and well refreshed themselves with that which they
brought, the Emperor did pull of his healme, and stretched out his body upon
the green grass, and laid his head on the Princess lap. And after that
he had discoursed with the Princess many ^weet and amorous speeches, he
fell a sleep, wherefore ^he Princess had great care of him and commanded
^ell her Gentlewomen to keep silence and to make no noise for fear of waking
of him, and she was well contented in her mind that they were passed the
Kingdom of Hungaria, hoping in a short time to enter into the great Empire of
Grecia. But all this in comparison was nothing unto the great love and
contented joy that she received, to see that noble Emperor lie a long with his
head on her lap, and subject unto her love, very much beholding the great
severity and courageous countenance of his fair face, marking his mighty
members, and the good proportion of his whole body. And as he lay upon the
grass, it seemed to her that inall the world there was not his like to be
seen, he was of so excellent a stature and worthy to be beeloued above all
other. And for that the Princess by experience was fully persuaded of his
noble prowess, she said unto her self, that there was not in all the world
lady or gentlewoman, that had better chance then she, affirming that although
Fortune in times past did show her self cruel, yet at that time she had
recompensed her with more honor and delight, higher dignity and prosperity
then ever she possessed, or thought at any time to attain unto. But as it is a
thing both general and common, that at such time as a man thinks himself to
have most felicity in this mortal lite, he is nearest unto perils, having
sodainlye all his mirth turned into mourning, with mischeefes unlooked for: so
at this present it happened, for in the mean time that the Emperor took his
rest upon the lap of the fair Princess, and she likewise remained in the
top of her prosperity, all her Gentlewomen being at a Fountain, washing
their hands and faces with that fair and christaline water, upon a sudden and
unaware they heard a great norse amongst the trees, and shrikes that seemed to
be of women that came toward the place whereas they were, with sorrowful
weepings and lamentecions. The Princess and all her Gentlewomen being amazed
at that sudden noise, saw come forth from among the trees toward the
Fountain, a mighty great and deformed Giant, all armed, saving the beauer of
his healme was up, and mounted on a mighty horse, having in his hand a great
boar spear, which had a very sharp and long blade of a span broad, and he had
a fierce and furious countenance, which caused great fear unto all them that
did behold him. After him there followed ten men (marvelous ugly and ill
favored to behold, and no less dreadful) which were on foot all unarmed,
with a certain kind of unused wepons in their hands, who brought in the
midst amongst them two knights upon one horse, with their hands fast bound,
and two Ladies upon two palfrayes, which gave very great and sorrowful
shrikes. But when the Princess saw that monstrous Gyaunt come forth of the
thicket, she gave likewise a great shrike, and quaked for fear, in such sort
that she had no more color in her face then a dead body: at which noise, as
well of the Ladies and Gentlewomen, as of the Princess, the Emperor awaked
out of his sound sleep, as one that had been greatly afrighted, and looking
about him he saw that monstrous and ugly Giant with all his internal company
coming toward them: wherefore with a trice he rose up and laced on his
healme, and came unto the Princess, who was as one that had been dead, and
said unto her: Take a good heart and be courageous, for it grieueth me very
much to see you in this plight, for I doubt not, (such courage receive I by
your presence, but principally God asisting me) to de^iuer you from this
monster. The Princess was so trou^led and in such fear, that she had not any
power to an^were him one word again: And at that time she would ^aue given all
the Grecian Empire, yea, the whole world ^f it had been hirs, to have seen
her self and the Empe^our clear from that monstrous Giant. At this time the
^reat Gyaunt came unto the place whereas they were, and greatly meruailed to
see them there, although to the ^ontrarie rejoicing, and very much delighted
with the ^are and excellent beauty of the Princess, with a dread^ull and
horse voice he said.

Oh my Gods, what a rich pray is this that you have reserved for me, these
fifteen years have I attempted no other thing but to rob Ladies and
Gentlewomen, with no less per^ll then pains, and yet all this time have I not
met with one, that so much does content me as this Lady, and in delivering
these words he approached un to the Emperor, and said.

Tell me thou unhappy Knight by what evil fortune art thou come hither unto
this place? The Emperor who at that time was very angry to hear his devilish
words, and again to see the Princess so changed, with a stout courage and
wrathful countenance answered him.

Tell me thou brute beast, wherefore do thou in this manner extol and
praise thy self of so evil and devilish a custom, knowing that there is a
God in heaven that will punish thee for these thy evil works which thou do
use.

The Giant was exceeding wrathful when the Emperor speak thus, so that he
made no reckoning to answer him, but giving a terrible and hoarse cry, he
threw that great and big Boar Spear which he brought, at the Emperor, with
so great strength, and in such sort, that if it had chanced a right with the
broad end and steely point, I doubt whether his Magical armor had been
sufficient to have made resistance, but it would have pierced thorough his
body: but the Emperor foreseeing that perlilous blow, mith great lightness
cleared hmiselfe from the fury thereof by leaping on the one side, so that the
Boar spear stroke the ground, and with the great strength wehrewith it was
thrown, it entered more then half the length thereof into the earth.

Which when the valiant and courageous Emperor saw, and finding himself to
be so nigh unto danger, the Gyaunt being on horseback, and considering the
great advantage which he had, straight ways laid hold upon the bridle of
the Horse, and with his strong armed fist stroke the horse such a vlow upon the
head, that he made the brains fly out, and he fell to the ground master and
all.

The Giant seeing that, with great have cleared himself from his horse, and
being on soote, drew out a mighty and broad faulchon, which hung at his girdle
and approached unto the Emperor, striking him so great and mighty a blow upon
his healme, that he could not otherwise choose, but that he was constrained to
stoop with both his knees to the ground, which did somewhat trouble his
remembrance, but this mighty Emperor quickly be thought himself again,
and took his sharp sword in both his hands, and stroke the Giant such a blow
upon his thigh, that although his armor was a finger thick of hard Steel,
besides a skirt of maile which he had hanging down, nevertheless he cut all a
sunder, and entered through the flesh unto the hard bone, where he made a sore
wound, from whence great abundance of blood ran out. The Giant feeling himself
thus wounded, and seeing so great resistaunce to be made with one alone Knight,
reared as though it had been a Lion. At which noise together with the rushing
of their harneys, and the sound of their mighty blows, there appeared out of
the windows of the Rock another Giant, which unto his seeming was no less
furious and ugly of semblaunce then the other, who seeing that mighty and well
foughten battle between the Emperor and his brother, (...) as great have as
was possible for him, he went and armed himself. In the mean time the other
Giant and the Emperor made their battale with so great and heavy blows that
the noise thereof did sound throughout all those mountains.

And the more that this Gyaunt did force himself to strike the Emperor, so
much the more did the Emperor provide to clear himself with great lightness
from his terrible strokes, for that he knew very well it would be very
per^llous, if he should fasten on him but one full blow, nevertheless the
Emperor at all times did wound him at his pleasure, in such sort, that what
with the strength of the Giaunt, and the great policy and lightness of the
Emperor the battle was brought into great doubt, although the Gyaunt had
lost very much blood by these wounds which the Emperor had given him. For
when he saw his blood in such sort scattered upon the ground, he was more
furious then before, and with great wrath he beesturred himself with his
Fauchon, cursing himself and blaspheming against his Gods, in that he could
not in any wise fasten one full blow upon his enemy, and that one Knight
should bring him into so great a perplexity. All this while the Empress and
her Gentlewomen did very well behold that wonderful battle, and had great
fear to see the hugeness of the Giant, and peril in which the Emperor was,
and so amazed, they were that they could not move themselves out of the place
whereas they abode, but every one of them on their knees very earnestly prayed
unto God with many tears, to deliver them from that great agony wherein they
were.

And being in this agony, they heard within the Rock ^ great noise and
rushing of armor, wherewith they looked about, and saw descending down the
stayres another Giant, all armed, of no less bigness and dreadful
countenance then the other, who came down in great have, with a mighty ma^e
of Steel in his hand. When the Princess and her Gentlewomen saw him, they
were more afraid then at the first, and yielded themselves unto destruction,
and therewith gave meruaylous and grievous shrikes and cries, which was the
cause that the Emperor was in a great fear of some misfortune, and looking
about him to see what it might be, he perceived another monstrous Gyaunt that
descended down his stayres with his mase in his hand: and although he did see
the great danger and peril at hand, yet did not his heart fail him one ^ot,
but with a noble and stout stomach his strength the more increased, so that
forgetting all the tra^ayle against that Giant, with new strength he str^k the
Gyaunt with both his hands such a blow overthwart the wast, that the thick
armor and skirt of maile had not sufficient strength to make defense against
his mighty and strong arm, but that the sharp cutting sword must needs
execute his fury, which dividing both armor and bones, entered into the
bowels, wherewith the Giant with grievous pangs of death straight ways ^ell
down to the ground, and with his fall made all the earth to*shake.

At which time the other Gyaunt was come down the stayres, and seeing that
terrible and cruel stroke, he lift up his eyes to heaven, and with a loud
voice he said. Oh cruel and cursed Gods in whom I beeleeue and worship,
which of all you is it that has consented unto the death of my brother
Argentaria? in what sort or how shall I be revenged of so great an outrage
done unto me, you being above in the heavens, and I here upon the earth.

And in saying these and such like words he came toward the Emperor, with
his mighty mase raised in the air, in such form, that it was most dreadful
to beeholde: but this valiant Greek whose strength was nothing inferior unto
his predecessors, the mighty Achilles, Pyrrhus, and Molosso, for when he saw
the Gyaunt coming toward him in that terrible sort, and so fiercely, in great
have he went whereas the Boar Spear stuck, and with exceeding strength he
pulled it out of the ground, and took it fast in his hand about the midst of
the staff, and therewith he stayed and abode the coming of the Gyaunt, who as
soon as he was come within eight or nine paces of him even as one would throw
a dart at a ^aighted Bull, so did this mighty Emperor lift up his rygorous
arm, and with great strength threw that Boar Spear at the Gyaunt, and stroke
him in the midst of the breast with so great strength, that passing through
armor and flesh, the broad and Steely point of the Boar Spear appeered at
his back all bloody. And the staff thereof, by reason of the great streangth
wherewith it was thrown, did shake in the Giants body till such time as he
fell down dead to the ground.

The force of this strong and mighty blow gave great contentment unto the
Princess and her Gentlewomen, and also on the other side those men that came
with the Giant were no les amazed when they saw their Lords dead, whom they
thought to be the mightiest and strongest in all the world, and although they
were many in number, yet had they no courage to withstand the fury of the
Emperor, and despayring in themselves, of their security, they all left their
prisoners, and every one of them procured to save himself by running away and
hiding them in the thickest of that Mountain. Then the Emperor seeing that
there was no more to be done, but that all was finished with that blow, he
rejoiced very much, and went unto the Princess whereas she stood (who had
lost the Roseall color of her face) and with a glad and cheerful
countenance he said unto her thus. Lady, now assure your self that these
people shall no more trouble you. Then the Princess who was almost in an
ecstasy with the great pleasure she received, when she saw the Emperor
return unto her without any wound or hurt, and the wonderful strength that
she saw in him, with great pleasure and delyght she saw in him in her arms
and said.

My Lord I have great cause to confess this my security, having so strong and
mighty a Knight in my company, but for all that my heart could not but
receive great fear to see you in such danger, with those terrible and ugly
Monsters, and I assure you that many days will pass before I shall be able
to cl^re my self of the great fear which by them I have conceived: so that
these and many other like amorous words passed beetwixt the Emperor and the
Princess.

Then the Emperor remembered himself of the prisoners that they brought with
them, and left the Princess, and went toward them, and did unloose them of
the bonds wherewith they were fast bound, and saw that the two Ladies were
very fair and marvelous richly apparayled, and the two Knights very well
armed, and of a good proportion, although their armor in many places was
broken and cut, and they themselves sore wounded, whereby issued from them very
much blood.

These Knights and Ladies did beehold all that passed, and saw with what
valor the Emperor did deal with those Gyaunts, and were greatly astonyed,
meruayling who it should be, that being but one alone Knight, he should by
his great might and force overcome two so mighty Gyaunts as those were, and in
so short time as that. And seeing themselves set at liberty by the noble and
valiant prowess of this Knight, they knew not how to gratify that great
benefit which they had received of him, but only in gieuing him ceaselesse
thanckes for the same.

The Emperor commanded the Ladies to bind up the wounds of the two Knights,
that they might loose no more blood: who did it with a very good will, for that
they were their Husbands. And the Emperor asked of then who they were, and
what was the occasion that the Gyaunt brought them prisoners in that sort.

Then one of the Knights said unto him. Sir, you shall understand that this
Knight which you see here and I are bretherin, and Lords over the seven
valleys: if at any time you have heard speaking of them. And they are
situated beetwixt Danubia and Transiluania, and are under the subjection of
the mighty King of Hungary, and these Gentlewomen which are with us are our
wives, and are likewise two sisters. And as we were for our recreation passing
away the time with pleasure and delyght in the company of many Knights and
Gentlewomen: in one of the said valleys high adjoining unto this Mountain
Sarpedo, being in the shadow under a Forest side, having least care upon any
danger or trouble, upon a sudden we were beeset with this Giant (that you
first slew) and with his men, we defended our selves against the^ as well as
we could, but in the end he slew the most part of the Knights that were in
our company, and the rest fled, so that we remained all alone, and not being
able to make any longer resistaunce against him, he took us jointly with
these two Gentlewomen, and brought us in this sort as you have seen. And this
is not the first robbery that these Gyaunts have committed.

For that of long time they have done great harm throughout all the Provinces
that are adjoining unto this Mountain. And as I have heard reported of them,
the meat which does most content them is humane flesh, which does make us to
beeleeue verily, that if your sovereign bounty, had not succored us in this
great extremity, in a short space we had been eaten up by these two Giants
and his people, and they use most commonly to have their habitation and
dwelling in this Rock which you see here, for when they are within it, if all
the world should come against them, they are able to make a long resistance.

And the Knight concluding with these words, the Emperor was very glad and
joyful that he had rescewed and ^t them at liberty from so great a danger,
for they seemed (...) him to be persons of no small estimation giving great
(...) to almighty God, for that he had taken away the (...) of so great an
evil from that land.

And therewith they went all together unto the Prince^, who received them very
cur^eously. And straight ways, she was known by the Knights, for that many
times before they had seen her: where at being very much amazed, they looked
one upon the other not knowing what to say.

When the Emperor perceived that those Knights did know the Princess, in
brief words be gave them to understand how he was the Emperor Trebatio,
and how the Princess was his wife, and that they were going toward the
Grecian Empire, and came unto that place to seek water. for the great
necessity they had thereof, and there the Emperor requested them that at
their return into their Country, they would go unto the Court of King
Tiberio and kiss his hands in his beehalfe, and declare unto him how and in
what sort they found him at the Rock.

When these Knights understood the whole matter by the Emperor, they could not
satisfy them in musing at so soddayne and strange a meeting. And falling on
their knees before the Emperor and the Princess, they required their hands
to kiss them, but they with great joy and pleasure did make them arise from
the ground, and after that beetweene them there had passed many delightful
words of conference, the Emperor said that he would go see what was within
the Rock, and so he ascended up the stayers till he came to the door, which
he found shut in such sort, that by no means he could get in, neither would
they open the door for all his great knocking. And as they might perceive,
those that remained within that Rock were household servant, and two sons
of those Gyaunts, being about the age of ten years, whom they saw at the
windows beeholding all that had passed, and they shut the door very fast, and
durst not open it, for that they thought verily yt Knight would destroy them
all, in so much that the Emperor was constrained to return back again.

After a while that the Emperor and all the rest of the company had eased and
refreshed themselves by the Fountain, he and the Princess determined to
depart, and the Knights with their wives would have borne him company, and did
desire very earnestly the Emperor to suffer them so to do, yet he would not
consent thereto, but desired them to return unto their own Country, and to
let them so alone as they were, for that he had greater pleasure to travail in
that sort, then with any more company. When these Knights understood his
determination, they would not stand in contention with him, nor importune him
any farther, but taking their leave of the Princess, they and their wives did
return unto their own country, having enough for all their life time to
declare that which they saw of the worthy Emperor Trebatio, and of his high
bounty, beeleeuing that in all the world there was not a Knight like unto him.
And when they came into their Country, they left their wives there, and
straight way departed toward the Court of King Tiberio, to show unto the King
their Embassage from the Emperor, and to declare unto him the whole matter,
how and in what order they were delivered from their great peril as shall in
this History by declared. And when they came unto the Court, they were
meruaylously well received, as you shall hear in this Chapter following.

How the Emperor Tiberio and the Princess Briana arrived in the Empire of
Grecia. Chap. 3.
WHen the coming of the Emperor Trebatio and the Princess Briana into
Grecia, was known unto the Prince of that Province, who was a young Knight and
one of his subjects, he was very much amazed, and likewise all his Subjects,
for that they thought verily that many years past he had been dead, and
there was no other reckoning made of him, neither would they beeleeue his
coming to be true, till such time as every one of them did see him with
their own eyes. And being certefied thereof, they did receive him with such
majesty as the Emperor did remain, and would not proceed any farther, but
first wholly and perfectly informed himself of the estate of all things with-in
the Empire. And there was given him to understand how that the King of Bohemia
had been and was governor of all the whole Empire, and how that he had ruled
and governed it with great discretion and justice. And how that all people
generally were very well content with his government, at the which the Emperor
received great pleasure, and sent unto him giving him to understand of his
coming, with the Princess Briana, certifying him by a brief letter of all
that he had passed, and willed him to meet him at Constantinople. When the
King and all the nobles of the Empire, who at this present were in
Constantinople, heard these news, I am not here able to express the great
admiration that they had, and the exceeding joy that they in their hearts
conceived for that sudden news, in such sort that if each of them had
received his own Brother, they could have possessed no more pleasure, he was
so well beeloued. So in a short space these news was published throughout all
Constantinople, and was a marvelous thing to beehold the great pleasure and
sports that, were in the City, and generally amongst all the people.

Then the King of Bohemia, with all those noble Princes and Lords did join
themselves together, and departed toward Dardania, whereas they received the
Emperor and the Princess Briana, and conducted them unto the great City of
Constantinople, with such majesty and pomp, that never Prince nor Roman
Emperor was so received into his country.

And when they were come unto Constantinople, that fair and royal Princess
Briana was crowned Empress of Grecia, at which coronation was made the
greatest Feasts and Triumphs, with such pompeous solempnity as never was in
all the world before that time. To which Triumph and Feasts, there did not
only come all the Princes, noble men, and valyant Knights natural of the
Empire, but also of all the Kingdoms and Provinces which were nigh adjoining,
unto whom the news came of the ariual of the great Emperor Trebatio.

And for that the excellent and mighty deeds which the worthy Knight of the
Sun did in the Castle of Lindaraza, should be manifest unto all people, and
that the memory thereof should not be forgotten, the Emperor commanded to
call together all the best Painters that were in Grecia, and commanded them to
paynt upon the fore front of his Pallaice, which was next adjoining unto the
great Court, in singular perfection, and natural sort, all the whole Island,
the Castle, the gates, and the terrible and wonderful keepers and gards, with
the mighty and perilous battle that the Knight of the Sun had with them,
and of all the rest that happened for to clear him of that enchantment, as
has bane told you in this History past. And when it, was concluded and set
forth in colors, it was a thing very strange to beeholde, and of great
admiration to all people that did look thereon, insomuch that they could not
beeleeue, that any humane man was able to do so great deeds of arms as was
done by the Knight of the Sun.

And all people had great desire to see him, although the Emperor had much
more desire, with no less love and good will, then if he had known him to
be his natural Son. And for that this great triumph shall be more spoken
of in this History, at this present it does leave them till their time, and
retourneth to tell you of all that passed in the Court of King Tiberio, when
he knew of the departure of the Emperor Trebatio and of the Princess Briana.

How the departure of the Emperor Trebatio and the Princess Briana, was
known in the Court of King Tiberio, and what passed about the same. Chap. 3.
THe History says, for that the Gentlewomen of the Princess Briana were
fully certified that their mistres kept her Nouena in her chamber as she was
wont to (...)* and as I before told you, they never ha^ any occasion to
mistrust her departure, for that at any time before they never could perceive
the lea^ presumption thereof, till such time as the nine days were past, and
the tenth day come, and seeing not the chamber door of the Princess open they
were all in a confusion, not knowing what it should mean. So in this doubt
they remained until the eleventh day, at which time not seeing the chamber
door opened, they determined to go thither, and began to call and knock at
the door, but there was none that answered them, whereat being more amazed,
they knocked hard, and stroke mighty and great blows at the door, never
thelesse there was none that answered them, although they were there a great
while knocking: and being much amazed thereat, they straight way gave the
Queen of Augusta to understand thereof, who was in the City of Buda, and
being very much amazed at that sudden news, she called certain of her
Knights and Gentlewomen, and in their company departed to the monestary. And
when she came unto the chamber door of the Princess, and found none to answer
her, for all their great knocking, she straight ways commanded her Knights
to break open the door, and hatchets and other things being brought for the
purpose, they broke open the door, which done the Queen with her Knights and
Gentlewomen entered the chamber, and not finding the Princess nor any other
person therein, were very sore troubled and amazed, she sat her self down
upon the floor, and knew neither what to say or do, but only to lament and
to make great sorrow. And as they were in this confusion they found the Letter
that was written lying upon the Table, and directed either to the King
Tiberio, or unto the Queen, the which Letter they gave straight way unto the
Queen Augusta, who with great anguish did open the same, and saw thereon
written all the whole Hostorye of the mighty Emperor Trebatio and the
Princess Briana, with the true relation thereof, till such time as they
departed, and in the end of the Letter they craved pardon for that they went
away in such sort as they had done, without giving them to understand thereof,
alleging the reason to be for the death of the Prince Edward, for that the
King Oliuerio, father unto the Prince, should not with any reason have cause to
quarrel with the King Tiberio, neither account him as pertaker in the death of
the Prince.

So when the Queen understood the effect of the Letter, she remained all
astonished and amazed, not knowing whether she might give credit unto so strange
a thing as this was, although to the contrary she received exceeding great joy
and pleasure, for the good fortune of the Princess her Daughter, that in all
her life she felt not in her self so much pleasure, and gave great thanks unto
God for his exceeding benefit which he had done unto her.

At that time the King Tiberio was in the City of Ratisbona, and the Queen
Augusta straight ways sent messengers, such as she thought could well declare
all that had happened, and by them she sent the Letter that the Emperor had
left written behind him in the chamber of the Princess, and the Queen
remained with her own Gentlewomen, and with the Gentlewomen of the Princess
in the monestary of the River: for that it was a place of great quietness and
pleasure, and sent all her Knights and the rest of her servants unto the
City, remaining only with a few Knights for her guard, and other servants,
such as were needful for her service.

The messengers which went with the Embassage unto the King Tiberio, came unto
the Court before him, at such time as the King was accompanied with all his
high Princes and Knights, amongst whom there was that excellent and worthy
Knight of the Sun, carrying to hear when the departure of the Emperor and
the Princess should be declared in the Court. And when the messengers came
before they King the straight ways declared unto him their Embassage, and
gave him the Emperors Letter, which at his commandment was read openly in
the hearing of all the Court. And when they understood all that this History
has told you, the great admiration that all people received, was wonderful:
and when the King heard the contents thereof, he remained a great while as
one being in a maze, and speak never a word. At last calling to his
remembrance the mightiness of the Emperor, the great majesty of his estate,
the worthiness of his person, and the excellency of his royal descent, he
thought within himself that God had done much for him, in giving him so worthy
and mighty a son in law, and that his Daughter was the most happiest
Princess then living in the world, that in the end of all her sorrow she had
found so noble and excellent a husband. All this and many other things did
greatly delight his heart, but considering how much he was in charge for the
Prince of great Britayne, he did not make any outward show of his inward
contentment, but demeaned himself as one (...) in thought, and very much
troubled.

And after that he had a great while remained in that trance, without speaking
any thing, he suddenly arose up from the place whereas he sat, and leaving
all his Knights and Noble men in the great hall, he intered into his closet,
and being there alone, he beeganne again to call to his remembrance the
noble and mighty deeds of the worthy Emperor Trebatio, and the more joy and
pleasure he seemed to receive, giving great thanks unto God for that all
things by the working of his mighty hand were brought to so good and joyful
an end. And thus all things well considered, he determined to make an
outward show of great anger against the Emperor, till such time as he might
understand how the King Oliuerio did take the matter, at such ^ime as he
should hear news thereof.

Likewise at that time came to his remembrance the mighty deeds that the
Emperor declared of the Knight of the Sun, musing with himself who that
Knight should be that was of so great strength and power, and was very glad
and joyful that he had hin in his Court. And at this time all the nobles and
Knights which remained in the hall did talk one with another, and very much
meruayled at the mighty deeds of the Knight of the Sun, and all people did
beehold him giving him great praise, and extol^ing him unto the heavens, in
such sort that he was ashamed to hear himself so praised: But as it is a thing
most common, that against prosperity of the virtuous there does not lack
malicious and enuions persons, who never rests to procure the execution of
their venomous stomachs, it so fell out amongst the Knights that were there
present, there was Florinaldus, he which the Knight of the Sun did overthrow
at the bridge before Albamira, who for that he was a stout and gallaunt Knight,
received great grief that the Knight of the Sun should overthrow him, and
especially before his Lady and mistress, and therefore he was very destrous
to seek to have opportunity wherein he might be revenged, and make
satisfaction of the shame and rebuke which he had received by him, many of
those nobles and Knights that were present were his parents and kinsfolk. And
I know not whether it was with the great hope he had in his own strength,
or in the confidence of his kinsfolks and friends, which were very many, he
determined with himself to seek some occasion of contention with the Knight
of the Sun.

Now at such time as these Knights were praising him, and giving him his
deserved commendation, for the good he had done unto the Emperor, Florinaldus
replied unto them, and with a loud voice, that he might be heard of all that
were there present, he said. The Knight of the Sun cannot in any wise
excuse himself of a great offense, in that he did not advertise my Lord, the
King Tiberio, that the Emperor Trebatio would secretly carrye away his
Daughter contrary unto his will, And for that he has been hitherto in his
company, it is to be supposed that he was acquaynted with the Emperors
determination: and if it please my Lord the King to give attencion unto my
words, he should command him for the same to be accordingly punished, for
that in no place there ought to be given any credit or trust to traycours, and
therefore much less in the court of high and mighty Kings.

When the Son of Trebatio heard these words, his color changed, and with
very anger he gnashed his teeth together, striving to mittigate his cholarike
ire by reason, and to answer Florinaldus with patience, but yet this valiant
Del Phoebo could not execute his virtuous desire, for that his wrath and cholar
did much more surmount his calmnesse, which did proceed of his worthy and
vexed heart, in such sort that he could not find which way to compass the same
without the great abusing of his honor, especially to ^eare so infurious and
vile words spoken against him, but with a surious and frowning countenance,
which seemed to terrify all them that did behold him, he replied unto
Florinaldus, and said: These words which thou have spoken, Florinaldus, be
villainous, and not to be suffered. Therefore upon the same if thou will go
forth into the field with me, I will give thee to understand that thou do
lie falselie, for that I was never traitor to King nor to any other creature.
When this stout and gallant Knight heard these words, his youthful blood being
moved, being politic and nimble, with a trice he wrapped his cloak about his
arm, and drew out his sword, with the which he would have stricken the Knight
of the Sun, who was unarmed: but giving the enterprise against the flower of
all knights, before his sword could descend to execute his will, with a light
leap more then three paces he avoided, and drew out his sword (which was a
heanie and sorrowful drawing out unto many.) And for that Florinaldus had
there many kinsefolkes and friends, and likewise of his own squires and
servants* they altogether drew out their swords, some against the Knight of the
Sun and other some to make peace betwixt them, so that there was not any in
all the hall but he had his sword readre drawn.

Now at such time as the Knight of the Sun would have stro^en his first blow
at Florinaldus, a brother of his called the Troyan Earl, with his sword in his
hand, put himself forwards, and thought to receive the blow which descended,
cutting the Air with great fury, and lifting up his sword* (with pretense
rather to hurt the Knight of the Sun, then to make peace, his misfortune was
such, that the blow descending with so great fury stroke the sword out of his
hand, and the sword of the Knight of the Sun lighted upon his head, so that he
claue it to the shoulders, and he fell down dead unto ye ground, which was
great grief to Florinaldus, and unto all the rest of his kinsfolks and
friends, that did see him fall: who with great desire to revenge the death of
their kinseman, did put their lives in great danger, with the peril that was
before them. And procured all that ever they could to wound the Knight of the
Sun. And being many and he unarmed* he found himself in the greatest danger
that ever in all his life he had been in. Yet for all that in this desperate
conflict, he did plainly show that he was the most courageous Knight of all
his predecessors, and of all that followed after him. So that in all the
twelve parts of this great history as Trebatio, they have no small cause to
mention this mighty Alfebo, more the^ any other Knight: for that this strong
Knight did think nothing impossible unto him that consisted in f^ates of
arms, and where so ever he came, there was nostrength nor courageable to make
resistauns against his fury.

Now, when this courageous Gentleman did see him self enclosed with his
enemies, and so many coming together to discharge and execute their fury upon
him, his wrath and courage increased in such sort, that in leaping forwards
and forwards, striking about him on every side, he chanced on two of them
which came before him, being servants unto Florinaldus, so that with an
overthwart blow he cut the one of them clean a sunder by the middle, and
chanced upon the other in the same place, that his sword entered into his
bowels, and both of them fell dead to the ground. And not staying, he laid
about him on every side, so that no man did endure before him that was unarmed,
but he overthrew him unto the ground, and all that ever he did was little
enough, for that with the great violence and fury which they used without all
fear, pressing upon him in such sort, that they hurt him in three or four
places, where at their issued very much blood.

Notwithstanding what with the great fory he had, and his exxeeding lightness
and deadly blows that he stroke, he made the most part of all them for great
fear to put them selves apart from him. And having space that he could turn
and wind his sword about him, there was none that was so hardye for to
assail him, but that he cut him a sunder in the myddest.

There was at that time many nobles and Knights that would have parted and made
peace betwixt them, but the tumult was such and so far out of order, that by
no means they could reform it, till such time as the King Tiberio heard that
great rumor and noise in the hall, he came forth out of his closet, and took
his royal Septer in his hand, and pressed in amongst the thickest of them very
furiously and with great anger. And when he came where as the Knight of the
Sun was, and saw round about him so many dead persons, and amongst them the
Troyan Earl, with great anger he laid hold on him and said, what is this O
Knight, that in such order thou d^st disqui^t my court, and have slain my
Knights, so all the rest when they saw the King, they immediately did retire
back and were in quiet.

Then when the valiant Knight of the Sun knew him to be the King, and heard
what he said, he forthwith did moderate his anger all that ever he could,
and said: it is your Knights that does disquiet your Court and not I and if I
have slain any it is in defending my self from the death, which they do
procure to give me. Of this said the King I will inform my self, and punish
them that has been the occasion hereof. And in saying these words he
demanded of him his sword, which he gave him, more for courtesies sake then for
any other thing, and having it, he also took the sword of Florinaldus, and of
all the rest that he suspected to be on his party, and straight ways called
before him all his Knights and guard, and commanded them to take the knight of
the Sun prisoner, and to carry him into a strong Tower which was on the one
side of the Palace, and likewise to take Florinaldus, and all those that were
on his side, and to carry them unto another Tower that was on the other side of
his Palace, so that both the one and the other were put in good keeping, but
if the Knight of the Sun had been armed, before he would have been taken
prisoner, he would have made the King to have given ear and to hearke^ unto
that he would have said in discharging himself, but by reason that he was as
it were naked, he yielded, and had patience with all that which the King
commanded, and so they lead them unto the Tower which was very high and well
walled. And when he was therein, they made fast a very great chain to his leg,
and for to keep him there was put thirty armed Knights, and as many mo other
men. Then the Duchess of Panonia, did send unto him a very good Surgion to
heal him of his wounds. At this time the death of the Troyan Earl was
published throughout all the Court, and there was made for him great
lamentacion, for that the most noblest Princes and Knights that were there,
were of his kinsfolks. So both the one and the other complained very much unto
the King of the Knight of the Sun, in such sort that he was very much
inflamed against him. At this time there entered into the palace the
Countess, Lady and wife unto the Troyan Earl, in mourning appare^l, bringing
with her two young sons, who entering into the Hall whereas the King was,
beeganne to power forth sorrowful complaynts, destring justice against them
that had slain her Husband, and seeing him lie dead upon the floor, she
threw her self upon him, and made such lamentation, that it was a heavy thing
to beehold, at which sight if the King before were inflamed against the Knight
of the Sun, his indignation did the more increase against him, in beeholding
the great sorrow of the Countess, and determined in himself to do justice
upon the death of the Earl, and he joined unto his indignation the great
authority that he had to be called an executer of justice, (which unto
many, yea, and very mighty Monarchs oftentimes is very hurtful, and the
end of those extremities obtain them the infamous names of Tyrants.) Then the
King commanded that the dead bodies should be carried out of the hall and
buried, and the Troyan Earl was buried with great honor, and accompanied with
the most noble and principal Knights of the Court. Now, he being very
sorrowful for the death of the Earl, many Knights that had affection unto the
Knight of the Sun did labor with him for his discharge, of being in any
fault of that tumult, and did inform him of the great cause that he had to do
that which he did in his own defense, but there was nothing that did profit at
all with the King, but rather he did show himself very angry and wrathful
against them that did speak unto him in the Knights beehalfe, which was a
great grief unto many which did know the valor and desert of the Knight of
the Sun, for it seemed unto them no reason that he should be entreated in
that sort. And because that the King Tiberio was daily and hourly urged on
all parts, the one crying and asking justice, and the other gayne-saying the
same, he was for certain days very doubtful, not knowing how co determine
what was best to be done, but answered them all to their little delyght. By
this time the ^night of the Sun was healed of his wounds, and the Duchess
of Panonia provided for him all things necessary in the prison, performing it
with as great care and diligence as might be: But when he knew the King was
doubtful of his determination, and of the great iudignation he showed against
him: it did repent him that he suffered himself so to be taken. And he
immagined with himself what means might best be wrought sor to clear
himself of that imprisonment: for that the nobility of his valyant courage,
could not abide to be so shut up, and abide the courtesy and pleasure of the
King. So in this order the story does leave him till the time serve.

How the Knight of Cupido did take his leave of the Queen Arguirosa, and
entered into the kingdom of Rusia, where he found a strange adventure. Chap. 4.
THE mighty deeds of the Emperor Trebatio, and the worthy knighthood of the
valiant Alphebo, has put almost in oblivion that excellent and worthy Knight
Rosicleer, whose amorous love, and invincible deeds, do deserve a more
eloquenter writer then my unskillful pen can perform. Now if you do remember
in the History past, how that one way Fortune caused him to be the most
saddest and sorrowful Knight that ever was seen, so full of bitter heaviness,
that whatsoever thing he did accomplish and bring to pass was not sufficient
to make him merry. And on the other side, Fortune did show him very (...) in
putting before him marvelous and wonderful things and adventures of so great
strangeness, that over coming them by his surmounted valo^r, in all the world
was spread a broad the fame of the Knight of Cupido. So after that he had
slain that valyant (...), from all the parts of Thesalia, and the confines
round about, there came many people for to see him, as a thing of great
admiration, in the time that he there remain^d, for to place the Queen
Arguirosa in full possession of all her lands, and that all her vasalls and
subjects were quieted and settled in good order. For by reason that he was on
the Queens side, in few days they were all in peace and quiet.

Now when he saw that there was no more to be done, he was very desirous to
go unto some other place, whereas in recompense of the great honor and service
done unto him, he might be in some solytarie desert, to beewayle his
mis^ortune. Then remembering himself, he determined to take his leave of the
Queen Arguirosa, who bare him great good will, and did love him as her self.
And if she had not perceived that his heart was prisoner in some other place,
she would with a very good will have chosen him Lord of hirs, and received
him for her husband, without any desire to be informed farther of his estate
and descent: for she rested wholely satisfied in that which she saw by
experience of his royal worthiness and bounty.

And when the Knight of Cupido did declare unto her his desire to depart, and
craved license for the same, she received so great sorrow thereat, that in a
long space she could not make him any answer. So after a while that she had
remained in that trance, distilling from her christaline eyes abundaunce of
tears which ran down upon her fair and lyllie white cheeks, like unto
oriental pearls: she uttered unto him these words.

Worthy Knight, this thy departure which thou do pretend, is unto me so
great a grief, that I heartily wish I had not known you, although it had cost
me a great part of this my Kingdom. For considering how much I am bound unto
you, and remembering the great desert and ba^our of your person, I do not
thinck neither can I well bee^eeue that there is any thing in all the world able
to make me merry, or minister unto me any pleasure or contentment but only
your presence. Oh, I would God (if he were so pleased) that I might know your
heart at liberty, (...) thereby ^ee able to repay you part of the great benefit
which you ^aue showed unto me, in making you Lord over all this ^ingdome, and
therewith I should account my self the happiest Gentlewoman in all the world,
but seeing it is so that another has possessed that place before me, and
deserved to be Lady of your liberty: this one thing I do desire of thee,
that wheresoever you become to remember me, and this my Country and Kingdom,
the which you may take as your own at all times when occasion shall serve, for
that there cannot be a greater pleasure unto me, then for you to command me
in any thing that is requisite. And if at any time Fortune bring you into this
country, with more delight then at this time you seem to be endued with all,
I shall thinck my self most happy, that as I have r^ceiued at your hands this
kingdom, so I may likewise obtain a husband at your appointment, for
receiving him at the hands of so worthy a Knight, it cannot be but very
conformable unto my honor, and convenient for my estate.

All this the Queen spoke, for the great love she bare unto Rosicleer, giving
him honestly to understand that if it were his pleasure to receive her for his
wife, she was very well content therewith, but Rosicleere who had his thoughts
very far from her purpose, would not answer any thing whereby she might take
any hold, yet gave her great thanks for her courteous proffer made unto him, and
promised her always to have her in remembrance, and to serve her in all that
ever he could. And although at that time ^e did excuse himself as much as he
might to clear himself of that charge, in providing her a Husband of his own
choice, yet time did serve that Rosicleer had opportunity, (...) did esteem
it very much, and he did pacify very great and troublesome controversies,
hatreds, and discords, by which she might have received great damage and
harm, as in this History shall be showed unto you. So in the end of many
courtesies beetweene them, Rosicleer took his leave of the Queen, and would
receive nothing of her but only a good horse, which she commanded to be given
him, and so he departed out of the City, and in few days after out of the
kingdom, and in passing through Dardania and Dacia, he trauayled many days,
in the which there chanced sundry adventures that I omit, to come unto the
effect of this history. And being forth of the Realm of Dacia, the history
says that he entered into the kingdom of Russia, whereas it was told him
there were great and meruaylous adventures. So it happened that the third day
in the morning he entered into that Country, and came unto a plain mountain,
so fresh and delectable as might be pos^ible, and he trauayled so long therein,
till at the last his way did part in twain, and the one way was more used then
the other, and by reason that his mind was troubled in thincking upon his
Lady the Princess Oliuia, he was so far from his remembrance, that he
respected not which way he took, but followed that way which his horse
voluntarily went, who entered into that which was less used, and he travailed
forwards in that way the most part of all that day, and being tormented with
his love, he remembered not to eat, neither had he mind of any other thing,
til such time as his horse for very hunger stayed and would go no farther, but
striued to eat of the green grass which was in the way. And by this occasion
the Knight of Cupide came unto himself, and saw that he had lost his way, and
was entered into that path, and considering the most part of the day was
already past, he quickened up his spirits, and trauayled with better
remembrance then before he had done, making great have to come unto some
place, where he might have somewhat to eat, and not suffer himself to dye
desperately with hunger. So he followed that evil accustomed way till such
time as it was almost night, and it brought him unto the sight of very high and
mighty Rocks, which were in the midst of that wilderness, under the which
he saw a thing that did put him in great admiration which was, that out of the
mouth of a cave under those Rocks there came forth great flames of fire,
accompanied with dark and thick smoke, which seemed to be some infernal
den, the mouth of the Cave was so great, that a Knight on Horseback might well
enter in thereat: and being ^rous to know what it should be, he drew nigh
unto it, but his horse was so fearful, that he could not come so nigh as the
Knights will was, but was constrained to alight from his back, and made him
fast unto a tree, and he went a foot toward that wonderful cave. When he
came nigh unto it, he saw toward the right hand engraven in the hard Rock
certain Letters very fair, which seemed to be of great antiquity, and he
read them, finding them to be as follows.

This is the cave of the wise Artidon, who dyed for the love of Artidea,
daughter unto king Liberio, the only heir of this Kingdom, who in recompense
of her cruelty does and shall remain here, giving true aunsweres unto all
that shall be demanded of her, till such time as a Knight shall come, who
with his great bounty and force can overcome the terrible keepers of the entry
hereof, and set her at liberty, and then shall this entry be free unto all
those that will know any thing of the wise man.

When the Knight of Cupide had well read these Letters and understood them, he
very much meruayled at that strange adventure, and straight way it moved in
him a great good will and desire to prove the same, both to see and know what
was within the cave, and even as one that did abhor his own life, so he
delyghted not in any other thing but in great and perilous adventures, and
endeavored to give the attempt unto them when he had opportunity, but by
reason it was late, and that it waxed dark, he determined to let the enterprise
alone till the next morning, for that the night might be a hinderance unto him
for the performance. And therewith he pulled off his Horse Bridle, to let him
feed upon the grass there abouts, and he as one that had no care of himself,
laid him a long upon the green grass, and then his mind beegan a new to be
troubled with his accustomed thoughts, not remembering that in all the day
before he had not eaten any thing, neither did he know where to get any meat
to refresh himself at that time of the night, and calling to his remembrance
the cruel words in the Letter of the Princess Oliuia, his heart suffered so
great greese and passions, that tumbling himself upon the grass from the one
side to the other, he said: Oh earth, that for all mortalytie thou openest
thy self, and receiuest them into thy bosom, wherefore do not thou now at
this present open thy bowels and receive me into thee, for being buried, I
should receive great contentment. I know not wherefore I live any longer, or
wherefore I am suffered in this world, for that I have lost all hope to see any
more the Princess Oliuia. Oh that this adventure which I mean to prove might
be the last, and that I might dye here within this cave, although the
occasion of my death be never known nor heard of. So these and many other
words of great lamentation he uttered, that it was most grievous to hear, and
passed away a piece of the first part of the night with great sorrow. And the
night being very dark, upon a sudden he heard a noise and murmuring of
people, which caused him to arise up to see what it should be, and he saw at
the foot of the Rock a great fire, and round about the same there were a
company of Shepherds, and those were they which made that noise. And being
desirous to know what they could say more of that cave, he determined to go
whereas they were, and when he came unto them, he saluted them with very
courteous words. When the Shepherds saw him of so goodly a stature, and armed
with so precious and rych armor, they received him as a Knight of estimation,
and gave him very good intertainment, and did inuit him to their supper, which
they had in a readiness, and after that he had surrendered unto them thanks
for their courtesy, he sat down amongst them by the sier.

Then one of the shepherds, who seemed to be the chief among them, and that
had more understanding, and was of a better conversation then all ye rest, did
demand of the Knight of Cupide, what adventure had brought him at that time of
the night to that place? The Knight answered and said. I am a stranger in
this Country, and now it is three days since I first entered into this
Kingdom, and for that I did not know nor yet do, this country, my fortune
has brought me hither this evening, and seeing that the night drew on,
fearing to be entangled in unaccustomed ways, I determined to remain there
hard by the Court till the morning, pretending to prove that adventure when
the day was come. And afterward when I saw you together here, I thought it
best to come into your company, as well to eat somewhat (for that I am very
hungry) as also to inform my self of you touching the adventure of this cave
of Artidon, for till this evening that I did come hither and see it, I never
before heard any mention thereof. Then the shepherds said, sir Knight, seeing
that you have given us to understand the occasion of your coming hither, we
will now give you to understand what we know, and what at any time we could
learn of the adventure of this cause, and possibly after you understand it,
it will withdraw you from this great good will and determinatyon that you have,
to give the proof and enterprise. And in the mean time that which we have
for our supper shall be made ready, and of such as we have with a very good
will you shall eat your part, for that your person and presence does deserve
no less.

Now, that which we do know and of long time past have heard say touching
this Cave, is, that in time past almost out of memory, there was in this
Kingdom of Russia a Knight called Artidon, who being a Knight of great courage
and high lynage, and gentle of disposition, was also the wysest in the magical
art that could be found in many countries. And in the chiefest time and flower
of all his Knighthood and science, this Kingdom was governed by a Lady called
Artedea, who at the death of the King her father was very young, but when she
came unto the state of marryage, thee was so fair and of so great beauty,
that many Princes and Knights desired to have her for wife, but among all those
that in their service did most endeavor to obtain her love, there was not one
of them that in so noble and valiant manner did demean himself as Artedon
did, for not alone in deeds of arms, but also by his science, he did mighty
and wonderful things in her service. But his fate and misfortune was such,
that the queen did not only withdraw her love from him, but did also hate and
abhor him to the death: and all that ever he did in her service did move her
to be melancholic and very angry. This worthy Artidon had his love so entirely
fixed vpun her, that he would do any thing for her delight, but all that he
did was not esteemed of the Queen, which was the occasion that after he was
fully certified and understood her great cruelty, he sell into a mortal
sickness, and being without all hope of remedy of the Queen, he determined
to revenge himself on her before he dyed. So on a night by his great learning,
he took the Queen out of her bed and brought her unto his cave: and that
night there was thundering and lightning, that with the great noise thereof, they
thought verily the whole world would have sonke. But in the morning when they
saw that the Quane was gone, and could not find her, they sought for her in
all parts, but all was in vain, for that chauncing to come this way, and
reading that which is there graven in the Rock, they straight ways
understood that the wise Artidon had brought her thither, in revenge of the
great cruelty that she used to him. Whereupon there was diverse Knights that would
prove the entry into the cave, and it fell out with them as you shall bear.
All such Knights as were in love did enter in thorough the fire, without
receiving any hurt, but within a while after they were put back and thrown out
again some ^arke dead, and other some very sore hurt and ill entreated. And
when it was demanded of them what they saw within the cave, and what happened
unto them, they said that at the entry thereof there was a great Bull, which
did ^efend the entry, and at the first encounter he stroke them with his
horns, and dorue them out of the cave, and this Bull was of so great and
wonderful bigness and fierce^esse that the like has not been seen, and his
horns were ^ so great hardness that they seemed to be steel, and all such
Knights as did not love, at the hoore that they gave the enterprise, they felt
so great heat and torment, that they were constrained to return back again,
so yt they could not come unto the knowledge of the Queen, neither unto this
day has there been any that has had so much prowess to come unto the
knowledge of her, although there have come many Knights out of diverse and
sundry countries to prove this adventure, and it is now a great time past since
any enterprise has been given, and yet all the people of this Country do live
in hope that their Queen shall be delivered out of this enchantment, so that
ever since the time of her enchanting this Kingdom has been ruled by
governors, and not one hither to has borne, the name of King, but at such
time as any do enter into this ground, they are sworn to deliver the Kingdom
unto the queen Artidea, at such time as she is delivered out of that
inchaunted cave. At this present he yt is governor of this country is a young
knight of great virtue and wisdom, whose name is Luziro, and diverse then be yt
be cunning in Art magic, that have told him yt in the time of his government
the queen shall be set at liberty^ from the Enchantment of Artidon, so yt they
do look for her delivery daily. This is sir Knight that which I have heard
declared and spoken by ancient men, and here I do tell you of a truth that the
keepers of that cave have caused so great sear in all this country, that of
long time there has ben^ no Knight so hardy to give the enterprise unto the
cave, ^ I do not think him to be a wise man that will put himself to prove
this adventure, for that hither to there has not bell a Knight of so much
prowes as to conquer the first keeper, and it is to be believed, that the cave
is not kept by that alone bull, but yt there is some other keeper as ill or
worse then he^.

The Knight of Cupid was glad and did very much rejoice at this good news
which the shepherd had told him of this adventure, and giving him great thanks
for the same he said, that for any thing he would not let but give the en ter
prise thereto if the day were come. Whereat the shep heardes were greatly
amazed, and did request him a^ that they might to leave and giu^ over this
determination, and not to put himself into such peril, for yt by no means he
could escape the death, or else to be very sore hurt. At this time their poor
supper was ready, and set upon the green grass* whereas they sat down to
supper together, and when they had supped the Shepherds went and took their
rests, and slept, and the Knight of Cupid did solitarily put himself a part,
and sat down upon the grass under a tree; and there passed that night with
great desire to prove the entry of the cave, and thought the night a thousand
year til that* day was come.

How the Knight of Cupid entered into the dreadful cave of Artidon, and of all
that happened there, Chap. 5.
SO the next day in the morning when the Sun began to show himself over all
the earth, the worthy Knight of Cupid arose up, and looked for the shepherds,
and saw them where they lay all a long upon the green grass* and were all a
sleep very soundly, and without all care, as those that were not troubled with
any kind of sorrow for to disturb them of their rest, and calling to
remembrance the great number of nights yt he had passed wholly without any
sleep or taking any rest, and of his great ^ares and profound thoughts, that
did not all only bannish ^way all sleep in ye night, but also in ye day time
it brought ^im into exceeding admiration, which did sore trouble his ^houghts,
and caused him to lift up his eyes to heaven and say.

Oh Fortune how little are we bound unto thee, all we whom thou have brought
into this world with dignitye and honor, and caused us to exercise and use all
military Knighthood, it had been much better for us, and with grea^er ease and
quiet rest void of all care, ^to pass our times in ^ mean and a base estate,
here in these green and flouri^ing fields, whereas is all the quietness in
the world: And not with so much pleasure in the courts of Kings and Princes,
whereas we do see and make captive our own liberties, and venture our lives
and honors every hour, and again if it be not with loss of blood and great
perils, he is not worthy of honor nor to * bear the name of a Knight, but
does greatly defame the order of Knighthoode, wharas they sleep and pass the
sweet nights with great quietness and receive no infamy nor rebuke* but do
comfort and rejoice themselves all night long with the peceable freshnes of the
air, whereas is all quietness of the wild beasts, the silence of the birds,
the pittering noise of the running of waters, ye great freshness of the trees,
the sweet and odoriferous smells of all flowers, which I say is unto the soul
and heart a continual peace and concord, and in the break of the day a new
form and mosicke, for to recreat themselves in their golden sleep, the sweet
noise and music of the birds, who does with the flittering of their wings and
notes, almost inuit a man to all delights, and afterward the golden bemes of
the Sun, at all times when he does show himself, does rejoice and recreat all
humane hearts, and all the rest of the day following is spent with great mirth
and pastime, with sufferable heats, under ye freshness of the green trees,
and when night comes on the^, they altogether join about the comfortable
fire, whereas they have a peaceable and friendly conversation with great
affection, and that which is most in this fortunate and happy estate, is, that
fortune cannot much hurt them, for yt in small matters they do with great ease
execute their anger, so that we are void of al these benefits, we I say yt live
in this troublesome estate of military knighthood, for that the first day we
be armed Knights, we begin to seek the death for our selves, and life for
others, we are always be wrapped with great dangers and perils for the sauegard
of our lives and honors, so that I know not what difference is be wixt our
trauayles, and the traualies of them which are always upon the seas, tossed
here and there with great torments and troubles And if this life be common to
all Knights* as in especial it is unto the sons of high and mighty Kings,
to whom and at what time Fortune will use her crueltye* she does not lack some
matter of occasion to execute her wrath* For I do account that mariner to be
unwise, that knowing of the storm and tempest, will leave his Port and ingulfe
himself wilfully into the seas. And it is not the wisest part of a man,
especially of him that does desire to live with rest, to seek highness and
honor, and thereby frequent himself where all dangers are apparaunt. And in
saying these words he began to go toward the place where the shepherds
were, and at the noise that he made in his going, they did all awake out of
their sound sleep: and when they saw him they did all arise up on foot, and
did salute him very courteously, and when they understood of him that he would
give the enterprise to prove the entering into the cave, they all together did
go with him, and promised him that they would there remain till such time as
they did know what should beecome of him, and so they went all together
toward the cave, and when they came thither, the Knight of Cupid did take his
leave of the shepherds, and when he saw those wonderful flames that proceeded
out of the mouth of the cave, he iugded that there must needs be many
marvelous and dangerous adventures within, and at the sight of that present
peril his courage and fury did very much increase, and he committed himself
unto God, beginning to put himself into the fire, and for that he was so true
a servant unto Cupid, that merualious fire did not hurt him any thing at all,
but found it true as the shepherds had told him. Then he passed through the
fire, and went forwards till he came into the cave, whereas no fire was, but
yet it gave so great a light and brightness, that he might see all that was
within very playnlie, and he went toward a very narrow lane, which seemed to
be cut out of that rock, and was so straight that three Knights could not pass
together through it, but with great difficulty: and over the lane it was
covered with arthes very strongly, like as it is in sellers. And as the Knight
of Cupid went toward it, he straight ways heard a great and wonderful noise
like unto a Thunder bolt, which descends unto the earth, thrown out of the
region of the air, and it was that out of the inner parts of the cave there
came toward him, along that narrow lane, a mighty great Bull, who seemed to
fill all the lane with his bigness, and according unto the fury which he
brought with him, and his long and sharp horns, the could not choose but must
needs be terrible to behold, and I know not how any humane heart could have had
so much strength and force, but that he must receive great fear and dread in
seeing so terrible a beast coming toward him, and especially in so narow a
place as that was, where he could not turn himself to the one side nor to the
other, but of very force he must abide that terrible blow of the Bull, yet this
valiant and worthy Knight whose heart was more harder then any Diamond, with a
stout courage as one that made little account thereof, did abide the coming of
that furious bull. So when the Bull came nigh him, he bare his head very low
to strike him, but the Knight laid fast hold with both his hands upon his sharp
horns, ^ here was a thing of great wonder done by the Knight, for that
according unto the fury and violence which the Bull brought with him, it was
sufficient to overthrow a tower to the ground, but this mighty Knight which ye
great strength of his strong arms did stay his fury* although he made the
Knight to recoyle backwards four paces, but firming su^ his feet and using his
great strength, he gate again the grou^ he lost, the Bull when he felt so
great strength against him, began to roar so terribly that all the mountains
seemed to open thereat. And when the shepherds that were without did hear
that terrible roaring, they were at a point to depart thence, and not to abide
the coming of the Knight of Cupid, they received so great a fear. Then the
Bull with a new fury and violence made the Knight of Cupid to recoyle backward
again, in such sort that if he had not at that pinch used his mighty force and
strength, he had been clean thrown out of the cave, but his strength did so
much increase at that present, that forcing the Bull therewith, he carried him
before him in that narrow lane, and the Bull being not able to make resistance
against him, was carried perforce through the lane, till he came to a very
fair and large court, which was all paued with colored brickes, which cast a
great light, and was founded upon great and mighty pillars of marble, round
about the court there were gallaries meruaylously wrought and very fair, and
according to the excellent work yt was there, it gave him to understand that
there was other then humane creatures at the making of it. Here in this court
the Knight of Cupid and the fierce Bull, the one did carry the other sometimes
forwards, sometimes backwards in this their wrestling, that it was wonderful,
either of them procuring all that ever he might to overcome his adversary. Then
the Knight thought within himself that in that order he could little profit
against the Bull, neither do him any harm, but determined to let him loose
and to assault him with his sword, which when he had done he did repent it
very^ much, for that when the Bull was loose, he seemed to be more terrible
then he was before, and retyring backward to fetch his course, he ran against
him with great fury and strength, that the Knight had enough to do to clear
himself from his terrible and mighty blows. And although he did strike him
very strongly with his sword, yet he did the Bull no more harm then if he
had been made of steel and his sword of wood, and after that he had proved
many times with his sword, and saw that it did not profit at all, but rather
brought himself in great danger, every time that the Bull came against him
he determined to turn unto his first contention, and to travail all that
ever might ^ee to overthrow him to the ground. And so he did, that when the
Bull came against him, with his head low is strike him with his horns, be
laid fast hold upon him, and a new began their wrestling, continuing a great
while ^n this contention, the one forcing the other with all their strength and
power they had, up and down the Court. This conflict endured so long, that
in the end the bull waxed somewhat weary, at which time the Knight when he
perceived it, he crossed his arms, and wrong the Bulls head on the one side,
and thrust him forwards with so great strength that he overthrew him on his
back to the ground. Upon a sudden the Bull being overcome the Sun was all
darkened, and the heavens, in such sort that the court was as dark as it had
been at midnight, and upon the same there was great thunderings and lightnings,
as it seemed that all that mighty work would sink or be overthrown, and sure
it would have been a thing very dreadful unto any other, that had not his
heart so stout and courageous as the Knight of Cupid, but this did not endure
long, for likewise upon a sudden this great tempests of lightning and thunder
did end and vanish away, and the day turned to be very fair and clear. At
which time there appeared unto the Knight of Cupid a new and strange and
unlooked for danger, which was, that in the time that the tempest did endure,
this fierce bull which lay a long upon the ground, his bowels were opened in
the midst all a long his belly, and straight way there came forth a dark
and thick mist, the which did endure a while, till such time as by little and
little it did consume away, and he saw in the same mist in the midst of the
court a black lump that after the mist was gone appeared to be a great and
fearful dragon, who shaking her self did stretch out her wings, which did
cover a great part of that court likewise she stretched forth her sinued legs
and paws, and showed her sharp claws* and opening her deformed mouth, she
showed forth her tuskes, which were like unto Elephants teeth, and out of her
nose and eyes she threw forth great flames of fiere, accompanied with black
and thick smoke, which made her seem the more horrible, and when she had
streched forth her self a great while, as one that awaked out of a sound
sleep, she arose upon her feet and gave terrible and great shrikes, that she
seemed to be some infernal monster, and straight ways went toward the
Knight, and according to her g^at s^ercenesse and lightness, he had need of
a stout and courageous heart that would abide and withstand her fury, but the
son of Trebatio who was desperate with love, did not alonely esteem a little
this horrible and terrible Dragon, but this present danger which was agreeable
unto his misfortune: and with a valiant courage, he did abide her coming. And
when the Dragon would have caught him in her deformed mouth, and have fastened
upon his shoulders, her cruel and sharp nails, he put himself on the one
side with great lightness, and having the Dragon on his right side, he stroke
her with all his strength a terrible blow upon the head, that he thought
verily therewith to have parted it in the midst, but the sword did no more
harm on her, then if he had stroke upon a hard Diamond, and being very much
amazed thereat, he said within himself, that all those things were infernal
and fantastical, but he had not so soon made an end of striking the blow,
when as this horrible dragon returned upon him, and having no time to clear
himself from her, she put her strong legs upon his shoulders, and clasped
her cruel nails on his back, and gryped him with so great strength, that she
had passed through all his bowels, if the force of his magical and fine
armor had not made defense against her, and by reason that his armor was made
by that art, the hardness and sharpness of her cruel nails were not
sufficient to pearce the^ through, yet notwithstanding this valiant Knight did
feel himself very sore troubled, as well with the fire and smoke which she
threw from her, as with the great strength wherewith she did gripe him, and
although he thrust at her with the point of his sword under her belly, yet he
did her no more harm then if he had stroke upon a Rock in this sort* the
stout Knight had the worst of this contencion, and was put in great peril and
danger, but his noble and stout courage could not suffer to see himself so
embraced with that infernal beast* wherefore letting his sword fall out of his
hand, with his fist he struck her such a blow upon the head, with so great
courage and strength that he made all h^ teeth to chatter together the one
with the other, and being therewith somewhat astonyed, she withdrew her self
from him, and he then being at lybertye, and having more room to profit
himself with his strong and rygorous arm, he straight way upon the same
with his close armed fist, which I may resemble unto a Mase of iron, stroke the
dragon the second blow in the same place whereas he had stroke the other, and
what with the great fury wherewith it was stroke, and the amazement of the
first blow, the scull of that monster which was as hard as flynt, was beaten
and broken down into the brains, yet at this present the dragon was not
slain, but rather did seem more horrible and devilish then before, for
beating of her wyngs and rising up in the air, she made a dreadful noise,
and with her terrible and long tail she beat the pauement, in such sort that
all the court and the galleries round about it did shake, the Knight was
greatly amazed to see her fierceness and infernal fury, and stood still to
see what would come thereof, and by reason that all which the Dragon did was
with the pangs of death, in a small time after she fell down dead, and o^ a
sudden the floor did open* and the Bull and the Dragon fell both in thereat
and were consumed, and the earth shut up again, so that there remained no
mention of them. And when the Knight of Cupide saw all these strange
adventures, he was wonderfully astonyed at them, as on that had seen very few
of such like inchauntments, so he recovered his sword which he threw from
him, and put it up in his sheath, and looked round about, be thinking himself
what was best to do, and as he looked about him, he saw upon a wall that was
right before him under one of the galleries in that court, a thing which put
him in great admiration* which was, that he saw there portraied his own figure
and likeness, with the device of his armor, and the entering into the Cave,
and all that happened in the contencion he had with the Bull and the Dragon,
till such time as they were consumed into the earth, every thing perticularly
a^ it was, that he himself could not declare it so perfectly a^ it did
appear there upon the wall, and the Bull and the Dragon appeered there so
fierce and furious, as though they had been a live. And when he had well
perused all this, he said within himself, that the wisdom and knowledge of
Artidon was great, and remembering the great passion and sorrow of love which
he passed and suffered, and the great dis^ing and hatred which he found in
her whom he so entirely loved, he gave a great sigh and said: Oh cruel and
tyrannous love, there is no wisdom and understanding able to refrain himself
and leave thee, neither any strength sufficyent to make resistance against
thee, so that I beeleeue thy power and strength is more in the wise and most
ripest of wit, and strong of courage, much more then in any other baler person:
as the fire is most furious of force being made with strong and hard timber,
but yet thou respectest no estate, neither one nor other, neither the strong
nor feeble person, they ought not to paint thee with thy eyes shut, for so much
as all they which do serve thee are blind, and thou with thy shut eyes do
beehold all their sorrows and troubles, and give them their payment for
their service. And in saying these words he went from that place, and on the
other side he saw a great and broad pair of stayres, very well wrought, which
went up unto the gallaries, and it seemed to be the way which he should take,
wherefore he ascended up the stayres, and when he came into the galleries he
saw that they were very broad, and well wrought with strange work, and three
of those galleries were on that side the court whereas he had the contention
with the monsters, and on the other side toward a very fair Orcharde, fresh
and delectable, full of all sort of green trees and sweet flowers, whereas he
heard a marvelous sweet harmony of many ^yrdes, which were in that Orchard,
and on the other side of the Gallerie was there meruaylous great and strange
buyldinges, and in the same Gallerie there was a door open for to enter into
that work, so the Knight of Cupide entered in, and came into a Quadran: which
appeared very clear, bright, and fair, and on the one side thereof there was
a door, which seemed to be shut on the inside, who had to keep and guard the
same a mighty great and dreadful Giant, with an iron Mase in his hand, who as
soon as he saw the Knight, with both his hands lift up his Mase above his
head, and did abide till such time as the Knight should come unto him, with so
terrible countenance, that any man would have thought it great solly to have
a^utted ^im, and over the door was written Letters to this effect.

When this door shall be open, then shall the Queen Artidea be at liberty,
and the entry herein shall be free unto all people.

And when he had read it, he thought within himself* that for to make an end
of that adventure, he must needs have battle with the Gyaunt. And so
without any more tarrying, with his sword in his hand he went toward him.
When the Gyaunt saw him nigh, he discharged from a lost his great and mighty
Mase, thinking to strike the Knight of Cupide on the head, but he who always
had in remem^e what was best for him to do, with a marvelous great
lyghtnesse leapt on the one side* in such sort, that the ^eat iron mase fell
down upon the floor, and with the fury wherewith it was stroke, it made all
the palace to shake: this ^ghtie blow was not so soon given, when that the
worthy Knight threw a some at him* and stroke him on the breast, and according
unto the great strength wherewith it was given, it had been sufficient to have
passed through the Giants body, although he was armed with strong iron, but
his armor was made by such art, that it made the point of his sword to double
and bow unto the hilts, and made no sign thereof in his armor. Then the Giant
lift up his mase again to strike him another blow but this valiant Knight
seeing the small harm that he could do him with his sword, determined to
assault him by some other means, and seeing that the Giant did discharge his
blow* he entered in soclose with him, that he was constrained to fall down
on both his knees for to clear himself from the fury thereof, and rising up
again with great lightness, finding himself nigh the Gyaunt, he threw his
sword from him, and with both his hands laid fast hold in the midst of the
Gyaunts Mase, and pulled at it with so great strength, that he pulled it out
of his hands, and was very joyful for the winning thereof. But as soon as the
Gyaunt had lost his mase, upon a sudden he vanished away that he was never
more seen, and the Knight of Cupide remained all alone very much meruailing at
such sudden and strange things as he saw there, and when he perceived that
there was no more to do but to open the door, he went to it and proved to
open it, but he could not move it neither on the one part nor on the other,
although he put great strength to open the same, and seeing that he cold not
profit with his strength, he took the Giants Mase in his hands and said: It
does come all to one purpose to break thee by force, as to open thee by
policy or art, and therewith he stroke a mighty blow in the midst of the
door, that he brok it all to small pieces, and upon a soda^ne at the same
time he heard a great and terrible noise of Thunder, that the heavens seemed
to open therewith, and in all the Kingdom of Russia was heard that terrible
noise, which caused all men to fear and wonder, for that the day was very
fair and clear, and could not imagine what should be the occasion to move
any such thing in the Region of the Air, and after that this great Thundering
and noise was past, the Knight of Cupide saw that the entry in at the door
was clear, and without any impediments, so he entered in thereat and came
into another Quadran, which was marvelous bright and clear* only by the
virtue of precious stones which were very big, set round about the walls, and in
the midst of this Quadran, there was in manner of a stage, very straungel^e
wrought and round about it steps like stayres for to go up upon, and upon the
same stage there was set in a chair very richly wrought, the Queen Artidea
who was very fair and royally apparayled, who le^ned her head upon her arm,
and there was beeholding a Knight of a very good countenance and disposition,
who was all armed with guilt armor, and brodered with precious stones,
kneeling upon his knees before her, having his breast open, showing unto the
Queen his bloody heart, and although his countenance did show him to be dead,
yet the wound and the blood was so fresh, as though at the same instant it had
been done. This Knight was the wise Artidon, who willingly and with his own
hands did wound and open his breast, after that he had brought the Queen
thither, at the hour that the Knight of Cupide entered into that Quadran and
saw all this, the same hour was the inchauntment undone, and the Queen was at
liberty, who when she lift up her eyes and saw him, she straight ways
understood that that Knight had finished that adventure, and set her at
liberty, for the which being joyful, she arose from the place where she
was set, and when the Knight of Cupide saw her arise, he went toward h^. and
did salute her very courteously, and she spoke unto him saying: O gentle
Knight, wherewith can I gratify you for this great benefit which by your
mighty bounty and prowess this day I have received, in that I am at liberty
and clear of this heavy and sorrowful prison, in the which I have been so
many years, doing no other thing but live in continual sorrow and
lamentation for the death of this Knight. Tell me I pray thee who thou art, and
in what estate does all my Kingdom remain, for that I beeleeue, by reason of
the long time that I have been here, there is no memory nor mention of me.

Then the Knight of Cupid said, Lady, unto god thou ought to surrender these
thancks, and not to me, for that he has been the principal dooer, and he
it is that has delivered thee out of this Enchantment, and that which I of my
part have done, it is sufficient satisfaction, for yt I have done it in the
service of such a person as you are. And as touching the rest which you do
ask of me, you shall understand that I am a strange Knight and was never in
this country before it was within these four days that I entered into it,
notwithstanding in this small time I have understood by certain shepherds
which I left here without the cave, that in all your kingdom there is great
memory of you, and that they do look for your return daily, and since your
first entry into this Cave until this day the kingdom has been in power
of governors, and none has been called King. And beeleeue this of a
certainty, that your liberty will be unto all them great joy and delyght,
and they will receive you with no small honor.

The Queen was very glad and did rejoice to hear those words. And when she
saw the excellent beauty of the Knight of Cupid, who had the beauer of his
healme lift up, she was greatly amazed thereat, and thought within her self
that she could not make him better satisfaction for that which he had done for
her, then to take him for her husband. And thincking the time long to see her
self clear out of that place* she said, that if he were desirous to know
the truth of any thing of the wise Artidon, that he which was kneeling on his
knees upon the Scaffolde was the same, and that he would give him the true
and perfect answer of all things that should be demanded of him. The Knight
of Cupide who was very glad thereof, went unto the wise Artidon, and said.

O gentle Knight and wise Artidon, let now thy misfortune give comfort unto my
sorrow, which thou do know is very great, and how that it should be unto
me a glorious death, that in opening of my breast, and showing my heart unto
that cruel Lady, I might cause her to weep, and it were but one tear of
pity to have compassyon of me.

Likewise thou do well know the great misfortune of the Princess Briana my
Mother, and how the Prince Eeward my Father and my Lord. her spowse was lost,
and we could never hear any news of him, and also my brother the Gentleman
of the Sun was lost being but an infant, and never yet could news be heard
of him, now here I besire thee that thou do give me some news of them, or
to tell me whether they be alive or dead, or whether I shall go to seek
them, for that whatsoever thou shall tell me, I shall hold it for a truth, and
when thou have satisfied me of the truth heerof, then I will desire thee to
tell me some news of that which passes in the court of King Oliuerio, and as
for the Princess Oliuia my mistress, I know well that I do not deserve to
know any thing of her. And when he had made an end of saying these words,
straight ways the wise man did open his eyes, and did look upon the Knight of
Cupide, and when he had well beholden him, he answered and said: Worthy
Knight of Cupide, thou ought to have thy self in great estimation, for that
thou have finished and made an end of this adventure, the which many could not
have done, although they were both mighty and worthy Knights that have come
hither, and given the enterprise of the same, although they have done other
wonderful and great deeds of arms, for the great compassion which thou have
had of my death I give thee thanks therefore, and in reward of the same I
will tell thee strange and secret things, which shall give thee great
contentment, touching that which thou have demanded of me of the Prince
Edward, and of thy brother. And in saying these words he told him
perticularly all the whole History of the great Emperor Trebatio, from the
first time that he was in love with the Princess Briana, till such time as he
went out of the Castle of Lindaraza, by the high prowess of the Knight of the
Sun, and how he went in his company into Hungaria, and how he carried the
Princess into his Emp^re of Grecia. So likewise he told him how that mighty
and valiant Knight who took the Emperor Trebatio his Father out of the
enchanted Castle, was the Knight of the Sun, of whom he was succored,
being at the point of death in the Island of Candramarte, and how it was that
Gentleman of the Sun his brother, who being a young intant was lost at the
Monestarie of the River, who at this present is a Pagan and does live in the
law of the Gentiles, for that he has been brought up amongst Pagans, and
does not know whose son he is, although he has been in Hungaria, in the
court of his grandfather, the King Tiberio* and has done so high and mighty
deeds of Knighthood, as ever has been seen or heard of. When the Knight of
Cupid heard all this, he received very great content and was very glad that the
long and heavy sorrow of the Princess his mother was remedyed, the which did
give her ^ally no small sorrow and grief. And being in this delight the wise
man proceeded forwards in his talk and said.

Touching the news that thou do^st ask of me of the Court of the King
Oliuerio, I give thee to understand that all which at this present they do
entreat of there, is, that ye Prince of Lusitania is very much in love with the
Princess Oliuia, and has demanded her of the King her Father for spouse, and
the King has promised him the grant thereof, and what shall happen thereof I
cannot ^ell, neither what the Princess Oliuia does pretend therein, for that to
me there is not granted so much liberty as to discover or declare the secrets
of hearts, neither of that which has passed at this present. And now pardon me
for that I cannot answer thee unto any other thing whatsoever thou will
demand of me. And in saying these words the wise Artidon did close up his
eyes, and remained dead as before.

But when the Knight of Cupid understood what he said touching the Princess
Oliuia, his blood wared cold in his body, and all the pleasure which before he
received, was now turned into heaviness, and having no power to dissemble any
longer, he cast up his eyes unto the heavens and uttered words of great
lamentation, and with so terrible sighinges and complayntes, that the Queen
Artidea, who was beholding him, had great compassion of his sorrow. And
being in this grief, he heard a great noise of people which were coming up
the stayres into the Gallerye: And looking what it should be, he saw the
Shepherds that remained without the cave abiding his success, who when they
perceived that he tarried so long, and came ^r soorth, and again hearing the
great noise of the battle of the Bull, as also when the Dragon was
ingendered, they were greatly amazed, whereupon two of them went to carry these
news unto the Prince Luziro, who was in a city but a mile from that place.
And in the mean time that these two Shepherds were declaring unto the Prince
all that they heard, after that the Knight had entered into the cave, at that
instant was heard that great and terrible thundering which was made when the
Knight of Cupid brake the door of the inchaunted Quadran, with the iron male
of the Giant, at which time the Queen was set at liberty, which when the
Prince and all his Knights heard that terrible and wonderful noise, they all
suspected that that Knight had broke up and undone that Inchauntment and
strange adventure of the cave, for that it was told him by many wise men, that
in his time the Queen should be discharged and set at liberty. So straight way
the Prince took his horse, and being accompanied with many noble Knights he
came unto the ca^e, and when he came thither he saw that the letters that were
wont to be there were altered, and other letters containing these words in
their place.

This adventure was finished by the Knight of Cupid, who did set at liberty the
Queen Artidea, and in remembrance thereof there does remain within the wise
Artidon, of whom all those that are touched with amorous passions, may pass
the flames of fire without any impediment, and know of him all that ever they
will ask.

When the Prince and all those that came with him had read that writing, they
were meruaylous glad and joyful, and thought long to see the Queen, and the
Knight that had set her at liberty. And without any more tarrying they entered
in through the flames of fire, and for that the most part of them were young
men and lovers, they passed in quiet without any (...) of the fire, and went
forwards on till they came into the court, and there they did all of them
behold the w^ll, whereon was portrayed the Knight of Cupid, making his battayles
with the Bull, Dragon, and Giant, which was wonderful to be seen, as well for
the flercenes and straungenes of the battles, as for the great subt^itye and
art that was in the setting forth of the story upon the wall. After that they
had well perused the same, they went forwards up the stayres and came into the
galleries. This was the noise that the queen and the Knight of Cupid heard,
and tarrying to see what it should be, the Prince of Luziro, accompanied with
all his Knights entered into the quadran, and when they saw the queen, whom
the Knight of Cupid had by the hand they were greatly amazed to see her so
fair and beautiful, and when they came unto her, they asked her hands to
kiss them, and told her who they were. When the Queen understood he was the
Prince Luziro, who was governor of the realm in her absence, she was very
glad and joyful, and intertayned him with a very good grace, and asked of him
how he did know that the adventure was furnished, because he came so quickly
thither. And then he told unto her what the shepherds had declared to him, and
of the great noise of thunder which they heard, he affirmed that to be the
occasion that they came thither so soon, and after that the Prince had talked
with the queen, he turned unto the Knight and did embrace him, receiving him
with words of great courtesy and friendship, who was like wise greatly
astonished at his mighty and fair countenance, which was agreeable unto his
great courtesy and courage* showed in that adventure, and being very desirous
to know who yt stout and valiant Knight should be, they requested the queen to
demand it of him, and for that the Queen heard that which the wise Artidon
had said unto him, she straight ways declared that he was the Emperors son of
Greece, and wondering very much thereat, they could not but look and behold
him with great affection.

So after that among them there had, passed many curt^ous words, the Prince
Luziro and all the rest that came with him, did endeavor themselves to
beeholde the strange things of that inchaunted Quadran. And when they saw the
wise. Artidon with his breast open in such sort that they might discover his
heart, they were moved and had great compassion on him, and did very much extol
and praise his wisdom and bounty, in that he would rather dye then profit
himself of the Queen against her will. And when they had viewed all things
that was to be seen, they went forth of that inchaunted Quadran, and
descended into the fair and broad court, and returned a new and beheld that
timorous battle which was there figured, and would not believe that in any
humane Knight there should be so much force and strength, as was showed to be
used in those battayles. So that after they had well debated the matter touching
ye valiantness of that worthy knight, they all together went forth of the
cave, and went unto the city, whereas that fair Queen was receyned with great
honor and admiration of all people, and within a few days after the Queen
and the Prince Luziro were made sure together, and at their Marriage there was
made great feasts and triumphs. And here the historye does leave them at this
present, for to tell you of two worthy and esteemed Princes Brandizell and
Clauerindo, whom we left in the court of the King of Polonia.

How the two Princes Brandizell and Clauerindo departed from the Kingdom of
Polonia, and came into the Kingdom of France, and of all the rest that
happened. Chap. 6.
NOw we must call to remembrance those two valiant Princes Brandizell and
Clauerindo, whom we left in the Kingdom of Polonia, whereas the Prince
Brandizel was well beloved of the Princess Clarinea, after that he had
delivered her out of the power of the Giant. Now the the history says that
after these two Princes had soiourned there certain days, they asked lisence
of the King to depart, for that they had great desire to go and seek out
their friend the Knight of the Sun, without whom they could not be in quiet
one hour. Likewise the Prince Clauerindo had great desire to go and know his
parents, and although that the King was very sorrowful for their departure,
yet he could not deny them, but granted the^ leave, and did offer unto them
very many and rich gifts, but the two Princes would receive nothing of him. So
one day before they should depart, the Prince Brandizel had opportunity to
talk with the Princess, and in the end of great communication that passed
betwixt them of love, he took his leave of her, and promised her to return
again into that Country with as much speed as might be. Then these two
Princes departed, and in their company Armineo, uncle unto the Prince, and
went toward the sea, and being entered into their ship, they began to
nauigate toward the Kingdom of France, and that coast bare out from the
Ocean sea toward the Septentrion, which was the occasion that they travailed
fifteen or sixteen days, without happening unto them any thing worth the
telling, till the seventeenth day they arrived in a very fair and pleasant
Port of Normandy, which was unto them all their great joy and pleasure, but in
especial unto Armineo, for that knowing the Country he wept with great joy,
for that he was returned again into it, and there they heard news of
Oristeo, and of the Queen Olindia, who were at that present in the famous
City of Paris, and were very sad and sorrowful, for that they could never
hear any news of their son the Prince Clauerindo, nor of his uncle Armineo.
Then they accounted together among them selves what was best to be done, and in
the end of many debates they thought it best and did conclude, that before they
went to Paris, or gave the King to understand any thing of their arrival they
would go and prove the adventures in that Kingdom, and atchieuing some of
them, it might be the occasion that they should be known with more (...).

and according thereunto they prepared all thiinges, and for the space of three
noneths they went through all the countries, and did many and wonderful deeds
of arms, by the which they got so great fame, that they had no other talk in
all the Kingdom, but of the two Knights with Flower de Luces, for that either
of them had for his devise a Flower de Luce, and for that the King Oristeo was
informed many times of the great Knighthood of these two Knights, he had much
desire to see and know them, that he might do them honor. So after that these
two Princes had in this time travailed all the whole land, they concluded
betwixt them to go unto Paris and there first before they made themselves to be
known unto the King, to maintain a just for the space of two months, and to
put for the price thereof a very fair tent, which was given them by the wise
Lirgandeo* that was so strange and rich, that the like was not to be found.
Now when they came unto the City* they straight way went unto the Tyl^ yeard,
which was right before the Kings palace, and there they commanded their rich
Tent to be armed, and sent an Embassage unto y^ King Oristeo giving him to
understand of their coming, and craving pardon for that they did not their
duty in going to kiss his hands, till such time as those iustes which they
had ordained were finished. When the King heard thereof, he was very glad, and
rejoiced, as one that had great desire to know so good Knights as they were,
and again to see some of their great bounty and valiantness, which has
been told him. And there with he returned them thanks for their Embassage,
and sent them word that he received great pleasure, that such Knights as they
were come unto his Court, and if it were so that they had need or lack any
thing, he would command them to he furnished of all necessaries. To
conclude, for that this Historye cannot song remain herein, for that which is
to be spoken of the Gran Trebatio and his Sons, wholly I do pass over all
the wonderful deeds of these two Princes, but yet they say that in the space
of two months these two Princes did maintain their just, that there was not
in all France a Knight of estimacion and valor, but was euerthrowen by these
Princes in the presence of the King and Queen, who were daily at the windows
to behold them, and thought that in the world could not be two Knights of more
force and strength But the King was somewhat sorrowful in himself, and thought
it a great dishonor to his court, for that there was not one Knight of valor,
but all were ouerthromen by the other, but this sorrow and grief endured but a
while, for that the last day of the iusts the Prince Clauerindo did make
himself known, as in the chapter following shall be told you.

How the two Princes Brandizell and Clauerindo being in the City of Paris,
there came thither a Giant called Brandafu^el, with whom the Prince Clauerindo
had a very strong and furious battle. Chap. 7.
THE great fame which these two Princes gate in the iusts that they did
maintain in the City of Paris, was such, that not only the Knights of the
kingdom, but also diverse Knights of other provinces and countries did come to
prove themselves with them, and as it is a common thing the fame, and in
especial of such not able iusts, do fly abroad into all parts. It happened
at that time there dwelt in a little Island in ye Ocean sea, near unto Normadie,
a Giant called Brandafuriel, of a very great stature and deformed, with whom
the King Oristeo was glad to hold friendship and peace, for the great damage
and harm which he did upon the sea at all times when it pleased him. And for
that this Island was compassed with high and mighty Rocks, which made it so
strong, that all his power were not sufficient for to do him any harm, he
being within, when the fame of these two Knights which were in Paris, came
unto the Giants ears, and of the rich Tent that was prepared for the prise of
this Just, it straight ways gave him a desire to go thither, as one that was
certain that ten such Knights as they were, were not sufficient to defend the
Tent* but that by his prowess he must bring it away* And to execute his
determination, he straight way departed from the city of Paris, and carried in
his company to the number of ten Knights: and came thither one day before that
the two months of the Iusts did end, whereas the two Princes were doing of
marvelous deeds of arms. And as the great place was full of Knights, as well
strangers, as those naturally borne in that Kingdom: at which time the great
and furious Gyaunt entered in amongst them, bidding them to make him way, with a
loud and terible voice. And when they saw him so great and ill favored, they al
feared him, and made him a large and broad way, that he might pass forwards.
And when the Ciaunt saw the rich Tent where it was, he went toward it and did
behold it with great admiration, and it (...) onto him to be very rich and
strange: and after (...) he ^ad satisfied himself with the sight thereof, he
said: which be the Knights which does defend this Tent. The Prince
Clauerindo, who was nighest unto him said: I am he that does defend it, with
an other Knight my companion* therefore say what thy pleasure is. That which I
will say said the Giant, is, That where you are but two Knights for to defend
it, I would you were twenty together. For winning of it it will be unto me
more honor to win it of twenty, then of two alone Knights. But seeing that you
are no more, come on let us go unto the battle: and come both of you against
me. For that with one alone blow I will hoyse you both out of your saddles,
the one of you with my la^ce* an^ for other I will take him under my arm. The
Prince Clanerindo was very much offended and angry at (...) pride of the
Gyaunt* and answered him saying. It is always the custom of you Giants, to
abound in to ^h arogancie and pride, which makes me not very much to
marvel, of any thing that thou have said. Therefore take unto thee thy
spear, and I alone will defend the tent from thee. And if thou do overthrow
me from my horse, the Tent shall be thine, without any denial of me or my
companion. The Gyaunt when he saw himself so little esteemed of one Knight,
he was so full of fury and wrath, that he could not refrain his ire, but drew
out a mighty great and broud fauchon which was hanging at his girdell, and went
to strike the Prince Clauerindo upon the healme, thincking therewith to
cleave him down unto the wast. But the Prince who was a very stout and
pollitike Knight, and in many things did resemble his friend the Knight of the
Sun, before that the Faulchin could execute the Gyaunts determination, he
gave a great leap with his horse on the one side, that the Gyaunt lost his
blow, and it was stick in vain. And by reason that the blow descended right
down, he stroke his own horse upon the head, that he cloue it in two
pieces* and he fell down dead to the ground with his master* so that the
Giant could not rise up again without great pain and grief, for that the
horse in his fall caught the Gyaunts leg under him. The King and all that did
behold them, fell in a laughter, and had great pleasure in that which the Giant
had done: Although his coming thither was a great grief unto many. For
according unto the great fame which he had in those parts, they thought verily
that the two Knights could not have sufficient force and might for to defend
the Tent, but that he would win it and carry it away. When the Gyaunt saw
himself without a horse, with great ire he arose up and went toward the
Prince* who with a trice leaped from his horse back* for that he would have no
advantage of him, and drew out his sword and did abide his coming: so that
beetwixt the^ there began ^ very angry and well foughten battle, striking on
every ^e, that it was strange and wonderful to beehold. The prince Clauerindo
was mighty of person and well proportioned, light and strong, beesides all
this, he had his a^monr made and tempered by art magic, which was given him
by the wise Lirgandeo, of the which he was sure that whatsoever blow his
adversary did fasten upon him, it should not hurt him, which was the occasion
that although the Gyaunt were of much more force, yet he should maintain
himself very well against him and make him to abate his great arrogansie and
pride. And by reason that the Giant was big and heavy, the Prince did strike
him at all times at his pleasure, and many times he did cut his armor and
flesh, whereat issued out great abundance of blood.

The King and all those that did beeholde the battle, greatly maruailed at
the prowess of that Knight, but above all, his uncle Armineo, was very glad
and joyful, that he made his party so good in the battle, and said within
himself, that it he did persevere and bring it unto a good end, that with
great honor the Prince might discover him self unto his Parents: and did pray
to God with all his heart to aid and help him in that battle, for that it
continewed still very dangerous and full of peril. For that thi^ great and
furious Gyaunt when he saw that his Fauchon could not enter, nor deminish the
armor of his adversary* He did procure all that ever he could for to strike
him upon the healme to astonish him, for that he never chansed to strike him
upon the Healme, but that he made him sometimes to bow his knees to the
ground, and other times to stoop with his hand to keep himself from falling,
in such sort that the battle was in balance very doubtful, for more then an
hour, that there was known no vauntage beetwixt them, but only that the
Giant was wounded, and the Prince not.

It was a great encouraging unto the prince Clauerindo, to see himself in
presence of his Parents, and hoped that very shortly he would give them to
understand thereof. And this was the occasion that made him to be the more
furyous against his enemy. The Giant when he saw himself wounded, and all
the ground be sprinkled with his blood, he greatly wondered at the strength
and resistance of his enemy: and finding all things clean contrary unto his
expectation before he began the battle, h^ was almost ashamed, yet he
beeleeued that the state of his victory did remain only in the striking of
one full blow upon the Helm of his adversary. And therewith he took his
great Fauchon in both his hands, and went toward y^ prince, making a show as
though he should strike him upon the head, whereat the Prince stooped on the
one side, and the Gyaunt did stay the striking of his blow, till afterward
unadvisedly at his pleasure, he stroke him upon the Enchanted Healme, that it
made all them that looked on, to marvel how he could sustain or suffer such
wonderful fury, for that it was sufficient to have cloue a great rock asunder,
but by reason of the virtue of his armor, made by that wise Lyrgandeo for such
necessities, that the Prince received no damage of that furious blow: but by
the great strength wherewith it was given, he thought verily all his skull had
been broken to pieces, and therewith he bowed his knees to the ground,
remaining for a good space all astonished, that he could not arise up.

When the furious Giant saw him in that trance, he turned again and lift up
his mighty Fauchon and stroke him an other blow in the very same place, and
by reason that with the other blow his fauchon was crased with the force and
strength of the second blow, it brake in three pieces, in such sort, that there
remained in his hands but only the hilt, which was the occasion that the blow
did no harm, otherwise it had cost him his life, and with the noise thereof
he came unto himself, and arose up somewhat amazed, and with the fury of
that great blow, he did not see that the Gyaunt was without a Sword, but
entered in with him in a great rage, and stroke him such an ouerthwrat blow upon
the thigh, that he cut his armor and flesh unto the hard bone: of the which
the Gyaunt felt himself very evil.

The Giant seeing himself without wepon, he would have entered in with his
enemy, to have caught him in his arms. but the Prince understanding his
pretense, recoyling back threw a foyne at him, which chanced on his beauer
which was broken, and thrust him thorough and through the head, wherewith this
firce and ugly Brandafuriell fell down dead to the ground, it was unto all
them that did beeholds what passed, a great admyration and wonder, when they
saw so sterce and mighty a Gyaunt, who in all those parts was greatly dreaded
and feared, in so short space overthrown and slain, by one only Knight, and
for that the King could not away with him for certain angers and griefs which
continually he did unto him, he was very glad and received great joy for his
death, and thought long to know the Knight who had done that valiant and
worthy deed, being certified within himself, that there was not a Knight in
all the world like unto him in courage and strength.

When the Prince Clauerindo saw himself clear of that monstrous Giant, he
lifted up his eyes to heaven and gave great thanks unto the almighty God, and
put his sword into his sheath, and went toward the Prince Brandizell and
Armineo his uncle, who received him with great pleasure and joy, seeing the
honor and praise which he had won in that place, and said amongst themselves
that it was not then time to keep them any longer unknown, but great reason
to discover themselves. And therewith they all three together went toward the
place whereas the King and the Queen were, accompanied with all the principal
Knights of the Court, and when they came before them, without taking of their
healme, they did their duty and reverence, the King received them very
gladly, and rejoiced much with them. Them Armineo beegan to speak and said.

Most mighty King, you shall understand that these Knights are come from
strange Countries unto this thy court, not so much to get honor here amongst
thy Knights as to give thee certain news, at the which thou will receive
great joy and contentment, which are concerning thy son the Prince
Clauerindo, who many years past was lost, being carried away by a great rouer
from his Country, who at this present is a live and does very well, and is
waxed such a Knight, that in the whole world you have very few like unto him,
and in company with him is his uncle Armineo, with no small desire to come and
see thee, and ever since they were taken by that Rouer, they have been always
together, and as we do understand they will not be long from hence.

The King when he heard these joyful news, with a loud voice said: Oh
mighty God, is it possible that my Son Clauerindo and my Brother Armineo be
alive, and that there has been in my court who has seen them, and never
told me till now, and so long time past. And in saying these words he turned
unto Armineo and said: Gentle Knight, seeing that you have brought me so
joyful news, I pray you also tell me where you did leave them, that I may
send to seek them, so shall I have my joy wholly fulfilled. It shall not need
that your highness do send to seek them said Armineo, for that they are within
the Kingdom of France, and will be here very shortly. When Armineo had
said these words, the King was in a great doubt whether this which the Knight
had told him was true, and whether he spoke it in manner of mockage. The
Queen who was present when she heard these words, thought it a thing
impossible to be true. Then the King arose up from the place whereas he sat,
and went unto Armineo, and cost his arms about his neck, saying: O gentle
Knight, tell me if this be true which thou have said, or whether thou boost
it to mock with me, for that my sad and sorrowful heart cannot beeleeue this
joyful news to be of truth.

Then Armineo said. I will not tell any thing unto your highness but that
which is of truth, and for that you shall be put in greater admiration
understand that he which slew in your presence that ugly and monstrous Gyaunt
Brandafuriell, is the Prince Clauerindo your Son, and the other Knight his
companyon is the Prince of Persia, and I am thy Brother Armineo. And in saying
these words they all three pulled of their Healmes, and straight ways the King
and the Queen did know Armineo, and although the Prince was lost in his tender
age, yet in the proportion of his face they did very well remember him, at
which words with a sudden and unlooked for joy, they ran unto him and clasped
their arms about him, and remained a great while embraced together, and could
not speak one word with the great joy and pleasure which they received. So in
the end when that their harls and arms had contented themselves with that
loving and joyful meeting, they fell into communication, whereas beetwixt the^
there passed a great discourse of their lives, whereby the King and the Queen
was fully satisfied of all that the Prince Clauerindo and Armineo had passed,
after such time as they were taken prisoners by the power of that great rouer
Mambriniano. So when the king and the Queen heard of the great misfortunes and
traualles that their son had passed, and was now in their presence accompanied
with that mighty Prince Brandizel, with whom he was brought up, there was no
joy that might be compared unto theirs, and they gave great thanks unto God,
for such his merciful benefits showed upon them. When these news was
published abroad, I am not here able to declare the general joy and pleasure
which was made, not alone in the great City of Paris, but in all the kingdom
there was great and solemn feasts made, the which endured a long while. And
for that the History has very much to tell of other Knights, at this present
it does leave to speak any more of them, and returns unto the Knight of the
Sun* whom we left prisoners in the court of King Tiberio.

How the Knight of the Sun escaped out of the prison where he was kept, and
perforce departed from the Court of the King Tiberio. Chap. 8.
THe History shows that the Knight of the Sun was thirty days prisoner in
the tower whereas we left him, at the great City of Ratisbona, in which time
the king Tiberio did never determine what should be done-touching the death of
the Troyan Earl, but was rather in a great doubt, not knowing what to conclude
therein, for that on the one side the wife and children of the Earl, and all
his parents and kinsefolkes, who were very many, and of the principallest of
the Court, did every day and hour importunate him for to do justice upon the
Knight, and on the other part, considering the great valor and deserr, and the
sovereign excellency that seemed to be in him, he could not consent in his
heart that such a Knight as he was should dye, although his offense had been
far greater then his was, and as the king remained in this doubt, the Knight
of the Sun was no less perplexed, seeing himself so long time in prison,
and that the King would not determine what his will was therein. Likewise the
same time Florinaldus was prisoner in another tower, unto whom the pain and
trouble of his imprisonment was not so much grief, as his desire was earnest
to be revenged on the Knight of the Sun, in especial for the shame which
he received at his hands before his Lady Albamira, as much as for the death
of the Troyan Earl, and for that he was a vallaunt Knight, he could not
persuade himself that the Knight of the Sun should have any vauntage of
him, if he entered battle with him by the sword, and thought within himself
that by no other means he could make satisfaction of his honor, but to defy
him to mortal battle for the death of the Earl his brother, and to demand
of the King lisence for the same, and as he determined, he put it in
execution, and called unto him a Squier of his, and sent him unto the Knight of
the Sun, for to tell him that it was not unknown what words did pass
beetwixt them, and how that he had slain the Troyan Earl his brother, ^o
that upon the same occasion he did defy and challenge him to mortal
battle, and if it were so that he accepted battle, he for his part would
procure lysence of the King for the same. So the ^uyer went with his message,
and declared it unto the Knight of the Sun, who was very glad and joyful
thereof, not for any good will (...) he had to make battle with Florinaldus,
for that he had no desire to dishonor or shame him, but the chiefest occasion
of his joy was, to recover his horse and armor, wherewith to defend
himself, and not to suffer himself to be taken and carried again unto
prison. And there with he said unto the squire, that he should tell his Lord
that he was very sorry for the death of his Brother, and that he did well
know that he was in the fault of all that passed, to that nevertheless seeing
he demanded the battle, he could do no otherwise but make his defense,
and so he promised to accept the battle, as far forth as the King would give
them lysence. Then the Squire returned with this answer unto his Lord, who
when he heard the meekness of the Knight of the Sun, his stout courage did
the more increase, and sent straight way unto the King a certain Knight of his
part for to ask lisence, that he and the Knight of the Sun might enter
battle about the death of the Earl, affirming that it was his request
against the Knight of the Sun.

Now you shall understand that it was the use and custom of that Country, that
the Brother or any other unto the fourth degree of the kindred, might revenge
the death of his brother or any other kinseman, of him whatsoever he were that
committed the murder, and the law being such, the King could doo^ no less
but give lysence unto all that which Florinaldus did request. When Florinaldus
did understand the same, he was well content, and the next day following the
battle was appointed to be held in the midst of the great court. The day
being come, the King sent unto the Knight of the Sun his sword, and when the
hour approached that they should make their battle, the King commanded 500
Knights, and as many more foot me^ to (...) and keep^ Florinaldus and the
Knight of the Sun, that they might have the field in quiet and safety.

And beesides all this they had all the principals and Knights of the Court to
accompany them, so that they went out of the prison whereas they were with great
h^nour. And when they came into the place, the King and all the rest of the
nobles were at the windows, and the people in other places whereas they might
best see the battle. Incontinentlye all those which did bear them company,
at the commandment of the King did a part themselves from the two Knights, and
were appointed for Judges the Duke of Austria, and the Earl of Denmark, who
were the best esteemed in all the Court, did divide the space betwixt the two
Knights, and put each of them in his place. When the Knight of the Sun saw
himself at liberty, he said unto himself: Oh mighty Emperor Trebatio, how
may thou blame me of forgetfulness toward thy majesty, for that I have not
performed the vow which I promised thee, to see thee straight after thy coming
into Grecia* the Gods do know how much I have desired it, notwithstanding if it
fortune this day, my purpose is to see thee very shortly. And in saying these
words the Trumpet sounded unto the battle, and the gallant and valiant
Knight Florinaldus did strike his furious horse with the spurs, and made
toward the Knight of the Sun, for his courage and furious force was such at
that time that it seemed fortune could not be contrary unto him in any wise.
Likewise the strong and mighty Greek came forth to meet him, with so great
furye, that in the running of his horse, the ground seemed to tremble whereas
he went, and in the midst of their course they joined together with their
Spears, and Florinaldus brake his great Spear upon the fine armor of the
Knight of the Sun, in such sort that he shieuered it in a thousand pieces,
which flew into the air, but this strong and stout Knight remained firm in
his Saddle, and made his encounter with Florinaldus, striking him on the breast
with so great power and strength, that he overthrew him and his horse to the
ground one upon another, in such for that his horse fell upon him, that he
could not arise by any means, whereby this gallaunt and (...) Knight was very
ill entreated, and lay along upon the ground as though he had been dead,
wherefore the King and all they that did beehold the battle were much amazed
at the great power and force of the knight of the Sun, saying one to another
that he had not his like in all the world.

Straight way there was heard in the great place many shrikes and cryings, and
looking what they should be, they saw it was the kinsefolkes of Florinaldus,
who thought that he had been slain, and began to lament his death, and the
death of the Earl. When the knight of the Sun saw Florinaldus did not rise
up again, he went unto the Judges and demanded of them if there were any
more to be done to clear himself from that enterprise* To whom the Judges
answered, that touching the battle there was nothing else to be done, and
as for any other thing, they did not know the Kings pleasure. In the mean
time the King was very sorrowful, and thought surely that Florinaldus had
been dead, wherefore he called his chamberlain and commanded him to go and
charge the Knight of the Sun to re^ourne again into the prison, and that the
gardes should bear him company till he came to the Tower, where he should
remain as prisoner. But when the Knight had done this message unto the Knight
of the Sun, he went to the windows whereas the King was, and with a loud
voice he said.

In the Courts of high and mighty Kings they ought not to entreat a
travailing Knight in this sort as you do me, for if I slew the Troyan Earl,
it was with my sword in my hand, defending my self like a Knight, from them
which sought my death, and for that I do not deserve any punishment, neither
was there any reason why I should be so long in prison. But now seeing you do
command me to return again unto prison, let every one defend and keep
himself from me as well as he can, for that I do pretend to keep my liberty.
And in saying these words he drew out his Sword, and set Spurs unto his
Horse, and pressed among the thickest of the guard, which had compassed him
about, and with the great fury that he had, he made way through the thickest,
overthrowing some with his Sword, and other some with his horse. The King
straight ways perceived the pretense of the Knight, and being very angry, with
a loud voise commanded the Knights of the guard and the foot men for to take
him. And at the commandment of the King, the Knights of the guard, resorted
unto the place whereas the Knight of the Sun was, and in great number they put
themselves before him with their swords in their hands, and over laded him
with very many blows, and although the Knights were many, yet in a short time
he made them to recoyle, and to give him way, flourishing with his Sword in his
furious hand, about him, on the one side and on the other, in such sort that he
never stroke blow but that he slew or overthrew a Knight.

The slaughter that he made among them was such, and in so great number, that
although the knights and all the foot men did the best they could to take
him, yet in spite of them all, this furious knight made way before him, and
went from amongst them out the place. And chauncing into a narrow streat, he
set spurs to his horse and made him run with great swiftness, till such
time as he was out of the City in the field. The slaughter which he made
amongst them, and the great fear which they received, was such, that there
was not one so hardy that durst follow after him, but to content the King they
c^ustered a great number together, and followed him through the streate a
trotting pase, and although they went a great number together, yet they which
were foremost stayed their horse brid^es, being unwilling to overtake that
furious knight, so that the knight of the Sun had time to a part himself a
great way from the City, and chanced unto a way which brought him unto the
river Danubia, and travailed along by it with all the speed he might, for that
if the people of the King should follow him, they should not overtake him, for
that he had no desire to have battle with the Knights of King Tiberio, as
well for that he was very weary, as that he was unwilling to do any more
harm then he had done, and so he travailed all the rest of that day till it
was night, and because he knew not the Country, he determined to stay and rest
himself in a very fair and green forest, which was betwixt the river and
the high way, and the place seemed unto him to be very delightful and fit for
to rest in, wherefore he alighted from his Horse, and pulled of his Healme, and
sat down upon the green, and leaned unto a tree, whereas he did rest himself
from that great travail which he had passed all that day before, and by reason
that he came thither very weary, he straight ways fell a sleep, and therein
he passed a good part of the night, which was very fair by reason of the
Moon light, and about midnight upon a sudden he awaked through a great noise
which passed the highway, as it seemed, and bearkening what it should be,
somewhat amazed with his sudden awaking, he heard that it was a great cry and
lamentation of Ladies and Gentlewomen, and much rushing of armor, where with he
put on his healme and did abide their coming on foot. Here the History
leaves them, for to tell you of all that passed in the Court of King Tiberio,
and of other things which happened in this time.

Of all that passed in the court of King Tiberio, after the Knight of the Sun
was departed, and how the brethren of the Duke of Pannonia, and Aridon of the
Wilderness did determine to revenge themselves of the King Tiberio, for that
he would not pardon their deaths. Chap. 9.
WIth great shame and reproach the Knights of the King Tiberio remained, by
reason that they were so many, and yet not able to prevail against one alone
Knight, and much meruayling at that which they saw him do, they said one unto
another, yt it was not possible he should be a humane Knight. And when they
came before the King and told him that he was gone, and that they could not
make resistaunce against him, he seemed to be very wrathful against them, and
was ashamed, taking it for a great reproach unto his Court, but that which
troubled him most was, the complaints and tears of the parents and kinsefolkes
of Florinaldus, and of the wife and children of the Earl, for that they all
together kneeled before him, which caused him to be more wrathful against the
Knight of the Sun. Then straight ways the Knights of Florinaldus did take
their Lord out of the place and carried him unto his lodging, and for that he
had no wound nor hurt but only the brusing and torment of the fall, he
straight ways came unto himself and was quickly whole and sound, with which
the rumor of his parents and kinsfolks was some what mittigated, and the King
Tiberio lost some part of his great grief which he before sustained. And
when he was somewhat in quiet and his anger over past, he called to his
remembrance all that he had seen the Knight of the Sun do, and the gentle
grace and courtesy that he used with all men, for the which he did deserve to
be honored and esteemed of all, and conceiving anger against himself, he said
in his mind, that he had rather have lost a great part of his estate, then such
a Knight should have departed from his court so much abused, and many times
when he thought thereof he was very sorry for that which he had done against
him. Now let us leave the King in his repentance, and many other of the
principal Knights in his Court, who likewise were very sorrye for the
departure of the Knight of the Sun, and let us tell of other things which
happened in that time.

If you do remember that after the Knight of the Sun, had overcome that stout
and valiant Knight Aridon of the black wood, the Duke of Pannonia, and he
confessed all the treason that was conspired betwixt them against the
Duchess, and how that the King commanded their heads should be cut off in
the midst of the place, without any pardon, although many Knights and great
Lords did importunate the King for their pardon. Now the History says that
this Aridon, of the black wood had a brother called Egion, a young man of a
mighty stature and force, and of a singular courage for to attempt any thing,
who was in the black wood, at such time as Aridon was beheaded. Also the Duke
of Pannonia had likewise another brother called Farmonte, a valiant Knight and
very proud, being Lord over many Countries in high Almaine nigh unto the black
wood, who went abroad seeking his adventures in those parts, and had got unto
himself great fame and renown, for many deeds of arms which he had done in
that country. Now when the death of their brethren came unto their knowledge,
and in what sort the King Tiberio commanded them to be slain, they were very
sorrowful for the same, and either of them determined within himself to annoy
the King Tiberio all that ever they could, till such time as they were revenged
of the death of their brethren. It so fell out that these two joined together,
and were both of one mind and determination, concluding between them to be
both together at the execution of reuengment, for that they may the better
bring to pass their pretense, and to annoy the king. Both these knights were
in great security in their countries, and were altogether one helping and
aiding another with great friendship, for that those Countries over which
they were Lords and governors were very montanish and craggie, in such sort
that there could not proceed against them any great host, but that they might
easily make their defense, and with very few people.

When they were agreed and conformed together Egion brother unto Aridon, by
whose death he was then Lord over the black wood, determined to go unto the
court of King Tiberio, and there to inform himself of all that had passed
touching the death of his brother, and for to spy out how and in what manner
he might be revenged on the King, so he came unto the Court in secret wise,
not making himself known what he was, whereas he was certified of all that he
would desire. Likewise he was given to understand how that the Queen Augusta
was with her Ladies and Gentlewomen at the Monestary of the River, and there
remained ever since that the Emperor Trebatio had carried away ye Princess
Briana. This Egion did very well consider the situation of the Monestarie, and
of the Knights which the Queen had for her guard and keeping, and thought
within himself that in that place better then in any other, he might make
satisfaction of his desire. Wherewith he returned unto his own country, and
conferred with Farmonte, and certified him of all that had passed, and told
that he had found out a fit place and opportunitye agreeable to be revenged of
the King, namely that the Queen Augusta with all her Ladies and Gentlewomen
were at the Monestary of the River, which was far from the place whereas the
King did abide, and although she had certain Knights for her guard, yet they
might go so well provided, that in despite of them all, they would go take
the Queen and her Gentlewomen, and bring them unto their own Countries,
whereas they should be in safety from all the whole power of the King Tiberio.

When Farmonte heard these words, being a courageous Knight, he lyked very
well of that which Egion had uttered, and thought it good to give understanding
of all this their pretense, unto a Gyaunt called Barbario, who had his dwelling
thereby* on the shirt of the mount Sarpedo, who was a great friend unto them,
and mighty and strong in deeds of arms, thinking with his help to destroy
all the whole power of the King Tiberio, when he had opened this unto Egion,
they both determined to go and talk with him, and to desire him if it were
his pleasure, to be a companion in that enterprise. This accordingly they
accomplished, manifesting unto him all their pretense and determination, when
he understood it, did straight offer them his company, and also certain other
valiant Knights which he had with him, being such as desired no other thing,
but to have opportunity where they might employ their force and strength to do
mischief. And to conclude, he came away with them, carrying with him ten of his
Knights, who were very big of stature, and of great strength, with whom he
durst give the enterprise against a thousand Knights.

And when they came unto the black wood, Egion did choose other ten Knights of
the best and strongest that he had. So being joined together, they did depart
and took their way toward the Monestarie of the River: and entering into
Hungaria, they went three and three to gether, because there should grow no
suspicion, and the most of their travail was by night. In this order they
trauayled, that at length they came to the Monestary of the River, and were not
suspected of any, whereby the^ might have occasion to follow them, to see what
they pretended. So tarying the one for the other, they joined all together, and
being in good order, upon a very fair and clear moneshine night, they set
upon the monestary, brake the doors, entered in, and took the Queen with all
her Gentlewomen, out of their chambers, at whose great shrickes and cries, the
Knights which were of their guard being lodged in certain houses out of the
monestary, did awake, and being all amassed, they began to arm themselves, in
such great have, that there were joined together more then fortye, who went unto
the place where as the no se was, so that beetwixt the Knights and the Giant,
began a great conflict, but it fell out very evil with them, for that the most
part of them were armed with out light, and upon a sudden, so that they lacked
many pe^ ces of their armor. And more, the power of the Giant with Egion and
Farmonte, was so strong, that they alone had been sufficient to destroy them
all: so that in a small time there was the most part of them slain, and the
rest that remained did hide themselves, for the great fear that they had:
Insomuch that they had time and space to take the Queen and many of her
gentlewomen into their power. And for that purpose they brought with them a
Coach. with four wheels, drawn with six mighty Horses, and very swift,
such as in a short space would carry them a great way: into the which coach they
put the Queen and her gentlewomen, whose lamentacions were so loud, that they
might be heard a great way. Then they all together placed themselves round
about the coach, and stroke the horse, and in great have they beegan to
travail toward their country, vyry glad and joyful for the rich pray which
they had obtained. And continually as the Knights which were of the guard and
keeping of the Queen, came thither at their great shreckes, they did not cease
to follow the coach, and had battle with the Giant and their Knights in the
way, but the Gyaunt did entreat them all in such sort, that some dead, and
other some very sore hurt, he left them lying along the way whereas they went.

This was the great noise of r^mour and the cries which did wake the Knight of
the Sun out of his sleep, in the Forest, thinking upon that great traua^e
which he had with the Knights of the King Tiberio, in the City o^ Ratisbona:
and in the very same night did this wrong happen unto the Queen, and the
coach did draw near the place whereas he was a sleep. And as this good
Knight awaked upon a sudden almost amassed, and bea^d a far of the great
shrikes of the Gentlewomen, he straight way la^d on his Helm, and went to
seek his horse, who was feeding on the green grass, and brideled him and
leapt into the saddle: at which time the Gyaunt and the Knights came right
against him whereas he was. And by reason that the moon did shine very bright,
he saw them coming in this order. Before the coach went the Giant Barbario,
mounted upon a mighty Horse all armed, with a great Iron Mase in his hand all
bloody* with the great company of Knights which he had slain that night, and
according unto his furious and dreadful countenance there were few Knights
that durst ab^e before him. And on both sides of the Coach, rode the two
valiant knights Egion and Farmonte, with each of them a battle axe in their
hands. And their furious and fearse semblaunce which they showed, was no less
to be feared, (by reason of the greatness of their bodies) then the Giants. And
after the coach there followed to the number of fifteen knights, which remained
of twenty that they brought forth, all on horseback, and well armed: who
went keeping of the Gentlewomen, that they should not fall out of the coach.
All this the Knight of the Sun stayed to beehold, and by the shricks which
the gentlewomen gave, and by the words which they spoke, he did well
understand, that the Giant and those Knights did carry the^ away by force. And
although it seemed to be an unequal match and very terrible, that one alone
Knight should thinck to set them at liberty, yet this mighty and valyant
Greek made no stay, but with a valyant courage set spurs unto his Horse and
issued out of the forest whereas he abode: and came into the high way, and
put himself before the Giant and said these words. Tell me Gyaunt what is
the occasion that thou do carry these gentele women perforce against their
wills. When this great Barbario in that sort saw the Knight before him, and the
great hardiness wherewith he spoke unto him, without making any answer, he
lift up his great mase of Iron, and went against him to have stroke him upon
the head, with a right down blow: but the Knight of the Sun had his sword
drawn in his hand, and ^et spurs unto his Horse side* and made him give a
great and a light leap on the one side, wherewith he cleared himself from
that terrible blow, and the mase fell down to the ground: and with the great
force and strength where*with it was stricken, it lackt little that the Gyaunt
had not fallen to the ground after the mase, for that he stoped with all his
body forwards upon the saddle bow. And before he had any time to settle
himself again, the Knight of the Sun entered in with him, and raising up
himself in his Styrops, he stroke with both his hands so furious and terrible
a blow at his wa^. that by reason the joints of his armor was in that place in
a manner broken with his former conflicts, he cut the body in two pieces, in
such sort, that the one half remained in the Saddle, and the other half from
the wast upward fell down to the ground: and it was so quickly done, that
when Egion and that mighty Farmonte beehelde the battle, with that
wonderful and terrible blow, and saw the half body of the Giant fell unto the
earth. And beeholding the knight which had done that deed, with his sword in
his hand all bloody, they received great admiracion, and either of them thought
within himself, that it should be some selestiall creature, sent from God
for to destroy them: for that they could not persuade with themselves that in a
mortal man there should be so great force and strength. Yet because they
were valyant Knights, and high minded, and of proud condition, either of them
did assault him with great ire and wrath: and the first that approached unto him
was the mighty Farmonte, who with both his hands stroke such a right down blow
at the Knight of the Sun, which lighted upon his right shoulder, that it had
been sufficient to clean him to his breast, if that his inchaunted armor had
not defended him. And by reason that the hatchet could not cut, the strength of
the blow was the heavier, in such sort, that it made him to double and bow his
body forwards, that his breast touched the saddle bow, and he had not well
settled himself in his saddle again, when that on the other side, he was
assalted by the mighty Egion, who with his mighty hatchet, stroke a another
right down blow at him, that if he had chaunsed to hit him, it could not but
needs it must have done him great harm.

But this courageous and valyant Knight, whose exceeding lightness and
strength, was in all points equal: stroke his horse with the spurs, and made
him to leap on the one side, which was the occasion that he cleared himself
from the ^ry thereof, and therewith he entered in with that mighty Farmonte,
and stroke him such a blow upon the head, that if he had not clasped himself
about the horse neck, he had fallen down unto the ground, he had no soo^
given this blow, but that the stout Egion lift up his Hatchet again and stroke
him another blow upon the Helm, that he made him decline his head unto his
breast, being somewhat amazed therewith. All this that passed, as w^ll with
the Knight of the Sun as the Gyaunt and the rest, the Queen Augusta and her
Gentlewomen which were in the Coach did beehould, for that those which drove
the Horse that did draw the Coach did stay, and the night was very clear, and
the Moon did shine so bright that it seemed to be day, and they greatly
meruailed at the sudden death of the Gyaunt, and likewise of the battle
which that alone knight made with the other two knights, and certainly they
beel^ued that that knight was sent from God. In this time the mighty Farmonte
had stroke the Knight of the Sun a terrible blow upon his Healme, with so
great fury and force, that he thought vorely his teeth had been broken with
chattering and beating one against another, then this valiant and courageous
knight seeing the great resistaunce that was against him, his force increased,
and he took his sword in both his hands, and raised himself in his ^rops, he
striking a mighty blow at the stout Egion, which lighted upon his shoulder in
all ill hour for him, for after that he never sorrowed for the death of his
brother Aridon, for that the fine and well tempered sword did cut the hardened
steel of his armor, and never rested there, but descended down unto hi^ wast,
and spared neither flesh nor bones. but that fore quarter with all the rest of
the unhappy Egion fell down dead unto the ground. When the mighty Farmonte saw
that terrible blow, and his companyons dead, he knew not what to say nor think
of the great force of his adversary, yet the great pride which he had would
not suffer him to acknowledge his mighty power, but bloodilie he pressed
forwards, thincking by one only blow to take reuengement of all the harm
which was done, not foreseeing that which should happen, and lifting up his
steely hatchet, with both his hands he stroke a mighty blow upon the hard
and Inchaunted Healme of the Knight of the Sun, so that it sounded throughout
all the woods and forests very strongly, and astonished him that he had no
remembrance, in such sort that his horse carried him more then ten pace^ from
the place whereas he was, but yet before the mighty Farmonte had time to give
him another blow he was come again to himself, and remembering the mighty
and furious stroke which he had received, full of wrathful ire and courage,
he took his Sword in both his hands, and setting spurs unto his horse
sides, he pressed toward that mighty Farmonte, to gratify the blow which
he had received, who with a stout and proud courage did abide his coming. The
Knight of the Sun raised himself on his stirrops, and gave him such a blow
upon the head, that he cloue it down to the shoulders, wherewith he fell
from his horse dead to the earth. At which time there approached with the noise
of the battle all the Knights which followed the Coach, and when they saw
their Lords in that battle with one alone Knight, they would not help them,
for that they thought either of them sufficient to use him at their pleasure,
and therefore they put themselves on the one side to beehold the battle, but
when they perceived both their Lords with two blows so suddenly slain, their
blood waxed could within their bodies, and they did verily believe that the
same Knight was some infernal spirit, and no humane creature, yet because
they were many, they took courage one of another, and did assail him all
together* striking at him very strongly, and by reason that they were all
valiant and chosen Knights, they had put the Knight of the Sun in great
ieopardie, if he had not been of so valyant courage as he was, who with so
valyant and stout a courage did beehaue himself amongst those Knights that if
there had been as many more, they had not been sufficient to have brought him
into any ^xtremitie, for that in a small time with his furious strokes, of some
he cloue their heads a sunder, and of other some he cut away their arms, and
other some he overthrew to the ground meruailously wounded, in such sort
(because they had no Lords nor masters to give account unto) all those which
remained alive and not wounded, determined to fly away, and thought it great
folly any longer to abide those mortal and wonderful blows, but turned their
backs and fled with all the have they could, leaving that strong and mighty
knight all alone, who seeing that there was no more to be done, went unto the
coach to see who they were that came therein. And when the Queen Augusta and
all her Ladies and Gentlewomen saw them dead and wounded, which carried them as
prisoners, and that there remained no more but the mighty knight all alone,
they gave great thancks unto almighty god, and wept for very joy to see
themselves at liberty. And the Queen having great desire to know who that
worthy knight should be, she spoke unto him and said.

Oh happy and fortunate knight, whom I beeleeue to be the mightiest and
worthiest in all the world, tell us I pray thee who thou art, that I may know
whom to gratify, for this great benefit that we have received in destroying
of these traitors that carried us away prisoners. When the Queen had said
these words, the Knight of the Sun did know her, for that he had seen her
before, at such time as he had the battle with Aridon, and being much
amazed to see her in that place, and in the power of those evil persons, was on
the contrary very joyful, for that he had done unto her that service, did lift
up the beauer of his Healme and said. Lady I give great thanks unto my Gods
for that it has pleased them to bring me hither at this time, and in so good
opportunity to serve you, for that I assure you I was very ignorant and knew
nothing heerof, but being soundly a sleep within this forest, I was awaked
by the great noise which they made, so that determining what it should be, I
arose up and came toward this place, and you shall understand that I am the
Knight of the Sun, he (if your highness call to remembrance) that had
battle in your presence with Aridon of the black wood, and by reason of a
sodeine injury which has chanced unto me, with certain Knights in the court
of the king, I came hither into this forest this night to sleep and take my
rest. When the Queen understood that it was the Knight of the Sun, and knew
him by the Sunn which he had upon his armor, her joy and pleasure did the
more increase, and thincking her self in a great deal more safety then
before, she said: Now I do well know and understand that my fortune is fallen
out much better then I did make reckoning of, for that it has pleased God to
have so great a care over me, as to bring me such a Knight in this our most
extremity, and considering the great good which thy coming has been unto
us, I cannot impute it, but unto the goodness of God in this our necessity. In
the mean time that the Queen was saying these words and other such like,
certain of her Knights which followed her somewhat out of the way from the
coach, only for to spy out and know the way whether they went for to give the
king to understand thereof. So long as they heard the noise of the battle,
they burst not approach nigh whereas they were, but afterward when they heard
that the Gentlewomen held their peace, and left off their shrikes and
lamentation, they by little and little drew nigh unto ye place whereas the coach
was, til such time as they saw the Giant and the two knights, and others ly a
long on the ground, some stark dead, and other some very sore hurt,
complaining their misfortune. Likewise they saw the Knight of the Sun talking
with the Queen, who^ they knew by the devise he had of the Sun, and being much
amazed at that wonderful sight, they drew nigh unto them, and when the queen
knew that they were of her company, she took great pleasure with them, and
commanded them to bring before her one of those knights of ye Giant yt lay
upon the ground hurt, the knights accomplished her commandment, and when they
had brought one of those knights before her, she demanded who they were that
had taken her and her Gentlewomen prisoners, and what was the cause that they
did it, threatening him with death if he did not tell the truth, and to the
contrary, his life if he did tell her the whole effect, and promised him to
have him healed of his wounds. The wounded Knight seeing that it would little
avail him to hide any thing, considering that their Lords were slain and
dead, did plainly and clearly declare unto her who they were, and of all that
had passed, and what was the occasion that they did it, according as you have
heard before in this History. And when the Queen understood the whole effect
of her imprisonment, her body trembled with the fear that she received,
knowing not how to recompense the Knight of the Sun for the great pleasure
which he had showed unto them, but desired him to bear her company unto the
Court of the King, promising him large and rich gifts, but because the Knight
of the Sun had a greater desire to go see the Emperor Trebatio, then regard
of riches and estate, he gave humble thanckes unto the Queen for her gentle
offer, and did excuse himself in the best sort he could, saying, that he had
a journey in hand which he could by no means leave of at that present, but
he hoped that the time would come he should return and serve the King, and
be in his court. So after that they had a great discourse about this matter,
the Knight of the Sun took his leave of the Queen, at which time were come
together ten or twelve of the Queens Knights, who had hid themselves for
fear^ of the Gyaunt, and when they saw that they could not by any means
persuade the Knight of the Sun to return unto the court again, they
suffered him to depart, although it grieved them very much that he should
depart in such sort, before the king had rewarded him, for the great benefit
which they all received at his hands. In the end the Knight of the Sun
departed from the Queen, and left her in the company of her Gentlewomen and
Knights, who determined to go unto the court of the King. And when those
Knights saw the great and wonderful blows wherewith he had slain the Gyaunt
and his companions, being very much amazed they looked one upon another, and
said that it seemed to be a thing impossible that a humane wight should do
such wonderful deeds. And for that it should be believed of them which did
not see the battle betwixt them, and because there should remain a
perpetual testimony and memory of the same, the queen Augusta determined to
carry unto ye court of the King the bodies of the Giant, and of Egion and
Farmonte, cloue and cut in pieces in such sort as you have heard, and for the
same purpose she commanded the coach to be prepared, she and all her
Gentlewomen came forth thereof, and caused the dead bodies to be put therein, so
there they passed away the rest of the night which remained, and two of those
Knights did return unto the monestary of the River, to give them to understand
of all that had passed, and to bring palfraies and all things necessary for the
Queen and her Gentlewomen. When the morning was come, and all things in a
readynesse, they took the way which lead them toward the court, carrying with
them in their company the Coach, wherein was the bodies of the Giant and of
Egion and Farmonte, who were very great and big, and for that the wounds
wherewith they were slain, were very terrible and wonderful to behold, it put
all them whom they met by the way in great admiration and especially when they
understood that one alone Knight had done that deed. There were some of the
Knights that were in the guard and keeping of the Queen, straight way when
they saw the assault which the Giant and his companions made in the monestary,
and seeing that they were many and that all their power was not sufficient to
make resistaunce, they straight way departed in ^ost with as great have as was
possible for to give the King Tiberio to understand thereof, and with the great
have which they made, the next day in the morning they came before the (...),
and told unto him all that passed, saying that if out of hand he did not with
his Knights give aid and succor, the Queen and all her Gentlewomen should be
carried away prisoners. When the King understood these news, he was very much
troubled, and fearing that the Queen should receive some harm, he commanded
that his Knights should arm themselves with all the speed that might be, which
(...), they departed to the number of two hundred Knights, and took their way
toward the Monestary of the River. After that they were departed there were
many other Knights that were arming themselves for to follow those that were
gone before, and being all in a readiness* with as great have as ever t^eir
horses could run they followed the other, in this sort they continued their
travail till it was somewhat late, at which time those Knights which went
foremost did discover a far of coming toward them the Queen and all her
gentlewomen and Knights, bringing before them the coach and when they were
satisfied that it was the Queen, with great and exceeding joy they went and
told the King, who was very heavy and full of sorrow, supposing that his succor
should come too late, by reason of the great distance that was betwixt the one
and the other, but straight way when he understood the news that his knights
gave him, he received so much comfort, that it seemed to revive him from death
to life, and therewith he passed forwards, and rode before them all, whereas he
saw the Queen and all her Gentlewomen and knights coming, and the coach
before them, wherein was the bodies of the giant and of the two dead Knights,
and being nigh it, they sta^ed, and with great admiration beheld those terrible
and wonderful won^ds, and could not imagine with themselves what it should be,
but being half amazed at that wonderful sight, they remained till the Queen
came, whom the King did embrace and receive with as great joy as if they had
not seen one another a long time before. Then the King demanded how and in
what sort she was set at liberty. To whom the queen said: My Lord, you shall
understand that I and my gentlewomen being in the monestary of the river, we
were assaulted by this Gyaunt and two Knights that we do bring here dead, who
had in their company more then twentye Knights, which came with them, who
killing and wounding the most part of the knights that were of my guard, they
took us and carried us away prisoners in this coach that we bring here, and
according unto the great have and swift course wherewith we were carried, I am
certain that all your succor had come too late, but God was so pleased and my
good fortune, that this night past travailing by the edge of a forest, there
was a knight sleeping, who afterward I knew to be the knight with the devise of
the Sun, which made the battle with Aridon of the black wood, who being
suddenly awaked by our great shrikes and sorrowful lamentations, came forth
into the high way to see what it should be, and he alone had battle with the
Giant and these two knights, and has entreated the^ in this sort as you do
see, and besides all this he slew and wounded all the rest of the knights that
came with them, himself remaining whole and sound, without any wound or hurt,
and we set at liberty, with great joy and pleasure, especially when we knew who
he was, and afterward came unto yt place certain of my knights that did follow
the coach wherein we were, and by one of their knights that were wounded and lay
on the ground, we did understand who they were that did carry us prisoners and
for what cause they did assalt us, and there the Queen declared unto the King
all that ever the Knight of the Sun had done for them in that battle and
rescew, and how he departed from her, and how she could not by any means cause
him to return unto the court for to receive his reward for that worthy and
valiant deed which he had done for her. When the King understood that it was
the Knight of the Sun, who in the delivery of the Queen had done so high
and worthy acts, one way he received great pleasure and another way he
suffered great grief, for that he had not d^ne him being in his court) the
honor that unto so noble and vali^nt a Knight appertayned, and was very angry
with the Queen, for that she did suffer him to depart and go away in (...)
order, and thought that if it were possible to overtake and find him, he
himself in person would follow him. But when all the Knights which came in
company with the king Tiberio understood that the Knight of the Sun had done
all this, they greatly meruailed, and beholding those wonderful wounds which
the giant and knights had, they thought it a thing impossible that any humane
Knight should do it, and wondering thereat they had enough to do to look one
upon the other. Straight way in this sort the king and the queen^ returned and
took their way toward the City of Ratisbona, with all their Knights, carrying
with them the Coach and the dead bodies, and the fame of the Knight of the
Sun increased, in such sort that never after his memory was lost in those
parts, and for long time after they had enough to do to communicate thereof,
whereas this History does leave them for to tell you what happened unto the
Knight of the Sun.

How the Knight of the Sun came unto a castle, whereas he did deliver a
Gentlewoman, and recovered two Pages, whom he carried with him. Ca. 10.
AFter that the high and mighty Alphoebo was departed from the Queen Augusta,
(...) would not stay in any place for to rest himself, although he had great
need thereof, because if the king and his Knights should follow him, they
should not overtake him, and so he continued his iourny, pretending to pass
into Grecia, and to go see his great friend the Emperor Trebatio, and with
this pretense he travailed and passed away the rest of the night which
remained and the morning being come, he chanced into a very large and plain
field, all covered with pleasant (...) green herbs, in which he travailed a
good while, for that it was somewhat long, and toward the end thereof at the
foot^ of a small mountain, he saw a castle, which seemed unto him to be very
fair, and having great desire to repose himself and to eat some thing, he
determined to go thither And before he came to it, as far as a man might
throw a stone, he saw come forth of the castle gate, a Gentlewoman, running
and giving great shrikes, and after her followed two knights armed with their
swords drawn in their hands, threatening her that if she would not tarry, they
would kill her. In this sort they all three came running toward the place
whereas the Knight of the Sun was: and by reason that the knights were armed,
they could not overtake her, till such time as she came whereas he was. And when
the Gentlewoman saw him so mighty and so well proportioned, she lift up her
voice and said. Succor me gentle Knight, and deliver me from these traitors,
who pretend to ravish me The Gentlewoman had no sooner said these words, but
that the Knight of the Sun alyghted from his horse, and put himself before
the^ with his sword drawn in his hand, and said: what mean you gentle
Knights, that you both follow one alone Gentlewoman. They who were full of
malice and very proud, without answering one word, they assalted him, and
stroke each of them a blow at him with their swords, but hard was their hap,
for that they knew not what they did, neither did they know him, which with so
great meekness spoke unto them. He then seeing their great discourtesie, and
little respect which they had, he stroke the one of them such a blow upon the
head, that he cloue it in two pieces, and he fell down dead unto the ground,
and finding the other on his right side, he stroke at him an overthwart blow,
that he cut of his sword arm hard by the shoulder: and when he saw his
companion dead, and himself with out an arm, making very dolorous and
grievous complaints, he ran about the field, and had all his life time after to
repent himself for that wrong which he would have done unto that gentlewoman.
Who when she saw her self at liberty from those two knights, and in so short
a space, being very much amassed at the might of that Knight. She came unto him
and with weeping said, Oh good and gentle Knight, seeing that God had given you
so much bounty and strength, succor and help my father and two brotheren,
which are in that castle which you see before you, and are at the point to be
slain by certain tra^terous knights, that do pretend to kill them. And when
the knight of the Sun heard this, with a trise he went unto the Castle, and as
he entered in thereat, he heard great rushing of armor in the galleries about
the court. And going up, he saw yt it was four armed Knigh^s at the entry of
a door, who did strive to come in thereat, and in the inside, there was an
ancient man, with two well proportioned y^ng men unarmed, having but only
their swords in their hands who did defend the entry. And when the Knight of
the Sun came where as the four Knights was, the first that he met with all he
stroke him so terrible a blow, that he overthrew him dead at the feet of his
companions. Who being very much amazed at that sudden mischief, turned
themselves about to see who it should be that had done that harm. And when
they saw the Knight of the Sun all alone with his sword in his hand, they
left them with whom they had the battle at the door, and went against him,
and with great fury began to lay upon him, but this their bravery did not
endure long, for that in a short time with very few blows he gave them to
understand who he was, for that he overthrew one of them to the ground, and
the other two being very sore wounded, ran away and left him alone, till
such time as the ancient man and the two young men that were with in the door
came forth, who when they saw what the Knight of the Sun had done in so short
a space, they greatly meruailed, although they straight way knew him by the
devise he had of the Sun, for that they were present at such time as he had
battle with Aridon of the black wood: and no less musing at his ariuall
thither, they went toward him and demanded his hands to kiss them, for the
great friendship which he showed unto them. And he received them with great
courtesy and said* My friends, I pray you tell me what was the occasion that
these Knights would have slain you, and other two Knights which followed a
Gentlewoman out of this castellw^o I have also delivered from them, and she
will be here straight way. Then the ancient old man, who seemed by his
gravity to be honorable, being very joyful for that he heard his daughter
was at liberty, answered him and said as follows.

Oh worthy knight, I do verily beeleeue that thou art sent of God, to defend
and maintain the feeble and weak persons, and to chastise the proud and
arroga^t* For that I was present at such time as thou were brought unto the
city of Ratisbona, for to make battle with Aridon of the black wood, and
now at this present art come for to set me at liberty from this great outrage
which these knights would have done unto me: so that I verily believe that by
great mystery thou art sent for our aid and help, therefore (gentle Knight) thou
shall understand, that the occasion wherefore these traitorous Knights would
have slain us, was, for that the one of them many days past, did demand of
me for wife my daughter, whom you have delivered out of their power. And for
that I did know he was an evil, malicious and a traitorous knight, and a very
coward, I would never grant unto the same: neither would my daughter consent
there* unto. And for to revenge themselves thereof, this morning at such time as
the gate of the Castle was open, we being without all fear and suspection,
upon a sudden, the six Knights which you have seen, entered in, and amongst
them came the same Knights which I have told you of. And because I did
perceive their determination was to kill us, and to carry away my daughter with
violence and parforce, which certainly, and without all doubt had happened in
this order, if it had not pleased God that thou should have come hither to
give us aid and succor.

So at such time as this ancient man had made an end in saying these words,
the Gentlewoman his daughter, whom the Knight of the Sun had delivered from
the two Knights, came whereas they were. For whose coming the father and her
brethren received double joy, and the no less joyful, for that she found
them clear from the outrage which they would have done unto them. So that
neither of them did know in what sort they might gratify the Knight of the
Sun, for the great benefit which they had received at his hands, but offered
unto him all that they had. And for that he found in them so great good will,
he determined to way there certain days, to comfort and ease himself: for
that he found his body in many places bruised and ill entreated, with the
battles which he had with the Knights of the King Tiberio, and the Gyaunt and
with his Knights when he set at liberty the Queen Augusta, for although his
good armor did defend him from being wounded, yet his body could not but
receive great damage, and he tormented by the heavy weight and strength of the
blows which he received, and he felt himself vory sore therewith, in such
sort, that he had great need to be cured thereof. All which he declared unto
the lord of the castle, and unto his sons, who were very joyful, and
received great contentment at the same, as those who were very desirous to
serve and pleasure him in all that ever they could. So the knight of the Sun
remained there certain days in which time he was meruailously well cured of
his bruses, by the gentlewoman, who was cunning and expert in surgery, and
did it with a very good grace.

The Gentlewomans name was Oliuia, and her fathers name was Onorio, and his
sons names were Aurellio, and Binnano, and they all did love him very much,
and would that he should never depart from thence, from their company. But at
such time that he would needs depart, the father requested the Knight to
grant him a bowne, which was, that he should receive into service his two
sons, and carry them with him for his pages. The Knight of the Sun knowing
them to be young men of great virtue, well proportioned and courageous in what
so ever necessity should happen: he took them with him, and they did serve
him for pages. And time did serve that they did very well ser^e him, and their
Father and mother did recompense the love which they bare unto him, as shall
be told you in the second part of this History. So at this present we will
leave them departed from the Castle, to tell you of other things which
chanced in this time.

Of the great triumphs which were made in Constantinople for the coming of
the Emperor Trebatio, and how the death of the Prince Edward was bruted in
great Britain, and of all that happened. Chapter. 11.
THe great sorrow and heaviness which the Grecians received for the loss of
their Emperor Trebatio was not so much, but that the joy and pleasure was
much more which they possessed for his unlooked for return, and that was well
seen and perceived generally in all estates, the knights in ordeining and
making great Iustes and Tourneies, and other military exercises, and others in
inuenting new devises of plays, and occasions of joy and pleasure, in such
sort, that throughout all the whole Empire they practiced no other thing but
pastimes and pleasure, as well in the one sort of people as in the other, and
that which was most to be considered of, was, that this mighty Emperor, the
more for to rejoice and pleasure his own subjects, did command to be
proclaimed a solemn Just, not only in the Countries be longing unto the
Empire, but also in all the Kingdoms and Provinces thereto adjoining, giving
and granting safe conduct to all that ever would come thither, as well Pagans
as Christians, of what kind of law and sect so ever they were, and for that
these Iusts were published in many parts, and that the Emperor gave free and
safe conduct, what with some for to see what passed, and other some to prove
themselves in the iusts, there came so many knights that it was a strange
thing to beehold, and every day there was great Iusts and (...) in the mighty
City of Constantinople, whereas the worthy and valiant knights did give
testimony of their great bounty, and either of them did labor and travail for
to get honor, but they which did show themselves most gallantest and valiant in
those iusts, were Rodamarte Prince of Sardenia, son unto Alselo, who was one
of the twelve that went with the Emperor Trebatio to the Monastery of the
river and Alpino, Lord of Lemos, and Rodofeo, Prince of the Rhodes, and
Artidoro Prince of Candia, all young men and amoro^s, who for their great
knighthood did get exceeding same at these feasts and iusts. In these pastimes
there passed many days, and every day there came new and strange knights, unto
whom ye Emperor Trebatio did much honor, and did spend liberally amongst them
a great part of his terasury, and for that these feasts and pastimes did endure
very long, and that there succeeded in them many strange things, as shall be told
you in this History, let us leave them new beegun, and tell of other things
that succeeded in this ti^e, which is very needful for this present History:
for as much as the return and coming of the Emperor Trebatio was published
in all places, and that the manner of the death of prince Edward was known.
The news of all this came unto the ears of the king Oliuerio, who although
he had almost forgot the loss of the Prince, by reason of the long time
passed since it happened, yet these new news of his death was so dolorous, that
it did renew within his thought the great love which he bare unto him, as unto
his son, that in a small time they thought verily he would die with very
sorrow, but the principal remedy that he took for his comfort, was to
determine himself to take reuengement for the Princes death upon the
Emperor, and although hi^ power was not so great as the power of the Emperor,
ye^ he thought that the king Tiberio to fulfill the great oblygation in the
which he was bound unto him, would giu^ him aid and succor: and again the
Prince Don Silueri^ would likewise succor him with all his power, which wa^
very great, giving him for spouse his daughter the Prince Oliuia, according as
he had determined. And besides this, the king of Spain who was his very
friend, would succor him all that he could, and here with he might very well
revenge himself upon the Emperor, and destroy all his Empire. All this the
king determined in his thought, and the great passion and grief which he had
for the death of his son, would not suffer any other thought to enter in his
breast, and with this determination he sent messengers unto the king Tiberio to
give him to understand how he was determined to he revenged for the death of
his son, and desired him of al friendship to aid him in his determination,
knowing how much he was bound thereto, for that he was slain in his service.
And touching all his determination he did write him a letter at large, of the
which he had an answer again to his desire, for that ye king Tiberio
acknowledging how much he was bound unto him, could do nothing to the
contrary but offer himself in all yt he might to help him, although he wished
for his part that all were excused, for it seemed unto him that if the Emperor
Trebatio slew the prince Edward, it was with his spear in his hand, and in
battle one with the other, like knights, and therefore he should not be blamed
in such sort, to take such reuengement against him, and although he had all
this within his thought, and was well content to have ye Emperor for his son
in law, yet he would not give any body to understand thereof, for that he was a
king which always had a great respect in matters of estimation and honor,
which was the occasion that the king Oliuerio as aforesaid, had of him a very
good answer, and to his contentment. Likewise he wrote to the king of Spain,
who also did offer unto him all he requested when he had need thereof. In
the mean time that all this passed, ye king Oliuerio travailed with the
Princess Oliuia his daughter, that she should think well to receive for her
spouse the Prince Don Siluerio, laying before her his great valor, and the
necessity he had of him: so considering this matter many times the king did
importunate her, sometimes with requests, and other times with threatenings,
in such sort that this fair. Princess was in the greatest perplexity that
ever Lady or Gentlewoman could be, and every moment she desired death,
whereby she might be clee^e from his continual requests, and which she had
determined to give her self, when she did see that there was no other
remedy. Likewise it was known in England, that Rosicleer the young knight,
who had left so great fame in all that country, was son unto the Emperor
Trebatio and the Empress Briana, which news did greatly content all people.
And when the Princess Oliuia understood the whole mystery, one way her joy
surmounted, in seeing that he whom she loved more then her own self, was
son unto so mighty an Emperor, and that there was not between them the
kindred which she thought had been, and another way she did greatly repent
her self of that which she had done against him, and the more was her grief
when she called to remembrance all that which had passed, insomuch that she
did nothing else but weep at all times when she was alone. Now after the king
her father had received an answer from the King Tiberio, and from the King of
Spain, talking with Don Siluerio, he gave him to understand his determined
purpose, and a new he di^ offer unto him his daughter, the Lady Oliuia for his
spouse, saying that first before he did perform the same, it should be great
reason that he return into his kingdom of Lusitania, and give his parents to
understand thereof, and to let them know all the war that he did determine
to beegin against the Emperor Trebatio, for that he might have his people in
a readynesse for to him give all the aid and succor that possibly he could,
for that the Prince did in^irelie love the Princess Oliuia, he desired
nothing more then to pleasure the king in all that he could, so that straight
way he did promise the King to perform all that he had commanded. So all
things being in a readiness that was necessary for his voyage, he went to
sea, and took his way toward the Kingdom of Lusitania, whom this History
does leave till time dooch serve, for to tell you of the three worthy
Princess, Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, of whom a long time
we have not spok^n of.

How the three Princes, Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, who
w^nt in the demand of Rosicleer, came into the Kingdom of Lusitania, and of
all that happened unto them there. Chap. 12.
THis History has very long forgot to speak of these three excellent
Princes, Bargandell, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, not for that their
worthy deeds of Knighthoode are not worthy to be spoken off, but only for
that we have so much to entreat of Trebatio and his children, that this
history has enough to do to declare their morthinesse, you do remember how
these three Princes all together with a very good will and one consent,
departed from the kingdom of ^ngland, to go and seek out their vory friend
Rosicleer, and after a long time that they travailed by sea, in the end they
arrived in the Empire of Trabisond, whereas they saw that fair Princess
Claridiana, who did put them in great admiration only for to be hold her
high and mighty deeds of knighthoode, and her strange demeanor, with the
excellent grace and courtesy that she used with all men, so in the end of
certain days that they there remained, they did take their leave of the
Princes, and departed out of that Country, and went again unto the Sea,
without any other determination whether to go, but only whether their
fortune would bring them. Now the History says, that in this sort they did
nauigate by Sea a long time, till it happened upon a day very early in the
morning they discovered land, which being known by the mariners, they said
that it was the Kingdom of Lusitania. And when these three Princes understood
the certantie thereof, they determined there to go a land hoping yt they
should hear some news of their friend Rosicleer, for that they were certain
whersoeuer he did beecome, his noble valiantness was such, that it would be
noised throughout all the Country. Wherefore they left the sea, and being a
land they took their Horses and followed the way which they liked best, and
travailed by it a good while, which in the end brought them unto the top of a
mighty (...), from whence they did discover somewhat a far of, a mighty great
plain, and in the most thereof was situated a fair City, hard by a rivers
side, which seemed to be very great and huge. Also they saw without the city
in the fi^lds a great army of knights and men of war, with many tents and
(...), by which these three Princes understood that the City was besiged, and
thereupon they consulted amongst themselves what was best to be done, so in the
end of many speeches they determined to go into the camp, and there to inform
themselves of the occasion of those wars, and knowing the truth they would
lean unto the part that they thought had most reason, therewith they descended
into the plain, and trau^iled by it til they came unto the army, and straight
way there came out against them more then twenty knights, to know whether they
were their friends or their enemies. Then these Knights did compass the
Princes round about, and demanded of them from whence they came, and what they
sought in those parts, and they answered that they were strange Knights, and
not known in that country, and for that they had seen their camp they came
thither as Knights that does s^rue for wages, Then those of the camp when they
heard their answer, and saw that they seemed to be Knights of estimation, as
well by their rich armor which they had, as by their good and gentle
dispositions, determined to conduct them before the king their Lord, for that
he might determine with them at his pleasure, and so they brought them before
their Lord, who was king of Balachia, which pretended to take the kingdom o^
Lufitania (for that it bordered upon him) and entered into that country with a
mighty army, and she that was Lady and governor at that time was widow
woman called Lauinia, who had a daughter whose name was Olimpa, a very fair
Damsel, and by reason that she had no husband, neither power to be compared
unto the King of Balachia, was beesiged in the same City, defending her self
within with such people as she had, in the best manner yt she might. All this
was told unto these princes in ye way as they went before the king. When they
came before the king of Balachia they found him in his tent, accompanied with
many knights and on the one side of him there was a Giant, of a marvelous huge
and big stature, and of so horrible and fierce a countenance, that it would
make one afraid to look upon him, and when the king saw those three knights,
he asked of them of whence they were, and likewise if it pleased them to serve
him in his wars. The Tartarian Zoylo who could speak the language, was
requested of the rest of his companions to answer for them, who said.

You shall understand O king of Balachia, that we are travailing knights, and
of the country of Tartaria, and do travel into the world to seek our
adventures, and although we be exercised in the wars, yet we are accustomed to
serve none in them, except first we know what our wages shall be, and it is in
this order as I will tell you, and thereof there is not to be diminished or
taken away any thing, so that we three will just with all such knights as will
come forth against us till such time as we be overthrown, and if so fall
out yt we at the first encounter be overthrown, then we three will serve
thee one whole year for nothing, and if it be our fortune to overthrow any,
the^ either of us so many knights as is over thrown by us, look how much
wages all they together have, so much must either of us have, according to the
number that he does overthrow. This is our use and custom of service in the
wars, therefore O king, look if that this our manner of service content thee,
and if not, give us lysence to depart, that we may go to some other place to
seek our adventure.

When the Tartarian Zoylo had made an end of this his speech, the king and all
that were in his Tent laughed very much at that which was spoken, not for that
they did think much in the wages which they did ask, but for that there see med
to be amongst them Knights, yt if they might come forth to the just with them,
at the first should remain and serve a whole year without any wages, and for
that they knew this for a certainty, the king did straight way grant unto all
that which the Tartarian Zoylo had demanded, and said that he was very well
content to stand unto that should happen, and the matter being by all them
agreed upon, these three Princes went out of the Camp into the plain field,
whereas they might just at their pleasure. Likewise the King went forth with
his principal Knights, such as did serve him for wages, to see what should
happen.

Now the king commanded straight way perticularly the best and most valyauntest
Knights that were in all the Camp should come forth to just with the three
Princes, who were in a readiness a horseback with their spears in their
hands, abiding the coming of those who should just with them. The first which
came forth to just with them, were three valiant Knights, of a mighty
proportion and stature, such as in all the camp could not be found the like,
and being in their places one against another, they made themselves ready unto
the just, but whosoever had seen them at that time, would have judged the
three Princes at the first encounter should have remained without any wages,
and especially the King who laughed at the accord which was made beetwixt them,
but it fell out clean contrary unto their thought, for that all six together
met in the midst of their course, and the three Knights of the Camp broke
their spears upon the Princes without moving of them in their Saddles, but
the Princes made their encounter with so great force, that they hoised them out
of their saddles, in such sort that they tumbled upon the ground, and passed
forwards so stiff and upright in their course, that they put the King and all
those that did beehold them in great admiration, but not long after there came
forth other three Knights to the just, which were also three of the best and
most esteemed amongst all the rest, and look as these Princes did serve the
first, so did they serve those three, and overthrew them to the ground, and
finally in the space of one hour they had overthrown to the number of
fifteen Knights of the most valiantest and worthiest amongst them all. Then
the King found himself half ashamed and mocked, with the bargain he had made
with them, and it seemed unto him that according unto their great valiantnes
and strength, they would have overthrown all the knights that were in the
camp, the one after the other, so that according unto the bargain, all his
treasure should not be sufficient to pay their wages. When that mighty and
monstrous Giant that was with the King saw him that he was somewhat sad and
heavy for that which the Knights had done, he commanded straight way to be
brought unto him a horse which was very great and conformable unto his
bigness, and straight way he leaped upon him, and chose one of the bigest
spears that he could find amongst all the rest, and said unto the king that
he would just with those Knights, and bad them come all three against him, and
that he hoped so to entreat them in the just, that afterward they should
neither be able to take wages nor to wear armor. The King received great
delight when he saw the Giant on horsbacke, and was very certain that his
power and strength was to perform all that which he had said, yea, if they
had been ten such knights together as they were. And when this proud and
furtous Giant was in a readiness to the just, these valtant Princes who were
very desirous to get honor, either of them did procure to prove their
adventure with him, but this mighty Tartarian with many requests unto his
companions did begin to just with this mighty Giant, and when the Giant saw
that alone knight did put himself before him, he would not move one jot from
the place whereas he was, but cried out unto the knights, that they should come
forth against him all three. But when he saw his words did little profit him,
with great fury and infernal courage he made his course against the valiant
Tartarian, who with a worthy courage, as one that was both stout and strong of
heart, broched his horse with the spurs and went forth to meet him, and in the
midst of their course they met so strongly together, yt their great spears
were broken into small shiuers and this stout Tartarian did double with his
body backwards, in such sort that his head strike di^ upon y^ Horse crouper,
and being somewhat astonished with that strong encounter, he passed forwards on
his Horse, and straight ways did settle himself again in the saddle, but the
strong and deformed Giant, Horse and all fell down unto the ground, with which
fall they made a meruaylous great noise, and he had his saddle fast betwixt his
legs. When the King Balachia saw his Giant on the earth, he was very heavy in
his heart, and commanded that no more Knights should come forth to the just,
but that the three Princes should be brought before him, at which time the
monstrous giant did arise from the ground, and drew out a great and mighty
fauchon which he had at his girdle, and went toward the Princes and said, that
they all three together should make battle with him.

The three Princes not making any reckoning of his words, on horseback as
they were, went before the King, and asked him if he were content to pay them
their bargain that was made betwixt them, if not, they would depart unto some
other place whereas they thought best. Then the King who was meruaylous angrye
and offended with them, answered and said* I will that you serve me in this my
wars, and afterward it shall be at my pleasure to pay you for your service,
and if you will grant unto this with a good will do it, if not I will make
you perforce. Then these three Princes who had no desire to tarry there, although
the King would give them all the treasure that he had, but only intended to
serve and help the Queen Lauinia, for that it seemed unto them that she had
most right, without speaking any word unto the King turned about their horses,
and took their way toward a great bridge of stone, which passed over the
river, and at the farther end thereof was the gate of the City, and upon the
said brige and wal^ of the City there were many people, and because the camp
was very nigh the city, they might well discern all that had passed with the
three Princes, and what they had done, and very much meruailed to what purpose
it was done, and could not imagine who those three valiant knights should be.

Now when the King Balachia saw that the three Princes went their way, with
great wrath and anger he began to cry out with a loud voice unto his knights
commanding them to take them perforce. At which commandment many of his
Knights did follow them with as great spend as their horses could run, but
before they could overtake them, these three Princes, were entered upon the
bridge. And when they saw so many people following the^ they drew out their
swords and turned back upon them. And wounded many of them. But by reason of
the great company that assualted them, they were put to great extremity, and
forced to retire backewards toward the city. And by reason that the bridge
was somewhat narow, it did profit them very much in that their enemies could not
assault them but all before, to whom they did very great harm. This battle
endured betwixt them more then half an hour, in which time they slew of their
enemies more then twenty Knights. And when those which were within the city
saw all that passed, they thought it best to open the gates unto those Knights,
that so valiantly and with great strength defended themselves, and determined
to retain them, on their part, to help them to make defense against their
enemies, for that they did withdraw themselves toward the City.

This determination they performed for as these three Princes did by little and
little retire toward the gates of the city, so when they came nigh them, they
that were upon the walls and battilments of the city, did shoot many
arrows, and threw stones, and other things at their enemies, with the which
they did them very great harm, and made them to retire backwards, by reason
whereof they had space for to open a (...) door of the Gates, by the which the
three Princes entered in, and the Poster^e being (...) again they of the city
received them very w^l, and gave them good intertainment, and much meruailed at
their great valor and strength, and the Princes with like courtesy did return
them thanks for that which they had done, and that in their defense they would
do all that ever was in their powers. There was amongst these people a knight
who was principal of them, and had the charge over that gate, and this Knight
carried the three Princes before the Queen Lauinia, accompanied with many
other knights and Gentlemen, and when they came before her, they gave her to
understand of all that they had seen those three knights do, and how they
came of their own good will to serve her in her wars. The Queen when she
heard that which the knight had told her, received great joy in their gentle
disposition and good proportion, receiving them very courteously, and doing them
all the honor she could, and offering her self wholly unto them, and like* did
advertise them of the small reason that the King had to besiege them. These
Princes answered her with wonted courtesy, and did offer themselves unto the
Queen so liberally that she was almost satisfied of the sauegard of her city.
Then they remained there all that day without doing any other thing, and the
King of Balachia remained in his camp^ with great anger and sorrowful
heaviness, that those three Knights were gone from him in that order, and did
swear a mighty oath that he would make them die an evil death, if he might
get them into his power. And although he had, at this present great wrath
against them, there did not pass very long time after, but that they did grieve
him much more, and made him repent himself for that he did not give them better
intertainment, when they first entered into his camp, as in this chapter
following shall be told you.

How the three Princes Bargandell, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, issued
forth with such people as were in the city, unto the camp of their enemies,
and of the mighty deed of arms that they did there. Chap. 13.
WHen the next day was come, these three princes were very desirous to go forth
of the city against their enemies, and to raise up the sege that was against
the city, and set at liberty the Queen Lauinia, from that inconueniens. They
requested to know what company of people were in the city. And m^stering them
they found that there were in all, a thousand Knights, and three thousand
footmen, all well armed, and very courageous, for to do all that which was
commanded unto them. And they were certified that in the camp of their
enemies, there might be five thousand Knights, and vi. thousand footmen. Yet
for all that it seemed unto the valiant stomakes of these Princes, that they
might go forth, with the people which they had, to give the assalt and attempt
against their enemies. So straight way they commanded that every man should
make him ready, and this being done, they left the city well provided and in
good guard: and commanded the gates of the city to be opened, and they issued
out, in very good order.

In the foreward went these three mighty and worthy Princes, and all the rest
when they saw them so mighty and well proporcioned of members, and very stout,
received great courage. Then those which were in the company without, when
they saw the people of the city came forth, they were greatly amazed, and did
verily believe that those three Knights had hartened and given them courage to
attempt the field. The King straight way commanded that all his people should
be put in order with all spee^ possible: but by reason that their enemies came
upon them unawares, before they could be in order, they were assalted of them,
and received great damage, and yet it could little have aduauntaged them, if
the three Princes had not been there, who being in the fore front, did wound,
kill and overthrow all that came before them, and put themselves so far amongst
their enemies, that their own people could not follow them, without great
travail.

So when the King saw this great destruction which the three Knights made
amongst his Knights, he pulled himself by the beard, and blasphemed against
himself, for that when he had them in his tent, he did not command that they
should be taken and put to a cruel death. Then the huge and monstrous Giant
which was there, left the King, and pressed in great have toward that place
whereas the three Princes were: and the first that he met with all was with the
Tartarian Zoylo, and when he knew him to be the same that did overthrow him in
the Just, he was very joyful thereof, and made toward him. When this aproued
and worthy Tartarian saw him coming, with a valiant and stout courage, he did
abide him: so that betwixt them there began a stout and well foughten battle.
And although the Giant was very great and monstrous, and had advantage by his
mighty members, and great strength, yet to oppose against the same, the Prince
of Tartarie, had very good armor, made by art magic, in such sort, that by
no means it could not be cut nor broken. So that he did strike at this furious
Giant so mighty and terrible blows, that many times he pierced both his armor
and flesh, that the blood ran out in diverse places. At the same time the other
two worthy Princes, Bargandell and Lyriamandro did marvelous deeds of arms,
and were all to be brewed in blood, with the great number which they had
slain: and were so feared amongst their enemies, that whersoeuer they went,
they made them way. And when their own people did see the great valiantness
and worthy deeds which they did, they received great courage, and did very
great harm and damage upon their enemies. And although this did endure for a
while, yet it could not endure no longer then the whole camp was gathered
together and put in order. And for that they were a great number more then
those of thec itie, with great violence they pressed upon them, in such sort,
that these two Princes could not choose but perforce they must retire
backewardes. And when the Tartarian Zoylo, who was in battle with the Giant
perceued that his companions did retire, he thought it not wisdom to remain
there alone amongst so many, but at that instant he left the Giant and put
himself amongst his companions, making them to retire in very good order, that
their enemies might not do them any harm. The giant when he saw himself
clear from his enemy, he was not sorry for it, but departed and made no
account of him, for that his courage was abated in meeting his match. So all
those of the city retired, until they came upon the bridge, and in good order
they entered into y^ city. And although their enemies would have entered in with
them, yet the three Princes which were the last, and those soldiers which were
upon the walls and battilments, did defend the entry so that they returned unto
the camp, where as they found the King very heavy and sad, to see the great
damage which he had receued that day of his enemies, and the great number which
he saw those three Knights to kill, who before he had in little estima^ion. On
the other side, those of the city received great joy, as well for that which
they had done, as to have on their part those three knights, with whom they
recovered more heart and courage the^ before. In the time of all this conflict
the Queen Lauinia, and hi^ daughter Olimpia, were upon the top of a tower that
was night the walls of the city, from which place they did see all that
passed. And when they saw the three Princes coming, with great joy and
pleasure, they went farther to receive them, and did them snch honor, as unto
those (next unto God) she put her whole trust and confidence in: not doubting
by them to be delivered from that great wrong done unto hi^. So there they
rested themselves, the rest of the day which remained, till the next day was
come, in the which they did all, as shall be told you in this chapter following.

How these three Princes went forth the second time into ^he camp, and were
taken prisoners by their enemies. ea 14.
THE sorrow and grief which the King of Balachia receued was very much, as
well for the slaughter and harm don (...) his people, as also for the coming
of those three knights to them of the city, by whom they had recovered such
courage: whereas before they were at a point to yield themselves. And it
seemed unto him, that according as that day they came forth upon them, so they
would do it oftener, and did imagine within himself how and by what means he
might be revenged on those three knights, and take away from his adversaries
the force and aid which they had of them. And having determined with himself
what was best to be done, he commanded to call unto him the Giant whose name
was Fulgoso, and when he came before him he said, do thus which I command
thee, choose in all the whole camp a thousand knights of the best thou can
find, and in a readiness with them, and when thou do see our enemies come
forth of the city, thou and all these knights shall have no other charge, but
to take the three knights which went from hence, and bring them prisoners
before me: for that I do see that in those three only rests the force and
strength of our enemies. The Giant who was no less wrathful, then the King,
with a very good will did promise to accomplish all that he had commanded. And
so he departed from the king, and began to choose out the knights that should
serve his turn for that attempt, and unto every one perticularly he gave his
charge what he should do. So they were all in a readiness, tarying the time,
when their enemies should come forth. And all the rest of the soldiers were
continually in very good order, very destrous to be revenged, of the harm
which they had before received. When the next morning was come, these three
Princes had great desire to finish that which they had beegunne, for that they
would follow and proserute their enterprise: wherefore they determined to go
forth of the city as they did the day before. And for the same purpose they
gathered together the best soldiers that were in all the city, and commanded
the gates to be open, and they issued out in very good order.

Now when they were passed the bridge, they set upon their enimes, whom they
found not vnprouid^d, as the day before, but in a readiness tarrying their
coming, so that beetwixt them there beegan a very stout and well fought^n
battle, and there these three princes went all together before, working
wonders, wounding* killing, and overthrowing all that ever they met, in such
sort, that they made large way whereas they went. In this sort endured the
battle more then one hour, and all things went well with them of the City,
but sodeinly came upon them the Gyaunt Fulgoso with his thousand knights, and
for that they had no other charge but to take these three Princes, they
straight ways compassed the^ about, in such sort that not one of their
company could come nigh them by a great space. Then this mighty Gyaunt beegan
the battle alone with these three knights, for that according unto his force
and strength they had mough to do with him, and in the mean time that they
were in battle with the Gyaunt, the knights of the Gyaunt did kill their
horses, and in falling unto the ground they all together charged themselves
upon them, and with the help of the Gyaunt they were not able to make any
resistance, neither was their great prowess and strength sufficient to defend
themselves, but that they must needs be taken prisoners. When they took away
their swords, and pulled of their Helmes, and carried them before the king,
who was in his Tent, very joyful when he saw them brought prisoners. And by
reason that the three princes did lack in the battle, those of the City
could not make any farther resistance against their adversaries, and therefore
they did retire in the best wise they could into the City, and when they found
missing in their company the three knights, and understood that they were
prisoners, I am not able to declare their great sorrow and grief which they
received, for that beesides the love they bare them, they hoped also by their
help to make defense against their foes, and if their absence and lack was
left amongst the common people, much more was the grief that the Queen La^ima
and her Daughter received when they heard that sor^owful news, so that it
seemed that they were past all hope of remedy, for that they had lost those
three knights, which caused them to be very heavy, and could do nothing
but weep. And now to return to them that were in the camp, the History says
that the King and all the rest were very ioy^ull, for that he had in his power
the three knights, and thought that he could not revenge himself upon them
to command them straight ways to be put to death, but would use some other
stranger reuengement, intending to keep them prisoners in such cruel
prisons, whereas they should by little and little be consumed and die, and to
give them every day torments, because their end should continue long, and
would not suffer that at once they should be slain, and therewith he
commanded the Gyaunt Fulgoso, that he should take unto him twenty knights
and carri^ them unto the castle of stone which he had taken, that was but
three miles from that place, and straight way the giant put all things in a
readiness, and bound fast the hands o^ the Princes, and so put them upon their
Horses, and with twenty Knights they took the way toward the Castle,
whereas the king had commanded to carry them. When these three Princes saw
themselves so carried, with their hands bound like unto malefactors, they were
very heavy and sad with themselves, and knew not what to do, but to have
patience at that sudden chance and mis fortune, not having any other comfort,
but to receive their death with a very good courage, in what sort so ever they
would give it them. The love of these Princes was so much the one unto the
other, and their great valor and bounty was so apparent amongst them, that
they received as great grief the one for the other, as though it had been
perticularly to each of the^, and either of them desired to dye for to save the
other two of his companions. So when they had travailed from the camp the
space of two miles, they passed by the foot of a small mountain, and when
these three Princes lift up their eyes for to beehould that Mountain, they saw
descending from the top thereof a knight of a mighty stature of his body, and
of a good disposition, very well armed and mounted upon a good Horse, who
seemed by his demeanor to be a knight of estimation, who descended the
mountain a reasonable pace, and came toward them, and for that this History
here after will declare unto you who this knight was, he does leave all at
this present, till time do serve to tell of other matters.

How the Knight of the Sun going toward the Empire of Grecia, should have
been taken by treason at a Bridge, and of all that passed therein. Chapter 15.
THE History says that the knight of the Sun remained eight days in the
Castle of Onorio, at such time as he found himself whole and sound, and felt
no grief of his great travail which he received, with the Giant and his
knights, so he took his leave of the Lord of the Castle, and of his daughter
Oliria, and carried with him his two sons Aurelio and Bynano, whom he gave
unto him for to be his Pages, and after he had a long time travailed, it
happened upon a day somewhat late toward the evening, they came unto a Bridge
which was upon the river Danubia, upon the which there was a mighty, great,
and well towred Castle, one of the most strongest that ever he saw in all his
life, and this Castle did beelong unto the king Tiberio, and it was edified
there very strong, for that it was in the uttermost parts of all Hungaria, and
was situated there for that his enemies could not enter into his Country with
any army, but only that way, by reason that the River there was very great,
and he that was Liefetenaunt and had the keeping of the Castle, was the
Troyan Earl, before the Knight of the Sun slew him, and after his death the
King did commit the charge and keeping thereof unto his Brother Florinaldus,
for that he was a knight of great estimatian, and one of the principallest of
his Court, who not forgetting the ^uill will which he had conceived against the
knight of the Sun, he determined to take him prisoner in that Castle, and
when by force he could not do it, he would do it by treason. For
understanding of a certainty that he could not pass by any other way, but
that only, as it in deed fell out, that at such time as the Knight of the Sun
should come thither, Florinaldus was within the Castle with more then twenty
knights, abiding his coming. So when the knight came thither, he ^ound the
gates of the bridge shut, which was under that mighty Castle, and he took
the ring of the gate in his hand and gave great strokes, at which noise there
appeared at a window a very fair Gentlewoman, and well apparayled, and when
she saw the Knight of the Sun, she straight ways knew him by the tokens
she had of him, and speaking unto him, she said: What is it that you would
have gentle Knight, that you knock so hard at the gates. When the Knight of
the Sun saw the Gentlewoman, saluting her very courteously he replied: That
which I would have (fair Gentlewoman) is, that you would command the gates to
be opened, that we may pass and go forwards on our journey, for that
according as it has been told me, there is no other way to pass, but by
this Bridge. I am very well content to doo^ this which thou do demand,
said the Gentlewoman, but yet first thou must do that which other Knights do
when they come to pass this way. What is that which I must do, said the
Knight of the Sun, for it may be such a thing that I shall have great
pleasure and delight to doo^ it. That which thou must do said the Gentlewoman,
is to just with a knight, and if it so fall out that he do overthrow thee
from thy horse to the ground, thou shall leave here thy name written, and then
pass forwards on thy journey, and if so ^ee that you do overthrow the
Knight, you must ^arrie here all night, and receive the honor that shall be
done unto you, and in the morning you may depart whether your pleasure is.

All this I am very well content to do, said the Knight of the Sun,
therefore command that the gates may be opened. Tarry a while said the
Gentlewoman, and therewith she withdrew her self from the window, and within
a small while after the gates were opened, and there came forth a very big
and well proportioned knight, mounted upon a good horse, and well armed,
seeming to be of a good disposition, and without speaking any word unto the
Knight of the Sun, he went and put himsel^e in the field with his spear in
his hand ready unto the just. Then the Knight of the Sun took his spear
and prepared himself, and being both in a readiness they broched their
horses with their spurs, and with great fury and force they made their
incou^ter, which was in such sort that the Knight of the Sun encountered with
the Knight of the Bridge with so great force, that he bare him over the horse
crouper, with the saddle beetwixt his legs, and he fell down to the ground,
and the Knight of the Sun passed his course forwards without receiving any
harm. Then the Knight who was thrown down arose up, and without speaking
ever a word went into the Castle. This Knight was Florinaldus, who as yet did
not acknowledge himself, but would prove his good fortune the third time with
the Knight of the Sun. Then the Gentlewoman which spoke unto him at the
window, came down unto the gate, accompanied with other two Gentlewomen, and
when she came unto the Knight of the Sun, she said.

Of a truth gentle knight, thy great bounty is such, that unto thee more then
to any other, with great reason we ought to give thee service and honor,
which in this Castle we be accustomed to do unto valiant Knights, and
seeing it is now late, and you cannot go far this night, alight from your
horse and go we up into the Castle, and rest your self, whereas we will do
you all the honor that possibly we may. The Knight of the Sun would very
feign have proceeded on his journey, and not have stayed there, but considering
his promise, and again that it was very late, he determined to accomplish
that which seemed unto him with a (...) good will the Gentlewoman had desired.
And therewith he did alight from his Horse and his Pages did the like, and it
was commanded that their Horses should be kept in good order, and the
Gentlewoman went unto the Knight of the (...), and took him by the hand and
lead him up into the castle, whereas he was served and banketted with (...),
and diverse sorts of fruits and other things, till such time as supper was made
ready, so they sat down and were served with diverse kinds of meats, in as
ample manner as could be at the table of King Tiberio. And all this while there
appeared not in the castle one knight, but Gentlewomen and householde
servant, at which the knight of the Sun was greatly amazed, and asked of
that fair Gentlewoman what was become of the knight with whom he did just.
And the Gentlewoman answered, that at such time as he is overthrown by any
knight, he never dare come in her presence again, till such time as he has
overthrown some other knight. And in talking of this and other things wherein
they most delighted, they passed the time away till it was time to go to take
their rest, then there came two Gentlewomen with two silver candlestickes, and
candles therein, whereby the Knight of the Sun perceived* that it was for his
departure to bed, and taking leave of that fair gentlewoman, he went with the
other two, who brought him unto a chamber which was very fair and richly
hanged, in the which was a rich bed, wherefore he greatly meruayled at the
honor which they did unto him So when he came into the chamber the
Gentlewomen left the Candles and departed, and his Pages did unarm their Lord,
and he went into the bed, one of the Pages who was called Bynnano was of a
very prompt wit and understanding, and very crafty in all his beings, and
he seeing the great honor which they did unto his Lord, not knowing him, and
that there was not se^ne in all the Castle a knight sturring, neither the
knight that was overthrown in the just, mistrusted some thing, which was the
occasion that he perused very well all the chamber round about whereas his
Lord should sleep, and lifting up a cloth of Tapisterie which hung upon a
wall in the same chamber, he discovered a half door beehinde it, which had
neither lock nor boult, at the which he received little pleasure, but went
unto his Lord and told him of it, saying.

My Lord, you have travailed many days in this Country of Hungaria, and by
your great valiant knighthood, you have got unto your self many friends, and
on the contrary likewise many enemies, therefore where so ever you do come in
any place, and the parties in that place not being by you known, it is
requisite to have some jealousy, and to mistrust the worst, especially always
to be well a^uised, for that with great ease by the way of treason, a coward
and weak person does take reuengement of a worthy and valiant knight, and
this considered, so much the more as a man is courageous, so much the less
ought he to trust. I have here very well considered of the great honor which
in this Castle they have done unto you, without knowing you, neither have you
done any thing for them: and again, I have not seen one knight sturring in
all this Castle, neither the knight that you did overthrow at the gate of the
Bridge in the just, at which I greatly marvel, and I do suspect some
treason, for that I have found a false door beehinde this cloth of Tapistrie,
which has neither lock nor ^olt, nor any other thing to make it fast withal,
whereby you may rest in quiet, therefore my judgment is, that you ^rme your
self again to be in a readiness whatsoever shall happen, and so armed you
may lay your self down ^gaine upon this bed and sleep, and in the mean
time I and my brother will be vigilant, and ready to awake you (...) we do
hear any sturring.

When the Page had made an end of saying these words, ^e Knight of the Sun
received great contentment to ^eare him speak so wisel^e and discreetly, and
seemed that he had great reason in that he sa^de. So taking his counsel he
arose up again and armed himself, and being armed he laid him down upon
the bed, and the two Pages likewise did say themselves down upon another bed,
which was provided for them, and leaving the candles burning in the
Candlestickes all the night, the two Pages in the mean time that the one did
sleep the other did wa^e, wathing till such time as that happened, which shall
be told you in the next Chapter following.

How Florinaldus would have taken the Knight of the Sun by treason, and how
he slew his Knights, and received Florinaldus to his mercy, and of all that
happened beesides. Chap. 16.
VEry much ought they to have in estimation and prise, the good and faithful
servants, when that jointly therewith they be of a ^harp understanding, wise,
and of a prompt wit: for besides the serving of their Lords with reverence,
duty, and discreation, they do supply many ouer-sightes which often times
men do^ fall into, and the wise advise of a good servant does come to more
effect, then of a perfect friend. And here I do digress from the judgment
of some wise men, that say a man ought to have but few servants, and those to
be the most vilest, for that with them a man shall live with more care. But my
judgment is, that rather with them they should live more viciouslie, for that
the vileness and simplicity of the servant, is unto the master a peaceable
means to live beastly, but unto him that will live virtuously and well, the
shame and discretion of a wise servant is a great warning, not to ouershoot
himself. And many times he does determine with himself that, which reason
nor the knowledge of God cannot withdrew him from his disordinate desie^s, yet
the sham^fastnesse of a wise and discreeta serua^nt does somewhat disturb him.
Well, seeing that this does bring profit for the soul, and for the honor of
man, wherefore should we not rather entertain them that be wise and able to
give good counsel, th^n those which can neither profit their master nor the^
selves. Besides all this, there is to be reapt of a discreet servant many other
good things as to be politic, touching the estate and living of his Lord and
master, as looking to his lands and goods, and respecting his honor, and by
his fidelity great rest and quietness, and many times a conversation of life,
as it happened unto this mighty and valiant Knight of whom we have spoken that
all his extreme and singular bounty had not ben sufficient to have delivered
him from the death if it had not ben by the discreation of the wise and prompt
understanding of Bynnano. And now to return unto the matter. The History
says, that Florinaldus with his twenty knights all armed were in a readiness,
so at midnight when they thought the Knight of the Sun had been in his
soundest sleep, in as secret manner as might be they went unto the false door
which was beehinde the Tapistrie, in the chamber of the Knight of the Sun, and
when they thought to have entered in thereat all together, with a great number
of Torches light before them, the two Pages heard the rushing of their armor,
and before that half of them could enter in, they had called their Lord, who
with a trice was on his feet, and when he saw these armed knights enter in at
the door, some with ha^chets of arms, and other some with their sword drawn
in their hands, with great anger and furious wrath he received them, and
drawing out his fine cutting sword, he stroke the foremost of them upon the
healme, that he cloue him down to the breast, wherewith he ^ell down dead
to the ground, and he was scarce fallen when that he stroke another with a
bie blow upon his neck, that he made his head fly from his body, and fell
against the wall on the other side. Then all the rest when they saw so sudden
a mischief following them by him, whom they thought to have found in his bed
and a sleep, their ^loud waxed cold in their bodies, and would not have
willingly have been there for all the goods in the world, and would feign have
fled back again the way they came, bu^ Florinaldus who was the hindermost of
all, and kept the door, would not let them go forth, but that they should do
their best against the Knight of the Sun. And so they returned a^ upon him,
and by reason they were many, they laid upon him like a company of smiths,
when they do beat their yro^ on the anfield. And if his armor had not ben
very good, (...) could not be but that he had been in great danger, yet by (...)
mighty courage he was without all fear, and put himself amongst them, in such
sort, that in a short space he sle^ and ^ uerthrew very sore wounded to the
ground the most par of them, and the rest which remained, returned and went
forth ^ the same door whereby they entered, in spite of Florinald^ that did
keep it, and among them that went forth, the Knigh^ of the Sun did likewise
go forth, and the first that ^e m^ withal was Florinaldus, which seemed unto
him to be ^o* of all the rest, as well by the rich armor that he wore, ^ by
keeping the rest that they should not fly, and he (...) such a blow upon his
healme, that he made him s^oup and bo^ his knee to the ground, and as the
History has told you, (...) naldus was very proud of heart, and of great
strength, and neu^ lacked courage to attempt any thing against the (...) the
Sun, and seeing himself at that time in so great extrem tie, he would prove
his fortune against him (...), stroke him so strong and mighty a blow upon
his (...) that the Knight of the Sun did feel the pain (...) of ver^
grievous, and there with he stroke Florinaldus another in (...) compence of that
which he had (...), with much more strength, that he made him feel his
great su^y, an^ nothing dismaying thereat, he pressed unto him, and (...)
tempted a brave and furious battle, for that his (...) was very good and made
by art magic, which (...) occasion at the first, although the (...) of the
Kn^ght the Sun were very strong and terrible, they (...) him (...) much
harm, but as this valiant and s^out greeks anger and fury increased more and
more, you might have seen how that the proud knight, sometimes he stouped with
his knees to the greund, and sometimes with his hands, that he had enough to
defend himself, and to arise up, so that he had no time to strike at his
adversary, but was almost out of his wits with anger, and thought unto
himself that he had all the force of the world against him, and when he saw
that his life could not long endure, but needs he must have patience unto
fortune, and that his power and strength was not sufficient to go through with
his intention, he determined to yield himself unto the mercy of him whom God
and good fortune was favorable unto, and to root out from his heart that evil
intent which he alwaie^ pretended against him, and therewith he pulled off his
Healme and put himself before him, saying.

Oh worthy and valiant Knight, the best that ever was girt with sword, here
I do acknowledge and conf^sse my great offense, and that I do deserve a
worser punishment then death, for that which I have conspired against thee, and
my evil determination has increased every day more and more fince the time
that I was overthrown by thee at the pass^ge of a bridge which I kept. Now
here I do pray and desire thee, that thou would pardon and forgive me all
that is past, and receive me into thy friendship, which I shall more esteem
of, then any thing in all the world.

When Florinaldus had said these words, and that the Knight of the Sun
did know him, all the blows that he received that night did not trouble him,
as that did penitrate into his heart, and abate his great courage and ire, for
that he did not only pardon him, with a very good will, but did also forgive
all the harm that ever he had done unto him or unto any other of his parents
or friends, for that he did acknowledge the same, and was very sorry and
repented himself, not withstanding for to prove whether that which he had said
were but dissembled because he saw himself in that great extremity, he said.
Of a truth Florinaldus I do not pretend by any means to receue thee into my
company and friendship, and less will I put any confidence or trust in thee,
till such time as thou do accom plish one thing which I will tell thee In
this I shall think my self most happy, said Florinaldus, that you would
command me to do the thing, wherein I may show the great desire that I have
of your friendship and conversation. That which I will you shall do said the
knight of the Sun, is, that out of hand you do depart hence, and take your
journey throughout as many Countries as you can, but especially through the
country of France, in the demand of a Knight which has a Flower de luce for
his devise, whose name is Clauerindo, and when you have found him do my
commendations unto him, and tell him that I do go straight unto
Constantinople, and how I do mean to tarry there till such time as I do hear
some news from him. With all this I am very well contented said Florinaldus,
and then these two did embrace one another, and from that day forwards, they
were perfect friends, as more at large shall be told you in this History.

So the Knight of the Sun with his Pages departed from this Castle toward the
Empire of Grecia, and Florinaldus in the demand of the Knight with the Flower
de Luce. And here this History does leave them till time does serve, ^
returns to tell you of the noble knight of Cupid, whereas we left him in the
Kingdom of Russia.

How the Knight of Cupid departed from the Kingdom of Russia, and of all that
happened unto him in his journey. Chap. 17.
Certain days the Knight of Cupid remained in the court of King Luziro, by
the earnest request of him and the Queen, who did honor and love him, and had
him in prise above all the Knights of the world, in such sort that they would
he should have remained with them in their company always, and never depart
from thence, but for that he could never be in quiet, neither take pleasure or
comfort in the honor, which they did unto him, after that he had heard the
news of the Princess Oliuia, certain days passed he took his leave of the
king and Queen, who did offer unto him very largely at all times whenever he
should have any need of them or of their estate. And being departed from the
Court, he determined with himself what was best he should do, and thought
that it should be good to pass into Grecia, and there to know his father the
mighty Emperor Trebatio, and to give him to understand that the mighty and
valiant Knight of the Sun was his son, and likewise his brother, whom he had
a very great desire to see, calling to remembrance that which he did for him in
the Island of Candramarte, and received great joy and contentment in himself to
have such a valiant and worthy knight unto his brother, and to be sons unto
so noble a father, and also the great remedy that was had for the sorrowful
loss of the Princess Briana his mother. But as he did delight himself in
these thoughts, straight way there came unto his remembrance, that which the
wise Artidon had told him of the Princess Oliuia which caused unto him so
great a sorrow and grief that all his pleasure and great contentment was
forgotten, and it made him to abhor his own lif^ and all ye world, and
thought within himself to go where all they should never after hear news of
him. For that he could not persuade with himself, thinking it a thing
impossible for him to live in the world, neither to receive any comfort
amongst his parents and friends. When that he should understand how that the
Princess Oliuia was in the power of any other Knight, thus he travailed in a
great confusion, and could not determine with himself what was best for him to
do, and being troubled in his mind he passed the Kingdom of Russia, and
travailed other three days in another kingdom adjoining thereunto, and by
reason that his mind was always occupied with these profound and contrary
thoughts, all his travail for the most part was out of the high ways, and
many times he was benighted in the fields, and would pass a whole day without
eating any thing. So it happened one day very early in the morning, having lost
his way, he found himself amongst a great number of mountains, and was so far
ingulfed amongst them that he could not find the way to come out, neither did
he know where he was, till the most part of the day was past, and then he
discovered a mountain which was higher then all the rest, and determined to
go up to the top of the same, to see if he could from thence discover any way
or town whether he might resort. Then he went up unto the top of that
mountain although it was with great travail, and being at the top he was
there a good while, and looked round about him toward all parts, and did
discover a mighty Country, and very plain, and that place whereas he was, was
the craggedst part of all that country. Also he discovered a narow way, for to
descend from those mountains into the plain, where he saw a mighty broad and
used way which passed along by the foot of that mountain, and as he would
have descended toward that place, he saw some what a far of coming toward
him a company of knights, whose armor glistered very much, and among them he
saw one that was more higher then all the rest from the breast upwards, and he
seemed unto him, although it was a far off to be a Giant, and being very
desirous to know who they should be, he stood still, till such time as they
drew nigher, and then he saw that in the midst of that ambush of knights there
came other three Knights on horseback with their helmes off, and their hands
bound behind them, whom he did well perceive to be carried prisoners against
their wills.

These were the three Princes Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo,
which were carried prisoners in the power of the giant, at the commandment of
the King Balachia, and the Knight which they saw come down from the mountain
toward them, as the History has told you be fore, was the knight of Cupid,
who seeing the^ to bring those knights prisoners, and very desirous to know who
and what it should be, did descend down the mountain toward the high way
whereas they should pass, and when he drew nigh unto them, he straight ways
knew them to be the three Princes his very great friends, and very much
meruailed to see them in that case, and upon a sudden the water ran down his
cheeks, and his heart was ready to burst with great sorrow and grief, to see
such peerless princes carried in that sort, and being straight ways desirous
to venture his life in that present danger for to perform that wherein he was
greatly bound, for the defense of his friends, he put himself into the midst
of the high way with his spear in his hand, and the great giant Fulgoso came
foremost of all the rest, mounted upon a mighty horse, and armed with very
thick and strong armor of freele, and with a spear in his hand so big, that
it seemed to be a Pine tree, and the beauer of his healme up, that a far off
one might discern his monstrous and evil favored countenance, and when the
Knight of Cupid saw that it was but labor lost to talk with that sort people,
and words spent in vain, he broched his Horse with the spurs, and with so
great fury that it seemed to be a Thunder bolt, he made his course against the
giant, who when he saw him come running against him, with so great a noise and
furious a violence, one way he thought he had been some foolish Knight, and
beside himself, and to ye contrary he very much meruailed to see him coming
with so galia^t a grace and furious courage, and without any more tarrying ^e
set spurs unto his mighty Horse and went forth to meet him so fast as his
Horse could run, and in the midst of their course they met both together,
and this worthy and valiant knight of Cupid stroke the p^ant in the midst of
his body, his spear being made of the heart of a C^pres tree. and the head of
very fine tempered steel, which was given him by the king Luziro for a very
precious and excellent good one* at his departure from him, and his encounter
was so strong, that before his spear did break, the sharp and well hardened
head did pearce through the ill tempered harneis of that great giant, and ran
through his body, appearing at his back, and therewith he fell down dead to
the ground, and with the mighty fall he brake the strong staff of the spear,
and the Knight of Cupid received so great encounter of the Giant that it made
him loose his stirops, and to let loose the raines of his horse bridle, and
passed forwards without receiving any more harm, and before that he came
whereas the other Knights were, he had recovered both his stirops and the rames
of his Horse again. When the three Princes and the Knights of the Giant saw
that great and terrible encounter, they very much meruailed thereat, and
remained astonished and amazed, and thought it so wonderful that they could not
tell what to say unto it, and with great sorrow and grief for the death of
their Lord, all the knights together assaulted the knight of Cupld, and with
great shrikes and shoutes they compassed him round about, and laid upon him
with all the power and strength they could, and although they were many, yet
this stout and valiant knight did quickly abate their courage, for that at the
first three blows which he stroke at them which came foremost, he overthrew
three of them to the ground very sore wounded and almost dead, and after
besturred himself amongst the rest with so great fury that it was a wonder to
see. The three Princes who did beeholde all that passed, knew not what to say,
to see one knight of so great bounty and force, to attempt the battle
against a Gyaunt and so many Knights, and with a good will they would have
given all that ever they were worth to have been loose and at liberty for to
have helped that Knight^. But at that time there was no need of their succor,
for that in less then half an hour the son of Trebatio had overthrown to
the ground dead and ^erie sore wounded the most part of all his enemies, and
the rest that remained seeing so great slaughter, thought themselves in no
security, but turned their Horse bridi^s and fled that way which they came as
fast as their Horses could run, and never forgot the ^eare which they received
neither did they look back till such time as they came into the camp before
the king, some with their faces cut, and some their arms, they told him that
one alone knight came against them in the high way and slew the giant and all
the rest, saving they which saved themselves by flight. The King and all those
that were with them very much meruailed at that sudden misfortune, and
thought it a thing impossible that any humane creature should give such an
enterprise and go through therewith, neither to have so much hardynesse and
courage of heart. The King receiving great sorrow and grief for the death of
the giant, did out of hand command a company of knights to be armed in a
readiness, and return unto the knight of Cupide. When he saw himself clear
and at liberty from his enemies, determined to set the three Princes at
liberty, and not to make himself to be known unto them* for two causes, the
one for that he departed from them out of England, without giving them to
understand thereof, and the other, for that they should not carry any news
of him to the Court of King Oliuerio, for that the Princess Oliuia commanded
him in her Letter to depart thither, whereas she might never here any news of
him, and for these causes he would not make himself known onto ye three
Princes, but came onto them and did vnbince them, and c^t a sunder the cords
wherewith they were bound, and counterfaiting his speech and voice in the best
wise he could, he asked of them who ^hey were, and what was the occasion that
they were carri^d away in that sort. Then they who were no l^sse amazed (...)
his great bounty, then glad to see themselves at liberty, ^aue hearty
thanckes for that which he had done for them, and the Tartarian Zoylo declared
unto him of whence they were, and likewise told him of all that happened unto
him and his companions since the time that they first entered into the kingdom
of Lusitania until that hour that they delivered them. When the knight of
Cupide understood all the whole effect, he received great joy within himself,
for that he had succored his friends in so great a necessity. And being
demanded of them who he was, for that they might know him of whom they had
received so great a benefit he answered them that he was a strange knight of
that Country, and that he could not discover nor tell unto them his name, till
such time as he had finished a journey which he had taken in hand, but if they
were desirous to return and aid the queen Lauinia, he would go with them
and bear them company, and do for her all that lay in his power. When the
three Princes heard him say those words they were very glad and joyful, for
that their whole desire was to return unto the City, as well for the succor
of the Queen Lauinia and her daughter, as to be revenged on their
adversaries, as of the king of Balachia, for that they were very angry and
wrathful against him, and beeholding often and very much that knight, how he
was adorned with all bounty, they said one unto another, that in all things
he resembled Rosicleer, as well in his great valor as in the gentle
disposition of his body, and in all the rest of his behavior, and calling him
to remembrance, and how that they could not hear any news of him, the tears
ran from the eyes of either of them for the love they bare unto him. And being
asked by the knight of Cupide the occasion wherefore they should shed those
tears, they told him that they all three went in the demand of a Knight that
in all things, as well in beehauiour as in proporcyon of body was like unto
him, and how that the remembrance of him was the occasion of those tears, for
that many days a gone he departed from them, and since that time they could
never hear any news of him. At this present the Knight of Cupide received
great sorrow and grief, in seeing that those three Princes being of so great
valor went in his demand, and that occasion did so serve, that he could not
discover himself unto them. Here may you plainly perceive what the
discurtesie of the Princess Oliuia did cause, for that it caused him to
withdraw from him the* great pleasure and contentment that he should receive
in discovering himself unto his friends. So after that they had talked of
these and other like things, the three Princes took each of them a horse o?
those knights that were slain, and they four together took their way toward
the City, although by the counsel of the tartarian Zoylo they went not the
right way, suspecting that when the king of Balachia should understand of the
death of the Giant, he would send some people against the^, but their
determination was not to be seen til such time as they were come nigh unto ye
camp, and then put themselves into the City if need so required, and in this
sort although the King did send his power they should not meet with them, but
that they might much more at their pleasure come nigh the camp of their
contraries, and consulting amongst themselves what was best for them to do,
they determined to give the assault upon their enemies suddenly, and to prease
through them till such time as they might get the Bridge, and being there they
were very certain that when those of the City should see them, they would
issue forth and succor them, or at the least ways they would open the gates
that they might enter in, and look as they had determined they did put in
practice, and all these four together did enter into the Camp of their
enemies, cutting, wounding, and killing, that it was a wonder to see the great
effusion which they made amongst them, and never rested til such time as they
came unto the bridge, whereas they did defend themselves very, valia^ntly, from
them that followed them, where those of the City did see all that passed.

And when they knew that those worthy Knights were their friends, they were
very glad and rejoiced to see them, and did open unto them the gates of the
City, and very much meruailed at the other knight that come with ye three
princes, for that they saw the great slaughter which he made amongst his
enemies with his sword in his hand, and when these sour Knights saw the gates
of the City opened, they did retire by little and little upon the bridge,
until such time as their enemies did leave off following them, as well for the
mortal blows they gave them, as for the great harm they received by them
which were upon the walls of the City, so that they had time at their
pleasure to enter into the City, and when they were within they shut the
gates, and received them with great joy, and carried them before the Queen,
whose joy was so great for the return of these three Princes* that I am not
able to express it, for that her comfort and hope that she had in them was
very much, and their imprisonment was a grievous corsie unto her heart. So
there they did repose and rest themselves all that day, and all the next
following, with a great deal more joy then at any time before. The next day
being come the knight of Cupide and the three Princes commanded that all such
people as they thought could do any thing to arm themselves unto the
battle, and so in very good order they went forth into the field against
their enemies, and overcame and brake the Camp and slew the King, and the most
part of those that were with him, and the rest ran their way, so that those
of Lusitania remained with the victory, and pursued their enemies till such
time as the night did withdraw them back, and made them to retire, and it was
a thing to be wondered at, to see the great feats and deeds of arms that the
knight of Cupide did that day, for it may be said, that he alone was the
occasion of breaking up of the Camp of their enemies, and the destruction of
all the whole army of the king of Balachia, so that on the one part as w^ as
one the other, they very much meruayled of the incridyble deeds which they
saw done in that battle. No^ when the night was come, the knight of Cupide
seeing that there was no more need of his help, he determined to depart very
secretly, for that he saw by the determination of the three Princes that it
was a thing imposible to keep himself close long, but that he must be
known by them. Therefore he called a knight of the City a side, and said
unto him, that at such time as the people were gathered together and entered
into the City, he should tell the Queen and those three strange knight^, that
he was departed and gone about certain business that did importune him very
much, and that they should not by any means follow him, neither hope of his
return, for that he knew not whether he should ever return again or no,
and so he departed ont of the Camp, and with a trotting pace trauayled all
that ever he could that night, very sorrowful in his heart for that he could
not rejoice himself in the company of his very friends, who with so loving
and perfect friendship went to seek him. With these sorrowful thoughts that
night he travailed so long that he came unto the sea, and the next day in the
morning, he entered into a Ship of merchandise, which arrived at that place to
refresh themselves with fresh water, and were bound unto Alexandria. Now to
return unto the three Princes, the History says that at such time as they
had gathered their people together, and would have entered into the City, they
found wanting the knight of Cupide, and being very sorrowful for his absence
they went seeking him, and asking for him of all that they met, till such time
as they came to the knight, with whom the knight of Cupide had talked, and he
told unto them his ^mbassage and all that he had said unto him. And when the
^hree Princes understood of his departure, they were very ^orrowfull for the
same, and remembering the valiant deeds ^at they saw him do, and the great
bound in the which they ^ere bound unto him, they were very desirous to have
^owen him, and to have had him in their company, and ^ery one of them thought
in his mind that he should be ^osicleer, for that they were fully resolved
amongst them^ues that there was not a knight in all the world yt was ^le to
do for them that which he did, but only Rosicleer, but straight way they put
this thought from them, in saying that if it were Rosicleer, there was no
occasion wherefore he should keep himself from them and not be known, seeing
that he understood that they went in his demand. Thus with a great desire
which they had to know who this knight should be, all yt night they would not
enter into the city, but sent unto the queen requesting her to pardon them,
they straight way departed to go seek out the knight of Cupid, and the next
day in the morning they came unto the sea side, and unto the Port whereas he
did ship himself, and there they had news of him, by the tokens that they
gave. So from thence they departed in his demand in an other ship, that the
Queens Lauinia commanded to be given them, and here the history does leave
them travailing by sea, and returns unto the knight of Cupide who departed
and went before them.

How the knight of Cupid arrived in the kingdom of Phenicia, whereas he
delivered from the death a knight, who afterward was a very great friend of
his. Chap. 18.
THE great sorrow and grief which the worthy knight of Cupide sustained in
his heart cannot be here expressed, as well for the loving of his dear
friends in those countries, and not making himself known unto them, as for
the news which was given him to understand in the cave of the wise Artydon,
concerning the princess Oliuia, and being sore afflicted with the thoughts
they sailed six days with a prosperous wind, but the seventh day they were
taken with a mighty great an^ perilous torment, which made them loose their
way, and were constrained by the furious force thereof to take port in the
kingdom of Phenicia, whereas the merchants determin^ to go a land, and there
to rest themselves certain daye^ for that they were very weary and Sea sick,
by reason ^ the great storm the which they had past. When the knigh^ of Cupid
was a land, and saw that the country seemed but him to be very fruitful,
fresh, and pleasant, he determined with himself to see the country in the
mean time that the mariners did trim their ship, and make provision of all
that was necessary, and so he took his horse and went alone from the port,
taking the way which led him unto a mighty great City that was but six miles
from that port. And when he had travailed two miles from the port, he saw a
far of from him in the same high way where he went, a great number of Knights,
which seemed unto him that they were in battle they so beesturred themselves,
and therewith he did amend his pace to know what it should mean, and when he
came nigh unto them, he saw that it was more them twenty knights who had
compassed about one alone Knight, who was a of a very big stature, and armed
with blackarmour, who made battle with them all, and did defend himself very
stoutly and strongly, and had overthrown wounded to the ground six of them,
so that he seemed to be a valyant Knight and of good estimation. When the
Knight of Cupide had well marked him, and saw him so valiantly defend himself,
he received great contentment, and determined to succor him in that conflict,
persuading him that the truth and right was on his part, for that there was so
many against one, and without any more tarrying he set spurs to his Horse
sides, and with his Sword in his hand he put himself in the midst of them
that had compassed him about, and before that he stroke any blow he said.
Knights hold your hands and be in quiet a while, and let me understand what
is the occasion of this battle, that so many Knights are against one? All of
them did well hear and understand what he said, but the answer which they
made unto him, was, that they all stroke at him, as they which made no
reckoning of him, which was a sorrowful hour for some of them, for that when
the knight of Cupid did see their villainy, his anger did presently increase,
and he lift up his strong arm and stroke one of them upon ye healme, that ^e
cloue his head down to his shoulders, so that he fell from ^is horse dead to
the earth, and he was scarce down when the stroke another upon ye shoulder, so
that he cloue him to the breast, and besturred himself amongst them with so
great fury, that before they did perceive their loss and harm he had
overthrown half of them to the ground. When this mighty knight who first
made battle with them all, saw himself succored and aided in that time as
he thought his life to be lost, he received great joy and contentment, and
was very much amazed to see the strange courtesy of that Knight, and the
furious strokes which he gave unto his contraries, the which was such, that if
he had not seen it with his own eyes he would never have beeleeued it, and
with that new and unlooked for aid and succor, his strength and courage did
so increase, that he stroke such a blow upon the arm of one of them that was
next him, that he cut it clean a sunder, and it fell to the ground holding
his sheelde fast and he stroke another upon the head that he cloue it to the
eyes, and overthrew him from his horse to the ground, so that afterward they
could not strike any more blows, for that the rest of the Knights seeing the
great slaughter and effusion of blood which those two Knights made, thought
their lives in small security, and fled away with all the have they could,
being to the number of six or seven knights, so that these two valiant
knights were left alone, and when the knight with the black armor saw himself
clear from his contraries, he lift up his beauer and went unto the knight of
Cupide, saying.

O gentle knight and the best that ever was seen, for I believe that in all
the world is not thy like, wherewith she be able to greatifie this good turn
which you have done unto me, I cannot surely with less then to offer my life,
so that next unto God by you I have my life, and at least wayt delivered me
that I was not carried away prisoner, whi^ would have been unto me more
grievous then my dea^ Sir knight, said Rosicleer, your great valor does
deser^ far more then this, and I do account my self very w^ satisfied for
that I have done, doing it for so worthy knight as you, nevertheless I
desire you to tell me if y^ are of this Country, and what is the occasion that
you had this battle against so many knights? To whom this Knight replied:
This question which you do demannd of me does require long time to declare,
and for that these Knights belongs unto the King of this Country, whom we
have had this controversy with, and I do believe that when these that be run
away shall come before him, he will send a number more of knights after us,
therefore me thinks it shall do well that we apart our selves out of this
way, and go up toward the mountain, and there we shall be sure not to meet
with them, and riding by the way I will declare unto you the whole effect of
this that you do demand. These words which he spoke liked well the Knight of
Cupid, and therewith they departed from that place and went toward certain
mountains which were toward the right hand, then the knight with the black
armor began to make relation unto the knight of Cupid, and said.

Sir Knight, you shall understand that I am called Sacridoro, and not long
since was King of Antiochia, and as rich and prosperous as any other king could
be, but Fortune has pursued me in such sort, and showed her self so rigorous
unto me that in a very short time I have lost my Kingdom, and am left all
alone bannished from a great number of very good knights which I had
continually with me, some of them ^e dead and slain, and other some in prison,
and the occasion of all this has b^n, that the king Polidarco, lord of this
country, has a daughter, whose name is Oriselua, a very fair damsel, endurd
with many good graces and Princelike conditions, to whom I did and do at this
present bear great love, which was the occasion that I did demand her in
marriage of the king her father, who would not give her unto me, in
consideration that in times past he had certain controversies with the king my
Father, for which cause I did move wars with him, thinking by force to get that
which by ^he way of request I could not obtain.

Whereupon either of us did join and gather together the greatest army that
possible we could, so that in the end we joined in battle, whereas my cruel
fortune and destiny would, that all my camp was broken and destroyed, and I
escaped out of the field by great adventure, and by reason that I had no
people, knights* nor soldiers, for to defend my kingdom, in few days they
made a conquest of all, without leaving me either town or village, wherein I
might rest my self, yea, and although I do see my self so destroyed and
overthrown, yet the love is so great that I have unto the princess Oriselua,
that I cannot go out of this country, for that I would every day hear some
news of her, and although I have procured to go in all the secret possibie,
yet it has been given the king to understand thereof, who caused forthwith many
knights to be put in diverse places, either for to kill me or to take me
prisoner, and these knights with whom I made the battle were the kings, so
that if it had not been for your good succor I had been slain, or else carried
before the king their lord, who I do believe would straight ways have
commanded to be put to the most cruel death that could be invented, for that
in times past my father slew his father in battle, since which time he had
always this rancour and great enmity against me. This is sir knight, y^ whole
effect of that which you demanded of me, and now seeing that I have given unto
you the whole relation of my life, I do here very much desire you to tell me
your name, and of what Country you are, that I may know to whom I have
discovered my self, and to whom I shall remain in dutiful obligation all the
days of my life.

When the King Sacridoro had made an end of declaring this, the knight of Cupid
was moved unto great compassion, and iontlie therewith he had singular
affection unto him, for that he seemed to be a person of great valor and of
like desert, and for that his high bounty did deserve to b^ had in reputation
of any good Knight, and especially for that the passions of love had been the
occasion yt he was brought into that state, the which alone was sufficient to
move any to have compassion on him, for that there is ^o other grief, sorrow,
perverse fortune, nor adversity, more worthy to be pitied the^ that, he was
a great while before he could make him any answer, in which time his
adversity did grieve him very much, but in the end he spoke unto him and said.

Of a truth worthy king, this discourse which you have made unto me of your
estate, has been unto me very sorrowful and grievous, for that so terrible a
fall of fortune is sufficient to overthrow any valiant heart or stout courage,
and especially being wounded with love as you have told me, and that thing
alone is sufficient to cause me to have compassion on you, and all this being
true, and your adversity very great, yet it cannot be denied but yt your heart
must be more stouter and valiante^, if that with a good stomach you do pass
it over, and not hold it as a new thing happened unto you, but as a thing which
of long time past before it chanced was known unto you, and daily looked
for, for that the valiant courage does mittigate and weaken the hardiness of
fortune with the virtue of the spirit, and in nothing it is so quickly known
as in the greatest extremities of their adversities. Fortune may very well
overthrow a strong knight, but yet his valiant courage may be such, that the
shall have no power to get the victory of him. He is overthrown that does
think himself vanquished, and he that has all his hope void as a thing dead,
and (...) whose courage is such, that all remedies does seem unto him
dissolute. You have lost your kingdom very slightie, and by the loss of one
battle, so likewise it may fall out, that by another battle you may get it
again, for it is a common thing in wars, to overcome, and to be overcome, and
many times we do see those which one day has victory, when the day before
they lost it. Possibly worthy king, you will say, that touching this which I
have said, you have no provision, and are alone without any army, neither any
power requisite, whereby you should have any hope to recover again your
Kingdom.

To this I auns were, that I have your adversary the King Polidarco in a far
more weaker estate, and that it may so fall out that you shall ^ee equal in
the field, for that he has your kingdom by tyranny, and against all reason,
all those whom he has on his side and in his behalf (or at least ways) the
most part of them, in the end will return against him and be on your side and
behalf, for that many and infinite times it has been seen, a tiranous King
does find himself alone and without company being in the midst of all his
subjects, yea, at such time as he thinks himself to have the most company,
and to be in power the most strongest. And it may be (worthy King) that this
your sudden fall and misfortune, is the punishment of almighty GOD, given
unto you for some secret and just cause, and being by you acknowledged, he has
given you to understand thereby how and what a frail thing all humane power and
strength is, at such time as we do lack his divine favor* and if it be his
pleasure he will return you again unto your honor and high estate. Therefore
if God be so pleased you have no need to seek any inconveniences, neither to
break your head how and in what manner it shall be brought to pass, but to
strengthen and comfort your self, and to fortify your valiant courage
against all that shall happen.

This I say, for that it seems unto me that you shall do well to leave
travailing in this Country, for so much as you do it in great peril and
danger, and profit you very little, and return unto Antiochia your own
Country, there to talk and confer one with an other, and procure to gather
together your friends and most principallest s^biectes, such as you were wont
to have and to trust. For that it cannot be but there be some that do remain
alive, who with fear or else thinking yt you are not alive, or perhaps lost,
dare not discover themselves, and then when you have gathered together some of
your party, every day you shall find your self increased, and then time will
tell you what you shall do, and according unto your disposition and strength
as y^ time shall serve. I for my part do assure you, (although I have to go
another way) yet for the great sorrow and grief that I receive for this your
misfortune, I will go with you into your Country, and will not go forth one
step out of your company, till such time as I do see how all thing will pass,
in this your enterprise and proving of fortune. And in that you do ask of me
my name, and what Country man I am? Surely I am so desperate and do so much
abhor my own life, that not many days since, by chance I met with the
greatest friends that I have in the world, who travailed in my demand, and
without making my self known unto them I departed and left them, for that I
would not that they should understand that I am alive, but now seeing that you*
most valiant and worthy knight, have declared unto me, and very plainly, the
whole discourse of your travail, and the secret of your heart and estate, it
now seems unto me, that I shall have no reason to hide my self from you,
understand then that I am Rosicleer, son unto Trebatio, the Emperor of
Greece, and the ^mpresse Briana, daughter unto the King Tiberio of Hungaria, and
by my misfortune I am out of favor and cast off by a precious Princess, whom
I do love with all my heart, by whom I am constrained to travail these
strange countries, only with the name of the Knight of Cupid, for that no
news of me might come unto the ears of that cruel Princess, who with the
same condition did grant unto me my life. And heerewith the knight of Cupid
made an end of his words.

When the King Sacridoro understood who that Knight was that gave him so good
and sound counsel, and so liberally did offer unto him his company* he did
suddenly con^eiue in his heart a great love and friendship, in so ample ^
manner, that he never had the like to any other Knight, the which thing did
show it self, as in this History shall appear. So he went unto the Knight of
Cupid and said: Oh worthy and most excellent prince, now may I say that I have
no occasion to complain on Fortune, for that it has not taken from me so much
as I have this day, only in knowing of you, and seeing in you so great a
comfort, for certainly I do believe and hope, that if I have your sovereign
bounty with me, not only to get again my lost kingdom, but also to have the
kingdom in my power, of the king Polidarco my enemy: Unto thee, O merciful
God, I do give in^inite thanks, for that I acknowledge this my remedy does
proceed from thee, and from thy hands, and so I will accept it, and therefore
soueraigue prince, here I do accept and receive the great courtesy that you
offered unto me, and will p^sse into An^iochia in your company, with no less
joy and assurance, then as though I were in the midst of a mighty and strong
army. With these and other words of great courtesy betwixt them they passed on
their way, and when they were departed out of that high way they travailed
forwards by the si^es of high and mighty mountains very craggy* which were
upon the right hand, and being there, the king Sacridoro said unto the knight
of Cupid: You shall understand (worthy prince) that for to pass into
Antiochia, either we must proceed forwards this way in which we now are, by the
plain country, or else we must travail over these high mountain^s which be
here before us, and by either of them there is great peril and danger, for
if we travail this plain Country, we must of very force pass through a great
part of the Country of the king Polidarco, and considering the number o^ spies
that he has laid in wait for me, it cannot be chose^ but that I shall be
known, so that every day we shall have great and perilous battles with the
knights of the King, and again if we do pass along the tops of (...)
mountains, they say that it is not inhabited, but all (...) and that there is
on them very many terrible and furiou^ beasts, so that of long time since
there has none (...) that way for fear of them, therefore valiant knight
consider unto which of these two dangers we shall offer our selves. The knight
of Cupid did study a while upon ye same, and afterward answered and said: Of
two evils it is good always to eschew the worst, and it seems unto me that
to pass this plain through the land of the king Polidarco, is not only
perilous for the battles which we do look for with his knights, but also
it is very hurtful unto us, for you be known, whereby we shall not at ease
enter into your kingdom. Therefore it seems best unto me that we take this
way by the mountains, for although there be wild beasts, as you say, we shall
with more ease overcome them then armed men, for that God did make man Lord,
giving him power over all wild beasts, and what by strength or by policy
there is no kind of wild beast, be he never so furious, but by man he is subdued
and brought into subjection. When the knight of Cupid had uttered these words
unto the king Sacridoro, his counsel did like him very well, and therewith
they took their journey toward the top of those mountains, which were of so
great height, that all that day and the next day following they had enough to
do to get unto the* top of them, and when they were above they saw that it was
very plain, although they saw in them many great and thick woods, and full of
bushes, which made it to be more hard to pass, and for lack of travailing that
way there was no usual path, which was the occasion that their travail was
more troublesome unto them, but for that the hearts of either of them were more
harder then that country, with a valiant and s^out courage they followed their
journey till such time as there happened unto them that which shall be told you
in the next Chapter following.

Of a strange adventure which happened unto the knight of Cupid and the king
Sacridoro, travailing by the mountains of Phenicia. Chap. 19.
AS these two worthy and valiant knights travailed together upon those sharp
and fragrant mountains, the one imparted unto the other all the whole estate
of their amorous pessions, so that both in declaring as well of the one as the
other, it seemed unto them that they did not ^eele the weariness of their
journey, and in this sort they travailed two days without eating any thing,
but of such wild fruit as they found in every place whereas they went. So the
third day at such time as the Sun was about an hour high, travailing without
any care by a forest, which seemed to be a more quiet and peaceable Country
then that which they had before travailed in. Upon a sudden their horses
started, and their hair began to stand upright, and they were afraid, and
braied and snorted in such sort, that they could not make them proceed
forward, and looking about them toward every side, to see what it should be
that caused the same, and on a sudden there came forth of the most thickest of
the Forest two great savage and wild men, who in the bigness of their bodies
seemed to be giants, who were mounted upon two Lions very furious, which served
them for horses, without any bridle or other kind of thing, but they had each
of them in their hands a mighty great, heavy, and knotted club, with the
which they did govern their Lions to go what way it pleased them, and when
they had discovered the two knights, they went toward them, and when they
approached them, the fear was so great that their horses received, that all the
policy and strength which the knights could use, was not sufficient to make
them go toward the savage men. So before they could have leisure to alight
from their horses, these savages were come unto the^, upon their tamed Lions,
and finding the knights with their backs toward them, for that their horses
did cast themselves about, they stroke them with their knottie clubbes two such
blows upon their five and steely healmes, with so great strength, that they
made them stoop forwards with their breasts upon the saddle bows, being
somewhat amazed. And before that they could come well again to themselves,
these savages stroke them other two blows that brought them out of their
remembraunces, and therewith they took them in their arms from their horses,
and carried them into the thickest of that forest, and they had not borne them
far, but they came unto a very great fountain, which seemed to be in the
manner of a cesterne, and the water was as clear as Crystal, but it was of so
great depth, that it seemed to have no bottom. When they were come thither,
these wild men did lay the two knights upon the ground without any
remembrance as they were before, and alighting from their lions, they made
them fast unto two Trees there by, and straight way they beegan to give
terrible and mighty blaringes and shrikes, such as might be heard a great
way, at which noise in a short time there was gathered together about that
Fountain more then twenty savages, such as they were, some riding upon
Wolves, and other some upon other wild beasts, some of them which came nigh
unto the knights whereas they lay, did labor and travail all that ever they
could to unarm them, and for that they were not expert in the use of armor,
they did nothing but tumble them up and down from the one side to the other,
and could not find which way to get of their armor. And in tumbling of them
in this sort, the knight of Cupid came unto himself, and he seeing in what
state he was, in spite of all those that were vnarming him he rose up from
the ground whereas he lay, and drew out his fine cutting Sword which was
given him by the Queen ^ulia, and with great fury and inflamed wrath, he
stroke the first that he found next him such a terrible blow upon the wast
that he cut him in two pieces, and overthrew him dead to the ground, and so he
served the second, and the third, and when all the rest of these wild men saw
what had passed, they were in a great fear, yet for all that they took unto
them their great knotted clubbes, and all together assaulted him, and when they
had compassed him round about on every side, they laid upon him so strongly,
that the knight of Cupide was put to great travail, for that with their strong
and heavy blows they all to bruised his flesh and bones, but seeing that he had
no other thing to deliver him from that reproach but only his sword, he so
beehaued himself therewith, beesturring him from the one side to the other,
that the effusion of blood was so great amongst those savage people, that the
clear and crystal water of that fountain was dyed red with the blood of
them, and the battle beetwixt them was very terrile and bloody, and if this
battle had endured long, this good and valiant knight had sound himself in
great peril and danger, for that there was no hum^ne creature able to suffer
the mighty blows which those savage people did strike with their clubs,
being strok so thick, as commonly a smith does strike upon his anfield, but
his valiant and stout courage was such, and his force and fury, that in a
small time he made such destruction amongst them, that of more then twenty
which were there of them, there remained alive but three, who ran away with all
the have they might, and put themselves into the thickest of the Forest, and
all the rest lay along upon the ground, some their arms cut off, and some
their heads cloven in pieces, and some their shoulders cloven to their breasts,
and other some cut clean a sunder in the midst, that whosoever had seen so
great ^estruction amongst such barbaro^s people and furious savages as they
were, would certainly beeleeue that there had been no humane power and
strength able to have done it, and when this battle was finished, this
worthy knight remained so weary and bruised of his body, that he could not
stand upon his feet, and being very dry, he went unto the Fountain, and
pulled of his helm, and whereas the water was most cleerest and troubled with
the blood, the same for to drink, and drinking thereof, he had not well
staunched his great thirst when he f^ldowne unto the ground without any
feeling or remembrance.

And at the same time that he was drincking, the good King Sacridoro was come
to himself, and when he saw that great slaughter that was upon the ground,
and the knight of Cupid a foot a drinking, he remained as one amazed and
beeside himself, and could neither arise up nor speak one word, seeing that,
which seemed unto him to be a thing the most straungest and wonderful that
ever was seen or could be imagined, and at that time that the knight of
Cupide did fall down to the ground in a sound, at the same instant there came
forth of the profound depth of that Fountain a Monster of the Sea, very great,
and of body very horrible and wonderful to beehould, who had the face of a
maid, with her hair hanging down half her body, so soon as she was out
of the fountain she went unto the knight of Cupide, who lay along upon the
ground, and took him in her arms, and returned unto the fountain and dyued
down to the bottom thereof with the Knight, in such sort that they could not
be seen, neither was there any sign of them. When this good king Sacridoro
saw his very friend so conuaied into the water and carried away by that
Monster, whether as be could not imagine to the contrary, but even to be
made her food, I cannot here declare the great grief and anguish that he
felt in his heart, in such sort, that if hi^ death at that present had been
presented unto him, it could not have grieved him more, and all times when he
did remember the loss of his friend, the most worthiest Prince in his opinion
that was in all the world, and again the great remedy that he had conceived
in his heart, to have recoue^ed by his aid and help, he could not by any
m^anes suffer so great sorrow, but fell down unto the ground as one that were
gasp^ng for life, tumbling himself upon the earth, giving very grievous sighs
and groans, lamenting much his misfortune with words of great sor^ow and
lamentation, and in this sort be passed away all the rest of the day which
remained, and likewise the whole night following, till the second day was come,
in the which happened as shall be told you in this next chapter following.

How the three Princes Bargandell Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, came
unto the fountain whereas the king Sacridoro was lamenting the death of his
great friend the knight of Cupide, and how they were advertised by him who he
was, and of all that happened therein. Chap. 20.
YOu do well remember how that we left the three Princes, Bargandel,
Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, in the kingdom of Lusitania in the
demand of the Knight of Cupide. Now the History says that the three princes
had beetwixt them a great controversy which of the two should be most
valiantest and of higher bounty, either the Knight of Cupide, or their very
friend Rosicleer, and were very desirous to hear some news as well of the one
as of the other, and with this great desire they did travail till they came to
the same Port whereas the knight of Cupid had embarked himself, whereas they
heard news of him of very many the which had seen him, and therewith they put
themselves in a good ship, and committed themselves unto God, and sailing by
the sea, they were taken with the same storm and torment that we spoke of in
the Chapter before. And whether it was by the great wisdom of Artemidoro, or
by fortune, I know not, but their Ship did aruie in the Kingdom of Phenicia,
in the same Port whereas the knight of Cupide did disimbarke himself, and this
was the next day following after that they had entered in, and of the
merchaunts that were there they understood news of the Knight of Cupide, and
how that the day before he was departed into the Country, and having these
news, they straight way departed and followed him, and did ask of every one
that they met for him. So they were certified by certaiine shepherds, (as
there were very many on the skirts of those mountains) how that he and the
king Sacridoro did take their way toward the wilderness, When the three
Princes had fully certified themselves thereof, with great joy they followed him
so long, that in the end they came nigh unto the fountain of the savage
people, and before they came unto the fountain, they found the Horse of the
King Sacridoro and of the Knight of Cupide, which ran about the fields, drawing
after them their saddles and bridles, and when they saw them and knew the one
of them to be the horse of the knight of Cupide, they were greatly troubled in
their minds, and knew not what to say, but looked one upon another, and seemed
that it could not be well with their masters, seeing their Horses run in
such sort about the field, and for that they were all of a marvelous strong
and stout courage, they did offer their lives into what so ever peril or
danger should happen. Thus they went round about from one part to another
seeking these two Knights, and in the end they travailed so much that they
came unto the great and fair fountain, whereas they saw the wonderful
slaughter of the savage people, which lay along the ground, and found the
King Sacridoro stretched upon the earth, as one that had neither reason nor
understanding, but beeside himself, with the great sorrow, weeping, and
grievous lamentation which he passed that night past, and all the day before,
and when they saw him in this case, and likewise the great slaughter made upon
that wild and furious sort of people, they received great admiration, and
thought verily that the king Sacridoro had been dead, and judged that he and
the Knight of Cupide had done the same, and for to certify themselves the
^etter, they all three alighted from their Horses, and came unto the King and
pulled off his helm, and therewith they ^ooke water out of the Fountain and
threw it upon his ^ce, and for that he had received no other harm but
drounesse with watching and weeping, he quickly came unto ^mselfe, and when
he saw those Knights before him, he ^gan a new both to sigh and weep very
piteously, shed^any tears, and he said.

O sir knights, wherefore have you done unto me so much harm, as to cause me
to come again unto my remembrance, you should have suffered me to dye, that
I might not have felt any more such evil fortune, let me pray you malte an
end of this sorrowful life, for that there is no other thing that can comfort
me. Oh Trebatio, Emperor of Grecia, who shall bear unto thee this heavy
news of thy son the knight of Cupide? Who dare come before thy presence to
give thee to understand of this grievous and delorous misfortune? These and
other many such words, said this good King Sacridoro, lamenting the death of
his great friend. When these three Princes understood, that he was son unto
the Emperor Trebatio, whose great fame came unto their ears: very much amezed
and sore troubled, they did beeholde one an other, and knew not what to say
unto that which they had heard spoken. And being very desirous to know to what
end it was spoken, they came unto the King Sacridoro, and did comfort him in
the best wise they could, and desired him to tell them what was beecome of the
knight of Cupide, for that of long time they had travailed in his demand. So
when the King saw the three Princes, which as well in their armor as in their
disposition seemed unto him to be knights of great estimation. With many
tears and great sighs, he told unto them all that which had happened unto
him, and unto the knight of Cupid with the savage people, and in what sort the
monster did carry away the knight of Cupide into the deapth of that Fountain.
Also he told them that this knight was called by his other name Rosicleer,
and was son unto the Emperor Trebatio, and of the Empress Briana. When the
princes understood that the knight of Cupid was Rosicleer their very friend,
either of them received so great sorrow and heaviness, as though he had been
dead before them. And having no power to suffer so dolorous news, every one
o^ them threw himself upon the ground, and without speaking any word, either
of them did weep and be wail the death of their friend very grieuouslie.

When the king Sacridoro understood that those three Knights were friends unto
the Knight of Cupide, he received a new sorrow and grief in his heart, to see
them lament and sorrow for his death, and with this great rage and mortal
anguish he went unto the Fountain, and standing upon his feet he did
beehold the profound deepenesse of the water, and three times he was ready to
throw himself therein, and many times he retired back again, but in the end
(the wise Artemidoro says) that he said these words: Oh worthy and valyant
knight of Cupide, seeing that my cruel destiny will not permit that in life
time I cannot enjoy thy company and friendship, my death shall now follow
^hine, and one Sepulcher shall possess both thy bones and mine. And in saying
these words he slipped forwards with his feet into the fountain, all armed
as he was, and with the great weight of his armor, he sunk straight ways
unto the bottom of the water, in such sort that he was no more seen. The
wise Artemidoro does write this notable act done by this king, declaring that
the love and friendship which he had unto Rosicleer, was the occasion that he
desired to live no longer, for that he thought verily he had been dead. But
the wise Lyrgandeo says, that the King Sacridoro had some knowledge of this
meruaylous Fountain, and that he had some hope to find his friend the knight
of Cupid alive, but how so ever it was, it was a thing worthy of great
memory, and the greatest experyence of friendship that ever was seen. And
when the ^hree Princes heard the words which the King said, and ^aw him throw
himself into the Fountain, they knew not what to say, but seemed as though
they had been in a dream, ^ut yet if the danger of the loss of their souls
had not dis^urbed them, every one of them very gladly and with very ^ood will
could have found in his heart to have done so much ^s the king Sacridoro did,
and there they remained all that ^y and all the night following, and did no
other thing but ^ment. So the next day they thought it could not profit the^
remain there, and determined to return to sea, and go to the court of the
King Oliuerio, and from thence to depart unto their own countries, and so they
departed from thence, and returned the way which they came so sad and
sorrowful, that many days after they could not receive any comfort, neither
could there any pleasure enter into them. Whom this History does leave till
time does serve, for to tell you of the worthy Knight of the Sun, whom we
left travailing toward the Empire of Gercia.

Of a strange adventure which the knight of the Sun found travailing toward
the Grecian Empire, Chapter 21.
AFter that the mighty Alphoebo was departed from the bridge whereas he had
the battle with Florinaldus, and his knights, the history says that in few
days he entered into the Empire of Grecia, upon that side which is beetwixt
Dardenie and Macedonia and travailing certain days in that Country, he
always kept his right way toward Constantinople. So it happened upon a day as
he travailed by a broad and used way which went from one City to another, at
such time as the greatest force^ of the Sun was ouerpassed, he saw in the
same way coming toward him a great multitude of people, and the mo^ part of
the^ seemed to be Gentlewomen, amongst whom the seemed ^o be armed giants, and
as they came a far of, it happened to be a thing of great majesty and
highness, and the knight of the sun being very destrous to know who it shall
be, did put himself somewhat out of the way on Horseba^ as he was, and stood
still, and tarried till all that peop^ should pass by, for that all things in
that Country seem^ very strange unto him, and likewise at this time a thi^
greatly to be meruailed at, for although he could not ^iecture with him what
occasion should move him to be tro^bled, yet he f^it within himself a great
weakness, as thou^ he should have sounded* which made him to think in his ^art
that he should hear of some new and strange event, and being thus troubled
with himself, within a while after those people which he had seen pass by,
but the great wonders and merua^s which he saw there at that present, no tongue
can tell nor p^can write the secret thereof yea, such, that if Homer were
present for to make description thereof, yet for all that, the wonderful matter
contained thereof, would surmount his eloquent style* and the pleasantness of
the History, the sweet harmony of his song. To conclude, the wise Artemidoro
says, that the adventure was worthy to be at chieued of so high and worthy a
knight, and did not appertain unto any other that was baser then the son of
Trebatio, and if that sovereign Princes without all comparison of beauty and
fairness, Claridiana had not been discovered and known by the Princes in
Trabisond. Then the author might well have said, that all the beauty of the
world was joined together in this adventure, the which came in this order.

There came foremost of all twenty damselles, and every one very richly
apparailed, and mounted upon But ^ornes, all betrapped with cloth of gold,
and every one of them had on their heads a very fair and gallant bunch of
^eathers, and all these came by three and three, which was a ^raunge sight to
be seen, and after these Damsells came a ^ery great and triumphant Chariot,
the which was carri^d upon twelve wheels of very fine Iuorie, and drawn with
twelve Unicornes, as white as the Snow, and all the ^arnesse that belonged unto
them was of very fine gold, and every one of these unicorns had upon him a
dwarf, with a whippe in his hand to govern him. This Chariot ^as very long of
one hundredth foot, and fifteen foot broad, and the Chariot was covered all
over with a Tent very ^chlie wrought with gold and silk, and under that Tent
^as there made a division of chambers and closets, and in ^e fore part of ye
chariot from the tent, there was in manner ^f a tabernacle very high, and all
the fore part discovered and open. And under the same was there wrought with
gold two arkes, the one joining to the other, of so excellent and rich work,
that according to the great and sumptuous riches, there was never Emperor of
Rome in his most triumph that had the like arks made unto him, and under the
same arkes there was two chaires, all of gold and precious stones, and in one
of those chaires there sat a Damsel, that according unto the great majesty
and beauty which she had, seemed to be some celestial creature come down
from the heavens. And it is not to be believed that Helena, for whom there were
stayne so many thousands of Greeks and Troyans, was so fair as she. Thiy
Damsel was apparailed in a roabe of cloth of gold, all set full of five
Sapheres, with very fair and strange work, and she had upon her head a call
made of Emeraudes, in manner of a net, through the which her yeolow hair was
seen, that it seemed to be third of fine gold, and for that she was as
white as Snow, she seemed of so great beauty, that no humane understanding was
able to comprehend the same. Under the other arc hard by that, there sat in
the chair, a knight all armed saving his head, of a high stature and well
made, his face was very fair and of a good and gentle proportion, and his
armor was so strange and rich, that the line was never seen in the world, for
that it was made all of scales of fish, which is in the Athlantike sea, ^d as
white as milk, and as hard as any Diamond, and all the joints and lasings
thereof was garnished with very fine gold and precious stones, wrought very
strangely, and beside that, they were of much more force, then if they had
been of fine steel, (and tempered by art magic) they were so strange and
fair in show, that any king or Emperor of high estate would gladly desire to
have the like. He had also a sword at his girdle girt unto him, the hangers
and the scabbard were all of fine gold, and the pommell and ball was of a fine
Emeraude. He hadd upon his head a Hat of green Silk, all full of small
Rubies, and had a very fair brouch in it. And for that he was white and
fair of face, it did beecome him meruaylously well: he carried his arm* upon
the chair, and leaned his head on his hand lookeing downwards with his eyes
somewhat with a sad countenance, that ^ seemed ^ee had some care, and at the
feet of this knight and of the Damsel that sat by him, there sat si^e
Gentlewomen, all apa^ailed in cloth of s^uer, brodered with very strange and
rich work of gold and stones, who were crowned with crowns of gold upon their
heads like unto Queens, and had in their hands certain instruments in form
of Lutes, with the which they made very sweet music. And before this Chariot
came on foot twelve Giants of a marvelous great and huge sta^ure, all armed
with very fine and shining steel, and every one of them had a hatchet of arms
in his hand, and according unto the fierce and furious figure which they
showed, it was a wonderful and terrible sight to behold. Likewise behind this
Chariot there came other twelve Giants, in such order as the first did, but
these came all mounted upon great and mighty horses, and had in their hands
heavy clubbes, and they came riding two and two together. In this sort did
this triumphant Chariot pass by the knight of the Sun, with so great a
majesty and high estate, that it was very marvelous and strange to behold.
When the knight of the Sun had well beheld all that passed by him, and had
contemplated himself in beholding that fair Damsel which sat by the knight,
he thought verily that he had ioyed in some celestial and dinine vision. So
when the Chariot was passed by and out of sight, he remained as one blind and
astonished, even as the Sun upon a sudden should loose her light, or as if
the day should be turned to night: Even so did he remain as one half
amazed for a while, and as one that had not known what had passed, and for
that he would the more better satisfy himself of that which he had seen, as
one which still remained in a great doubt, he broched his Horse with the spurs
and rode before the chariot, and stayed himself till such time as they should
pass by him again. Now when he saw that Damsel, and had contemplated on that
strange and sovereign beauty, straight way his hard and strong heart that
never was overcome by love, was in such sort wounded, that of long time after
many and difficult remedies were sought to heal that cankering wound, and he
that no humane power was sufficient to move out of his saddle, was by the show
of that fair sight so troubled in his under standing, that his strength failed
him, in such sort, that if his Page Bynnano had not ben, who did very well
perceius his perturbation, and stayed him, otherwise as one without any
remembrance he had fallen down to the ground, but his Page Bynnano very
quickly came to his Lord the knight of the Sun, and held him fast in his arms
with all his strength he could, saying: What is this my Lord that before this
fair company you do show your self so feeble and weak: Unto which the
knight of the Sun did answer never a word, but as one amazed and astomed he
knew not what to say. In the mean time the damsells which rode before the
Cahriot on their Unicornes, did very much beehold the kinght of the Sun, and
he seemed unto them that he was the best proportioned knight that ever they had
seen, and one of these damsells who seemed to be more pitiful then all the
rest, (...) his great alteration, and how his Page did sustain him in his
arms, supposing that he had been in a sound, she let the Chariot pass
forward and came where the knight of the Sun was, and said unto his Pages:
Brethren, I pray you tell me what is the sickness of this knight, for that it
seems to me he is in a sound.

The Knight of the Sun when he saw the Damsel, of whom he might inform
himself of that which he so much destred, coming somewhat unto himself
answered her and said.

Fair Damsel there has happened unto (...) ^ sudden sickness, that I my
self do not know (...) to name, wherefore I cannot advertise you thereof, but
now seeing it has been your pleasure to have some care over me, I do most
hartelie desire you to declare unto me what they are that ride in that Chariot,
and whether they are going in such triumphant sort, for it may so fall out, in
the mean time that you do give me to understand thereof, this my sickness
will leave me, and herein I shall be much bound unto you, and if I may require
that courtesy. The damsel who received great contentment in his company said:
Of a truth sir knight, although it will be somewhat tedious to declare unto you
all this which you do demand of me, yet I will tell it you with a very good
will, for that your behavior does deserve that I accomplish this, yea, and
much more for you. The knight of the Sun did give her great thanks for her
gentle offer, and she began to tell unto him that which was his desire, saying.

You shall understand sir Knight, that in the Gran Ca^aia within the Orient all
Regions owelleth an high and mighty Lord called Alicandro, who is Emperor of
Tartaria the great, and of the Scitiha, and Lord over all the Islands Orientales
and Meridionales, who by his mighty power has brought in subjection almost
all the kings and mighty Lords of Asia, for the which he is called the
mighty Emperor king of kings and Lord of Lords, and comes of the lineage of
the divine Gods, whom we do honor and worship, for which cause all we that
by his vassals and subjects have him in more reputation then any humane
creature. This mighty Emperor when he was a young man was married unto a
damsel, who for her great bounty and beauty was had in reputation for a
divine Goddess, and being with child by the Emperor, when her time was
come, she was delivered at one birth of a son and a daughter, which be those
two that are in the Chariot under the two rich arkes, and the Damsel is called
Lindabrides, and the Knight Meridian, and as you see her without comparison
fair and beautiful so is he, neither more nor less without comparison in
arms, for that in those parts there was never seen knight of so much
strength that could compare himself with him, and it is to be supposed that
Jupiter was never so mighty and strong as he is, of whom he is reported to
descend. So when these two Princes came unto age, there was a great contention
amongst the kings and mighty Lords, subjects unto the Emperor, which of these
two should be sworn for Prince and sovereign ruler of that great estate and
empress, after the death of the emperor, for that in those countries as well
the daughter as the Baron, if she be first borne, does succeed in the
kingdom, and this controversy was not only amongst the subjects, but also
betwixt the Emperor and Empress, for that the Empress did love least the
Prince Meridian, and the Emperor did affect most the Princess Lindabrides, and
was very desirous that she might succeed him in his estate, and in the mean
time that this contention endured amongst them, the Emperor commanded to call
together all the wise men as could be found in art magic, and these he
charged that they should give their judgment, and prognosticate upon the
succession of these two Princes, and to declare which of them would best
reserve his divine lineage, and his high consecrated estate. Now all these wise
men gave their judgment, and in the end of many days the most part of them,
especially the wisest, did jointly conclude, that by the offspring of the
Princess the Tartarian Princess shoule be exalted, and the lineage of the
Emperor should be by her better reserved, for that they found how a knight in
a another Empire in Europe should marry with her, who should come to be the
most highest and puisaunt Prince in all the world, of whom should succeed
very famous knights. Other wise men there were which did prognosticate the
contrary, and said that the Princess would be the occasion that that high and
mighty estate should be destroyed and overthrown, and that her wedding should
be lamented in all Asia, much more then the wedding was that was made with
Helena, and the son of Priamus. When the Emperor and all his nobles did see
the great controversy betwixt the wise men, and well understood their
judgments and prognostications, they came to a conclusion betwixt themselves,
and did determine that the Prince Meridian and the Princess Lindabrides should
come in this sort as you have seen into this great Empire of Grecia, for that
they found that there was no other Empire in all Europe, and that they should
travail through all the kingdoms and provinces in the Empire. And if it be so
yt the princess Lindabrides did find a knight that could overcome the Prince
Meridian in battle, that he should enter into the Chariot and sit down in
the Princess chair, and that afterward he should defend her great and
excellent beauty for the space of three months, in the court of the Emperor,
and if in the mean time he found not a knght that could overcome him, that
then he should return with the Princess to the court of the Emperor
Alicandro, and there he shall be married unto her, and made heir of that great
Empire. And if it be so that the Prince Meridian do travail through all these
kingdoms and Provinces, and find never a knight that can overcome and get the
victory of him in battle, that then he should remain for prince and
successor of all the great estate of that empire, and the like preferment
should be given unto him, whosoever should overcome him that overcame the
Princess. And this we hold for certainty that the prince Meridian shall
remain with the Emperor, or else he that shall succeed him, shall be the best
knight that is to be found in all the world. And in this sort it seemed best
unto ye Emperor and all his nobles to appease the controversy, and the best
way that the truest prognostication should come to effect. So the emperor and
the empress being very well content here with, commanded that this chariot of
triumph to be made, with the majesty which you have seen, so that it is now
two months since we entered into the Empire of Grecia, and we have passed
Dalmasia and Dardania, and Missia, Thessalia, Macedonia and Archadia, and other
Provinces, in the which the Prince has had many battles. And as yet he
could never find knight, but that he overcame him, and had the victory with
great ease, but now he is very sad and heavy, as one that has some great
care, for that coming unto the court of the King of Macedonia, after he had
overcome the Prince and many other knights he was stricken with the love of the
Princess Florabindia, daughter unto the king of Macedonia, who is the fairest
damsel that ever I saw in all my life, except the Princess Lindabrides, our
Lady and mistres, and now the way we take is toward Constantinople, for that
it has been told us that there are joined together the most highest Princes and
valiantest knights of all the empire. Whereas our prince Meridian may the better
show his great bounty, for that according as he is of might and power, I do
believe the Greeks shall have enough to talk of him all the days of there
lives.

Now here have I told unto you gentle knight, all your desire, therefore I
commit you to the Gods, and I will depart, the Chariot is gone a great way
before, therefore pardon me, for I cannot tarry any longer. And in saying
these words this damsel departed upon her Unicorne, and the knight of the
Sun remained very much amazed at that so strange an adventure, and was very
glad and rejoiced within himself for that his sickness might have some
remedy, although he thought that he was not worthy of so great a benefit, yet
he had heart and stomach to give the attempt unto a thing of greater
importance, and did little esteem any knight in the whole world, and yet he
had no courage to conceive that he was worthy to come to so high an estate,
and so he remained amazed a good while, and by reason that his new sickness
did trouble him very much, he lacked understanding to direct him in what he
had to do, till within a while after he came unto himself, and broched his
Horse with his spurs, he rode forwards and said. What is this, whereupon
do I stay, for that I see it is impossible for me to live, if I left to
comfort my self with the divine beauty and sight of the Princess? And with
this he put himself before the chariot with great good will to speak unto the
Prince Meridian, and as he turned his horse for to beeholde that fair face of
the Princess, his tongue failed him, and as one boyde of reason and
understanding he stood still with his horse, without speaking any word, till
such time as the chariot was passed by and gone a great way. So when the knight
of the Sun was come again unto his remembrance, he beegan to be angry with
himself, for that he seemed to be of so small a courage, and striking his
horse once again with the spurs, he over took the triumphant Chariot, and
putting himself beefort it, he commanded the dwarfes to stay the Unicornes,
and coming as nigh as ever he could unto the Prince and the princess, with a
troubled voice he said these words.

The divine Gods be in your guard and keeping, mighty and worthy Prince of
the Scithians, by one of your Damsels I do understand the manner and occasion
of your coming hither into this Country being so far from yours, and
although I think my self unworthy of so high a recompense as is granted unto
him that shall overcome you, yet me thinks by all reason I am bound to
answer in the justice of this sovereign Princess Lyndabrides, for that
according unto her great beauty, she deserves to be Lady and Gouernesse,
not only of the Emperor of the Scythians, but of all the whole world,
certainly I had rather serve you and be at your commandment, then give
occasion of your coffeehouse, but seeing that it cannot be done by any other
menaes, I desire you yt you would take it in good part, that in consideration
thereof we may enter in the battle, and pardon this my enterprise, for that
surely it does not proceed so much of the confidence that I have of mine own
power and strength, as it does by the duty I owe unto so divine and sovereign
a Princess.

In the mean time that the Knight of the Sun was speaking these words, the
Prince Meridian did very much beehold him, and it seemed that he was the best
proportioned knight that ever he had seen, although he had the beauer down,
and receiving no less delight at his words, then at his gentle disposition,
with a great and severe countenance, he answered him, saying:

Sir Knight, I do gratify very much your courteous words, as well for them as
for your gentle disposition. And I do certainly believe, that your bounty
cannot be small. And the battle which you do demand of me, I accept for
that I come for no other thing in this sort and manner as you see. And in
saying these words, he arose from the chair whereas he sat. And straight way
two of these Gyaunts which went a foot, entered in, under the Chariot, and
brought forth there a horse, the most fairest and strongest that ever was
seen: and somewhat disforming from other horses, for that he had his body very
big, and the hinmost half was all as black as any Ieate, and the half
forwards was as white as the driven snow, his head was very little, and in the
midst of his forehead was there a little horn like unto an Unicorne: and in
his legs he had four joints, for which cause he was very light, and did
run as swift and quick as the wind, and as yet there was never Horse that
could overtake him, and some said that this Horse was ingendered of a mare and
a Unicorne, the which they affirm for certainty, as well for his form and
making, as for that they have in that Country of Scythia and Tartaria many
Unicornes, and oftentimes they are seen in the fields feeding with the Mares.
To conclude, this horse as well in his strength as in his swiftness was the
best Horse that ever was seen, and was called Cornerino, by reason of the
horn that he had in his forehead.

They brought him forth all covered with cloth of gold, and with a bush of
white feathers on his head, and all his Saddle was enameled, and brodered about
with Oriental Pearls, the styroppes were of fine gold, and his bridle and
all the other trappinges were of fine gold and silk, and for that the Horse
was very great and fair, and his furniture so rich, certainly he seemed to
be the Horse of some mighty Prince. So this worthy Prince Meridian did mount
upon his horse, and it was a thing greatly to be mernailed at, to see him on
horseback with that strange and rich armor that he brought with him, and his
mighty and big proportion and gentle disposition did meruailously beecome him,
and this worthy Knight of the Sun rejoiced very much to see him in that
order, and had great contentment to see him. But if this Prince Meridian did
seem so brave on horseback, what shall we say of that gran Alphoebo, in whom
all the proportion and gentle disposition of humane was comprehended, for unto
all them that did beehold him, he caused great admiration, and therewith he
beegan to move his Horse and to turn him in the field, and the Prince
Meridian did beehould him very well, and did straight way conceive within
himself, that it should be a Knight of great prowess, for that before he
never saw a Knight better set and well made, and he took great pleasure to
beehould him.

Likewise this beautiful and sovereign Princess was overcome by that sudden
and unlooked for sight, for in lifting up with great majesty her gray and
Christaline eyes, she saw the Knight of Sun and his goodly proportion and
gallaunt demeanor, wherewith her heart did so alter, that she bare him better
good will, and had him in more estimation then any other knight that she had
seen. So these stout and valiant Knights did put themselves in a readiness
to the battle, and what happened therein shall be told you in this Chapter
following.

Of the stout and well foughten battle betwixt the Knight of the Sun and
the Prince Meridian, and of all that happened afterward. Chapter. 22.
IT was so strange as worthy to beehelde, those two stout and valiant
warriors, the Knight of the Sun and the Prince Meridian, who were with their
Spears in their hands one against another, with so furious semblaunce, that
all those which did behold them were amazed, and seemed by their furious
demeanor that the battle betwixt them would be very rigorous and well
foughten, therewith the Knight of the Sun did cast up his eyes upon the fair
Princess Lyndabrides, and when he saw that fair and celestial face, which
seemed to be an Angel of heaven, straight way he felt all his strength and
force to fail him, and that he had not the heart that he was wont to have,
neither the courage and force wherewith he was wont to enter into battle,
and being very much amazed thereat, he lift up his eyes unto heaven and said.

Oh immortal Gods, at whose will and commandment all things are roled and
governed, do not now show your selves contrary in this battle which I do
determine to make against this Knight, and although he do descend from your
divine progeme, this heavenly Princess Lindabrides his sister does the like,
and with no less reason then he, does deserve to be Lady and gouernesse of
that mighty and consecrated estate of the Emperor Alicandro her Father. And if
it be so that herein I shall not have your favor, consent that I may have
the favor of this Princess, which if I do obtain, I will not fear all the
whole world if it be against me.

And when he had said these words, it seemed unto him his heart did rejoice
and was very much comforted. So straight way six of those Dwarfes which rode
upon the Unicornes that drew the Chariot did sound their Trumpets, the which
did make a very great and timorous noise, at the sound whereof these stout
warriors did move themselves the one against the other, and the great
swiftness and fury of that Horse Cornerino was such, that it seemed he could
not be seen in his swift course, and the ground under him, but although the
horse of the knight of the Sun was not so swift as he, yet the great have
and fury which his master used made him run with so great swiftnes, that almost
in the midst of the course they did meet together, and the encounter was so
strong, that their mighty spears were sheeuered in such sort that the
splinters slew into the air, and these stout warriors did pass ye one by the
other, and neither of them were moved in their saddles, and yet for all that
it seemed that the great violence and force of their horses in their course was
nothing abated, but with great lightness they turned them about, and these two
knights gave the assault one against another with their swords, and beegan to
strike in such furious sort, that they seemed to be all on fire, with ye great
abundance of sparkles which slew out of their armor, and throughout all the
field was heard the great noise of their terrible blows, and many knights which
trauayled in those parts came unto that place to see what it should be, and
beeholding that terrible and well foughten battle beetwixt those two knights,
did stay as half amazed thereat. This furious battle beetwixt them did
endure more then one hour, and there was no advantage known then, and for
that the armor of the Prince Meridian was the best in all ye world, and
likewise the armor of the knight of the Sun of no less strength then his,
the sharp edges of their cutting Swords had not so much force as to enter,
neither to unbuckle their armor, although they did execute their mighty
blows with all the force and strength possible, by which means they were both
in great security not to be wounded, notwithstanding for all that, the great
and mighty fury wherewith they did strike one another, did make them many
times to stagger and be amazed, and almost beside themselves and put them in
great danger, and when the Knight of the Sun did feel the great courage and
strength of the Prince Meridian, he did conjecture with himself that the Gods
were all on his side, so that it was ^ot possible to overcome him.

Likewise the Prince Meridian said unto himself, without all doubt this is
the Greek knight which the Southsayers and wise men of my father did
prognosticate should be married unto the Princess Lindabrides my sister, and
that he should descend from high estate, for it seemed him that if all the
force of these knights that ever he had battle with, were joined together, it
was not so much as that which he only in this one knight, and both in thought
and fury of their battle, they were equal. As this fair Princess
Lindabrides did beehould them, she lost the pleasant and fair color of her
face, and was greatly troubled to see her brother brought into such extremity,
for that she thought there was not any Knight in all the world that might
compare with him. At this present the worthy Prince Meridian did strike the
knight of the Sun such a blow with both his hands upon the helm, that he
took away the sight of his eyes, and the raines of his bridle fell out of his
hands, but straight way this gran Alphoebo gave him his payment, and stroke him
so terrible a blow upon his hard and Diamond Healme, that it made no less
noise then the Thunder does in the region of the air, when it Thundereth down
the Thunderbolt, and troubling his remembrance he fell forwards upon his
Saddle bow, without other moving, and his Horse Cornerino carried him round
about the field without any remembrance. This worthy Prince revived
presently, and seeing himself so far from his enemy, he set spurs to his
horse with great fury, and ran against him, and when he came nigh unto him, he
stroke him such a blow upon the healme, that the Knight of the Sun thought
verily his eyes should have been burned out of his head, with the great
abundance of sparkles of fire that flew from thence, but the Prince Meridian
did not go without his payment, for that the Knight of the Sun returned
upon him with great fury, so that the one laid upon the other very strongly,
and the battle beetwixt them did endure more then two hours, in such sort
that the Gyauntes and many other Knights which came thither at the noise of the
battle, greatly meruayled, and did wonder with themselves, how they could in
any wise endure so much travail.

Likewise the fair Princess Lyndabrides, who with great admiration did
beehold the battle, was in a strange confusion in her self, and could not
imagine what that knight should be that was so strong, and with so great
valor and prowess did maintain the battle against her Brother, and which
was of so mighty personage, and of so good proportion. In this sort did these
valiant and worthy warriors contended full two hours and a half, and there
was no advantage known of either part, but in the end the wrath of the
Knight of the Sun did so increase, that his blows seemed to be of more
strength and fury then at the beeginning, but the Prince Meridian did con^
always in one estate, and his force was at all times equal, and seeing his
adversary so strong before him, with both his hands he stroke him such a
blow upon the shoulder that he made him stoop with his body forwards upon
the saddle bow. The Knight of the Sun with a trise did raise himself up
again, and setting again in his saddle, he took his sword in both his
hands, and stroke so terrible a blow at the Prince upon his hard Healme, and
with so great strength, that if he had not embraced the Horse neck, he had
fallen down to the ground, and the blow was so heavy unto him, that he had
thought a whole Tower had fallen upon him, and when he knew and felt the great
force and strength of his enemy, he lift up his eyes to Heaven and said.

Oh sovereign Gods, save and defend me from this knight, for that according
to his great force and might, and the inuinsible power that he uses against
me, I ^aue no security of my life under this hard and strong ^rmour. And in
saying these words he raised himself up in his saddle, and stretched himself
upon his stirops, and with both his hands he stroke the knight of the Sun
such a terrible blow upon his magical (...) that he made all the teeth in his
head to chatter one against the other, and to decline his head down to his
breast, who considering himself again gratified his salutation with another
blow, so furious, that he brought him out of all remembrance, and his horse
carried him throughout all the field as though he had been dead. The Knight
of the Sun at that time did stand still and not move himself, but abode
still till such time as he should recover. The Prince as soon as he was come
again unto himself, took his Sword in both his hands, and with great fury
made toward the knight of the Sun, who seeing him coming toward him did
the like, and in the midst of their course they met together, and raising
themselves both together upon their stirrops, they stroke two such terrible and
mighty blows upon their healmes, that the Knight of the Sun overthrew the
Prince Meridian to the ground so bold of feeling that he moved neither hand
nor foot, but lay as one that had been dead. Likewise the blow which the
Prince gave unto the knight of the Sun, was with so great force and strength
that he made him bow with all his body forwards down to his horse neck, and
also he stroke his healme from his head. Wherewith he remained unarmed, and
showed to all the people his fal^e and severe countenance full of royal
majesty. And by reason that he was chafed in the battle, his color was
the more lively and amorous, and in such sort that there was no feminine heart
of so great force, that could make any resistaunce against that terrible and
sudden blow of natural beauty. So that when the Princess Lyndabrides did
see him, neither the majesty of her high estate, nor th valor of his
courageous heart was sufficient to resist, but that she must needs be taken
prisoner with his beauty and love, in such sort, that many days after passed
before they could find remedy for to minister a salve to the cruel sore of
Cupid, which her heart received at that sudden and unlooked for joy. Likewise
when he saw her brother lying a ^ng upon the ground as though he had been dead.
She there lost her fresh and lively color, and fell in a sound in the arms
of her Ladies and gentlewomen, then the knight of the Sun alighted from his
horse, and went unto the Prince and pulled his healme from his head, and saw
that all his face was swollen, and that he voided much blood at his mouth, for
which he was very sorrowful, for he thought he had been dead, the which he
would should not have happened for all the goods in the world, for that his
sister the Princess Lindabrides should conceive no displeasure against him.
And again, he had him in great estimation, for that he was a knight of such
valor and prowess, but he was quickly cleared of that sorrow, for that after
he had given him some air, he straght way by little and little came unto
himself. So when he was wholly in his perfect remembrance, and saw himself
unarmed and in the arms of his adversary, with a mighty courage he embraced
patience, and yielded himself unto that his present misfortune in being so
overcome, and with a cheerful and severe countenance he spoke unto the knight
of the Sun and said.

Ualiaunt and worthy knight, seeing that the divine Gods has permitted me by
you to be overcome, and that I have lost the victory, I do verily beeleeue
that it is a thing agreed and determined in their divine counsel, that you
must be successor in the sacred Empire of the Tartarians, and to have to wife
the Princess Lindabrides my sister, for according unto your great valor and
desert, you are that Greek knight of whom there has been so many and very
high matters prognosticated by the wise men of Tartaria, and such as are expert
in art magic. And for that you have all their favor on your side, do not
delaie, ^ut prosecute your good fortune, and go with my sister unto the Court
of the Emperoor Trebatio, whereat you must ^efend and maintain her beauty for
the space of two months, and this time being finished, you may with great
honor accompany my sister unto the Empire of Tartaria, and there at your
coming all that has been promised shall be performed without diminishing
any parcel thereof. For with a knight of great worthiness both in courage and
courtesy, the Emperor my father and all his subjects will be very well
content. When the Prince had made an end of saying these words, the knight of
the Sun did answer thus.

Oh high and sovereign Prince, the great fury of your blows, and the peril
and danger wherein I found my self in this our battle, has showed and fully
certified me of your great force and strength, and how that the divine Gods
have been favorable unto me, in defending and keeping me from the fury and
force of your mighty arm. And as touching these words which you have said
unto me, yuor princely and severe countenance do fuilie assure me that your
bounty is much more then any other humane creatures, and that your great
virtue cannot but proceed from the high progeny of the heavens. And as
touching this courtesy which you do promise me, I do think my self
unworthy to receive it, being the greatest honor that any humane heart can
have. And here I do request your highness that you would return and sit
down again in your seat, and prosecute your begun journey, and I promise you
that hereafter I will never demand any right or title that I have in this
adventure And again, for that this sovereign Princess Lindabride shall not
loose ye right of her victory, let it be divided in this manner: betwixt you
and her part that high and mighty estat^ of the Emperor Alicandro, for seeing
he is Lord over s^ many lands, there will be sufficient for both of you.

Then the Prince Meridiaan who was endued with a^ virtue and courtesy,
embracing the Knight of the Sunn^ said.

Worthy Knight, your great bounty does deser^ all that is given unto you,
and much more. And there no reason (although you do excuse you self) but that
you should enjoy that which you have got by your great noble promise. And of
all the good fortune that does happen unto the Princess Lindabrides, my
sister, I do make reckoning to have my part. And I do receive as much delight
that she does succeed in the empire of Tartaria, as though I did succeed
therein my self, and especially for that you shall be her husband, by whom it
has been prognosticated, in our estate shall be increased all goodness and
honor.

And in concluding these words, the prince Meridian did take the knight of the
Sun by the hand, and did carry him unto the fair Lindabrides, who as soon as
they came before her, arose from her chair, and did make unto them great
reverence, and they likewise did unto her their obedience, and then the Prince
Meridian laid.

Lady and sister, receive unto you this knight that here comes unto me, for
this is he whom the divine Gods have promised and ordained for you, and he that
above all knights in the world does deserve to be Lord over the great Empire
of Tartaria: before the Prince Meridian and the knight of the Sun, came unto
the princes Lindabrides, she was wounded with his love, and those words which
were spoken unto her, did open the wound more, yet for all that in her
behavior she made on outward show thereof, but with great gravity and
sobriety, she answered them and said.

My Lord and brother, I do give to the Gods great thanks, for that you have
escaped from the fury of the battle past being so cruel and rigorous, I
would not see you again in it for all the empire of the mighty Emperor our
Father, no, although I should possess the whole world it would profit me
little, when that it should return unto your damage: and this knight I receive
(not for that the gods has promi^ed him unto me) but for that he is given me
by you, and here ^ certify you, that there is not in me so much discurtesie as
to ^efuse him. When the Princess had made an end of saying ^hese words, the
knight of the Sun received so great joy, that he knew not whether it was in
heaven or earth, but kneeling down before the Princess, he asked her hands to
kiss them, which she would not consent unto, but took him by the hands and
caused him to arise, and after that there had passed betwixt them many words of
great courtesy and love, they all three together entered into the chariot under
that rich tent, and in a very fair and rich quadran, they sat down, whereas
they were served with many precious conserues and other delicates, with the
which they did comfort themselves for the great travail which they had passed,
and the exceeding pleasure which the knight of the Sun, and the Princess
Lindabrides did receive in beholding one another, to see themselves together,
was such, as they seemed to be transported into another world. Now when the
banquet was ended, the Prince Meridian and the knight of the sun walked up and
down in that quadran and the Prince desired the knight of the Sun to tell him
who he was, and of what country. And there he did declare unto him how he was
called, and as much as he knew beside of himself. At which the Prince
meruailed, thinking within himself that this knight should be borne by great
mystery, and that he was son unto some of his Gods, for that so strange and
marvelous beauty, with that sovereign and mighty force could not be
comprehended in any so amply, except he were some divine creature. After that
they had largely talked together of all his estate, the Prince Meridian
discovered unto the knight of the Sun the entire love which he bare unto the
Princess Floralidia, daughter unto the mighty king of Macedonia. And more, he
told him that he was determined to return unto the court of the king of
Macedonia, and to remain there certain days unknown: and the better to
accomplish the same, he desired him to let him have his armor and Horse, and
he would leave him his, with the which he might likewise go unto the court of
the Emperor Trebatio, and be there in those triumphs unknown for the space of
two months, which he must accomplish in defending the beauty of the princess
Lindabrides my sister. And before that time were accomplished, if it pleased
God to send him health he would come thither, and that all three together they
would return unto the gran Tartaria. Then the knight of the Sun agreed that
all should be done as he had devised, saying that any thing which unto him
seemed good should please him, and that he should receive great delight thereby.
With this determination they passed away all the rest of ye day that remained,
until it was time to go to supper. And there within the Chariot they supped
all three together with so great majesty, as though they had been in the court
of the Emperor Alicandro.

How the Prince Meridian did leave the Chariot of the princes Lindabrides his
sister, and how he went with the armor and horse of the Knight of the Sun,
unto the Court of the King of Macedonia. Chapter. 23.
WHen the night was come the prince Meridian, talked with his sister, and told
her that he was determined to go unto the court of the king of Macedonia in
secret wise, and not to be known, and the better for to accomplish the same,
he would arm himself with the armor of the knight of the Sun, and promised
her that before the two months were finished, that he would meet her again at
Constantinople, and then all they three would return unto ye gran Tartaria.
And although the princess did show her self to be very sorrowful for the
same, yet in the end she yielded unto all that he pleased to command. So
straight way he armed himself with the armor of the knight of the sun, which
did fit him very well, for that they were almost both of one stature. Likewise
he took unto him his sword and his horse, and took his leave of the knight of
the Sun and of the Princess Lindabrides his sister, and with only two Pages
he entered the way which lead him unto the city of Macedonia, and for that it
was then time to rest, this fatre Princess did take her leave of the knight of
the sun, and being accompanied with all her Damsels, she entered into a closet
which was appointed for her self, in which she lay, and the Damsells that had
the crowns of gold upon their heads, which were all Queens and great
gentlewomen, and all the other damsells did lie in another chamber
nigh^adioyning unto that of the Princess. And all those giants had the guard
and keeping of them in this order following. Six of them without round about
the chariot, and other six within at the chamber door of the Princess and all
her Damsells, and the other twelve giants did sl^pe till it was midnight, at
which time they did arise and then the other twelve slept till it was morning,
so that they did watch equally and in order. Likewise at that present they
carried the knight of the Sun unto the prince Meridians chamber, which was a
good way from the chamber of the Princess, where he was served with two
damsells, till such time as he was unready and laid into a very rich bed,
whereas he passed all that night with so profound thoughts, that he could not
sleep one whit, for that there was represented in his heart that Angelical
force of the fair Princess Lindabrides, which made him as one astonished and
amazed, with contemplating therein, many times he did talk unto himself, and
did arise out of his bed, imagining whether it should be a dream or some other
fantasy which had entered into his thought, and he had such great desire to
have the day come, that he might return and comfort himself with the
Angelical vision, that he thought every hour to be a whole night. But it was
not the knight of the Sun alone that was troubled in thought, but also the
princess Lindabrides tumbled and tossed in her bed, as one to whom such
amorous thoughts and passions was very rare, for she had her heart out of quiet,
and could not sleep one hour in all the night, but always had in her
remembrance her new gest which was lodged in her Chariot, and his strange and
marvelous countenance was so printed in her mind, that she did verily believe
the Gods had sent him unto her as a thing of their own choice, for that he was
in all points agreeable unto his valor and strength. In this sort did the one
and the other pass away that night, till the next day was come, and then they
did as shall be told you in this next Chapter following.

How the Knight of the Sun and the princess Lindabrides travailed toward
Constantinople, and sent messengers to the Emperor Trebatio, to give him to
understand of their coming. Chap. 24.
WHen the next day was come, the knight of the Sun did arise from his bed, and
his Pages did help to arm himself with that gallant and strong armor of the
prince Meridian, and likewise did gird about him his rich sword, and when he
was armed, it was strange to be seen how well it did become him. And when he
understood that the Princess Lindabrides was up and ready, and that she would
come forth, he went toward her chamber door, but when he should come before
her presence, his flesh trembled, as though a whole army of knights would
assalt him. And when he was entered into her chamber, he found the fair
Princess accompanied with her damsells and ready to come forth, and showing
unto him great courtesy (whom the Princess was not a little joyful to see)
she spoke unto him and said. Sir Knight, how has it ben with you all this
night in your new lodging. Uery well fair Lady, answered he, and I could well
have slept in that rich and soft bed which I had, if other occasions had not
troubled my mind and caused me to watch: the^ according unto your saying said
the princess, you have not slept well. No forsooth Lady, said the Knight, for
that cares be enemies to rest and sleep, and do bannish away all ease, and
especially when they be new conceived.

The Princess did very well understand to what intent their words were spoken,
and it did nothing grieve her to hear them rehearsed, yet because she would
not make any outward show that she understood them, she said. Unto all sorts
of men it is natural to be careful, and there is none that can live with so
great felicity in this life, but at one time or other he shall be troubled
with carrs, therefore let us go unto our seats and command that the chariot
may go forwards on our journey, for that it is time. And in saying these words
she went forth of her chamber, and the knight of the Sun did take her, by the
hand, and they went together till such time as they came unto their seats,
whereas they sat down under the arks of that triumphant chariot, and straight
ways the Damsells mounted on their Unicornes, and the giants did put
themselves in order, in the same manner as when the knight of the Sun did see
them the day before, and straight way they began to take their way toward
Constantinople. So when this Alphoebo did see himself set down by that
precious and fair Princess, he was as one in an ecstasy with the great joy
and pleasure that he received, and it seemed unto him that his joy was equal
to the celestial glory which the faithful enjoy after their departure out of
this world. And this fair Princess did as greatly rejoice to have by her him
whom she loved with all her heart, but her great majesty that she showed in
outward appearance was such, that the knight of the Sun durst not be so bold
as to make manifest unto her his love, but rather had her in estimation, as
though there had been present Juno, his principal Goddess. In this order they
travailed certain days, till such time as they came within one days journey
of Constantinople, and then the knight of the Sun said unto the Princess,
that it should be good to send some messengers unto the Emperor Trebatio, to
give him understanding of their coming, for that he was a Prince that would
very much rejoice and have great pleasure therein. Which thing seemed good unto
the Princess, and she called straight way before her four of those Gyaunts
which were on Horseback, who were Kings, and had crowns of silver upon their
heads, and did inform them what they should say, and sent them unto the
Emperor Trebatio. So these four kings went unto Constantinople, and they
entered into the great Court at such time as it was full of diverse armed
knights, for to celebrate the Feasts and triumphs which were there ordained.
And at such time as the Emperor Trebatio and the Empress Briana were at the
windows of the palace, beholding the great feasts and Iourneyes which were
there made. And when these four Giants did enter into the great Court, all
people did very well beehould them, and made them way that they might pass
whether they would. So they demanded for the Emperor, who being certified
what they were, they went unto the Palace gate and did alight from their
Horses, and went up whereas the Emperor was, and much people followed them to
know wherefore their coming was, being so sudden. And when they came before
the Emperor, one of the Giants said these words following.

Most high and mighty Emperor, you shall understand that in the Oriental
regions of Scythia the divine Gods did create a Damsel, who is endued with so
great grace and beauty, that she is had in no less estimation then a
celestial creature, who is daughter unto the mighty Emperor of the
Tartarians, King of kings, and Lord over all the Lords in the Orient. This
Damsel is called Lyndabrides, and she has a brother called Meridian, of so
great bounty and strength, that it is to be beeleeued in all the whole world
his equal is not to be found, and by reason that both these Princes were borne
together at one birth, there has grown a great controversy as well beetwixt
the Emperor Alicandro and the Empress, as amongst all his subjects, which of
these two should be sworn for Prince and successor of all those kingdoms.
And in the end of many and diverse judgments of prognostications and
deuination, it was concluded that these two Princes should come into this thy
Empire of Grecia, in such triumphaunt manner as you shall quickly see, in such
sort, that if there be any knight, that in part and defense of the Princess
Lindabrides did enter into battle with the Prince Meridian, and overcome him,
that the same knight should possess the place of the Prince, and for the space
of two months defend and maintain the beauty of this Princess in thy Court.
And if it so fall out he be not overcome by any another knight, that the^ he
shall have for spouse the fair Princess Lyndabrides, and shall be successor
with her in the great Empire of Tartaria, and he that shall overcome the
other, and make her defense for the space of two months, shall have the like.
And to the contrary, if the Prince Meridian, after that he has travailed
throughout all the kingdoms and provinces of thy Empire, and is not overcome
but does maintain still the victory, that then he should be sworn for
Prince and everlasting successor of the whole Empire. So that in this sort and
for this occasion they came unto your Empire. And after that the Prince
Meridian had trauayled through some kingdoms and overcome many Princes and
knighis, the divine gods did permit them at length to meet with a knight of so
much bounty and force, that entering into battle with the Prince he got the
victory, and did overthrow him from his horse to the ground with one blow with
his sword that he gave him: and that being done, he entered into his place,
and being ready with the Princess to come hither to this thy court, they
first determined to send us hither unto you, from them we should desire to
kiss your Imperial hands, and to request you that you would accept and
receive their coming in good part, for that their intension is for no other
thing but to serve you. This is only our coming hither, therefore your
pleasure may be to consider hereof, and to give us our answer.

The Emperor and the Empress, and all those which heard what the Giants had
said, very much meruailed at so strange an adventure, and the Emperor did not
let to thinck within himself, that possibly the knight which did overcome the
Prince Meridian should be the knight of the Sun his great friend, for whom
he looked every day, and did very much marvel at his long tarrying, whom he
loved with no less good will then if he had known him to be his son, and
was very desirous to know of the Gyaunts what signs and tokens he had, and
the devise upon his sheeld and armor, but he could not learn of the^ by any
means, for that they were willed before that they should not tell him. For the
knight of the Sun was determined to enter into the Court unknown and did
call himself the knight of the Chariot. Then the Emperor arose up from the
place whereas he sat, for to give answer unto the Gyaunts of their Embassage,
and said.

Friends, you may declare unto your Lady the Princess Lyndabrides, and unto
the knight that does come with her, that the Princess and I receive great
pleasure for their coming into this Country, and we shall deem it no small
courtesy, that they will come unto this court at what time so ever their
pleasure is, and I promise you here shall be done unto them all the service
we can, although it will not be sufficient for so high and mighty a Lady. And
here with the Giants took their leave of the Emperor and the Empress, and
returned unto the Princess, declaring unto her and the knight of the chariot
the whole answer of the Emperor, who decreede the next day to enter in
Gonstantinople. When the night was past they did the day following, that which
shall be told you in the next Chapter.

Of the entering of the knight of the Chariot and the fair Princess
Lyndabrides into Constantinople. Chapter 25.
YOu remember the great feasts and triumphs which the Emperor Trebatio
commanded to be published, not only in the Grecian Empire, but also in other
kingdoms, lands, and Provinces, adjoining there unto, and of the safe conduct
that he gave unto al knights as well Pagans as Christians, that would come unto
him. Now the History says, that when the time drew nigh that these feasts,
and triumphs should be celebrated, there were so many knights gathered together
as well strangers as naturals, yt they could not be all reciued into ye great
city, but that the Emperor was constrained to command to arm a great number
of Tents in the field, wherein were lodged very many Knights, and never in
Grecia until that day was seen so great and gallant a number of knights
together, for that the most part of all them that came unto those feasts, were
knights of estimation, and armed very richle, and the mighty Emperor heereat
received great delight, and did show unto them great liberality, in such ample
sort, that they all greatly meruailed and said, that he was the mightiest
Prince in the whole earth. So these feasts being beegun, there was one day in
the great place of Constantinople meruaylous iustings and full of armed
Knights, and all the windows and galleries were replenished with people. And
those which that day did best beehaue themselves, was Artidoro Prince of
Candia, and Alpino Lord of Scicilia, and Dardante Prince of Dalmatia, but they
which more then all these did show themselves gallant and stout, were Rodomarte
Prince of Sardenna, and Rodafeo, Lord of the Island of the Rhodes, who had
overthrown so many Knights that day, that all people did thinck verily they
would carry away the price of the just, thee which was very rich, which the
Emperor did ordain and apoint for them, who most worthiest and stoutest did
beeha^e themselves in those triumphs. The mighty Emperor Trebatio and the
Princess Briana was at a window of their great Palace, beeholding those
iustes with very great joy and contentment, to see such a number of glistring
Knights as were in that great place, and at such time as they were in the
chiefest of the iustes and most hottest, with all their force and vigor, upon
one side of the place there began amongst the people a great ^umult or
wondering, and straight way they heard a noise and sound of Trumpets, wtih so
great violence and force, that it made houses to tremble, in such sort that one
could not hear another what was spoken. So after that the Trumpets had left
sounding, they heard Music of sundry Instruments, whose melody was so
Heavenly and sweet, that all those which heard it thought they had been
ravished in their senses, and the noise of that Music was so loud, that it
might be heard throughout all the whole place. At which sudden and sweet
noise all the people turned their eyes that way, whereas they saw entering
into the great place a number of Damsells, mounted upon Unicornes, marvelous
richly apparailed, so that every one of them seemed to be a Queen, and they
entered in order, in two ranks, and each of them had in their hands an
Instrument, wherewith they made that sweet and concordant Music. Straight
after them they saw coming in the triumphaunt Chariot the fair Princess
Lyndabrides with her Damsells, and the twelve Gyaunts before them, who came
with so great a majesty and sovereignty, that it put strange admiration in
all them that did beehold it, and this fair Princess and the knight of the
Chariot were set in their Chaires, under those triumphant ^rkes, and at their
feet sat the six Queens with crowens of gold upon their heads, but when the
sovereign and fair princess was well seen and noted of all, it seemed
wonderful unto them. Likewise they saw the Knight of the Sun armed with that
fair and rich armor of the Prince Me^idian, and his helm upon his head,
because he would not be known of the Emperor, he put them in great
admirati^n. In this sort did this triumphant Chariot pass through the great
place, till such time as they came under the windows whereas the Emperor and
the Empress were, where the Dwarfes did stay the Unicorns that did draw the
chariot, and being right over against one another, by reason that the chariot
was very high, and the window wherein the Emperor stood was very low. The fair
Princess and ye knight of the Chariot did arise up from their seats, and made
reverence unto the Emperor and the Empress, who with no less courtesy did
receive them, showing great pleasure and delight for their coming. And
returning all four, they sat themselves down again into their places, where
there passed beet wixt them many words of conference, wherein was used great
reverence and c^rtesie: and heerewith they departed and passed forwards, and
the triumphant Chariot was put on the side of that great court, whereas all the
Damseuls did alight from their Unicorns, and went unto the chariot, and the
Giants did put the Unicorns in the nether part of the chariot, and likewise
their horses, the^ all the four and twenty Giants placed themselves round
about the chariot, to guard and keep the same, and put all the people in fear
at their furious countenaunces, and straight way one of them took a Letter of
parchment which had the seals of the Emperor Alicandro, and read it out
aloud, that all people might well hear it, and did declare the form of all
that adventure, and the great promise and preferment which the Emperor had
granted unto him that did defend the beauty of the Princess Lyndabrides, for
the space of two months in the court of the Emperor Trebatio. When he had
made an end of reading thereof, and that this aduen^ur was well understood,
many of those most esteemed Knights were very joyful and took great pleasure
therein, every one thinking in himself to have his part therein, and thought
long till such time as they might prove themselves with the knight of the
chariot, who tarried not long, but did give them ^ul satisfaction of their
desire, for that as soon as the letter was read* two of those Giants did bring
forth his Horse Cornerino, very richly trimmed, in such sort as he was
brought f^orth for ye Prince Meridian, at whose sight they not a little
marvel, and the knight of the Sun making great reverence unto the Princess,
descended from the chariot, and lept on horseback, and beesides his mighty
proportion, the great beauty and riches of his armor, and of the saddle and
all other trappings and necessaryes belonging to his Horse, he was a spectacle
for all the Knights that were in that place, and taking a spear in his hand,
he went and put himself in place whereas the iusts were made, with such
gallant demeanor and gentle disposition, that before they saw him strike a
blow with spear or sword, they all judged him to be of great bounty and
strength, and to be a knight of wonderful estimation and price, he was not
well setteled in his place of just with his horse Cornerino, when there came
before him a big and well proportioned knight, who amongst all the Greeks was
had, in greatest estimation, this was the stout Alpino, Lord of the Island of
Lemos, who had done that day many deeds of Knighthood, and haing both of them
their Spears in their hands, one of the Gyaunts of the Chariot did sound a
Trumpet, at which sound these two knights did beegin to move themselves one
against the other, and with the great ^wiftnesse of the Horse Cornerino, it
seemed in a moment they joined togethr. This strong A lpino, who thought to
^aue part of that precious Lady, by the great force and strength of the
encounter which he received, lost the sad^le of his Horse, and found him along
the ground, lying so ^uill entreated therewith, that he took his speech from
him ^or a great season, and the knight of the chariot passed forwards in his
course, so upright in his Saddle before, as though he had made no encounter.
The Emperor and all ^e rest that were in that assembly, were amazed to see
that ^ighty Alpino overthrown, but yet in a short time they (...) more at the
knight of the Sun, and had him in grea^r estimation, for that presently there
came against him to (...) Artidoro, Prince of Candia, and Alfonte, Lord of
Sicilia, and (...) Prince of Dalmatia, called Dardante, and the two Princes
(...) and Rodafeo, the valyantest of all the Greeks, all which he did
overthrow to the ground at the first encounter, and not one of them did once
move him in his saddle. To conclude, that day he did overthrow all knights
that came to the just against him, which were to the number of more then
fifty, as well strangers as naturals of the Empire of Grecia, and the like he
did to all them that came against him in eight days following, and in some
days he did overthrow more then an hundreath, and there was not one that did
abide him the second encounter. So that the great Chivalry and worthy deeds
of Kighthoode of the knight of the Sun, was manifest in the court of the
mighty Emperor Trebatio, and he knew not what to say, but that the Knight of
the Chariot was the best Knight in all the world, and that he had made more
strength then any humane creature, and the Emperor Trebatio, who had
continually his mind upon his friend the Knight of the Sun, was in a great
doubt, for that he could not hear any news of him, and it seemed unto him
that the Knight of the Chariot did resemble him very much, as well in
proportion, as in his great strength which he saw in him, and could not by any
means persuade with himself but he should be the same, but yet he had
great credit and was fully resolved that if it were his friend, he would not
but make himself known for the great friendship that was beet wixt them. In
the same time the precious and sovereign Princess Lyndabrides was very
ioyefull to (...) the mighty Knighthoode of her Knight, and was fully
persuaded that her Gods had created him to be the worthies^ and strongest in
all the world, and chosen him for her (...) which was the occasion that she
did love him so much, and in such sort that she could not be out of his
presence on^ moment, as one that was very certain and sure that ther^ was no
other Knight of so great bounty, nor any peruer^^ fortune, of so great force
to separate the love that was be^twixt them. But yet for that all humane things
are (...) such sort, that there is no firmness nor stabilitie in them Long
time did not pass but this souerainge Princess ha^ great fear of Fortune, as
hereafter you shall understand. And here the History does leave the court
of the mighty Emperoor Trebatio, to declare of a damsel, whom nature had
endued with beauty, above all creatures in the world, which was able to
overthrow the great pleasure of the sovereign Prince of the Scithians.

Of a strange adventure which happened unto the Princess Claridiana, being a
hunting. Chap. 26.
AFter that the three Princes, Bargandel, Liriamandro, and the Tarrarian Zoylo,
were departed from the empire of Trabisond as the History has told you, the
royal princess Claridiana, who received the order of knighthoode, used for
her exercise to go on hunting, and she took great pleasure therein, that
there was no other thing that did like her but only that, and the game wherein
she most delighted, was the wild Boar, Lions, and Bears, and other savage
beasts, that were perilous and difficult to be slain. And for that she could
not at all times find these wild and furious beasts when she would, it was the
occasion yt one day she determined to go unto the mountains of Oligas in
Galatia, six days iourny from Trabisond, whereas it was told her that there
were many wild beasts, for that the mou^tains were very high, and void of all
inhabitants, (...) upon the top of them there were great forests full of trees,
and very thick and bushie. So she asked lisence of her parents, who granted it
unto bir with a good will, as they which were desirous to pleasure her in all
things, for yt she was so ^aire and courageous. So this fair princess did
take with her ^iftie knights to bear her company, and six gentlewomen ^o wait
upon her and to serve her, beesides a great number (...) other servants and
hunts-men, and they departed from Trabisond, and in the end of eight days they
came unto the ^ountaines of Oligas, whereas she commanded to be pitched many
tents and pauilions, for to lodge her self and her people, for that her
determination was to tarry there a whole month, because the country did like
her very well, although the mountains were exceeding high, and they found in
them many plains and valleys, very pleasant and delightful for that time of
the year, for that the same was very hot, and there the Princess found great
abundance of all kind of game, where she did satisfy her whole desire, and it
was a strange thing to see her when she rode a hunting, upon a mighty great
and light horse, apparailed in green velvet, and a hat of the same, wherewith
she covered her golden hair, the which was knit up in a call of gold, and she
carried in her hand a boar spear, with a very sharp and fine steeled head,
and at her neck a horn of Iuorie, so that in her demeanor she seemed to be
some Seraphin come down from heaven. In this order she went forth to seek her
game, and when she had found any wild beast, she ran after them like a whirle
wind, and although they were very great and furious, yet she would ever quell
and kill them with her b^are spear, so that in the space of fifteen days,
that she was there, she had slain many wild boares and hears and two Lions, at
the which she received great contentment, and as it happened upon a day she did
enter into the mountains more then at three times being alone and without any
company, she came into a mighty great and broad plain, whereas she saw come
forth of the thickest of the forest, a very great heart, fair, and as while as
snow, who although he came forth without any fear, yet at such time as he saw
ye princess, he began to take his course through the plain, ^ when she saw ye
heart to be so great and fair, as one yt had great desire to overtake him, she
began to run her horse after him with great swiftness, and with such
lightness, ye it seemed she did not hurt any grass whereas her horse did
tread. So she ran a great way, but the Princess could not overtake the heart,
neither was the heart far from her, til such time as (...) were at the farthest
part of that great plain, whereas the Heart did enter into a thicket, and as the
Princess would have entered in to have followed the Heart, upon a sudden there
was before her a very great and dreadful Lion, such a one as would have put
any good knight in great fear, which raising up himself on his hinder feet,
was as high as the Princess on horsbacke, who pretending to make his pray,
would have griped her with his great and heavy paws upon the shoulders, but
she with a valiant and manlike courage stroke him in the midst of his breast
with her boar spear, so terrible a blow, that it passed through his body, and
he fell down dead to the ground. When she had done this, being very desirous
to overtake this white heart, she followed her course after him, and running a
while in that thicket, in the end she came into a little plain, which was
compassed about with that thicket, in the midst of the which she saw a great
hole, in manner of a cave, which entered into ye ground, and straight ways she
saw coming forth thereat a mighty great serpent, and wonderful to behold,
who beating with his wings and giving terrible shricks went toward the Princes
Claridiana with his terrible mouth open, so great and wide, that a man might
very well pass in thereat. When the ro^all Princess did see him coming, which
a stout heart and valiant courage she did abide him till he came nigh unto her,
and having in her hand that bloody boar spear, wherewith she flew the furious
Lion, she stretched out that warlike and strong arm, and threw it at the
Serpent with so great force and strength, and chanced to strike him in the
midst of that ^nmeasurable mouth which he had open, thinking to have made his
pray upon the Princess, that almost all the boar Spear was hid in his
body, and passed through his ^owelles, in such sort, that this monstrous and
dreadful Se^pent could not (...) himself out of that place, he was so wounded
with the Boar Spear, and giving many great and terrible shrikes, within a
little time ^e fell down dead to the ground. This being done, ^he Princess
was very much amazed, and did behold the Serpent being dead, and it seemed
unto her to be the most fiercest that ever she had seen or heard off, and
thought within her self, that where all such Porters and keepers were, it could
not be chosen but that there was some secret within. And as she was determined
to go toward the mouth of the cave, she saw coming forth thereat an old
woman, who seemed by her personage and apparel to be a person of authority,
who coming unto her said. The fair and royal princess Claridiana is very
well welcome, for that many days past you have been of me meruailouslie wished
and looked for. This worthy Princess when she saw that she was known by the
old woman, being very much amazed, she said: Of a truth gentle madame, your
words, and that which has happened here unto me, does put me in great
admiration, and I do not know what I should say unto this which I have seen.
The old woman answered, I do well believe that all this which you have seen
does make you marvel very much, for that as yet you do not know the secret
of this adventure, but come, and go with me, and you shall understand the
mystery thereof. When the old woman had said these words, the worthy and
valiant Princess alighted from her horse, and made him fast unto a tree, and
went unto the woman, who took her by the hand and lead her unto the cave, and
going down a pair of turning stairs, they went so long till they came into a
very saire Hall four square, and although it was under the ground, yet it was
so light as though the Sun di^ shine therein, by reason of a great precious
stone that was set in the wall thereof, from the which proceeded that great
light, and there was in the midst of that hall a table of Al^blaster, very
white, and upon the table lay a whole armor, with the sword, and was so
garnished with rich pearls, that it seemed to be of great valor and
estimation. And when they came nigh unto it, the old woman said unto the
Princess.

Worthy Gentlewoman, this armor which you do ^ here, did beelong unto the
Queen Pantasillia, who was slain at the destruction of Troy, the which is one
of the best in all the world, for so soon as she was slain they were brought
hither by a wise man that did foresee and know that it should be achieved by a
damsel, who in forre of arms, and beauty, should ^ar surmount that famous
queen. And for to guard and keep the same, he put that Lion, and that
wonderful Serpent, which you have slain: for whosoever had come h^ther, that
had not ben of so high and heroical courage as you are, could not atchiue the
same, neither come unto the sight thereof. And for as much as by your prowess,
they belong to you, you may well take them and arm your self with them, for
that there shall succeed unto you* marvelous and wonderful things, which shall
be the occasion that you will have them in great estimacion, and this is the
end of this adventure, and the occasion that you were brought hither by that
white Heart. And for that I do perceive you are desirous to know who I am, you
shall understand that I am called Oligas, of whom those great mountains does
take their names, for that I have many years past, had my habitation and
dwelling place here as you have seen. And for the knowledge and understanding
that I have in the art magic, my fame is spread in many regions: and here
does never (...) adventures in these Mountains, for such knights as come
hither.

When the old woman had uttered these words, the princes was much amazed to
hear her, and no less joyful for the precious armor which she had obtained.
Then she armed her self there with, and they were as fit for her as if it had been made of purpose. And after she was armed, ye wise Oligas did take her by
the hand and said: come worthy princes and go with me, and I will show you
things that you will rejoice at. Then this Lady did carry her out of one quadran
into an other, till such time as they came into a fair and great hall,
whereupon the wa^s was painted all the fairest damosells that were in all the
world? such as in times past had the fame to be fair and beautiful. Amongst
the which ye princes did see her own face pictured, and next unto her, she saw
the Empress Briana, and the fair and beautiful Oliuia, at whose great
beauty they did much marvel. And going forwards, they saw the fair and
excellent Lady Lindabrides, sitting in her triumphant Chariot, at whose great
majesty, and sovereign beauty, this royal Princess was very much amazed.
And turning unto the lady Oligas, she asked of her who that gentle woman should
be, and wherefore she did put her self into that chariot. So after a while yt
they had well perused all yt was there to be seen, this Lady took the
princess by the hand and lead her out of that hall into another, whereas was
pictured all the famous knights that has been and were at that present in all
the world, and all such as were dead and past, were painted upon another:
amongst the which she saw pictured, that illustrious and worthy Greek, the
knight of the Sun, who above all the rest did manifest himself, as did apere:
and had before him all ye whole castle of Lindaraza, and the great mighty and
wonderful battles that he had with the knight of triumphant chariet, and the
fair Lindabrides therein, in the like manner as he was in Constantinople,
defending her great beauty. And as the royal princes did cast her eyes upon
him, and did consider his mighty statnre and gentle disposition, and his
severe countenance, who seemed to be more a celestial creature then any
humane knight. And joining thereunto his great and mighty wonderful deeds
and prowess, which was portraied there before him. She straight way found her
self wounded with his love, in whose heroical and liberal heart, did never
enter any humane thought before: was now all only with that sight, taken
prisoner in such sort, that life should first want, before that she should be
released and at liberty. And because she would dissemble that new and amorous
passion, she asked of the old Lady, who that knight should be, then the Lady,
who did well understand her thought, said: you shall understand fair princess,
that this knight is called the knight of the Sun, and now by another name is
called the knight of the Chariot: this is be that does defend in
Constantinople, the beauty of that Lady Lindabrides, according as I have told
you, when you did behold the infant. And as yet it is not known whose son he
is, nor he does not know his father nor his mother, but the time will come and
that shortly, that they shall be known, greatly unto their honor and praise.
And thus much I can certify you, thnt never amongst knights past of old
antiquity, neither at this present has been, nor is, that is equal unto this
valiant and worthy knight, and his worthy and heroycall deeds will
extinguish and blot out all other before his time, and all others that shall
come after htm.

These were words that caused the wounded heart of the Princes to be the more
tormented, for considering the great worthiness of his person, and the ielosie
that she felt in her mind, and had of that Princess Lindabrides caused her
love to be the more greater. And from that present she had great desire to
pass into Grecia, and to see with her eyes, that knight whose picture had
robbed her of her liberty. And she was fully certified within her self,
that if the knight of the chariot did once behold her beauty and fairness,
that he would quickly forget that princess, whose beauty he does now defend,
although she should appear to be more fairer. And having these thoughts within
her, she was a good while and could not take away her eyes, in beholding ye
picture of the knight of the Sun, till such time as having shame of that old
lady, she put her eyes apart, and did behold the mighty Trebatio, and his son
Rosicleer, who in his stature and countenance, did very much resemble the
knight of the Sun. And for to know who they were, she did ask of the old Lady,
and she did tell her that next unto the knight of the Sun, that they two were
the best and strongest knights in all the world. And how that, that mighty
Emperor, was he whom the knight of the Sun had taken and delivered out of
the enchantment of Lindaraza, as she had seen in the painting of the knight
of the Sun. So being much amazed at that she had seen, she remained there
till she thought it requisite to return unto her company, for that they should
not trouble themselves in seeking her. And there with he said unto the old Lady,
that she would depart if it were her pleasure, and that she had no other thing
to command her. Unto whom she answered, saying, that the might use her
discreation, although she had many other things to show her, which she should
keep close until such time as occasion served to come that way again, at
whose sight she should take great pleasnre. And therewith she took her by the
hand and carried her forth the same way she entered, till such time as they were
out of the cave, whereas the old Lady committed her to God, and taking her leave
of the princess she returned into her cave, and straight way upon a sudden
the cave was vanished away, in such sort, that the princess could see it no
more, and remained a while amazed at that which had happened she took her horse
whereas she had left him tied to a tree, and sought out her company, very glad
and joyful for that precious armor which she had won, although otherwise she
were so far in love with the knight of the Chariot, that she thought long to
return unto Trabisond, and depart from thence and pass into Grecia, for to
see that knight, for she thought with her self, that he alone was above all
the rest of the world, that did deserve to enjoy her person and beauty. And
with this great desire she travailed, till such time as by the sound of her
horn her knights came unto her, who meruailed to see her armed with that
precious and rich armor, and did receive her with great joy and pleasure for
that they had gone about seeking for her a good while, complaining very much
for her absence, for that they ^nspected some mishap had chanced unto her. The
Princess did riceiue them very courteously, and declared unto the manner how
she got that rich armor, and so ^hee went with them unto their Tents, and the
next day in the morning they departed to Trabisond, for that with her new and
amorous passions which troubled her, she did not like well of those deserts,
neither did she receive so great delight in her hunting and game as she was
wont to do, but all her desire was to see the knight of the Sun* and all her
joy was in Grecia, desiring there to manifest her beauty. And here the
History does leave her till the time serve for to tell you of the knight of
Cupid, whom we left in the depth of the mountain of Phenicia.

Of that which happened unto the sorrowful knight of Cupid, after that he was
carried into the Fountain of the savage people. Chapter 27.
YOu do well remember of the strange and sudden loss of that amorous and
strong knight Rosicleer, how after he had drunk of the water of the
Fountain of the Savage people, he fell down on the ground, and how that
there came forth of that Fountain a monster of the Sea, and took him in her
arms, and carried him unto the deapth and bottom of the water. And how that
his great and faithful friend the King Sacridoro not having so much patience
as to suffer so great loss, did throw himself after him into the fountain,
with great good will to receive the death with him. Now the History says that
the meruayles of this fountain were very many and strange, for that so soon
as this amorous knight was in the depth of that water, he found himself in a
very fair and and green field full of flowers, whereas the calmness of the
air, and the cleerenes of the Sun seemed unto him to be the same as it was
before, although considering what he had before suffered, he seemed to be in
another world, and looking about for the monster that had brought him thither,
he saw that she was a fair damsel and well proportioned, who with a merry
countenance came unto him and said: Ualiant and hardy knight, by your great
bounty and strength, you have obtained to come and drink of ye water of this
fountain, and by drinking thereof you are come hither, therefore I will give you
to understand of this adventure, and of the merueilous things that you shall
here see. For I hope in God and my good Fortune, that you are the knight for
whom I have many days looked, by whose great strength, considering you be so
loyal and perfect a lover, to set me at liberty out of this place, and also
being a worthy Prince, who does suffer every day very grievous and mortal
pain. When the fair Damsel had spoke these words the knight of Cupide did
salute her very courteously, and therewith she beegan to declare her aduentnre,
saying.

You shall understand (gentle knight) that the king Polidarco, who is now king
over this Country, had a son called Don Lusindo, who being dubbed knight, was
one of the strongest and well proportionedst knight yt could be found in all
these parts. Likewise ye king Polidarco had a brother, a very wise man in the
art Magic, who dwelled in these mountains, and in this valley, which seems
unto you to be a new world, and this wise man was my father, who for my better
sauegard and honor, did carry me unto the courtof the king Polidarco, whereas I
continued certain years in the company of the queen and her daughter
Oriselua. And being there, the prince Don Lusindo fell in love with me,
insomuch that in the end of many days he did so importune me, that he
plighted me his faith and troth to take me for his wife, and I having my
confidence therein, he did obtain of me all that his pleasure was, and
although this was kept secret many days, yet in the end it came to be
discovered, for that my father was very old, and knowing that his time was come
that he should die, he did procure to marry me and give me unto a husband,
according unto my estate and honor. And being very importunate with me
therein, I was constrained of necessity to declare unto him yt I was made sure
unto the Prince Lusindo, and how that he was my spouse and husband. And at
such time as the king my father went unto the prince, for to know of him the
truth, he denied it and said* that there never passed beetwixt us any such
promise. And all that ever my Father could, was not sufficient to make him
confess the truth. And he seeing the great disloyalty of him, determined
before he did die to be revenged of that injury, and likewise of me, in such
sort, that in time there might be some remedy, and so by his great knowledge he
brought the prince hither unto his habitation, and put him into a quadran full
of fire, whereas he is continually burning, and without ceasing he cries out
and gives terrible shrikes, and cannot come forth of that quadran. And when
he was put therein, he said, that by no manner of wise he could be clear of
that great torment and peine, till such time as a knight, who by his bounty and
prowess, should come unto the fountain of the savage people and drinck of the
water, and drinking thereof, he should discover the entry into this habitatio^,
as you have discovered the same. And how yt this knight by the great loialty of
his love should supply the great disloialty of the prince, and how he should
take him forth of that quadran whereas he is, by ye force and strength of his
arms, first getting the victory by battle, and how that after he is
delivered from that place, he should receive and take me to be his spouse, and
tell the truth of all that had passed. This being ordained and done, my father
died, and here I do remain all alone very sad and sorrowful for his death,
and with great grief and compassion of the prince, for that there cannot be a
more grievous thing in the world the^ to hear him shrike and lament. And
although the king his Father did know of a certainty that the wise man his
brother did bring him hither unto this habitation, to be revenged on him, yet
for all that, he could never find the entry into it, although he has
procured by all means yt ever was possible. So that the king and the queen
his mother, and all the rest of the kingdom do live in great sorrow and
heaviness for the loss of the prince: for this habitation has an other entry
by a Cave, which in all the world does bear ye fame, ^ut the entry thereof is
so perilous and dark, that there is ^o humane knight dare enter it, and there
is none but I a^one that does know of this entry into the valley. And seeing
that you, most ventrous knight, is he, by whom my Father said should be
concluded and finished, this adventure.

Therefore I pray and desire you, to take compassion of this Prince, and of
me, who do likewise in my heart feel every way his pain and grief: and go
set him at liberty, that possessing the same, he may go and comfort his
Parents, giving them the joy and pleasure, that in his recovering again they
might receive. And here with the Gentlewoman made an end of her tale. And the
knight of Cupide remained, and maruailed at that which he had heard. And having
a great desire to set at liberty the Prince Lusindo, he requested the damsel
to show him where he was, and he would do all that in him did lie for to set
him at liberty.

And when he had said these words, the damsel did take him by the hand, and
lead him through that floorishing green Ualley, till they came unto certain
high and mighty Rocks, wherewith all that valley was compassed about. And there
was cut out of one rock a pair of stairs, where at this damsel and the
knight of Cupide went up, till such time as they came unto a door, where into
they entered, and came into very many great and fair rooms, at the beauty
whereof the knight of Cupid greatly maruailed, for that beesides they were all
cut out of the hard stone, they seemed to be the straungest kind of work that
ever he saw in his life. And straight way when he beeganne to enter in
thereat, they might here the Prince Don Lusindo complain with great and
terrible shricke.

So they went forwards till they came unto the Quadran of Fire, the door
whereof was open, whereat he saw the bright flames of Fire, of which the whole
quadran was full, which was a thing of great wonder. And he saw in the midst
of the Quadran, the prince all armed, with his Sword in his hand, sitting in a
Chair, and could not move, neither to the one part nor to the other, and it
was very pitiful to see his demeanor. And when they came thither, the
damsel said unto the knight of Cupide: worthy knight, if you be amorous, and
have not committed an^ disloyalty against your friend, you may without all le^
or fear enter into this fire which you see before you, and bring out the
Prince from the place whereas he is, and the fire shall by no means hurt you,
but if you be no loyal nor firm lover, the fire will burn you as it does
the prince, and you shall have no power to go forwards with this enterprise*
for that the prince is a valiant knight, and will make his defense very
strongly for a good while. The knight of Cupide when he heard her say these
words, had little care to make her answer, but without any more tarrying he
went in at the door of the Quadran, and went forwards till he came whereas
the Prince was, and the fire did not hurt him any thing at all, who as soon as
he saw him, arose from the Chair whereas he sat, and with his sword in his
hand went to strike him, and charged him with great and mighty blows, but he
who had no other desire nor determination, but to procure his bringing out of
that place, drew not out his Sword against him, but with his mighty, great,
and strong arms he took him by the wast, and in spite of his heart he lift
him up from the ground, and carried him through the Quadran, till he came unto
the door whereas the fair Damsel did tarry for them, and when he had
brought him thither, the Prince beegan to make great resistance in his defense,
as one that were beeside himself, and ignorant of the good that should come
unto him. The knight of Cupide seeing that the Prince did set all his strength
against him, he likewise enforced his strength, and overthrew him down to the
ground out at the door, whereas straight way the Prince did find himself at
liberty ^f that terrible fire and pain he suffered. And before he ^ould
arise up, the knight of Cupide did pull off his Healme and said unto him. You
are but dead Prince Don Lusindo, (...) you do not acknowledge this Damsel to
be your wife. and when the Prince saw the Damsel and did know her, ^ee
received great delyght to see her there, and said. Of a ^uth gentle Knight, for
this thing which you do ask of ^ee, there is no need to certify me with
the fear of death, (...) that I have very much repented me of the great
disloialtie I have used toward her, and there is nothing that I desire more,
then to take her unto my spouse and wife, as surely she already is. In saying
these words the knight of Cupid did a part himself from him, and gave the
prince his hand, helping him to arise from the ground. And being on foot he
did embrace the fair Pinarda with great love, for so the damsel was called.
And the prince returning unto the knight of Cupid, he gave him hearty thanks
for that which he had done for him, and requested him to give him to
understand of whom he had received so great a benefit, and he told him that
he was called the knight of Cupide, and how that he was of the kingdom of
Hungary. And when the Prince saw that he made no more declaration of himself,
he would not be importunate with him, for that he perceived well how he was
unwilling to be known, and for that it grew to be very late, the fair
Pinarda did request them to take their rest that night in that habitation,
whereas they were both of them very well served, and there grew beetwixt the^
great friendship* So the next day they all three together descended out of that
habitation, by ye same stairs whereby the knight of Cupide did go up, and
descending down into the green valley, they saw coming toward them a knight
of big stature and very well armed, whereat they were all much amazed, but
straight ways when they drew nigher, he was known to be that valiant and
worthy king Sacridoro, who as it has been told you did throw himself into
the depth of the fountain, whereas he found himself in that green and
flourishing meadow, and he went to seek out the knight of Cupide, greatly
amazed at that which he saw, for that it seemed he was in a new world. And
when the knight of Cupide knew him, with the greatest pleasure and delight i^
all the world he went toward him, and there they did im^ brace one another,
as though they had not seen one another a long time, and there they declared
the one unto the other what had happened unto either of them. And straight wa^
the knight of Cupide made known unto the Prince Lusindo, his friend the king
Sacridoro, and gave him to understand, that by his occasion and for his cause
he came unto that f^taine of the Savages, and that he ought to thank him for
his liberty. The Prince who had known him before, and knew of the great love
that he bare to his sister Oriselua, with great joy and pleasure he did
embrace him, and promised him that he would do so much with his father, that
they should be friends, and give him the Princess for his wife, with the
which the King Sacridoro was so joyful, that he was as one beside himself
with the great pleasure which he received, and gave thanks unto God for that
benefit showed unto him, in meeting with that good knight of Cupid, who was the
occasion of his remedy. So after that beetwixt them there had passed very much
talk, they determined to go unto the court of the king Polidarco, and they
departed from that place, having in their company the fair Pinardo, and went
through the famous cave of Phenicia, where of has been spoken so much, and
there they did understand the occasion of that terrible and fearful noise
which continually was there heard, for the which there was none that durst give
the enterprise to go into the cave, and was by reason of the valley which the
knight of Cupid found himself in, at such time as he was taken into the
fountain of the Saua^es, was so deep, and compassed about with such high and
^ightie rocks, so that never any man could enter in, neither ^ould they climb
up unto the top of those mountains, nor ^ome to the knowledge of any such
valley that was in that ^ace amongst those rocks, and under those rocks and
mou^^ines there was a cave that passed through, which was ve^ obscure and
dark, and also narrow, by reason whereof, ^gether with other open parts in the
same Rock, the air ^d enter in, passing through from the one side unto the
^her, and the noise was so great that it made in the same ^ue, and by cliffes
thereof, that it was very time^s and fearful to beehould, in such sort that
there ^s none durst enter in there at, whereupon it was ^led the terrible Cave
of Phenicia. So the Knight of Cupid, and the king Sacridoro, and the prince Don
Lusindo, with the princess Pinarda, went forth of the cave, and all four
together went unto the court of the king Polidarco. Who when he understood of
the coming of the Prince Don Lusindo his son, the great joy and pleasure
which he and the Queen did receive cannot be expressed, and the honor which
was done unto them, for the time that they remained there. In which time the
king Sacridoro was made sure unto the princess Oriselua, for whose sake he had
passed great misfortunes and troubles. And the prince don Lusindo was married
unto the fair Pinarda, at which marriage, there was made great feasts and
triumphs in all the kingdom* And here the History does leave them till time
do serve.

How the three Princes, Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, went
unto Constantinople, whereas they gave understanding of the death of Rosicleer.
FULL of sorrow and heaviness departed the princes Bargandel, Lyriamandro, and
the Ta^tarian Zoylo, out of the kingdom of Fenici^ for ye loss of their great
and especial frien^ Rosicleer, as those who certainly beeleeu^ that he was
dead. And without receiui^ any comfort or consolation, they trauayled many
days (...) Sea, till in the end they arrived in the Empire of Grecia whereas
they understood of all yt had passed with the Emp^ rour Trebatio, and the
Empress Briana. But when Ly^ mandro did understand and know the good fortune
of (...) sister, he did therewith mittigate the great sorrow that (...)
suffered for the news he brought. And having a great (...) sire to see the
Empress, and to know the Emperor, the all three accorded together to go unto
Constantinople. A^ in that time ye fame was so great in all parts, of the knig^
of the Chariot, that in what place wheresoever they ca^ ^her was no other
communication but of him, and of his great prowess, and of the knights that
every day he did overthrow to the ground. And by reason that this was the
occasion to bring unto their remembrance, the high bounty of their friend,
the knight of Cupid, they could do no other thing but weep and sigh, with
great sorrow, saying to themselves, that if they had him in their company, they
might get honor in Constantinople: for that the knight of the chariot could
not be of so high a courage and force, but that he would unhorse him and get
the victory.

So when they were come unto Constantinople, they did one day enter into the
great place, at such time as it was full of knights, as well strangers as of
their own country. And the knight of the Chariot had overthrown the worthiest
and best knights that were there. So these three princes did prove themselves
with the knight of the chariot, but he overthrew them all to the ground. But
first they had broken with him each of them three two spears, which was unto
the^ no small honor, for that until that time, there was not one knight that
had fastened themselves to break two spears: and it was the occasion that
they were well esteemed of all the beholders. And so without any more staying,
they went to make themselves known unto the Emperor, and to the Empress, who
were very desirous to know who they were. But when the empress did know her
brother, and the Emperor was informed who they all three were. I cannot
express the great joy and pleasure, which they received, at their coming
thither, and according there unto they gave them entertainment. For that the
desire which the empress had to hear news of her brother, was very great,
because she loved him exceeding well, and likewise to know somewhat of her
son Rosicleer, ^or that they two were very great friends. And as it is a
thing natural, that when a person is most at his contented ^oy and pleasure,
in this life: suddenly they are mixed with ^reat sorrow and bitter heaviness.
And it now fell out, for that these three. Princes did not know that Rosicleer
was son unto the Emperor and the Empress Baiana, at such time as both parties
were in the chiefest of their delight* ^ received great contentment.
Liriamandro did declare all that happened unto them by Rosicleer, and of his
great strength and worthiness, and of all that which he had done for them
being unknown, but in the end he told of his strange and dolorous loss, and
in what sort the king Sacridoro did throw himself after him and was s^ke down
into the depth of that fountain. When the Empress understood this of her
son Rosicleer, she thought verily to have died presently, with the great
sorrow which she received, and there with she fell down to the ground in a
sound. Then the mighty emperor who did very well understand the occasion,
did use all diligence to comfort her, for that those news were a corsie unto
his heart likewise, but yet dissembling his sorrow, with great courage he took
the empress in his arms and did comfort her all that ever he could. And when
these news were published through out all the city, they began to make great
lamentation, in such sort, that the feasts and iusts did cease and stay for
certain days. Likewise the three princes were very sad and sorrowful that
they had brought such heavy news, and their great sadness and (...) pain
did increase more then before, when they understood that their perfect friend
Rosicleer was son unto so high and mighty parents, as also so nigh kinsman
unto Bargandel and Liriamandro. So they remained there certain days, whereas
the Emperor and the Empress did them much honor, and were with them very
royally entertained, and for that the two princes Bargandell and Liriamandro
had great desire to see their loves, Rodasilua and Siluerina, in one night very
secretly they departed out of Constantinople, and taking the way toward
England, they travailed till they came unto a part of the Ocean sea which was
in Rone, and there they did ship themselves and came into England, where they
were very well received of the King Oliuerio: and being asked for their friend
Rosicleer, they gave him to understand of the sorrowful less of him, for whom
the king received great grief (...) sorrow, for that he loved him very well.
But when the news ca^ unto the understanding of the Princess Oliuia, there
could be no sorrow equal unto hirs, neither any tongue so eloquent for to
express the half part thereof, for that the did love Rosicleer more then her
own self, and at that present death had been more welcome unto her then such
sorrowful news, so that at the sudden hearing thereof she remained one whole
hour without any remembrance, in such sort yt she seemed rather to be dead
then alive. And when she came unto her self her sorrow did double increase,
and in a more deadly trance then before, she fell down upon her bed,
whereas she lay the most part of all the day without speaking any word* till
such time as a damsel that was with her fearing that she had been dead, ran and
told the king, who straight way went unto his chamber, accompanied with many
knights. And being very much amazed to see his daughter in yt case, he procured
for her many remedies, by which this fair princess did come again unto her
self, although her desire was rather to die then to live. And seeing her self
in the presence of her father and of so many knights, she could not manifest
the great grief which she felt in her heart, which was the occasion that her
pain was the more. And it is to be beeleeued that at that present she had
died, if God had not preserved her for a farther benefit more then she did hope
for, or think off. And because that all this great sorrow and grief of the
princes was for her more glory and pleasure in time to come. The History does
leave to speak any more of her till occasion serve, and shows of other things
which happened in the mean time.

How Florinaldus came into the kingdom of France, where he was taken
prisoner at a bridge, and how by two knights that came thither he was set at
liberty, whom he knew to be the knights of the flower de luces, which he
sought. Chapter. 29.
THe good Lnight Florinaldus, who by the commandment of the knight of the Sun
went in the quest of the knights of the flower d^ Luses, and travailed through
many and diverse countries, till such time as he came into the kingdom of
France, coming at length unto a bridge, which was upon the river Rodano, he
saw two knights very fierce, and by seeming valiant, who were brethren unto
Brandafuriel, that mighty and strong Giant which the Prince Clauerindo, slew in
the great city of Paris, and they were come unto that place for no other
occasion but to keep passage, and to do all the damage they could unto the
king Oristeo and his knights. The one of them was called Crudamonte, and the
other Rocardo, being of their bodies and lims as giants, and they had in that
place taken diverse prisoners, and slain many knights, and before that
Florinaldus did pass that bridge, he must needs just with one of them, and his
fortune was such, yt by the strong encounter he received his Horse and himself
fell down to the ground, in such sort that one of his legs was under his
Horse, so that he could not make any longer battle, and the mighty Rocardo,
which was he that made the just with him, if he had not embraced himself
about his Horse neck, had likewise fallen down to the ground, with that
strong encounter which he had received. So Florinaldus was taken prisoner, and
put into fast hold, but it was not long after that the news of these two
knights came unto, ye court of the king Oristeo, and being understood by ye two
princes Clauerindo and Brandizel, they in great secret departed from the court
to make combat with them. And when they came unto the bridge, there was betwixt
the^ four a very fierce and stout battle, in which the two Princes found
themselves greatly perplexed, for yt these two were very stout and valiant
knights, yet for all yt the goodness of their armor did stand them in great
steed, and again, they were of such courage, that in the end they got the
victory, and slew them, and cut off their heads, and sent them unto the king
Oristeo, and requested of him pardon, for that they had departed without
lisence, certifieng moreover, that they were gone to seek out their friend the
knight of the Sun. And in as short time as possibly might be they would
return again unto the court. Now when these two brethren were dead, the two
princes did set at liberty all the prisoners that were there, amongst whom was
Florinaldus, and when he saw the devise of the slower de ^uses, he straight way
knew that those were the knights, in whose demand he had travailed. And
therewith he went unto them, and declared the Embassage of the knight of the
Sun. And when they understood the same, if there had been given vnt^ them all the
world, at that present they could not have received greater pleasure,
especially after that Florinaldus did tell them all that he had done in the
Island of Lindaraza, and afterward how that the Emperor Trebatio entered into
Hungaria, and of all the rest. So that these two princes were as men amazed to
hear him tell of those high and mighty deeds, and thought the time very long
till they did see him. With this great desire they all departed from that
bridge and travailed till they came unto Marsella*, whereas they ^id imbark
themselves, and took their way toward Grecia. Whom the History leaves till
fit time, for to declare of the Knight of Cupid, whom we left in the kingdom
of Phenicia.

How the Knight of Cupid and the King Sacridoro departed from the kingdom of
Phenicia for the Empire of Grecia. Chap. 30.
VEry great and solemn feasts were celebrated in the kingdom of Phenicia, at
the marriage of the valiant and well esteemed King Sacridoro, and the Prince
Don Lusindo, with the fair Pinarda, and also for ^o give delight and pleasure
to the Knight of Cupid, whom they did honor and had in so great estimation as
the worthiest and most valiant knight in all the world, and were all greatly
amazed, as well at his great grace and virtue, as at his bounty and strength,
yet notwithstanding for that he had always in his memory the discurtesie of
the princess Oliuia, any thing whatsoever he did see could not make him
merry, neither give him any contentment, so that continually he was very sad
and heavy, for the which his great friend the King Sacridoro was very sorry and
roceiued great grief, for that he knew from whence his eui^l and infirmity
proceeded, and did comfort him as much as possibly he could, in saying, that
per adventure the princes Oliuia had she wed him that discurtesie, for that she
did not know who it was, and that it did not agree, neither was it requisite
for her honor to show favor unto any knight, except he were a king or prince
such as with all honor and majesty she might receive for her spouse, but
(said he) possibly when she knows that you are son unto the Emperor
Trebatio and the Empress Briana, she will repent and change her mind, and
that he was such a Knight as that princess Oliuia should receive great delight
to receive him into her service. And then he gave counsel that he should go
into Greece, and make himself known unto his parents, and from thence he
might take his iourny into England, and there to prove once again his fortune.
And in saying these and other such like words in effect, this good king
Sacridoro comforted the Knight of Cupid. And after that the feasts and triumphs
were ended, he said that he would depart and go toward the empire of Greece.
And with that determination he asked leave of the king Sacridoro, but he which
bare him no less good will then unto the queen Oriselua his wife, said, that
in no manner of wise he would consent unto to his departure, except he were in
his company, for that he would bear him company, until such time as he made
himself known unto the Emperor Trebatio, his father, but the knight of the
Sun would very feign have excused that journey, saying unto him that it was not
a thing that beseemed him to be absent at that present time from his country,
being new married, for that possible the king Polidarco, his father in law, and
the Queen Oriselua his wife would be angry, but all that did profit very
li^le, for the king was determined to go with him, and although he thought
again to loose all his kingdom, yet would he not leave his company. So that
the Knight of Cupid was constrained against his will, to take him in his
company, the which he refused, thinking that the king Polidarco, and the Q^eene
Oriselua would receive some grief and anger for his departure, and yet he had
so great delight in his familiarity and friendship, that it seemed unto him in
all his life time he never met with a knight, so conform^ble unto his, neither
that with a better will did offer unto him friendship. And although at time he
did refuse his company, yet time did come afterward that it was very necessary
and profitable unto him, as he reafter shall be told you in this History.

And for that the king Sacridoro did know the great desire the Knight of Cupid
had to depart, talking on a time with the king Polidarco, and the Queen his
wife, he gave them to understand how that the Knight of Cupid was son unto
the Emperor Trebatio and of the Empress Briana, and how that he would depart
toward Grecia, to make himself known unto his Father, for which cause he
could not but bear him company, for the great obligation in which he was bound
unto him, and did desire them that they would think well thereof. And although
his departure grieved them very much, yet seeing the great reason that he had,
they answered that he might do as he thought best, for that it seemed unto
them he had great reason therein, and they much meruailed that the Knight of
Cupid should be so high and mighty a Prince. At length when they had taken
their leave of them and of the Prince Don Lusindo, who was also very sorrowful
for their departure, they went out of the city, and travailed unto the sea
coast, where they did imbarke themselves, and took the way toward Grecia, where
that happened unto them which shall be told you in this Chapter following.

Of a very fierce and perilous battle which the Knight of Cupid had with a
famous giant in the Grecian Empire. Chap. 31.
THe sorrow and grief was very much which was in the whole empire of Grecia,
by reason of the news touching the death of Rosicleer, for the Emperor did
command, that for the space of one month all mirth and pastimes which were
made in the great city of Constantinople, whereas were so many and excellent
knights, that it was a strange thing to behold. Which knights not having any
thing to do, some departed into their own countries, and other some went out
of the court to seek their adventures in the Empire, till such time as the
month was passed. In the end of which, the Knight of the Chariot should return
to defend the beauty of the fair princess Lindabrides* so that at that time
the city of Constantinople was left void, and all the land of the Empire full
of Knights, as well strangers as naturalls amongst whom there did not lack to
be every day great contentions. It fell out in this time that there came into
Grecia a mighty great and famous giant called Mandroco, who was Lord of Achia,
which was an Island joining unto the grecian empire, of so great force and
strength that he was inuinsible, and of long time the whole country of Grecia
did not like well of him, for that he greatly harmed them, as well by land and
by sea, and as this mighty Giaunt heard the report of the high deeds of
chi^alrie done by the Knight of the Chariot, in the great city of
Constantinople, and likewise of the great safe conduct granted by the Emperor,
with the great desire he had to prove himself with him, and to make manifest
his mighty force and strength in that Court, he passed into Grecia, and came
thither two days after the demand of the Knight of the Chariot, and being
determined to remain there till the month was accomplished, he travailed in
the Empire, and with what knight so ever he met, he should not depart, but
first prove himself with him, and o^ all such as he did overthrow to the
ground, he would, take their Horses from the^, and when he had joined a great
number together, he would send them into his Island. So he beehaued himself,
that in space of twelve days he had ever thrown more then two hund^ed
Knights, and all their Horses were his and for that they did find themselves
agreeued, many of those Knights did make their complaint unto the Emperor of
their misvsing, who received so great sorrow and grief, that he him self
would have gone in person, to have proved himself against him, if the Empress
had not hindered him. And again, calling to remembrance the safe conduct that
he had granted unto all Knights, he wo^ld not send any people against him,
for that he would not break his promise. So that he received great grief for
that which every day was told him of that giant. And his great name and fame
was spread throughout all that Country, in such sort, that many Knight did
procure to apart himself out of that way whereas he went, and unto all Knights
his name was terrible, and they said that in all the world there was not a
Giant so mighty and strong. And trauayling in this sort, it so fell out, that
in the same time there came into the Country of Grecia the Knight of Cupide,
and the good King Sacridoro, and straight ways there was given them to
understand of the high deeds of the Knight of the Chariot, and how that he
remained in Constantinople, till such time as the month was accomplished, for
to return and defend the beauty of the fair Princess Lindabrides. Likewise
they heard the great complaints which was made of the mighty Gya^nt Mandroco.
The Knight of Cupide having great desire to meet with him, did direct his way
toward that way whereas it was told him that he went. And it fell out one day
that as he and ye king Sacridoro did pass through a mighty and great used
way, they saw the giant coming the same way, with more then thirty of his own
knights, which bare him company, and he was of so high and big stature, that he
did appear above all the rest from the breast upwards, and when these two
Knights came nigh unto them, the Gyaunt did beehould them, and liking well both
of the Knights and their Horses, (...) straight ways said that they should
prepare themselves unto the just with him, one to one, or both together, which
their pleasure was, and best liked them.

Then the Knight of Cupid, who had a great desire to prove himself with the
giant, requested the King Sacridoro, that he would let him have the first
battle. To whom he answered, that he should do his pleasure, although he
would have been very glad first to have proved his own fortune, and so ye
Knight of Cupid, without answering any word, went and put himself in one part
of the high way. And when the Gyaunt saw him so big and well made, it liked him
well, and laughed unto himself, because he would just alone with him, and
might profit himself with his companion. The gyaunt had under him a very fair
and mighty Horse called Rondarte, that next unto the Horse Cornerino was the
best in all the world, and for that he was so mighty and strong, he travailed
on him, for if he had not been such a one, there were no horse that were able
to sustain and suffer him, for that he was so big, and again the great
weight of his armor which was more, and being on Horseback he had a mighty
great and big spear in his hand of so great weight, that a Knight had enough
to do to lift it from the ground, and therewith he put himself right against
the knight of Cupid, in the presence of many Knights yt were gathered together
to see what should pass beetwixt them. So both of tham did broch their horses
with their spurs, with so great fury, that it seemed the ground would sincke
whereas their horses ran. So they met together, and made their encounter, which
was with so great strength, that their mighty great and big spears did fly
into the air all in sheeuers, and the Giant lost his saddle, and had a great
fall unto the ground, but the Knight of Cupid kept his course forwards on,
somewhat astonished with the force of that encounter, which made all the Knights
of the giant, and those which were there gathered together to see that
contention, and all those which had seen the worthy knight of ye Chariot,
said, that without all doubt it was he, and that he had gone abroad with
other armor, because he would not be known, and to prove himself with the
Giant, for that in his gentle disposition, and great force and strength in his
encounter, he did resemble him very much. So when this mighty Gyaunt saw
himself overthrown to the ground, he knew not whether it was a dream, or
truth which he saw, he was so amazed, and seemed that it was not possible
that he should be overthrown, and his enemy remain in his saddle, whom he
saw returning back again on Horsback, and when he came unto him he said.

It is great right and reason Giant, that thou possessest the same order and
condition that thou did ordain for them, with whom thou have iusted, which
is, that he who so ever is over thrown to the ground, to loose his Horse, and
to be his o^ whom he received the encounter, that did overthrow him. Then the
Giant did look upon him with a very fierce and furious countenance, that it
seemed there flew out of his eyes great lightning and sparckles of fire, and
^ayde.

Here I do give and yield unto thee my Horse, for that ^hou ^ast won him,
but I will so handle thee, that living thou ^hal not inoy him, although all the
gods do come down from ^eauen to aid and help thee. And in saying these
words, he a^ose from the ground, and drew out a very great and heavy ^auchon
that he had at his side and went toward the knight ^f Cupide with it in his
hands, who would not abide him ^n Horsback, but with great lightness he leapt
forthwith (...) his Horseback, and drew out his sine cutting ^woord which
he had won before of Candramarte, that was of the Queen Iulia, and went
forth with the same in his hand to receive the Giant, and as they met to strike
both to gether at one time, the Knight of Cupid did stay his sword in the air,
and tarrte^ till such time as the Gyaunt had discharged first his blow and at
such time as his great Fauchon did descend, he leaped on the one side with
great lightness, that his blow could not fasten upon him, and being down,
he entered into him with a stout and courageous stomach, and give him such an
overthwart blow upon the thigh* that he cut both armor and flesh unto the
hard bone out of the which wound there issued great abundance of blood. The
Giant did complain very much of this wound, and beegan with a great noise to
cry out against the heavens, and with great ire and courage he turned again
and u^t up his curting fauchon, and because he would not miss his blow, he
stroke the Knight of Cupid overthwart his wast with so great fury, that if his
armor had not been made by the great wisdom of Artemidoro, he had cut and
parted him in two pieces. And therewith he made him to fly on the one side
more then six paces, and thought verily that all his bones had been broken,
and before that he could settle himself for to return against him to give
him his pa^ment, this great and mighty Giant was upon him, and lift up his
mighty fauchon, and would have stroke him a right down blow, but this val^ant
and good Knight seeing himself in so great extremity, with sovereign courage
and with a valiant heart, and strength, he let loose the sword out of his hand,
and before that the Giant could execute his blow, for that he had his arms
all a high, he entered in with him, and embraced him with his strong arm^s
about his wast, that he made him to loose the force of his blow and with so
great strength he charged him upon that thig^ which was wounded, that sore
against his will, he ouer^ threw him to the ground, who fell in such order
that it see med a great wall had fallen down. The Giant when h^ saw himself
under foot, he did force himself all that eue^ he could for to ^se up
again, and thrust with his strong arms at the knight of Cupid, for to get him
from over him, but he did use so great policy, that he did recover his sword
again which did hang by the wrist band, and putting the point thereof to his
visor of his helm, he thrust it in thereat, in such sort that he thrust it
through and through his head, so that there was slain that great and famous
Giant Mandroco, with so great wonder unto them which did see him slain, as
though he had been an immortal man, for that no humane strength had been
sufficient to have slain him. And when his knights did see him lying a long
upon the ground and dead, being very desirious to revenge the death of their
Lord, they all together did assault the worthy knight of Cupid, and did
compass him round about for to kill him. So when the valiant king Sacridoro
saw his very friend in that great extremity, he stroke his horse with his
spurs, and put himself am^gst the thickest of them, and the knight of Cupid
began to strike upon his enemies, in such sort, that every blow that he ^oke
was with so great fury, that either he slew one, or overthrew one to the
ground. And the king Sacridoro did h^lp him with so great strength, that more
then six he overthrew dead to ye earth, at which time the knights that were
there gathered together for to see the battle, when they saw the giant dead,
and the high bounty of the two knights, more then twenty of them returned in
their behalf, so that in a little time after that they came to help them, the
knights of the Giant were all slain, and all those received great contentment
and pleasure at the death of the Giant, for that they were all amazed and had
great fear of him. And seeing the high and mighty prowess of the knight that
slew him, they were all very desirous to know him, and so some of the^ did
^oyne themselves together, and did desire him to tell the^ his ^ame, for that
they were desirous to know what he was that had done so great benefit and good
unto all that Country.

Then he surrendered unto them great thanks for the ^reat aid and succor he
had received at their hands, and ^uld unto them that he was called the Knight
of Cupid, and that he could not at that time give them any farther to
understand* (...) that those Knights did cease from troubling him any farther,
but always* had in ^elofie that he should be the Knight of the Chariot, for
that in all things he did resemble him very much. So when that the knight of
Cupid and the king* Sacridoro departed from that place, certain of the knights
which were there, considering the great contentment and pleas^e that the
Emperor and all his court would receive, for the death of that Giant. Even
dead as he was, they took him, and laid him overthwart upon a horse, in the
saddle, but by reason of his great length his head and feet did traile upon ye
ground, and in that sort they carried him unto Constantinople, having great joy
and pleasure, and no less wonder, unto all the^ that did see him. And when
they came unto Constantinople, they made representation of him, unto the
Emperor, and declared unto him, all the manner how and in want order the
Knight of Cupide had stain him, how was not a little amazed, and seemed unto
him that the Knight which had done that act, could not be but of great and
exceeding valor, for that the giant was of great strength and force: and that
there was not one of so great name and fame amongst all the Islands of the
Terreno sea. So the Emperor had great desire to see and know him, for that by
the signs and tokens which he understood of him, it gave him in his mind,
that he should be the Knight of the Sun: Whom he had a great desire to see,
and very much marueled that he came not thither, according unto his promise.
So in this sort the fame of the knight of Cupid, began to be known throughout
all ye whole Empire of Greece. And after that the Giant was slain, the Knight
of Cupid, neither the king Sacridoro, would not enter into Constantinople, till
such time as the Knight of the Chariot did return to defend the beauty of the
Princess Lindabrides, but travailed in that Country certain days, in the
which they did many deeds of great Chivalry, whereby their fame did increase,
in such sort, that there was no other communication, but of them: likewise
there was great contencion grown amongst many, which of the two Knights, he
of Cupid, or he of the Chariot, should be the best proporcioned and strongest
Knight: and all in general had great desire to see them both together in
battle, the one against the other. And did beeleeue very certainly, that
they two were the best Knights that were in all the world.

How the Knight of the Chariot returned to defend the beauty of the Princess
Lindabrides, in the mighty City of Constantinople, whereas happened very
strange things. Chap. 31.
AT such time as was accomplished the Mooneth that the Emperor had commanded
the triumphs and feasts to cease, for the death of his Son Rosicleer. Straight
way ye great city of Constantinople, began again to be furnished with al sorts
of worthy and va^aliant knights, as well strangers of their native country,
who had travailed throughout that country, to pass away the time of the
Emperors commandment. So for to prove the adventures with the knight of the
Chariot, and other some to see his mighty Knighthood. So ye first day that the
knight of ye Chariot entered into ye place, he overthrew more the^ twenty
knights, such as were very famous, and came* from far countries, for to prove
themselves with him. The Emperor and ye Empress were in the windows of their
great ^allaice, with so sad and sorrowful semblant, yt it did well appear in
them, ye great grief which they received, for the ^eath of their son. And
being in this Just, there entered unto the place three worthy Knights, of a
strong and big proportion, and armed with very rich armor, wrought and ^rauen
with great cost. The which were straight ways ^nowen, by the Knight of the
Chariot, in the device which ^ey brought: And were joyful of their coming,
for that ^ese three knights were the two valiant princes Brandizel, Clauerindo,
and his! friend Florinaldos, who were come in the demand of the knight of the
Sun. And when they heard the great report and fame of the knight of the
Chariot, they came thither to prove themselves with him, and so they entered
into the great place, and Florinaldus was the first that put himself against
the knight of the Chariot. And at such time as he should make his encounter,
the knight did lift up the point of his spear because he would not strike
Florinaldus, but yet Florinaldus made his encounter with so great strength, yt he
sheeuered his spear al to pieces, and either of them passed the one by the
other, without any moving. So then they returned to make the second encounter,
and look as the knight of the Chariot did the first encounter, so he did now
likewise again, because he would not hurt him, which was the occasion that
Florinaldus did plainly understand that his adversary would not encounter
against him, and there with he did a part himself from ye place of just,
meruailing very much at the great courtesy which ye knight of the Chariot did
use with him. So straight way entered into the just that stout and valiant
Brandizel, but to conclude, it happened with him as with the prince Clauerindo,
as it happened with Florinaldus, so that they were constrained to withdraw
themselves all three half abashed, for the little profit that did proceed o^
their encounters, and no less meruailed at the great courtesy which the knight
of the Chariot did use with them, for the which they conceived within
themselves that he should b^ their great friend the knight of the Sun, for
that in his de^ meanour in all points he did resemble him very much, and
again, that setting him a part, that there was not in all the world a knight of
so great power and strength. At that tim^ that the great place was al covered
with people and arme^ knights, on the one side thereof they saw enter in a
might^ knight of his body, and mounted upon a very fair and great Horse, and
was armed with so precious and rich armor that amongst all the knights there
was not the like, excep^ the armor of the Knight of the Chariot, he brought
wi^ him three Damsells, all mounted upon their palfrayes, a^ brought with them
certain fardels. Likewise a very foul and ill fau^ed dwarffe, which carried
his spear and shield. And being within the place, he turned his Horse head, ^
went and put himself nigh unto the triumphant Chariot, whereas he beegan to
behold and to view that precious and fair princes, Lindabrides, who received
great pleasure, in beholding the great and mighty valor of her knight. So
after that he had vewed her a good space, he departed from thence, and went
unto the knight of the Chariot, and saluting him very courteously, he said: of a
truth worthy knight, the great beauty of this precious princess, does far
exceed. And that you have great reason to detend the same. Notwithstanding, I
do know a damsel, very strange and far from this country, that if you did see
her, doubtless she would seem unto you to be of no less beauty, then the
princes. This cannot be said the Knight of the Chariot, for that the princes
Lindabrides my mistress, does exceed in fairness and beauty and like good
grace, all the damsels, ladies and gentlewomen, that are in all the world. And
this will I affirm and defend against all such, as shall say the contrary.
Upon the proof thereof, said the Knight, I will Just with you. And possibly I
will make you to know the contrary: the which he did very well accomplish and
perform, although there were many that did laugh at him. So when he had said
these words, the strange Knight took of the dwarf his spear and shield
which he brought, and with a very wrathful and strange semblaunce, he put
himself on the one side of the Just, the knight of the chari^t did the like,
and beegan to take their course together with great force and strength. And in
the midst of their ^ourse, they made a very great and mighty encounter,
brea^ing their spears, and shiuering them all in splinters, without any
mension or moving in their saddles, or doing any more harm, but passed their
course forwards with great (...). And returned and made their second encoun^er,
where at the strange Knight lost his stirrops, and the ^eanes of his horse
fell out of his hand, and did somewhat decline him self in his saddle: yet for
all this he ran forwards on his course, and quickly recovered himself again,
although very sore troubled, and no less amazed at that mighty and strong
encounter which he had received. The knight of the Sun did follow his course,
and kept himself upright, although it seemed unto him, that to be the
strongest encounter, that ever he received unto that time, and had that strange
knight in great estima^ion. And being determined to make the third encounter,
and ready to take their course, there entered into the midst of the place, a
dwarffe, the least and the most ill fauoredst that ever was seen, who came
riding upon a roane Horse, and brought in his hands two spears all g^lt, and
maruailosly well made, and went directly unto the Knight of the Sun, and giving
unto him one of those spears he said. This spear is sent unto you by a wise
man, who has great desire to serve you, and does send it you, for to just with
this Knight who is before you. And he does give you to understand, that
therewith you shall make such an entounter, that all ye force and strength
thereof, shall return against your self, and shall pass through your mighty
and stout heart, and death shall first conclud with you, before that wound be
healed. And when he had said these words, the Knight of the Sun did receive
the spear, and was very much amazed at the words that he heard spoken. And
without any more saying, the dwarffe departed from him, and went unto the
strange Knight, and gave unto him the other spear which he brought, and said:
This spear a wise man does send it unto you for to just with the Knight of the
Sun, and he does give thee to understand, that at this encounter thou shall
overcome thy contrary, and shall make him to lose the name which now he has,
and thou shall remain wounded for ever. And when he had made an end of saying
these words, not staying any longer, but struck his Horse with his whip, and
returned the way back again, where he came. And all men remained very much
amazed: but much more the knight of the Chariot and the strange knight, and
could not understand to what end those words were spoken, but left their
spears which they had and took the spears which the Dwarffe had brought them,
and spurring their Horses they began to run one against another with great
fury, and in the midst of their swift course, at such time as all people did
behold them, and loking what should be the end of their encounter: the two
worthy knights did encounter very strongly together, and either of them chanced
to strike one another upon the beauers of their helmes. Now whether it was hap
or fortune, or whether those guilt speres did work by art or instuence,, I know
not, but both these knights did fall backwards, and strok their heads upon
their horses croupers, and the lasings of both their helmes did fail, and they
fell from their heads. But straight way they settled themselves upright again,
and as you see that shining Sun and the fair Diana, when they do appear:
even so seemed the faces of these two knights, for that the knight of the Sun
did show that perfect and severe countenance, which until that time not one
that was in all that place had seen. And of the other part, the strange knight
did seem to be the sovereign, and without comparison in beauty, that fair,
Claridiana, whose Rubicomde hair which seemed to be of fine gold fell loose
and spread about her ears, and hanged over all her back, parted in the midst,
as though it had been don by a compass, showing her celestial face, which
seemed unto all people, to be some divine creature. What should I say unto that
fair Medusa who did transport men into stones, yet was she not to be compared
to this royal princess, who with her celestial and fair countenance did put
all those that were in that place, in great and strange admiration, and almost
astomed and amazed, not believing to the contrary, but it should be some
divine vision: So that the fair Pincesse Lindabrides could not with much
reason blame her knight of the Sun, if that he were wounded by that mighty
and strong blow, and that the true and perfect love which he bare unto her,
should be somewhat troubled. for that the force thereof was such, that he was
not able to make any resistance, but that his heart was cloven asonder in the
midst, and the one half remained rotted as before it was. And the other half
he did yield unto that sovereign princes that was before him. So straight way
when he felt himself wounded, he considered of the words which the dwarf had
spoken, and knew that they fell out to be true, not knowing what to say unto
that strange adventure which happened unto him. But when the royal princes did
see that pleasant countenance, whose all only picture did wound her unto ye
heart, and made her to come into those parts, the joy and pleasure which she
received, I am not able to express: and her love did the more increase, for yt
it seemed unto her, that by a great deal, that royal presence that she had
before her, might be compared unto the figure which she saw in ye mountains of
Oligas. Then the knight of the Sun went unto her and said, worthy gentlewoman,
show us I pray you so much (...), as to tell unto us, who you are: for that
according unto the strange things which we do see in you, we cannot believe to
the contrary, but that you do desend from the heavens, and that you are ye
divine goddess Palas, of whose sight, I should think my self happy, if
fear did not put me in doubt to obtain so great glory. Then the princes with
a merry and cherefull countenance, did answer him and said. Worthy knight,
your great valor does constrain and force me to give you to understand of
all that you do ask, although when I came unto this court it was with intent,
not to give my self to be known. You shall understand that I am called
Claridiana, and I am daughter unto the Emperor of Trapisond, and of the
Empress his wife, who in her time did exercise military knighthood: and for
that the great fame of your high prowess does so far extend in the world, I
departed out of Trapisond for to come into these parts, not for any other
purpose, but to prove my self with you. And now I do think my travail well
bestowed that I have taken, for yt I do know so mighty and strong a knight.

Oh what great joy and contentment did the Knight of the Sun receive when he
heard these words, as well for that he did know who she was, as also that she
was a humane damsel, whereon he might occupy his thoughts, and likewise the
great honor that she did unto him (...) saying that his son had brought her
thither. And as he would have made an answer, at the same instant came thither
the mighty Emperor Trebatio, who as soon as he knew the knight of ye Sun, in
great have he withdrew himself from the window and came unto him. When the
knight of the Sun saw him coming, with a trice he alighted from his Horse, and
kneeling down before him he demanded his hands to kiss them, craving pardon
for that he did not before that time make himself to be known. The mighty
Emperor did embrace him with entire affection, showing unto him so great joy
and pleasure, as though he had known him to be his son, and having him in his
arms, he said. My friend, how could your heart suffer so long time to refrain
to speak unto me, for certainly according unto the great desire which I have
had to see you, and the great care that I have had of your so long absence,
does make me say that you have done me great wrong, in not discovering your
self unto me in all this time that you have been here. My Lord, answered the
knight of the Sun, I do acknowledge my error wherein I have erred, yet I am
worthy to be pardoned of your highness, for that love has been the occasion
hereof, and it may please your highness to speak unto this damsel, who is
ye sovereign princess Claridiana, and daughter unto ye emperor of Trabisond.
When the emperor understood thereof, for that before he knew nothing, being
very much amazed, he went toward her. When the princess saw them coming, she
did alight from her horse, and received them both with a marvelous, great, and
dutiful reverence. And the emperor began first to speak unto her, and said.

Since when did my desert deserve to see in my Court so great goodness and
honor: certainly I shall never be able to do service unto God, for to
gratify this great courtesy. My Lord answered the princes, the great valor of
your person, and the mightiness of this your Court does deserve, that all the
rest of the princes in the world should come to serve you: and I for my part
do account my self happy to find my self here, whereas is joined together
all the worthiness of the whole world. So after that these and many other words
had passed betwixt them, they all three together went toward ye great palace,
and when they came thither, the empress Briana was advertised, how that the
Knight of the Sun and the princess Claridiana were there, who with great joy
and pleasure went forth to meet them, whereas the Empress did embrace the
princess with great love, and there passed betwixt them words of great
courtesy. Likewise ye empress entertained the knight of the Sun, and as he
kneeled down before her for to kiss her hands, the empress did take him by
the hand, and made him to arise up, and as in his semblance he did resem^le
very much her son Rosicleer, as well in her face, as in the proportion and
disposition of his person, the tears issued from her eyes, for that it gave
her occasion to remember her lost sons, and giving a great sigh, she said
within her self: Oh that if God were so pleased to use so great courtesy unto
me, as that this knight were one of my sons. And with her tender heart
overcome with sorrow, she said: Gentle knight, I find my self very much
grieved, because you have been so many days here in this court, and that
neither the emperor my lord nor I have known you, for that many days we have
tarried and looked for you, as for one unto whom we are most bound unto in this
world. This my fault, said the knight of the Sun, your highness pleasure may
be, to impute it unto the Princess Lindabrides, who has been the occasion
thereof, for that in nothing I could take greater delight, then to come and
serve my Lord the emperor, and your highness. With these and such like words
they entered into the great palace, and coming into a great and fair Hall,
the empress sa^e down on the one side with the princess Claridiana, and the
emperor with the knight of the Sun sa^e down on the other side of the hall,
whereas the one did declare unto the other the whole discourse of all that
happened unto them, after such time as they parted a (...) in the kingdom of
Hungaria, and either of them received great pleasure to hear one another. In
this time the fair princes Lindabrides, who was in her triumphant Chariot, had
no security, neither received any contentment, for having seen the sovereign
beauty and great majesty of that royal princess Claridiana, which seemed
unto her to surmou^t and pass any humane judgment or understanding, she waxed
very heavy of Heart and sorrowful, which caused to engender in her many ^ealous
thoughts, and complained against her gods and nature, for that they created so
great beauty and majesty in that damsel, and began somewhat to suspect the new
amorous passions of her Knight. So being very sad and heavy, and no less
meruailing at all that which had happened, she arose up from the chair whereas
she sat, and went into her chamber, and threw her self upon her bed, whereas
she lay weeping a great space, and the longer the knight of the Sun did stay
his return, the more did her pain increase through the jealousy which she
conceived.

How the Knight of the Sun returned to defend the beauty of the fair
Princess Lindabrides, and what happened beesides. Chapter. 33.
AFter that the Emperor Terbatio and the knight of the Sun had beetwixt them
declared the whole discourse of all that which had happened, as well of the one
as of the other, the Emperor was very desirous that the knight of the Sun
should remain and lodge within the palace, but the knight of the Sun
a^swered, that by no means he could do to the contrary, but keep company
with the princess Lindabrides, till such time as was accomplished the two
months that he should defend her beauty, and at such time as he should take
his leave of them, he was in a great confusion of himself, not knowing which
way or how he might return unto his demand without offense unto his mistres
the Princess Claridiana, whom he loved with all his Heart, and being in her
presence, there remained in him no memory of the princess Lindabrides. Being in
this confusion within himself, not knowing what to do, the royal princess
Claridiana, who was not a little joyful to see him in her presence, spoke unto
him and said: It shall be very requisite (worthy knight) that you do return
unto your demand, for according unto the justice yt you have of the princess
Lindabrides, I do think it ended. Then the knight of the Sun who was not a
little joyful when he heard these words, answered saying: Sovereign Lady, my
demand is brought to a conclusion, for that you have made an end thereof,
getting the victory of me by the strength of your rigorous arm, in making me
to acknowledge the contrary, in beeholding your excellent beauty. Then the
princes said, not for that I have any vantage of you in prowess, for that unto
all people it is known to the contrary, and look how far you do exceed me
in chiualry, so far does the fair Princess ezceed me in beauty, neither have
I done any thing which should be the occasion to disturb you, that you go
not forwards with your demand. This will not I do, except you will command
me, said the knight of the Sun. And as he stood in contention, not for to
go without her lisence, the Princess Claridiana did (...) great pleasure
therein, although to the contrary she was so high minded, that although the
worthy knight of the Sun does defend the beauty and gentle disposition of
the Princess Lindabrides, yet she received no grief for the same, because
she knew very well, and unto all other it was manifest, the great advantage
that she had of her, and whatsoever affection the worthy Knight of the Sun did
bear unto her, was not sufficient to make her acknowledge the same. And this
was the occasion that she had so great trust in the knight of the Sun. And
afterwar^ it fell so out, that this confidence did bring her almost to the
point of death, and she said unto him: Ualiant and worthy Knight, I shall
receive great courtesy in that you do accomplish yt which I have desired you,
and if it be but only rejoice my self in your high and mighty Knighthood, so
that you shall do me great pleasure to return unto your accustomed demand.
Here with the Knight of the Sun did take his leave of her, and of the Emperor
and Empress, and mounting upon his Horse, he went out of the palace with
great desire to speak with the two princes Brandizel and Clauerindo, who were
with Florinaldus adiding his coming. So when he came into the place, he went
straight unto them and lead them into a secret Chamber within the Chariot,
whereas they made themselves known the one unto the other, where they embraced
the one the other with great delight, as those which loved together like unto
perfect frinds. And with ye great desire they had to see one another, they
remained a great while embraced before any of them could speak, but after that
they were somewhat quyeted, the two Princes Brandizel and Chaueryndo did give
the Knight of the Sun to understand all that ever they had passed, after such
time as they were separated at the sea. And the knight of the Sun did declare
ye like unto them. Wherein they passed all that day till night drew on, at such
time as the knight of the Sun would go and speak with the Princess. And so
he took his leave of them in saying that he would return again straight
ways. The two Princes and Florinaldus did remain lodged in one part of the
Chariot, whereas they were provided for of all things necessary for them.

The Knight of the Sun who went to speak with the Princess, found her in
her Chamber sitting in a Chair, where she slept, and leaning her head upon
her hand. There was two torches of (...) burning in her Chamber, at the light
whereof she being a sleep, seemed so fair and beautyfull that the Knight of
the Sun seeing her, it was the occasion that his (...) lou^ (...) renew
again, in such sort, that he had clean forgot the Princess Claridiana, and
so he stood still a good while and did beehould her, and seemed unto him that
there was not ye like thing to be desired in all ye world, and being in this
thought, the fair Princess did awake, and when thee ^aw the Knight bee^ore
her, she was very joyful for the same, yet for all that with a very sad and
(...) semblaunce she spoke unto him, saying: What has been the occasion of a
thing so strange unto me, worthy Knight, that you have not come to see me
all this day? My Lady and mistress (said the knight of the Sun) the renewing of
acquaintance with the Emperor, and with other of my friends, has been the
occasion thereof. And the Gods does kn^w how I should have received much more
contentment, if I had remained in your presence. My presence would little have
profited you, said the Princess, for that you took so great pleasure, and
rejoiced your self in the sight of that fair Princess Claridiana. The Knight
of the Sun who well understood her jealous heart, very desirous to put it away
from her, said: The divine Gods has not created your great beauty with such
advantage above all the Gentlewomen in the world, that the presence of another
Gentlewoman should be sufficient to give occasion that yours should be
forgotten, and in especial of this your Knight, who does thin^k that in the
heavens he should not receive rest, if your presence should fail him. With
these and other like amorous words which the Knight of the Sun said unto her,
the fair Princess was somewhat pacified, and forgot a great part of the
suspicion she had. So these two were together a great part of the night,
talking of things in which they received delight, and I am fully persuaded with
my self, that if the Knight of the Sun had not returned to see the Princess
Claridiana, that the memory of her would have troubled him, for that the force
of her excellent beau^y, and the sweet and amorous conversation that she had
with him was such, that the knight of the Sun thought himself mos^ happy.
At that time it was past midnight, and the Princess said unto the Knight of
the Sun that he should go to bed, and so he took his leave of her, and
returned unto his friends, and there they lodged all four together in one
chamber, in four beds, whereas they slept the rest of the night which
remained, till the next day, in which succeeded all that which you shall
understand in the next Chapter following.

How the Knight of the Sun did defend* the beauty of the Princess
Lyndabrides, and how there entered into the iusting place the knight of Cupid,
and the king Sacridoro. Chapter 34.
WHen the next day was come, the knight of the Sun should go forth to
defend the beauty of the fair Princess Lindabrides, at such time as the great
place of the Imperial city of Constantinople was garnished with very many
valiant and glistering Knights, and the mighty Emperor and Empress were at
the windows of the great palace. Likewise the Princess Clarichana, who was
that day apparailed like a Gentlewoman. Also the princess ^indabrides was in
the triumphant Chariot. So the Knight ^f the Sun came forth armed with that
precious armor, ^ounted upon his Horse Cornerino, that all people received
^reat contentment at his strange and gentle disposition, but (...) especial
the fair Princess Claridiana, who thought that ^ight to be a thousand
years, her desire was so great to see ^im again. So after that this gentle
Knight had advanced ^imselfe on Horsbacke a while, with a quiet pace he went
and put himself at the li^t, abiding ye just against him what (...) ever he
were that would give the enterprise. And from that place, he cast his eyes
upon the royal Princess Claridiana who was next unto the Empress, But when
he saw her strange and sovereign beauty, the wound which the night past was
cured and made whole, with the presence and conversation of the Princess
Lindabrides, did now return and open again, in such sort, that it was
requisite to procure other more difficult and stronger remedies for to cure the
same. The fair and gallant princess Lindabrides did greatly fear the same,
for when she saw the fair princess Claridiana, and did well consider the
great force of her beauty and grease, the cause did work in her effect, in
such sort, that she could not receive any contentment in her sad and heavy
heart. So that after it was not long when there came forth against the Knight of
the Sun many Knights, and iusted with him, but in less then one hour he
had brought unto the ground more then twenty Knights, of such as held
themselves most valiantest and of greatest prise. And being about noone tide,
on the one side of that great place, they saw entering in two Knights, of the
which one of them was that worthy Knight of Cupid, and the other was the good
king Sacridoro, his loyal and great friend. And for that he was known by his
device, and his great fame was spread abroad in all the Empire of Greece, there
arose a great rumor amongst all the people, in saying that the same was the
famous Knight of Cupid, who slew the great Giant Mandroco, and how that the
Knight of the Chariot had found now his equal. And all in general had great
desire to see them prove their strange and mighty forces, the one against the
other. And the mighty Emperor when he understood that it was the Knight of
Cupid, he was very glad and rejoiced much a^ his coming, for that he was
very desirous to know him, and to give him all the honor that such a Knight
does deserve. And turning unto the Empress Claridiana, he said You shall
understand (fair Lady) that all the people tha^ are in this great place are
altered, at the coming of thi^ Knight which brings the devise of Cupid, for
that he i^ one of the best and most famous knights that has come into this
Country, and all in general has great desire to see him prove himself with
the worthy Knight of the Sun. Then the Princess Claridiana did very much
beehould the Knight of Cupide, and saw that he was very big and well made, and
that in all points he did resemble very much the Knight of the Sun, she
said that they had great reason to give him the name and fame, as the Emperor
had said. At that time as the Knight of Cupide and the king Sacridoro did
enter into that great place, they did not know that the Knight of the Chariot
was known to be the Knight of the Sun, for that they came then from their
journey, and had travailed that day seven miles, and the Knight of Cupid had
great desire to prove himself with the knight of the Chariot, as well for that
he could not suffer that any knight should make defense, and say that there
was a fayrer Gentlewoman then his mistress, the Princess Oliuia, and first
before he would consent thereunto, it should cost him his life. And with this
determination he passed forwards more into the place, and all people that did
beehould him received great contentment. And when he came unto the Knight of
the Chariot, he saluted him very courteously, and said.

Worthy Knight, I had rather serve you, then give you any occasion of anger
with battle, for that your great bounty is so notorious and manifest unto
all people, yet notwithstanding your demand is of so great importance, that
there is no Knight whatsoever he be, that does know what lone is, can either
suffer nor consent unto the same, ^ill such time as he does prove his
adventure with you, for ^lthough the Princess Lindabrides be very fair and
beuti^ull, yet there be damsels and Gentlewomen in the world that does account
themselves as fair and as beautiful as he. And I my self do serve one,
that as I have justice on (...) part for to defend her beauty, I have so great
security ^f bounty and force for to comath with you upon this de^aund, I
would not think much to take from you this enterprise. The Knight of ye Sun
who received great delight, did answer him and said: Sir knight, I do give
you great thanks for the (...) used, and the self same good will I have
always to be at your commandment, for yt the great fame which is spread
abroad in this Country of your high and mighty knighthood does constrain any
good knight to have you in prise and estimation. And in that you do say of my
demand, I would my gods were so pleased, that my bounty were conformable and
agreeable unto the justice and right which I have of my part, and if I were
sure thereof, then would I against all the Knights in the world defend ye
contrary, not withstanding if you do thin^k yt both in the one and in the
other there is lack of my part, come let us go and make the proof thereof, for
that first I will loose my life before I will leave to do all that in me lies.
When the knight of Cupid heard this, without making any more answer he turned
about his Horse, and the knight of the Sun did the like, and either of them did
put themselves at the list, and the knight of the Sun said unto himself: Oh
high and sovereign gods, with a devout and humble heart I request your aid and
help to succor me in this battle, for that I shall have to do with so famous
and worthy a knight. And if it be so that you be favorable unto me, although
all the Knights in this great place do help him, yet shall I not fear them.
But when the Knight of Cupid did see himself before the Emperor Trebatio his
father, and the Empress his mother, he did not let to say: Oh high and mighty
God, the creator of all things, here I do desire thy divine majesty, who
hither to in all the battles which I have made, have given me the victory,
let me not now I pray thee be forgotten nor denied of your aid and help, for
that in any of them past the death should never have grieved me if I had been
overcome. What happened betwixt them you shall understand in this Chapter
following.

Of the wonderful and cruel battle made beetwixt the knight of the Sun and
the knight of Cupid, and of the perrillous end and success thereof. Chapter
30.
THere was great attention and silence in the great place, and at the windows
of the mighty city of Constantinople, abiding to see the perilous and
dangerous contention that should be beetwixt the knight of the Sun and the
knight of Cupid. Then the two worthy and valiantest knights in the world stroke
their ^urious Horses with their spurs, and made the^ to run with so great
swiftness, that the ground seemed to tremble under them, and it put great
admiration in all those that did beehold their furious ^estures, and the fierce
end of their rigorous encounters, but especially the princess Lindabrides, who
lost that roseall cou^our of her fair face, in such sort, that she had no
courage to ^eehould the running of their swift course. These furious knights
made so great have in their long course, that when it was thought they had not
begun, these valiant knights with their great and big spears did execute their
encounters with (...) great strength of their arms and puissant force of their
^odies, that their big and long Spears being broken in ^eeces, the sheeuers
thereof flew into the air, showing the (...) of these two Knights, with so
great noise and ^umbling, as commonly the hard shingle does by the Sea ^oast,
being thrown up by the force and strength of the ^ormy Sea: And these two
worthy knights with no less ^ry then a Thunderbolt, passed by one another,
without (...) mention of grief received by that strong and rigo^us encounter.
Their furious Horses had scarce made an (...) of their long course, when that
with strange lightness (...) turned their horses about, almost as swift as the
air, ^awing out their fine cutting swords, and with a trise, their light
Horses were togther, and they stroke both together the one at the other such
blows, that warding it with their sheelds, they were both of them cloven a
sunder in the midst, and their swords descended upon their Helmes with so great
force and strength, that both of them declined their heads, as though they had
done reverence the one unto the other, like brethren as they were. And when
they saw that in their sheelds there was no defense, the rest that remained of
them they ^hrew off their arms to the ground, and with with their swords in
both their hands, they beegan to strike one another, in such sort, that it
seemed they could not endure one quarter of an hour, but that these valiant
Knights should be cut all to pieces in this perilous battle, for that their
strong blows were far out of measure, and although their armor, for that they
were the best in all the world, it did defend them that they could not be
wounded, yet for all that the great force and weight of their mighty blows did
all to bruise their flesh and bones, but yet these worthy Knights did not faint
any thing at all, but rather their fury and force did the more increase, and
were so furious in this their wonderful battle, and their blows so thick,
that scarcely they could be perceived, but the Knight of the Sunn stroke the
knight of Cupid such a blow upon his rich and strong helm, that he made the
fire to fly out thereat in great abundance, the which took away the sight of
his eyes, and did deprive him somewhat of his feeling. And as the Knight of the
Sun would have doubled another blow upon him, the Knight of Cupid was wholly
come again to himself, and before he could discharge the same, he made his
light horse to leap on the one side, in such sort* that his blow was stricken
in vain, with so great forc^ and strength, that he had fallen down to the
ground afte^ his sword, if he had not sustained himself by the pommel of his
saddle, but this blow was not so soon discharged when the Knight of Cupide
entered in with his Horse, an^ with both his hands he stroke the Knight of
the Sun (...) strong a blow upon his Heime, that he deprived him alt^gether
of his feeling, and made him to loose his stirrops, and the bridle of his
horse. And the furious horse being tormented with that mighty blow, did
somewhat apart himself from yt place, whereas they made their battle. The
emperor Trobatio, and the Princess Claridiana, was greatly amazed, when they
saw the Knight of the Sun, brought into that estate. Likewise the precious
Princess Lindabrides out of her triumphant Chariot, with great sorrow and
grief, did behold the same. But all this did not endure long, for that the
Knight of Cupid for all the have that he made could not come to double upon
him, so soon as the valiant Knight of the Sun, was come again unto himself,
and recovered his bridle and stirrups. And full of mortal courage, being to
the presence of his Ladies, and by one all only Knight to be so ill entreated,
he lift up his strong arms, with his sword in both his hands, and spurred
forwards his furious Horse, with so great wrath, that all them that did behold
him, were greatly amazed: and coming unto ye Knight of Cupid he stroke him
such a right down blow with so great force and strength, that he made him to
decline and stoop with his head down to the horse neck, and the blood ran
out at his ears and nose, and out of all feling, he rested with his breast on
his saddle bow. And his horse carried him from the one place to the other, in
such sort that it seemed that he had in him no life, till such time as within a
little space he came again unto himself: and see^ng himself in that sort
used, with great grief he beegan ^o say: Oh sovereign God, who has been my
^ider and ^uccourer, in all battles past, which I have sustained and (...)
the victory of brave and furious Giants, and valiant Knights, now I do most
heartily desire thee, at this present ^o be favorable unto me, for I do
acknowledge and con^esse, that with out thy help, I shall not be able to make
my ^efence against this courageous Knight: for that he is the (...) that in
all my life I have proved. And do not con^ent my God, that I be overcome,
before my parents, and before I do give my self to be known, except it be
by the knight of the Sun my brother. And in saying these words, the valiant
knight of Cupid, stroke his furious horse with the spurs, and returned upon the
knight of the Sun, and with so courageous force, he stroke so terrible a blow,
with his hands, upon his rich and precious helm, that the sound thereof was
heard through all the City of Constantinople, and was charged so much
therewith, that he thought verily that his eyes and all the teeth in his head
were broken, by the great abundance of blood that issued out from the lasing of
his helm. And his horse Cornerino, did founder under him, with the great force
and wayght of the same blow, and so remained a good while, and could not arise,
till such time as the Knight of the Sun with great fury did quicken him with
his spurs: and said within himself, that with great reason the Knight of Cupid
was so praised in the court, for that there was never Knight or Giant, that ever
did bring him into that extremity. So there again these valiant warriors did
return unto their battle, with so furious braveness, that all those which
did behold them, were greatly amazed, musing how that two humane bodies could
endure so long, and suffer so great torment. And with great reason they said,
that those two knights was the flower of all the knights in the world.

The Emperor Trebatio being very much amazed to see the knight of the Sun in
that extremity, he said unto the princes Claridiana. Oh who had seen the high
and mighty knighthood that was done by the knight of the Sun in the Island of
Lindaraza, upon the monstrous giants and wild beasts, and the great prowes done
against so many worthy knights, as well in this court, as in other places,
that seemed to be done by some divine providence, rather then by any humane
knight. And now to see him in so great danger to be overcome by one alone
Knight, surely it is a strange thing, and to be wondered at. Of a truth, said
the fair princes, they which have not seen, cannot well believe it, but yet
it seems unto me that the knight of Cupid should be such a Knight, that where
he is known he is had in the like reputacion, as the knight of the Sun is
with you.

In this time the valiant knights never seized, neither were they weary,
although more then two hours they combatted together, but seemed rather with
more force and fury, then at the beginning, they did persevere in the strong
battle, striking the one the other with so great fury, that many times their
heavy blows did astony them, as well the one as the other, and brought them
both unto the point to be overcome.

Which was the occasion that their stout couragis did gather more strength, and
their strong arms the more force: and made either of them to think, that it
were better to be slain then to be overcome, before them, whom they did
combatte, which was the occasion, that their battle was of a great deal more
force then at the beginning. And again, if their horses had not ben the best
in all the world, they could not have carried them, neither have suffered the
great travail, which their masters put them unto, with entering in, and
retyring back, with the Arong and heavy blows which they received, and the
light leapes and springes which they gave, forced by their sharp spurs was
sufficient to have weried them: but by reason that their horses were so good,
and their armor so suer, all the state of the battle remained in the force
and ^he strength of the knights. And by reason, that either of the^ was
suffiently furnished therewith, was the occasion that the battle went in such
sort, that betwixt them there was not known any vauntage.

And as the Knight of the Sun at that time did behold the fair Princess
Lindabrides, and saw her to be so sad and lost all her color, he suspected
the occasion to be in the peril of the battle. With a new fury, and double
force, he stroke so mighty a blow at the Knight of Cupid, that he thought
ve^ily with that alone blow, to have finished the battle, for that his arms
did hang lash down, and his head upon his horse neck, and he without
remembrance, in such sort that his Horse carried him about that great place, and
all men did look when he would have fallen from his Horse to the ground.

And for that the Knight of the sun did think that he had been dead, he did
leave to follow him. But yet he had not concluded to give a compass round
about with his Horse, in sign of victory, when the good Knight of Cupid was
wholly come again to himself, and was settled in his saddle, and recovering his
sword which he had lost by the strength of that blow with great fury he spurred
his great and furious Horse, and went toward the knight of the Sun, and
settling himself upon his stirrops, he stroke him such a blow upon the
shoulder, that if his enchanted armor had not ben such, without all doubt, he
had cloven him unto the Horse saddle. But by reason that they were so strong,
his sword made no more sign on him, then if he had stroke upon an anfield of
steel. Yet for all that the knight of the Sun was so charged with that blow,
that if he had not embraced himself about his horse neck, he had fallen
down unto the ground.

Oh how great was the wrath which the knight of the Sun received, in seeing
himself brought into so great extremity, before the royal and beautiful
Princes Claridiana, and the fair princess Lindabrides. It caused the fury of
his mortal blows to double, and to be angry with himself, for that one alone
Knight should so long endure against him.

But what did all his wrath and fury profit him, for that he had to do with
that strong and worthy Rosicleer, the very same who next unto him, was the
best Knight in all the world. And the same, that if all the Knights in that
place should move attempt against him, his valiant and courageous heart should
not fail him one iotte. And seeing him self before the Emperor his Father,
and the Empress his Mother, if he got no^ the victory of the battle, it
would utterly discourag^ him to come any more into their Court and presence
which caused him to execute these rigorous blows, with so great force, that it
made the knight of the Sun, to wonder at his great strength. At this time the
one was known so well to the other, that the end of the battle was very
doubtful, for that the greatest part of the day was past, wherein the valiant
and worthy knights had combatted, and no less vantage to be judged betwixt
them then at the beginning. At which the Emperor and the princess and all the
rest of the knights and Ladies that were in the palace, very much meruailed,
and said that the knight of the Sun had met with his match. Likewise the
valiant king Sacridoro, for that he knew the great force and strength of the
Knight of Cupid, was greatly amazed that the knight of the Sun, should so
long endure with him, and said unto himself: Surely not without great reason
the high bounty of the knight of the Chariot is extolled, that he alone does
maintain himself against him, that the savage people of the enchanted
fountain could not endure one half hour, and against him that the fierce
Tiger and monstrous Giant, which were keepers of the Prince Lusindo, could not
make any resistance. And in saying these words he desired God of his goodness
to grant the victory unto his perfect friend, for that before the Emperor
Terbatio and Empress Briana, his father and mother, he might not be
disgraced, which would be the occasion that he should never come more before
them. In this time the blows of these two valiant Knights were so rigorous,
that all those which did behold them were greatly amazed, and two miles about
that place was the noise of their blows heard as though it had been thunder,
putting the hearers in great fear, and the lookers one waxed weary, but they
seemed with new force to begin the battle again. So in this sort these
valiant Knights did persevere in their rigorous battle, without any ceasing,
but still executing their terrible blows the one upon the other, till more then
six hours were past since the beginning of their combat, and it seemed that
the Sun would separate the battle, for that she began to withdraw her self
into the occidentall Regions. At this time it seemed unto the knight of Cudid,
that in all that day he had done very little, and that the day was almost
spent, being very angry with himself, he said.

Oh lasie and cowardly knight of Cupid, with what face can thou come into the
presence of the emperor Trebatio, and acknowledge him to be thy father, seeing
that in his presence one Knight has brought thee into this extremity. Is it
possible that I am that same Rosicleer, who in the court of the king Oliuerio
pushed out of their saddles so many knights and giants, and he who always
thought that there was none but he that was worthy to put his thought and care
upon the princess Oliuia. Now do I see that I have no reason to blame that
princess for entreating me so evil, for that with one alone knight I cannot
defend the justice of her great beauty. What is become of that great hardines
wherewith I attemted the enchanted cave of Aridon, and the mighty force wherewith
I did overcome those two furious beasts? Certainly I do believe that all is
lost and gone, for that I cannot now make resistance against one knight: It is
possible that I am that Knight of Cupid, that in all the battles that he has
attempted in his life time got the victory? No surely, for that by one alone
Knight I am at the point to be overcome. Now I do see that from this day
forwards I must dye without all hope of any remedy for my sorrow and grief,
for that I am impotent, and do lack my force and strength for to revenge me of
the prince Don Siluerio, and the occasion I hoped to have given, that the
princess Oliuia should have understood of her error: Oh my loyal, true, and
perfect friend king Sacridoro, what reason was it that did move thee for to
throw thy self into that profound and deep fountain of the Savages, and
again, for to leave thy loving wife and natural kingdom, for to bear and
keep company with a Knight, who before thy presence is at the point by one
alone knight to be overcome. And you Bargandel and Liriamandro, with the
Tartarian Zoylo with what reason have you left your mighty kingdoms, and
tyauile in the world to seek Rosicleer, your great friend, having other which
does ouerpasse him very much: Oh knight of* the Sun where is now your singular
bounty, and in what place have you travailed ye you have not met with this
Knight, whereby might have been excused this great reproach that your brother
does look to receive this day: Oh how it ^oth grieve me not for to know you,
for that I shall not be able to say that I am your brother.

At the same time the knight of the Sun, with no less sorrow and grief, said
unto himself.

Oh weak and cowardly knight, how much does it stand thee in hand from this
day forwards to loose the name of the Snn, for that all those which has been
by thee overcome under that name, do account thee for a coward and of little
force, seeing thee by one alone knight to be brought unto this perplexity. Is
it possible that I am he that had so much courage, and was so hardy as to set
my mind on two of the most highest damsells in all the world: Of a truth if I
be the same with great reason I ought to receive of them my payment for this my
great folly, in considering what they are, and I at the point to be overcome in
their presence. Oh royal princess Claridiana, how may you think your self
mocked, that coming from so far countries only for to see the wonderful
deeds of the knight of the Sun, whose fame was so spread throughout all the
world. And in the first battle which you have seen him to make, you do see
with the blows of one alone knight brought out of his remembrance many times,
and his horse to carry him as a thing dead throughout the field. How can I from
this day forwards without great shame come before you, having received me for
your knight, and cannot in your presence defend your rare and singular beauty.

With what reason and boldness dare I before the Empress bind my self unto
your service, seeing that in so short time I have found my equal. What reason
is there to the contrary, that you being in the most extremity of all the
damsells in the world that likewise he to be the most valiantest amongst all
knights, that durst be so bold to set his mind on you.

So these valiant Knights saying these and other words unto themselves, did so
much animate their courageous stomachs, that eight hours* were past since the
beginning of their rigorous battle, and at that time their wonderful blows
seemed to be with more force and strength, and their horses with their great
and continual labor waxed weary, but these two valiant knights at that time
seemed to fight with new force and strength, and never ceased striking one
another such terrible blows, that the standers by had their ears filled with
the sound of their fine tempered armor, and were so greatly amazed to see the
great travail that they suffered in that bartaile, and likewise to see with
what great force and strength they did execute the same, in the end of long
time that they had endured, and seemed that there was never done by them the
like prowess nor actiuitie, as was done at that prelent, as truth was, for
that neither of them in all their lives was ever brought into the like
extremity or peril, as they were in this battle, nor never had the like fear
to be overcome. But the great shame and reproach, with the jealousy of their
honor, did so much touch either of them, that it made them without feeling any
travail to procure all that in them lay for to get the victory, or ele to die
in the demand. So at this time the golden Diana began to show her light in the
oriental Regions, and the worthy Knight of Cudid not esteeming his own life,
if he should not get the victory of the Knight of the Sun, with both his
hands, raising himself in his stirops, he stroke him so terrible a blow, that
it did deprive him of his understanding, and made him to fall backwards upon
the back of the saddle, that his head touched the horse crouper, and his weary
Horse carried him about that great place, in such sort, that all those which
saw him, thought that he had been dead. But when the Princess Claridiana did
see him in that plight, her blood waxed could within her body, and being sore
troubled, she asked the Emperor if he were dead or no, but he was at that
wonderful blow so troubled, that he had no power at all for to answer her,
but whosoever at this time had seen the face of the fair Princess
Lindabrides, would have known by her color the great love that she did
bear unto him, but at such time as the Knight of the Sun did come again unto
himself, there was never Lion nor furious beast more outrageous then he was,
and considering the great danger and peril that he was in, his out ragious
heart was so full of mortal anguish, with unmeasurable wrath, yt he stroke
his light horse with the Spurs, and crushed his teeth together, that it seemed
sparks of fire proceeded from his eyes, and like unto a whirle wind he ran
toward the Knight of Cupid, who seeing him recovered again, made likewise
against him with so great fury, that the ground where his Horse did run
seemed to tremble: Oh how great was the fear which the fury of these valiant
knights caused in them that did beehold their mortal wrath, coming the one
against the other, terrifying their understanding to abide the end of their
mortal blows. I do believe certainly that there was not one knight in all
that place, of what force and strength so ever he was, that seeing the fury of
those valiant knights, but he would have been terrified, neither was there
any friend, although he had been fully satisfied of the bounty of any of
them, but would have prayed unto God for them, seeing them in that great
peril. The Emperor Trebatio, with the great love that he bare unto the
Knight of the Sun, and the desire that he had to know the knight of Cupid,
received no less fear then all the rest, and said.

Oh mighty God, thou who made these Knights of nothing, I pray and desire
thee to aid and succor them, and let them not execute their great wrath the
one upon the other, neither do not permit that the Knight of the Sun be
slain before he do acknowledge thy great power, and turn unto thy laws,
that his soul be not condemned to immortal pain. So the swift course of
their furious Horses joined their encounters, and the two wrathful Knights
raising themselves in their stirrops, pretending to make an end of their long
and doubtful battle, with the extremity of all their force and strength,
they stroke one another with so great wrath upon their fine Helmes, that
although the fine edges of their mighty cutting swoords could not enter nor
cut their enchanted armor, yet these valiant Knights were so ouerlayd with
the great might and power of their blows, that the knight of Cupid was
constrained to decline himself on the one side, and therewith he fell down to
the ground, whereas he lay, and moved neither hand nor foot, but was as one
that were dead, and the inuinsible knight of the Sun by the force of the blow
was clean void of any understanding, and had likewise fallen to the ground if
Fortune had not favored him, that he fell forwards upon the saddle bow, that
his head touched the Horse neck, and his arms hung down on both sides, and
voyded great abundance of blood out of his mouth and eyes, in* such sort, that
they thought him likewise to be as dead as the Knight of Cupid, and his horse
being tormented with that terrible blow did founder under him, and remained
without any moving, as though the bones of his legs had been broken. At
which sight all those that were in that great place, received so great sorrow
and grief at the extremity of these two valiant Knights, that thinking they
had been dead, they lamented as though they had been their natural
brethren. But the Princess Lindabrides when she saw her Knight in that
estate, not having any power to resist so mortal a grief, had not the power
to govern her self, but fell in a sound, and had fallen out of her Chair
whereas she sat, if her Gentlewomen had not ben, who seeing her in that case,
took her in their arms, and carried her into her closet, and laid her upon
her bed, whereas she had more semblaunce to be dead, then as one having any
life.

Likewise the Princess Claridiana, with no less pain and grief did beeholde
her knight, who with the mightiness of her courageous heart did make
resistance against that amorous thought which love caused within her. Who with
no less sorrow and grief when he saw the Knights in this extremity, and as
though he had known the^ to be his sons, he withdrew himself from the
window, and descended down into the great place, accompanied with many
Knights, he went whereas these knights were, and found that they were
compassed about with their perfect friends, the two Princes and the king
Sacridoro, who lamented with great abundance of tears, and caused their Helmes
to be pulled of, and to throw water in their faces, thinking therewith and
with the air* they would come again to themselves, but all was in vain that
they did, for that there was in them no other sign, but as though they had
been stark dead. For which occasion and with dolorous grief the Emperor
commanded them to be carried unto his Royal Palace, and caused their armor
to be taken off, and to be laid in several beds, which was in two quadrans,
very richly hanged, joining the one unto the other.

Then were called together the best Hhisitions and Surgions that were in all
the whole city of Constantinople, who did beehold and peruse them very well,
and told unto the Emperor that they were not dead, although they were in
great peril of their lives. Who being somewhat comforted thereby, commanded that
foorth-with their faces should be washed and made clean, that were all to be
rayed with boold, and swollen, and did not a little marvel in their minds
when they saw the great beauty of the Knight of Cupid, and the small quantity
of years which he seemed to have. And how that he resembled very much the
Knight of the Sun, and he had so great love unto both those Knights, that
he would have given half his estate to have seen them out of that great
peril. So after the Phisicions and Surgions had well perused them, they found
that the greatest evil which they had, was weariness of their bodies, and all
their bones and flesh bruised, by the mighty force of their terrible blows. So
they ministered unto them very sweet and comfortable ointments, and all that
was necessay for them and most convenient, and commanded that every man
should depart from thence and let them alone, that they might sleep and take
their rest, with only two Pages, which were in another chamber there by with
great silence, that whenever these knights should come unto themselves they
should call the Physicians and Surgions. In this time there was not a knight in
ye city of Constantinople, neither in that great place, nor in their Tents in
the field, as well strangers and Country men, that did occupy themselves in
any other communication, but in the wonderful and timorous battle of these
two Knights, and of their mighty blows, perticularly every thing as it was,
and said, that there was never seen in all the world such like contention
beetwixt two knights, with so great strength, force, and peril, neither was
any Damsel or Gentlewoman that saw the peril of these two Knights, but did
very much lament the same, and said, that if these two Knights did die, that
the flower of all knighthood in the world was finished and ended. But in this
time what did those two Princes Brandizel and Claueryndo and his very friend
Florinaldus? Surely no other thing all that night but lament for their very
friend the Knight of the Sun, and making so great sorrow, that it would have
moved any to have had compassion that should have heard them. But what shall
I say of that valiant and worthy King Sacridoro, his perfect friend, that when
the night was come, he found himself all alone in that great place, without
the company of his very friend the Knight of Cupid, and not knowing where to
lodge himself, surely his sorrow and grief was such, that if he thought to
find his friend the Knight of Cupid in the profound depth of the sea, he
would have thrown himself therein, as he did into the deep fountain of the
savage people, for to take reuengement on that monster who carried his friend
away. So he went forth of the City, and being in the fields he did alight
from his horse, and laid himself down upon the green grass, whereas he
passed away all that night, with great lamentation, beewayling ye misfortune of
his perfect friend. The history does not declare any thing of the fair
Princess Lindabrides, but that she passed all that night in sorrow and
grief. But he says that the princess Claridiana when she was alone in her
chamber, there was no sufficiency in the highness of her estate, neither in
the generositie of her courageous heart, for to draw her from the lamenting of
ye misfortune of her knight, in such sort, that all the night she did no other
thing but shed abundaunce of tears which ran down by her Crystal cheeks,
and spoke such lamentable and sorrowful words, that it seemed her life could
not have endured till the next day, if it had not pleased God to have given
remedy therein, as in the next Chapter shall be declared.

How the knight of the Sun and the knight of Cupid, were come again unto
themselves, and how they were known to be brethren by a meruaylous means.
Chapter 36.
NOw was the time come that the universal creator and maker of all this, would
that these strange meruayles should be manifest unto all men, and that the
great travails and biter complaints of the Empress Briana should come to an
end, his divine providence does so ordain all things, that at such time as
the loss of the Greek Princes was very certain unto them, and that there was
great suspicion and doubt in the lives of the two worthy Knights of the Sun
and of Cupid, at that time were the lost princes found again, and these famous
knights clear of their peril, and known to be sons unto their royal
fathers, for that with more honor they might celebrate the triumphs and
feasts of their natural Princes. So after that this rigorous and furious
battle was ended, about midnight the knight of the Sun came unto himself and
awaked out of his long and heavy place. And when he was well settled in his
remembrance, he called so mind the passed battle, but seeing himself naked
and alone in that bed, with a torch burning in the quadran, ^e straight way
suspected what it should be, and thought verily that the knight of Cupid had
got the victory, and he overcome. Whereat he reciued so great sorrow and
grief, that he though it better to be dead then to remain with life, and
was the occasion that he fell again in a sound, and so remained more then one
hour, at which time he returned again unto him self, with mortal anguish
and inward grief, he said.

Oh false and deceiuable Gods, how much have you been by me honored and
worshipped, now I do beeleeue that your sect is false and evil, and all we
which do believe therein, we do err and are out of the right way. How could
your divine providence (if you have any above men) permit and suffer that he
who in this world was no less esteemed the^ you in the heavens, to be by one
Christian before so high and mightte Princes and knights brought to be
overcome. Wherefore has it been said that your high and divine power was very
much extended upon the knight of the Sun, and now by one enemy of your law
is come to be destroyed? Wherefore did you put into him more higher estate and
prowess then ever was in any other Knight, and now so soon to come unto
reproach and shame. Oh how convenient it is that I die, or else to go whereas I
shall never more be seen, rather then with so great reproach to come unto the
Court of the Emperor Trebatio.

Oh Princess Claridiana, wherefore would you by the rigorous force of your
arm that the Knight of the Chariot was known to be the knight of the Sun,
that now in so short time the high renown and fame of his great valiantness
is lost: Oh how much better it had been for me to have been flame, being
the knight of the Chariot, then now being known to be the Knight of the Sun,
to be overcome and loose the victory, for that whatsoever had chanced under
this name of the Chariot, should not with so great reason have received the
reproach. Oh how much better and more acceptable had it been for me, to have
been some base and towardly Knight, and not by so high and mighty deeds by
me done, which caused in me so much pride, for to put my mind upon the most
highest damsels in all the world. From this day forwards it does not beehooue
me to come in their presence, but procure my death, or else to go whereas
they shall here after never hear of my name.

And in saying these words he received so great courage, that he blasphemed
against his Gods, calling them false diceiuers, making an oath to destroy all
such Idols and Temples of theyrs as were in that Country. And with great fury
he arose out of his bed, and went seeking of his armor round about the
Chamber, with determination for to depart from thence whereas they should never
hear any news of him. So when he saw that in all that Quadran he could not
find his armor, for that the Emperor had commanded them to be laid up and
kept, by the light of a Torch that was in another Quadran, he went thither to
look for his armor, but at such time as he would have entered in thereat, he
heard a Knight which did greatly complain himself which lay in another bed,
and for to hear his ^orrowful complaint, he stayid himself without at the
door.

This was the Knight of Cupid, who being come again unto himself, with great
grief and sorrow was ready ^o burst to see himself alone and unarmed in that
place, beeleeuing that the knight of the Chariot had overcome him, and the
Emperor had commanded him to be brought thither to be cured, and amongst
many other things he said thus.

Oh heavy and uncomfortable Knight of Cupid, what misfortune did move thy
desire to come and seek the Court of the Emperor Trebatio, for to see the
great meruailes of the Knight of the Chariot, for that therein thou have been
so feeble and faint, so that it does not beehooue thee by no means, to
acknowledge thy self unto the one to be his son, neither to go and seek the
other to acknowledge him to be thy brother. How dare I be so bold as to say
that I am son unto the Emperor Trebatio, who is the highest and mightiest
Emperor in all the world, or for to say that I am brother unto the knight of
the Sun, he being the flower of all knighthood in the world, and to be
overcome by another and not by him? Oh sorrowful Rosicleer, how much does it
profit thee to go whereas thou may never more be seen, and not to come any
more in the company of men, seeing at such time as thy fame was most spread in
the world, fortune has given thee so great a fall: Oh Princes and Knights of
the world, how many of you has been by me overcome, from this day forwards
you need not to speak any more of the Knight of Cupid, for that all his
honor and victory is transported unto the Knight of the Chariot: Oh Princess
of England, my heart is not now so sad, as yours may rejoice and be glad. And
if you have forgotten Rosicleer, I have no reason to complain, for you being
the most precious Damsel in the world, you have no reason to have in
estimation a Knight that so quickly is overcome and shamed: What reuengement
can I take now of the Prince Don Siluerio, of whom the Princess Oliuia hoped
for to frustrate, and make satisfaction of her error: Where is now all her
confidence, seeing that first I am overcome, what hope shall I have of any
victory: Oh valiant and worthy Knight of the Sun, what is beecome of your
sovereign bounty, that you hau^ not met with this knight of the Chariot.
Certainly I do believe, yt it should have gone otherwise with you, the^ with
this sorrowful Knight of Cupid, your brother Oh haw from this day forwards,
may you be without all good hope for to know your royal parents, for that there
is none that does know who they are but I alone. It does accomplish me first to
die, then for to discover it so greatly unto my shame. In saying these and many
other words, this sorrowful knight would have risen up from his bed, to have
departed from thence. But when the knight of the Sun had well understood all
that was said, he was the most ioyfullest man in all the world, and so naked as
he was, he entered into the quadran, and with his arms abroad went toward him
and said: Oh my Lord and perfect friend Rosicleer, what fortune is this unto
me, that without knowing you* I have been by your rigorous blows so ill
entreated, in such sort, that without any remembrance I was almost at the point
of death. Beehold here your friend the knight of the Sun, the same, who in the
Island of the false giant, before that I did know you, I got the battle, for
to succor that fair damsel. Behold me here, I am the knight of the Chariot,
with whom yester day you made the stout and perilous battle, who according
unto the entertainment that he had of you, it had been better that you had first
known him to be the Knight of the Sun, so should I not have received so much
damage. And here I do desire you that if you ^oe know any thing of my
progeny, to let me understand thereof, for behold I am the Knight of the Sun.
And for that you shall the better believe that I do say, behold here the
mark that I have upon my body, for being borne with the ^ame, I was called by
this name, of the Sun, at which time ^s I was found at the sea in a small boat,
by Florion. And in ^aying these words* he did open his shirt at his breast, and
did how the sign of the Sun, which was upon his right side.

So when Rosicleer had well understood, what the worthy Knight of the Sun had
said, and knowing him by his face, and by the sign of the Sun on his body. He
saw before him the present romedy, of all his sorrow, which was such, and of so
great force, that never in all his life he received the like. And again, in
knowing his brother the knight of the Sun, he received so great joy and
pleasure, and was so glad, that as one half amazed and from himself, he
imbrased him, and so remained a good while without any power to speak, not
knowing whether it was of a truth that which he had seen, or some false vision
with the which many times he has be^ deluded.

But after many amorous and comfortable words of the knight of the Sun, he was
fully certified, and put out of all doubt, and returned a new to embrace him,
shedding many salt tears, which distilled down his breast, he said as follows.

Oh divine power and majesty of him that the heavens and earth does govern,
how have I deserved so great merit, that at such time as I was in the greatest
favor of fortune, I was upon a sudden brought unto the estate to be over
thrown down into the pit: And by thee I am reserved and comforted, and have
attained to know him to be my brother, which is the most famous knight in all
the world, whom I thought to be my great and mortal enemy.

Oh my Lord and knight of the Sun, acknowledge this knight of Cupid, which is
the same Rosicleer, who you going in the small bark at the Island of the giant,
did deliver from death: and although I do not deserve so great a benefit, yet
I give you to understand that I am your brother, and both borne at one time and
at one birth, of the high and mighty empress Briana, at such time as she was
at the Monestary of the River: being with child, by our high and mighty father
the Emperor Trebatio And by a misfortune which happened unto the nurse, who
did nourish bring and us up for her own children, you were lost in a small
boat, which by the furious force of a mighty deep* and perilous River, and
with the swift course thereof, you were carried into the maine sea, and there was
tossed up and down* till such time as you were found by Florion, the Prince of
Persia.

The two pages which was in another quadran hard by to watch them* with the
noise which the Knight of the Sun did make at such time as he arose out of his
bed, they did awake, and heard all that passed betwixt the two Knights: who
being almost from themselves with the great joy and pleasure they received,
they took a torch that was light in that quadran, and without making themselves
ready, they went running unto the place whereas the Emperor Trebatio and the
empress Briana lay, and were a sleep. And never rested knocking and giving
great blows at the door, till such time as they were answered by the guard,
that kept them. And the pages in great have willed them to open the door, for
that they brought unto the Emperor, the most ioyfullest news that ever in all
his life he received.

The guard who did know the pages by their speech being very much amazed
thereat, did open the door, and they without any staying, went in with the
burning torch in their hands, whereas the Emperor and the empress were a
sleep, and with a high and loud voice, they said: Oh high and mighty Emperor
Trebatio, and you sovereign Empress Briana, arise up from your beads, and you
shall see the knight of the sun and the knight of Cupid alive. And by the great
providence of God, they are known to be brethren. The one is the gentleman of
the Sun, and the other is Rosicleer, both your lost sons.

So when the Emperor Trebatio and the Empress Briana heard that news of so
great joy and pleasure, without any more tarrying, they arose out of their
beds, and covered them selves with certain mantells, which were very rich, and
in great have they forthwith went unto the quadran or lodging whereas they left
them. So when the Empress came unto their lodging, she did behold ^he
christalline face of Rosicleer, who did know the same, although she had not
seen him of long time: and again, he was very much grown in bigness of his
body and person.

But when she was fully certified that to be most true which was told her,
without tarrying for the Emperor she ran unto him, and did embrace him with
great love and joy, and took him out of the arms of the knight of the Sun, who
was in his shirt, and embraced with him. But the great joy, which the Empress
received, to have him in her arms, was such, that she had no power to speak
in a great space. But in the end, with shedding of great abundance of tears,
she did reprehend him, for being so long away from her. In this time, the
Emperor came and did embrace the knight of the Sun, with so great pleasure,
that scarcely he could keep himself upright. Who when he saw the Emperor, he
kneeled down before him, and asked of him his hands for to kiss them, and
said: It may please your highness to give unto me your hands, as unto the
knight of the Sun, your faithful servant, where with I may wholly and entirely
rejoice my self, and enjoy that great benefit, which the high gods, this night
has permitted that I should know for father, him whom unto their divine power
does make equal. The knight of the Sun, had no^ more time for to speak, for
that the Emperor did embrace^ him, and made him to arise from the ground, and
kissed him with great love, as much for that he was the knight of the Sun as
for that he knew him to be his child.

And in shedding many tears, which ran down by their cheeks, for great
joy, he embraced him again, and said. Oh (...) loyal and faithful friend, and
loving son, with what word^ shall I give thanks, unto my sovereign Lord and
god, for the great benefit which he has showed unto me, this night, t^
acknowledge my self to be father unto him who is the fl^ were of all knighthood
in the world, and without knowing hi^ to be son, is the only person that I
most loved an^ made account of in all the world. Surely I know n^ what to say,
but to receive it for so great a merit, that it seems unto me that I do lack
force and strength for to conceive it, In this time the pleasant and amorous
words which passed betwixt the fair Empress Briana and her son Rosicleer, was
with so great joy and pleasure, and they received so great contentment, that I
know not whereto to compare it, but unto that joy which the Emperor Trebatio
and the Empress Briana received, when they met together in the monestarie of
the River, after long time that the Emperor was absent. So with this
sovereign joy the Empress did not remember the knight of the Sun, till such
time as Rosicleer said: May it please your highness to speak unto my brother
the Knight of the Sun, and to acknowledge him for the best son that ever was
borne of mother. Then the Empress all astonyed and amazed, as one awaked out
of her sleep upon a sudden, she left Rosicleer and went unto the knight of
the Sun, who was still in his shirt, and at the opening of his shirt before,
she did see the sign of the Sun that was on his breast, whereat she received
so great joy and pleasure, that if the Emperor had not ben who did sustain
her, she had fallen down unto the ground. Then the knight of the Sun did kneel
down before her, and took her hands and kissed them very often, till such time
as she being ravished with joy, threw her arms about his neck, and fell down
upon him, and kissing him on that fair face, with a terrible sigh of great
love she said.

Oh Knight of the Sun, the loyal and perfect friend of my Lord the emperor
Trebatio, how shall I now rejoice my self in this great benefit which my Lord
God has showed unto me, to have the knowledge of so worthy a son, if the
fear which I have of Fortune do not disturb me, in remembering the solitary
life which I lead, and reloycing my self in your childhood and with what
sudden change Fortune did carrye you away from me. Likewise the great sorrow
and grief which I received for your love was such, that as yet I am not
perfect in my self, neither can I believe that in one who was environed with
so great sorrow and bitter anguish, should receive so great mirth and joy, so
that in the remembrance of all troubles past, if it should not be rejoiced with
this present joy, to mitigate the fury thereof, my feminine force and strength
were not iufficient to suffer the fury of this great pleasure the which is come
unto me, in acknowledging such a valiant and worthy knight to be my son: Oh
how now do I give great thanks unto my God, for the travails and troubles,
which your loss and the absence of my Lord the Emperor has caused unto me,
seeing that I am now paid with so high a gift, and joyful reward. Saying
these and many other words, the Empress Briana had the knight of the Sun so
fast embraced in her arms, with her face joining unto his, that he had no
power to make any answer. And for that these two brethren were still in their
shirts, the pages which were nigh them in the quadran, had belonging unto them
two mantels, wherewith they did cover themselves, and the Knight of Cupid with
the greatest pleasure that ever he felt in all his life, went and kneeled down
before the Emperor and said.

Let it please your sovereign highness to know me the Knight of Cupid, who
has not received small travail for your absence, and for the loss of my
brother the Knight of the Sun, in seeking of you both in strange Countries,
very far and aparted from these countries, although it was not in so ample
manner, as was requisite to the service of my Lord the Emperor Trebatio, for
that at that time we had him rather for an enemy then for a Father, but for
the accomplishment of that which I was bound unto my Lady the Empress. And for
to know who was the occasion that my Lady the Empress should lead so straight
and solitary a life, which she maintained in the monestarie of the River, which
was a thing that touched me very much. But now knowing the occasion and ground
thereof, I do not marvel so much, but only how she could sustain her self
and live one moment without his presence And again if she had not said that he
was called the prince Edward, I do believe that she would not have been
deceined, and being innocent, she did not mistrust any such deceit.

So vath no less joy and pleasure then unto the knight of the Sun, the
Emperor did embrace him, and made him to arise from the ground and said: Oh my
son Rosicleer, how it seems unto me that you were not content, neither
received any pleasure at this deceit or policy, as you do say I used with the
Empress your mother, but in consideration of the fruit that I received in
doing the same, I may compare it unto your lo^ suffering and being quiet, and
delating of the time that I could not receive the great joy and pleasure that I
should in the acknowledging of such a Sun. Tell me for Gods love, what has
been the occasion that you have refrayned your self so long time, and delated
to give me this sovereign joy which now I do receive: if it before the deceit
and policy which I used with the Empress your mother. The fruit which
proceeded thereof is sufficient to excuse that error done, if it had been of
greater importance, but what reason have I to excuse my self from the
occasion that made me to do it. Then Rosicleer not a little abashed at that
which the Emperor had said unto him, answered: If the ouer-plus o^ the reason
which I have to rejoice me in the acknowledging of such a father. I had to
encourage me, to public my self for his son. Then had your highness
reason to blame me, in the detayning my self so long herein. And because I
do find my self not worthy to deserve so great a benef^, I did make
detraction thereof, till this time should supply the great lack which was in
my valor. So that your highness may of truth understand, that all that which
happened unto me by the Knight of the Sun my brother, had been done by some
other Knight. First I would have consented to the death, then with so great
shame to have acknowledged my self to be son unto such parents. The
Emperor would very ^ayne have answered Rosicleer, but that the Empress and
the knight of the Sun came unto them, and altogether they did a new embrace
each other, in such sort, that they had no time for to speak, and the joy and
pleasure was so much in the Empress Briana, that she was almost from her
self, and could not well satisfy her eyes in the beholding of her sons, and
showed unto the emperor the signs* tokens which they had upon their breasts,
and brought them into the world at their birth. So that betwixt them there
passed a great discourse of many things, which did greatly augment their joy
and pleasure, of all that had happened unto the^, that if I should here make
particular relation, I should never make an end, therefore to avoid
tediousness I do let it pass, it is sufficient that the readers here of do
understand the great reason, as well of the parents as of the children, for to
recoice themselves of this new and sudden pleasure. In this time it was
published throughout all the palace, these good and strange news, and the
noise and rushing was so great amongst them with the have they made for to go
and see their new princes, that all the whole city was in a rumor and tumult,
suspecting that it had been some other thing, and was the occasion that there
resorted much people unto the Palace, in so great abundance, tha^ he palace
was full, and could no more enter. Likewise the st^s had so great prease, that
one could scarce pass by another. But when it was known unto all people of
the acknowledging of their new princes, there was so great pleasure amongst them,
that in a short time all the whole City was so lightsome, as at noone days
with the great light of Bonefires and Torches that was in every street thereof,
with many pastimes and new inventions of so great mirth, that it seemed that
there were joined together all the pastimes and pleasures in the world. The
royal Princess Claridiana was not the last that came for to see these new
Princes, for that so soon as she heard of the great joy which was caused by
this new and strange news, she arose ont of her bed, and covered her self
with a precious and rich robe, lined with Martines furre, which was brought her
by her Damselles, and her golden hair hanging down, with so great beauty,
that she was esteemed rather for some divine Goddess, then any humane
creature. She went unto the place whereas the Emperor and the Empress with
their sons, were embracing one another. And for that her Gentlewomen went
before her, with light Torches in their hands, every one did give place unto
her, and did receive her with great honor and courtesy. But with a gracious
and smiling countenance accompanied with great severity, she left them all,
and went and did embrace the worthy Knight of the Sun, and said: If that by
the force of my arms, worthy and valiant Prince, did cause you to receive any
anger and grief, when I made you to be known for the knight of the Sun,
with the same arms I will now make satisfaction of my fault, in embrasing of
you, as the son of the Emperor Trebatio, and of my Lady the Empress Briana.
The great pleasure which the worthy Knight of the Sun received of this
embracing ought not to be compared unto that which was the occasion that he
came unto the knowledge of his father and brother. But this may well be said,
that he could not receive greater pleasure and contentment, if at that time
the whole world and all the riches therein had been given unto him, for when he
felt himself touched with those delicate arms and warlike hands, he thought
verily that in all his life he could not receive the like glory, and humbling
himself very much, with a meek voice he said: As it was perilous unto the
knight of the Sun, that rigorous encounter, which by your strong arm (worthy
princess) he received, yet this sovereign and great benefit, which as son
unto the Emperor Trebatio I have received, I do acknowledge my self to be
fully satisfied and paid of that high recompense, although it was not so small
the harm which I received by that encounter, that I think to receive any
satisfaction, but will rather put me in farther peril and danger. The
Princess Claridiana did very well understand the last words that were spoken
by the knight of the Sun, but dissembling with him she left him and went unto
the knight of Cupid, and said: Let it be in good time the acknowledging of the
knight of Cupid, for that there was no cause sufficient, being less the^ this,
for to make peace with him, who in this battle did show so much enmity. And
for the part that I have therein, if that by any other knight the knight of the
Sun should be put into so great extremity, I say I am very glad for yt it
happened to be done by you. For to conclude, it was gods pleasure, that all
bounty and goodness in the world should consist in the blood of the Emperor
Tiebatio, wherein the knight of Cupid is pertaker with the knight of the Sun, so
that it is not much to be mer^ailed at, that the bounty of the one and of the
other should be equal. So after that Rosicleer had answered the royal
Princess Claridiana, straight way came unto them, the two worthy Princes
Brandizel and Clauerindo, who when they heard the news, almost from themselves
with the great ^oye which they received, they came in great have for to* see
their good friend the Knight of the Sun, whom they did embrace with so great
love, as though they would never have separated themselves. The Knight of the
Sun gave understanding unto the Emperor, and to all that were present, who and
what these Princes were. Of the which they did al greatly rejoice, and the
Emperor with great joy and pleasure said.

Oh what great wrong has been done unto me hitherto, that being in this my
Court, such, and so high and mighty Knights, and I could never have any
knowledge thereof, for to do unto them the honor that unto such personages
does appertain. And now have I my joy and cont^nt fully accomplished, for that
I have so high and mighty Princes and Knights that be pertakers with me
therein.

At this time was the reioyeings and pleasures so great in the Pallai^e, as
also in the City, that one could ^carce hear an other with the great noise yt
was amongst them.

And as the Knight of Cupid looked round about him on every side, and could
not see his faithful friend the King Sacridoro, being somewhat troubled
therewith, he did enquire after him, and there lacked not them which did tell
him, that when the battle was concluded beetwixt him and the knight of the
Sun, that he was seen to go forth of the City very sorrowful and
comfortless, but they knew not whether he wae gone. The Emperor by and by
when he understood what was the occasion of his sons alteration, rejoicing
very much that he had so high and mighty a king in his Court. Forthwith he
commanded certain Knights to go and seek him out, toward that way which he
was seen to depart. Who in a small time they found him out, whereas he lay a
long in the green field almost from himself with great sorrow and weeping,
that he seemed to be dead. And when they had brought him to himself again,
one of the Knights said.

What do you make here sir Knight, that you do not go and help to celebrate
this great mirth and joy which is made, for the acknowledging of the new
princes of Greece? What feasts and reioycings be these, said the King
Sacridoro, I for my part am more fitter to command to make preparation for my
burial, then to celebrate any Feasts. Then the knights said, may it please
you to arise up, for you shall understand that the knight of Cupid your
faithful friend, has sent us to seek you out, praying you to come and bear
him company, to rejoice in that he has known the knight of the Sun to be his
brother, and son unto the Emperor Trebatio, which is that knight of the
Chariot, with whom he made the battle the day past. What is this that you do
tell me, said the king Sacridoro, that the Knight of the Chariot is brother
unto the Knight of Cupid.

Yea surely, that he is, said the knight, but and you will not beeleeue me,
lift up your eyes and look toward the City, and you shall see the great
Feasts and triumphs which are made therein, for the acknowledging of their new
Princes. The king Sac^idoro, who was no less amazed then ioyefull at those
news, looked toward the City, and saw that with the cressets, fires, and
other lights, as though the City had been on fire. In great have he arose up,
and the knights which came to seek him, fetched his horse, who was loose in ye
field, and bridled him, the^ they all together leaped upon their horses, and
went toward the mighty palace, and met with so many maskes and other kinds
of pleasure, that almost they could not pass through the streets. And when
they came whereas the Emperor and the Princes were, this good king was known
by them straight by the device of his armor, and he who first went forth for
to receive him, was the Emperor Trebatio, who clasping his arms about his
neck, said.

Now is all my desire accomplished (worthy King) for that I am come to the
knowledge of him, who for that he would not loose the knight of Cupid, his
faithful friend, did abhor his life, and sought his own death in the deep
fountain of the Savages, whereas he could have no other hope but to die the
death: Oh happy and fortunate son Rosicleer, that could obtain so high and
faithful a friend. And more happy are you (worthy King) that in doing of this
worthy act of friendship, you have filled all the whole world with ye fame
thereof, in such sort, that it will never decaie nor be forgotten, so long as
the reason of man does endure.

The king kneeling down would have taken his hands to have kissed them, but
the Emperor did cause him to arise from the ground, and would not consent
thereunto. Then did all the rest come and embrace him, and did him great
honor, for that it was known to them all what he had done for Rosicleer, by
the other Princes which came thither, as you have heard in the History. So for
a perpetual memory heerof, because that such a worthy deed should not be
forgotten, the Emperor commanded that it should be portrayed in the fore
front of his mighty Palace, nigh unto the adventure of Lindaraza, which made
all them that did beeholde the same to marvel much thereat, When Rosicleer
came to embrace the king Sacridoro, their joy and pleasure was no less at that
time, then if they had not seen one another in twenty years. In this time
the good Pages of the Knight of the Sun, who never departed from their Lord,
from the time that the battle was finished, until the time that the worthy
Knights were known for Brethren, and the great sorrow and grief which they
received for that which was past, was nothing in comparison so much, but their
joy and pleasure was much more, in that they saw before their eyes, and thought
all their labor meruaylouslie well beestowed (which at all times they well
accustomed to do in ample manner) upon so worthy and valyant a Lord. And as
they did partly understand the love that their Lord the Knight of the Sun had
to the Princess Lindabrides, and remembering that she remained in a great
sound at such time as the battle between the two brethren was ended, Aurelio
said unto his brother Bynnano, that he should remain there with their Lord,
and that he would go and carry these news unto the Princess Lindabrides,
for that possiblte she had no understanding thereof. So he departed out of
the Palace and w^nt unto the triumphant Chariot, whereas he found the Giants
in their watch very heavy and sorrowful, for that all of them thought verily
the Princess Lindabrides had been dead, for that she never returned nor came
unto her self from the time that they carried the Knight of the Sun out of
the iusting place, and for that Aurelia was known of all the gards, he went
up into the Chariot, unto the chamber whereas the Princess was laid upon her
bed, and her Damsells round about her as though she had been dead, who were
very much comforted when they saw and knew him, and with the great desire that
they had to know what was beecome of the knight of the Sun, they asked of him
where he was? Let us do so much that we may bring the Princess again unto
her remembrance, said Aurelio, for that I do bring news that she will not a
little rejoice ^ir self at. And therewith her Damsels and he took the
Princess by the hand, and made her to sit upright upon her rich bed, and threw
on her face meruaylous sweet waters, and used such remedies that she somewhat
came again unto her self, that seeing Aurelio with a merry and cheerful
voice, he said. What is this Lady, that in the time that your highness ought
to be most merry and glad, in helping to celebrate the great joy and pleasure,
which my Lord the Knight of the Sun does receive, in acknowledging himself to
be son unto the Emperor Trebatio, and brother unto the Knight of Cupid, with
whom yesterday he made that rigorous battle, and now you to be so sorrowful
and sad, and out of all remembrance, and as yet the news is not fully known
abroad. You shall understand that my Lord the knight of the Sun is very well,
thanks be to almighty god. And for that the Emperor Trebatio his father, and
the Empress Briana his mother, will not give him leave to come and see your
highness, he does send me to desire you to pardon him for this night, till to
morrow it be day. At which news the great joy and pleasure which the fair
Princess received was such, that if the Page had not been so well known as he
was, she could not have beeleeued it, but because he was known to be so
faithful a servant unto the knight of the Sun, she was fully persuaded of the
truth, and arose up from her bed as merry and as joyful as ever she was in all
her life, and said that by no means she would remain there, but go and see
the knight of the Sun, and speak unto ye Emperor Trebatio, and unto the
Empress* Briana, and help them to rejoice the acknowledging of their lost sons,
and therewith she called her damsels to help to make her ready, and to trim her
in the best and richest manner that was possible, calling to remembrance how
the Princess^ Claridiana was in the palace, who would not let but to be
present at the acknowledging of the knight of the Sun, in consideration
whereof she determined to go in such sort, that she might assure y^ fear
which the princess Claridiana did put her in. So after that she was by her
damsels made ready and put in gallant and rich order, she commanded to call
unto her two of the principallest Gyaunts that were there amongst the rest, and
taking him by the hand she descended out of the Chariot, and before her went a
great number of damsels with Torches burning in their hands, and were so richly
apparailed, that either of them seemed to be a queen, and her train was
carried up by two very fair damsels, with crowns of gold upon their heads,
because they were queens, and they had other two damsels which carried up
their trains, and came last, and in the midst amongst the Damsels that carried
the burning Torches before the Princess, there went four Giants, of those of
the guard, all armed with very bright and glistering armor, and each of them a
mighty Fauchon in his hand, who were so furious and terrible to beeholde, that
the sight of them (to all that did look on the^) was a sufficient sauegard
unto the Princess. And in the same order there went other four Giants after
the princess, who were no less sauegard unto her, and for that she was one
of the fairest damsels that was in all the world, and so richly apparailed,
she seemed by the light of the Torches to be so exceeding fair, that many
which were rejoicing themselves in the city, and celebrating these great
feasts, did forget themselves in their own inventions and sports, and remained
astonished and amazed in beeholding the strange beauty and sovereign highness
and estate, which ye Princess had. In this sort she passed through the great
place till she came unto the mighty Palace, and entered in ther^at. When the
Emperor understood of her coming, and all those which were with him, they
went ^oorth to meet and receive her, and all that were there present, ^ere not
a little amazed at the strange beauty of the prin^esse, unto whom when they had
done all their duty and reue^ence, the Empress Briana received her and took
her by the ^and, and took the Princess Claridiana in the other hand.

So they went all three into a very fair and well garnished quadran, whereas
they did pass all the rest of the night which remained with so great mirth and
pleasure, that it is better (...) be thought on then told, althought the
(...) Claridiana was in no such security as before, who at times did beehold
the knight of the Sun, and seemed unto her that there lack no reason for to
love the Princess Lindabrides, if there remained any remnaunt of love in him,
after that he had seen her, although on the other part, with great reason
she her self in estimation, and was in all things assured, if that she had
been satified, that by reason the Knight of the Sun would govern himself,
yet the great fear of the Princess Claridiana was nothing in comparison to
that which the princess Lindabrides felt, with her perilous grace and
countenance. For when she saw the great vantage that she had over all that
ever she had seen, and the great reason that the knight had for to love her,
she was in great perplexity of mind and thought, that she did very much
repent her self for coming thither.

Likewise in this time the Knight of the Sun was not so firm in the love of
the one, but many times he was overcome with the sight of the other, neither
had he brought himself into such bondage, but that he had liberty for to renew
the love lost, and although his mind was brought into such alteration and
contensious battle, as he never found himself in the like, yet his body in
such sort did refrain the desire which his covetous ey^had for to behold,
that he gave unto none of all them that were there present, any occasion of
suspicion of his grief, neither unto any of the Damsell^ occasion for to
think any thing but the fear of their beauties, and the great reason that
either of them had for to (...) beeloued, which desert surmounted in either of
them.

In this time the Emperor Trebatio and the (...) Briana never ceased to
enquire and asked of their preciou^ sons, what things had chanced unto them
in adventures until that time that they were known. Unto the which sometimes
their sons, and sometimes their fathfull friends did satisfy themselves in
such sort, that not only the emperor and the Empress, but also all those
that were present to hear them were greatly amazed, and gave great thanks
unto god for his miracles showed upon those knights. Although they had greater
reason to marvel within a while after, because the wise Artemidoro came
thither, and did show the chronicle of all that two worthy knights had done,
wherein was declared perticularlie the worthy deeds of either of them, and
likewise of their friends. So in declaring what had happened unto them, they
passed away the rest of the night which remained, with so great contentment
unto the hearers thereof, that they wished the night longer, so that he might
not leave off declaring those things.

Of the great feasts and triumphs that were made in the great City of
Constantinople, for the acknowledging of the princes, and of a certain
adventure which came at that time thither, whereat all the Knights of the
Court were at the point to be lost. Chapter. 37.
THe next day in the morning the rejoicing and pleasure that was in the great
city of Constantinople, with the inventions that the citizens had, the more to
increase the same, was in such sort, that the strange Knights, which found
themselves present thereat, had great reason to say that it was the best and
most richest city that any prince had in all the world, and the people thereof
so loyal and faithful as any subjects might possibly be. Likewise the
Greekish knights mounted upon very good horses, garnished and beetrapped with
very rich cloth of Gold and (...), and did pass throughout all the great
City, and made a great noise upon the paued streets, which did not a little
augment the great feasts: amongst whom there did not lack princes of great
estimation, and knights of great fame. And for that they were subjects unto the
Emperor Trebatio, they did as well show themselves very gallant and joyful,
in acknowledging of their new princes. And all of them went and did kiss their
hands, who received them with great love, embrasing of them and acknowledging
some of the^ for very good and faithful friends, more then for subjects, but
in especial, the good and valiant prince Rodafeo, prince of the Rhodes, and
Rodamarte, and other valiant princes and knights, which the knight of the Sun
in the Just, did know them to be of great bounty, and worthy to be esteemed.
So this day the emperor Trebatio did inuit to dyne with him, all princes and
Knights of fame, as well strangers as of his countries, that were in the court.
And with the great importunance of him and of the Empress Briana, of force
there must remain with them that day the fair princes Lindabrides, who with a
better good will, would have remained in the place, whereas she had little
security of her love, in the princess Claridiana: and for that as then it was
not a time to take any armor, the emperor, princes and knights, did aparell
and adornat themselves, with cloth of gold and silk, of great valor, and was
conformable unto their high estates. At which time ye princes Claridiana, did
not forget the rich apparel, the which her damsels brought for her from
Trapisond, the which in contention of the princes Lindabrides, she did put on,
and was so well garnished, that it might well be said, that the stones and
pearls that was on it, to be worth half some kingdom.

So likewise the Empress, who was as brave and a^ gallant as the other two,
came forth, and all three on hors^ back, they went to hear divine service, at
a Monestar^ that was without the City, in a fair fresh and green^ feelde,
with whom there went out ^ great a number o^ knights for to bear them company,
that the streets of the great city could not hold them, so that the most part
of the^ were constrained to remain in the field, and yet the Emperor and the
princes were not come of the palace. But before him there came forth, all those
princes and knights of greatest estima^ion of Greece, so gallantly apparailed
and furnished, that it did augment very much his great estate.

So after them came the good Emperor, in the midst beetwixt his sons, all
mounted upon great and mighty horses, so gallant and well proporsioned, that it
might well be said, that in all the world there were not three knights of so
gallant a semblance, as they were. And the contentment was so great which all
their loving subjects did receive, that they did contemn with an other to put
themselves in places where as best they might recreate themselves in the
seeking of them. Likewise, all the windows of the City were full of damsels
and gentlewomen, not a little wondering at their strange and big proportions,
giving great thanks and praise unto God, for that in all this time he did
preserve, defend and keep them. And by reason that the Emperor was in the
enchantment of Lindaraza in the prime of his years, they all three did so much
resemble the one the other, that they could scant be known the one from the
other, but that his sons were somewhat bigger of body then their father was. So
after them came the fair Empress Briana, upon a Moyle, very richly garnished
and betrapped. And the king Sacridoro did lead him by the bridle, the empress
was so gallant and fair, that in all the whole empire of Greece could not be
found neither lady or damsel, that being put before her, but that she had
great vantage over them, except it were the excellent beauty, tho two fair
ladies and princes, who went the one on the one side and the other on the other
of the empress. One of them was ^nounted upon a white Unicorne, and the other
upon a white ^awfery: and the two Princes Clauerindo and Brandizel, did lead
them by their bridels.

And they were of as gentle dispositions of their bodies, as they were fair
and beautiful in their faces, that like the beams of the Sun, they did dim
the sight of all them that behold them. And amongst the people there was not a
little contempt and strife which of these two should be most fairest, and of
best proporsion, although much more greater was the contention that either of
them had in their hearts, for the knight of the Sun, for they knew not to which
of them he would yield himself prisoner, but the force and strength of the
presence of either of them was such, that it could not be judged but to be a
continual contention, without hope of any victory, and although there was some
vantage in the perilous sight and surmounted grace of the royal princess,
more then in the fair Lady, yet considering the long time and great
conversation that she had with the knight of the Sun, was the occasion that
there was such attension within his heart, that he had not so much understanding
for to acknowledge the small vauntage that was betwixt them, by reason whereof
he was brought into that estate, that the knight of the Sun should never have been by any of them overcome, except the presence of one of them had lacked. So
in this order they went toward the monestary, with the Giants of the
princess, hindermost of all them, and their Damsels, very strongly armed for
their sauegard. So they issued out of the City into the field whereas the
monestary was, and there the Knights of Greece, as well as the strange Knight
did make a great triumph and gallaunt show with their Horses, and for that they
were all lusty and valiant knights, and meru^ylonslie richly apparailed, and
it was a great comfort, joy and pleasure, unto all those people which did
beeholde them.

When they came unto the Monestarie, the Knight of the Sun did alight from
his Horse with a trise, and for that he knew not which of his Ladies he might
be bold first to take down from their Horse, he left them both, and went unto
the Empress his mother, and took her in his arms and lifted her from her
Moile, whereon she was riding, and sat her down upon the green grass, and
the Emperor and Rosicleer did alight the Princes. Then they altogether entered
into the monestary, whereas they heard divine service with great solempnitie,
yet the two sons did not so much rejoice themselves thereat, as the Emperor
their father did, for that the presence of those fair Ladies did cause
Rosicleer to call unto remembrance the great beauty of the Princess Oliuia,
who was no less in degree then any of them, so that there could no joy nor
pastime enter into his heart, that was suffient to take away that great
heaviness that so long time was rooted in him, but rather the conversation of
his parents and of the princes and Knights, did cause in him the more sorrow,
for that he could not occupy himself in those deep and profound thoughts as
he was to do, and was very desirous to find some means, how with reason he
might leave that life which he then lead very much against his will, and seek
some other way which was more agreeble unto his unfortunate estate. In this day
the knight of the Sun, more by divine inspiration, then for any duty unto his
parents, did receive the holy sacrament of baptism, and did confess that all
those gods in the which he did believe, to be false and liers, and did return
unto the law and faith of Christ, with so great will and determined mind, as
though he had been a long time before instructed therein, for he had always
before his eyes, and could not be fully satisfied that it should be good, that
law in the which he had lived hither to, which was the occasion that with the
more ease he did attain to the perfection of the law of god. In which he
continued his life time, like a true and faithful Christian. At the which the
precious Princess Lindabrides did receive so great sorrow and grief, that she
seemed to prognosticate unto her self, that the Knight of the Sun was not
ordained for her, neither for to be Lord and reign over the great Empire of
the Seythians. And to the contrary, the princess Claridiana was so glad and
joyful, for that she was wholly persuaded of her security thereby, and also
void of the fear yt she had of ye great beauty of the fair Princess
Lindabrides, (although time did serve that she could have had a much greater
in effect.) So the divine service was ended, and every one of them in such
order as they went forth returned back again unto the royal palace, whereas
they dined together, in the one part of the palace more then two thousand
Knights, and in the other part in a fair great quadran, which opened upon a
very fresh and odiferous green garden, whereas the Empress dined, with all her
Ladies, Damsels, and gentlewomen, and in the mean time while they were at
dinner, there was so great melody and music, with strange in^entions of mirth,
and the grear abundance that there was of all things for their service, that
with great reason all the strangers in general did say, that it was the most
highest and royallest Court that was in all the world, and the emperor to be
ye most worthiest prince, for yt in ample manner he did know how to honor all
good and worthy knights. And to see the Emperor and Princes, with all other
Knights so gallantly apparalled with cloth of gold and silk, adorned full of
precious stones and pearls, with their faces and proporsions of so exquisit
beauty. And on the other part the Empress, with the Princess Lindabrides,
and the princess Claridiana, with all their Damsels and Gentlewoman, the
Knights being served with Squires and Pages exceeding gallantly apparailed, and
the Ladies were served at their Table with very fair Gentlewomen and well
apparailed, that surely it seemed there was comprehended all the bounty and
beautye in the world. And there were many Knights at the boorde that did
forget to eat, and were as half amazed or astonished in beeholding the mighty
and strange things that were done in that great hall all the dinner time,
which seemed unto them to be the straungest that ever they had seen.

So being in this order all together as you have heard, and dinner being done,
and all the tables taken up, they saw entering in at the door of the great
hall a gentlewoman, who did very much digress from all those that were in the
quadran, as well in apparel as in her person and disposition, in such sort,
that all which were there present did behold her, for that she was very fair
of face, and so high of person, that she did surmount all the knights that were
there four fingers, she came apparailed with a large roabe, which covered all
her body down to her feet, and was wrought with so many diversities of silk,
full of precious stones and pearls from the top unto the lower part, and was
made fast before with gold and precious stones of great price, which did become
her very well, the hair of her head was very yeolow, and curled, knit behind
her ears, in such sort, that being separated in the midst, they were brought
over her shoulders, and hung over her breasts down to his knees, and at the
ends of the partition of her hair, she had hanging two precious stones,
either of them as big as a reasonable apple, the which did augment her beauty
the more.

This Gentlewoman brought leading by the hand, a knight of a very big body and
members, and resembled very much the prince Brandizel, who was there present,
but that he was higher then he was by a fingers breadth, and was armed with
armor that was very well guilt, that it seemed to be of very fine gold, and
was wrought by marvelous cunning, and garnished so full of precious stones,
that it did manifest unto them all to be a Knight of great estimation, his
sheeld was all of fine Steel, and in the golden field thereof there was graven
two Lions of Silver, and a knight with a bloody sword in his hands, who at two
blows did part them both a sunder in the midst, he had the beauer of his
healme lifted up, in such sort that they might discover and see his face to be
swartish and boystrous.

and his countenance very fierce, that it gave them all to understand, that he
should be very proud and arrogant, and after them came two dwarfes, very
little, and of so ill favored semblaunce, that it made all them that were in
the hall greatly to laugh. The one of them carried up the train of the damsel,
and the other dwarffe carried the knights sheeld, which was a great deal
heavier and higher then he was, for that being at his back, there was nothing
seen of the dwarf, but seemed that the shield was carried in the air, without
help of any person. When this Knight and yt gentlewoman were in ye midst of
the great hall every one held his peace, and there was great silence to hear
what their demand should be, and knowing the Emperor for that he was set at
the upper end of the Table, and again be the Imperial arms that was over
whereas he sat, they turned themselves toward him. And the gentlewoman began
with a loud voice, that all that were there present might hear her, and said.

The high and mighty power, and the divine providence of the high Gods, keep
and increase the mighty estate, of thee emperor Trebatio, and of all the
worthy and valiant Knights of this thy Court, for that they being overcome, the
victory of the Arabicall prince may be the more extolled, the better to obtain
and deserve the love of the queen of Carmania. You shall understand emperor
Trebatio, that this knight who is here present is called Rodaran, prince and
lord of Arabia the great, of that which is called Felix, for that it is a
country of great abundance, whereas the influences of the same, and all the
celestial operations does most rejoice themselves. And I am called Carmania,
for that I am queen of Carmania, and the occasion that we are come hither
into these far Countries is, for that this being a young man and a Knight,
doubtful to find such another in all the world for his valiantness and
force, being very desirous to get honor, he departed out of his own Country,
and after that he had done marvelous and incredible feats of arms, he
arrived in my kingdom of Carmania, where when he had seen my great and
strange beauty, and I being a damsel and not married, it chanced that he
fell in love with me, and uttered unto me all his whole mind, but first he
told who he was, and requested me to receive him for my husband. The which, so
that it might not be prejudicial to my honor, nor hurtful unto my fame, but
profitable unto my estate, for that he is so high and mighty a prince, and so
valiant a knight, I did conclude and grant him my love, upon this condition,
that first he should do such feats of arms as I should see and understand,
that he was the best and most valiantest Knight in all the world, and if not,
it was not for him to procure my love, for yt I would by no means marry with
him, neither with any other. For as I have my self in estimation to excel in
beauty and highness of birth and estate all the damsels that are now living.
So likewise he whom I will take for to be my husband, shall surmount all other
knights. The which condition this knight did accept and grant unto, and
moreover he said, that the choice should be mine to appoint wherein he should
prove himself, and how that he would in all points perform my request, and
he would speak no more words therein, till such time as all should be very
manifest and plain. And I being very desirous to know the truth thereof, not
giving any credit unto those mighty acts which I herd to be told of him, I
caused an uncle of mine to come unto me, who was very expert in the art
magic, and I desired him that by his art he would advertise wherein and how I
should prove this knight to be (as it was reported) the best knight in all the
world. Who after that he well perused his books and studied in this my
request, he told me that he had found by his art, that in the Court of the
Emperor Trebatio in the city of Constantinople, that there should be in this
day in the great hall joined together the flower of all Knighthoode in the
world, and the most famous and valyauntest Princes and Knights therein. And
that it seemed unto him, that there was no better opportunity to accomplish my
desire then this, and how that this Knight and I should come unto this court,
and he to defend and maintain the quarrel, in saying that I am the most
precious and fairest Damsel in all the world, against all amorous Knights that
shall say the contrary, and he to be the only Knight, above all other that
does deserve my love. The which counsel seemed so conformable unto my great
desire, and he granted unto the same. At the same very instaunt we departed
on our journey, and in the end of much travail we are come hither the self
same day that the wise man did tell me, and according unto that which I do
see in this great hall, I do find it to be true, although I am doubtful
amongst so goodly a company of Knights to find any that is to be compared
unto this valiant and worthy Prince Rodaran, and how that the fame of this
court is much more then the deeds thereof. And for that this our long journey
shall not be ended without receiving some benefit and profit, here I do
desire you most high and mighty Emperor, to give leave and lisence unto these
your knights, that in this case they may procure to do their best, otherwise
with great reason they might have shame to come before their amorous Dames, if
that you too refrain the consentment hereof, and not to defend them in this
case with all their might and power, but first I do give you to understand,
that before that this valiant Prince Rodaran do enter into battle with any
of these knights, it shall be upon this condition, that if he be by any
knight overcome, that both he and I to be prisoners unto him yt gets the
victory, to do with us all that his will and pleasure shall be. And if it be
so that he does overcome any knight, that likewise in the same order he to be
his prisoner, to carry him into his Country, or to do his pleasure with him.
And again, although the Prince Rodaran as one that is without all fear, would
in the midst of the place of this great City make the proof of his great
bounty, for that it should be the more manifest unto you all: yet I being no
man, and somewhat timorous, for the great love which I do bear unto him, have
requested him that it might not be here in this city, for that the
imprisonment of so high Princes and knights as be here present, might grow
unto great peril and danger, and great disturbance to use his will of his
prisoners, after they be overcome. And for that the security of all parts
shall be more certain to avoid the inconveniences that may happen to the
contrary, it shall be good, and seems unto me very convenient, that these
trials do pass at the bridge of the white Jasper ston, that which is on the
first arm of the five Rivers, which runs into the River of Danubia, and
runs into the Sea Maditaraneo, which is in the confines and utter parts of
this mighty Empire, whereas the Prince Rodaran shall tarry and abide the
coming of all such knights as will combat in the defense of this demand, and
never to depart the field till such time as he be overcome, or else to
remain with the victory of all Knights, of what estate and same so ever they
be. And for security, that ye prince Rodaran shall perform and keep all
that is said, according unto the order of knighthood, he shall give his gage
before all and unto all that is in this great hall.

And therewith the Prince Rodaran did throw his gantlet so high, that all those
which were there might see it, in token of defiaunce. And without saying any
more, or doing any reverence, they departed out of ye great hal, leaving
amongst all them that were therein a great laughter, as well at the demand of
the Gentlewoman, as at the disposition of the Dwarfes, although they received
great contentment at the disposition of the knight, and there were many that
were very desirous to make the first proof with him, and beeleeued of a
certainty, that according as he was of members and stature, that he should
be of great force and strength.

With this desire there were diverse that arose up from the table, and went
unto the Emperor, and asked lisence that they might go and prove themselves
with that knight, amongst the which, the first was that good Knight Rodamarte,
Prince of the Rhodes, a young Knight, and one of the valiantest that was in the
Emperors Court. Likewise the valiant Prince Rodafeo, who was also a very good
Knight, and both of them in love with fair ladies that were with the Empress,
the one of them was daughter unto the king of Bohemia, called Amilinia, and the
other was daughter unto the king of Dalmatia, called Salandria, who receiving
great contentment of their valiant desires and good dispositions, did show unto
them great favor and courtesy determining to take them to be their husbands.
Likewise in this demand there lacked not y^ valiant Brandizel, who sustained
great passions with the grief that he received for the absence of the fair
Princess Clarinea, would in her absence do her this service, for that the
beauty of that Gentlewoman was nothing in comparison unto his Lady. And with no
less good will ye good king Sacridoro came forth to ask lisence, and after
him Rosicleer, and the knight of the Sun, all being on foot before the
Emperor, did desire him to give them lisence to give the first attempt: who
with a pleasant laughter said that he knew not what to say in that case, but
did remit it unto the Princess Claridiana, that she should determine what they
should do therein. Who did excuse her self in all that ever she could, and
did remit it unto the princess Lindabrides, yet for all that it fell out that
in the end she must needs determine and conclude the great contention that
was amongst all those Knights, who should be the first that should give the
attempt. So she concluded that the first enterprise should he given by him
that did first ask lisence of the Emperor, and next unto him the second that
demanded lisence, and so the third, in the same order as they craved lisence.
And although it was a grief unto them which should be the last, having for
certayntie that the first would conclude the demand of Rodaran, yet for all
that they thought the sentence just and right which was given by the royal
Princess Claridiana, who if at that time had been lawful, with a very good
will she would have been the first her self yt should have defended her own
beauty, rather then to have made the order and repetition she did unto the
knights. The Prince Rodamarte would presently have departed in the demand, but
the Emperor by no means would consent there unto, but said that in all that
day they should not meddle therein, neither should any knight arm himself,
neither do any other thing but spend ye time in pastime and pleasure, and
celebrate that feast for the acknowledging of his sons, and how that they had
time enough afterward to accomplish their desires. So yt they spent the time in
no other thing, but in making of mirth and pastime, with marvelous strange
and new inventions, holden in the place of that great City by the Citizens,
that gave great contentment unto all the Knights, who likewise did dance with
the Ladies and Damsells of the Empress, who were very fair and pleasant.
Likewise the Knight of the Sun did dance with ye princess Claridiana, and with
the princess Lindabrides, with so gentle and courteous demeanor, that they
received so great contentment therein, as to see him in his armor, although
according unto his deep thoughts, he had more care to rule his eyes to
beeholde them in equal manner, then he had to keep his feet in compass in
his dancing. So the night drew on, and all those which dined with the Emperor
did likewise sup with him, and after supper they passed away the most part of
the night in dancing and mirth. At which tune the princess Lindabrides,
although it was great grief unto her for to depart from the presence of ye
knight of the Sun, yet would she return unto her Chariot. The Emperor and ye
Empress did importunate her very much for to tarry there, and to remain in the
Palace, but all that ever they could do d^d profit nothing at all. So she
returned unto her Chariot, accompanied with the Emperor and all the rest of
the Princes and knights, til such time as she was within the Chariot, whereas
they did all take their leave of her, and returned back, unto the palace,
which was a great grief unto the Knight of the Sun, for that he could not
carry and remain to sleep in the Charior as he was wont to do, and no less
was the grief of the princess Lindabrides when she saw him depart, and
although the acknowledging of ye knight of the Sun did cause her very much to
rejoice for that he was of so high estate, yet she would for her part have
given the half of her lands, upon the condition that she had never known him
what he was, for that she was better in quiet when she understood no other
thing but only his great val our and bounty, and the name of the Knight of the
Sun, and the great security that she had to marry with him, then now to know
him to be of so high blood and lineage, which the peril that she does suspect,
and a thing apparaunt before her eyes, which was the occasion that in all that
night she could not take any rest nor sleep, with the great care and grief
which she received, and her mind so tumbled and tossed with diverse such
strange thoughts concerning the Knight of the Sun, that never in all her life
she found her self in the like confusion. For one way considering with what
intent she departed out of her own Country, and how that her brother the
Prince Meridian was gone and left her, and another way, the acknowledging of
the knight of the Sun, and the renouncing of his law, and likewise the
coming of the Princess Claridiana, with her estate, and surmounting beauty,
did cause her to suspect very much that the knight of the Sun would wholly
give over the enterprise that he had taken in hand, so that she did account
her self to be the unhappiest and most vnfortunatest Damsel that was borne
into the world, and with the great grief that this doubtful thought did cause
in her, she said.

Oh high and divine providence of the immortal Gods, whom all the whole nation
of the Oriental and Septentrionall Scythians do worship, with reason has your
divine power to permit, that upon the unhappy Princess Lindabrides, such
strange things should be showed, as it for that it should be published in all
the world, how that I was constrained to bannish my self from mine own
Country, and to travail in the world to seek other strange Countries, whereas
only for one Knight I do hate and abhor mine own life, and my liberty
brought into great captivity? Oh how much it had been better for me to have
been accounted amongst the meaner sort of Gentlewomen, for then I should not
have had reason to have procured the extremest of all Knights, neither should
I have had any reason to captive my self for him, but now reason does require
that I despair with my self, for my fortune does lack to give me any aid or
remedy: Oh immortal gods, seeing that in the strangenes of my beauty, you
would manifest your high and mighty power, wherefore did you not only make me
and no other, to be the deseruer of him, that only does deserve to inioye my
great beauty and fayrenesse: Wherefore did you make another so equal unto me,
which is the occasion that I do sustain this great grief, I would it were
your divine pleasure, that seeing alone I do deserve the Knight of the Sun,
that the Princess Claridiana might he she, for that she being the only
deseruer of him, will be the occasion to excuse beetwixt us a great jealousy
and cruel contention, for that I had rather to account my self unworthy of
such a Knight, then to enjoy him with so equal a companion, for that neither
of us in this sort can live in any security, but will rather be a continual
dying, for being unto one alone, the remembrance of the other will be the
occasion of great danger, and she which should be forgotten, in remembering
the victory of the other, would cause in her a cruel and mortal grief: Oh I
am without all good Fortune, what shall I do, considering that I am none but
my self, whether shall I go, being a prisoner; What comfort shall I take
seeing that I am whithout all remedy? What counsel shall I take having no
understanding, neither is there any power to persuade me to reason, but will
rather the more increase my sorrow and grief? What shall I do, if I do
remain here, I shall lack reason to sustain my self, and considering my high
estate, will cause a farther grief: and again, the sight of the knight of the
Sun cannot be so joyful unto me, as the presence of Claridiana will be
hurtful. And if I depart out of this Country, and returned unto mine own, it
will be no other thing but to separate the life and soul from the body. And to
live without the presence of the Knight of the Sun, will be a life unto me,
as unto those who are in the dark, and see no light. But alas what do I say,
although they receive nor see no light, yet the pain does not trouble them:
but it I do find my self banished out of the presence of the knight of the
Sun, there can be no pain in the world compared unto that which I shall
suffer. Oh Knight of the Sun, how mighty and strange is your Fortune, that
only in your hands does remain the whole remedy of the Princess
Lindabrides, she who in beauty and fairness is excellent and does exceed,
and amongst all Ladies is the most highest, and yet will let to give her
remedy, but rather condemn her unto cruel death. Wherefore have I so many
Lordshippes and kingdoms, with so many thousaads of people, which the divine
Gods has given unto me, when that with all those jointly with my strange and
exquisite beauty, I cannot subject the will of one alone Knight.

The sorrowful Princess Lindabrides had scarce made an end of saying these
words, when that void of all memory and understanding, she remained upon her
bed as one that were dead, whereas she remained all that night, without
coming again to her self. With no less sorrow and grief the worthy Knight
of the Sun passed away the night without sleep, calling to mind all that
had passed beetwixt him and the Princess Lindabrides, and the great love which
unto that day he bare unto her, ioyntlye with his marvelous surpassing
beauty: which was in such sort figu^ed in his heart, that it made great
resistance against the love which he had unto the princess Claridiana, in
especial, when she was not in presence. But being both present, ye great
liking he had of the royal Princes, did almost over come him: who at that time
neither more nor less, did take as little ca^se, as the others did sleep. For
that the great love which she had unto the knight of the Sun did not let but
put some doubt in that which her wounded heart so much desired. And although the
highness of her estate and the excellency of her beauty, did almost wholly
persuade her of security, that the knight of the Sun would not forget her. Yet
the sight of the princes Lindabrides, and her remaining in the court did cause
in her some Ielosie, not knowing what would be the end of that her demand.
Likewise she had great doubt in her hope: For that at such time as the
princess should return into her own country, the knight of the Sun could not
do ^o the contrary, but to bear her company, so that the continual
conversation of them two together, would be the occasion of that, which being
in her presence, might be excused. So with these and such like thoughts, they
passed away the night: ^n the which the good knight of Cupid neither more nor
less, did not sleep very much, whose passions are not to be accou^ed, nor
compared with the rest. For if I should here declare ^ll that ever he passed
for his lady and mistress, the fair prin^es Oliuia, all this history were not
sufficient to hold it, al^hough it were very much bigger. It is sufficient that
he pas^ed away the night with no less care, then the others that ^ have told
you of: although his passions were not so strange unto him, as it was unto the
other their griefs. But the fu^e of his sorrow was somewhat apeased, with the
hope that ^e had for to be revenged on him, who was the occasion of ^ll his
evil and mortal pain. So at that time it was ^oysed (...) the great City of
Constantinople, and in all the whole Empire of Greece, the great army that was
making in a readiness in england, and the occasion wherefore they did ordain
the same. Which was the occasion that the sorrowful knight of Cupid, did think
every day a whole year, with the great desire he had to see himself with the
prince don Siluerio, not for that he would have any recompense at his hands,
for that it seemed unto him, that he was in no fault, but only to give to
understand unto the princes Oliuia, the small reason that she had so for to
cast him off. So in this sort they passed away all that night, very conformable
in their sleeping and rests, but very different in their variable and pensive
thoughts.

Who the valiant Rodaran was, and the Damsel, and the occasion wherefore they
came unto the Court of the Emperor Trebatio. Cap. 28.
THe coming of this valiant knight Rodaran unto the court of the Emperor
Trebatio, was not so void of occasion, but that there was comprehended there
in great disc^ipt, mischief, and treason: and an evil prejudicial unto all
Christendom, and hurtful unto the best princes and Knights therein. All the
which came in such order knit and put together, that it lacked but little all
to be lost, if it had not ben by the di^ine providence, (who forgetting the
offenses (...) his people) did by his infinite mercy and goodness provide a
remedy: although many times, for the sins of the people, does permit many and
continual persecucions, done by the unbelievers, upon the Christians, to make
them the better to know him, and to leave all their evil and wickedness,
(...) to return unto him. Yet for all that, he never does so abhor and
leave them, for to bring the Christians unto utter confusion and end: as it
has apeared in the old and ancient times, amongst the laws and customs of
men, nor never will so long as this world shall endure.

You do well remember how that in this history has ^en told you, that at such
time as the worthy knight of the Sun did first see the Princess Lindabrides,
he did partly understand of the mighty power of the emperor Alicandro, her
father, how that he was king over the Scithians, and emperor over the
Tartarians, and Lord over all the Indians and Regions orientals, from whence it
grew that he was had in reputation of the greatest and mightiest prince in all
the world. Likewise he was lord of the great Cataya, whereas is that mighty
city which is of one hundredth miles compass, and of all the rest that is in
the Oriental India, in that part whereas amongst all his subjects he was called
the mighty king of kings, Emperor of the Tartarians, and the Lord of the
Oriental Indians, son and heirs unto the high Gods. This title they gave unto
him, because the people of these countries had it for a law and custom amongst
them, and always had in reverence his predecessors which were Emperors,
before the emperor Alicandro, to be sons and heirs of their false gods, in
whom they did all believe and worship. Besides all this, this mighty emperor
had in his subjection all the kings and lords that were in the oriental part
of the Indians, unto the meridionall, which are nine kingdoms, all very great
and mighty, and full of great riches: so that with great reason they might say,
that he was the mightiest emperor and king in all the wor^h. Here the History
says that many ^e deceived to think that this mighty empire should be
christians, for although they have amongst them some part of the law, which God
gave unto that great Captain Moses, yet their law does differ very far from
the true and perfect law of Jesus Christ, for that they be all Idolaters, and
every one of these kings does beeleeue in that which seems unto him best,
for that there is no law nor commandment to make them incline to any kind
of goodness for the sauegarde of their own souls. So it happened on a time
as this mighty Emperor Alicandro was in his great city of Neptaya, which is
in Cataya the great, very pensive and sad, for that he could here no news of
the children* ye Prince Meridian and the Princess Lindabrides, reprehending
himself very much, for he had so sent them forth into the world. One day
being accompanied with all his mighty Knights and lords his subjects, he
received so great sorrow and grief in the remembering of his children, that it
caused him to weep. And leaning his cheek upon one of his hands, he shed
forth many salt tears which ran down upon his white face. The which being
seen by those peers his subjects, they were all very much amazed, what should
be the occasion that the Emperor should weep.

So before that any did arise up to demand of him the occasion, there arose up
amongst them a king, who was king of Gedrosia, an old man of more then one
hundredth years, who amongst all the rest present, was esteemed to be the
wisest in Astrology, and deuination, that could be found in all Asia. And all
they did give so great credit unto that which he did tell them should happen,
as though it had been all ready accomplished: the which king did weep very
bitterly, and with so great sorrow, that almost he could not speak, but yet he
said. Oh high and mighty king of the Scythians, and Emperor of the Tartarians,
if you had as good judgment of the knowledge of things to come here after, as
now to conceive in matters present, then wo^ld you leave of this great weepings
for your children, who are very well and in health, and in place whereas they
are very much honored and had in estimacion as they do deserve. For that the
time will come yt thou shall weep and bewail, thine own loss and
deste^ction, of all thy vassalles and subjects, with whose blood, all the
feeldes of the mighty Empire of Greece* I do see be sprinkled, and yet I
cannot atchiue to know how, nor the occasion thereof: but only I do see by
great signs and notable tokens of the colestiall influences, and my knowledge
does so far extend* that I do know, that my days does draw unto an end, and
I cannot endure long. In the grecian Empire he that is the most mightiest king
and Emperor and greatest Lord in all the world, shall loose his great strength,
and ha^ing lost his own liberty, the most valiantest and worthyest knights
that shall be there at that present, shall loose their lives and the quantity
shall be so great, that the waters of Inno shall loose their christallyne
color, and shall be changed into red blood, which shall give testimony of the
greatest destruction of Knights that ever has been in the world. The which I
cannot by my knowledge atchieue nor think to fall upon any other, but upon
thee, for that at this present thou art the most mightiest Emperor in all the
world. And if it be so that unto my words you or any of yours do give any
credit, procure out of hand with great wisdom to seek remedy to prevent the
same, and to cut off so great an evil as is prognosticated against us. And if
unto these my words you will give no credit, the time it self will give a
perfect testimony of this that I have said, when that you shall have no time
nor space for to give any remedy at all unto the same.

Without saying any more this old king of Gedrosia, did set himself down
again in his place, leaving this mighty emperor and all the other kings and
Knights that were in that great hall, very much amazed at the words which he
had spoken, and knew not what to say, but being amazed they did look one upon
another, and spoke never a word. But this mighty Emperor who always found the
prognosticating and deuining of this old king to be true, yet he thought this
to be a thing impossible, and not to give any credit thereunto, but yet to
hear farther what he would say, after a certain space that he had bethought
himself, he said.

The great wisdom which I do know to be in you, good king of Gedrosia, and
the truth which you have said, that the cause of my weeping was the
remembrance and tal^ing to mind my loving children, and the great sorrow and
grief which I do receive by their absence, is a sufficient peswasion that I
and all that be here present should give wholly credit unto all this which you
have said, but yet it is not known unto you and all this nobility, that my
power and strength is such and of so great force, that if all the whole world
should join together, and make their confederacy against me, yet were they
not sufficient to bring me unto that estate to be overcome, neither once to
abate any point of my mighty power, much less the Empire of Greece, for that I
am fully persuaded that the least of you here present, with the power which
you have in your kingdom, is sufficient to destroy it, and to consume it with
fire and v^ter ruin (if any occasion of controversy should be betwixt us) as
yet there is none, neither is there any mistrust of the same, for that it is a
country very strange unto us, and likewise very far of from this Country.

When the Emperor had said these words he held his peace and showed so merry
semblance and countenance, that it seemed unto the king of Gedrosia that the
Emperor gave but small credit unto that which he had said, who with great
anger arose up again and said.

High and mighty Emperor, the great confidence and trust that you have in your
high estate and power does cause you to make a jest at these things which I
have told you, for that it seems a thing impossible, without any
consideration, how that there is no security of worldly things, for when a man
does think himself to be most surest, then he is farthest off, and as it does
happen unto all estates, so likewise high and mighty Princes do fall and come
unto destruction, even at such time as they account themselves to be in the
greatest favor of Fortune, then is their fall the greater. And here I do
tell you again for a certainty, that all that which I have told is of a truth,
and shall come to pass, without failing any jot thereof. And for that you shall
not put so great confidence in the mighty power and strength which you have*
here I do give you to understand, that before one year does come about th^r
shall, be ^oyned together in the great city of Constantinople, which is in the
empire of Grecit (that you have in so little estimation) such a number of
Knights, although not very many, yet they shall be such, that they alone shall
be sufficient (being together) for to destroy the greatest and mightiest army
that you and all your subjects, in their kingdoms and Lordships can join
together. And if yt out of hand you do not procure that these knights, (or at
the least) the principallest of them may loose their lives, to avoid the
inconveniences that are pronounced against us. And if you will not, here I do
return and say to you again, that the sharp edges of their ^ine cutting
swords shall use such cruelty upon yours, that the small brooks shall be
turned into great Rivers with their bloods. Therefore considering my duty, and
that which I do owe unto your high estate, to give whole credit unto these my
words, and to prouid such remedy as shall be convenient for so great a peril
prepared against us.

Without speaking any more words this old king of Gedrosia set himself
again in his place, leaving this mighty Emperor and all those Kings and
Nobles that were there present, much more amazed then they were at the first,
although they were fully persuaded and beeleeued of a certainty, that it was
impossible to find in all the world so many Knights that might compare
themselves with them that were at that present in that court, no not by a great
deal, whith was the occasion that whereas before they did not give full credit
unto those words which the King Gedrosia had said. At this time they gave
less and made a mock at him and at his diuinations, but yet for that the
Emperor Alicandro was very wise, and had great experience of the small
security that was in the prosperous estates of this transitorye world, with a
wan color and sorrowful semblance, he fell in a great imagination and deep
thought, musing upon the words which the King Gedrosia had said. And as the
Emperor was in this sort a great while without speaking any word, but very
pensive and heavy, amongst the rest of all those kings and nobles that were in
that great hall, the valiant Rodaran arose up and put himself on foot, who was
king of Arabia, subject unto the Emperor Alicandro, a young man, and so
valiant, that in all Asia there was not a knight to be found, that by a great
deal was able to compare himself with him in mighty prowess and feats of
arms, and for that he was so furious and stubburne, he was feared of all, and
all that were in the whole Empire of Tartaria, were very desirous to pleasure
him, and not one that durst anger him in any respect, except it were that
valiant Prince Meridian, with whom he would never contend nor procure to
combat, yet there was never other knight nor Giant that ever did abide the
battle with him one hour. This Rodaran with great courage and anger, as
though fire should proceed out of his eyes, beegan and said as follows.

I do not know high and mighty emperor of Tartaria, with what reason is
attributed unto thee the name of the divine, and the parentage that you have of
the high and divine Gods, that you do suffer in your presence, and in the
presence of so many mighty kings and lords your subjects, that the king of
Gedrosia should be so bold and hardy to speak these blasphemies, the which he
has said, for that I do believe, that if all the power of the gods, and the
rest of all the whole world besides, should join themselves together by the
Deity that you have received by your predecessors, if they were all joined
together, yet were they not sufficient to comprehend this, the which the king
has said, much less the Emperor of Greece, and the knights that shall there
be assembled and joined together. And here I do swear unto you by the order
of Knighthood that I have received, and by my kingly estate, that if I had
the^ all together in the field against me, I do think to kill and destroy
them all, or make them to yield as prisoners. And again, if it be so that the
diuinations of this old King of Gedrosia do put any fear or dread into your
hearts, and that his words should seem unto you to be true, and that the
remedy the which he has ordained will be sufficient for to avoid the great
inconveniences, in making away those knights. Here before your divine
highness, and before all that be here present I do promise, that at such
time as these knights shall assemble and join together in the City of
Constantinople, to be there present in that Court, and will maintain and
defend that the Queen Carmania, my well beeloued Lady and mistress, is the most
fairest Lady in all the world. And with all those that shall say unto the
contrary, upon the same reason I will combat with him, until such time as one
of us be dead or yielded prisoner unto the other, upon condition that he who
has the victory, shall use his pleasure with him that is overcome. So that in
this sort either they shall remain the most weakest and cowardliest knights in
the world, or else I will bring them prisoners before your presence, for that
the king of Gedrosia may loose the great fear which he has conceived of them.

When he had made an end of speaking, there was not one King nor Knight
amongst all them in the great hall that durst make any answer unto those
proud words of Rodaran, but only the king of Gedrosia, who rising upon his
feet did answer him, saying.

If thou were so valiant of arms and deeds Rodaran, as proud in thy words,
then should I be fully certified, that thou would be sufficient to
accomplish much more then here thou have said, and that there were not in all
the world a Knight that might compare himself with thee, but for that thy
strength and prowess is far different and contrary unto thy great pride,
here I do give thee to understand that this day twelve months there shall
be such Knights assembled and joined together in Constantinople, that whereas
thou shall exceed them in the one, they shall exceed thee in the other. And
it shall happen unto thee many hours in the day that thou shall acknowledge
this to be true, all this which I have said unto thee, although at this
present it seems unto thee to be a fable and lie. And I do desire no other
reuengement for the injury which I have received at thy hands, but only the
reprehension which thou thy self shall make at such time as it shall be unto
thee well known. And for that my words shall seem unto thee to be of less
credit, and that thou shall have farther experience of that which I by the
stars and celestial opperations do understand and know, here I do give
thee to understand (that if thou do go forwards with this enterprise which
thou have promised) thou shall find in the City of Constantinople a woman,
who with her singular beuty and fairnes shall far excel the beuty of ye queen
of Carmania, thy lady, and with the great force and strength of her arm, shall
abate thy courage and make thee to yield.

And therewith he held his peace, but the great pride of that valiant Rodaran
increased, in such sort, when he heard those words of the old King Gedrosia,
and his anger was so great, that if the Emperor and those kings which were
there present had not disturbed him, with determined purpose he went toward
him to have thrown him out at the window. But when he saw that he could not
execute his pretense, with great anger and courage he went out of the hall,
swearing great oaths, that he would accomplish and perform all that which
he had promised, and that being finished, to take reuengement of the great
injury which he had received of the old king Gedrosia. Wherewith he left
all that were there present greatly amazed at his pride and hardiness. And so
departed unto the kingdom of Carmania, whereas all his joy was, for that he
was amorous of the Queen of Carmania, who was in great royalty and estate,
and very fair. And in process of time finding himself in great favor with
her, and having her aid and help to his contentment, he straight way gave her
to understand of all that which had passed with him in the court of the mighty
Emperor of Tartaria, and of his promise that he had made before all those
which were there present, in saying that he could not in any manner of wise
excuse the same, but that he must needs beegin the enterprise of his journey
toward Greece out of hand. The Queen Carmania was very wise and of a good
judgment and understanding, and if it had been in her power, she would very
feign have hindered this journey, and for that she knew very well the condition
of this valiant and stout Rodaran, and that there were none that were able to
persuade him from the contrary of this his determined purpose, she would not
by any means say ought against him, but with a merry countenance she did
offer her self to go with him into Greece, upon condition that he would
grant unto her one thing that she would demand of him, if his pleasure were
that she should go with him. The which with a very good will he did grant
unto her. And she promised him to bear him company. Then did they ordain
all things necessary, for to carry with him on his journey, but half the year
was almost past before they could begin to travail, for that the queen
commanded a net of iron to be made, very arteficially and cunningly wrought,
and it could not be made an end of in any shorter time.

And although that Rodaran did often times ask wherefore the same was made,
yet for all that the Queen would never tell him, but after that this net was
made, and all things in a readiness, this valiant Rodaran and the Queen
departed out of the Country of Carmania, and carried in their company certain
knights and Pages which were necessary, and after that they had passed many and
diverse countries, they came unto the port of Tenedon, whereas they did imbarke
themselves, and took their way toward Greece.

And although there happened unto this mighty Prince in his journey many
strange and wonderful things, because it is not necessary, this History
does not make any mention thereof, but only in the end of many days and
great travail, they arrived in Greece, not far from Constantinople. This
valiant Rodaran was determined to execute his enterprise within the City of
Constantinople, but the Queen of Carmania did disturb him, and said, that
now was the time come that he should perform the gift that he had promised
her before he did depart out of Carmania, which was, that the contension
which should pass with him and the Knights of Greece, should not be executed
in the City of Constantinople, but in the place whereas she would appoint it.
The which Rodaran, although it did grieve him very much, yet durst he not say
against it because he promised her. So they nauigated all along the shore,
till they came unto the Bridge called Iasp^, which is the first passage over
Danubia toward the sea, and was the most strongest that was upon all the
river, and furnished full of Towers and battlements, and especially three
towers of great force and admiration, the one at the entry upon the Bridge,
and the other in the midst, and the third at the farther end, all wrought with
fine white Jasper stone, of so great strength, that it seemed impossible to be
taken or won by force of arms. And this Bridge was mayntained and kept by
the Emperor of Greece, by reason that the people which does inhabit on the one
side of the five arms which proceeds from Danubia, and runs into the sea
Fuxino, they are very barbarous, furious, and beastly, and many times they do
enter into that Countri^ and do very much harm therein. And although the
Emperor would make a conquest over them, as diverse times he has put it in
practice, yet he cannot, for that they have neither Cities, Towns, nor
villages, neither any dwelling houses, but only great Caves under the ground,
whereas they do make their habitation, because they are so beastly and
brutish. In consideration whereof it did behoue the Emperor to have that
bridge very strong and exceeding well kept, and it was for that along the
River there was none other passage. When this valiant Rodaran and the Queen
arrived at that bridge, and saw it to be a place very convenient for their
purpose, straight way the prince Rodaran did prepare himself for to win the
same, and being armed and in very good order, he took the queen by the
hand, and without any more company they went toward ye gate of the bridge, and
knocked thereat, and for that they were all alone, the gate was straight way
opened. When they were entered within the first Tower, this valiant Rodaran
commanded those that were the keepers thereof, that they should yield up the
towers and bridge, and that they should depart with quietness. Who seeing him
alone and they so many, would not obey his commandment, but did procure to
defend the towers and the bridge, and would not suffer him to perswadge any
farther. But this valiant Rodaran in a small time did so beehaue himself
amongst them, that wounding and killing the most part of them, the rest were
constraynd and thought it good for the sauegard of their lives to yield, and to
do all that he commanded them. And so they delivered unto him all the keys
of the gates and towers, and departed thence at their liberty, with the loss
of the most part of their companions, and although they were ashamed so many
to be slain and overcome by one alone Knight, which made them to refrain
coming into the Emperors presence, yet there did not lack (who before Rodaran
did enter into Constantinople) that did advise the Emperor thereof. At such
^ime as he came thither, he was very angry with himself, for that he was
so bold to give that enterprise, and if ^t had not been for the disturbing of
their great feasts and ^riumphs which were made there for their sons, he would
^aue sent thither such as should have rewarded him unto ^is contentment for his
boldness. But when that Roda^an was come unto the Court, and the Emperor
fully sa^sfied of his demand, he was very glad and ioyefull, for that he
had so good opportunity, whereby he should receive his p^yment for his
boldness, and small account that he made of him and his estate. So when this
valyant Rodaran and the Queen of Carmania saw themselves Lords and governors
over the whole bridge and their Towers, they commanded all those that came in
their company to enter in thereat, whereas they did establish their abiding,
and caused the ship wherein they came thither, which was at the sea, to enter
into the river, and to surge close unto the bridge, whereas they did let fall
their ancker, and made her very fast, for that in the same Ship Rodaran did
determine, having overcome the most part of the best and principallest knights
in all Greece, to put them prisoners into the same ship, and return with them
into his own Country. So after that the Queen of Carmania had well perused
the situation of the bridges, and of the towers, she saw that the tower that
was in the midst of the Bridge was made in such sort, that beneath it was round
like unto an arc and hollow, without any gate, but as broad as the bridge was,
whereas she caused the net of iron to be hanged in the highest part of the
hollownesse within, in such sort, that it could not be seen nor descerned
without, but it was so large, that it occupied all the bigness of the vaut
within, and in such sort the Queen of Carmania caused it to be hanged, that in
pullling of a cord, ordained for that purpose, the whole not should fall down.

When Rodaran saw the net hanged up and put in good order, he was very desirous
to know to what purpose it was put there, and did importune the queen so much,
that in the end she was constrained to declare it unto him, saying.

You shall understand (my Lord) that the great love which I do bear unto
you, has caused me to fear that which your valiant and singular bounty
does assure me and put me in great doubt of, and although that I am fully
persuaded that there is not in all the world a knight that can compare his
bounty unto yours, yet it seems unto mo, that having to do with so many who
will prove themselves against you, it cannot be chosen but there must needs
be some amongst them that will trouble you so much being weary, that you
shall receive some harm on your person. And therefore being moved with the
great love that I do bear unto you, I have caused to be made and put in this
iron net which you see, that at what time so ever being in battle with those
Knights, you shall find your self to be in any extremity, that then you may
retire your self with him whom at that present you do combat, till that you
are both right underneath this net, and being there, then presently both you
and your adversary shall take your ease. And this (Sir) is the whole cause and
effect why I have caused this net to be made. And if it be so that this which
I have done do cause in you any disconentment or grief, here I do crave
pardon, and do request you to attribute the occasion, as a fault committed by
a woman, for when an offense is committed for love and good will, it is the
easier to be pardoned and forgiven.

This valiant Rodaran in all his life time did not receive so great grife and
sorrow, as at that present, when he did understand and see what the Queen had
ordained, and it seemed unto him that she had doubt of the victory that he
hoped to have of the Greekish Knights, yet for all that the love that he bare
unto her was such, that he would not say against that which she had done, but
showing himself to be very angry for the same, he said.

Lady and mistres, it does griue me very much, that the Prince of Arabia is so
little known unto you: What ^oo you think that in all the world there is one
for one, that is of so great strength, that of himself he is sufficy^ to
bring me into so great extremity in battle, that I shall be driven to
seek for rest and succor, for to bring unto an end this my enterprise which
I have vnderta^.

And if the battle which I had with the Prince Meridian in your kingdom of
Carmania, does cause you to suspect or have any doubt in me. You do well
understand that the occasion does grow by the Deity that is in him, of the
immortal gods, from whom he and all his progenitors does desend, and would
not consent nor suffer, that by any humane knight he should be overcome, so
that our battle was separated, without any victory of either of our part. The
which was no small favor and honor unto me, that the Gods would make me
equal unto their divine bounty. And seeing that the Prince Meridian is he,
who only is pertaker of the divine Deity, and no vauntage betwixt us two, for
very certain and sure I may account the victory of my part against the
Greekish Knights, without thinking of any need of help in the bataile, that I
shall have with them.

The Queen was very discreet and wise, and with her amorous and sweet words
did pacify him, in such sort, that the net did still remain as she had
commanded it to be put, for a farther effect then she did give Rodaran to
understand. And although at that time it did cause in him great anger and
grief, yet before many days had passed, he received great contentment and
pleasure therein, so that this was the occasion that moved this valiant
Rodaran and the Queen of Carmania to come unto the Court of the Emperor
Trebatio, and the occasion of this their demand.

How the Prince Rodamarte went unto the bridge of Iaspe, for to combat with the
valiant Rodaran. Chapter 39.
WIth great care and small rest the ^alyaunt Prince Rodamarte did pass away
the night, thincking long till the morning was come, for to depart unto the
bridge of Iaspe, for to combat with Rodaran, for that the day before he liked
him very well, and seemed to be a knight of great valor. Yet for all that, he
was of so valiant a courage, that he had no fear of his might and big
proportion, but very early in the morning before that the sun had covered the
earth, he was armed, with very strong armor, and his horse trymmed and dressed
very richly with cloth of gold, which did signify unto all people his high
estate. So in this sort he went forth of Constantinople, with but only one
page, which did carry his spear and his sheeld. And having his mind occupied
on the love of the princess Analiria, he travailed so much that the next day
he came unto the bridge of the Iaspe: But Rodaran and the queen with great
quietness, and contentment, did abide the coming of the greekish knights. So
when Rodamarte came unto the gate of the first tower, he found that it was fast
shut, and he commanded his page to call there at, who with the ring that hong
at the gate, he gave great and mighty blows, and straight way apeared one of
the keepers out of a window, somewhat high, and perceiving that it was a Knight
of the emperor Trebatio, he willed him to tarrye a while and the gate should
be opened unto him. The keeper straight way went and told his Lord Rodaran, who
incontinently did arm himself with his strong and rich armor, and requested
the Queen that she would with her own hands help him, and said. L^dy now shall
you (...) the difference that is betwixt the greekish Knights, and your (...),
and how evil shall be accomplished the prouis^es of that king of Gedrosia. So
when that all things was in very ^ood order, he commanded that the gate of the
first tower should be open, so that ye Prince Rodamarte did enter in there at,
and coming on the Bridge in the space that was betwixt the first Bridge and
the second, which was as long, as ye corse of a good horse might endure. There
he found Rodaran, mounted on Horse back, with his spear in his hand, who was
so big and of so great stature, that he lacked but little, to be as big as
a giant. And at the farther end of the great space that was from the first
tower unto the middle tower, under the vaut thereof, was the queen, Carmania,
sitting in a chair of estate, with cushions and pillowes of cloth of gold very
richly, and curiously wrought with silk. So when the prince came unto the place
whereas Rodaran was, he did salute him very courteously and said. Thou shall
understand Rodaran, that I am a knight of the Emperor Trebatio, one of them
that thou did disceiue openly in the great hall of his Court. And for the
love of a fair Lady whom I do serve, I am come hither, for to chastise thee,
for thy great folly, which thou spakest before the most fairest damsels, and
most valiantest knights in all the world. Therefore turn thy horse for to Just
with me, or else turn and deny all that thou spakest there. With great laughter
and disdain Rodaran answered unto the prince Rodamarte and said, of a truth
knight, if that my Lady the queen of Carmania, were not before me and in
presence, possible it were better for me to deny that which I have spoken, then
to just with you, for that you do seem to be a gentill and valiant knight. But
for so much as she is present, I know not how to excuse my self, but first
consent to loose my life. then to commit any such offense. Therefore as reason
does require, seeing that you do know who I am, let me likewise know by whom I
shall be overcome. I am said he Rodamarte, prince of Cypres, and vassayle unto
the emperor Trebatio: Therefore leave of these thy words, and let us come to
the effect of deeds, yt thou may believe of certainty, that which thou have
now spoken in mockage and gesting. Unto the immortal gods I do give great
thanks, said Rodaran, for that so far as I can perceive by your gentil
semblance, that you do seem to be a knight of great estimation, if my judgment
do not disceiue me. And therewith all these two valiant knights did depart the
one from the other, Rodamarte toward the foot of the bridge whereas he entered
in, and Rodaran toward the place whereas the queen was. And when he came nigh
unto her, with great pride he said: Lady, I pray you to give very good
entertainment unto this prisoner, for that he is the prince of cypress. And
therewith all the one moved against the other with so great fury, that it
seemed the bridge did shake under them. And in the midst of their swift course,
these two made their encounter, in such sort, that their s^aues were sheuered
in pieces, and they passed forwards on without any moving by the force
thereof, till such time as they iustled together with their bodies horse and
man. And by reason that the valyant Rodaran was bigger of body and of more
force and strength, he stroke the prince in such sort, that he overthrew him
horse and all to the ground, so clean void of all memory, as though he had
stroke against a mighty rock, and he broching his horse with the spurs, passed
over the Prince, who was so evil entreated, that he could not arise, till such
time as Rodaran returned with his horse, and alighted from him, and took his
sword from his girdell, and his healme of his head, and did help to raise him
from the ground. And when he was come unto himself, he took him by the hand
and lead him to the Queen Carmania, who when she knew who he was, she
received him very well, and said: Gentle knight what do you think of my Lord
Rodaran be all the other Knights of Grecia like unto him. Lady and Queen,
answered Rodamarte, if this contention does long endure, the knights of Grecia,
will seem unto you to be other manner of knights then Rodaran.

Well said she, for that you shall see how much you are deceived, here you
shall remain with us till such time as the best knights of the Emperors court
be brought hither to bear you company. Then Rodaran did cause him to be
unarmed, and to be put at his foot a great chain, and commanded him to be put
into a deep and dark dungeon, whereas he was certain days, with more sorrow
and grief to loose the victory in that demand, then to be overcome as he was.
Then his page which came with him, departed from thence, and returned unto
Constantinople, with a sorrowful heart.

And one day at such time as the Emperor with his sons, and all the knights,
in the court were in great pastimes and pleasures, sporting themselves, with
dancing in company with the Empress and her Ladies and gentlewomen, and the
princes Lindabrides, and Claridiana with them. The page entered into the court
with so great sorrow and grief, that he was scarce able to speak, for to tell
the heavy news of the prince Rodamarte, yet as well as he could he gave them
to understand of all that he had passed with Rodaran, at the which they did all
marvel very much for that Rodamarte was had in reputation for one of the best
knights that was in all the empire of Greece, and the emperor received great
grief that it fell so out, that by one alone knight he should be overcome.
Then straight way that valiant and esteemed prince Rodafeo, who was the second
by lot to go forth, without speaking any word departed out of the great hall,
the emperor seeing his determination did commend him unto god, and so did the
rest that were there present, but especially his lady the princess, who when
she saw him depart, her heart was ready to part a sunder. When this valiant
prince came unto his lodging, he armed himself with very strong and rich
armor, and commanded his horse to be trapped with cloth of gold, which did
signify unto all men his (...) and high estate, and so departed out of
Constantinople with one alone squier, and when he came unto the bridge, the
like happened unto him by Rodaran, as happened unto Rodamarte, and was put
prisoner with him in the same dungion, whereas they received so great sorrow
and grief to be in such a demand overcome, that rather they desired to dye
then to live. So when the valtaunt Rodaran saw that he had two prisoners, and
both princes o^ so great valor and estimation, he was so proud and high
minded that it was stra^nge, and beeleeued of a certainty that those two were
the best knights that were in all the Emperors Court, and was as pleasant
and idyfull with the queen, as though he had overcome the^ all. And was very
sorrowful because that this victory did not pass in the great city of
Constantinople, thinking that there, better then in any other place, he might
rejoice himself of his great pride and vain glory, and did very much reprehend
the queen for that there was so much time lost in Carmania, in making that iron
net for that they had no need thereof. The Queen seeing that he had great
reason so to say, held her peace, and answered nothing there unto. When the
prince Rodafeo was overcome and prisoner, his squier returned back again unto
Constantinople, and watching the time that the Emperor and all his Knights
were together, he entered into the court, and declared all that which happened
unto the prince, at the which they were greatly amazed, and from that day
forwards they had the valiant Rodaran in much more estimation, seeing that he
had overcome two of the best knights that the Emperor had, and although at
that present the emperor received for them great sorrow and grief, suspecting
that these two princes should be ill entreated in the power of Rodaran, yet
because he was fully certified that there remained behind such knights for to
combat with him, that very shortly would not ouely set them at liberty, but
also bring Rodaran prisoner unto him. So for that the third lot did fall unto
the mighty and valiant prince Brandizel, to take this enterprise and demand,
straight way as soon as the squier of Rodafeo had told the news of his Lords
imprisonment, he arose up from the place whereas he was set nigh unto the knight
of the Sun and put himself before the Emperor, and asked lisence for to go
and combat with Rodaran, who did grant it unto him, and said.

I am very sorrowful (mighty and valiant Prince) that you were not the first
that went in this demand, for if you had, I do believe of a certainty, that
Rodaran should not have had any occasion to boast himself of the victory of
any knights of my Court. And therewith the Prince doing his duty unto the
Emperor, departed out of the great hall, and went unto his lodging for to arm
himself and the knight of the Sun said unto the emperor. This may your
highness with great reason speak unto the prince Brandizel, for yt in the
great wars of Persia, I have the best knights that were in all Asia, ag^ainst
the bab^lonians, and I could not see one that in arms and prowess could match
with him. And again, if by the divine providence there had not ben remedy put
in the acknowledging the one the other, his high and mighty bounty had been to
me full dear, in a battle which we had at the sea, without knowing one
another, the which battle endured betwixt us more then six hours. So there
the knight of ye Sun did declare unto the emperor all that happened between
them two, and what he had seen him do against his knights at the sea.
Likewise some part of his valiantnes the Prince Claueryndo had told him of, and
done in his presence and company. At the which all those that were there present
meruayled very much. And the Emperor answered, his precious and gentle
proportion does cause me to believe much more then he is able to do. And with
this they all departed, abiding the news of all that shall pass with this
valiant prince.

How the Prince Brandizell went to combat with Rodaran, and of the strong and
rigorous battle he had with him. Cap. 40.
AFter that the valiant Prince of Persia was armed with very rich and
glistering armor, and mounted ou a mighty courser, which did show forth his
great magnifisence, and conformable unto his estate, with one alone Squier, for
to carry his spear and healme, he departed out of the great city of
Constantinople, and took his way toward the bridge of Iaspe, not without
great grief and sorrow in finding himself absent from the presence of that
fair Clarinea, although he received great comfort in being in company with the
knight of the Sun. And with the great desire that he had for to bring Rodaran
prisoner unto the Emperor, he travailed so much that in a short time he came
unto the bridge of Iaspe. At which time Rodaran and the queen Carmania were
both sitting in a window of the tower of the same bridge, and saw him coming.
Who seemed unto him to be a Knight of great bounty and estimation, by the big
and mighty proportion of his body. At whose sight Rodaran did arm himself,
and being mounted upon his courser, the queen commanded that the gates should
be opened unto the prince, who entered in thereat, but in any wise they would not
suffer his squier to enter in with him, and being entered into the first tower,
the gates were shut very fast at the commandment of the Queen, so that his
squier remained without. And when he came unto the place whereas Rodaran was
armed and mounted upon his horse, the prince saluted him and made reverence
unto the queen like a courteous knight as he was. Unto whom Rodaran with far
more pride than c^rtsiee, returned his salvation, and said.

Sir Knight, if thy deeds be conformable unto the presence of thy person, then
has the Emperor Trebatio done verse well to let thee be one of the first to
come and combat with me, for that by ouercomming thee, this contention shall
straight way cease, for that I am persuaded there shall not remain a knight in
all his court that shall be able to resist my demand. But yet I do desire,
that first before thou do enter into battle with me, that thou will tell me
who thou art, for that I do very much muse and marvel within my self, that
in this country I should find a knight, being naturally borne therein, so
mighty of person, and of good and gentle disposition as thou art. Unto whom
this valiant and courageous prince with great ^eekenesse did answer him in this
manner.

Not in the mightiness of personages, neither in the abundance of words, does
consist the bounty and force of knights, but in the great virtue and
valiantness of a courageous heart. And here I say unto thee (although I am
more bigger of personage then any other that does remain in the court of the
emperor) yet after such time as I am by thee overcome, the Emperor Trebatio
has such knights remaining with him, that the victory of them shall seem
unto thee very doubtful, although at this present thou art very certain to
overcome me. And in that thou do ask of me who I am, here I give thee to
understand that I am a Knight of the emperor Trebatios, and a very friend unto
he knight of the Sun, the which is a thing at this present that I have in
great estimation. And in saying these words the prince did turn about his
furious horse, and Rodaran did like, who when he saw the Queen, whereas she
sat in her accustomed place at the second tower, with her face very pale and
wan, half dismayed, for that the prince did seem unto her to be a valiant
knight, he said unto her.

Lady, pacify your self, and you shall see that at this encounter with my
spear, I will cause you to forget the fear which you have of this monster.
And therewith these two valiant Knights with the great fury of their Horses,
and with their great and long spears in their hands, in the midst of their
swift course they made their terrible encounter, in such sort, that upon their
shields their mighty Spears were sheeuered all to pieces, and neither of them
at that terrible encounter made any semblaunce of moving in their saddles, and
at such time as they did join and meet together with all the force of their
bodies, it was with so great force and strength, that neither of them could
proceed forwards, but that Horse and man came all unto the ground, and made so
great a noise with rushing of the harneyes together (by reason that it was with
so great strength) that it seemed as though a great piece of ordinace had shot
off. At which time the Squire of the Prince Brandizel, who remained without the
gates, did not let to pray unto his Gods for the victory of his Lord, after
that he heard the noise of that terrible encounter, which made him very much
to marvel, but much more did Rodaran marvel, at a thing which seemed unto
him very strange, to see himself overthrown to the ground by the encounter
of one alone knight, whereas before he thought that there was not one Knight
in all the world that was able to do it unto him. Likewise he was greatly
ashamed to see himself unhorsed before the presence of his Lady and Queen,
which caused to increase in him great anger and fury, for to revenge himself
of that injury, and drew out his Sword the which was very great and broad,
and went against the Prince, who was not a little amazed to see him come
against him with so great fury and force, and seeing his determination, did
likewise draw out his Sword and met him, and both of them stroke together with
so great fury and force, that at the first blows their sheelds were cut
asunder, and their swoords descended upon their Healmes with so great strength,
that it made both of them to decline their heads down unto their breasts, and
made each other of them feel and acknowledge the force and strength of his
adversary, and from that time these two warriors did strike such mighty and
furious blows the one upon the other, with so great strength, that it was
wonderful to beeholde, always procuring where to strike his adversary, for
to do him most harm, and although their armor were of so strange and
excellent mixture, that there was never force nor strength of man, neither any
Sword so fine, that could cut or perish them, which was the occasion that it
did save them from wounding one another, yet for all that, they did strike
their blows so thick, and in such great have, that at such time as they did
fasten a right and sure blow, they did greatly bruise one another flesh and
bones, so that either of them did procure the best he could to defend himself
from the terrible blows of his enemy.

At this time was passed a good hour, from the time that they first beegan
their battle, at which time Rodaran seeing, that although he did his best in
executing his fury, that there was no vauntage to be seen of neither of
their parts, he was very much amazed at the great force and strength of his
adversary, and beegan somewhat to acknowledge the great reason that the old
King of Gedrosia had, in praising and extolling the high and mighty deeds of
the Knights of Greece: moreover, he said unto himself, that that knight
alone was sufficient for to destroy half the army of the Emperor Alycandro,
and by reason that his pride was very great, and he himself of a valiant and
stout courage, although the victory should be very late, yet he supposed
that the fury of the Prince Brandizel could not endure long against him, and
being fully persuaded in his thought, he made so great have in striking of
the Prince, that he made him very much to marvel at his stout and valyant
courage, because it troubled him very much, and brought him into that
perplexity, that he was driven to beesturre himself from the one side of the
Bridge unto the other, for to clear himself from some of his great blows,
which to the contrary he should have received, and made him to use more
lightness then the big proportion of his body could well endure, and for
that their sheelds were all cut and broken in pieces, in such sort that there
was no defense in them, the whole state of the battle was in the great and
mighty force in striking on another, executting their blows with their
swoords in both their hands, in such furious sort, that the one had great fear
of the other, their bones and flesh were all bruised with the mighty force of
their blows, and their bodies so wearied, that if it were not for the great
valor of their hearts and courage, and again the loss of victory so
shameful and reprobrious, there was neither of them, but with a very good will
would have thrown himself along upon the ground to have taken some rest, but
by reason that they were so valiant Knights, and very few in all the whole
world that were able to have any vauntage of them, would not show one a another
the great necessity in the which they were brought, Rodaran for that he was in
the presence of the queen, who was very sad and heavy in her semblance, and
no less meruailed to see the cruel battle that was beetweene them. Likewise
the Prince Brandizel, with the remembrance of the fair princess Clarinea,
and of the Emperor Trebatio, and all the rest of the knights of his court, he
thought it better to die there a thousand deaths, then to return back unto the
court, and loose the victory, at which thoughts they recovered so great
courage, and gathered so great strength from their valiant hearts, that either
of them looked as well for death as victory. At which time there had passed
more then three hours from the beeginning of their battle all which time they
never rested themselves, nor ceased not to oppress the one the other all that
in them was possible. Which was the occasion that the mighty and courageous
stomach of that valiant Rodaran was not sufficient, neither the presence of
the queen of Carmania, but that his great pride did abate (which before was
never brought in subjection) and of pure necessity and force, by reason of his
great weariness, withdrew himself on the one side, and with the great grief
thereof he beegan to speak unto the prince and said. Knight hold thy hands,
and let us rest our selves a while, for that there does continue time enough to
finish our battle.

Likewise the Prince Brandizel at that time was brought into so great
necessity of rest, that without answering him any word, he did likewise
withdraw himself, and leaned upon the p^mell of his sword for to take some
ease, and immagined upon the great strength and courage of Rodaran. And it
seemed unto him that in all his life time he never combatted with any knight
or giant that ever did charge him with so great and terrible blows, neither
that ever did endure so long battle with him without taking some rest, but
only that most worthy and valiant Knight of the Sun. And he thought
verily within himself, that if the force of Rodaran did long endure, it could
not be otherwise but that he should be overcome and loose the victory, and
yet considering what a great shamd and rebuke it would be unto him to come
before the Emperor Trebatio, and the rest of his great friends, the Knight of
the Sun and the Prince Clauerindo, he did fully determine with himself to
loose his life fiting on foot, and not to be overthrown from his Horse to
the ground, and to loose the victory. At this present time likewise Rodaran
was leaning upon his sword to breath himself, and called unto his
remembrance the words that the old king of Gedrosia had said unto him, and
seemed that they would prove to be true, and did very much commend his great
wisdom and knowledge, and did reprehend his own gpeat pride, and would with a
very good will have given the greatest part of his estate, upon condition that
he had not put himself in this demand, and contention, because he found
himself to be so weary, and that in so long time they had battle and
combat together, there was no vantage to be judged on either part, he thought
of a certainty that it could not be otherwise, ibut he must be overcome and
loose the victory. And as he was beeholding of the Prince, and very much
meruailing at his great force and bounty, it seemed unto him that according
unto the mightiness of his person and the richness of his armor, that he
should be some Knight of high estate. So after a while that he had well
breathed and refreshed himself he said.

Wherefore have not we great care over our selves, and wish that we had not
known one another, for that according unto that which has passed beetwixt us
in this first battle, and again, that which we do look for in the second
battle, cannot be, but that either of us will sooner consent to die, then to
be over come and loose the victory. Therefore I do desire thee by the virtue
of that thing that in all the world thou do best love, that thou do tell
me who thou art, for that according unto thy mighty stature and great
bounty, I cannot beeleeue that thou (...) ^ee a Knight of the Empire of Greece.

Here the Prince Brandizel could not by any means let, but certify him of
his demand, having coniured him in that sort, and therefore said.

Rodaran, because thou have so great desire to know who I am, I will give thee
to understand, although it does grieve me very much to tell thee. Thou shall
understand that I am Brandizel, prince and right heir unto the whole, Country
of Persia, and son unto the king Florion, and of the Queen Balisea. Great
thanckes do I give unto the high and immortal Gods, for that I was fully
certified within my self, that so valyant a knight as thou art could not be
borne in this Country, therefore here once again I do desire thee that thou will tell me the occasion that so mighty a Prince as thou art, and being a
Pagan, that thou dooest abide and recreate thy self in strange Countries, and
to show thy self so great a friend unto Christians: Tell me I pray thee, if
thou have received their laws, and customs, and left the law of the Pagans?
Thou do demand of me great account, said the Prince, but for that thou
shall not beeleeue all that which thou have said, I will be brief and give
thee to understand in few words. I do beeleeue that thou do know, or at the
least ways have heard, of the great battles and contentions that passed
betwixt my Father the King Florion, and the mighty Africano, who had usurped
and taken away my Fathers kingdom. I have heard the same (said Rodaran) and I
was called unto the said wars, and for that I did see that Africano had
neither reason nor justice, I did refuse the journey, and would not go with
him. Then the Prince said, you shall understand that in these wars my Father
got the victory, and recovered all his lands the which he had lost, but
especially by the great force, strength, and bounty of the valiant Knight of
the Sun, and Son unto the Emperor Trebatio, who at this present remains
in his Court, and by the prowess of the Prince Clauerindo, son unto the king
Oristeo of France, both the which being very young were lost, and both found
at the Sea by the king my father, who carried them with him, whereas they two
and I were brought up all three together, and from that time there did grow so
great love and friendship beetwixt us, which was the occasion, jointly with the
duty which I owe unto them, that I am come in their company into this
Country, and cannot certify my self, neither am I at quiet but when I am
with them, and in their company and conversation. This is the occasion
wherefore I am come into this country, because you are so desirous to know,
and here I mean to remain so long as these princes abide in ye Emperors
Court. Oh Prince Brandizel, said Rodaran, now I plainly see and perceive how
that the high Gods are very angry with the Pagan people, and will plague and
punish us by the hands and power of the Christians, for that we have now at
this present, more then at any time heretofore so great confidence in them. Oh
Prince of Persia, if the loss and destruction of thy natural Country do
cause in thee any sorrow, or the destruction of the Pagan people do cause any
grief, then would thy heart lament, and cause thee to leave off this great
friendship which thou have with the Christians, and take upon thee mortal
war against them, for here I do give thee to understand before the great
Cane, king of the Cambalos, and Emperor of Tartaria, and before all Kings and
Lords, his subjects and vassals, the King Gedrosia, who is one of the wisest in
deuination and Astrology, that is to be found in all the world, to whom at
that present I gave but small credit, he did declare and pronounce that in our
days and times should be stayne and destroyed the most part of all the Pagan
people in the fields of Greece, by the mighty force and power of the Knights
that be therein, and that there the greatest and mightiest Kings in all Asia
shall loose their government and estates. Unto whose words I made no
contradiction, for that it seemed unto me to be a thing impossible. And
moreover he said, that in the Empire of Greece there were such Knights, that
if means were not found by one way or other to disturb them, that they alone
were sufficient to accomplish and bring to pass all this which I have said.
And for this occasion I departed out of my Kingdom and Country, and did
promise the Emperor Alycandro never to return again unto the same, till
such time as I came unto the Empire of Greece, and there with my power and
force to take prisoners the best Knights that be in all the Empire, and to
carry them away with me unto the Emperor Alycandro, and now seeing that you
do know my determination and purpose, and the great profit that will grow
thereof unto all Asia, I do desire thee by the service and duty which thou
do owe unto the high Gods, that leaving the great friendship which thou have
with the Christians, let us two procure to take and carry them prisoners into
our Country, that by them we may ransom and set our selves at liberty from
the great destruction which is prognosticated to be done unto us by them,
which by no means can be excused, except first we do this which I have
told thee. Then the Prince Brandizel answered and said. Let the Pagans
remain in their Country, and let the Christians alone in theyrs, for that
this remedy which thou have taken in hand Rodaran, will very little profit to
excuse the harm which thou have spoken of, being a thing determined by the
high powers. And here I do give thee to understand that there does remain
many Knights in the City of Constantinople, and such, as ten such knights as
thou art be not sufficient to take one of them, and to bring him unto prison.
And here I do advise thee to take good heed and beeware of the fury of the
Knight of the Sun, before whom there is no humane ^reature able to make any
resistance. And in that thou ^oost request me to leave of their friendship,
and to bee^ome their enemy, speak no more thereof unto me, for I ^oo more
esteem their friendship and love, and to be friend unto the sons of the
Emperor Trebatio, and his friends, ^hen to be a Prince, yea more then to be
Lord over all A^ia. And if thou will leave off this demand which thou bring
with thee, and go unto the Court of the Emperor Trebatio, and become a
brother in our friendship, there shall be done unto thee the honor that to
such a knight belongs, and if not, let us return again unto our battle,
and he which of us two shall be overcome, let him do all that the other who
wins the victory shall command, and so shall be excused all the requests
that are beetwixt us two.

Here Rodaran was very sorrowful, because he found so small comfort of the
Prince in this his determination, and believing that only in the ouercomming
of that knight did consist the accomplishing of his adventure, and that it
might so fall out, by the victory of him to end his demand, for that which
the Prince had told he could not beeleeue, neither give credit that those
knights which did remain beehinde in the court, should be such as he did
report them to be, but with the great anger which his words did cause in him,
with a courageous stomach he took his sword in both his hands, and went
against the Prince, and stroke him such a right down blow upon his fine and
precyou^ healme, that with the noise and force thereof it thundered in his
ears, and so dazeled his eyes, that he was constrained to fall with his hands
upon the ground, not in such sort that he lost his remembrance, neither did
his courageous heart fail him, but was set in such a heat, with the anger of
that mighty blow, that with great lightness he arose up again, and with his
sword in both his hands he stroke so terrible a blow, being overthwart upon
the strong helm of Rodaran, that he made him to fall on the other side with
the force of all his body upon the wall of the Bridge, the which did sustain
him, that he fell not to the ground, neither into the river, although whereas
he received the blow with the sword, it did grieve him in such sort, that he
thought verily the ear and the iaw on that side had been broken all to
pieces. Likewise the blow which he received upon the wall did grieve him very
much, that if it had not been by the great fury that he received, which did
sustain him, he could not have kept him upright on his feet, but his anger and
fury was such, that as one that had not received any hurt nor harm, with great
lightness returned upon the prince, and began to strike at him such terrible
and thick blows, as though the battle were but then new begun. At the which
the prince was very much amazed, and did force him self all that ever he
could, to strike at Rodaran, the mightiest blows that it was possible for him
to give, in such sort that the battle was at that time in the greatest fury
that ever it was. And the noise of their terrible and thick blows upon their
fine helmes, was so great, that the towers and gates of the bridge did seem to
tremble. Then the squier of the prince who was without, was very much amazed
that the battle did so long endure, fearing that Rodaran did not make the
battle with the prince alone, for that it did so long endure, which caused
him to go from one place unto an other, procuring where he might be to see what
passed betwixt them, to certify the truth thereof. And as he went along the
waters side, he went so far that he might discover the space of the bridge that
was betwixt the two towers, and although the walls or battilments of the bridge
were somewhat high, yet for that the knights were both very big of their
persons, that he might from their breasts vpwardes discern them, so that part
of their battle he might perceive. And when this squier did see that they
were alone, and the great heat and fury of their battle, which seemed at
that time to be but new begun, he was greatly aston^ed and as one half
amazed, and could not persuade with himself, that in two knights could be
comprehended so great force and strength. So these two knights continued in
the second battle more then one hour, and no vauntage could be known
beetweene them, although both of them, had done to the uttermost that was in
their power, force and strength. And for that they were both of them of very
big bodies, and the travail great which they had passed, and the terrible
and mighty blows by the one and the other receued, did so much torment them,
that they were brought unto the estate, that their strengthes did fail them,
in such sort that either of them was at that estate, and thought verily to be
overcome.

So when that Rodaran, saw that his contention did little profit him, and could
not help himself in the battle, he then called to remembrance, that which
the queen Carmania, had advised him off, and was, that in that place whereas
she was, he should find ease, at such time as he found himself in the
greatest necessity in the battle, which caused him little and little to
retire backwards toward the place whereas she was, giving and receiving
blows, as the time did serve.

The Prince Brandizel, likewise at that time was in that perplexity that he
was ready to yield himself for to be overcome, but when he saw that Rodaran,
did begin to retire, with the great joy and pleasure which he received to see
him so upon a sudden to fainte, that he began a new to recover his force and
strength, and followed him, striking at him with all the might he could, but
his faintness and wariness was so great, that he could scarce life one leg
after an other* for to follow him: the which when Rodaran did perceive, he
would with a very good will have returned to have made resistance for that it
seemed unto him that in a small time he should overcome him, for that the
prince was so weary and feeble, But when he would have forced himself
thereunto, he feared that he was wholly deprived of his strength, and his arms
so sore with weariness, that he was constrained still to retire backwardes,
till such time as he himself and the prince, were wholly under the uaut or arch
of the second tower of the bridge, whereas the queen Carmania, nigh unto the
same, sat in her estate. Who when she saw that these two knights were so weary
that almost they could not stand upon their feet.

She pulled a cord of Silk which hanged by her, and came down from the
height of the arch, which caused that artificial net of iron to fall down upon
both those knights, in such sort, that their heads were fast in the net, and
their legs and arms so fast bound with all their body, and with so great
strength, that they were not able to turn them selves on the one side nor on
the other, but were taken prisoners in such sort, that if they were not made
loose by other, it were a thing impossible to be loosed.

So when this was done, the queen arose up from the place whereas she sat, and
commanded a great chain to be brought, and the helm of the prince to be taken
off, and the chain to be put about his neck, likewise they made his hands fast
with manakils, that he was not able to move nor to do any thing.

Then she commanded a gentlewoman that a key should be brought, wherewith she
did open a lock that the not was made fast with all, and cleared out of the
net, both the prince and Rodaran. They being out, the cord was pulled, and the
net carried up again into the place whereas it was before. But when this
valiant prince Brandizel, saw himself betrayed and prisoner, he thought verily
to have burst with anger: and with great ire and wrath he said unto Rodaran. Oh
false and traitorous knight, what reason has moved thee being a knight of so
great power and strength in arms, and of so high estate, for to commit so
great treason, against one alone knight, making battle against thee, his body
against thine.

Tell me traitor, how can thou consent to be called knight, when thou do
use so great villainy unto the noble order of Knighthood.

How can thou praise and extol thy self, in the great Asia, to have
overcome and gotten the victory over knights of Grecia, when that with so great
falsehood and treason thou have apprehended them.

Rodaran, was very much amazed at this which the Queen had done, and at the
great subtilnesse of the art where with she did assure him of this victory
against those Grecian Knights, And for that before this time, he did not know
the secret of her polesie, and making himself very ignorant thereof, he
answered and said. Thou have no reason, prince of Persia, to call me traitor,
for that in all my life time I have not committed any treason. And here I do
swear unto thee by the high god^, that I was as ignorant of this which the
queen has done, as thy self. And retiring backwards toward her, was, for
that I being weary in the battle and very faint, I thought by the sight of
her to recoyer some force and strength, for that the love which I do bear^
unto her, is very much. Well said the Prince, seeing it is so that thou art
without fault, do so much that my helm may be brought unto me again, and that
this chain may be taken away, and let us return again unto our battle. I
will not consent there unto said the queen, for that thou art my prisoner. And
Rodaran, shall not give unto this liberty. Then lady said the prince, give it
you unto me, for no longer time, then to make an end of our battle: and that
being finished, I do promise you by the faith of a knight, to return again
unto your person. For unto such a lady as you are, what so ever knight he be,
will think well to be your prisoner.

Truly I do like as ill of this as of the other, said the Queen of
Carmania, for that at such time as the battle shall be finished between thee
and Rodaran, thou shall remain in such pitiful case, that I shall receive no
profit of thy imprisonment. Therefore go your ways at this time and bear
company with the other Knights of the emperor Trebatio, and give them some
comfort, for that they are very sad and sorrowful, to find themselves
prisoners: and very shortly we will send others for to comfort thee also. And
take this of a certainty, that we will not carry you from hence till such time
as we have all the best Knights that the Emperor Trebatio has* here
prisoners, to bear you company.

And forth with they carried the prince away from thence who was so angry and
furious, that it seemed that he felt no weariness of the battle past, but
rather if all the world were his, he would give it, upon condition that he had
on his healme, and his sword in his hand, for to take reuengement of this
treason upon Rodaran. So they took him and put him in to a deep dungion next
the water, which was in the second tower whereas the other two knights Rodamarte
and Rodaseo were, who were greatly amazed when they saw the prince Brandizel to
be brought in that order, thinking that he had been overcome by Rodaran, but
the prince who knew them very well, with the great sorrow and grief that he
received when he saw them, he gave them to understand of all that which had
happened betwixt him and Rodaran, and of the great treason which the Queen had
ordained, whereby they were fully persuaded that all the rest of the knights
which remained in the court of the emperor Trebatio, would be brought thither
prisoners, if they had not some aduertisment given them thereof. With this
thought (which grieved them not a li^le) these three good knights did pass
away the time, tarry^ to see what fortune would dispose of them. And straight
ways after that the Queen Carmania understood who the prince was, she sent a
damsel of hirs unto him who did unarm him, and caused him to be laid in a bed
which was brought thither, whereas he was cured with very good and comfortable
ointments, of those great blows which he received, where with all his body was
full and his flesh all to bruised, whereby was given to understand the great
contention that was betwixt him and Rodaran. The squier of the Prince who
remained without, received great contentment when he saw Rodaran retire
backwards, ready to yield the victory, and having lost the sight of both these
two Knights, when they entered in under the second tower, he remained there to
understand what the end would be, till such time as he saw Rodaran return
with his sword in his hand, who commanded the gates of the first tower to be
opened, and being very much amazed because he could not see his Lord, he ran
unto the gate, and meeting with Rodaran with a heavy cheer, he asked what was
become of his Lord? To whom Rodaran said, he is overcome and has lost the
victory, and does remain prisoner, therefore do thou return unto the
emperor, and bid him send other knights, and such as can better defend
themselves then those which he has sent hitherto, for that these do remain
my prisoners. The squier durst not give him any answer, but departed from
thence very sorrowful, and with great weping, he returned unto Constantinople,
and at such time as the emperor was accompanied with all his princes and
knights, he entered into the great hall whereas they were, and there he declared
unto them the news, and all that had passed, with is much sorrow, that he was
scarce able to tell it unto them. When the Emperor and all that were there
present had heard and understood the words of the squier, they were very much
amazed that such a knight as the Prince was should be overcome by Rodaran, but
amongst them all the knight of the Sun and the Prince Clauerindo were amazed
most, for they knew very well his great bounty and prowess, and could not
believe that it should be true, for that there was not ^ knight in all the world
that was sufficient to abate his courage and get the victory, but the sorrow
and grief which every one of them received was such, that out of hand they
would have armed themselves for to go and combat with Rodaran, but this stout
and valiant king Sacridoro, who was the fourth person that did demand the
enterprise, did disturb them of their desire, and straight way arose up from
the place where as he was set, and put himself before the emperor, and asked
lisence of him, who straight ways did grant it unto him, saying.

Ualyant King, I pray God grant unto you the victory against that strong and
stout pagan, and deliver thee from treason, for I do believe that ye
imprisonment of such knights can not be without some treason or falsehoode. So
after that the king Sacridoro was departed, the knight of the Sun said, that if
there were not some treason used with Rodaran, that the prince Brandizel would
rather consent to die then to be overcome. And of this your highness may be
well assured, said Rosicleer, that if the king Sacridoro do not end this
contention, that all we shall have enough to do with Rodaran, for except it
were with the Knight of the Sun my brother, I never met with so valiant a
knight. I hold him for no less, said the Emperor, for his presence does
perform the same, and the same which we have heard of him. In all this life,
although the imprisonment of the three princes were some grief unto them, yet
for all that they ceased not continually to make great feasts and sports
throughout all the great city, and in the Emperors pallaice, whereas every day
the princess Claridiana came and many other ladies and gentlewomen, they had
great pleasure and delight in making amongst themselves so great feasts and
sports, that they passed away all the time in great pleasure and pastimes,
although the jealous thoughts of the princes Lindabrides would not by any means
suffer her to rejoice her self in any kind of pastime, but it was the occasion
that she received the greater grief, because the princes Claridiana at all
times was in presence, and her great beauty and gentill grace would not suffer
her to assure her self of the great love she had unto the knight of the Sun,
who always when he was in presence of these two ladies, was so troubled, that
all that were there present did greatly marvel that he was so quiet and
had so few words, and the other for that he was no more wearyer, of the
which the princess Claridiana did not let but had some suspicion of that which
her great beauty and desert did assure her. And because the knight of the
Sun did not behold her, and cast his eye upon her, so often as she
desired, she was in a great confusion and troubled within her self, not
knowing whether he did it or no, for that he would not have that those which
were there present should have any suspicion of the love that he bare unto her,
or whether the presence of the princes Lindabrides did cause any
forgetfullnesse of his part toward her. So because this History must more at
leisure declare of their loves, it does return to tell you of the King
Sacridoro, who were departed in the demand of Rodaran.

How the king Sacridoro went to combat with Rodaran, and of all that happened
unto them therein. Chapter. 41.
THe valiant King Sacridoro after that he was departed out of the great hall,
went straight unto his lodging, whereas he was armed with his strong and rich
armor, and mounting upon a mighty great and light horse, accompanied with one
alone page, for to carry his spear, he departed out of Constantinople, and with
the great desire he had to prove himself with Rodaran, in a short time he came
unto the bridge, and as soon as Rodaran had discovered him from the top of one
of the towers, he straight way armed himself with his strong and rich armor
and being mounted upon his horse, he commanded that the gates of the first
tower should be opened, whereat the king Sacridoro entered, with his spear in
his hand, and straight ways the gates were shut again, leaving his page
without, who did as the squier of Brandizel did, procure where he might see and
behold the battle. The king Sacridoro as soon as he was within, found
Rodaran mounted upon his horse, and very well armed, with his spear in his
hand, whom he did salute very courteously. To whom Rndaran said, knight, thou
art welcome, for that according unto the semblance and good proportion, thou
should be one of the best esteemed knights that the emperor Trebatio has
in all his Court. Therefore I pray thee tell me who thou art, that I may
understand with whom I shall make battle, and I am sure if the emperor do
send thee, it is to amend the faults of the Prince of Persia, and it should
appear that thou art in great estimation, for to come and revenge the Prince,
who was so valiant, that I never in all my life had so much travail to
overcome one knight. To whom the King answered and said. Thou shall
understand Rodaran that I am called Sacridoro, and am king of Antiochia, and
Knight unto the Emperor Trebatio, and a perfect friend unto Rosicleer, his
son, who otherwise is called the knight of Cupid, of whose valiant and
mighty deeds I am sure thou have heard tell. Of a truth I have heard great
talk of him (said Rodaran) for that in all Asia there is not a thing more
noysed and published abroad, then the great adventure which he finished in
the cave of Phenicia. And one of the chiefest occasions which has brought me
into this country is, for to prove my self with him, for that I cannot (...)
of truth, that he should be so valiant as the fame (...) of him in all y^
country. To whom the king answered, of my faith I do promise thee, that if
once thou do prove him, he will bring thee out of this doubt, for all that
thou have heard speak in him, is nothing, in comparison of that which thou
shall find of him, if thou do once prove him. Truth it is thou have
overcome and got the victory of such knights, that there be few in the world
like unto them, and although I do come hither to combat with thee, I do come
more for to put my self out of doubt, of a mistrust that I have, for that I
cannot beeleeue that thou could get the victory of them without some
falsehood or deceit, and for to thinck that I can do more against thee then
they were able, for in all things, they were able to amend my faults. Thou
shall straight ways see, said Rodaran, whether that my power and force be
able to do more then this or no. And there with he turned about his horse, and
took so much scope as was sufficient for his Horse. The King did the like, so
both of them with their Spears in their hands, broched their furious Horses,
who made their course with so great swiftness, that quickly they were
together, whereas they did execute the force and strength of their furious
encounter, and shieuered their Spears all to pieces upon their fine armor,
after that they had glanced from their sheelds, and with the force of their
furious encounter, their horses joined together with their mighty bodies, that
horse and man fell upon the ground, and being fast in their saddles, the evil
fortune of the king Sacridoro was such, that one of his logges doubled under
his Horse, in such sort, that by no means he could pull it out, nor clear
himself to arise again, and Rodaran with the force of the mighty fall, was
so astonyed and amazed, that void of remembrance he lay along upon the
ground without moving hand or foot, but as one that were dead. The occasion
thereof was, for that he was so big membred and footed withal, that the
rigorous fall was more perilous unto him then unto the king Sacridoro. But
when the Queen Carmania saw all that had passed, she arose up from the place
whereas she sat in company with all her Ladies, and came whereas these two
Knights were on the ground, and took of Rodarans healme and gave him air, so
that he came again to himself presently, and arose up on his feet, and was
greatly amazed at the great strength of the king Sacridoro, and went toward
him, who with very anger was ready to burst, to see himself in that great
extremity, and could not help himself. Rodaran pulled of his healme from his
head, and took his sword from him, and made fast a mighty great chain unto
his leg, and put a pair of manacles upon his hands, and so carried him
prisoner whereas the other Princes were, with so great sorrow and grief for
that which had happened, that if it had not been for the loss of his soul,
he would have slain himself. And when the other Princes did know the
valiant king Sacridoro, their sorrow and pain did double increase. And when
either of them had told him all that they had passed with Rodaran, he and all
the rest were very sad and heavy, for that they did beeleeue of certainty, if
God did not put remedy therein, it were not possible that there should remain
any good knight, but be brought all to prison. So there they remained all
four together very sorrowful, til their fortune did procure to the contrary,
but their sorrow and grief was not so much to see themselves so in prison, as
Rodaran received joy and pleasure, for the good fortune that he had with the
King Sacridoro, for that according unto ye great encounter that he received of
him he should have passed great extremity, if he had joined with him in
battle with their swoords, so that at this time he made little account of
the rest of the knights which remained, because he had brought into his power
these other past, who were very valiant and of great prowess. The Page of the
King Sacridoro when he saw his Lord carried to prison and his healme from his
head, after he had made that great encounter, he would tarry no longer, but
with great sorrow returned unto Constantinople, whereas he gave the Emperor
to understand ^ud all the Knights that were there present, the heavy news of
all that had passed, which caused such an admiration in all them that heard it,
that they knew not what to say, but that Rodaran was the most valiauntest and
strongest knight that was in all the Pagan land. And the sorrow and grief was
so much that the Emperor received, that he would have armed himself, and have
gone and proved himself with Rodaran, but that his son Rosicleer, who
received greatest grief for the imprisonment of the king Sacridoro, and was
the fifth to whom the lot did fall out to follow the demand. Without any more
tarrying he asked lisence of his Father, who committing him unto God, did
grant it unto him, saying.

My welbeeloued and good son, use thy self in such sort that thou may
revenge the injury done unto thy friends. And in this thing I do acknowledge
the great benefit that God has done unto me, in that I do know thee and thy
Brother to be my sons, which is the occasion that my court is so greatly
honored with so many valiant knights, and now in this time that Rodaran has
put us into this great extremity, which would have fallen out very evil if
we should have lacked you.

But whereas your highness is, said Rosicleer, we might be well forborne, for
if it were so that we were all prisoners unto Rodaran, we should receive
great comfort, and have our liberty very certain, if you alone did remain.
God deliver you from this, said the Emperor, for although there should be no
lack in my good will to receive death to set you at liberty, yet my force and
strength should want for to supply the lack of such knights. And therewith
Rosicleer did humble himself unto the Emperor, and departed out of the great
hall, and went unto his lodging for to arm himself, leaving the Emperor and
all the rest very joyful, be leeuing of a certainty, that for his great
bounty and mighty power, there was not a Knight in all the world (setting a
part his brother the inuinsible Knight of the Sun) that might be compared
unto him. In the which they were not deceived, although it happened not so well
unto Rosicleer in the (...) which he had with Rodaran as they thought, as in
the chapter following shall be declared unto you.

Of the strong and well foughten battle that the valiand Rosicleer had with
that stout Pagan Rodaran, and of all that happened unto them therein. Chapter
42.
THE valiant and well esteemed Rosicleer departed out of the City of
Constantinople, carryeng upon his sheeld the devise of Cupid, by the which he
was known and looked on of all people. Likewise the windows were full of
Ladies and Damsels, who prayed unto God for the victory of their Prince, as
though he had been their own brother, who travailed with so deep and
profound thoughts, mixed with sorrow, which were unto him as much care, as to
see himself with Rodaran in battle, and to bring him prisoner unto the
Emperor. In this sort did the Prince travail toward the Bridge of Iaspe, and
being sore troubled within his thoughts, oftentimes he had lost his way, if
his page which went with him had not put him in remembrance, which was the
occasion that he made the time long before he came unto the bridge, and for
that the remembrance of Don Siluerio did cause unto him great sorrow and
grief, that many times he said unto himself: Oh if God were so pleased, that
in satisfaction of the great travail which the Princess Oliuia has caused
me to have, that this knight were Don Siluerio, he that I do now go to
seek, and although the great favor which he has, is sufficient to defend
him from all the world, yet the great reason which I have to complain my
self, is sufficient that I do execute upon him this my great anger and
wrath. And in this thing alone the Princess Oliuia must pardon me, for
although I would rather suffer death then in any thing to cause her to receive
anger, yet cannot I let to do that and much more, to give her understanding
of the small reason that she had to forget me and receive another. And here
I do protest that if death does not cut me off first, I will revenge this my
bloody wrath, and then perhaps she will weep and lament her error. And
althought this is not sufficient to make satisfaction unto this my unhappy
Fortune, neither can it give any remidie or ease unto this great grief, the
which I have for her cause received, yet it shall suffice me that another shall
not boast himself, to have obtained and got that which I have lost, neither
any other to rejoice himself with that which does cause my sorrow and grief.
And although that this shall ^ee against all reason, and that Don Siluerio does
dot deserve (...) at my hands, yet shall it be comfortable unto my heart,
(...) that it is so captive unto love, it does consent unto no ^eason.

Rosicleer in saying these words, and other like in ef^ect, after much travail
he came unto the bridge of Iaspe, ^ho straight ways was known by Rodaran, by
the de^se that he had of Cupid, whose great fame and renown (...) that time
was spread throughout all Asia, more then any Knight therein. When he was
armed with his heavy and strong armor, he straight ways mounted upon one of
the biggest and lightest horses that he had, and the Queen being in her
royal seat of estate, commanded the gate of the first tower to be opened,
wherein this valiant Rosicleer entered without any suspicion. And when he drew
nigh unto Rodaran, he did salute him and said. The knight of Cupid and son
unto the Emperor Trebatio is very welcome unto me for that his great fame
which flies throughout all the world of his great and valiant deeds, as also
the great desire which I have to prove his great strength with mine, more then
the desire that I have to apprehend the knights of the Emperor, has caused
me for to come hither into these Countries. Both the one and the other, might
have been excused Rodaran, said the knight of Cupid, for that men being in
their own Countries are subject unto the blows of Fortune, and have enough to
do for to cleer^ themselves thereof, much more to come and seek the perils
and danger in a strange Country, it were much better for thee to have
friends in Greece. And if the Queen o^ Carmania do bear thee so great love,
as she has published, we would rather procure thy rest and quietness, and
not thy troubles and travails, wherein thou do so much pu^ thy life in
adventure. It had been better excused of thy part, said Rodaran, the seeking
of the adventure under the water of the Fountain of Phenicia, then my coming
hither to seek the Knights of Grecia, but for that both Kings, Princes, and
Knights, are no more, but as the world does yield unto them honor and
promotion for their deserved deeds. Then it is not much that we adventure our
lives, the more to increase our honors, for that according as thou have said,
in all places men are subject unto the perils and dangers of this world, and
unto the terrible blows of fortune when she lists to strike us,
notwithstanding if thou do pretend to make battle with me, upon the
occasion which you know, choose the advantage of the bridge to the contentment,
if not, return back again from whence thou come, and make no more
preaching unto me. But the answer (...) the valiant Rosicleer made unto him
was, he turned about his light Horse, and put down the beauer of his helm,
with his spear in his hand he went and put him self at the end of the
bridge, and Rodaran did the like, and being both settled, they stroke their
horses with so great fury with their spurs, that they made them run like the
wind, and in the midst of their furious course they made their encounter,
and executed the strength of their mighty spears, in such sort, that
glauncing upon their sheelds, they lighted upon their fine harneis, and
sheeuered all to pieces, and the splinters ^ew a great way into the field, yet
these two valiant Knights remained as firm in their saddles, as though they
had made no encounter at all, and passed the one by the other without touching,
and with a trise they returned again with their Horses, and their swoords in
their hands, and assaulted one another so strongly, that the first blow that
Rodaran stroke at Rosicleer, lighted upon his Healme with so great strength,
that he made him decline his head to his breast, but the first blow that
Rosicleer stroke at him, was such a one, that the sheeld which he lift up for
to ward the same, was cut in pieces hard by his hand, but the fine cutting
Sword of the Queen Iuha, not remaining there, did descend down upon his
healme with so great fury and force, that he made him decline his head down
unto his Horse neck, who felt such great grief with that terrible blow, that
he thought verily that all his head had (...) in ^eeces, and be^gan to say
unto himself: Oh high and immortal Gods, in whom I and all the Arabians do
beeleeue, ^et here thy divine power defend me from this strong and ^aliant
Knight, for if it fall out so, that I receive many such ^lows as this was, it
cannot be otherwise, but that needs ^ must here end my days: Oh old King
of Gedrosia, who ^ould have believed that I should have found in the Christi^
knights so much strength.

Oh you immortal Gods, save and defend the mighty Emperor of the gran
Tartaria, that he come not into this Empire of Greece, for to acknowledge and
prove the knights of the Emperor Trebatio, his Court, for that I do assure
you if you come hither, that you nor none of yours will return again unto
Arabia, for that these alone knights are sufficient to destroy you all, if that
now by my power and force I do not make resistance, and put order for to
disturb them.

And in saying these words, Rodaran with great courage stroke at Rosicleer
great and mighty blows, who likewise received such by the hands of his
adversary, that if it should have endured long, he must needs have received
the worst. And having great confidence in his mighty strength and in the
bigness of his body, determined to assault his adversary by proof thereof,
and therewith he threw his Sword from him, and caught Rosicleer in his arms,
and travailed with his strength all that ever he could for to hoise him out of
his saddle, or to overthrow him to the ground, but Rosicleer who was as strong
as he, did not refuse the wrestling, but likewise threw his Sword from him,
and caught him beetwixt his strong arms, and did so strongly crush him, that
Rosicleer did well perceive that his determination did not fall out as he
thought. So in this sort for a good space they trauayled the one to overthrow
the other, but there was no advantage perceived beetweene them, neither could
the one overthrow his adversary, till in the end after great travail they both
together did force themselves so much, clasping their knees hard unto their
saddle, having one another in their arms, they did so much, that both their
Horses foundered and fell with their masters unto the ground, and being down,
for to arise again they were constrained to loose themselves. who with a (...)
were upon their feet, and returned to their battle again with their
swoords, for they could little profit themselves with wrestling, in the which
contention they endured more then two hours, without knowing any advantage in
either of them, although in the end it seemed unto Rodaran that Rosicleer, did
execute his fury with so great courage and lightness, as when he first began
the battle, and saw plainly that whatsoever he could do, he should get no
victory of him, but saw the peril of his destruction to be very certain, if
he should long endure his strong and terrible blows, which was the occasion
that he dissembled and showed himself to be much more weary then he was, and
began little and little to retier backwards, toward the place whereas the queen
of Carmenia was: always striking at Rosicleer, his blows of more fury and
force, who followed him, for that he should not gather any suspicion of
falsehood. So in this sort they did combat together very strongly, till such
time as they were both under the arch or vaute, hard by whereas the Queen was:
who seeing Rodaran, so nigh the point to be overcome, she pulled the cord, and
made the Iron net to fall down upon both the knights in such sort, that they
were both prisoners, and so fast baund, that they could not move themselves to
the one part nor to the other. And straight ways the queen of Carmania, arose
up from the place whereas she sat, and went unto Rosicleer, and pulled of his
helm from his head, and likewise took away his sword, and he could not defend
the same, and caused manakles to be put upon his wrists, and a great chain at
his neck. And this being done, she opened the iron net, and caused it to he
drawn up, as it was before, and the Knights clear of the same: But when
Rosicleer saw this great dis^eit and treason, he was so angry and full of
courage, that being as he was, if he had had his sword in his hand, he would
have rewarded Rodaran according unto his deserts. But when he saw that there was
no remedy, with great patience and wisdom he did overcome the great force of
his ire, paciently^ suffering that his peruers fortune: and with great
discreation he said unto Rodaran, I do much marvel what thy meaning and
determinate purpose is, to use such disceipt for to apprehend good and worthy
knights: for that their overthrow cannot advance unto thee any honor, neither
their imprisonment give thee any profit. To whom Rodaran answered and said:
Do not thou think Knight of Cupid, that I have profited my self in using of
this remedy to get the prisoner, for it has not been for fear or doubt that I
had of the battle, or for necessity of help for to overcome and get the
victory of thee: no no, but only for that I do see that there does remain a
great number of good knights with whom I must combat: so that I would not
detain my self so long in the apprehending of one alone knight. For that I
have promised, in a very short time, to present unto the mighty Emperor of
Tartaria, the best knights in all Grecia, for prisoners. Who for that you are
all enemies unto our sect and laws, he would gladly see you all slain. Unto
which words of Rodaran, Rosicleer would not answer any thing, but suffered
them to carry him whereas the other knights were prisoners: who having heard the
great noise and rumor of the battle, they were meruailously astonished,
fearing what it should be. But when they saw them bring thither Rosicleer with
his helm taken of, and a great chain at his neck, their sorrow and griese
did increase, in such sort, that either of them would have given the adventure
against ten such as Rodaran, for to see themselves at liberty, only for to
give him his payment for this his great treason.

But when Rosicleer, did see them, his sorrow and pain was so great, that he
could not speak, but they forceing themselves all that ever they could, did
comfort him, saying: That now was the time to put away sorrow and grief and to
be thankful unto almighty god, for that seeing that the knight of the Sun,
was abrod, and at liberty, that God would not consent that so great treason
should go forwards, but that by the force and strength of his arms, he will
put remedy, the better that we may understand and know, that the great force
and strength of men, neither the great and surpassing beauty and valor of
knights, is not sufficient, whereas does lack his divine succor.

At this time the great joy and pleasure, which Rodaran received, was out of
all measure, seeing he had got for prisoner that famous and valiant Knight of
Cupid. And that there could remain no other knight, that was able to make any
resistance against his great force and strength, but only the knight of the
Sun, of whom he had heard tell of his marvelous and strange deeds of arms.
And hoped to have him very shortly there prisoner, with ye rest of the Knights,
by ye aid of this subtle art of the queeue Carmania, unto whom he gave great
thanks for the great policy used therein. Whereas before he was very grievous
and sorrowful for the same, thinking it should not be requisite nor needful
in any respect.

So when that the page of Rosicleer, who was within perceived that the battle
was ended, he knocked very strongly at the gate by the ring, till such time, as
he was answered and given to understand, that his master was overcome and lost
the victory, and was prisoner: and how that he should depart unto the emperor
Trebatio, and tell him that he should send an other knight. The page when he
heard these words, with great sorrow and heaviness, he departed from thence,
and said within himself: well, seeing that Rodaran had overcome the Knight of
Cupid, so likewise he would overcome and have the victory of all the rest that
remained. And many times he did curse and ban Rodaran, and the queen Carmania,
for yt they came unto the court, at that time of so great feasts and
triumphs, which the Emperor made, for acknowledging of his sons: and thereby
to cause unto them so great sorrow and grief. So when he came unto
Constantinople, he awayted such time as the Emperor was at dinner, accompanied
with all his best knights: at which time he entered into the great hal, where as
they were, and began to declare unto them (shedding so many tears, that almost
he could not speak) how that Rosicleer remained prisoner, and of all that
passed with Rodaran, saving in what sort he was taken prisoner: for that in the
place whereas he stood for to see the battle* he could not see any part of
the second tower, so that he could say nothing therein.

But when the emperor and all the rest of the knights heard those heavy news,
they were so greatly amazed, that they were almost out of their wits, not
knowing what to say, but looking the one upon the other, and seemed unto them
as though it had been a dream. But when these news came to the hearing of the
Empress, her sorrowful grief was so great, that as one dead, she fell down
into the lap of the princes Claridiana, who sat next unto her, and procured
with all her force, to bring her to her self again, and did comfort her,
saying, that she had no reason so much to set unto her heart the imprisonment of
Rosicleer, and how that she was fully persuaded, that it was a thing
impossible, except it were by treason, and requested her to pacify her self,
for that there remained such knights behind, who very quickly would discover
the secret thereof, and when that this will not serve, Rodaran is still in your
country out of the which you need not let them to depart and carry away their
prise.

At which time the knight of the Sun, without any more tarrying arose out of
the place whereas he was with so great anger, that his fair and white
color, was turned into sanguine and black.

And asking license of the emperor, he departed out of the great hall, and
went unto his lodging and armed himself with his strong and bright armor, and
mounting upon his strange and light horse, he departed out of Constantinople,
and took his way toward the bridge of the Iaspe, with as great desire to see
himself with Rodaran, as to return whereas he might comfort and rejoice
himself with the sight of his Ladies: without whose sight, in such like
passions, it seemed that it was not possible that he could live: who at this
present this History does leave, for to tell you of other things that passed in
the mean time in England.

How the Prince Don Siluerio returned and demanded of the king his daughter
the Princess Oliuia, to wife, and because she would not marrye with him, she
returned with her knights, and of all that chanced therein. Chap. 43.
YOu have heard what great sorrow and grief the news of the death of
Rosicleer did cause in the Court of the King Oliuerio, and likewise how joyful
the prince Don Siluerio was, for that the king had given him his word and
promise that the princess Oliuia should marrye with him, but he did not so
much desire it, as the princes did hate him. For although that the heavy news
of the death of Rosicleer did touch her very near, yet she repented her self
so much, for that cruelty which she had used unto him, and the great love that
the remembrance of him did cause in her, that rather she would consent to
death, then agree unto that which the king her father had requested of her
diverse and sundry times. And for that the prince Don Siluerio did many times
importune the king to perform his promise, which was the thing he most
desired. Who answered him, that till such time as he had ended the wars which
he had with the emperor Trebatio, he could not by any means conclude with
the princes, which was the occasion that continually he passed the time in
grievous passions, supposing that it was for no other thing, but a pollisie, to
cause the princess to give her father such an answer as should be contrary to
his will and desire. And because the time to give case and remedy unto his
desire was so long, and he not able to endure, (his sorrow and grief was such)
the delay thereof. Upon a day, at such time as he found the princess Rodasilua
all alone he did very earnestly desire her, that by all ways and means
possible she should learn to know of the Princess Oliuia the truth of the
answer which she made unto the king her father at such time as he told her
that he would marry her with him, whether, it was with good will and determined
purpose to accomplish the same at the time appointed, or whether she did it to
prolong the time, being moved by some hatred toward him, for that according
unto her answer, he would determine what were best for him to do. Then the
princess Rodasilua who had great desire to use remedy and to case the
sorrowful passions of her brother, did promise him to do all that ever in her
power was possible to be done, and so took her leave and departed from him,
and waited her time. It chanced afterward upon a day at such time as the
princess Oliuia was alone in her closet, she went and knocked at the door,
and being known who she was, the door was opened straight ways, and she went
in, and found the princess with her countenance very heavy and sorrowful, and
her eyes swollen with continual weeping, and her fair cheeks which before
were wont to be rudy and full, was now so lean and wan, as though she had been
new risin out of some great sickness or infirmity. And finding her in this
order, being moved thereby unto great compassion, she said: What is this my
lady and mistres, is it not sufficient, the time wherein I served you for maid
of honor, and the great good will that continully I had in any thing that did
appertain unto your service, in the which I was always faithful and true,
and do I not now deserve to know the occasion wherefore, and from whence does
proceed (that whereas at other times you were wont to be very merry and
joyful, and given to pleasure and pastimes, and now upon the sudden to be so
sorrowful and sad) for that I have seen your great beauty and fairness to
snrmou^t all other damsels and gentlewomen in the world, and now I do see all
lost and in a mortal hew. Tell me the occasion for gods sake wherefore it
should grow, that I might do my good will and therein show the great love that I
do bear unto you, in seeking remedy for the same. And here I do protest that
if you will not give me to understand the occasion hereof, that forth with I
will depart from hence unto mine own country, for that I do not determine to
serve any more those that so evil do reward them that do travail in their
service.

At which words of the princess Rodasilua, the princess Oliuia received no
joy nor pleasure, but rather did the more increase her pain and grief, for
that she knew not what to answer unto such an importunat demand although
after a while that she held her peace, with great desire that she had to turn
her of, and to send her away, she said.

Lady it is very doubtful and hard to think that any person in the world can
persevere in their great pleasure and contentment, and never to receive any
sadness nor griefs in their lives, no, for sure it is a thing that only is
received for those happy creatures who do rejoice themselves in the celestial
glory, and if at this present that I am so sad and discontented as you do see
me, it is not a thing to be meruailed at, for yt it is no new thing to all us
that do line in this world, every day to receive pleasure and displeasure. And
if in all this time I have not told you the occasion wherefore I am sad, it has
not ben for lack of good will for to pleasure you, neither lack of knowledge of
the good deeds which continually I have received by you, but only the evil
which I do feel in me is such, and of such quality, that I my self do not
understand it for to show it unto the physician, whereby he might procure some
Physic for to remedy the same. But this only I can say, that I do find my
self very sad, for that there is nothing that can give me any contentment to
rejoice and recreat my self. Likewise I do feel my self mortal, for that I
do hate and abhor to live, so that there is no Physic to be ministered,
whereas sickness is not known And this great heaviness and coffeehouse
does proceed from my heart, and there is none but the heart that can declare
from whence the occasion does proceed.

This is all that I can advertise you, my ladies and princes, and if this do
not give you satisfaction, you must pardon me, for that I am not to give you
any farther intelligence. In this has your highness showed me great favor, said
Rodasilua, in yt you would vouchsafe to declare unto me the quality of this
your infirmity, which is one of the strangest diseases that ever I heard of in
all my life. And being such a sickness as you have told me, it cannot be
known, neither is there any physic to be ministered, I promise you I know not
what to say thereunto, but only this, and in my judgment it is best, that you
take unto your self a husband, having now so good opportunity, in that the
king your father does offer unto you such a marriage, as is convenient for your
honor and estate. And although I am a damsel and have no experience of these
matters, yet by my self I may judge of another, and do suppose that there is
nothing under the Sun that is more profitable to give you pleasure, and to
cause you to have contentment, and to put from you this heaviness which you
have upon your stomach: and seeing that it is a thing certain that you must
do hereafter, as you have promised and given your word unto the king
Oliuerio, your father, in my opinion it were better out of hand to procure the
same, and not to prolong the time, but take time whilst time does serve, for
that peradventure the time will come that you would, and then you cannot, for
as you have said, there is no constancy in things of this world, and every day
you have a new change, and the conditions of men do alter. At which words the
princes* Oliuia did well understand, that the whole communication of the
Princess Rodasilua did extend in the favor of Don Siluerio her brother, for
the which, being angry, as she, who did hate and ab^orre him more then any
thing in all the world, pretending to put her out of all doubt, and that she
should not afterward come unto her any more with the like enterprise, she
answered her again and said: Lady I do give you great thanks for this
remedy which you have given me for my great sickness, and do accept very
much your good will therein, but yet I should think much better of you
(seeing as you do say that your whole desire is that I might have remedy for
the same (that such Physic as you do wish unto me, might extend wholly to
expulse this my great sorrow and grief, and not under color of pretense to
ease and help me, to procure to put remedy in some other, fayning to apply
it wholly unto me. Therefore Lady and Princess Rodasylua, here I do give
you to understand of a certainty, that there is no remedy of Physic that can
give remedy and ease of this my great evil, no I say, not to one part thereof,
but only death, which I do desire to take me out of this world. And now
seeing that I have so plainly declared unto you that your counsel given me
for my comfort and ease, does little profit, and therein no remedy nor help is
to be hoped of, I do most hartelie desire you to speak no more unto me
thereof from this day forwards, for that it is not unknown unto you how young
and tender I am of age, and that there is no time lost in me for to tarry,
and when time shall serve, I will accomplish and perform all that shall be
reason, and whatsoever the King my father shall command me. And in that you
do say, that peradventure when I would, then opportunity will not serve:
Lady, you do know well* that there be many Princes in the world, and other
Lords of great estate, and again, that I am a damsel and daughter unto such a
Father, that with the help of God I shall not remain by the walls and lost.
And heerewith the Princess Oliuia did hold her peace, and arose up from the
place whereas she was, for that Rodasilua should not reply any more in her
beegunne pretense. Who hearing and well understanding all that the Princess
had said unto her, without any more words she departed out of the Closet,
and went unto her own lodging, and presently sent for the Prince her brother,
and declared unto him all that she had passed with the Princess Oliuia, who
received so great sorrow and grief, that in a good space he could not speak
one word, but the Princess Rodasilua his sister did comfort him, saying, that
he should be quiet and have patience, and to dissemble all that possibly he
could, for that she hoped with the help of God that time would serve that the
Princess Oliuia would be better persuaded, and that she did beeleeue that
all her sorrow and grief was for the death of Rosicleer, and that being once
forgotten, then would she acknowledge the great benefit which she should obtain
in receiving so noble a Prince for her husband, and give God great thanks for
the same. So beetwixt the^ there passed much other communication about that
matter, and in the end they took their leave of one another and departed, but
the prince Don Siluerio receied so great sorrow and grief, that a great time
after there never entered in him any mirth or pastime, but always in great
sadness, languishing with the great suspicion that he had of his love the
Princess Oliuia, till such time as he beethought himself of a policy,
whereby he might remedy himself of his great sorrow and grief, and because
opportunity did not serve, he did delay the time till he did execute it, as
shall be told you hereafter in this History.

How the Knight of the Sun went to combat with Rodaran, and how by a demand
he left his determined journey. Chapter 44.
WIth great desire the Knight of the Sun trauayled toward the Bridge of
Iaspe, for to be with that Pagan Rodaran, with so valiant a courage, that he
thought more of the time that he should be absent from the sight and company
of his Ladies, the^ of the brave and (...) battle which he should have with
Rodaran, and although ten of the most brauest and valyaun^ Knights in all the
world did abide his coming, for to have contention with him, yet for all that
it should not be any occasion to put from him his amorous thought and great
care, neither cause him to receive any fear in his valiant and courageous
stomach. And being ingu^sed with these his amorous passions, his horse carried
him whether he would. And calling to remembrance the Princess Claridiana and
the fatre Princess Lindabrides, the absence of them was the occasion that he
thought verily his heart would have parted a sunder in two pieces. In this sort
he travailed toward the bridge the first day, and the second day that he
departed out of Constantinople, travailing in a great broad used way, he saw a
far of coming toward him a knight of a big stature, and mounted upon a mighty
couser, and armed with very rich and precious armor, and brought in his
company a lady of great beauty, meruaylouslie well appara^led, and mounted
upon a Palfray. And when he approached nigh unto them, having a great pleasure
to beehould the Knight, he stayed his horse, and saluting them with great
courtesy, he asked of them if they were of that Country, and whether they
trauayled. Then the Knight who was greatly amazed at the singular disposition
of the Knight of the Sun, and the strangeness of his armor and horse, did
answer him and said, that they were not of that Country, but strangers. And
what should be the occasion to move him to ask that question. The Knight of
the Sun replied again saying: for no other intent but to do unto you all
the pleasure that in me does lie, for your gentle disposition caused me to
demand this question. I pray God that I may gratify your great courtesy,
said the strange Knight. And here I do give you great thanks for your good
will offered unto me, being as I am.

You shall understand sir knight, that I am of a Country very strange and far
from this land, and I am come hither in the demand of a knight who is called
the Knight of the Sun, whose fame is such, that I am come forth of my
Country to seek him. Therefore sir Knight, if you can^e give me any news of
him, and ^ell where I shall find him, you shall do me great pleasure and
courtesy therein. At which words the Knight of the Sun was very much amazed,
hearing that a knight of a strange country should come in his demand, and
being very desirous to know his Embassage, he answered and said.

Of a truth sir Knight, you could not have met with one that better could have
given you news of this knight then with me, for I can give you to understand
where you shall find him before one hour be past, but yet first before I do
tell you where he is, I shall receive great courtesy if you do tell me what
the occasion is that you do come in this sort to seek him. The knight was
very glad and joyful when he heard that news, for that it was the thing that
at that time he most desired, and thinking the time long to know where he
might find him, he said. Of a truth sir Knight, although there had been no
occasion of your part to bind me to declare unto you the occasion of my
coming, your great courtesy and gentle disposition is sufficient to cause me
to declare unto you that which you do demand, and to bind me to do in your
service any other thing whatsoever your pleasure is to command me.

And now you shall understand that I am King Lyseo of Lydia, and this Lady whom
I bring with me is my wife, and our evil hap and misfortune has been such,
that at such time as we were most prosperous and received greatest joy and
contentment in our Kingdoms, and most at our ease, a cruel tyrant and King of
Arcadia, in respect of certain contentions which chanced beetwixt us two,
being trauayling knights, he is now risen up against me, and as a mortal
enemy does invade my kingdom, with so great puiss^nce of Knights and
Gyaunts, and has entered into the same, and has spoiled and taken all, saving
one alon^ City called Lydia, whereas I have defended my self for the space of
two mooneths with those small company of knights which remained with great
travail, and every day is presented unto us death before our eyes. So in the
end of this time, I seeing that the strength and power of the king did daily
increase, and that mine did still diminish, and that I had no remedy to defend
and deliver that City, which is the principal force and strength of all my
Kingdom, the remnant of my knights called a counsel together, and command
what was best to be done therein, and they all with one consent thought it
best that I should go and seek some aid and succor, wherewith we might
defend our selves from our enemies, and give me their words that they would
defend the City till such time as I returned. And I seeing that it was the
thing that did ^eehoooue me very much, I fell at a consent with them that they
should make their defense, and abide my return for the space of two months,
and ie it so fell out that in that space I did not return again, that they
should conclude a truse with ye king of Arcadia for a certain space, as they
thought best. This being agreed upon, in great secrecy I and my wise departed
out of the City, with determination to seek out some aid and succor,
wherewith I may defend the City of Lydia, for in making defense thereof,
almost the whole Kingdom is defended. And that being lost, it is without all
hope ever to recover the same again. And bee^hinking my self unto what king
or Emperor I were best ^o go to procure succor, I could not imagine any place
wherein so short time I might accomplish my desire, as to ^eeke out that
valiant Knight of the Sun, whose fame is ^o much spread abroad throughout
all Asia, after the great ^arres of Persia, so that the great confidence which
I have (...) him has brought me into this Country, and I am ful^y persuaded
that if I do carry him in my company to ^idia, that he alone is sufficient
for to raise the siege from ^he City, for that all the force and strength of
that war and great power, does consist in the death of the king of Arcadia,
and if that the Knight of the Sun do give unto ^im the death, it is
sufficient to conclude and end the wars, ^r when all the rest of his army
shall find themselves without their king and Lord, they will return again
in^ their own Country. And that which now does most grieve me (gentle
Knight) is, that it is now forty days since my departure out of Lydia, and by
reason of a great storm and foul weather which happened unto us at the Sea,
we could not ariue here in this Country any sooner. So that there rests
unto me no more but twenty days of the time that I set with my Knights for
to return, who cannot by any means do otherwise after that time be expired,
but to yield up the City, for they have no victualle^ for any longer time, and
although at that instaunt I (...) find out the Knight of the Sun, yet shall
we have inoug^ to do to come thither in time. So gentle knight, this is al^
that I can advertise you of, that you have saked and demanded of me,
therefore I pray you now to tell me when I may find this knight of the Sun,
for that accordin^ unto the great excellency and virtue which is spoken (...)
him throughout all the world, I beeleeue that there will b^ nothing to the
contrary to disturb him, but that he (...) have pity and compassyon upon
me, for that God (...) not created a knight of so great estimation, but only
to (...) mend such great wrongs done in this world.

When the Knight of the Sun had vnderst^ the demand of the King Lyeso, in
all his life he did (...) find himself in so great confusion and trouble,
for that (...) the one part the demand which he made against Rod^ran, and the
imprisonment of his great friends did cau^ and bind him not to leave off his
enterprise beegun, and (...) the other part the great and extreme necessity
of (...) King and of that sorrowful queen, who in the mean ti^ that the King
did declare unto the Knight of the Sun (...) you have heard, did weep very
pitteouslie, the which (...) ued him unto great pity, in such sort, that for
any thi^ as he thought, he could with no reason leave her, but g^ them
suc^our and help, and seeing that the time was short that the King Lyseo should
return unto the City Lidia, it seemed unto him a thing impossible, first to
conclu^ the demand of the Pagan Rodaran, the which he det^mined, and
afterward to give them aid and succor, wh^ was the occasion that he was in
great doubt, and for a good space he could not speak one word, till such
time as the king asked him wherefore he did not answer him. Whereto the Knight
of the Sun answered and said:

Mighty King and Lord, do not you muse nor marvel that until this time I
have not answered you, for that at this instant has happened unto me two
things of great importance, and if I leave either of them undone, it will be
unto me as grieuos as death. The one of them is, that Rodaran king of Arabia
is at the bridge of Iaspe, which is ^n the confines of this Empire of Greece,
and I am going ^hether to combat with him, for that he has prisoner a bro^her
of mine, and many other Knights of the Emperor Trebatios court. And the other
is your demand and great ^ecessitie, the which does grieve me as much as
though it ^ere unto my self, beecase you shall understand that I am ^he knight
of the Sun whom you do come to seek, and ^lthough there be not in me that
bounty which you have ^oken of, yet there shall not lack good will for to put
my life (...) adventure in your service. And because this my demand (...)
Rodaran has chanced at this instant, and lik^wise your ^reat necessity,
which does not require any delay, has (...) the occasion that I am thus
troubled, and in this great (...), for that I cannot accomplish them both
according (...) my desire, but now seeing it is so fallen out, and that (...)
in the confidence the which you have had in me, you (...) left to seek and
procure aid and succor in other pla^. And now the time is very short, and you
cannot other^ise procure for your selves, hap what hap shall, and come that
shall come, I am determined to go out of hand with (...). And in the mean
time that we shall with the favor (...) God clear our selves, and set our
selves at liberty from (...) war, I do beeleeue that Rodaran will not depart
out of (...), for that in the Court of the Emperor there do re^ many valiant
knights, with whom he will have i^ to do before he can overcome them all.

But when the king Liseo understood that he was the knight of the Sun, and
with what determination he did offer himself in their aid and succor, in
all his life he did not receive greater joy and pleasure, and went unto him
and embraced him, saying: Great and infinite thanks do I give unto my Lord
God, for that it has pleased him to let me see so high and worthy a Knight,
and I may well persuade my self, that you being a knight of so strange and
gentle disposition, can be no other, but he whose fame is in all the world,
and not a little amazed at your strange and excellent bounty. And now seeing
that it is my fortune to come into this great extremity, and that you of
necessiti^ must make an end of this your pretend^d enterprise, God forbid that
ever you should leave this your determined pretense for to accomhlish my
neces^itie* it were much better that I loose my whole Kingdom, then to hazard
the liue^ of so precious and valiant knights. Therefore I will return again
into Lidia, and procure to be with my knight^ before my time be expired, and
there offer my self unto death with them, for to accomplish and perform that
which I have promised. Then the Knight of the Sun who wa^ wholly determined
to go with the King said. I am fully determined to accomplish all that which
I have said* and if it be so that you are not content therewith, here (...)
do swear unto you by the order of Knighthood, that (...) am purposed to go
thither all alone, for that your necess^ tie does not require any delay. And
for this my demau^ which I have beegunne, I shall have time enough, for the
Rodaran cannot depart toward any place, but I shall find him to execute my
fury on him. And likewise there (...) remain in Greece many valiant Knights,
who will (...) taine him for the time, and I am very sure that it was (...)
possible for him to apprehend those knights whom he (...) prisoners in his
power, except it were by some treason^ falsehood.

At which time the King Lyseo would with a very (...) will have stayed with
the knight of the Sun, from (...) determined pretense, all only for that he
would not that he should have left his first demand, but by any means he
would not be persuaded thereunto, so that in the best ways he could, he did
gratify his great courtesy and good will offered unto him, still persuading
to the contrary in saying, that it were better that he should perish, then so
many noble knights. But all was spoken in vain and nothing would serve, for
that the knight of the Sun would depart with them in their company, and leave
of his first and own demand. So straight way without any longer tarrying, in
company with ye king and queen, they took their ieurney toward Lidia: and the
king said unto the queen, that he was the most virtuous knight that ever he
saw in all the world, and how that the great fame that went of him, was with
^ust reason. So in this sort they travailed till they came unto a little
castle, where as they determined to ^ary, for that the night was come upon
them: and there resting themselves, very early in the morning they arose and
did prosecute their journey. And they had not ^rauailed long when that out of
the same castle, they saw ^ome forth six armed knights, who likewise
soiourned there, ^ll that night: and following them, they did overtake them
(...) the entry of a great valley, and when they drew ni^h, one of ^he knights
said. Sir knights you understand, that your horse (...) armor does give great
contentment unto these my com^, and I for my part, does all only desire this
Lady, for (...) she seems to be very fair, and to be of high estate, ther^,
out of hand it does accomplish you, to leave them, except (...) will dye in our
hands. Then the knight of the Sun, who (...) the first was with them very meek
and sufferable, and with (...) dissimulation he said: Sir knight, if we do
give and (...) unto you our armor, and our horse, will you not be ^ntent to
leave with us this Lady. No of truth, said the (...), for that I ^ad rather
lie and take my ease with her (...) night, then to have all the horse and
armor that is in (...) the world.

Then the knight of the Sun, who could no longer suffer so great villainy nor
outrage to pass before the presence of the king, and finding himself very
nigh unto the knight, he lift up his fist and stroke him with his armed hand,
such a blow upon the helm, that he buckled it unto the skull in such sort that
he broke it all to pieces, and he fell from his horse dead to the ground. The
rest of the knights his compa^ions, when they saw that terrible blow, they were
very much amazed, for yt never in all their lives they saw the like done, and
with s^ great strength, and wished that they had not put themselves in that
demand and enterprise. But yet (...) themselves, for that they were many, they
drew forth their swords and w^nt against him, and did assau^t him, with mighty
and terrible blows. Yet ^or all that the knight of the Sun made little account
of them, and would not dr^w his sword, but stroke a^ other of them such a
terrible blow with his armed fist, that likewise he overthrew him from his
horse dead to ye ground, and said, god forbide that I should drawout my sword
to defile it upon so vile people as these be, that without all shame does
demand our (...) and armor, and yet not content, bu^ (...) so would have the
queen for to defile her. Then the king Liseo, who was one of the (...) knights
in the world, being very much amazed, at the great bounty and strength of the
knight of the Sun could no longer forbear himself, but (...) his sword drawn
in his hand, he assaulted the knights* tha^ remained. And the first that he
met with all, he cut of (...) arm, and with a trise, he stroke at another
and wounded him (...) ry fore, and over threw him from his horse to the ground.
An^ the knight of the Sun, at that time stroke an other with (...) armed fi^t,
that he all to be bruised his helm and skull, and oue^ threw him dead to the
ground, so that there remained of (...) six, but one alive, and seeing himself
all alone, thought no (...) to tarry, but set spurs unto his horse, and ran
(...) with all the have he could.

^o that these two valiant knights remained all (...) with great content to see
themselves clear of those discourteous knights, as als^ to see the pro^e of
the great valiantnes of either of them, and so they returned onwards on their
journey, and had great pleasure and pastime, at the demand of those
discourteous knights they travailed till such time as they came unto the sea
coast, and unto the part whereas they found the ship out of the which the king
and queen had disembarked themselves: into the which they entered, and found
the wind very prosperous and so great, that within three days after their
departure, they arrived at a port or haven of Asia, where as they went a land,
and to^e their way toward Lidia, always travailing in great have for that
they would come to the city, at the time that the king Liseo, had appointed
and promised unto the knights, but yet for all the have that ever they could
make, their time was accomplished, and over and above, more then ten days, at
the end of the which, one day in the after noone, at such time as night drew
on, they had sight of their enemies, who had their camp still pitched and
compassed round about the city. And that day they assalted the city, and made
a meruaileus great skirmish in such sort that they lacked very little to e^ter
into the city, and the most part of the knights that made their defense, were
slain: who did defend the city with great force, and like good and loyal
vassalle, always determined first to dye the death, then for (...) up the
city. Although they were all that remained so weak and so feeble, that if
they had returned to give a new ^sault, by reason of their great weariness,
and wounds, they must needs have yielded unto the death and were all very much
amazed, that the king Liseo, was not returned again according unto his
promis^, for that they had him in estimation for one of the best knights that
was in all those parts, and they feared very much least some ill fortune or
mis^ should have happened unto him.

So when these two Knights came within the sight of the camp where their
enemies were, the king Liseo said, my very friend and Lord, what do you think
is best for us to do, for to enter into the city, that we may give some
comfort unto those sorrowful and afflieted knights. You do best know worthy
king, what is best to be done in this case, said the knight of the Sun, and
therefore if it were possible before yt I do enter, I would very feign know how
far the force and strength of these knights does extend: therefore if it please
you, to take the queen behind you upon your horse, and procure in all that
ever you may, for to get unto the gates of the city, and cause your Knights to
keep ye gates open, for that I will be there very quickly. Do all things
according unto your pleasure said the king, and I pray God to give unto you
such victory, that our enemies might understand and know, that as yet the king
Liseo, is neither dead, nor overcome. So when the night waxed dark, the king in
the best manner he could, he took the q^eene behind him on his horse, and
embrased the knight of the Sun, shedding many tears, he took his leave with
the queen, and departed by a narrow lane, which he knew very well, and went
toward the city: and although he met by the way with diverse, yet for all
that, having no fear by reason that he spoke the language very well, they made
little reckoning of him, and did not mistrust yt he should be any of their
enemies. Then the knight of the Sun when he supposed that the king had passed
the camp, he took his spear in his hand, and dre^ nigh unto his enemies: and
when he saw them, that they were with out watch, or care of any evil that
might ^appen unto them, ^e committed himself unto God, and put himself
amongst his enemies: and with his spear he began to kill and to destroy so
many of the knights and other soldiers, that his great force and strength was
quickly known, by the number that lay dead in the field. For that in a short
space, he had flame more then fifty of them, at the nois^ of whom with a tri^e
all the whole camp was in an vpro^ and cried unto armor.

And after that this valiant knight had broken his (...), with his sword in
his hands he pressed still forwards amongst them, in such sort, that he seemed
to be some infernal creature. And without finding any great resistaunce he
approached unto the tents that were in the field, which were very many and rich,
whereas he found in them very many that seemed to be valiant Knights, who at the
noise and vpr^are of the soldiers were all armed, and in their company many
great and deformed giants, that seemed to be great towers, who when they saw
all the people run away, and saw not their enemies follow them, being greatly
amazed thereat, they stood still and knew not which way to depart, but when the
valiant knights drew nigh unto them, the first knight that he met withal, he
stroke him such a blow upon his helm, that cleeuing it and his head down unto
the breast, he overthrew him dead to the ground* and turning himself about, he
stroke another upon the wast, that he cut him a sunder in the midst, and
overthrew him from his horse likewise dead to the ground, which made all the
knights that were there not a little to marvel, and for that this valiant and
worthy knight would not at that time tarry any longer, he set spurs unto his
furious horse and passed through the camp with so great fury that there was not
one knight that could get before him, and being seen by one of the most
valiantest giants amongst the rest, with a great mase in his hand he followed
him, pretending to strike him with the same. The knight of the Sun perceiving
it, turned about with his horse, and before that the giant could execute his
mighty blow with his mase, he stroke him so terrible a blow upon the wast, that
his sharp cutting sword entered into his bowels, that he fell down from his
horse dead to the ground, and then without any stayin^ he put himself in the
midst of the whole camp and made so great a spoil amongst his enemies, that
he whom he found in his way might well think himself unhappy. So that they
all fled and ran before him, as from some infernal creature, that according
unto the great destruction that he made amongst them, they thought him to be
no other. In this sort this valiant knight went throughout the whole camp,
without finding one that was so hardy to disturb him, and slew with his own
hands more they two hundredth knights, and being all embrued in blood, he came
unto the gates of the city, whereas he found the king Liseo, who being known
by his knights and subjects, did open the gates, and did abide his coming. And
when they saw the knight of the Sun to come, all to be raied with blood, the
knig straight ways did imagine what had passed with him and embraced him
saying: Oh my good and perfect friend now I am fully persuaded that it has
pleased god to give me full remedy, and set at liberty all my kingdom, only
in that I have your valiant person here with me. At this time the most
principallest of all the knights of the city came unto them, and with great
contentment and joy to see their Lord and king they entered into the city, and
commanded the gates to be shut very strongly, and exceeding good watch and ward
to be kept, and they altogether went unto the palace, whereas they were of the
queen meruailously well received and entertained and did unarm the knight of
the Sun with her own hands, and there they did repose and rest themselves that
night, not without great care and complaints unto their king, to see themselves
in such great affliction, and almost all the people in their Country lost.

Likewise also was the valiant knight of the Sun sore troubled with his amorous
thoughts of the fair princes Lindabrides, and of the princess Claridiana,
which thoughts were more troublesome unto him then the furious battle which
he should have with his enemies the next day following. But when he remembered
his brother, and the rest of his friends that were prisoners with Rodaran, he
received so great sorrow and grief, that he thought long till the day was
come, and had a good trust and confidence in God, that very shortly he should
see himself clear from his enemies, and for to have time to return unto the
bridge of the iaspe, and to conclude his pretense to combat with Rodaran.

Likewise at this time all those that were in the camp of the king of Arcadia,
did not take their rest in perfect quietness, but when they remembered that
which did pass with the beginning of the night, they all trembled with their
great fear which they received of that worthy and valiant knight. And when
they had made relation of all that had happened unto the king of Arcadia, he
began to blaspheme against his gods, for that it was not his fortune to meet
with him, and they were all amazed, because they could not understand and know
who that valiant Knight should be. And again they were fully persuaded that
it could not be the king Liseo, for that he was not a knight of so great
valor, for to make such destruction amongst them, for that they had combatted
with him diverse and sundry times* and likewise others had been so ventrous as to
enter into their camp, but never did show so great force, and the King being
very desirous to know who he should be and to see him, he passed away all that
night with much more care then any of the rest.

How the Knight of the Sun and the King Lyseo went out into the camp of their
enemies, and of the cruel battle that thy had with them. Chapter. 45.
THe next day very earlye in the morning, the good king Lyseo and the valiant
knight of the Sun, after that they had committed themselves to God and broken
their fastes, they armed themselves with their strong and rich armor, and went
out into the great court of the Pallaice, whereas were joined together before
the king all the knights of the city, who did exhort them to be valiant, and
to put their lives in adventure fighting, seeing that the goodness of God had
brought him back again, and in his company so valiant and worthy a knight, who
did offer themselves unto death in whatsoever it pleased the king to command
them. The king gave them great thanks for their great loyalty, and did animate
their courageous hearts in the best wise he could, saying: My good friends and
loyal subjects, I have always had before mine eyes the great love which you
do bear me, and now you do show it more amply, that you have kept and
defended this my city, in the time that I have been from you in procuring this
aid and succor, God for his infinite goodness and mercy sake grant us victory
over our enemies, that I may have opportunity to gratify you for this your
great loyalty and travail. And I have good hope in my Lord Jesus Christ that
it will so fall out, only for that I have this happy and worthy knight in my
company, whose fame does sound throughout all the whole world, and all you
together ought to have him in greater estimacion then if I had brought a
meruallous huge and mighty army of knights. And in saying these words, he
commanded to number the people that were in the city, and they found that there
was to the number of one thousand of very good knights and valiant, and two
thousand other, that might well bear armor, and turning toward the knight of
the Sun, he^ said. Ualiant and worthy knight, and my very friend, your pleasure
is to command what is best to be done, for all we will obey you as our
principal captain and defender. Then the knight of the Sun humbling himself
very much said.

Worthy King, I am not come hither into this Country, but to serve you with my
person, therefore I pray you command what we shall do, for I purpose to be
the first that shall obey it, and for my part I give you to understand that
forasmuch as all these your knights are very weary^ of the battayles past, I my
self alone this day will go forth into the camp, and there to procure all
that is in my power against your enemies, for that principally with the favor
of almighty God I will do so much, that they shall receive damage and grief.
But when the King Lyseo and all his Knights heard those words, they meruayled
greatly at the mighty stomach and courage of the Knight of the Sun, and
with great admiration did bee^olde him, and it did seem unto them a thing
impossible that in a Knight of so few years should remain so great force and
strength, that he alone should offer to put himself into the ^field against
more then twenty thousand Knights, and as many more soldiers that were in the
camp of the King of Arcadia, whereas was amongst them the brauest Knights and
Giants that were in the Pagan Country. Then the good king Lyseo who could not
by any means abide to remain in the City, said, that he might do all
that his pleasure was to command, but he would not in any manner of wise
remain beehinde in the City, but that he would also go out in his company.
Then do what your pleasure is my Lord, said the knight of the Sun, for
having you in my company, I will not fear all these our enemies. And so
contrary unto the wills of all the other Knights, they prepared for to go
forth they two alone together, and before the time that the Sun had mounted
to mid day, these two valiant and worthy warriors being armed with their
strong and rich armor, and mounted upon their mighty and furious courses,
they commanded the gates of the City to be opened, and at such time as the
Queen and all the rest of the Ladies, Knights, and people were upon the tow^rs
and battlements of the Cit^ie for to beehoulde all that should pass, they went
forth of the City, and when they ^ad passed a mighty long and broad bridge
which was nigh unto the walls, under the which ran a great and deep ^ater,
and putting themselves a little out of the way for ^o view the Camp, whereas
they remained a while, and bee^ors they entered into the army, the knight of
the Sun took from his neck a very fair and rich Bugle, and blew it with so
great strength, that it made all the hearers thereof in the camp for to
tremble. And being discovered by their enemies, the King of Arcadia did
straight ways understand that it should be the Knight that so troubled them
the night past, and therewith commanded that the best of all his Knights
should be armed, and that they should go forth for to know what was their
demand. The first amongst all those Knights that went forth, was Brother unto
the King, called Momfriero, a valiant Knight and stout of his person, and
worthy in feats of arms, and such a one, that in all the Pagan Country
there was found very few, so gallant and so lively in any kind of exercise,
and marvelous presumptious, who being mounted upon a great and furious
courser whet out of the camp, and with great threatenings and oaths he swore
that with the first encounter that he should make with his spear, for to
bring him prisoner unto the King. When he came unto the place whereas the
Knight of the Sun was, with great pride and arrogancy he said.

Tell me thou simple and captive Knight, what great boldness and folly is
this of thine, that thou being but one alone, dare for to sound thy horn
against so great an army as this is, whereas there be knights sufficient for to
conquer the whole world, and here I do swear unto thee by the high Gods,
that before it be long I will give thee thy reward for this thy great folly,
because thou shall not advance thy self here after, how that before
Momfriero thou did this or that. And in saying those words he drew nigh
unto him, reserving that which was requisite for the course of his horse, and
with his spear in his hand he came against the Knight of the Sun; who
wished* and desired no other thing, and with the force of his horse Cornerino
he made against him, and although the course was very long, yet with a trice
they met together with so great fury, that the earth seemed to tremble under
them, they made their encounter in such sort, that the valiant pagan sheeuered
his great Spear all in small sheeuers, but at such time as he thought all had
been finished, he found himself from his Horse upon the ground by the great
encounter of his enemy* in such sort, that he was constrained to leave his
saddle, and the Knight of the Sun passed forwards as though he had done
nothing at all, and this valiant Pagan was not so soon overthrown, but
presently he arose up again, and drew out his sword, thinking that the
Knight of the Sun would have returned again upon him, but he making little
account of him, did blow his horn again. Then the king of Arcadia, who from
his Tent did beeholde all that passed, being greatly amazed to see his brother
overthrown, sent another knight called Rufier, who was a great Lord in
Arcadia, and one of the most brauest that he had in all the camp, who being
mounted on a mighty courser went out of the camp, with so great pride and
arrogancy, that he thought verily to revenge the injury done unto Momfriero,
but his expectation fell out clean contrary, for when he came to make his
encounter with the Knight of the Sun, he gave him such a blow with his spear,
that he pierced him quite through, that he overthrew him dead unto the ground,
and breaking his spear therewith, he drew out his great and sharp cutting
sword, and in his company the King Lyseo, they put themselves into the press
of the Camp whereas they made great slaughter, killing and overthrowing as
though they had been all naked without armor: Oh how joyful were all those of
the City, when they saw the great meruailes of their Captains, and their
great bounty and surmounted strength, and to the contrary how the King of
Arcadia was amazed when that he saw two alone knights for to do so great
murder and destruction in his mighty and puissant army, and said with
himself, that if all the world should have told him the like, he could not
have beeleeued it, except he had seen it with his own eyes, and for that he
would see more of their wonderful deeds, he did not procure to arm
himself, neither would he move from the place whereas he was* but stood
still beeholding the two valiant knights how they did beehaue themselves
amongst their enemies, who without finding any thing that did disturb them
in their way^, they went throughout the whole army, killing and wounding all
that they met withal, in such sort that they were all to be ra^ed with blood,
and the field lay full of dead bodies, and whereas it was before all dust, it
was now turned into dirt. At this time was well perceived the mighti and
valiant courage of the Knight of the Sun, who was so furious and fierce in
his battle, that whereas the King Lyseo did kill or wound one, he for his
part did kill four, so that they slew beetwixt them that day more then three
hundredth Knights, and in the end there went forth to make resistance against
them two great and stout Giants, and with their mighty mases in their hands,
they went toward the place whereas the Knights were. Then the Knight of the
Sun because they should not take so great pains as to come unto them
whereas they were, but seeing them a far off to come toward them, he went
forth to meet them, and scarcely they could have so much leisure as to life
up their mases for to strike them, when that the Knight of the Sun with great
lightness stroke one of those Giants with his sword in both his hands so
terrible a blow upon his right shoulder, that he cut him down to his bowels,
in such sort, that the fore quarter with his right arm did part from his body,
and he fell from his horse dead to the ground. Then the other Gyaunt who saw
the ill success of his companion, beeganne to roar, and to discharge his
heavy clubbe upon the Knights head, but this courageous knight perceiving the
same, set spurs unto his horse, who springing forwards, did clear his
master from that terrible blow, so that his mase fell down unto the ground,
at which time the good King Lyseo did find himself nigh unto the Giant, and
stroke him so terrible a blow upon his arm, that he cut his armor and flesh
unto the hard bone. At which time the Knight of the Sun was embraced with
other Knights, and the Gyaunt lift up his mase again, and stroke the King
Lyseo so strong a blow upon his hard and rich helm, that he made him fall
backwards upon his saddle bow without any remembrance, with his head upon the
horse neck, and his arms hanging on both sides as though he had been dead,
and vo^did out of the beauer of his healme great abundaunce of blood. Then the
knight of the Sun, who at the noise of that terrible blow did look about him
to see what it should be, and when he saw the King in that great perplexity
as though he had been dead, his sorrow and grief was such, that never in all
his life he received the like, and wished that he had not brought him out
that day unto the battle, but seeing that it was then requisite to revenge the
same, with more fury and wrath then ever he received, he went toward the
giant, who was ready to strike the king Lyseo another blow, and raising
himself in his stirrops, with the force of both his hands he stroke the Giant
such a blow upon his head, as though he had no armor upon him, he cloue him
down unto the breast, and the Giant fell down dead to the ground, then the
King of Arcadia and all those that were with him wondered greatly when they
saw that terrible and mortal blow stricken, their blood waxed cold in their
bodies, and all their bones did shake, and received such fear, that there was
not one that was so hardy almost scarce to look upon him, much less to
assault him, and the King of Arcadia ^ayd unto himself: Oh immortal Gods, who
could have beeleeued that your power does so far extend, to make a ^ortall
man so mighty, that at two blows he has slain ^wo of the most valyauntest
Gyaunts that were in all the ^orld, and he alone sufficient to make
resistaunce against ^wentie thousand Knights, the flower of all the Pagan
Country. And I do verily beeleeue, seeing that you do force ^ee to speak
it, that the force and strength of this knight (...) much more then yours, and
if it were possible for him to ^oe up into the heavens, as he is here on the
earth, he would (...) destroy you all. At this time all those which were (...)
the City, when they saw the disgrace of the King Lyseo all the great joy and
pleasure which they received to^ see the wonderful meruayles of those two
Knights was turned into great sorrow and heaviness, and beegan amongst them
grievous lamentations, but especially the Queen, who fell in a deadly sound,
and so remained more then one hour, but in the mean time this inuinsible
Knight not making any stay at the death of the Gyaunt, without departing from
the king Lyseo, did such wonderful deeds round about him, that they durst oot
come nigh him to assalt him by a great space, but with great sorrow withdrew
themselves, because their lives depended in receiving but one blow of his
hands, if he chanced to hit them right, and although a far off they threw at
him Darts, Lances, and swoords, as well at his Horse as at him, yet they did
him little harm, for that his armor was such as the history has showed, and
his horse was all covered with a very small and light mayle, made by such art,
that there was no weapon able to cut nor pearce it, for so the Prince Meridian
had caused it to be made, of whom he won his armor as you have read, which
did not a little profit in the mighty and immortal deeds of this inuinsible
knight, for if that his own armor and the armor of his Horse had not been
of so great force and strength, it had not been possible for him to have
finished and brought to an end so many perilous battayles and contentions as
he has done. When this good knight saw that his enemies with great fear did
fly from him and gave him way, he went unto the king Lyseo and took him in
his arms, and rubbed and chafed him in such sort, that he came again unto
himself, and when he saw the great peril and danger wherein he was
brought, and the great slaughter which the knight of the Sun had made* he
lift up his hands to heaven, and gave great thanks unto almighty God, and with
a very good courage he joined with him, and with great and mighty blows he
beegan to help him, with desire to revenge the great peril in which his
enemies had brought him: in this sort these two knights put themselves into the
thickest of their enemies, making s^ great slaughter, that they were judged
rather to be devils of hell, then mortal knights, and there was none that
was so bold that durst withstand them in their way, and by reason the night
drew on, they being all bloody, and almost weary with killing and wounding
of their enemies, they beegan to take their way toward the City, with so
great quietness as the ravening Lion after she has had her pray does depart
through the feeble and weak herds of cattle, but the King of Arcadia when he
saw them depart so quietly and to their contentment, by his outward show he
seemed to be so furious and full of wrath, that not one that was about him
durst come in his presence, but with many vprobrious words he rebuked them,
saying: Oh vile people and of base courage, how is it yt you are not ashamed
that two alone Knights against so many as are of you, has had so great courage
and boldness, to enter into our camp, and has slain so many of your
brethren, kinsfolks, and friends, and to suffer the^ to depart in so quiet sort
as they do, as though they had done us no barme at all. Here I do make a vow
and swear by the high Gods, whom I esteem but little, that to morrow if they
return bether again, to arm my self, and with mine own hands to take
reuengement of him that all you together cannot do. At that time there was in
presence with the King many stout and valiant Knights, who thought it a great
shame and small manhood to be so many against two alone Knights, and therefore
they would not arm themselves that day, who when they saw the King to be so
angry and wrathful, every one of them made a solemn oath, to take cruel
reuengement of those two Knights, if the next day they did come forth again.
In this time if the sorrow and grief was very much with them in the Camp, the
great joy and contented pleasure of them of the City, to the contrary was as
great, when they saw those two valiant warriors return together, and caused
the gates to be opened, and went forth to receive them, and ^ould not satisfy
themselves in honoring of them, and gave great thancks unto God in that he
had sent unto them so valiant a knight, for when they saw his great and
singular bounty, they were all fully persuaded that God had sent him unto them
for to aid and succor them in this great necessity. But when they came unto
the Kings palace, I am not here able to recite the great joy and pleasure
wherewith the Queen received them, who thought of a certainty that the king
had been dead, but when she saw him by her, she knew not what to do for
joy, but with her own hands did unarm the King and the Knight of the Sun,
and would not consent that any other should help her, and because their armor
was so strong and exceeding good in making defense, they had not received any
one wound that was needful of curing. So there was brought unto each of them
straight ways a new gown, and putting them on, they sat down unto supper,
and passed away that night with more contentment and joy, then any night
before since the King of Arcadia came into that Kingdom. Whom at this present
the history does leave, for to declare unto you what passed in the Court of
the Emperor Trebatio, after the knight of the Sun was departed from the
Court.

How Rodaran sent unto the Emperor Trebatio, demanding more Knights, and who
went forth in the demand. Chapter 46.
EIght days remained Rodaran at the bridge of Iaspe, tarrying for some knight
that should come from the Court of the Emperor Trebatio, for to combat with
him, in the end of the which when he saw that none came, he sent a damsel
of the Queen of Carmanias unto the Emperor Trebatio, giving him to understand
how that all those Knights which were sent by him were prisoners, and that he
should send more Knights, and if not, how that he was determined to depart
into his own Country with those Knights which he had in his power. So the
damsel departed, with this her message, and at such time as the emperor, with
other princes and knights, were in the great hall of the pallas, this damsel
entrrd in theratand without acknowledging any courtesy she went before the
Emperor, and said.

Rodaran, king of Arabia, my Lord does send me to give thee ^o understand
emperor Trebatio, how that all those knights which thou did send unto him,
are prisoners, and does me will ^hee to send other knights, such as may with
their great bounty and strength set them at liberty, and if not, he is
determined to depart into his own country, and to carry them with him prisoners
that already he has, and will declare in all places that there were no knights
in thy court that durst come forth to combat with him.

When the damsel had made an end of saying these words, she returned back and
went out of the great hall, and without any tarrying returned unto Rodaran,
leaving the emperor and all his knights that were with him in great
admiration (...) sorrow, believing that the knight of the Sun was also pri^,
and as men half amazed they looked one upon another, and ^new not what to say,
and there was not one of them that could ^eleeue, that such knights as went
forth for to combat with Rodaran, could be taken prisoners, except it were by
some ^reat treason. Then the valiant Clauerindo, who could no ^onger suffer his
courageous heart so swelled* but asking li^ence of the emperor, he departed
toward the bridge of ye (...), more with pretense to understand if there were
used a^ treason, and for to be prisoner with his friends, then for any ^ope he
had to conclude that which the knight of the Sun and ^osicleer could not do.
And when this valiant prince came (...) y^ bridge, the battle that was
between him and Roda^ was so well foughten, that they were more then half day
in great contention, and could not get the victory (...) of another, neither
was there any vauntage known of ^ther side, but in the end Rodaran feeling
himself weary and (...) the night drew on, he began to use his accustomed
remedy, and did retire backwards: this valiant prince with great courage did
follow him, till such time as they were under the (...) of the second tower.
Then the queen did pull the cord. (...) let the iron net to fall down upon
those knights, in ^uch ^ort, that they were both prisoners, and straight way
they pulled of the princes helm, and took a way his swood, and when his hands
were bound, they took him out of the net, and did carry him prisoner unto the
other knights. Great was the sorrow and grief which these good knights
received, when they saw themselves together prisoners by so great treason. And
seeing that they were in place whereas they could not profit themselves of
their force and strength, but to have patience, and to suffer that terrible
blow of fortune, they committed themselves unto God, till such time as it
pleased him to dispose of them to his pleasure. So when this valiant prince was
likewise prisoner with the rest, Rodaran sent the damsel again unto the
emperor, for to give him to understand how that the knight which he sent last
was also prisoner: and that he should send other knights of great bounty in
arms. But when the emperor did ^eare that message, without speaking unto the
damsel or (...) any other that was there present, he arose up and wen^ all
alone into his closet. And kneeling down upon the ground, shedding many salt
and bitter tears from his eyes, he began to complain himself saying. Oh high
and mighty Lord, the creator of all things, without whose good will and
permission nothing can be done. Here I (...) acknowledge that the great pride
and presumtion of all more tall men is such, and being by thee abhorred, many
times i^ the occasion, yt being by thee forgotten, they fall into great
troubles and necessity, by the which we may understand, tha^ all our great
force and strength, high estates, and all goodne^ which we do receive does
proceed and come wholly and onel^ from thee, and by thy will and permission:
and lacking thy aid an^ help, we are* of our selves nothing at all. And I a
morta^ man, at such time as I thought to be most highest in estat^ and most
(...) est, with the new acknowledging of my worthy valiant sons, with the high
and mighty knighthood of my court, with whom I did believe to be sufficient for
to conquer the whole world. Forgetting with my great pride and presumption, to
give thee thanks for so great benefit which by thee I have obtained and now is
the occasion that I am by thee for gotten and void of thy mighty hand and
power. And in a short time I do see my sons and all my knights which was ye
flower of all the world, in the power of one pagan, and prisoners* and I my
self in danger to be with them. Here I do humbly desire thee my Lord good,
seeing that I do acknowledge my fault, that I alone may receive the
punishment. And do not permit that so many good knights to perish and decay.
In saying these and other like lamentable words, the good emperor all that
day he would not go forth of his closet: but when night was come, he armed
himself very secretly, with his strong and rich armor, and took a mighty
great and light horse, and with one squ^er, he departed out of the city, and
took his way toward the bridge of the Iaspe, leaving order that they should
say that he was in his chamber very sick, and that he commanded that none
should enter in unto him* for that if they did know of his departure, all
knights of the Court would follow aft^r him, which was contrary to his desire.
So in this sort went this worthy emperor, with so great desire to find
himself with Rodaran, that he thought every hour to be a whole day. But yet
he made so great have that the fist day after his departure, he arrived at the
bridge of the Iaspe, without finding any adventure by the way, worth the
telling. And at his coming unto the bridge, (...) knocked at the gate, and
straight way it was open* and the Emperor entered in there at, and hi^ squier
would hau^ entered in with him, but those that were at the gate would ^ot let
him to go in, so that the squier did strive with the^ and did stand in
contention, and one of the men took up (...) ^ogell and stroke the squier,
that it grieved him very sor^* ^t which noise the Emperor looked beehind him,
and saw ^is squier to be so misused, he drew out his sword and (...) that man
such a terrible blow, that he euerthrew him dead to the ground, the rest
seeing their companion slain, they began altogether to buckle with the
emperor, but he used himself so with them, that in a small time of ten which
were of them, he slew eight, and the other two ran away for to tell their lord
what had passed, and the gate remained with o^t any keepers, so that the
emperor entered the bridge, and his (...) with him, and he had not well passed
half the bridge, when Rodaran armed with strong armor, and mounted on his
furious horse, with his spear in his hand be came ^orth and met him, and with
presumptuous and proud words he said: Knight, thou seem to be some innocent
and variable person, thou coming to combat with me, thou ^ast made contention
with my men. Here I swear unto thee by the high god^, that thy life shall
make me recompense for theirs, but first I will that thou tell me whether thou
art the Emperor Trebatio, or some of his court, for that hitherto those which
has come hither, have not ben so discourteous as thou (...) ben. Then he said,
thou shall understand Rodaran, that I am the emperor whom thou ^oost speak of,
and not bele^uing tha^ thy strength is sufficient to overcome and take
prisoners so good knights as thou have in thy power, I am come hither (...)
combat with thee, for to know by experience that which (...) many times has been told me of thee* therefore look unto the self, for thou shall have (...) to
do herein, and let pass the death of thy keepers. And in saying these words,
the good (...) perour turned about his horse: likewise Rodaran no less (...)
full* as much meruailing to see the emperor there, turned (...) bout his horse,
and being both in place to begin their cours^ they both of them together set
spurs unto their horses, and (...) the midst of the bridge they made their
encounter, and (...) each other with their spears in such sort, that they were
(...) broken in pieces, and passed by one another without (...) any more harm,
and turned their horses about (...) with their Swoords drawn, and their
shieldes on (...) shoulders they assauited the one the other very (...) lie,
and the one of them stroke the other with so (...) force and strenzth, that the
noise ran all along the river. Rodaran did so much o^presse the Emperor with
his mighty blows, that he gave him to understand, that he was a knight of
great bounty. Likewise he received such blows of the emperor, that Rodaran
did very well feel and understand him to be so good a knight as any of the
other knights that came before him, and many times he said unto himself, that
with great reason those valiant knights did serve the Emperor Trebatio, for
that he was of his own person the most worthiest prince that ever ^e saw or
^elt, and seemed unto him, that for so much as he was come thither unto the
combat, there remained in the court no other knight that was of any account or
estimation, which was the occasion that he did animate and force himself very
much for to oner^ome him, and did charge him with great and mighty blows, but
he had to do with the emperor Ttebatio, father unto the knight of the Sun and
unto Rosicleer, and such a one for his person, that setting his sons a part,
there was not a more valiant and worthy knight in all the world, who with the
great sorrow and grief which he received for the imprisonment of his knights,
did so charge Rodaran with his mighty blows, that although his strong and
fine armor did save him from death, yet many times he brought him out of his
remembrance, that his horse carried him round about the bridge.

In this sort the battle en^ured more then three heures, and could neither of
them overcome the other, but in the end because their horses waxed weary, they
concluded together to leave them, and to make their battle on foot, and for
that they might then more at their ease bestur themselves to execute their
terrible blows, the battle at that time seemed to be more furious and well
foughten, for their sheelds were all broken in pieces, and with the strength of
both their hands they stroke the one upon the others ^elme, that it made them
to sound like bells, and their ^ares were so full with the noise thereof that it
was strange. And many times these sto^t Knights with the mighty strength of
their blows, were constrained to vow their heads down unto their breasts,
and stoop with their knees to the ground, and likewise with their hands to
stay them from falling all together, yet with a trise they recovered
themselves again, and abated nothing of their courageous striking one of
another, although they were all to shaken with the force of their blows, yet
the one had not so soon discharged his blow as the other had his sword aloft
for to recompense the same and if at one time the emperor did bow his knees to
the ground straight ways the mighty Rodaran did stoup with his hands, because
he would not altogether fall down, and sometimes he fell upon his face, as
half amazed. At this time was Rodaran very much amazed at the great and high
bounty of the Emperor Ttebatio, and thought verily unto himself that it was
not possible for him to get the victory of that rigorous battle, if he did
not profit himself of his wonted remedy and treason, yet was he marvelous
desirous to overcome that Magnanime, and valiant emperor in battle, for that
he had taken all the other Knights prisoners by that treason, he would not if
it were possible, but overcome the emperor by force of arms, which was the
occasion that he did very much enforce himself to augment his blows, but by
reason of the great fury of the emperor, and the mortal and troublesome
blows which he stroke, brought him into great feebleness and to be weary, the
emperor was not clean void, but by reason of the long endurance of the
battle, he waxed likewise weary, so that both of them had great need for to
rest themselves some what, of the great travail which they had passed, and did
withdraw themselurs both together, and tested themselves upon the (...) of
their rich swoords, and without speaking any word the one unto the other, they
remained so a good space, till such time as the Emperor feeling himself
somewhat refreshed said.

Tell me Rodaran, what is the occasion that thou being such a knight as thou
art, and so mighty a prince, and king of Arabia, have left thine own country,
and come into these strange countries, so far from thine, whereas we are all
contrary unto you in customs and laws.

Well, said Rodaran, seeing that you so liberally have shown unto me who you
were, I will straight way give you to understand of your demand. You shall
understand that on a time I being in the court of the mighty Emperor of Tar
taria, which is the gran Cataya, by the mouth of the king Gedrosia (who is an
old man, and very well seen in the art of nigromancy, I heard him say, that
the knights of Greece before many years did pass, shall destroy all the
Tartarians and pagans, and bring unto destruction the most mightiest kings and
Lords that are in all those countries, and overthrow all their I^ols down unto
the ground in despite of our Gods, and for that the words of that king did make
the emperor and all the kings and noble men that were there present greatly to
marvel, I in the midst amongst them did arise bp, and gave my word and
promise in their presence, for to come into these parts, and by mine own hands
for to take and carry away prisouers all the knights of Greece, and for that
they all did make a jest thereat, and thought it a thing impossible, I
straight ways departed out of the court, and took in my company the queen of
Carmania my spouse and wife, and am come hither, and done as is apparent unto
you, And with pretense and good will when I have prisoners the best and most
esteemed knights of all the court to depart unto the sea, and return again
unto Tartaria, and there to make a present before the emperor of all the
prisoners that I shall carry, that he man do with them all that his will and
pleasure is and according unto the evil will which he does bear unto the
christians, he will cause them all to die an cruel death, so (...) as they
shall be presented before him. Therefore emperor Trebatio, look well unto t^y
self, for that I do desire more to carry thee prisoner, then to enjoy the
kingdom of Carmania, although it were more greater then the whole Empire of
Tartaria.

God will do better with us then thou do think for, said the emperor, and
being very angry and wrathful at the evil pretense of Rodaran, he went unto
him and in such sort beegan to charge him with his strong and heavy blows,
brusing both his bones and flesh, that he was constrained to bestur himself,
more for the defense of the blows ^ee receiuid, then for to procure to strike
any. At this time was more then six hours past since the beginning of the
battle, at which time the worthy emperor with new force and strength did
double his blows, and in such sort did entreat Rodaran, that he was without
all hope of victory of that battle, which caused him to retire backwards upon
the bridge, for to seek remedy for the sauegard of his life, although it was a
great grief unto (...) for to do it, and was the occasion that this good
emperor was brought subject unto the cruel blow of fortune, as the others
were, and there he was taken prisoner in the iron net, whereas he understood all
the treason, whereby all the other knights were taken prisoners, and straight
ways they pulled off his helm, and took away his rich and precious sword,
and bound his hands, and made fast to his feet a great and long chain, and
carried him whereas the other knights were, but when they saw him brought
thither, and he them prisoners, either of them received so great sorrow and
grief, that they thought verilye to burst with anger, and there were knights
amongst them that would gladly have yielded themselves unto death out of hand,
upon condition, to be but one hour at liberty, but especially the worthy
Rosicleer, who when he saw the emperor his father prisoner, his sorrow and
grief was so much, that he could not speak one word. Then Rodaran when he saw
that he had prisoners the most principal^est Knights of all Greece, with the
counsel and consent of the Queen Carmania, his wife, he put himself
presently into his ship, which was at an an^er in the river hard by the bridge
of the Iaspe. Likewise all the prisoners in very good order with the Queen
Carmania, and all their people, they commanded to hoyse sail, and being very
glad and joyful of their noble pray, and the wind prosperous, in short time
they were put into the main Sea, whereas they shaped their course the nighest
way they could for to go unto the Emperor of Tartaria. Rodaran received the
greatest contentment that ever man could receive, for that he very well knew by
experience, that the present which he carried, was the most worthiest and
valyauntest knights that were in all the woorld. Also he thought that the
Emperor of Tartaria and all his nobles would have him in great reputation for
that pollycie which he used herein. Let this now remain for an example unto
all kings and mighty Lords, wherein they may see the small security which they
have in their high estate, and how subject they are unto mutable Fortune, for
that at such time as they are exalted all aloft, with great pride and
presumption they forget God, who is the author of all goodness, and he once
leaving them, they are straight ways overthrown, and brought into such perils
and dangers, that none but god alone is sufficient to deliver them, from whence
does proceed the myrrour, to see how little their own power and strength is,
when they think they are exalted in the most highest estate, as it has
happened unto the good Emperor Trebatio, who at such time as he thought to
be so puissant and strong to conquer the whole world, and mounted so high,
that never Emperor nor king achieved the like, in a short time he was taken
prisoner, with his son, and other valiant Princes, only by one Pagan. Whom at
this present, the History does leave, to declare unto you what chanced in
Constantinople after the Emperor departed.

How it was known in Constantinople the imprisonment of the Emperor, and what
was done in consideration thereof. Chapter 47.
AT such time as the squier which was with the Emperor saw his Lord prisoner,
and the great treason which was used to take him, without any more tarrieng he
returned unto Constantinople as fast as his horse could run* and at such time
as there was joined together in the great hall of the palace many princes and
worthy knights, he entered in at the door, and with a loud voice ^e said: O^
princes and knights of Greece, what do you hare so without care or
consideration, and do not procure to go and help the Emperor our Lord who by
the greatest treason that ever was seen or heard of is taken prisoner by
Rodaran. At which time all the princes and knights were amazed at the words,
and there grew a great vpro^re amongst them, and demanded of him how and in
what sort it happened, who in brief did declare it unto the^, the which was
presently published in the great palace, and throughout all the city. And
when it came unto the ears of the Empress, in her estate whereas she sat she
fell in a sound, and was in the arms of her Ladies more the^ an ho^re as one
that were dead, and in all the palace was made such sorrow and lamentatio^, as
though the Emperor had been slain, and with a trise therewere many princes
and knights armed, and joined together a company of more then two hundredth,
who departed out of the city all together as fast as their horses could run,
and they took their way toward the Bridge of the Iaspe, but all did (...)
little, for that when they came unto the Bridge, they found that Rodaran with
hi^ rich pray was gone, and they could find no sign which way, so that they
knew not whether to follow them. In this time the great valor of the Princess
Claridiana was not absent, for that aseer she had very wisely and courteously
comforted the Empress, she promised her and gave her her word never to
return any more unto the Empire of Greece, without the Emperor, and straight
way she was armed with strong and rich (...), and mounted upon a light horse,
only accompanied with her Damsels, she departed out of the City, and when
she came unto the bridge of the Iaspe, she found the knights that went out to
seek the Emperor, very sorrowful and without all comfort, because they knew
not which way to go seek Rodaran, some of them embarked themselves to the sea,
and other some went travailing into the land to go and seek him, but the
Princess finding in a port (which was nigh unto the place whereas they were) a
ship rea^ie in all points, she embarked her self therein all alone with her
Damsels, and it seemed unto her that seeing that Rodaran did carry with him so
rich a pray, that it did not beehooue him to stay in the country. So she put
her self unto the sea, without knowing any certain way whether to travail,
but only committed her self unto Fortune. So they na^igated five days at the
Sea, without finding any adventure worthy the telling, in the end whereof
very early in the morning they discovered land nigh unto them, which was
pleasant and well furnished with all manner of green trees, and having great
desire to go a shore, they commanded to hoise out their ^oat. So the Princes
and her damsels went a land, and she mounting upon her horse, and her Damsels
upon their Palfraies, they beegan to travail by a very narow and small used
path, which went through a Ualley, which was garnished full of very sweet
Roses, and other odoriferous flowers and herbs, and they had scarce travailed
therein one mile, when they saw coming against them a damsel upon a palfray,
so fast as he could run, and men running threatening to kill her, if she
would not stay, but when she found her self nigh unto the princess, she
said: Oh knight defend me from these traitors, for they have committed the
greatest treason that ever you heard. Then the princess having her helm on,
she put her self before these men, because they should not come unto the
damsel, who would not withdraw themselves, but perforce would have laid hold
upon the Damsel, wherewith the Princess with her Spear stroke one of them
therewith, that she gored him clean through, and (...) fell down dead unto
the ground. Then one of the other offered to strike at the princes with a great
fauchon that he had in his hand, who perceiving it, spurred her horse over him,
who tore him all to pieces under his feet, and slew him, and offering to
strike the other with her spear, he took his legs and ran so fast as ever
he could the way he came. Then the Damsel being at liberty, the Princess
demanded of her what was the occasion that those men did follow and pursue her?
Ah sir, said the Damsel, do you return with all speed back again the way
you came, and make no longer tarriaunce in this place, for if you be taken it
is not possible that you should live any longer. Tell me first the occasion
why, said the Princess, then afterward I will do that which seems best
unto me.

Sir knight (said the damsel) here before goes a giant, the greatest and
most furious that ever was seen by men, who with more then twenty knights in
his company, does carry prisoner the Queen of Hiberia, with the Princess
Theophilia her daughter, and (...) more Ladies and Damsells of hirs, who by
force this infernal Giant did take away from the King Hiberia, and more then
forty Knights of his, who were passing away the time abroad in a very
delightful forest, this Gyaunt did put us all together into a Ship of his,
and has brought us hither prisoners, carrying us into a Castle which is there
a little before, from whence I came running away, and it seems unto me
better to dye in the hands of them that shall follow me, then to be prisoner
in the power of that infernal Giant.

The Damsel finishing these words, she received so great fear, that the
Princess could not stay her, but more by force then with her good will, she
caused her to return again in her company the way which she came, in which
they had not trauayled very farr^, when they saw coming toward them ten
Knights as fast as their horses could run, who being advertised by him that
ran away, they came in the demand of the Knight which had slain the other two
men. And when they saw them, by the signs and tokens that the man had given
them, they understood that it should be the Princess, then all together with
their swoords in their hands they ran against her, but she received them in
such sort, that she received no harm of their encounters, but she stroke one
of them so right, that ye point of her spear came forth at his back, and fell
down dead to the ground, and breaking her spear with that encounter, she
drew out her sword and beegan to combat with them, and did so beehaue her
self, that in a short time she had slain the one half of them, and although
those Knights did charge her very much with their strong blows, yet by reason
that her armor was so good, she was in great security not to receive any
wound, by reason whereof, without all fear she put her self amongst them,
striking such mortal blows, that it was wonderful to behold, and never
rested till she had slain all save two, who seeing the great force and
strength of the Princess, durst not tarry any longer, but returned the way
they came as fast as their Horses could r^nne. The Damsel at this time would
very feign have had the Princess return back again, and not have gone any
farther, but her courageous and valiant stomach would not consent thereunto,
but followed the other in that way they went. After they had trauayled in that
way a small space, they discovered upon the top of a high Rock a Castle, very
great and full of towers, and compassed about with a very strong wall, and
coming nigh unto the same they saw come forth of the gate a Giant, the
greatest and tallest that ever they saw in all their lives, and mounted upon a
great and mighty courser, and in his company more then ten Knights, who came
that way wherein the Princess trauayled, but as soon as the Damsel of the
Queen had spyed them, she had no desire to stay, but returned back again the
way she came as fast a^ her palfray could run, but the Princess who received
no fear of the Gyaunt nor of his Knights, kept (...) her way toward them, and
when the Gyaunt came nigh unto her, with a hoarse and hollow voice he said: Oh
foolish and unhappy knight, how is it, knowing that I am Orbion, and having
slain my knights, thou durst be so bold and have so great courage to tarry and
abide my coming, it does grieve me for the anger which thou have given me,
for that it will be unto thee a great honor to be slain at my hands, and I
smally satisfied for the death of my Knights, in taking away thy life. Far more
foolish and unhappy, may thou account thy self Giant, said the Princess,
if thou did know thy self, knowing that god is in the heavens to punish all
evil deeds, and how dare thou be so bold to use so great evil and ^illany.
Therefore out of hand make recompense of all this evil which thou have done,
and set at liberty all those which thou have prisoners in thy Castle, if thou will that the divine justice be not executed on thee this day. The proud
Giant when he heard those words was so full of anger and wrath, that a thick
smoke came out of his Beauer, and without answering any word he turned about
his horse, and with his Spear in his hand he came against the Princess,
saying: Oh if the high Gods were so pleased, that the^ were that great
Siracusano and Achilles the Greek, io^utly with Hector of Troy, that all three
together I might deprive the^ of their (...), wherewith I might somewhat ass
wage this my great wrath and anger. This valiant and worthy Princess did not
refuse that terrible and cruel encounter of that furious Giant, but with her
spear in her hand went forth to meet him, and meeting together in their first
course, the Gyaunt encountered with the Princess in the midst of all her body
with so great strength, that if her armor had not been made by the art of the
Queen of Pantafilia, it had not been possible for her to have escaped death,
for if he had made that encounter against two other Knights, he had surely
yearced them through, and for that the force of her fine armor would not
consent to be broken, the head of his spear^ glaunced on the one side, and the
staff was sheeuered all t^ pieces, in such sort yt the princess (...) clear
of that encounter, but she made her encounter with so great force again^ she
Giant, that chancing on the one side under his arm, it perced him through his
harneis, and her spear appeared more then half on the other side, making a
little wound, and by force of that strong encounter, his horse was overthrown
to the ground, and in his fall one of his legs chanced under his Horse, in
such sort, that by any means he could not move himself, and as the
princess would have returned upon him, all the Giants knights came against
her, and compassed her round about, and charged her with mighty blows on every
side, but when she saw her self in that necessity, she drew out her sword,
and in a small time gave them to understand her great bounty, and stroke at
them such blows, that they durst not come nigh her, at which time she had
overthrown and slain more then half, in all which time the Gyaunt could not
by any means clear his leg from under his horse, and if so be that any of
his Knights alighted to help him, the princess was presently with him and slew
him, so that all the b^ttayle was with his Knights, and this valiant princess
had so great confidence in her excellent and strong armor, that she put her
self amongst them, as the r^utshing Wolf amongst the poor and simple lambs,
and she never stroke blow but she did kill or sore wound a Knight.

There was not as yet full an hour passed since the beeginning of the
battle, when this royal Princess had slain the most part of the Knights,
and the rest which remained ^eeing much amazed at her mortal blows, ran
away, so that she remained all alone in the field with the Giant, and (...) her
self clear from all those knights, with a trise she (...) from her horse,
and giving the bridle to one of her (...), she went unto the Gyaunt, who was
blaspheming against his gods, in seeing his knights slain before his eyes,
and could not help them, but the first thing which this royal (...) did, she
took the horse off his leg, and did help him (...) arise from the ground,
saying: Orbion, here thou shall (...) how little the force of man avails,
when they (...) forgotten of God, and for their evil works they lack divine
(...): Tarry a little, said the Gyaunt, for as yet I am not at the point to
acknowledge this, and there with he drew out a mighty great and broad
Fauchon, and went against the Princess, and stroke her such a blow upon the
healme, that it sounded throughout all the Ualley, and if it had not been
very good and of great force, both head and body he had cloven clean a
sunder in the midst, and for all that it made her to stoop with her hands
unto the ground, yet did not this worthy Lady receive any fear, but rather
it did increase her force and courage, wherewith she returned unto him, and
stroke him such an overthwart blow upon his leg, that it cut both harneys and
flesh unto the hard bone, whereat ran out great abundaunte of blood, then the
Gyaunt returned again with great fury for to strike the Princess upon the
healme, pretending with that blow to conclude the battle beetweene them, but
she taking warning by the first which she received, with great lightness did
clear her self from the fury thereof, and his blow descended down to the
ground, that the fauchon entered into the earth almost up to the hilts, and
before that the Gyaunt could pull out his Fauchon, the Princess cast a thrust
at the visor of his healme, in such sort, that chauncing in the sight, it
passed through his head on the other side, so that the Giant fell down dead to
the ground. This being done, the Princess gave great thancks unto almighty
God, for that great victory which he had granted unto her, and mounting upon
her Hors^, she took her way toward the Castle, and when she came there the
gates were opened unto her, for that the small company which remained alive of
the people of the Giant, received greater pleasure then sorrow for his death,
only for his evil and cruel customs and confines. The Princess straight
way entered in, and called for the keys of all the Castle, and demanded where
the Queen was, and she was brought foorth^ with unto a great quadran, whereas
she found the Queen with the Princess Theophilia, and all their Ladies and
Gentlewomen, in great sorrow and heaviness, without any hope of succor, who
when they heard of the death of the giant and of all that had passed, their joy
was such, that till such time as out of a window they did see him dead in the
field, they could not believe it. And as the princes entered in whereas the
queen and the princess was, they understanding what she had done in their
delivering, they went toward her saying: Ualiant and worthy knight, the living
God reward thee for that which thou have done in our behalf, and here we do
most heartily pray you to pull of your healme, or else to tell us your name, that
we may know unto whom we are bound for this great benefit showed unto us. Then
the princes the more to glad and comfort them, did pull of her helm, and did
declare unto them who she was. And she remained so fair and so full of beauty
after the great travail that she had passed, that it was as great marvel to
behold her, as Diana in break of the day: the queen and the princess were
greatly amazed at that great wonder, and looked the one upon the other,
believing it rather to be a dream then of truth, all that which they saw. But
in the end being fully satisfied the queen and the princess did embrace her,
giving her great thanks for that she had done for them. So they remained there
all the rest of that day and all the night: and the next day in the morning the
princes ordained and made lord of that castle, a knight of the giants, for
that he seemed to be a good knight, and the queen and the princess with all
their ladies and gentlewomen did depart from thence, and the princess did
bear them company unto the port. And in the way as they went, they met with
the damsel that ran away, who for very shame would not come in presence of the
queen, although they all had great mirth and pastime with her, for the small
confidence she had in the princes. So when they came unto the port, they all
embarked themselves in the same ship wherein the princes came into that
country: and having the time and wind very prosperous, the next day they arrived
at Hiberia, and they had not all fully disimbarked themselves a land, when that
thither came the King with more then two thousand knights, who went in the
demand and seeking of Orbion, whohad carried away the queen, and when he met
them there, and v^derstood of them all that had passed, his joy and pleasure was
such, as to the judgment I reter me: but when he was fully certified by the
queen who the knight was that put them at liberty, he went toward the
princess, and said: Worthy Lady, ^iue me your royal hands that I may (...)
them, for I owe it unto you for this great benefit showed unto me, and all
kings and princes in the world, are bound unto your great highness and bounty.
The princess did then embrace him saying: Unto God do I give great thanks for
his great benefits showed unto me, in that he has permitted that I have done
this great service unto the queen and unto the princes, and likewise in
excusing your travail begun to sake out Orbion. And now seeing that there is
no more to be done herein, in your service, I do most heartily desire you to
give me lisence to depart, for that I have very much to do in other places.
And so very much against the kings will, he took leave of her, and offered
himself and all his kingdom at her commandment. So she departed from them
and tra^ailed eight days without finding any adventure, till in the end she
was clean out of Hiberia, and entered into another kingdom and upon a sudden
at such time as the knight of the Sun was past, she discovered a great way off
from her, a mighty army o^ knights, with very rich tents and ancients: likewise
she saw nigh unto that army, a great and well (...) city, out of the which
there went forth one alone knight, and within a little while after she saw
him to make battle with the most strongest knights that ever she saw, and in
beholding this fier^ battle the history leaves her, till opportunity.

How that the Knight of the Sun and the king Liseo (...) forth the second day
against their enemies, and of the hig^ knighthood which they showed in their
battle. Chap. 48.
IN the kingdom of Lidia, was not the knight of the Sun idle, neither received
he much ease in the time yt he was there, for that calling to remembrance the
imprisonment of his friends, and also the great love which he bare unto the
princess Claridiana, whom he exceedingly loved, and also unto the fair
princess Lindabrides, was the occasion that he could not take any rest, but
was put in the greatest care and doubt that ever he had in all his life. Not
knowing when to clear himself of that which he had promised unto his new
friend, the king Liseo. And because that the time should not pass away (...)
wares. The next day after the battle as the history has told you, the king
Liseo, determined to go forth again in his company. Then the knight of the
Sun bid request him very much, to let him that day go forth alone, for that
they should have other days wherein they would go soorth both together. The
which the king Liseo by no means would consent thereto, saying: that first he
would consent to loose all his kingdom, for that it did accomplish him so to
^ee, rather then to consent to see him in y^ camp amongst his enemies alone.
But the knight of the Sun having a great desire to go forth alone said. Here
I do swear unto you my good Lord, that if you do not like wall hereof, that
I will leave all your friendship, the which I do esteem very much, and depart
whereas you shall never hear more of me. Then the king when he saw him so
determined, said: My good friend, do your pleasure, yet consider I pray you
what pleasure I can receive to see you in ye midst of mine enemies, and not be
a partner of your pain: notwithstanding seeing you are therewith content, I
will not contend against any thing you will command. So this valiant Knight
being armed with his strong and rich armor, and mounted upon his horse,
somewhat before that the S^nne had any sorce, he went forth out of the City,
at which time the king and the queen, and all the kinghts and Ladies were upon
the towers of the city, and at the battle ments, for to behold and see what
should pass with this valyant and warlike knight, who before that he came into
the camp, did set his horn unto his mouth and did blow it so strong and loud,
that there was no knight so stout in all the camp, knowing who he was that did
sound it, but his heart would tremble thereat, and such were there that would
gladly have given all that they had, upon condition that they had not entered
into the kingdom of Lidia, although to the contrary there were many other which
did never prove his blows, and were very valiant and stout, who did arm
themselves, and at the commandment of the king they went forth against him,
and the first that went forth amongst them, was one named Alberro, and borne
in Seras, and being a Knight arraunt, he came in company with the king of
Arcadia to those parts, and was counted for one of the most valiauntest knights
that was amongst the pagans, and his armor was so excellent good and made by
such art that there was no blow of sword able to cut it, who was mounted upon
his horse with great pride and arrogance, and went toward the knight of the
Sun, and without any other salutation or courtesy he said: It shall well
appear foolish and simple knight, that in y^ battle which thou had in this
field, thou did not meet any enemy so valiant as I am, for if thou had^t
yesterday proved and felt the force of my blows, thou would not have
returned this day to de^ie us with so great boldness.

Well said the knight of the Sun if thou have thy self in so great estimation,
and that there is not a knight in all the camp that is thy equal: Wherefore
did thou not yesterday come forth and make resistance, seeing I made so
great slaughter amongst thy companions, and in resisting thereof thou may well
understand and know that there (...) no more in thee, then in any of them, for
it seemed unto (...) great villainy to be so many against thee alone, said
(...) berro, but now that we are alone together I will (...) thee to
understand that it is true all that I have said. And in saying these words both
of them turned about their horses, with their spears in their hands, and made
their encounter the one against the other, with so great swiftnes of their
horses, that they which did beehold them could scarce ^ary the sight of their
eyes after them, and their encounter was with so great force and strength, that
this valiant pagan very much against his will was thrust out of his saddle, and
the knight of the Sun passed forwards on, and lost one of his stirrops, but the
force of that strong encounter grieved him very much, and he was not well
settled again in his saddle, when there came forth to just against him another
valiant pagan, called Pirro, and brother unto Alber^o, no less valiant and
prou^ then he was, who did encounter him very strongly and for that he came
upon him on a sudden, and stroke him unawares, i^ lac^ed very little to have
overthrown him from his horse out of his (...), but this courageous knight
framing himself very strongly with his sword in his hand, stroke him such a
blow upon his helm, that all amazed he (...) him fall forwards upon the
sad^le pommell, and as he would have stricken another blow, he heard behind
him a great noise of horses, and turning him about to see what it should be, he
saw that it was a knight that came to encounter him, with a big spear in his
hand behind him, and being well advised at such time as he should strike him
with his spear he put himself with great lightness on the one side, and cut
his spear a sunder in the midst with his sword, and the knight passed
forwards on without doing any more harm, this was a valiant Moore called
Gruto, and borne in Africa, and being a wandering Knight he came in that
country, in the company of the ^ing of Arcadia, for one of the stoutest and
most valiantest knights in all the whole army, whom the ^ing sent out against
the knight of the Sun, beeleeuing that with the aid and help of the others
they should overcome and take him. So straight ways after him ^ame another
knight called Breo, brothers son unto the (...)* and no less valiant then
the others, who likewise broke his spear upon the knight of the Sun, who
moved no more in his saddle, then if he had made his encounter against a
strong tower. At this time the valiant Alberro was mounted again on horseback,
and Pirro was come again unto himself, so that they two in company with Gruto
and Breo, all four together with their swords drawn in their hands assalted
the knight of the Sun, and began to charge him with so many hard blows, that
it had been sufficient to have cut and broken an anfield of steel into pieces,
and there was never Knight in the world at one time so assaulted as the knight
of the Sun was, for that he made battle and resistance against four of the
most valiauntest knights that were in all the country of the pagans, and such,
that either of them were sufficient to fight against twentye knights, but this
was that knight of the Sun, he whom all Persia and Hungaria, and all the whole
Empire of Greece, with the greatest part of all the world did tremble when they
heard him named, and he who with his great bounty did bring in subjection the
terrible and fearful keepers of the castle of Lindaraza, and he whose high
and mighty knighthood is such, as never was heard of, who did strike and charge
these four knights with so terrible and mighty blows, all together, that the
wide fields and valleys, with the sumptuous works of the great city, with
the timorous noise of that cruel battle was full with ye sound, and because
their armor was of so great excellency, that no sword being never so sharp
could pearce and cut them, all the whole state of the battle remained in
their great and mighty strengths, and ouercharging of their terrible blows
upon one another. Then the stout and valiant Alberro, who showed himself very
rigorous in the battle, when he saw that the king of Arcadia, and all the
whole army stood and did behold them, and seemed to be a great shame and
rebuke that on alone knight should so defend and maintain himself against
four knights, and such as they were, with his sword in both his hands he
stroke him such a blow overthwart the visor of his helm, and because his
mighty cutting sword could not enter there in, yet it took away the sight of
his eyes, and there flew so many sparks of fire out thereat, that it seemed the
whole helm, to burn there with, but yet for all that this valiant warrior was
nothing amazed or astonished thereat, but procuring to give him his payment for
the same, stroke him so terrible a blow, that out of all remembrance he made
him fall backewards upon his horse crouper, and his horse carried him round
about the field, voiding at his mouth and nose great abundance of blood. But
when his brother Pirro saw that, believing yt he had been slain, he stroke
such a blow at the knight of the Sun, that he made him to loose the raines of
his horse bridle, and was therewith some what astonished, and being not fully
clear from the fury thereof, when that the stout Breo stroke him another blow
upon his hard healme, that the noise and sound thereof was heard a good way* and
the knight of the Sun so ouercharged therewith, that he declined with his head
down to his horse neck, and as Gruto came unto him to strike him an other
blow, thinking thereby to overthrow him out of his saddle, with great lightness
he raised himself again, and with the great ire the which he had, he stroke
such an overthwart blow at Alberro with both his hands in the midst of all his
body, that be all to bruised his armor, and with the great force thereof he
broke his ribs and his gall within his body, in such sort, that he fell from
his horse down to the ground: Oh how much was the great sorrow and grief which
the king received when he saw that terrible and wonderful blow, for that his
cousin was very rich and a knight that was best beloved above all other knights
that he had and also for that he conceived within his mind, that if that knight
should endure long, that he would not leave one knight alive in all the whole
camp that is of any reputation.

So with the great grief which the loss of his knights caused him to have,
with a trise he caused himself to be armed with his strong armor, which was a
finger thick of very fine steel, and so good as any was in all the world, and
being mounted on a strong and light horse he went out of the camp with his
spear in his hand, saying: Oh that my fortune were so good, that as I go
against this valiant knight, I might make battle against all my false gods,
in whom I have believed and put my confidence, for if they were all against me,
and they were knights in this world, I think verily to overcome them all, and
make them to know and understand that the power and strength of this knight is
much more then theirs. The king had not fully concluded in saying these words,
when the valiant Pirro with one blow that the knight of the Sun gave him with
his sword, fell from his horse as though he had been dead, but when the King
saw that, with wonderful force he went toward him, and with a great and broad
fauchon in his hand he stroke the knight of the Sun upon the helm, that it
took way the sight of his eyes, and deprived him of his understanding, and his
horse carried him a while about the field, for you shall understand that ye king
of Arcadia was so stout and courageous a knight, that never any knight with
whom he did make battle with, could endure with him a whole day in the field,
and was of great fame and feared amongst the pagans, but yet he did not go
away boasting himself of this blow, for the knight of the Sun before the king
could strike him the second, returned and came again to himself, and set spurs
unto his horse, and came running against the king like a whirle wind, and with
his sword in both his hands he stroke him such a blow upon his healme, that
he made him to fall forwards upon his horse neck, and the blood ran out both
at his mouth and nose, and his horse carried him round about the field out of
his remembrance, as though he had been dead, at which time Alberro was come
again to himself, and he and Gruto together did terribly assault the knight
of the Sun, chargeing him with great and heavy blows, the which he felt and
grieved him very much for though his armor did defend him from wounding, yet
for all that it could not excuse him, but that his flesh must have been very
fore bruised with those mighty and strong blows, and it had been better for
him to have contended against the whole army, then against those four
knights, for that being embraced with a great number, the valiant knights
could never have so good opportunity to execuse their mighty blows upon him,
but in such sort these valiant Pagans did so charge him, that he felt
himself sore troubled, but yet for all this, not faynting nor loosing one
point of his courage, but rather increasing more and more, did so beehaue
himself with those two stout Pagans, that in a small time he had overcome
them, if the king of Arcadia had not come again to himself, and Pirro mounted
again upon his Horse, who seeing themselves so evil entreated, with great
fury and courage they went to help their companyons, which was the occasion
that at that time their battle was more kindled and better foughten then it
was in all the day before, for when these stout Pagans saw themselves all
four together, their courage and force did the more increase, and herein the
knight of the Sun was nothing behind them, for the more they did charge him,
the more his strength increased. At this time it was more then three hours
since their battle beegan, without taking any rest either of them, and those
that beeheld them waxed weary, and likewise the Pagans meruailously tormented
with the mighty blows which they had received, and the knight of the Sun
more angry and wrathful then he was all the day before, and his anger did
so far exceed, and his force so much increase, yt at one blow he overthrew the
stout Gruto to the ground, and with an other blow he overthrew Pirro, but the
valiant Berro stroke him so strong a blow upon his helm, that he made him to
stoop and decline his head to his horse neck, but he made no brags thereof, for
that the knight of the Sun returned his payment with so great fury and
force, that buckling his helm, and breaking therewith all to ^eeces the skull
of his head, he overthrew him dead to the ground, and with a trise he turned
upon the king of Arcadia, who was coming against him to strike him, and strok
him such an overthwart blow on the one side, that he overthrew him on the other
side. Then this valiant and worthy knight without any longer staying amongst
them, but with as great fury as a whirle wind he put himself in the midst of
the whole army, and wounded and slew so many, that all the way whereas he went,
he left it full of dead bodies, so that there was not one in all the camp that
durst make resistance against him, but passed through amongst them, as commonly
the bayted Bull, being well pricked with darts does pass through a company
of men. At this time the day passed away, and night came on, and this valiant
Knight somewhat weary with wounding and killing of Pagans, all to be brued
with blood he departed out of the Camp, and without any following him he came
unto the gates of the city, the which were straight wais opened, and he found
at the entry in thereat, the king Lyseo* all armed in a readiness to go
forth in his aid and help, if he were driven to any necessity, of whom he
was received with great joy and pleasure, and the gates being shut, they went
unto the palace, whereas with great mirth and joy they were received by the
queen, and supped together with great joy and pleasure, and took their ease
all that night, and the knight of the Sun determined not to go forth other
two days to the battle.

How Rodaran came to land, and by great adventure he came unto the kingdom of
Lidia. Chapter 49.
WIth great pride did this Pagan Rodaran nauigate by sea with his rich pray of
the prisoners which he carried, for to present them before the Emperor of
Tartaria, who was no less endued with wisdom and patience, the^ with force
and strength, for to suffer that terrible and cruel blow of Fortune, always
abiding the good hour that fortune would use upon them, and as so many knights
as well in virtue as in prowess, was not wholly forgotten of God, as appeared
here at this present, for that he did ordain their fortune in such sort,
that the ship in the which they were carried, and did ariue in the Kingdom of
Phrigia, and for that it was the right way to go unto Tartaria, Rodaran and
the Queen went a land, and commanded that the prisoners likewise should be
taken out of the ship, who were all bound in chains, so that they were carried
very strongly and in good order. So in this sort they trauailad five days
without happening any thing unto them worth the telling, in the end of the
which they came into the Kingdom of Lidia, and came in the sight of the camp
of the King of Arcadia, and Rodaran demanded whose army that same was, and it
was declared unto him the truth thereof, who received great joy and contentment
thereat, for that the king of Arcadia was a very great friend of his, for being
in the Court of the Emperor of Tartaria, and a travailing knight, he had great
acquaintance and frequentation with him, and having great desire to see him,
and give him understanding of his pray the which he carried, he said unto the
Queen Carmania, that he would go^ unto him for to see him, and she thought
it good, and consented thereunto. So they went and carried their prisoners
before the king, and when they came unto the tent of the king of Arcadia, they
alighted from their horses and entered in ^herat, and as soon as he knew that
it was Rodaran, with ^reat courtesy and pleasure he received them, for that
this was he greatest friend he had in all the world. And when he understood
the occasion wherefore he came into those parts, and ^f the prisoners he
brought with him, the King very glad and joyful caused them to be brought
into his tent, where he honored them very much, and gave Rodaran to
understand of all that ever he had passed and done in the king^ of Lidia, and
how that he had brought his enterprise vn^ that estate, that he had almost
taken that last city, and ^w that there was come to help them a Knight, the
most ^liantest and strongest that ever in all his life he had seen, and gave
to understand of all that he has done, in three times that he came forth to
battle with his people, at the which Rodaran was greatly amazed, and as one
that all rancour and mallaice was not clean rooted out of him, he had great
desire to see that knight, and to combat with him, believing that he should
conclude and make an end of that which the whole army before could not do.
So Rodaran remained till the next day hoping therein to see that valyant
Knight. Whereat the King of Arcadia received great joy and contentment,
thincking that if he and Rodaran might have the knight of the Sun beetwixt
them, that he could not by any means escape, but either be slain or taken
prisoner. In this sort they passed away that day, and the night with great
pleasure, although it was unto the prisoners over much sorrow and grief,
always with patience abiding the good hour of Fortune.

How the Knight of the Sun went out the third time into the camp of the king
of Arcadia, and what happened therein. Chapter 50.
THE next day after that Rodaran came into the Kings Camp, the knight of the
Sun was determined to go out into the field, with the great desire he had to
clear himself of that enterprise, for to return again into Greece, as well
to combat with Rodaran, as to recreate himself with his Ladies, the absence of
whom was unto him no small grief: likewise he was put in great perplexity and
care, for that according unto the great number of people which the king of
Arcadia had with him in his Camp, it was not possible for him to clear
himself so soon as he thought he should, which was the occasion that very
early in the morning, before the Sun did show her self this valiant
warrior being armed with his rich and strong armor, and mounted upon his
great and light horse, with a mighty s^eare well steeled in his hand, he went
out of the City, and very much against the will of the King Lyseo, whom he
caused to tarry within the City in a readiness, for to come forth to aid
and help him, if any cause of necessity did call him, and to give him his whole
contentment he would not say any thing against him that his pleasure was to
do. So when this courageous Knight came unto the Camp, he blew his horn
with so great strength, that it was heard throughout all those wide and broad
fields, and put great fear in the most part of all them that were in the Camp,
for that there were very few of them that had any security, salling into his
hands. Then the King of Arcadia understanding the demand of the Knight, did
straight ways command the most valiauntest and strongest in all the army to
arm themselves, and commanded to set thayres without the door of his tent,
whereas he and Rodaran sat down, to see and beehold from thence all that the
Knight of the Sun should do. It was not long after that there went out of
the Camp a valiant Pagan called Alri^o, who was mounted upon a mighty great
Horse, and armed with guilt armor, ^ull of rich precious stones, which
certified them that he was of high estate, and went toward the Knight of the
Sun, and with a great spear in his hand, with the which he gave him a very
strong encounter, in such sort, that his spear was sheeuered all to pieces,
and the Knight of the Sun thereat made no mention of moving (...) his
saddle, but he made his encounter so strongly against ^is enemy, that by
reason of the stiffenesie of his Spear, and the fineneste of the others
armor, that would not content to be broken, with the force of that blow he
was hoi^d out of his saddle, and thrown over the horse crouper to ^e ground,
ten p^ces from his horse, and the blow chaun^ed under his breast in such
sort, that before he came unto ^e ground his breath was gone, and he stark
dead, and though at this blow all the Pagans wondered great^* yet for all that
came forth another Knight, no less ar^gant and proud then valiant, who at
the first encounter (...) bear Alrifo company. Then after him came forth ten
knights together, of the valiantest and strongest that were in all the whole
army, all the which this valiant and worthy warrior did overthrow to the
ground some stark dead, and other some so evil entreated and bruised with their
falls, that afterward they would serve to use no armor* And this being done,
there was not one Knight in all the camp that was of so great force that durst
go forth to combat with him, so that he was there t^rrieng a good while to see
if any would come forth against him. All this being seen by Rodaran, and how
that there was none that durst take upon him the enterprise, with a trise he
causee himself to be armed with his strong armor, and being mounted upon
his big and light Horse, with a great Spear in his hand he went forth
against the Knight of the Sun, who when he saw him coming so big and well
membred, he had him in estim^tion to be a very good knight, and choosing
himself a good Spear, amongst a great number which he caused to be brought
out of the City, he did abide the coming of Rodaran, who when he came nigh
unto him, he said.

Thou shall understand, sir Knight, that I am newly come into this camp, and
hearing very much spoken of the^e thy valiant deeds, it has given me great
good will to come and see part thereof, and for that according unto that which
I have seen thou seem to be a good knight, I would that thou would
leave to be any more against the King o^ Arcadia, and to forget the
friendship and favor which tho^ sh^west in the part of the king Liseo, and I
will carry the in my company, and do so much that the King of Arcadia shall
receive thee to be his ^night, and to pardon and forgiu^ thee all that is past.
And if thou will do this which I d^ offer unto thee, I will receive thee unto
my friendship an^ be thy friend, and if not, see that thou do defend thy
sel^ from me, for that I will make thee by force to do that whi^ thou would
not by fair means. Then the Knight of (...) Sun, who received better
contentment at his gallant d^ position, then any pleasure in his words, with
great ^eek nesse answered him and said.

Sir knight, who are you that is so valiant, that alone does presume to do
with me that which all this whole army has not had power to accomplish. To
whom he said: Hitherto I have not denied my name to and that has demanded it
of me, neither will I now, nor ^ro^ this day forwards. Neither will I deny
mine unto thee, said the Knight of the Sun. Then the knight said: Thou shall
understand that I am Rodaran, King of Arabia, who with the force of my arm
think to flush that which all thi^ whole army have not power to do. Oh how
joyful was the Knight of the Sun when he heard those words, and knowing him
to be that Rodaran, and the person which in all the world he most desired to
meet with, as well to combat with him, as to know of the imprisonment of his
brother, and of his loving friends, and the more to keep himself sacret, he
said: Is it possible that thou art that Rodaran, who in company with the
Queen Carmania passed into Greece, to combat with the knights of the Emperor
Trebatio. To whom he answered very quickly, and said: I am he, and more thou
shall understand that by the force of my strong arm I have prisoners the best
knights that are in all Greece, and likewise the Emperors person. All the
which I do bring with me in my company prisonrs, for to present the^ before
the Emperor of Tartaria, to do with them all that his pleasure is to
command. Then the knight of the Sun without making any tarryeng, but as glad
as ever he was in all his life giving great thanks unto God, that his fortune
was so good to find Rodaran at that instant, he set Spurs unto his horse and
turned him about, and came against Rodaran who likewise came against him, and
ran against one another with so great fury, that the earth seemed to shake in
their wift course, and in the midst thereof they made their encounters, which
were such, that their spears were broken to pee^es, and passed by one another
without receiving any harm, and ^rning about with their swords in their hands,
they assal^d one another with so great force, that they which be held (...)
were terrified, and the Knight at the Sun understood that Rodaran was very
valiant and stout. Likewise Rodaran thought not that he had to do with the
Knight of the Sun, but when he saw how strongly he did strike his blows,
and the little account he made of his blows, with great sorrow he said unto
himself.

Oh high and mighty Gods, what a number of strange meruailes be there in this
world, for that I thought verily there was not any that was able to be
compared unto me in force and strength, and yet I found those in Greece that
did far surmount and pass me therein, and beeleeuing that there was none
other in all the world, now without seeking of them, I have met with one, with
whom I hope of n^ other remedy, but to be slain by him, or else to be
overcome. And with the great grief that the remembraunc^ hereof caused unto
him, he took his Sword in both hi^ hands, and stroke the Knight of the Sun
so strong a blo^ upon his helm, that he took away the sight of his eyes an^
deprived him of his remembrance, and so he remained ^ stoyned a little space,
and before that Rodaran had an^ time to strike him another, the valiant
Knight was com^ again unto himsele, and with great wrath he stroke Rodaran
such an overthwart blow on the one side of his healm^ that if he had not
clasped himself about his horse neck, h^ must needs have fallen unto the
ground, and he had n^ well seteled himself again in his saddie, when he
stro^ him another right down blow upon his Healme with great strength, that
he fell down backwards upon his hor^ crouper, clean out of all remembrance,
and his horse c^ ryed him round about the field, voyding at his mouth a^ nose
great abundaunce of blood, and he was so long beefo^ he came again unto
himself, that all men thought he h^ been dead, and without doing him any
farther harm, ^ Knight of the Sun tarryed till he came unto himself gain.
When the King of Arcadia saw this and how eu^ his friend was entreated, with as
great anger as thou^ he would have burst, with a trise he was armed with ^
thick armor, and mounted upon a mighty great ^ light horse he went out of the
camp, and went toward ye knight of the Sun, without taking any spear, but with
his great and broad fanchon he stroke at him so heavy and strong a blow, that
it grie^ed very much the knight of the Sun, who answered him with the like,
that all the wide fields were full with the sound. Then ye prisoners who were
in the tent of the king, and very much amazed to hear the sound of so terrible
a blow, asked of them that were in the tent what it should be, and straight
ways it was told them that he should be some worthy in prowess that could
maintain and defend himself against two so valiant pagans. At this time the
king of Arcadia stroke the knight of the Sun so terrible a blow that his ears
were tormented with the sound thereof, and lost the sight of his eyes, and
remained astonished a good while, although it was not so long that the King had
space to strike him another, but it was in an evil hour for him, for when the
knight of the Sun came again unto himself, all kindled in wrath and with more
fury then a thunderbolt he assaulted the king, and with both his hands he
stroke him so strong a blow upon his helm, that as one that were dead he
overthrew him from his horse to the ground, voiding great abundaunce of blood
out of his ears and nose, at which time the knight of the Sun had scarce
withdrawn himself from giving of that blow, when Rodaran came again unto
himself and went against him, and with both his hands he gave him such a
mighty blow, that it was heard a great way off, and the knight of the Sun to
keep himself from falling, was constrained to embrace his arms about the
horse neck, and felt by force of that great blow that Rodaran was both strong
and stout, but for so much as at that instaunt all ire and wrath did remain in
him, with one alone blow he pretended to make an end of that battle, for
that he thought the time very long till he kn^w some news of those prisoners
his dear friends, and therewith taking his sword in both his hands, raising
himself in his stirroppes, changing his white color into perfect red, like
unto the brave and ramping lion that follows the fearful Dear, even so
went this wrathful knight against Rodaran, and stroke him a blow overthwart
his helm, that out of all remembrance he threw him as dead at his horse
feet, and leaving these two Pagans in such sort that all men judged they had
been dead, with no less fury then a whirle wind he put himself in the camp
amongst his enemies, killing and wounding all that ever he found in his way, so
that there was none that made any resistance against him, but they all ran
away before him, that he found no^e with whom to fight, except he did follow
them to overtake them, and he thought himself most happiest that was farthest
of from him. In this sort this valiant knight pressed into the camp, and went
so far, that at the last all embrued with blood of them which he had flaine,
he came unto the Tent of the king of Arcadia, whereas he was put in great
perplexity and trouble, for that there was joined together many stout and
strong knights, who altogether did assault him very strongly, but he feeling
the great resistance that there was made against him, did double his blows with
mortal fury, that his force did appear to he more at that time, then it was
in all the day before. All this time of the battle from the beginning that
the knight of the Sun went out of the city unto that instaunt, the royal
princess Claridiana was beholding the same, for that this was the contention
of the three knights that she stayed to behold, at such time as the history did
leave her, which was the knight of the Sun combatting with Rodaran and the
king. Then the Princess drawing more nigher, did straight way know him, as
well by his armor and horse, as by the mighty and singular disposition of his
body, and the better for to behold his high knighthood, she sta^ed and stood
still, and meruailed very much at that which she saw, and although she did see
it before her eyes, yet she could not believe it, and said.

It is not possible that although there were here those two captains of the
mighty Africa and Scipion, and with them Hercules and the mighty Sampson,
that all they together were not sufficient to do that which this alone Knight
does on his enemies. Of truth I have great reason for to love him, as the
highest and most precious knight in all the world. And in saying these words,
seeing that he was compassed round about with so great a multitude of knights she
stroke her horse with the spurs with so great fury, and put her self in the
midst of the camp, and never stayed till such time as she came whereas the
knight of the Sun was, and began to deal such blows, that she made his
enemies to run away. At which sight the knight of the Sun was put in great
admiration, and could not imagine who that valiant Knight should be, and being
very joyful of so good aid and succor, he put himself amongst his enemies,
killing and overthrowing so many, that they all ran away before him as from the
death, and with great favor that he had of the princes, and the valiantness
that she used, he left her at the door of the tent, and alighted from his
horse and entered in, and stroke such mortal blows at them that he met, that
he made them all to retire backwardes, and to put themselves into another room
in the Tent, whereas they thought better to defend themselves, but the knight
of the Sun with terrible furye followed after them, and with a few blows he
slew six or seven of them in presence of the Emperor and all the rest of the
prisoners that were with him, who were greatly amazed at such a sudden
chance, not knowing what it should be, and very much meruayled beholding the
great wonders the which he did in their presence, but when in beholding they
knew him very well by his armor, and by the mightiness of his person
(although he was all bathed in blood) I cannot here rehearse the great joy
and pleasure which they received, seeing themselves in that great necessity,
and upon a sudden in that time vn^oo ked for, so great succor, surely they
did believe that he was (...) thither by the power of almighty God. And as yet
this good Knight had not seen them, for that he was occupied in disimbarking
himself with them that he had before him, upon whom he stroke such mortal
blows, that some of them he cut a sunder in the midst, and other some he cloue
down to ye teeth, and others to their breasts, with such mortal destruction,
that in a small time there remained not one of all their enemies alive in the
tent, for that the princes Claridiana did worthily defend the entry, in
wounding and killing all those that came nigh unto her. At this time because
the king Liseo had seen all that the knight of the Sun had done, and how far
he had put himself in amongst his enemies, having great desire either to be
slain or else to see an end of his liberty, all such as were within the city
and able to wear armor, went forth to aid the knight of the sun if need so
required, they put themselves amongst their euemies, defending that none should
come and give succor unto the king, who still with Rodaran were in a sound and
from themselves, and as they came al forth with desire to die or to be at
liberty, like mad dogs they put themselves amongst their enemies, and slew many
of them, but in especial the good king Liseo who never stroke blow, but that
he slew or overthrew a knight to the ground, and by reason of the great hurt
and damage which they of the camp received on that side having great need of
aid and succor, they all did leave the battle at the tent and went thither,
although there remained not so few against the Princess, but that she had
mough to do. Now when the Knight of the Sun was clear of his enemies, he
saw the prisoners whereas they were in a corner of the Tent, all of them with
great chains at their legs, and knowing them, on the one part he shed many
salt tears from his eyes, for to see so high and mighty Princes brought into
so great extremity, and on the other part he was as joyful as ever he was in
all his life, because his fortune was so good to bring him to give them their
liberty, and lifting up the beauer of his helm, he went and kneeled down
before the Emperor his father, and took his hand and kissed them, but the
emperor with a tender love, more then of a father, in shedding many tears
that ran down by his cheeks, with great joy and pleasure he did embrace
him, saying: I was very certain and sure, my well-beloved son, that we should
not lack your aid and succor in the time of this our great necessity, and
here I give great thanks unto the sovereign creator, that by his mighty
power you were sent at this time to give us liberty. Then Rosicleer and all the
rest of those mighty princes and knights did embrace him, and could not believe
that he should be the knight of the Sun, with the great joy and contentment
they received when they saw him, who pulled off all their chains, and set them
at liberty, and took from one of them that was there slain, the keys of
certain chests, whereas was all their armor, so that they lacked not one piece
of them, for that Rodaran and the queen Carmania commanded all to be kept very
well, that none should be lost. All this time was the queen Carmania hidden in
a closet of the same tent, so heavy and sad to see all yt passed, that she
thought with very sorrow to have died. And in the mean time that the emperor
and the rest were arming of themselves in great have, the knight of the Sun
returned to succor and help that Knight, whom he left defending of the door
of the tent, that none should enter in thereat, and it was that worthy and
royal princess Claridiana, whom he found very bravely and stoutlye combatting
with a great number of knights, and had before her at the entry of the Tent,
very many slain and wounded, and for that she kept her self in the inside of
the entry, she defended her self the better from all that came against her.
But when he came amongst them with his mighty blows, he made all his enemies
to a part themselves from the door of the Tent, for when they saw him coming,
every one did procure to make way all that ever they could from him, for that
they thought verily he could be no mortal man, doing that which they saw him
do. At this time the good king Liseo came with all his knights together in an
ambushment, in the midst of the camp, killing and wounding his enemies, that
they thought them to be all ravening Lions, but yet in the end if they had
endured long, there could not one of the^ have remained alive, for they were but
a small number, and their enemies very many and valiant. So at this time the
good emperor and all the rest of those worthy princes and knights were armed,
and with their swords drawn in their hands with the greatest fury in all the
world they went out of the tent, and as those which had a great desire to
revenge themselves in a small time they made such a slaughter amongst their
enemies, that they thought it best to give them way, so that they had time and
space enough to provide themselves of horses, of those which ran round about
the field of the knights that were slain, and when they were all mounted on
horsback they joined themselves together in an ambushment and put themselves in
the midst of all the battle with so great fury, and stroke such cruel and
mortal blows, that there were none in all the camp that durst abide before
them. Who so had seen the good Emperor Trebatio at that present, in the
midst of his two sons, killing and wounding so many, that he was all to be
bathed in blood, and did well appear by the blows he gave the great good
will which he had to revenge himself, and that val^aunt prince Rosicleer did
strange feats, that whosoever had seen him might well know him to be brother
unto the knight of the Sun. Likewise the mighty and furious Prince Brandizell
with king Sacridoro and Rodamarte, it might well be said that all they were a
sepulcher unto their enemies, for that they were very many that were slain
that day, and for that there was none that did know the princes Claridiana,
seeing the mortal blows which she gave, and the wonderful things which she
did, they all meruailed much, not knowing who that mighty and strong Knight
should be, and they had a merua^lous great desire to know him. To conclude, for
that this excellent company kept themselves together, they made such a
slaughter amongst their enemies, that which way so ever they went they made a
broad way, and in a small time they came and joined with the good king Liseo
and his knights, who were wonderfully amazed when they saw the knight of the
Sun accompanied with so many stout and valiant knights, and could not by any
means imagine what it should mean, and being all joined together, those that
were with the king Liseo received great conrage, and their enemies hearts
failed, and much the more because they had no captain to govern the^, and put
them in courage, and mistrusting the worst, many of the^ ran away out of the
camp, procuring each one to save his own life, and when the rest saw some of
their companions run away, they out of hand did the like, in such sort, that in
the end of one hour, the prisoners were at liberty, there remained not one in
all the camp of the king of Arcadia, except it were those that were slain and
wounded, which were more then half of them. And when they saw themselves at
liberty and clear of their enemies, not finding one with whom to ^ight, the
king Liseo went unto the knight of the Sun, and pulled off his belme, and
embraced him, saying. Ah my good Lord and perfect friend, how can I gratify
this great good benefit the which this day I have received of your great
worthiness, for by you I have recovered my lost Kingdom, therefore worthy
Prince, I do most hartelye desire you to tell me who these valiant knights be,
and from whence so excellent a company should come. Then presently the knight
of the Sun, who did esteem very much of him, declared unto him who they
were, and by what adventure he had found them there. At this time the Emperor
and all the rest of the Princes and knights had taken off their ^elmes, and the
king Liseo was the gladdest man in all the world, and went to kiss the
emperors hands, saying: May it please your sovereign highness to give your
hands to kiss them, for that through you I am restored unto my lost kingdom.
This high and worthy Emperor did embrace him with great love, so likewise did
all the other Princes and knights, and there passed betwixt the^ many curt^ous
words, yet for all this was not the royal princess Claridiana known. And
being desired by the emperor and all the other princes and knights to give
them understanding who and what he was, she straight way pulled off her helm,
whereas he did discover her yeolow hair, which was bound up with a net of gold,
very richly and wonderfullye wrought, and by reason of her great (...) which
she received in the passed battle, her color was somewhat moved, wherewith
she showed so perfect and singular beauty, that verily she seemed unto them
all, to be rather some divine creature, then any humane person, and there was
never a one there but she seemed unto them to be some celestial thing. Then
the Emperor and all the rest of the knights that did know her, being as much
amazed at her beauty, as to see her there at that instant, went all unto her.
and did welcome her with great courtesy. And the emperor said: My Lady and
mistres, this liberty the which I and all these princes and knights have
received, it cannot be but by the hands of so high a damsel as you are, and I
pray God that we may be able to gratify you for the same. Unto the knight of
the Sun, said the Princess, ought you to surrender and give these thanks,
for that for him is ordained and kept the atchiuing of all good adventures, and
to give the final conclusion of y^ same. What might here be thought of the
great joy and pleasure which this amorous and valiant knight conceived, when
that in that time and place he found himself in the presence of his Lady and
mistres, having seen what she had done for him before he knew her. Truly
this mirth and gladness was so much, that he thought all his understanding to
be transported into a celestial glory whereas the chosen does remain, and
going toward her, he said: Your sovereign beauty may please to give unto me
your se^re hands, that I may kiss them, in acknowledging of the great courtesy
which all we have received by your sovereign aid and succor, and for that
all enterprises which I do take in hand may have credit, it shall be done in
your service and praise, as I am bound, and likewise all good and valiant
Knights in the world. Then the Princess who received great contentment at his
words, laid her arms upon his shoulders and said: Worthy Prince, your
politic dealings and excellent bounty sooth so far excel, that it is not
needful for me to express the same, neither any other, but only to beehold
what is done by your valiant hands here in this Camp, and unto this there is
good witness, who is the king Liseo and all his knights. And passing beetwixt
them many other amorous words, the Knight of the Sun did tell them all how
and by what adventure he came thither, and all that happened with him after
he departed out of Greece. The like did the Princess Claridiana, so that all
the whole company understood by what order they were there assembled and
joined. In the mean time that they were in this acknowledging one another,
those of Lidia were not idle, for they minded no other thing but to rob and
destroy all that were in the Tents and Camp of the King of Arcadia, and
finding there great store of riches and treasure which the king had brought,
every one of them did so lade themselves, that ever after they remained very
rich, and thought their long and great travail to be well employed, the end
fell out so prosperous unto them. Then the Emperor Trebatio out of hand
commanded that the Queen Carmania should be brought before him, for there
should be no harm done unto her, who when she thought verily that Rodaran
had been slain, tare her hair, and did such justice on her self, that they
thought verily it would be her death. And asking of them whether the king of
Arcadia and Rodaran were alive or dead, they went straight ways unto the place
whereas they lay a long upon the ground, and commanded that their Healmes,
should be pulled off, and fresh water to be thrown upon their face to
refresh them, and straight ways they came again unto themselves, and when
they understood in what estate and perplexity they were all this time, their
sorrow and grief was such, that they thought it had been better for them to
have been slain, then to suffer so great misfortune: but when the King of
Arcadia, did look^ about him for his army, and could see never a Knight on his
part, but those that were slain and lay in the field, with very sorrow and
grief he thought verily his heart would have burst. Likewise when Rodaran,
saw all his prisoners at liberty, and he overcome by one alone Knight, the
great sorrow and grief which he received, could not be here expressed, and
if he had had his helm and his sword, and on horseback, he would have
tarryed there no longer. Then straight ways the King Lyseo, did desire all
these worthy warriers, to repair unto the City for to refresh themselves,
and to take their ease, who consented unto his request, and went toward the
city, and carried with them their prisoners, whereas they were received of all
the Citizens and nobles of all the kingdom, that were there present, with so
great joy and triumphs, that the whole City seemed to be on (...), with the
great bonefiers and other lights which were made in every street of the City,
not remembering any of their troubles past. So when they came unto the Queens
palace, who was very wise and discreet, she received them with such
courtesy, as was requisite to so noble persons: whereas they were all unarmed,
and recreated with very sweet waters and ointments requisite for such hurts and
bruses as they had received. For although their armor did defend them from
wounding, yet could not their flesh be free from bruses, by the force of such
terrible blows as they received. And in especial the knight of the Sun in
the battle which he had with Rodaran, and the King of Arcadia, although he
esteemed it in nothing, with the great contentment and pleasure which he
received in seeing before him the fair Princess Claridiana, not he alone
who loved her as his own soul, did receive contentment, but likewise the
Emperor, and the other princes and knights did rejoice very much, and had her
in that reputation as her high estate deserved. So in this sort they passed
away all that night in great pastimes and pleasure, till the next day in the
morning, in the which the king Liseo, went unto the ^mperour and unto the
Knight of the Sun, and asked of them what their pleasures was to do with the
king of Arcadia, and Rodaran, for that they were their prisoners. To whom the
Emperor said* that those prisoners did beelong unto ye knight of the Sun, and
how that he would give order what should be done with the^. The knight of the
Sun when that he heard that, he would very feign have excused himself thereof,
but it did little profit him his excuses, but that generally it was concluded,
that all should be done as he would command it. So he seeing their
determination, commanded to be brought before him Rodaran, and the king of
Arcadia, unto whom he said. The high estates great riches and sovereign gifts
which fortune yields in this world, and by the will of god is departed amongst
men, often times is the occasion that pride does increase, the more in them:
and having clean forgotten that they are mortal, and subject unto any
misfortune. Contrary unto all reason they put themselves in exercises to
comprehend things of great wait and no less perillo^s, as though there were
not a god to withstand the^, thinking themselves to have power over all
fortune: from whence does proceed, that when they think themselves most
surest and most highest in their throne, lacking the chief and principal
ground of reason and justice, the wheel of their hope, being very swift and of
no security, turns about, and throws down unto the ground, that which is
most highest, in such sort, that there is no human creature able to resist, so
great force. And so it has happened unto you, for being made Lords and kings
over great and mighty Kingdoms, and likewise endewed with force and strength,
yet there increased in you so great pride, that all seemed little, the which
you had of your own, but against all reason and justice, you came to seek
that which at such time as you thought all concluded and ended, then were you
farthest of, and brought in that estate that you do well understand and know,
how little the power of men is, when in wrongful causes you apply your selves
Now in the behalf of the Emperor my lord, and these knights I require you to
swear to be true to King Liseo and his kingdom. but return unto your own
Countries and Kingdoms, and procure to defend them, and keep your selves
therein, and not to give from hence forwards any such attempts as hitherto you
have done, for if you do you can look for no ^ther thing but loss of your
lives or else shame unto your persons. And first before all other things, to
make satisfaction unto the King Lyseo of all such hurts and damages as has
been done in his kingdom, and likewise to surrender and yield up all such
things as you have taken from him, lands, and otherwise, without any delay.

At which words of the knight of the Sun, the two Kings received no great
contentment, for they were so rooted in pride and mischief, that it could not
be rooted out till such time as they were utterly overthrown and lost in the
fields of Grecia but now seeing in what estate they were, and how that it did
behoue the^ to show more patience then they had, they swore before the Knight
of the Sun to perform and fulfill all that he would demand them, and for
their liberty which they received at their hands they gave great thanks. And
so they with the Queen Carmania* taking their leave of all the^, they departed
thence, and went toward their own Countries and kingdoms, whereas they had
enough to do to tell of the knights of the Emperor Trebatio, so that in the
most part of all the Pagan Country, his name was feared Whom at this present
this history does leave till time does serve.

How the Emperor Trebatio with all his Princes and knights departed out of the
Kingdom of Lidia toward Constantinople. Chapter 51.
THree days after the departure of the King of Arcadia and Rodaran, remained
the Emperor in Lidia, with all the rest of the Princes and Knights in great
mirth and pastime with the King Lyseo and all his nobles, in the end whereof
they thought it time to go and see the Empress, and the rest of Greece, whom
they were well assured to be very sad and sorrowful for their absence. So
concluding together, they determined the fourth day in the morning to depart.
The time being come, they all did take their leave of the Queen, who shed
many tears to see them depart, and the king Liseo went to bear them company
till they came to the sea side, for they could not by any means cause him to
abide in the City. So they travailed seven days, in the end whereof they
came unto the Sea, whereas the king did take his leave of them, embracing them
all, offering himself at their commandment at all times when occasion should
serve. And after that he was departed from them, he found himself very
solitary without their company, and in especial without the company of the
Knight of the Sun, for that he esteemed more his company and friendship then
all his whole Kingdom. The Emperor and all those that went with him did
imbarke themselves in a very good Ship, and took their way toward
Constantinople, and having the wind and weather very fair and prisoners, they
made their navigations whith great joy and pleasure generally amongst them all,
but in especially the knight of the Sun, who finding himself always in
presence of the royal Princess Claridiana, he was as pleasant and joyful as
ever he was in all his life, and although many times all the rest that were in
the ship, were at the ship side sporting themselves, when that he had
opportunity to speak and utter his mind, yet for all that he had so great
respect unto her, that ^t seemed unto him that he lacked boldness to utter
unto ^ir his pain and grief, and for that the royal Princess, neither more
nor less then he was, troubled with ^morous ^assions, did not let at all
times to make some outward ^ew thereof, which was the occasion that it caused
him so ^ake heart at grass, and speak unto her, who with no ^sse courtesy and
(...), as the Pagans (...) use when ^ey do (...)* and worship their false
Gods, in such sort he beegan to speak and said: Excellent and royal princes
of Trabisond, your sovereign highness and the divine excellency of your
royal person, being by the Knight of the Sun seen and known how far it
does extend, does make him not to be so hardy and bold for to publish
himself to be yours, for that it seems unto him not to deserve to enjoy so
great favor and renown, and as I am now a Christian, and do beeleeue in the
law of the true God, whereas I was wont to be a Gentile, then might you be
well assured, that in no other God in heaven or on earth would I beeleeue in,
but only in you, neither would I recommend my soul and body unto any other:
and as I am persuaded that in thinking herein, much more in speaking, cannot
be without great offense unto God, yet if it were before his divine Majesty, I
might make any excuse, I would perform this that I say, and here I give many
and infinite thanckes unto the sovereign creator, that not only has brought
me out of that blind custom and law of the Gentiles, and has given me the
law of grace, but also he has sustained me until this time for to behold
your sovereign beauty, that only therein I may also know his great might and
power. God also made the heavens, the earth, and the stars, and endued them
with greatness and light of great beauty, but yet ob divine clemency, in you
alone i^ more to be seen then in all them, I will not declare unto you
(royal Princess) how that singular beauty and fairness have been the
occasion that my heart does receive sorrow and grief, yet I may say that it
is rather glory then pain, for that without it I am not able to live one
moment. And here I do give you to understand that I am so much yours, that so
long as this soul does sustain my body, my heart shall not neither cannot,
but continually have you for my Lady and mistress. Therefore sovereign
Princess, I do most heartily desire you to show so much favor unto the Knight
of the Sun, as to grant him lisence to be yours, for that without it, he
living cannot choose but serve you, and for that with my life I will no^ offend
you (if you do not receive contentment heerewith) I will give my self the
death.

The royal Princess at these words received neither anger nor grief, but
being very pleasant and merry for that he had said unto her, with an
excellent grace and great humility she answered him and said.

Knight of the Sun, who for his name, which is the name of so high a prince,
by desert deserves to be lost, and in how much is this name amongst the most
esteemed Knights in all the world had in estimation, I do not know by what
reason he should so little esteem himself, and so far exalt me, that for to
publish himself to be mine, he says that he lacks courage and
boldness, here I give you to understand that I have in such estimation your
mighty deeds, and the great worthiness of your person, that for to receive
you to be my knight, I am therewith very well content, and with all only
this, I do beeleeue that in all the world there is not a Damsel that is
equal unto my highness. And farther you shall understand (gentle knight) that
the great fame of your high Knighthoode was the occasion that I came out of
Trabisond, only for to see you, therefore my good Lord, from this day
forwards, procure that we may return thither with as much speed and in as
short time as may be, for that I desire very much, that in the Court of the
Emperor my Father, so high a Prince and so worthy a Knight as you are might
be known. Then the knight of the Sun with more contentment then ever he
received in all his life, kneeled dowen before the Princess and would have
kissed her hands for the great courtesy showed unto him, but she in no wise
would consent thereunto, but caused him to stand up, and took him in her
arms, whereas grew beetweene the^ so great love, that nothing was to separate
them but only death and although these loving words passed between them, and
seemed that there was no conclusion of any thing, yet in their hearts there was
so strong a knot ^ade, that before it should be undone, it should be greatly
amented. So they passed the time in these and other resons, in the which time
their Ship did nauigate with prosperous winds, and the fifth day after their
departure from Lidia, they arrived in a port or haven of Grecia, whereas they
did disimbarke themselves, and went a land, from whence they had not trauayled
far, when they met many Knights, who went seeking of Rodaran, meruaylous sad
and heavy for the imprisonment of the Emperor, and all the other Princes and
knights that were with him, who when they knew the Emperor and the rest, so
fast as their horses could run they went unto Constantinople, to carry the
news. And as soon as it was known throughout the great City, there were
very few that remained, but they went forth to meet their good Lord, the
Emperor and his sons, and received them with so great joy and pleasure as
though they had been their own kinsfolks or children, and had been very
long absent from them. So they entered into the great palace, whereas of the
Empress they were received with that joy and contentment, as in such like
absence may be conceived, and with no small complaining of the Empress unto
the Emperor, for that he all alone, and without giving her to understand,
would go forth and put himself into so great peril. Straight ways it was
known throughout the whole City all that had passed, and the great deceit and
treason that Rodaran used for to take prisoners all th^se Knights. Then the
Emperor the more to extol and make manifest the worthy deeds of the Knight
of the Sun, commanded to be painted all that ever had happened from the
first time that Rodaran came unto the Court, until such time as he departed
after the battayle^ in Lidia, and to be done in the fore front of the great
palace nigh unto the adventure of the Island of Lindaraza, and for that it was
done by the hands of excellent workmen and very natural, it did not a little
amplify and set forth the great bounty of the knight of the Sun.

So in this sort with great joy and pleasure they remained a good while in the
Court without happening an^ thing worth the telling, but the knight of the Sun
received not so great joy and contentment, in finding himself in the presence
of his ladies, as the princess Lindabrides received sorrow and grief to see
the great conversation which the knight of the Sun had with the princess
Claridiana, and the great peril which her presence might cause unto her, which
was the occasion that she received no pleasure, but was always very sad and
perisiue, and caused unto the Emperor and Empress great sorrow and grief*
seeing her in that case, thinking that she received some displeasure in his
court, which greatly discontented her, because she did not as she was wont,
showing her self pleasant, and many times they asked of her the occasion,
offering to do all that was possible whereby she might receive joy. And she
answered them with great diss^mulatton, saying, that there was nothing that
caused her to be so sad, but only because she could never hear any news of
her brother the prince Meridian, since his departure from her. Then the
Emperor believing it to be as she had told him, presently sent abroad knights
into all parts to seek him, and dailye did comfort the princess, (...) that
before long her brother Meridian would come thither. Likewise at this time the
good knight Rosicleer was not altogether at his ease, for that idleness and
eass was the occasion that he called to remembrance things passed, in such sort
that the old wound of his love began to renew and feaster again, so that
within few dai^ee that he had remained in Constantinople, his own natural
country and habitation, waxed (...) unto him, and the ^onuersation of his
father, mother, and brother (for that he could not receive any pleasure or
delight) did cause unto him great (...) and grief, and did ab^orre their
company* and all his delight ^as to be alone, and to any place where mirth and
pastime was ^e could not abide. All the which increased in him so much, that in
the end he determined with himself to do that as ^eereafter shall be told
you.

How the Empress Briana was delivered of a son, and of the great feasts that
were made at his birth. Chapter. 52
IT is said in this famous history that the mighty emperor Trebatio had
another and the third son, by the fair empress Briana, of whom is made great
mention in the second part of this history, for that was one of the most
mightiest and famous knights in all the world, and that next unto his singuled
brethren the knight of the Sun and Rosicleer, there was none equal unto him,
and many times combatting with his brethren unknown, he put the^ in great
hazard, and with either of them he has maintained battle almost a whole day,
and in the end it was very small the vantage they had of him, so that this
valiant knight did finish so many mortal deeds, that they deserve to be
spoken of, and to be put in the number of his brethren, and in all other
things, as in body and stature, he was conformable and equal unto them, and did
resemble so much the knight of the Sun in his face, that many times he was
taken for him, and if it were not that he was of fewer years, with great
difficulty might you know the one from the other. This valiant and fortunat
prince, as the wise Artemidoro says, was borne straight after the emperor and
all his company came from the kingdom of Lidia, for that when that stout Pagan
Rodaran came into Greece, the empress was very big with child. It does apeere
that the wise Lirgandeo does make difference, for he does make no mention of
this young gentleman, till the conclusion of the great battles which they
passed between the emperor Alicandro of Tartaria, and the Emperor Trebatio
of Greece, from which time he does declare marvelous and wonderful things
done by him. I do believe that the occasion of this is, because that the wise
Lirgandeo did not see him, till such time as he came into Greece, and made no
mention of him till all the battle was finished, and at such time as the
emperor and all the rest took their rest with great joy and pleasure, after
the great travail which they received in the wars past, for that at this time
the young gentleman, was very tender of years, and passed not six years of
age, so that till that time there is no more mention made of him, then is in
this chapter, but afterward these two wise men do begin to writ of him
marvelous great and wonderful deeds, and do both agree in their writings.
When the time was come that this royal empress should be delivered there
chanced a thing of great admiration and marvel, which did show and declare a
very high and great mystery in the birth of this ^hild, which was that night
and very moment that he was borne, the Moon did shine so bright and clear,
and threw from her such glistering beams of light, that it seemed to be the
Sun, and the most part of all the earth was so clear, as commonly it is in the
morning, when the Sun does spread her beams abroad. This was seen just at
midnight, and did endure for the space of half a quarter of an hour, i^ it
put all those that saw it in great admiration, and those which afterward heard
tell thereof, and greatly meruailing thereat, they demanded of the wise men
what that strange token might singnifie, and there was none that could declare
the signification thereof, but only the wise Artemidore, who was at that
present in Constantinople, who did tell them plainly that it did pro^nosticat
and show that the features and deeds of that young prince, should so clearly
shine in the obscure and dark regions of the barbarous people, as the moon did
show her shining light, in the obsure darkness of the night. And time did come
that it was perfectly seen and proved to be true all that this wise man had
told them, for that by his occasion the most part of the oriental regions were
turned into the christian faith and true belief in Jesus Christ.

After this which the wise man had told him, as also for that the child was
borne very fair. The Emperor and the empress and his sons were very glad and
joyful, and all the knights of the court, and the citizens began to make great
feasts and pastimes for the birth of the new prince, the which endured in the
City for the space of one moonth, and afterward as the child did increase in
years, so did he increase in bounty and bigness of body, in such sort that
all men meruailed greatly there at, and said, that according unto the wonderful
tokens seen at the birth of that child, it could not be but that he should
recover as great fame* and be as singular in bounty as his brethren. And many
times the princess Claridiana, and the fair princess Lindabrides did take
him in their arms, and shows him great joy and love, for that he was brother
unto the knight of the Sun, and said that never in all their (...) they saw a
child of so great perfection, but this was nothing to that which they would
have done, if they had known how that be should quench the fury and perilous
discord that was between them, for certainty if it had not ben done by him,
neither the oue nor the other should have lived in security, and for that this
history shall make perfect relation in his time, at this time there shall be no
more said, till such time as the wise men in their writing of this happy prince
shall agree in one and be conformable, which shall be at the age of six
years* as is aforesaid, for till that time he was nourished and brought up in
the court of the Emperor his rather, under the cockering and wing of the
Empress his mother. And now let us return unto the fair princes Lindabrides,
for we have great and marvelous things to declare of her.

How the Princess Lindabrides before the Emperor, Princes, and knights of his
court, did ask a boon of the knight of the Sun, and he granted it unto
her, which was the occasion that he must depart out of the Empire of Greece.
Chap. 53.
LOng time was the Princess Lindabrides in the court of the Emperor Trebatio,
without having any mirth, joy or pleasure, for that she saw that the knight of
the Sun did frequent very much with the princess Claridiana, and that it
seemed unto her that he did not love her, as before time he did, and being
fully persuaded, that alone the presence of the princess was the occasion of
all her evil, many times she imagined with her self how and by what means
she might take him away from the same, for that her great beauty might take
effect in him, so that she might live in more security, and for that her mind
was always troubled there with, in the end she determined to do as you shall
hear. Upon a day at such time as was joined together the Emperor and all the
Princes and worthy knights of the court with the empress and the princess
Claridiana, and all their Ladies and gentlewomen, making great feasts and
pastimes in the great hall, at such time as they were most in quiet, the
princess Lindabrides rose up and stood on her feet, and when they saw her
demeanor they all held their peace.

Then she began to speak saying.

High and mighty Emperor of Greece, if valiant princes and mighty knights
for the maintaining of their honors, are bound to respect ladies and damsels
in their necessities, as by their promise and oath made, at such time as they
do receive the order of knighthood: in how much more are bound so high princes
and knights as are here present, to respect a damsel of so high estate as I
am, who is banished from her natura^l contr^, and come into this, as unto the
court of the most hghest king and emperor in all the world. And here I say of
truth that if the remedy of my necessity does now fail me according as I
would have it, and denied me by so high princes, with just reason may I account
my self for an unhappy damsel. Therefore now in the presence of you all I do
ask a boon of the knight of the Sun, who is here present, ye which I do
request that it may be by him granted unto me, and likewise consented, by you
most high and mighty Emperor and Empress. All that were there present were
very much amazed at the words of the princess, not knowing what should be the
occasion why she should ask that boon. And first she would have the grant
before she would declare her demand. Then the knight of the Sun seeing that the
princess would not declare, but first he must be bound, he was somewhat in a
confusion, although he made no outward show thereof: but upon a sudden, he
arose up, and answered her, saying. My good Lady, if the duty which I have to
serve so high a damsel as you are, you do not esteem in more, then in giving
of my word, here I do grant unto you the boon, which you have asked of me,
although of the security I am agreeued, according to the benefits which I have
received. Uery well said the princess, seeing that you have granted me of your
part, likewise I desire the emperor, and my Lady the empress, to consent and
grant unto the same, that I may be sure of all parts. We do grant unto the
same, said the Emperor and the empress, laughing very much at the security
which the princess ^emanded. Now shall you understand the boon the which I
do crave, said the Princess. For so much as the knight of the Sun did
overcome the prince Meridian my brother, and that I remained in his power, that
now he carry me unto the court of the Emperor my father, whereas it is great
reason that I do return, being so long since my departure from thence. And
this I will that he shall do, without having the company of any other. When
the knight of the Sun, heard the boon which the princess demanded, he was
in a great confusion, but the princess Claridiana, was in a greater, but yet
she made signs unto him with her eyes, that he should grant unto her all
that ever she would demand, for that it seemed unto her, that with his hon^ur
he could not (...) to the contrary, and there the knight of the Sun did promise
her to bear her company till she came unto the court of the Emperor her
father, and although it grieved the emperor and the empress very much, yet
there was no other remedy, but he must consent unto the same by the voice of all
the rest, and being concluded, their departure was determined to be within
eight days following, with great joy unto the princes Lindabrides, and much
grief unto the princess Claridiana, who seeing that the knight of the Sun
must needs absent himself from her, and that it was for his honor to depart
into far countries, her sorrowful heuines was so great, that she could not
dissemble so much, but some part thereof was discovered, and especially
considering the perilous company that he had with him, for that in her
presence, she had no fear of the princess Lindabrides, for that the
singularity of her excellent beautye did fully assure her, but in her absence
she knew not what continual conversation of the princes, with the knight of
the Sun would work, and being much troubled with this thought, she called unto
her a damsel, one of them that was most private with her, and said: Arcania my
well-beloved damsel, as unto the most trustiest and faithfullest servant the
which I have, I will commit one thing into thy hands, the which does importune
no more but to have continual pleasure, joy, and quietness, or else sorrow and
heaviness all the dates of my life, and I would you should put such diligence
therm, as ever you have had in things which belongs unto me. You do
understand how that the knight of the Sun has promised unto the princess
Lindabrides to go with her and bear her company unto the court of the
emperor her father, and I knowing the great worthiness of the knight of the
Sun, as well in his own person, as in his high estate and bl^nd from whence he
does descend, I am fully determined in my heart, consenting thereunto my father
the Emperor and the Empress my Mother, to take him for my husband, as the
most highest and mightiest Knight in all the world, and for the accomplishing
and performing of this, I find nothing more contrary, then the great beautye
of the Princess Lindabrides, and the continual conversation which the knight
of the Sun shall have with her in this long journey, and my pretense is to know
whether the knight of the Sun does ^eare any affection or love unto the
Princess Lyndabrides or no, for if it do so fall out, it is not convenient
that so high a damsel as I am should set my mind any more on him, and the
better that I may be certified he (...), it does behooue me that you go in
his company* and whatsoever thing shall happen unto thee by the way* (but
death) do not leave their company till such time as the knight of the Sun does
return again into his Country, and doing so, you may very perfectly and truly
inform me of all that shall pass. The^ Arcan^a understanding all that the
princes had said unto her, she kn^eled down before her, and kissed her hands
for the great courtesy which ^he showed unto her, because she did commit that
secret unto her before any other, and promised her to put all d^ligence therein
that was possible. And not long after that the dams^ll had made an end of
saying these words, when the knight of the Sun ^hanced to pass that way
whereas they were all alone, and his coming was, with pretense to speak with
the princess, if time and place might serve. and when he saw her all alone
with her damsel, he drew nigh unto hi^ and made great reverence, and almost
scarce able to utter his words, he said: M^ Lady and mistres, what is it that
your sovereign highn^sse will command this sorrow^ull knight, who bannished
out of your pres^nce, does go^ to accomplish that (...) which he has grant^d
unto the princes Lindabrides. The almighty God does know my lord, said y^
princess how great a (...) it ^s unto me your departure, and how solitary I
shall find my self in your absence, but for that we are more ^ound ^o regard
our honors and high estate, th^n ^o b^e (...) unto our wi^s. I can do ^o
otherwise but (...) then my self the b^st I may for this departure, and
comfort my self with the ho^e I have of your speedy return, but one thing I
will yt you take with you of mine in this iourn^y, to put you in (...) of this
Country, and of her that gave it you. And in this Damsel w^o is the
faithfullest and best beloved that I have, who will serve you with that
loyalty and care as she does owe unto my service, and she shall not depart
from you till such time as you return unto my presence. With great joy and
pleasure did the knight of the Sun receive that (...) and (...) which the
Princes showed unto him, and with the great sorrow which he felt for his
departure from her said: Now I say that my departure is good, and all my grief
turned unto glory, for that your sovereign highness^ in this great perplerity
has given me company, now with great reason shall I traua^le in comfort, for
that your royal person does gri^ue at my departure, and the great benefit
which you offer unto me, in this your Damsel Arcan^a, I do receive it with
humble than^ks, and it shall be unto me great comfort to have before me one
that so long time has been in company and conversation of your highness,
although this damsel to cause me to have in remembrance this country does
little se^ue my turn, for that I have remembrance on no other thing, but only
in thincking that your highness does (...) look for my return, and heerewith
my desire shall be such to return, that all such time as they ^oo detain
me, will be sorrow and grief unto my (...) heart. Th^se and many other
communications in effect passed beetwixt the Princess Claridiana and the
knight of the Sun, till such time as with great grief they took their le^ues,
and he departed, and for that the day of their departure drew on, all things
that were necessary for their ionrncy were made in a readiness* and the
Emperor commanded such provision to be made for the Chariot of the Prin^esse
Lindabrides in such sort, that they had small ^ack o^ any refreshing, till such
time as they came unto Scithia.

When the day was come that they must depart, they were all in a readiness*
and in the triumphant Chariot there was such sweet Music with Trumpets, that
it o^d well signify their departure, but the Knight of the Sun, neither the
Princess Lindabrides would enter into the Chariot, for that the Emperor and
all those Princes and knights would go forth to take their leaves of them,
the knight of the Sun was mounted upon his horse, and the Prince^se
Lindabrides upon an Unicorn, and being accompanied with the Emperor and all
those valiant Princes and Knights, which were to the number of more then three
thousand, taking her leave of the Empress, who was so full of sorrow and
grief, that she thought her soul would depart from her body, seeing that her
san did depart from his own Country, into a Country so far off, and although
her sorrow and grief were very much, yet that of the royal princess
Claridiana was much more, who seeing her self absent from him whom she so
much loved, and how that he went in company with them that put her in so great
peril, her stou^ courage neither her royal estate was not sufficient to
withdraw her, but that she received so terrible a grief, that it took away
all joy and comfort from her heart, and having no power to go forth to bear
them company, she remained all alone in her chamber, dissembling that she was
not well, and lying upon her bed uttering (with many salt tears) such
sorrowful and lamentable words, mixed with heavy and deep sighs, that it
showed her great grief. Now to return unto the knight of the Sun, who was
departed two miles from the City, whereas the Emperor and all those Princes
and knights did take their leaves of them, and returned unto the City, and
found themselves very solitary without the company of the Knight of the Sun,
who was with the princess Lindabrides in her Chariot, and had great grief for
his departure from his friends* whom the history does leave at this present,
and the fair Princess Claridiana very solitary, the which ye absence of her
knight did increase daiely more and more, and finding her self in no rest nor
quietness in that Country, she had great desire to return unto her own,
(...) such time as she heard news of the knight of the Sun.

How the Knight of Cupid in the company with the King Sacridoro went out of
Constantinople, and of all that happened more. Chapter 54.
Certain days after the departure of the Knight of the Sun, did Rosicleer
abide in the City of Constantinople, the more for to give contentment unto the
Emperor and Empress his known parents, the^ for any contentment he had with
himself although he was singularly well beloved of his friends and vassalls,
and in such sort, that if his heart had not been set and fully satisfied in
another place, in all the world he could not find himself so well as in that
country, for that all the Princes and knights that were came ^hether to
celebrate the great feasts and triumphs, did still remain th^r in the court,
for that the Emperor riceiued great pleasure of their company, for which
occasion there were none of them departed: but the old sore of love of the
Princess Oliuia did feaster a new, by reason of his great idleness, there was
nothing that was sufficient to give him any delight, but continually he was
very sad and pensive, and full of care, so that the Emperor and Empress with
all the other Princes and Knights his friends, beeleeued that he had some
secret in^irmity, which was the occasion of his sorrowful demeanor, and was a
very grief unto them all, and by reason that this sorrowful and amorous
passion did daily in^erase more and more in him, and made him so careful that
he could not take any kind of rest nor quietness in the Court of the
Emperor his father, he fully determined to depart from thence, and
considering the great obligation in which the King Sacridoro was bound unto
him, he could not choose, but with great reason request to have his company.
So one day finding himself all alone with him, he told him what he was
determined to do, and how that his w^ll was to go unto England, and there to
certify him self fully and wholly, of all that had past with the princess
Oliuia. And although it did not seem well unto the King Sacridoro, that
Rosicleer should leave the Emperor his father and his mother, at such time, as
they cannot but receive great sorrow and griese for his departure, yet seein^
his determined purpose therein, and the small contentment which he received in
that court, he could not but needs must consent unto all that he requested,
and offer him self in person to bear him (...). whether so ever his pleasure
was. So beetweene these two friends was conc^uded when they ^ould depart, and
in great secret, for that they would not be disturbed by any. And so in a
night, they two all alone, and one page, they departed: And Rosicleer, left a
Letier written for the Emperor his Father, (...) he gave him to understand,
how that he and the King Sacridoro, went upon a journey, the which did import
the^ very much. And desire him of pard^n, for that they were deyar^ed without
his lisence: and that their return should be in as short time as was
possible. So the next day after their departure, they were found lacking, the
Emperor asked for them, and straight way was brought unto him the letter which
Rosicleer left beehinde him, by the which he understood his departure, for the
which he and the Empress Briana, and all the rest of the Princes (...) in the
Court, were very sorrowful. But for that he (...) in his letter that his
return ^ould be with (...)* they did comfort themselves with that hope,
praying unto God to prosp^r him in his journey and to return with health.

So these two perf^ct and faithful friends, travailed with so great speed,
all that night, that the next day in the morning, they found themselves a great
way departed from that mighty City of Constantinople. And being certain
that none, in the beehalfe of the Emperor, would ^ollow them, somewhat for to
ease their horse of the great trauayl^ they had all that night, they alighted at
the house of a foster, or keeper of a Forest, somewhat out of the broad way.
And after that they had well refreshed themselves and their Horse, they
returned unto their travail, wherein they endewred many days, in the which
they did marvelous and wonderful deeds: all the which this history does
leave of the telling, for if that all things which was done should be made
mention here, there would be no ^nde of this book. To conclude, of
necessity they must needs pass through all the whole Country of Grecia, and
the great Ocean Sea for to imbarke themselves for England, (whereas he thought
the time long till he came thither) and not taking the right way, in the end
of many days, they (...) in the borders of the great Empire of Russia, on that
part which falls toward high Almaine. And trauayling therein certain (...),
at such time as they had passed the greater part thereof: upon a day, in the
same way wherein they travailed, they saw coming toward them, a great
bushment of more then tw^ntie Knights. And when they came nigh unto them they
saw one in the midst of them that did surmount all the rest of the company
two spans in height, and so big of all his members, that it did appear he
should be of mighty and great force of arms. They brought also with them
three Damsels, with their hands bound, and upon their palfraies, who made
marvelous great and pitiful lamentation, and with great shrikes they did
give to understand, that they were carried away by force. So when these two
va^iant Knights came nig^ unto them, they were moo^ed unto great compassion in
such sort that their courageous stomachs could not suffer that before them any
damsel should he perforced, and Rosicleer coming nigh unto that great
knight, who appeared by the riches of his armor, to be Lord over all the rest,
he said unto him in this manner.

T^ll me if it please you for God^ love, what great evil ^ath these Damsels
committed, that they do deserve to be ^arried thus prisoners. Then the knight
who had his bea^er lift up, with a fierce countenance he did beehold them, and
as though he were very angry at that demand, with ^reat pr^de he answered
him and said.

From whence have thou had so great hardiness, thou foolish and simple Knight,
that thou dare to ask of the mighty Fulmineo, the occasion wherefore he
does apprehend Damsels. It does well appear that thou art a stranger in this
Country, then thou have not heard of my great fame. And for that thou may
tell news of my great wonders, when thou art in thy Country, thou shall
understand that I am called Eulmineo, as I have told thee: And I am son unto
the mighty Giant, Brumaleon, Lord over seven castles that I have in this
Country, and of so great strength, that they are sufficient to make their
defense against all the whole world. It is now ten years since my father died,
and since that time hitherto, I have it for a custom, to leave neither Ladies
nor damsels, that seems fair in mine eyes, but that I do take them
parforce, and do carry them unto my Castles, and do solas my self with
them. And when I do find others that does better content me. I do take
them and let the other go: so that I have in my Castles, great store of them.
And although the Emperor of Russia being very angry and wrathful of my
doings, has proved to drive me out of his country, yet has he never been
able to do it, but all only in hearing me named, he does tremble with
fear, and always I have in my company these knights as thou see, and in my
castles I have as many more, not so much for the guard and defense of my person,
as for the authority of my Lordship. Here have I told unto thee knight, all
that thou have demanded of me, that thou may tell thereof when the^ do
find thy self in place, whereas they have not heard of my fame. And in saying
these words he left them, and would have passed forwards his journey, but
Rosicleer, and the King Sacridoro, were very much amazed when they heard of
that evil and abominable custom, and determined to put their lives in
adventure, to cause that great knight to amend his life, and to leave of that
evil custom, Rosicleer put himself before him and said. I would very
gladly desire to know of thee Fulmineo, if the contentment which thou do
receive in this thy biuellish life, can suffer to receive any counsel, and
considering how abominable thy works are, and thou will acknowledge the
error in the which thou art, repenting thee of the same, and never after to
use them any more, and turn over a new leaf, taking unto thy self some other
kind of life that may be more profit unto thy body, and honor unto the
person, but principally for thy soul, and in doing so, thy high and mighty
Lord of all powers, of his bountiful and great mercy will pardon thee of all
these great evils which thou have done, and thou shall excuse the self of the
infernal pains, to the which thy soul is condemned, and if thou will not
do this, beehold the justice of God who can no longer suffer thy abominable
deeds, and seeing that there is no amendment in thy life, when thou ^oost
thinck least thereof, will fall upon thee to thy utter destruction. Oh strange
Knight, said Fulmineo, how I am now fully certified that thou art altogether
foolish, in that ^hou do put thy self to preach unto me, and to give me
counsel, but I my self am in the fault thereof, because I stayed and used
words with thee, and although I gave thee to understand of my woneerfull
deeds, yet did I not tell thee the principal of them, the which I will give
thee to understand, because it shall be a warning unto thee how to return an
answer to me any more. Know that being my Father Brumaleon, one of the most
strongest and valiantest Gyauntes which was to be found in all the world,
only for reprehending me for a rape the which I did unto a Damsel, and did
offer to give me counsel to the contrary, I did defy him even to the
battle, and hand to hand (...) slew him, although as then I was very young and
tender ^f age, for at that time I was not full eighteen years of age. Now
seeing I did this against mine own father for giving ^ee counsel, consider
what I will do against thee, if thou (...) stand in contention herein, and
make me angry.

And in saying these words, without speaking any more, (for (...) was not his
custom to stay long with any) he broched his furious Horse with his Spurs,
commanding his knights to proceed forwards he would have departed, but that
valiant Knight Rosicleer who was a great enemy unto such as he was, and could
not suffer that any in his presence should receive rebuke or shame, and
especially (...), seeing that it was labor lost to speak unto that vile
Gyaunt, he took his spear in his hand and put himself before him, saying.

For as much as thy ears are deaf for to receive counsa^le, choose unto thy
self that part of the field that does best please thee, for that possibly
with the death thou shall know how profitable it will be to amend thy life,
therefore take to thee thy weapon and defend thy self, for it does beehooue
thee by force to do that which thou will not of thy own good will, for
always I have heard say, that the evil and naughty tree it is best to dig
him up by the root.

When Rosicleer had said these words, he turned about his horse, and took
that part of the field that liked him best, and with his spear in his hand he
put himself before Fulmineo, who laughing very much beegan to go forwards
his way with great anger, saying.

Captive Knight, thou shall not get by me so much honor, in saying thou
did enter alo^e in battle with me. Then Rosicleer said: Thou vile and
evil beast, and the head of all pride and presumption, take unto thee thy
weapon and defend thy self from (...). Then Fulmineo when he heard this, with
great ^re ^ee pulled down the beauer of his helm, and aparted himsel^e from
his Knights, without spear of sword in his hand, and said: Come against me,
thou foolish and caprime knight, that for as much as thou have heard of my
deeds, it shall be good that by experience thou do prove my force and
strength, for that without spear or other weapon I will take from thee all thy
armor and weapon that thou bring with thee. Then Rosicleer being very
angry at the great pride of Fulmineo came unto him and said: Brute and
devilish brast, take unto thee thy lance and sword, and come against me, for
that I am not such a knight that will combat with thee with any advantage, and
for that Fulmenio did stand in contention not to take any weapon, Rosicleer
threw his spear from him and assalted him with his sword in his hand, and
stroke him such a blow upon his helm, that he made him decline his head down
to his breast, and Fulmineo in all his life never received the like blow, that
he thought verily his teeth had been broken in his head with beating one against
another, and being very much amazed at the great strength of that knight, and
seemed unto him to be such a one, that without weapon he could not overcome
him, he drew out from his side a great and broad sword, and went against
Rosicleer to strike him on the head with great strength, that chau^cing upon
his helm it made him somewhat astonished* and if his helm had not ben very good,
he had clonen him down to the breast* but Fulmineo did not advance himself
very much in giving that blow, for the valiant Rosicleer did strike him such
another on his right shoulder, that by reason of the great strength of his
armor his sword could not cut it, yet for all that it did charge him so much,
that if he had not embraced himself about his horse neck, he had fallen down
to the ground: Oh how greatly am^zed was Fulmineo at the great force and
strength of Rosicleer, for when he saw with what courage he stroke his blows,
and feeling the mighty force of them, he said with in himself: By fortune is
there returned again into ye world that Greek Achilles, or that valiant
Hector, for that he was fully persuaded that he was not in all the world that
could bring him into so great extremity, and yet he hoped to kill the^ both,
if they entered into battle with him, and for that he was one of the strongest
and brauest knights in all the world, without abating any thing of his great
strength, but still incresing his courageous furye, in such sort, that he
beeganne to lay upon the valiant and stout Rosicleer, with so strong blows,
that if he had been an (...) of (...), he had surely cloue it in pieces.
Likewise if it had been one other knight with other armor, he had been cloven
asunder. But by reason that the valiant Rosicleer was in perfect security with
his armor, (although sometimes with ye great fury of his blows, he was
astomed, and almost from himself) yet he did answer him, with other blows of
so great fury that Fulmineo, being tormented with them, did roar like a Bull.
So that in this contension and rigor^us combat, these two endured more then two
hours, and every blow that was stroke, did make each other to doubt of his
life. And for that I will not be tedious, to tell all things perticulerly, the
which was done in this well foughten and perilous battle, I will conclude
and tell you what happened in the end. It was ordained by the divine providence,
that this mighty Fulmineo, should make an end of his evil and devilish life:
who being very angry with himself, and blaspheming against all his goods, and
against all things both in the heavens and on the earth, for that one alone
knight did endure so long in battle against him. With an infernal fury which
he had within him, (as it seemed by the great quantity of smoke which came
forth at his beauer) he went against Rosicleer, and with both his hands as he
stroke him such a blow upon his enchanted and rich helm, that if his sword had
not glanced upon his shoulder, ^o doubt he had been in great peril. Yet for all
that, it was so terrible, that it took his remembrance from him, and made him
to fall forwards upon his saddle bow, in such sort, that all men did think that
he would have fallen down dead to the ground. But this good knight did not long
remain in this trance, but came again to himself, and with a trise he
settled himself in his saddle, and stroke his horse Rondarte, with his spurs,
with so ^urious wrath and mortal courage, that the earth seemed to tremble
under him: and raising himself a good span in his sadle, he went to wards his
enemy, and stroke him such a blow upon his steely helm, that he cloue it a
sunder, and cut his head all to pieces. And with the great strength of ye blow,
his borse was so charged, that he bowed his knees to the ground, and so
remained a good space before he arose up again. In this sort the evil
Fulmineo did make his end, and his soul condemned unto hell, whereas with
continual torment he is plagued for his evil deeds, as shall be done unto
those that in this world with so great pride does commit ye like offense, if
that by the permission of god he does not repent him of them before he die, for
that his neighbor being by him injured, at the day of judgment he will ask
vengeance of the same. But when the knights of Fulmineo saw their Lord slain
and dead, they were greatly amazed to see him so soon overcome and slain by
one alone knight, that they were without all heart and courage for to revenge
his death, and remained all astonished and amazed without any moving, as though
they had been a company of Images made of stone, and beholding of Rosicleer, who
seemed unto them to be a knight sent from god to punish and chastise the evil
deeds and life of Fulmineo. So after that Rosicleer had given thanks unto
almighty god for his great victory having compassion upon ye damsels which they
brought with the^ tied, he went toward them for to set them at liberty. And
when he came unto the first, he straight ways knew her to be Fidelia, one of
ye damsels of the princess Oliuia, she whom in England brought unto him the
sentence of banishment, and straight ways calling to remembrance all that ever
had passed he received so great sorrow and grief, that his heart was all
covered with sadness in such sort, that clean void of all remembrance he fell
from his horse to the ground as though he had been dead. This his great friend
the king Sacridoro, when he saw him in that trance, with a trice he alighted
from his horse and went toward him with great ang^ish and grief, not knowing
what it should be the occasion of that sudden and strange alteration, and
taking him in his arms, he lifted him up from the ground, thinking that in
giving him air he would return again unto his remembrance, but all that
ever he could do, did profit him very little, for that he was in such sort,
that he seemed to have no li^ within him. Then the knights of Fulmenio, who
were very glad and joyful for the death of their Lord, did unloose ye
damsels, and the knights with the damsels came together for to help the king
Sacridoro, to lift him from the ground, and to carry him unto one of the
castles of Fulmenio, which was there nigh at hand, and when they pu^led of his
helm for to give him are, the damsel Fidelia knew him straight ways by his
fair face, although in many (...) before she had not (...) him, which was the
occasion that he was somewhat al^red, and knowing him and seeing him in that
estate and perplexity, and shedding many tears she wept very vitterly over
him, although otherwise she was half from her self with great joy that she
had found him, for that many days before she had trauatled in his d^maund, and
for that the time was long, and Rosicleer ca^e not unto himself, and they
seeing that it was a sound accompanied with anguish and very deep sigbes,
those of Fulmenio did take him in their arms, and with the help of the king
Sacridoro they carted him unto a castle that was there ^igh at hand, whereas they
said him upon a bed, and when the D^wsell Fidelia had told the king Sacridoro
of whence she was, he straight ways understood the occasion from whence did
proceed all this alteration and evil of Rosicleer, and straight ways
requested all the Knights that were there to depart, and let him alone, and
being all departed the king requested the damsel to tell him if she brought
any message unto his friend Rosicleer, for that of long time travailing in his
compante, he knew of his love, so well as himself.

And when Fidelia understood that that was the king Sacridoro of whom she had
heard so much of his doings with out any suspicion she told him how that she
was damsel unto the fair Princess Oliuia, and how that she brought him a
letter from her. How is this said the king, is not the princess Oliuia as yet
married?

No surely, said Fidelia, for first she will consent to die a thousand deaths,
then to forget the great love which she does bear unto Rosicleer. Oh lord
have mercy upon me, said the king, how has Rosicleer ben deceived, for that it
was told him that Oliuia was married, which was the occasion, that a thousand
times he has been at ye point of death. And in saying these words with the
great joy he received, he went unto Rosicleer, whereas he lay, and took him by
the arm, and did shake him in such sort, that he made him somewhat to come to
his remembrance. Then the damsel Fidelia, went unto him and said: My lord
wherefore will you not speak unto me, who with so great travail and grief,
has wandered through all the world, this two years in strange countries in
seeking of you. And being at this time wholly in his remembrance, and
understood what the damsel had said, with great anguish of mind and pale
color, he said. Ah Fidelia, how would thou that I should live before her,
who brought me the sentence of my death. How can I live one moment, calling to
remembrance the ^ast hour that thou did see me, when thou did leave me,
more dead then alive, from that time hitherto, there has not entered one ^ot of
joy or mirth in my heart. And if it had not ben for the great regard which* I
have (as a christian) unto my soul, I could not hitherto have sustained my
self, but a thousand times, I had slain my self, for that I would not live
without the love of the princess Oliuia. What heart is that so diamant hard and
strong, that seeing and knowing my fortune, and the pernersenes thereof, that
would not be moved unto compassion. For that in all the world, the sight of the
princes Oliuia, was demed, neither unto the unreasonable beasts of the fields,
nor unto fowls of the air that flies, neither unto the stars and plannets of
the heavens, unto all these were nothing hidden, but unto all thing permitted
the sight and presence of Oliuia, but all only that unfortunate Rosicleer
whose life was sust^ined only with the sight of her, was prohibited a
forbidden her presence. Ah my good Fidelia what aduensure has brought thee
into this country, tell me I pray thee, and give me to understand something of
the princess Oliuia, my Lady and mistress, to whom my name is so greatly
abhorred. Yet for all that it shall be to me great quietness, to here tell
something of her. And in saying these words, he went unto the damsel and did
embrace her, with some contentment, more then he ha^ before, for that he saw
before him, the faithfullest and trustiest secretary of ye princes Oliuia, his
mistress, of whom he might very perfectly inform himself of that which his
heart did desire. Then Fidelia, who could not refrain her self from weeping,
when she remembered the cruel letter, which she delivered unto him in england:
and the great sorrow and grief, which he received by occasion of the same: she
took forth a letter out of her bosom, the which she brought with her, and
delivered it unto Rosicleer, saying: My goodlord, take bee^e this letter which
is sent you from the princess Oliuia, my mistress, and by it you shall
understand, what part she has sustained and had of your grief and sorrow, and
what grief it has been unto her, your absence: and as a witness of the same,
I can give you to understand, and do verily believe, that there is not a
damsel in all the world, at this present borne, that has sustained so heavy
and sorrowful a life, as she has done since yt you departed out of england.
My lord what shall I say unto you, I have had her in my arms more then a
thousand times for dead, without any hope of life. And her sorrow and grief is
so much, for that she has done against you, yt there is nothing yt she has
desired so much as for the death. Three times have I gone forth into the
world, travailing all about to seek you, and every time I have been forth
hal^e a year. But when I returned unto the princess Oliuia, without giving
her any word of you, her sorrow, grief and care was such, that I being moved
with great compassion, came forth again in your demand. And that with the
great peril of my own person, and the news which I heard of your death, did
give me occasion for to return back again. And unto the contrary,
understanding the great sorrow which my La^ye would use with me, I was
determined rather to die, trauayling from one country to another, then to
return into England: but God who knows the hearts of all creatures has
permitted that this should proceed no farther, but has giueu me so good
fortune as to find you. When Fidelia had ended these words, the joy which
Rosicleer received was such when he heard that sweet news from his mistres,
not believing that that which he heard should be true, but rather a dreme, and
coming again unto himself, he went unto Fidelia and said: My good friend and
well-beloved Fidelia, I desire you by him which created all things, and by the
duty which you owe unto my lady the princes Oliuia, that you do tell me if
this which I have heard, has been the principal, occasion of your coming, or
whether you have spoken it to comfort me in this sorrowful life which I have
had continually, for I cannot believe that the princes Oliuia has received any
grief for me, having bannished me out of the kingdom of England, as (...) by
the cruel words of the letter which she sent me by my faithful friend, and if
it be now true which you have told me, happy am I, and more happy is the life
in which I have lived so long in sorrow, for yt I am now recompensed with so
so^er agine a reward: it has been told me that my mistres the prin^es Oliuia
was married, which was the occasion of my, greater sorrow. And how is it possible
that all this should be true which you have told me? Then Fidelia answered, I
have told you the truth of all my lord, and in that you say that she is married
it is the thing yt is (...) off from her heart, for although the king her father
would have married her unto the prince of Lusitania, and did importune her very
much to accept the same, yet could he never conclude with her to accept the
marriage, but first she would rather consent to receive a thousand deaths, the^
to do it, so that to perform all that which does owe unto your love, she has
^en brought into great extremity and danger with her father. The great joy
which Rosicleer received h^reat, was such, that he thought himself to be
transported into another world. So taking the letter of his lady and mistres,
he did kiss it many times, for that it had been many times in her hands, and
did open it, w^eras was written as follows.

The Letter of the Princess Oliuia to Rosieleer.
IF the pain which I receive in writing, were not confirmable to that which
thy desert does deserve, then should not I have any (...) to write, neither
reso^ to ask pardon for that which is past, but yet ob Rosicleer, the great
force and strength which caused your highness to make defense, was the occasion
to make the wound more greater in my heart. I did send to bannish thee out of my
presence, for that I might not peril my self with thy continual presence,
but in doing that, I did bannish my own soul from my body, whose absence
shall continue and endure so long, as thou art absent from me, and am so far
from reason, and so void of memory, since the time that thou departedst from
this court, that when I do consider of my own life, I know not whether I live
or dreme, or whether I am a woman or monster, for that life is odious unto me,
and I do abhor all pleasure, and the company of my damsels is great grief
unto me, and when I am alone I am tormented, my ears are deaf and do not
hear, my eyes blind and cannot see, and my tongue dumb and cannot speak,
except it be to name Rosicleer, in such sort are all my senses prisoners unto
thee, that in no other thing they do occupy themselves in, but only in
accusing me for the error the which I have committed against thee: my eyes say
that they are blind, for that they cannot see the goodness that they were
wont to see, my ears deaf, for that they cannot hear that continual praise
which they were wont, of thy person, the telling of thy mighty deeds, the
victory of thy perilous battles, the great fame of thy high knighthood, and
the continual praise of thy high and wonderful attempts. My memory says
that it does remember, that only with thy presence all the whole Kingdom of
England was glad and joyful. In the Court of the King my father, thou did
exalt such as were good Knights, and did honor them, and did chastise and
(...) such as were evil, and proud Giants did thou make humble and ^eeke.
Likewise Damsels did travail all alone, for that only in thy name they went
in great security. And the Princess Oliuia in only seeing thee was always
joyful and gallant above all the rest. And now my understanding does tell me
that all is changed topsie turuie, and clean contrary unto that it was wont
to be, all the whole kingdom of England very sad and sorrowful, the court of
the king Oliuerio overthrown, for that good knights lack therein, and the
evil does increase, and such as are proud does augment, and damsels as
Orphants do tru^ile with no security, but does m^strust all knights: all
does find lack of they presence, all does weep and be w^ste thy departure,
all does curse the hour of thy departure, and the occasion that moved
thereunto. But what shall Oliuia now do, who has been the occasion of all
this, and yet unto her has thy departure been more grievous? O^ a truth, if
that with my death I could have made a means for all this, with a very good
will a thousand times I would have been glad to have received it, and should
have thought i^ the least of all my deadly sorrows. But alas what shall I do,
if I do lack death for my remedy, the shall I loose all the hope I have to see
thee, the which if I do loose, I shall think my soul far more then lost, and
in this sort I shall not make any recompense for this great error, neither you
satisfied for the great hurt and harm received, so that I take ^t for the
better choice to live, sustayning my life with this ^ope, and for that I do
greatly fear that my life cannot long endure, if thy coming be not with
breuity, therefore I do ^end this Damsel to seek thee, for to desire thee
(in first par^oning of that which is past) that thou would not permit that
my soul depart out of this world, till such time as my eyes may rejoice
themselves with the sight of thee, for that only therewith I shall think my
self happy, and for that in all other matters thou may give perfect credit
to this my faithful secretary, and understand all my sorrowful passions, I
do enlarge no farther, but remain prayeng unto God to keep and defend thy
person, and to direct thy paths arighi.

When Rosicleer had read this Letter, and knew it to (...) hirs, what shall I
say unto the great joy and pleasure which he received, but that it was equal
unto the great sorrow and grief which he suffered, for that as one from him
self he was reading, (...) did not contemplate himself with those sweet and
amorous words of his Lady and mistres, and the great love which she did
profess in her letter, and how (...) did repent her self of all that was
past, of all the which he received so great joy and contentment, that all his
senses were occupied therewith, in such sort that he (...) him self
transported into the celestial glory, so that he had no tongue for to speak
unto the King Sacridoro, neither feet for to remove himself out of that place,
nor eyes for to look upon Fidelia, but only occupied in recreating himself in
that contemplation, reading and beeholding that Letter many times. In the end
he remembered himself as one that did awake out of a dream, and went unto the
King Sacridoro, and embraced him and said: Oh my Lord and perfect friend, I
desire you to put me out of all doubt of this doubtful thing which I have
before me, for that you shall understand, that look how much the glory is
which at this present I receive, so much more will the pain and grief be
unto me if it fall out otherwise.

Therefore tell me (I pray you,) whether I do sleep or am awake, or whether
it be true that I do now see, or whether it be one of those dreams which I
was wont to have, do not let me I pray you to live deceived, for that is ^ot
reason, one so unhappy and void of good fortune as I am, should recreate and
content himself with so high a benefit as this is. Beehould how I do dream
that the Princess Oliuia has sent me a Letter by her secretary Fidelia, and
having compassion on me, she would that I should be hirs, and to go into
England for to serve her, and be at her commandment, and does write to me
such amorous words, that there is no humane creature that does deserve the
same, much less a man that is so forgotten as I am: Beehould here Fidelia,
here is the Letter, the hand and seal of my Lady and mistres, the Princess
Oliuia: Tell me I pray you, whether I do sleep or dream, and whether it be
true this which I do see. The King did not marvel much at all this which
passed because he did very well understand the operation of love, but
embracing him, he took him by the hand and said: Oh my Lord Rosicleer and
perfect friend, now I do see the great wonders of God, and how great his
mercy is, for that he does forget none that does put their trust in him, for
when I was very prosperous in riches, high (...) estate, and accompanied with
all my vassalls and subjects, and in sovereign hope for to overcome, and have
that which I most desired, straight ways I found my self very far from the
easement of my grief, and the end of al my desire separated, for that I was
overthrown from my estate, and all my kingdom destroyed, my people overcome
and left desolate without my vassalls, and bannished, out of mine own
Country, and thrown out into the world, and sunk into a lake whereas I found
all that which I desire, remedy for my sorrow, and recovered again my
Kingdom, and restored unto mine own estate, and above all things, I recovered
a good and perfect friend of you, therefore all aff^iction and tribulation in
the world, God does permit it unto them that he does not forget, and when
they do think themselves most afflicted and troubled, overthrown and
brought most low, and most without all hope, and void of all goodness, at
such time with a trise and in a moment they are brought into more higher estate
then they were before, with joy and prosperity, giving them occasion for to
esteem and have in more honor the thing that they most desire, and so has it
happened unto you my good friend Rosicleer, for that at such time as thou did
abhor thy own life, and when thy sorrow and grief had most government over
thee, and when that all hope of remedy was past and farthest off from thee,
upon a sudden has come unto you remedy for all things, and in so high
order, that you your self cannot be leeue it, and you do think your self
unworthy of that which God has ordained for you, therefore surrender unto god
thanks for the same, and gratify this Damsel for her great travail which
she has taken for you, and do not ^ay that it is a dream or mockage, that
which we do all see with our eyes. At which words of the King, Rosicleer came
wholly to himself, and having no heart to speak, with the great joy he
received, he embraced the King and Fidilia many times, and by exterior tokens
and signs, he did communicate his pleasure and joy unto them. Then
afterward Rosicleer demanded of Fidelia all what had (...) by whom he
understood all that ever she did know of the Princess Oliuia, for there she
made manifest unto him her life, her passions, and her cares, and all that ever
had passed in the Letters, and how by them she understood him to be Son
unto the Princess Briana, and afterward it was published that he was son
unto the Emperor Trebatio. Likewise she toulde him the occasion of the
writing of the first Letter, and the great repentance which she had for the
same, the great anguish and grief she had for Don Siluerio, the great good
will of the king her father, and the great importance he used, also the great
(...) of the Princess Oliuia, all which when Rosicleer heard, he was as you
may judge of all them that faitfully and truly do love, at such time as they
are given to understand any thing of their best beeloued: the which things unto
such as are free from all love are counted but tr^fles, and childrens toys,
whereas to the contrary unto them they are pearls and precious stones.

Then the King seeing them in this profound and deep rehearsal, took him by
the hands and said: My good Lord let all these matters pass for this time, and
let us understand that which does most accomplish you, which is to go into
England, whereas you shall understand and know all these matters of the
Princess Oliuia, for that I do perceive by the long travail, in the which
Fidelia has gone, in seeking of you, that you delay the time very long.

Then Rosicleer, as thou^h he did awake out of a sound sleep came unto
himself, and savd. O^ high and sovereign Lord and God, here I do give
infinite thanckes unto thy holy name, for that it has pleased you to put
remedy in the life of this your Knight, with this unlooked for remedy. And
unto you my very good friend Fidelia I do give great thanks for the great
travail the which you have passed and taken, in seeking of me, that I may go
comfort and recreate my self, in the sight and countenance of my Lady and
Mistress. And I do desire of God, to grant me life, that I may gratify
your large pilgrimage, which you have passed, ^n seeking me. And tourning
himself unto the King, he said: Pardon me, I pray you my good Lord, these
my amorous passions, and let us go whether your pleasure is to command us,
without tarrying any longer. So straight ways they commanded the kn^ghts of
Fulmineo, to bring before them all the Ladies and damsels, that were in all the
Castles. And being brought before them, they were more then thirty, all very
fair and full of sorrow. All the which Rosicleer, did command, that they
should go and present ^hemselues before the Emperor of Russia in saying,
that ^wo (...) Knights, has slain Fulmineo, and that they do ^urrender and
yee^d unto him all his Country and lands, ^or that Fulmineo, has left no
heir. And unto the Damsels ^ee did give all such riches as he found within
the Castells. and for to set order in this and in all (...) things, they tar^ed
there that day and that night: and for that his desire ^as so great for to go
into England, the night seemed so (...), that he thought the day would never
have apeared. So the next day, at such time as the Sun did scarce appear,
when they were armed with their rich and bright armor, and mounted upon their
good horses, these two valyant knights and perfect friends went forth of the
castle, and in their company the damsel Fidelia, leaving a good Knight which
was Fulmineos in the guard and keeping of the Castle and all the rest, till such
time as the Emperor of Russia did command his pleasure to be done with them.
So all they together took their right way toward the sea, whereas they might
embarke themselves for England, where the history does leave them til time
does serve. So the Ladies and damsels of Fulmineo went before the Emperor,
and declared unto him the embassage of the knights, and of all that ever had
passed, for the which he received great joy and pleasure, and meruailed
greatly that one alone knight had slain Fulmineo, and was very sorrowful for
the departure of those two knights, and would have given a good part of his
country for to have had them remained in his court, and presently gave unto
those ladies and Damsels all the castles and lands of Fulmineo, in recompense
of the great harm and damage which they received of him. The Emperor as well
as all the rest that did border upon the country of Fulmineo, gave great laud
and praise unto god, because he was out of the world, and would very feign
have seen and known that knight that had so much force and strength for to
kill him.

How the knight of the Sunnne and the fair Princess Lindabrides went forwards
on their journey toward the great Tartaria, and of the stout battle that the
knight of the Sun had with the Trojan Oristides. Chapter 55.
LOng time did the knight of the Sun and the fayr^ Princess Lindabrides
trauayled together toward the gran Tartaria, with great majesty in her
triumphant Chariot, which did manifest their high estate unto all that sa^
them. In this sort they trauayled without happening unto them any thing worth
the telling, till they came unto a convenient port, whereas they might embarke
themselves toward the gran Tartaria, and by reason of the continual
conversation of the Princess, and the Knight of the Sun, and the great
beauty and sovereign grace of the Princes Lindabrides, which continually in
the eyes of the Knight of the Sun did work effect, in such sort, that what
so ever contrary might be presented before him, was not sufficient, but that
his hard and stony heart must of force be molified, and cloue it a sunder in
the midst in such sort, that the old wound did rankle a new, and he put in
far greater extremities then at the first beeginning, for that the Princess
Lindabrides deprived him of all his senses, and as the Diamond stone does draw
iron unto him, so does she bring unto her all his thoughts, so that the
Princess Claridiana by reason of her absence, the remembrance of her great
beauty is forgotten, and the wound which he received at his heart by hi^
singular beauty, is not now felt, by reason of the great grief of the
Princess being present, so that his eyes could beehould no other comfort nor
pleasure, neither does his thoughts desire any other glory, so that he does
not occupy himself in any other thing, but to serve her, and to gieue her all
the contentment possible, her presence ^s unto him great joy, comfort, and
pleasure, and her ab^ence great sorrow, pain, and grief. When the Sun should
^rise he says, that it is slothful, and when that it goes ^owne, he says
that it flies, for that all the day time he ^oth rejoice himself with the
sight and conversation of the ^rincesse, and the night does separate them a
sunder the ^ne from the other. At this time you may beeleeue that the ^rincesse
Lindabrides was more gladder and ioyefull then ^hen she was in the city of
Constantinople, in the presence ^f the Princess Claridiana, for now seeing her
Knight by (...), and considering the great love which she bare unto her (...)
in the wa^ trauayling toward the Court of the Em^ Alycandro, her father, her
contented pleasure was so great, that she never thought to be so merry,
neither to enjoy so great glory. So when they came unto the sea ^ide, they
embarked themselves in a very fair and great ship, wherein they put themselves
into the power of the waves. And upon a day when the knight of the Sun found
himself alone with the princess Lindabrides, amongst other matters which
passed beetweene them, he said.

Lady and Princess of the gran Tartaria, if I did think that my over much
pain and inward grief were perfectly known unto you, then would not I at
this present declare it, neither the remedy for the same would I crave at your
hands, for if you my Lady and Mistres, did understand and know how grievously I
do feel it, and in you to reign any good will to do me good, then would
you of your proper good will procure to put remedy to the same without my
asking, for that I cannot beeleeue nor think that it is possible, that Nature
has formed a Damsel endued with so great beauty and sovereign grace, that it
does surmount all which at this present are borne, and should lack in you
pity, the which is an extremity amongst Damsels, for whereas any pity does
dwell, they cannot be without compassion, and having comassion to procure to
put remedy in so sorrowful a heart as mine is, which in every hour and moment
is in lively flames burning and languishing in burning coals. The shining
beams of your sight has so kindled my thoughts, that they be all occupied in
your service, and has likewise scorched all my inward parts, and all my senses
are blind, my body all to pieces, and my soul as immortal always. Therefore
Lady I do desire you, that although my pain is equal unto that which they
have that are condemned to the pro^ound lake, yet that in our remedies we
(...) be different that the mercy which does lack for the^, let it be in you
for to help me, that I may be clear from so terrible a fire. And do not
delay any longer my remedy, for my grief is so great, that it cannot suffer
any delay because that thereby I may be brought unto such extremity, that then
you would show me this pleasure of remedy, then shall not I be able to receive
it at your hands.

And in concluding these words, the knight of the Sun with as great courage as
ever he had, went unto her and kissed her on one of her fair cheeks. Then the
princess, who very well understood the words of the knght of the Sun, and his
desire, although she was very glad and joyful to see the great love that he
did bear her, which was the thing that she did most desire, yet for all that
she was so full of honesty, and adorned with so great majesty and highness,
that she was clean contrary unto the purpose of the knight of the Sun, and
would rather consent to die, then to yield unto any such thing, and so making
some semblaunce as though she were angry, accompanied with great gravity, she
answered him and said.

Knight of the Sun, my very good and perfect friend, I would never have
believed that the true and perfect love which I have borne unto you, should
have been recompe^ced with the like singlene^ and purity of love, and to have
proceeded from a pure and perfect thought, for that of mine own part I have
always thought to be sure, and in the great force and strength of your person
I had always hope of defense against such like reproach, at such time as I was
most captive and overcome by love, and most kindled in the burning flames
thereof. I hoped in your sovereign virtue to have found defense for my imbe^:
but now alas, I find all to be contrary and clean changed from my
expectation. What, will you give remedy unto your sorrow and grief, with that
which will redound much to my barme? Will you first serve your own turn and
accomplish your own desire, without any consideration of my highness and
honesty, the which if you did bear good will and love, as you do publish, you
would never procure so great harm unto me, for it should be more grief unto
thee the sorrow that I should receive, then thy own grief: neither should you
receive any joy in that, which should cause in me grief. (...) and knight of
the Sun, that I hau^ not my self in so little estimation, that you should
think that my love were so base to cause such desires, nor the desires so
mortal that should cause unto you pain, but rather I do think that things
above nature do cause ne pain unto men, having want thereof: So likewise my
high and royal estate accompanied with sovereign beauty should be to you
holden as a thing above nature, so by that means you should not have the pain
and grief which you publish, neither for to seek and procure such unseemly
remedy, I will not enlarge any farther herein, for that I am angry, and with
anger ought little to be spoken, and especially with friends. It is sufficient
good knight of the Sun, that I do love you more then my self, and when time
does serve I will do that which love and reason does bind me, that shall be
at such time as we shall come unto the gran Tartaria, by the Emperor my
father, and all those mighty kings and lords of his court, with great (...),
equal unto your highness, our marriage shall be (...), and in the mean time
have patience and bridle your own (...) and affections, and do not loose the
glory of your great and mighty deeds, in being vanquished by your own
affection, for as the victory is greater that a man does get of himself, so
much greater is the victory when he does overcome his own will, for to that
which reason does deny, and a greater shame when that by a base knight he is
overcome, for that the first is, for the lack which is of virtue and of the
person, for so much as they did not lack force and strength for to make
resistance, and secondly, the lack was in nature, for that it gave him no more
strength for to defend himself.

And heerewith the princes made an end of her reasoning, being somewhat mo^ed,
her redicond color apeered, signifying that pure anger was the occasion
thereof. Whose words took so great effect in the knight of the Sun that one way
it did grieve him very much, for that he had declared unto her his des^re, and
otherwise the great majesty and highness of the princess, was so augmented in
his love, that he did love, her much more from that day forwards then before,
and asking pardon of her, he kissed her hands perforce. At this time Arcadia,
was not so far of, but that she did understand part of their communication,
for that at all times when she saw the knight of the Sun and the princes
Lindabrides all alone, she straight ways procured to put her self in place
whereas she might hear what passed between them, and having very well
understood what passed, it did grieve bir very much, for the great sorrow which
the princess Claridiana would receive when she should understand the truth
thereof, especially seeing it is a thing that may be held, for that according as
she did understand, that they two had great good will to be married at such
time as they came unto the gran Tartaria, and so dissembling her grief in the
best wise she could, she tarried and did abide the time, that fortune would
ordain therein.

So at this time, being three days after their departure toward the port
whereas they did imbarke themselves, they did ariue at the port of ^enedon, hard
by that place whereas there was wont to be the great City of Troy, where they
went a land, and by her giants were taken out of the ship of the triumphant
chariot, and placing themselves in order with sovereign majesty as before,
they began to take their journey by land, and they had not well ^rauailed full
two hours, when that they saw before them, a very high and well ^owred
Castle, situated at the foot of a Bridge. So when they came nigh unto it,
they saw that the River was so deep, that of force they must pass over the
Bridge with the Chariot, which had breadth enough for the same. And as yet
the Unicornes were scarce entered upon the Bridge, when that there came forth
out of the Castle a Knight armed with very rich and substantial armor, and
mounted upon a great horse, who was so great and so well made, that in all
their lines they hadd^ not (...), so great and well proportioned a knight. Who
when he came nigh unto them, he lifted up his beuer and said. Lords you shall
understand that the passage over the bridge is defended by me, against all
knights, that presumes to pass this way, except first they do leave here
their shields, and their names written thereupon, in confessing themselves to be
over come by the troyan Oristedes. And seeing the great majesty of your
coming, it does give me occasion to give you better entertainment then I
accustom to do. For that you shall understand the ancient custom of this
bridge, and likewise the bondage wherein I am bound, for the defense and keeping
here of, is, that I must show no courtesy to any knight that here passes.
The knight of the Sun was very much troubled, as well at the good disposition
of Oristedes, as at his gentle speech and great courtesy: and being very
desirous to know more of him he said. Sir knight I do give you great thanks
for your good will and courtesy showed unto us, and for that you shall not
break any custom that has been so long kept at this bridge, I will do what
does lie in me, for to make the passage ^ree for us. And when I can do no
more, then will I do that the which I am constrained unto by force.

But yet of courtesy I require you sir knight tell me what is the occasion
that you do call your self troyan, and wherefore do you keep and defend the
custom at this bridge. For that according unto the long time that is past
since that this city of Troy was destroyed by the greeks, I do believe that
there is no knight that does remain, that is of the trojans blood. I will tell
you, said Oristedes, for that you have so great desire to know it. And I do
marvel that you cannot beeleeue this which I have said, for that all those
that has not been accustomed to come this ways, are likewise deceived, for
that the ancient writers, never wrote of that which I will show you. You shall
understand gentle Knight, that at such time as this great city of Troy, was
bes^eged by the greeks, there came in the aid and succor of the king
Priamus, queen of the Amazons, named Pantasilla, who having heard many times
in her own Country to praise and extol the great strength and valiantness
of Hector, more for his love then for any zeal she had to defend Troy, she
came together with very many people of her for to see him and in the time of
that siege, the queen declared unto Hector the great love she bare unto him,
and he who was no less affectioned unto her granted her all that ever she
would demand, so that the queen was begotten with child by Hector, and was
delivered of a son whom they called Pireo, the troyan, who very secretly and
not known to any body, was given unto a nurse borne in that city, to be
brought up as her own child. So after the death of king Priamus and all his
sons, and the destruction of the city, there remained certain citizens of a
base sort, such as ye greeks made no account of, amongst whom it chanced the
nurse who brought up Pireo was one of them, who knowing whose son he was, did
bring him up with great care, till such time as he was a man, and by nature he
was inclined to the exercise of arms, so he gave himself only thereunto, and
had delight in no other thing, and for that it was manifest unto him whose
son he was, for to sustain some memory of the city of Troy, and of his
father, he caused this bridge to be made, and this castle, and ordained a
custom that no knight might pass that way, but first to combatte with him and
to leave herein his shield and his name, saying that he was overcome by him,
and in the time of his life he overcame so many knights, that they are without
number, and when he died he left beehinde him a young son, and commanded
that all those that did descend from him, should maintain that custom, which
of long time has been maintained at that bridge, so that all those which have
succeeded in this Country from him until this time, has maintained and kept
that order and custom, and has overcome so great a number of knights, that in
all that great forest which you do see, there is no room almost to hang
their sheel^es. And in saying these words, he showed unto the^ the forest,
whose trees were all full of sheelds, which did hang upon the boughs and
branches, some of them were glistering, and other some with great antiquity
had lost their colors, and there were so many of them, that without great
difficulty they could not be told, and proceeding forwards, Oristedes said:
This is the occasion why and wherefore this custom is kept and maintained at
this bridge. And I will keep and defend the same so long as I do live, for
that my lineall descent does come from that noble stock of Pireo, and his
father Hector, and for that there has remained no other remembrance of Troy,
this shall remain for a memory of the noble blood that was there spilt.

The knight of the Sun rejoiced very much at that which Oristedes had told him,
and did esteem him little for that he came of that royal blood of Troy, and
seemed unto him according to his disposition, that he could not but be like in
valiantnes unto his predecessors, and giving him great thanks for that which
he had told him of his life and custom, he said unto him: Well gentle knight,
seeing it is so that you cannot choose but keep and maintain this your
custom, neither I nor all these that do come with me cannot pass this
bridge without making battle, or else to return again the way which we have
come. Let us if you please, procure to do all that in us does lie, and unto him
that does lack fortune, let him do all that the other does command. And in
saying these words the knight of the Sun descended out of the chariot and
commanding his horse to be brought forth, he mounted upon him, and with his
spear in his hand he went and put himself at the entry of the bridge, of the
which Oristedes was very much amazed, and seeing him coming with so great
majesty, and in the company of so fair a damsel, he did verily believe him
to be some knight of high estate, and of great bount^e of arms, and although
he was a very valiant knight his mighty demeanor did not cause in him any
faintnes, and although he had had perfect intelligence that he had been the most
valiantest knight in all the world, yet he had no doubt to combat with him, for
that he had kept and maintained that bridge more then eight years, in which
time he had overcome more then one thousand knights, yet he never met with
knight that by very much might compare himself with him.

And then with as valiant a courage as appertayned unto his progeny, he went
and put himself right against the knght of the Sun, and both of them at one
time did broach their horses with their spurs, and with so great fury, that the
bridge seemed to be ouerthorwen, and both the Knights to be on fire, with the
great quantity of sparks that came forth of that paued pauement, and in the
midst of the bridge they made their encounter in such sort, that their spears
were she uered all to pieces, and they passed the one by the other as though
they had done nothing, and with a trise they turned about their horses with
their swoords in their hands they assalted one another, and the first blows
that were stricken, it seemed that all that valley was full of the sound
thereof, being st^iken upon their inchaunted healmes, whereas all those were
executed, and being nothing amazed nor astonished therewith, but with great furye
and wrath^ulnesse they did assalt each other with their sound blows, and being
meruailous^ie ouercharged with the great force of them, it made them to decli^e
their heads to their breasts, so that either of them did feel the great force
of his a^uersarye, and Oristedes said unto himself, that never in all the
days of his life did he combat with a more valiaunter and worthyer Knight,
but being determined to give to understand his great force and strength,
without any fear or dread, he beeganne to charge the knight of the Sun with
his terrible blows, and with so great force and strength, that he made him to
bestur himself from the one part to the other, because that he should not
fasten a full blow upon him, and this valiant knight of the Sun said unto
himself, that not without just cause and great reason the fame of that worthy
Hector endured so long in the world, and now proving that knight, who does
proceed of that anc^ent stock, he does find him, and do believe that there is
not a more valianter knight then he is to be found in all the world, and seeing
that it was necessary and stood him upon to use against him all his power and
strength, he presently charged him with his mighty and furious blows. So
these two worthy knights endured in their battle more then one hour without
ceasing or taking any breath, but breaking their shields and tearing of their
shirts ^f maile that was so fine, sustaining the terrible blows of^th other,
and by reason of the great goodness and finenesse of their armor and helmes,
their furious swoords could not execute any wound, yet for all that their flesh
and bones were all (...), and many times they brought each other out of all
r^membrance, and seeing that their battle endured very long, without
acknowledging any advantage between them. The princess Lindabrides was very
much amazed, likewise all the ladies and the damsels, and giants that were with
her, and (...)* O^istedes for an extreme and valiant knight, that so long did
sustain himself against the fury of the knight of the Sun. Now was it almost
two hours that these two valiant knights were in their battle, when that
the knight of the Sun with very much shame and anger, for that the battle
endured so long before the princess, and with one alone knight, with both his
hands he stroke such a blow at Oristedes, upon his fine and enchanted helm,
that the ^ound thereof was heard throughout all that valley and forest, and
endured a good space, and made him to fall forwards upon his saddle bow out of
all remembrance, and his horse carried him along the bridge till he came unto
the Castle gate, whereas he stayed till such time as Oristedes came again unto
himself, very much tormented with the force of that mighty blow, and all his
face beerayed with blood, and ran out at his nose and mouth, and when he saw
himself in that case, with more fury then ever he was in all his life, he
set spurs unto his horse, and made him to run toward he Knight of the Sun
with more fury then his weariness would well consent, and with his sword in
both his hands he stroke him such a terrible blow upon his fine enchanted
helm, in such sort, that if his swerd had not somewhat glaunced, upon his
shoulder, it would have put him in great peril, for that the fury of that blow
was such, that the knight of the Sun had fallen from his horse to the ground,
if he had not embraced himself about his horse neck, and was so greatly amazed
at the great force and strength o^ Oristedes, that he said unto himself.

Oh valiant and famous Greeks, such as were joined together at the siege of
this great City of Troy, with how great reason, (above all things the which
does happen in this world) ought you to be honored and praised, for that you
did not alone resist the great force of the Sons of Priamus, but also you did
destroy and overthrow all his generation, with all the whole power of the
Troyans: Oh Achilles that Captain of Greece, with what reason can I name my
self and say, that I do proceed of the noble blood, from whence my father
the Emperor does descend for that it was not unto thee so much reproach the
blows of that stout warrior, the first begotten of Priamus, as are unto me the
blows of this knight, who does descend of his lineage. And of truth I do say,
that if of this reproach I do not revenge my self, I do pretend never
hereafter to name my self for a Breeke. And in saying these words the fury
which he had was so great, that he hasted with great speed toward the
valiant Oristedes, who being not very well experienced with such like force,
did abide his coming, and with both his hands he stroke him such an
overthwart blow upon his strong and inchaunted healme, that he made it to fly
of his head, and so unarmed he fell from his horse to the ground, so far out of
remembrance and from himself, that he could not arise up again, till such
time as the Knight of the Sun did alight from his horse, and did help him.
And when that he had received air, he came again unto himself, and the
Knight of the Sun took up his helm, and gave it unto the knight, saying:
Gentill knight take unto you armor, and do not loose by their ^ack, that
which your great bounty does assure you. Then Oristedes, when he saw the great
courtesy of the Knight of the Sun, he threw his sword unto the ground, and
said. My gods will not consent, for so much as I do lack Fortune, for to
defend my self, that I do let to acknowledge, that I am by you overcome. It
is sufficient gentill knight that you have overcome me in battle of arms,
and not now to overcome me in courtesy.

Then the valyant and worthy Knight of the Sun) wh^ had no good will to
combat with him any more) being very joyful, he went unto him saying: Happy
art thou gentill knight, that your deeds do give to understand of your
descent, from that noble and valiant Knight Hector. For as there does remain
in you force and strength of arms, so is there no lack of virtue in you. I am
he that is overcome, and he has the victory that will not that our battle
should proceed any further. And in saying these words the two knights did
embrace one another. And the knight of the Sun at the request of Oristedes did
tell him who he was, ^ knowing the same, at that time he did discemble, a
maruailous dolor and grief the which he received at his heart. And did
complain very much against his gods, for that they seemed to be so favorable
unto the Greeks against the Troyans. So likewise when that he did know who the
Princess Lindabrides was, he went unto her, and making a great reverence, he
would have kissed her hands, for that he did know her in the court of the
Emperor her father, and was two years in the same court, whereas he did so
high feats of knighthood, that he was esteemed to be one of the best knigh^s
in all his own country, and likewise in the gran Tartaria, and for that he
was so great a friend unto the Prince Meridian, he did not combat with him
about his demand, and if that Oristedes would have remained and abode in the
court of the Emperor Alicandro, he would have made him a mighty Lord, but
understanding the death of his father, and for to maintain that custom, he
returned unto Troy, whereas hard by the bridge there was a little City, to the
number of two thousand households, and inhabited by the descent of such as
remained at the destruction of the great city of the Trojans, and likewise
unto such Gieekes whom the country did like well. Now to return unto the
purpose, then did the Princess receive Oristedes with great love, and said: Is
it true my friend, will you thus entreat us in your own Country, we would
not use you in this sort in Tartaria, if we had you there. Sovereign
Princess, said Oristedes may it please your highness to pardon and forgive
me this error, for that my duty in the which I was bound by mine ancestors
to maintain this custom, as also lack of knowing you, was the occasion that
I have committed this ouer-sight, and for that Oristedes did know of the
demand that the Prince Meridian did bring out of his country, he demanded of
the Princess for him. And she told him how that the Knight of the Sun had
battle with him, and of all that passed betwixt them both. The which when
Oristedes understood, he did comfort himself very much, for that it seemed
unto him to be no reproach, for to be overcome by so valiant a knight, by whom
Meridian was first overcome, who thought that there was not a knight in all the
world that could match him. So receiving great contentment for the acknowledge
of the Princess, as also to know that she should be married to so valiant a
knight, with great joy and pleasure he said. For that which unto so high a
princess as you are is due, I think it is no reason that in this sort alone you
should enter into the gran Cataia, whereas are assembled ye mightiest lords in
the world, in the emperors court, therefore if you please I will go before, and
carry them the news of your coming, that they may receive you, as your high
estate does deserve, for that I am sure that the Emperor will be as glad as
ever he was in all his life with the news, and I shall receive great
contentment to find my self present in the Court of the Emperor Alycandro,
at the celebrating of so high a marriage, and at the great triumphs and feasts
as shall be there made, as also for my bounden duty, for the great good will
which always the Emperor bare unto me. The Knight of the Sun would very
feign have disturbed the voyage of Oristedes, for to have excused the great
travail which he should receive in that journey, for that it was very long,
and needs must pass through very strange Countries, but he offered this with
so great good will, that it did profit nothing all that ever he could do for
to disturb him of his journey. So for that day they all went unto the City,
whereas they were meruailously well received, and were served of al things very
abundantly. Then the knight of the Sun lookeing out of a high window of the
palace, he saw pieces of walls and towers of old antiquity, which was a
memory of the great City of Troy, and round about the same the wide and broad
fields, whose sight caused the tears to fall from his eyes, when he remembered
the great number of worthy knights, as well Greeks as Troyans that were there
slain, and beehoulding the great circuit thereof, which did extend from the
one side unto the other four miles, and the smalnesse of the City at that
present, and the great demonstration of towers and other mighty building, he
said within himself: Oh weak, miserable, and feeble life of man, what
confidence or security can mortal men have in the great riches and pomp of
this world, considering with great attention the sudden and uncertain mouings
and changes of humane things, and how suddenly they are overcome and destroyed.
Who had seen the great city of Troy compassed about with so strong walls, and
fortified with so high and great towers, and furnished with sumptuous
buildings, full of people, governed by so mighty a King, and defended by so
famous captains, who had known the King Priamus, Lord over the principal
regions Orientalls and Meridionalls, of the great Asia. Who had seen his
mighty power, his great riches, his pride and high estate, the great number of
vassalls and subjects, the worthiness of his Captains, the singular force and
strength of his sons, and all these upon a sudden and unlooked for, the great
City of Troy destroyed and beaten down, their strong walls overthrown, with
their towers, their mighty palaces and buildings flat upon the ground, King
Priamus and his sons gored to death, Hector drawn about the field, Policena
her throat cut, the Queen stoned to death, Andromica, with the notable Matrons
of Troy defiled, the whole City destroyed, the Citizens (...), and their
wives, and widows banished from their natural Country, with their young
sons in their arms, dispearsed throughout the world. all is lost and all is
go^e, and no memory left, but that which is for a farther grief, in
remembering that which is past, leaving beehi^de that which does give us
continual sorrow and grief, and considering thereof, it does make us greatly
to mernayle, in seeing how that fortune sometimes does exalt us aloft, and at
other times does throw us down, tossing us this way and that way, like a
tennis ball. Now I know of a truth, that with great reason the Mariners does
call ^he tempest, Fortune, and not without great occasion wise ^en does say,
that it is very troublesome to suffer prospe^itie, and that it is requist for
to learn to suffer the a^undaunce of Fortune, for as that wise Poet Lirico
says, (...) the high and mighty Pine Trees are oftenest beaten (...)
tormented with the winds, and the highest Towers (...) the greatest falls, and
on the high mountains and (...) does the thunderbolts commonly strike. It is
said (...) the humane highness of it self, is unquiet and with security,
for that there is nothing that can be so secret, (...) it comes to be
discovered, as care, travail, envy, (...) fear, weeping, and in the end
death. And likewise I do now know to be true, that how happy so ever the
beeginning is, the end is uncertain and doubtful, for that all humane things
do turn about like a wheel, and after a quiet and calm Sea, follows
tempests and troubled waters, and after a clear morning a clowdie evening.
Therefore comfort your selves you Greeks and Troyans, that have been banished
in these fields of Troy, for that the fame of your mighty deeds is out of
the subjection of Fortune, and it cannot be that by her you be overthrown so
long as the world endure. In saying these and many other words the knight of
the Sun remained a good while at the same window, with great sorrow and
grief which the remembrance of all those things did cause unto him. So night
drew on, and every one went to take their rest, and after that they had stayed
there two days, the knight Oristedes took his leave of them, and took in his
company two Pages, and departed out of the City, and took his journey
toward the gran Cataia, and gran Tartaria, unto the court of the Emperor
Alycandro, which was in the gran Cataia. So that at this present the History
does leave him with the Knight of the Sun and the Princess Lindabrides, till
time serves.

How Rosicleer and the king Sacridoro came into England, and what happened with
them there. Chapter 56.
MAny days travailed Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro toward the kingdom of
England with so great desire to find themselves there that Rosicleer did
thin^ke eue^y day to be (...) whole year, and passed through many countries
whereas happened unto them many and (...) things worthy to be kept in memory.
Yet the history does let them pass for shortning of time. But in the end of
much travail, they came unto a port haven of Holand, whereas they found a ship
that was ready to depart for England. And being very glad, for that they found
so good opportunity, they entered into the said ship, wherein they found many
Ladies and damsels, accompanied with certain knights, who declared that they
went unto the City of London, unto certain triumphs and feasts which was made
at ye marriage of the Princess Oliuia, with the Prince of Lusitania, for that
in many (...) bordering there about, it was commanded to be (...). (...) when
Rosicleer heard that, he was very much (...), not knowing what it should
mean, but the damsel, (...)* who did very well know the determined will of the
Pri^cesse, did straight way fall in the reckoning thereof, * (...). ^ir knight
fear not, and do not dismay your self, for without all doubt there is no
other thing in this matter (...) be (...), but this which I will tell you: and
is, that ^he prince (...) Siluerio, has very much importuned the king (...)
this marriage. And he seeing the great necessity that (...) in, for to
maintain these wars against the (...) Trebatio, and having need of his aid
and help, will (...) unto him his daughter in marriage, although it be against
her will. But this one thing you shall understand (...) me to be for
certain, and to build upon the Princess ^liuia, that at such time as her
father will compel her to do (...) thing perforce, that first she will kill
her own self, the^ (...) unto the same. And so it ^ell out true, as the
damsel ^elia, d^d conjecture, for that the sorrow and pain of the ^nce Don
Siluerio, did so much increse, seeing the little good ^ll that the Princess
Oliuia did bear unto him: upon a (...) such time as the King was occupied in
preparing ^ldiers in a readiness, and other things necessary and con^ient for
the wars, the Prince finding him self all (...) with him, be said: That
for so much as it was not (...) unto him, of his promise made, to give (...)
the Princess Oliuia, for his wife, he destred him for to accomplish the same,
and to give her unto him for his spouse, if he would that he should perform
that which he had promised him, of people for the wars, for that to the
contrary he would return again into his own Country with his Knights.
Then when the King saw with what determined will he spoke unto him, he was
very sorrowful for the same, and remained a good space without making him
any auns were, in which time he remembered how many and sundry times he had
procured that marriage of his daughter, and like wise how often he had
importuned her for the same, who always did apart her self by diverse
excuses, as though she had no great desire thereunto. So that if he should
grant unto the Princes desire, it must of force be done contrary and against
the will of his daughter, wherein he did hope of no good success of that
Marryage to be done against her will, for that in such cases the principal to
be considered amongst men, as well in high estate, as in meaner sort, is to
understand the good will (...) their daughters, for that only in them does
consist the forc^ of Matrimony. And if there be lacking this point therein
they may better say that it is violence then Marriage. An^ again, the wound in
his heart was so fresh for the death (...) the Prince Edward his son, that
he little esteemed to (...) uenture his estate and life, for to be revenged
for the sam^ and as these grievous passions after that once they be (...) ted
in man, does shut up all their senses and understanding that they cannot have
any judgment within themselves to consider any thing with reason: Even so the
(...) grief which the King conceived for the death of his son did so shut up
his understanding, that he desired no (...) thing but reuengement. So he
determined for to force (...) constrain his Daughter unto that Marriage, only
for satisfy his appetite and evil desire, not having before (...) eyes,
neither consideration that after that all should be nished and done, according
as he would have it, that (...) son should remain d^ad, and his daughter
lost and (...) away, for that he married her against her will, and (...)
seeing that if he should deny to accomplish his promise unto the prince, he
would return again into his own country with all his people, and without him
he could not do that which he so greatly does desire. So after a while that he
was trobled with these thoughts, he returned unto the prince and said: Worthy
prince of Lusitania, if I have withdrawn my self in giving you my daughter to
wife (according as you have demanded her of me) do not you think that it
has been neglected, or that there has lacked in me any good will, for that
rather more then you I do desire the same, but the detraction hereof has been
for two causes, the one, in part of my daughter, for that she is young and
tender of age, she has no good will to be married so soon, the other, in
consideration of the great wars which we do look for and the great have that
we do make for the same, I would that first all these wars should be fi^ished
and made an end of, and then afterward with a great deal more quietness
should your marriage be celebrated with that honor and highness as is requisite
unto so high princes. But now seeing it is so that you cannot suffer so long
delay, I will accomplish and perform all your request, and (...) promise you to
give you my daughter for wife, and will diliuer her unto you as I have
promised, before these wars begin, and I will at the celebrating of this
marriage (for that the princess is the only heir unto these kingdoms) that
t^er be made great and solemn feasts, and that it be proclaimed in all the
kingdoms and provinces joining heereabouts, for that this day two moonths I
will have it agreed and concluded.

Wherae the prince Don Siluerio was very glad and joyful, thy force did kiss
the kings hands, and offered unto him all his knights, and his estate, at all
times when he would command them, then the prince did take his leave of the
king, and straight ways it was known throughout all the city, and the feasts
were proclaimed. But when the news came to the ears of (...) Oliuia, her
sorrow and grief was so great, that many times she was at the point of death,
and was fully determined within her self, that at such time as her Father
would use that force unto her, that first before she would consent there unto
she would kill her self. Then the king knowing her will and mind to be
contrary unto his pretense, commanded her to be put into a tower, and alonely
in the company of her damsels, and commanded that none should either see or
speak with her, believing that thereby she would reclaim her self, and yield
unto his request. In the mean time the prince Don Siluerio made ready and put
in order all that was requisite and needful for those feasts, with so great
expenses, and now inuentio^s, as never the like has be^ seen, for that this
was one of the most riches princes in all the world, and had brought with him
more then fifty thousand knights into England, and amongst them were such,
that they thought that in all the world was not their equals. These were the
great triumphs and fea^ts that were told unto Rosicleer and the king Sacridoro
in the ship whereas they came passengers, all the which they belee^ed to be as
Fidelia had told unto them, and with the great desire that Rosicleer had to
meet with Don Siluerio, he thought to be very slow the swift course and
sailing of the ship, as though she did not move out of the place. So in this
sort the ship did nauigate a leaven days, in the end whereof they arrived in a
port of Scotland, which was a province of England, and disi^barking themselves
they gave great thanks unto them which came with them in the ship, for their
good conversation, they took their leave of them and departed all alone, and
it was consented between them that Fidelia should go before, and give
understanding unto the princess Oliuia of their coming, and afterward
finding her conformable unto their will, they would determine what was best to
be done.

How Fidelia went to the Prince Oliuia, and gave her understanding of the
coming of Rosicleer. Chapter. 57.
AS you have heard before, it was concluded between the two knights that
Fidelia should go before unto the City of London, for to carry news unto the
princess Oliuia of the coming of Rosicleer, and to understand the estate of
all things. So she took her leave of them and departed on her tourney, and
they two remained in a monestary of religious men, which was four miles from
London in great confusion, not knowing how to determine themselves in these
matters, that they stood them so much upon, seeing with what great have they
did provide all things necessary for those triumphs and feasts, and the
celebrating of ye marriage of the princess Oliuia, for that within four days
the time would* be expired of the two months which were appointed as it was
told the^ of many that they ouertoke going unto the triumphs. And Rosicleer
hearing the same, was so full of anguish in heart, that he seemed like a fool,
furious and from himself, and would neither eat nor drink, neither all that
ever the king Sacridoro could say or do, was sufficient for to appease him,
and many times he did arm himself and would have taken his horse for to go
and seek the prince Don Siluerio, and wheresoever he had found him, to have
sl^ine him, but by the great wisdom and government of the king, by force and
against his will he did stay and detain him, always putting before him the
ill success that would proceed in doing the same, and how that he might
therein bring himself into a marvelous perplexity, and be an occasion that
the princess Oliuia shall be put whereas he shall never see her. Likewise yt
he should consider how Fidelia was gone to speak with the princes Oliuia, and
that it was not good till such time as she had sent her answer, and given us
to understand her purpose, not to give any attempt. With which p^rswasions
Rosicleer stai^d himself, although very sorrowful, and without any
contentment, or hope of remedy. He did abide the return of Fidelia, and the
answer she should bring from her lady the princess. Who when she came unto
the city of London, she went unto the great pallas whereas she found not the
princes, but it was told her* how that the king had commanded her to be carried
into a strong tower, whereas no body could neither see her, nor speak with her,
but only two damsels, who did serve her, and without opening any door, to any
body all such things as was necessary for her, was drawn up at a window. This
tower was situated, upon a high rock, very strong, and nygh unto a very broad
and deep river, and walled round about. And the king kept the keys thereof,
for that he would that none should enter in thereat for to visit the Princes,
for that she seeing her self so solitary, and in so great straightnes, would
be the occasion, that she would yield her self unto marriage, and to do all
that the kings pleasure was to command her, although it were all only for to
be clear of so straight and solitary life. So when Fidelia, came unto the
gates of the tower, and saw that they were shut, she knocked at a ring that
hong thereat, till such time, as a damsel whom she did know very will, did
look out at a window: who when she knew Fidelia, being very much amazed to see
her, she said. What has been become of you my sister Fidelia, that in so long
time, you have not come to visit the princes our mistress, for that your
absence has grieved her very much, and has thought long for your coming. To
whom Fidelia, answered and said, my good friend I have been all this time in
Scotland in my mothers house, for that I was very sick, and till now she would
never let me depart from her. Then the other damsel said, if you do mean to
come in hither, you must go unto the king, for that he has the keys of the
tower. Then Fidelia very heavy when she heard these news she would stay there
no longer, but went unto the kings pallas. And entering into his chamber,
finding him all alone, she kneeled down before him, and kis^ed his hands.

Then the king when he knew her, he was very glad and joyful of her coming,
and said, my friend Fidelia, where have you ben so long, that you have not come
to see us: unto whom she said, in Scotland with my parents, and here I do
desire your highness to pardon me. For that, and by reason of a great
infirmity which my father had, was the occasion that I have deteyned my self
so long, and have not come to acknowledge my duty and service unto the
princess my lady and mistress. Thou art welcome said the king, and here I
do desire thee, to go and see the princess, and to declare unto her the
great benefit which will come unto her, in taking for husband, the prince Don
Siluerio. And there the king did declare unto her all that was appointed to be
done, for that he had her in reputation for her gravity, and wisdom, and
thought that the Princess would give more credit unto her words, then unto any
other. Then Fidelia, who made a very good semblance, showing that all that was
done, did seem very well, and that the king had great reason therein: did
promise unto him, to te^l and persware the princess in such sort, that she
would make to remove her purpose Then the king gave the keys of the tower,
unto one of his privy chamber, and commanded him to go with Fidelia, and to
open the gates of the tower, and bring Fidelia (...), and to lock the gates
again, and to bring him the keys. So Fidelia did take her leave of the king,
and went with the knight unto the tower, whereas the gates were opened, and she
being within, they were shut again, and the keys brought to the king. Then
Fidelia, went up into the tower, unto the chamber of her lady and mistress,
who having news of her entering into the tower, did abide her coming, in so
great confusion and sorrow, as ever she was in all her life, suspecting the
news to be very evil that Fidelia should bring her. And being in her chamber
all alone, faining not to be very well, whereby she might the better
understand of Fidelia the whole effect of her message. Who so soon as she
entered into the chamber, she kneeled down before her, and did kiss her
hands, at which time the princess had no power to speak unto her, she was so
suddenly taken, and pinched at her heart, misdoubting her embassage, but after a
while coming again unto her self, as though she had awaked out of a dream
or sound sleep, and seeing in presence an other damsel, who at the same
instance, entered in she said. Thou art welcome my Fidelia, tell me how thy
mother does who has been the occasion of thy so long tarying there. Ah my good
lady, said Fidelia, my mother has lien so sick, that a thousand times I
thought she would have died, and although that I would many times before, have
departed to have come hither, yet would she never consent thereunto, till now
that thanks be unto God she does remain very well. I am very glad thereof,
said the Princess, although I have thought long for your coming. And in
saying these words the other damsel went forth, and Fidelia, did shut the
door after her, so that the princes, and Fidelia remained all alone. And
seeing that she would give her news of her embassage, she was again so
suddenly taken that she had no heart to hear her, but looked so pale, as though
she had been dead, trembling with all her body and flesh, as though she had been
afraid to hear what Fidelia would say. Who with a gentle laughter to see the
princes in that case, she said. If the strange countries, high ways,
mountains, and desolat places, in the which I have travailed and the troubles
which I have suffered, and the great perils in the which I have seen my
self, were manifest unto you (my lady and mistress) then do I will believe
that you should be satisfied, of the great love, and good will, that your
Fidelia, has to serve you. How oftentimes in the cruel teeth, and unmerciful
nails of furious beasts, did I think to be torn all to pieces, finding my
self all alone in the deserts of Siria, and inhabited Petrea. How many times
in the high towers and rolling mountains of sand, have I ben delivered, out of
the deserts of Africa, and how many tunes has mine honor put been to sale,
and I to be lost in so many strange countries, in the which I have passed, and
fallen into the power of monstrous and strange kind of people, and of different
manners and customs, I have found and seen my self in all these perils and
dangers, and God has brought me out and delivered me from all these
tribulations, and in the end of all, when I was past all hope to find out him
that I sought, and at such time as my honor was in the greatest peril to be
lost, and being carried prisoner with my hands bound, in the power of the most
euillest knight yt ever human nature framed, and so valiant in arms, that
all the whole empire of Russia did fear and tremble at him, then did god aid
and help me, by meeting of that happy and fortunate Knight, he who never in the
world was borne the like, for refuge and defense of damsels, he who had
travailed and wandered throughout all the world, accomplishing the banishment
that by you was commanded him, whose life was as a fantasy unto his soul,
with more desire of death then to live, his fortune at this time did bring him,
whereas without knowing me he slew that evil knight that carried me prisoner,
with other damsels the which he had taken, and after that he had s^aine him,
coming for to set us at liberty, he straight ways knew me, and calling to
his remembrance that cruel sentence of yours the which I carried unto him, and
delivered after that out of the like peril he had delivered me, his grief was
such in his heart, that for the space of two hours we had him for dead, at
which time if the letter of your succor had not ben presented unto him, I
believe he would there have ended his days. To conclude, he read your letter,
and there with received so great joy, that he seemed to be transported into
another world and of truth my lady, you may believe, that according unto the
sorrowful life which he has lead, and the over much troubles which he has
passed for your occasion, that now he is as one restored from death to life, he
is come with me, and has brought with him that worthy king Sacridoro, he who
many times you have heard tell, did launch himself into the fountain of the
Savages after him, so that they are now the greatest friends in the world.

They are altogether, and ^oo remain in a place four miles from hence,
tarrieng to know what your pleasure is to command them. The princes was so
attentive unto that which her damsel told, that when she had made an end of
her tale, with the great joy which she received, the tears ran down her fair
cheeks, and felt within her heart so marvelous pleasure and sovereign
contentment, that she found her self clean changed from that she was wont to
be, in such sort that she had no tongue to speak unto Fidelia, neither did she
remember to make her answer, for that all her senses were occupied in thinking
on Rosicleer, not beeleeuing to receive so great a benefit as to see him. Then
Fidelia seeing her in that case, to ^e her by the hands, and bringing her to
remembrance, she said: Lady, why do not you answer me, and give me thanks
for this security which I have done, for I perceive that now I have
accomplished and brought to pass all that you so much desired, you make no
account of me: Ab Fidelia, said the princes, my heart is full of anguish and
grief, that I cannot comprehend so great a benefit which God does show unto
me, only in that I know that Rosicleer is alive, and if he did come see me,
having my perfect remembrance, my pleasure and contented joy should be such,
that in all things I should think my self happy, if death did take me in
Rosicleers arms. Lady, said Fidelia, let all such matters pass, and let us
be diligent in that which is most convenient to reserne the life of you and
Rosicleer, and to make all things sure for that which is to come, for with
death you can put small remedy in that which is past. Ah my Fidelia, said the
Princess, one evil being past, another is come, do you not see this my
close keeping, and how fast my Father has me in this tower, that of a
thousand other damsells I cannot be seen. And above all this, he has
promised unto Don Siluerio, that within these four days, he will marry me
unto him, and deliver me in his power, to lead my life with him, therefore my
good friend, imagine with your self what is best to be done, in this my great
trouble, for that I know not what I should say. Fidelia likewise was at her
wits end, not knowing what was best to be done, for that the tower whereas
they were was so strong, and the windows of so great height, that it was not
possible for any to enter into the tower, except it were by the gate. So that
both of them passed away the day in great confusion, and likewise the night,
without sleeping any whit at all, but talking and imagining what was best to
be done, in that so dangerous and perilous a case.

How Fidelia departed from the Court, and went to speak with rosicleer at the
Monastery, whereas she left him. Chapter 58.
WHen the next morning was come, Fidelia said unto the princess, that
forasmuch as beetwixt them two they could find no remedy how and by what
means Rosicleer might come and speak with her, that if it were her pleasure
she would go unto the place whereas she left them, and see if they could
determine some means for to disturb this that the king did determine to do
with Don Siluerio, and set her at liberty out of that secret bondage. The which
counsel seemed very good unto the Princess and commanded her presently to
go forth and put it in ure. But how is it possible to go forth, the king
having ye keys of the tower? Fear not for this said Fidelia, for I have good
remedy for the same. And in saying this she went unto a window, and seeing an
ancient man that passed up and down, and calling him unto her, she bad him to
come nigh unto the tower, and said unto him: Good man, for gods love I do
desire thee to do so much for me, as to go unto the king, and to tell him that
Fidelia the damsel of the Princess Oliuia, would speak with him about
certain matters which does accomplish very much her highness, and that I
would desire him to command the gate of the tower to be opened that I may
come forth. This ancient man took his leave of her, and promised to perform
her request* So he went unto ye king, and declared the message of Fidelia, who
when he heard it was very glad and joyful, beeleeuing that it was concerning
that which he had said unto her, and delivered the keys unto his chamberlain,
who was a very honest old man, and commanded him to go and to open the tower
gate, that Fidelia might come out. Then the chamberlain did as he was
commanded, and Fidelia took her leave of the Princess and went unto the king,
and taking him on the one side somewhat a part, she said: Soueraigns Lord, you
shall understand that I have got the victory of the princess, and she says,
that seeing it is your pleasure she is very well content to marry with the
prince Don Siluerio, and if she has not hitherto consented, the occasion has been her young and tender age, and also considering the great wars which is
looked for, she knew not how God would dispose with her husband, for that he
is a young and very courageous, by reason whereof he would put himself whereas
should be the greatest peril and danger. At which words the king received so
great contentment, that he said unto Fidelia. There is nothing in the world
that does so much content me* for to marry her against her will, would be a
gri^uous corsiue unto my heart, and therewith he cast his arms about her neck,
and embraced her, and gave her great thanks for her travail therein, and
promised her for her pains taken, to marry her very honorably. If it please
your highness, said Fidelia, the Princess my Lady wills me to go unto the
Monastery of Nuns, that is twelve miles from this City, to comm^aund them to
make certain works which she has great need of. Let it be done in Gods
name said the King, go thy ways and God send thee good speed. And heerwith
Fidelia took her leave of the king, very joyful, and she being gone, the
king presently sent for don Siluerio, and when he came he said unto him, how
the Princess was content to be married unto him, and that all things should
be made ready for the marriage. But when the prince don Siluerio heard that
news, there was no joy and pleasure in the world that might be compared unto
his, and being proud with the same, he went and gave all his knights
understanding thereof, and presently it was published throughout all the City,
for the which they were very joyful, and the preparation for the feasts and
triumphs went forward more then it did before. Then Fidilia who in all this
time did not sleep, but in great have trauayled toward the monastery,
whereas she left the two knights, and at her coming thither Rosicleer
received her with great pleasure, for he thought every hour he travailed to
be a whole year. And when she had declared unto him the whole estate of all
things, and of the great joy which the Princess received for his coming, one
way he was very joyful, for that his Lady showed him so great love, and
another way he was in great confusion, not knowing what order might be taken
for to deliver his Lady and mistress out of that great perplexity in the
which she was brought, with the which she was brought with the marriage of
the prince Don Siluerio, but in the end after great debating beetweene them,
the king Sacridoro who received as great grief for the sorrow of his friend as
though it had been unto himself: My good Lord and friend, that which I can say
is this, that for these and such like attempts god did ordain knights in the
world for to surpass others, and so likewise to be in greater per^ls, and for
to do such things that should seem to surpass and exceed nature, and to
appear strange unto others, for if the lustaining of perils were equal in
all degrees, then for very little should serve the extremity of knights, for
that they should not find wherein to exercise themselves, for to appear
valianter then others. Therefore seeing that God has made you more valyaunter
then any in the world, you ought for to put your person in adventure to put
remedy in this matter, with reproach and peril unto your ^erson, such as
never has been seen in Knight, seeing that ^he Princess Oliuia is so fast
locked in, that to take her out from thence it is a thing impossible, and it is
now requisite that you do pacify your altered mind, that you may the better
abide time and season to work our feate.

And my judgment is this, that we do weight the time that the king shall
command the Princess to be taken out of the Tower, to carry her unto the
palace for to celebrate the Marriage with Don Siluerio at which time there
will be little memory of armor, but all occupied in apparayling themselves,
and to seek out new inventions, then we to enter in, and to take the
princess from them, and paying with your rigorous arm him who shall withstand
us, for that at that time they shall not have so great strentgh, for to cause us
to stay, and if once we get well out of the City, we have the sea at hand,
whereas we cannot lack a ship, all furnished and ready for to make Sail, we
being once within, and betwixt this and that place our horse be so good, that
I beeleeue there is not any that can overtake us, of all remedies impossible,
this is one amongst them that is possible to be done, therefore now my Lord,
consider with your self, what is best to be done in this extremity. Then
Rosicleer who was meruaylous attentive unto these words which the King
Sacridoro had said: having his heart so valiant and courageous for such like
attempts, and likeing the counsel of that invention very well, before that
the King had fully ended his judgment, when that he would have put himself
in that enterprise, and finding this to be the best remedy, they concluded,
and straight ways therewith they all three departed to the sea side, which was
not far of, and when they came thither they procured to seek out and to
provide for to serve their turn a good Ship, and amongst a great number of
strangers that were come thethey with people for to see their feasts, they
chanced to enter into one, which seemed unto them to be the strongest and the
best sayler amongst them all. And talking with the master or patron thereof,
they found him to be of the Empire of Greece, and Rosicleer knowing him by hi^
speech to be of Greece, he took him a part, and did discover unto him who
he was, and told him what great necessity he had of him and of his sheep,
promising him excellent payment, with the advantage, if so be that they did
well escape with their enterprise, and without reproach. Then the Master of the
Ship being a Grecian, and having heard of Rosicleer, was very glad and
joyful, for that he had so good opportunity to serve him, would have kissed
his hands, as the hands of his Lord and Prince, and offered him not only his
ship, but also his life to serve him at that and all other times. Then
Rosicleer with great love embraced him, and gave him great thanks, and all the
rest of the day that remained, they were in the Ship with him, putting in order
all things necessary, as unto so peril^ous an enterprise was requisite. So the
next day drew on of the marriage, as it was agreede, which should be the third
day, in the which time these two perfect friends did peruse and mend their
armor, and fortified their ship, for it seemed according unto the great
necessity into the which they were driven, that it was all needful. So the
next day being come, Fidelia took^ her leave of them, and went unto the city,
and straight ways unto the king, who commanded that the Tower should be
opened, willing her to do his hearty commendations unto his daughter, and to
tell her that she should make her self in a readiness, for the next day she
should come forth to see the great feasts and triumphs which the Prince Don
Siluerio has ordained for her sake. With this Fidelia took her leave of the
king and departed, and the gates of the Tower being opened, she entered in
thereat, and the gates were shut again ^s before. When she came unto the
Princess, they two to^ether entered into her closet all alone, and there
Fidilia de^lared unto the Princess all that ever she had passed with ^he King
her Father, and what was concluded with the two ^ights. And when the Princess
understood the great peril and danger in the which she should put her self,
her heart (...) her to think thereof, and waxing pale of color, she (...) as
though she had been dead, not knowing whether she were in Heaven or in the
earth. At which time Fidelia, did comfort her saying: What is this my Lady and
mistress, at such time as his death was most published, and you environed with
most mortal anguish, at that time, you had a good heart for to suffer all, and
courage for to discemble. And now you that have your knight so nigh at hand
with hope quickly for to see him, you do lack force for to suffer, and your
heart do fail you for to enjoy him, that more then your own life you have
desired. For Gods love do it not, my Lady, but rather animate your salfe, and
do you rejoice, for that in such great necessity, the great valor of noble
courage is known: and in especial, whereas no evil may chance unto you, but
rather a further benefit and contentment of mind, more then hitherto it has
been unto you. And if once Rosicleer, have got you into his power, then is
there nothing that can be hurtful unto you, for to ^ourne you to any grief,
for that you have recovered for your husband, the most high and worthiest
Prince in all the world as well in his estate, as of his person. Then the
Princess^ said, with a great sigh, ah, Fidelia, I have no dread nor peril of
my own part, for that I did choose rather to kill my self, then to do any
other thing to the contrary. So that I have little fear in any other thing,
touching my self: but my fear is only for Rosicleer, for that this his
enterprise the which he does take in hand is great, his life must needs be
in great peril, if God for his (...) mersie do not maruaylously deliver him.
For this cause (said Fidelia,) has God made him of such force above all
other, for tha^ he has delivered and cleared himself, in greater dangers
then this is: so if God permit, he will clear himself o^ this. And I do
beeleeue, that God has not forgot you, bu^ will deliver you, with your honor,
out of this rebuke, an^ will not permit that your father the king, should do so
great outrage, in forcing you to marry against your will. S^ with these and
other such words in effect, did Fidelia perswad^ the princess Oliuia, in such
sort, that she did not esteem an^ peril that should happen unto her, with
the great hope tha^ she had for to see Rosicleer, although other ways the
great love which she did bear unto him did make her to fear more then his
great bounty did make her security. So all that same day they passed with
great confusion, tarrying till the next day did come, that the great triumphs
and feasts should be made, and that the prin^sse should be taken out of the
tower for that the next day following should be the day of the marriage.

How the great triumphs and feasts of the marriage of the Princess Oliuia were
celebrated, and of all that happened therein. Chapter. 59.
WHen the day was come that the marriage of the Princess Oliuia, with the
prince don Siluerio should be celebrated, the great City of London was so full
of people as well strangers, as those borne in the Country, that the streets
could scarce hold them, and all the streets were full with the military
knighthood of Lusitania, ye which did publish and set forth the great power
and mightiness of the prince don Siluerio, who was that day apparailed with
very ^ich apparel^, of cloth of Africa, full of marvelous precious ^tones of
the Indias Orientals, and accompanied with many va^iant knights of his own,
and also borne in the country of ^ngland, and in company with the king, they
went unto the church, and in the midst amongst them the three precious and
esteemed Princes, Bargandel, Liriamandro, and (...) Zoylo, unto whom the
Prince* Don Siluerio did offer (...) friendship. Then when service was done,
the King (...) inuit, to dinner with him, all the most esteemed ^nights that
were in the Court, as well strangers as ^ose of the Country, and there was so
great a number of (...), that they could scarce be placed in the mighty
palace. And after that with great majesty and pomp they had ended their
dinner, they together did accompany the king unto the tower, for to take out
the princess Oliuia, who being advertised by Fidelia what she should do, was
meruaylous richly apparayled, abiding they time that the should come to take
her out of the tower, and dissembling with her self clean contrary unto that
which was in her stomach.

So when the gates of the tower were opened, she descended down from her
closet, accompanied with her damsells, and Brandizel and Lyriamandro did take
her and set her upon a white Palfraye, which was ordained for her, meruaylous
richly traped, and being accompanied with the most principallest Knights in
all the court, they carried her unto her palace, and put her in a royal
estate that was appointed, whereas she might see all the feasts and triumphs.
When don Siluerio saw her to be so fair and of so great beauty, that in all
the whole world was not her peer at that present, he was as joyful as ever
he was in all his life, and was so gallant and mercy, as though they had
given unto him all the whole world, and did pretend to do such things that
day, that the Princess should have him in estimation for a very valyant
Knight. Their triumphs and feasts they had ordained in this sort, fifty of
those knights and o^ the principallest that he brought with him out of
Lusitania, did hang their sheeldes round about the Tents, which were pitched in
the midst of the great court of the palace* and their names written upon
their sheeldes, and all the knights were within their tents, abiding all other
Knight^ that would come and combat with them, as well with their swords as with
their spears, and whatsoever Knight dy^ come and touch any of those sheelds,
presen^ly should comfoorth he whose n^me was written thereupon to comb^ with
him, and on the other part of the great court was do^ Siluerio in another Tent,
very richly wrought with gold and silk, an^ was ordained, that all such
ventrous Knight as had in Just or combat overcome any of his Knights should
afterward Combat with him one after another and he had his shield likewise
hanged upon his tent, as the others had, setting himself in a chair at the
tent door, whereas he might very well at his pleasure see all that ever was
done by his knights. And the king was set in his royal place appointed, and
having in his company, those three worthy princes, Bargandell, Lyriamandro, and
the tartarian Zoylo, who because they were so great friends unto the prince Don
Siluerio, they would not as that day just, but did bear the king company.
Likewise many other princes and knights which came thither to see the triumphs
and feasts, and being all set in order, the ^usts began, for there was come
forth into the court an english knight called Amberto, very valiant and
courageous, and famous in all that country, who straight ways at his cu^ring
in, she wing a valiant mind, he went unto the tents, and with his spear he
touched the shields of the knights of Lusitania, whose owner straight ways
came forth, who was one of the stoutest that was amongst them all, whose name
was Bramides, and being mounted upon a strong and great horse, with his spear
in his hand he put himself into the field, and Amberto doing the like, with so
great fury and force as their horses could run, they made their encounter,
which was in such sort, that the english knight was pushed out of his saddle
down to the ground, and Bramides of Lusitauia proceeded forwards on his
course, without any moving, and as though he had done nothing, for the which he
was esteemed of the king Oliuerio and of all those that beeheld him to be a
worthy knight, and presently after the foil of Amberto, came forth into ye
court a strange knight, who was very desirous to get honor, but at the first
encounter Bramides of Lusitania ^uerthrew him, and without staying he overthrew
six or sea^en that came forth to just with him, and this being done, he went
into his tent, where the prince Don Siluerio received so great pleasure, that he
did not let but say unto the king (who was in his royal estate hard by whereas
he was) how does ^our majesty like the knight of Lusitania that can so well
behave themselves and maintain the field.

It seems unto me said the king, that if all they be conformeble unto this
knight, they ought to be had in great estimation. At this time entered another
valiant knight into the field, and was naturally borne in France, called Reno,
who touching with his spear one of the sheelds, there came straight ways
another knight of Lusitania, who although he was a very valiant knight, yet the
French knight was of so great force, that at the first encounter he overthrew
him to the ground, and passed on his course as though he had done nothing at
all, and presently taking another spear in his hand, he went unto the prince
Don Siluerio, and touched his sheeld with his spear, and straight ways the
prince came forth mounted upon his mighty horse, very gallant and courageous,
and joining in their encounter, although the french king was very valiant, yet
the prince was of far greater strength, by reason whereof he gave him and his
horse a great fall unto the ground. Whereat the king and all those that did
behold it, received marvelous great contentment of the prince Don Siluerio. So
ye most part of the day was passed away, wherein the knights of Lusitania had
overthrown unto the ground more the^ five hundredth other knights, and the
prince Don Siluerio in al^ that time received no foil that was any thing to
his reproach for the which he was very glad and joyful, and thought that i^ all
the world at that present there was not one like vnt^ him, who imagined that
the princess Oliuia received great contentment thereat, who had her
understanding occupied i^ other matters, and had her mind so occupied upon
Rosiclee^ that she had no regard unto any thing that was done in (...) the
great court, and having continually before her eyes the great reproach which
should be done unto her that night, she was so full of fear, that many times
her heart did fail hi^ but by reason of her shamefastnes (for that all people
ver^ much beheld her great beauty) she did cover and hide a (...) part of her
sorrow. At this time because the knights of (...) had overthrown so many in
the field, there was not knight in all the court seen to prove their
adventures, of the which Don Siluerio with great pleasure said unto the king: I
believe that for the knights of England this day, the knights of Lusitania
cannot loose their custom, to have the better in feats of arms. At which
words of the prince Don Siluerio there were diverse knights in company with the
king that received great grief, especially two ancient knights, kinsmen unto
the king Oliuerio, who in their time were valiant knights, and because age
would not agree that they should put on armor, they were like to burst with
anger, in seeing how the knights of Lusitania would disgrace the knights of
England. Then upon a sudden there were amongst the countrymen of the country a
great rumor, which seemed to be of some sudden joy, and looking what it
should be, they saw entering on the one side of the great place a knight of a
very big stature, and armed with rich armor, and mounted upon a great horse,
who by his gallant disposition seemed they knew to be Brandamarte, the best
knight which at that time was in all the court, he was borne in England, a young
man and very valiant, and since the small time that he was an armed knight, by
his mighty prowess he has got very much honor. And all those of the country
had great hope in him that he would defend the honor of his Country against
those knights of Lusitania. The King likewise was very desirous that his
Knights might not receive any reproach. When Brandamarte came unto the Tents, he
touched one of the shields with his spear, and straight ways the owner thereof
came forth, mounted upon a mighty horse, and coming unto the just, (because
the knight of Lusitania was very valiant) yet Brandamarte was much more, and
overthrew the other unto the ground, and without any farther delay he touched
other six sheeldes, and at the first encounters he overthrew the owners of
them to the ground, which gave great contentment unto the king Oliuerio, and
unto all those of the Country, for that he defended so valianutlie the honor
of their country: But their joy endured not long, for that after that
Brandamarte had touched the shield of Bramides of Lusitania, with his spear,
he came straight ways forth, and for that they were both of them very good
and valiant knights, they made their encounter very strongly, in such sort,
that Bramides of Lusitania, lost his stirrups and passed his course forwards
on, without receiving any other harm. And Brandamarte, with his horse, (who
was somewhat weary) was constrained of very ^orce to fall unto the ground, at
which fall there was few in all that great place, but was very sorry: and the
wore, for that after that he was euerthrowen for the space of a good hour,
there was not one Knight yt durst enter into the great court. And the knights
of Lusitania with great pride, was aduansing and praising themselves. But in
especial, Bramides, who with a loud voice, that all the people might hear
him, he said: Come forth, come forth, you knights of England, that you may
understand and know, how valiant and of great strength, the knights of
Lusitania, are. The^ the prince Don Siluerio, who was in his tent, hard by the
place whereas the king was, with great pride and contentment that he had of the
honor, which his knights had got, he said unto the king. Now mighty king you
shall understand, that not without great cause the knights of Lusitania, are
esteemed for the best knights in all the world, for that in any place
whersoeuer they beecome, they never loose, but always get honor. And I do
believe and have it for a certainty, that with these first thousand knights,
that I have here with me, of Lusitania, that I am not able alone to make war
against the emperor Trebatio, but also to conquer the most part of all the
world. At these words of the prince unto the king, not one which was with him
received any contentment. But in especial those two ancient knights, the one of
them was called Adriano, who could not suffer to hear ye great reproach, but
with very anger, he said: My Lord and prince, of truth I may speak it, that
the bounty and force of all the world, does not consist in the knights of
Lusitania, for that I have seen in this country such, that if they were here
now at this present, that all your knights would get by them but little honor.
Then the prince said, I would that god were so pleased, that those knights were
here now at this time, for that I and my knights would very quickly bring you
out of this doubt. So at this time, some of the knights of Lusitania, were very
joyful for the honor and victory which they had received, and other some as
sad and sorrowful, for the reproach and shame happened unto them, by the
knights of the country, at which time upon a sudden and unlooked for, they saw
two knights which entered into that mighty place, of so gallant and gentle
disposition, and well armed, as ever they saw in all their lives, of the which,
one of them upon his mighty horse did put himself right over against the
great pallas, and the other went unto the tents of the knights of Lusitania,
and touched one of the knights shields with his spear, and straight way the
owner thereof came forth. And this strange and venterous knight, made his
encounter with so great strength, that in the midst of that great place, he
overthrew him from his horse to the ground, his heels upwards, and so far from
himself as though he had been dead.

Then straight ways came forth an other, who with great lightness he shoued him
out of the saddle, so that he was taken in men's arms and carried him into the
tent, for that all ye bones of his body were shaken and bruised, with that
strongs encounter. And without any long tarying, he overthrew other ten
knights of them, entreting them in such sort, that not one of them all could
arise from the ground, of himself, but that they were carried in other men's
arms, into their tents. At the which the king Oliuerio, and all that were
there present, were greatly amazed, and could not learn by any means to know
who those two valiant knights should be. Then all th^se of England received
great joy and contentment, for that they saw that the knights of Lusitania,
there pride and joy did abate.

And Adriano said unto the king, I believe that the Prince Don Siluerio is not,
well pleased with this knight. Let him alone said the king, for I have a good
hope that his knights will carry away but little honor of that which is past.
Then Bramides of Lusitania came forth mounted upon a mighty great horse, and
with a big spear in his hand he gave a turn about the place, showing great
pride, and thinking certainly that at the first encounter he would overthrow ye
valiant knight, but it fell not out according unto his expectation, for that
they made their encounter with such force that Bramides upon the sheeld of the
strange knight sheeuered his spear all to sheeuers, but the knight made no
show of moving in his saddle, but he made his encounter so strongly against
Bramides, that heauing him right out of his sadle, he carried him a good way off
from his horse, with his head to the ground and his heels upwards, and was so
astonished with that terrible blow, that he could not arise from the ground,
till such time as some of his companions took him up, and carried him into
their tent. Oh how great was the grief that the prince Don Siluerio conceived
when he saw his knights receive so great reproach, and the knights of England
with so great joy and pleasure, because they saw that strange knight defend
their honors so valiantly. The king and the two ancient knights that were with
him, desired very much to know who that knight should be, and likewise his
companion, who as it seemed unto them, was as one amazed, beholding that
mighty palace, and in his semblance and proportion seemed to be no less
valiant the^ his companion, as it was of truth, for that it was that valiant
Rosicleer, who had not so much government of himself for to saffer, but needs
he must come forth into that great place with the king Sacridoro, for to
behold that day the princess Oliuia, but that he saw the princes in her royal
estate, showing forth her sovereign countenance with so singular beauty, he
was as one astonished and amazed, not knowing whether he were in Heaven or on
Earth, and the great glory the which he felt within himself when that he had
before him that precious sight so long of him desired, that forgetting himself
he remained in one place without any power for to move himself, but as one
deprived of his wits. And the other was that stout and strong king Sacridoro,
who seeing the great mischance of his companion, would make some show of his
great bounty, and by reason that he was of so great bounty, in less then one
hour he overthrew unto ye ground all those fifty knights, all very evil
entreated, and ill beestead with the force of the mighty falls which they had
received, and the great pleasure the which Adriano received heereat was such,
that he could not let but say unto the prince Don Siluerio, how do you like
this my lord, now you may well see that the bounty of all the world does not
consist only in the knights of Lusitania: By God I do swear, that according
unto the using which these knights have received, the emperor Trebatio shall
be in great securitye of them for any harm he shall receive at their hands.
The prince was so full of sorrow, and so angry for that which happened unto his
knights, that without making any answer unto Adriano, with great fury he
mounted upon his great horse, and took a spear in his hand, and put himself
ready at a point for to revenge the in^urie done unto his knights. At whith
time the valiant Zoylo, for that he was a great friend unto the prince, fearing
that there should happen some reproach unto him, said unto the king: Truly my
lord, if it please your highness, I would very much that the prince Don Siluerio
might excuse the iusting at this time with that strange and ventrous knight,
for that he has gotten this day very much honor, and I would not that now he
should loose it again* Surely said the king Oliuerio, I should be very
sorrowful, and I would that all might well be excused, and they separated if
there were any good mean for the same. I will go and part them said the
^artarian Zoylo.

And therewith he arose up from the place where he sat by the king, and
descended down the court, and mounting upon a horse very gallantly and richly
trapped, which was brought unto him, he went unto the king Sacridoro, and said.

Sir knight, by the way of courtesy I do heartily desire you that this day you
would cease your high and valiant deeds, for you have done enough to give
testimony of great bounty, and at this time to depart, for that the king
Oliuerio shall receive great contentment and courtesy in so doing. Then the
king Sacridoro, who knew him very well, since the time that he saw him at the
fountain of the savages, and having great desire to show him pleasure, answered
him and said: Sir knight not only in this, but in all other things whatsoever
your pleasure is to command me, with all my heart and power I will do it to
do you pleasure. So after that the valiant Zoylo dad gratified him with great
thanks for his courtesy, the king Sacridoro departed and went unto the place
whereas Rosicleer was as one amazed and astonished, beholding the great beauty of
the princes Oliuia, and shaking him by the hand, he said: Come let us now
depart from heuce, for we have tarried here very long. Then Rosicleer coming
to himself, as one which did awake out of a dead sleep, set spurs to his
light horse, and went with the king Sacridoro and put themselves in a by way
out of that great place, in such sort, that in a short space they were out of
sight, and the prince Don Siluerio ramained very furious and full of anger, for
that the knight was departed from thence before he did first take reuengement
for the injury done unto his Knights, and for that it wax^d late, and again
there were no knights left for to just, there beegan straight ways a great
noise of sounding of Triumpets, and other instruments of music, which was
done in such sort, that all the whole City did ring thereof, and here with
the iusts were made an end, the Tents taken out of that great place, and the
Prince Don Siluerio, with great honor, accompanied with many Princes and
knights, was brought unto the mighty palace, whereas he was very well
received by the king, ^ was carried into a Chamber which was on the one side of
the great hall, whereas he was unarmed. The Princess Oliuia before this time
knew Rosicleer, for Fidelia when she saw him advertised her, whereat she
received great contentment, and did esteem all her travails and sorrows which
she had received well bestowed, although when she remembered ye great hurly
burly that should be that night, her heart was very much out of quiet, and full
of anguish, and could not by any means be merry, but with great sighs and
bitter tears she desired God to deliver her well out of all those dangers.

How that at such time as the King Oliuerio and the mighty Princes and knights
of the Court were joined together, that the Princess Oliuia and the Prince Don
Siluerio should take hands, Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro entered into the
mighty palace, and what happened therein. Chapter. 60.
AFter that Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro were departed out of the place
whereas the iusts were made, they both put themselves into a Forest which
joined nigh unto the City, whereas they remained till the night was come,
being fully determined what they should do, for that they had left their ship
at the coast, all in a readiness and very well appointed, and considering in
what great peril and danger they did put themselves, they prayed unto god with
all their hearts for to deliver the^ well out of that great reproach, and having
a very good hope yt god would aid and succor them, for that which they went
about was in a just and right cause, for to set free the great wrong and harm
done unto the Princess. The day being past and the night come, they issued
out of the forest, and entered into the city, and for that there were so many
knights, as well strangers as Country men, they could not be perceived, for
the streets were full of them, and likewise the night being dark, their armor
could not be discovered, neither was there any account made thereof, for that it
was a time void of suspicion, so they drew nigh unto the palace, at such time
as the Princess Oliuia and the Prince Don Siluerio should join hands
together, vowing matrimony, the palace being clear and light with the great
number of torches and candles that were there lighted, that it seemed to be mid
day, and there were so great a number of people, that they could scarce move
by one another. All this time went Fidelia very diligently up and down the
palace, and when she saw the hour draw near that their pretense should be
put in execution, she went out of the palace, and taking with her a bundle of
things necessary for the princess, she went toward the sea side, and put her
self in the ship, abiding the time to see what fortune would do for her Lady
and mistres, and for those worthy and valiant Knights, and was in so great
fear, that for any thing she would not be put in the like again. All this
time was the Princess Oliuia so full of anguish and alteration, that she knew
not whether she were alive or dead, and being in a quadran nigh unto the
great hall, accompanied with all her Ladies and damsels, ready to be taken
forth to join hands with the Prince, she many times fell in a sound, and
being very much comforted by the Princesses Rodasilua and Siluerina, yet all
that ever they could do did profit very little, neither could she recover any
force nor receive any comfort, for that the hour was come that she should pass
that great affliction, and in remembrance thereof she thought verily that her
heart would have leapt out of her dody. At this present time Rosicleer and the
King Sacridoro, came unto the palace, and by a false door which Rosicleer
knew very well, they entered into a chamber whereas the princess was, leaving
their Horses with a Page of the kings, who put them under a portall where they
could not be seen of the people, so they went up a narrow pair of stayres
till they came into the great hall, whereas they found the King Oliuerio, with
all those mighty Princes and knights, in a fair Quadran, in company with the
prince Don Siluerio, abiding the coming of the Princess Oliuia, to take her
to his spouse. Likewise on the other side of the hall in another Quadran was
the Princess Oliuia, accompanied with all her Ladies and Damsels, and with the
Princess Rodasilua and Siluerina, who had her in the midst beetwixt them, and
when they would have gone whereas the King was, the Princess Oliuia could not
step one foot forwards, but fell in a sound in the arms of the other
Princesses. Then when these two valiant knights saw it was time, they entered
both together into the quadran, and the king Sacridoro carried his Sword
drawn in his hand, and his sheeld on his arm, the which put a great tear
amongst all the Ladies and Damsels, and Rosicleer went straight unto the
Princess Oliuia his Lady, and took her in his arms, lifting her from the
ground, all which time she was in a sound, and by reason at their entering in,
all those Ladies and damsells gave great shrikes and out cries, there came
presently to that place many Knights, and being without armor they drew out
their Swoords, and doubled their cloakes about their arms, and went to rescue
and take away the Princess from Rosicleer, who carried her in his arms, but
for that the good King Sacridoro was at hand in a readiness, with four blows
which he gave, he overthrew four Knights dead to the ground, of them that
first approached where they were, the which did put so great fear in all the
rest, that they durst not come nigh him, so that Rosicleer had room to come
unto the narrow stayres, which descended down to the false door. Then the
King Sacridoro put himself in the face of all the people, and did so much,
that Rosicleer came unto the place whereas his horse was, and findeing none for
to disturb him, he mounted forthwith upon his Horse, and took the Princess
in his arms before him, and he had the Page to tarry for his Lord, and
setting spurs unto his good horse Rodarte (which he had of the Giant
Mandroco, and one of the strongest and lightest that was in all the world)
within a short time he found himself out of the City, and with so great
jury, that it seemed a Thunderbolt or whirle wind, he took his course
throughout those fields with so great swiftness, that the grass whereon his
horse trod, seemed as though it moved not. This valiant Rosicleer trauayled
with so great joy and contentment for that rich pray which he carried, that
he could scarce beeleeue he had so great a Jewel with him. At which time the
Princess Oliuia was in a sound, without any sense of knowledge who carried her
away, and by reason of the great care of the people, in the which the king
Sacridoro remained, troubled so much Rosicleer, that it was the occasion he
forced his Horse with so great speed, that in a short time he came unto the
sea coast, and straight ways he entered into a Ship, and laid the
Princess upon a bed, and kissed her, and left her in the company of Fidelia
her damsel, and he went a shore and mounted upon his horse, and with as
great speed he returned back again, to seek out his perfect friend the King
Sacridoro, who in all this time had done meruaylous deeds, but by reason that
the King and all the other Princes and Knights that were in the Quadran, at the
great shrikes and outcries of the damsels were come thither, they had so
compassed him round about, that he could not move himself neither on the one
part nor on the other, but for that they were all unarmed, he quickly made
such a slaughter amongs them, that the rest durst not come night him, so that
he had time to descend the stayres, and coming under the porch, wheaeas his
Page was with his horse, although that a great number descended the stayres
after him, yet in spite of them all he mounted upon his Horse, and by reason
that the number was great, being on Horseback he slew many of them, then the
page mounted upon his Horse, and broching them furyous^ie with their Spurs,
of pure force they went out of the Palace. In the mean time the Prince Don
Siluerio seeing what had happened, was the most furious and angriest Knight in
the world, and entered into his chamber, and armed himself with hie* rich and
glistering armor, and the like did many other Princes and knights, as well
those which were borne in England, as of those which he brought with him out
of Lusitania, and being armed he came unto the place whereas he left the
king, and when he saw that they were gone, in great bast they calied for their
horses, and mounting on them they follow their enemies with so great fury, that
many of their horses burst in their running, and in pursuing of them they met
with many that told them news of the King Sacridoro, and they forced so much
their horses in following after them, that the Prince Don Siluerio ^uertooke
the King Sacridoro a mile out of the City, who when he saw him come alone,
did abide his coming, and when he came unto him, with an outrageous fury he
stroke the King such a blow upon his helm that he made him to decling his
head down to the breast, but the King returned such another vnpon his helm,
that he had overthrown him to the ground if he had not embraced himself
about his horse neck, but the Prince received so great grief for the carrying
away of the Princess, that he feared not the peril of the battle, but with
great fury and courage he beeganne to strike at the King, charging him with
very furious and terrible blows, but all that did profit him very little, for
that the king was a great deal more stronger then he was, so that it could
not have fallen out well with him, if the battle had endured long, but at
this time there were joined together with him more then one hundredth Knights,
the which ^yd compass the good and valiant King round about, and ^harged him
with very great and thick blows, but he who was very valiant and
courageous, did very little ^steeme his life (for that it was in the quarrel,
and his du^ie which he did own unto his perfect friend Rosicleer) and (...)
such sort he did animate himself, that in a small time ^ee had slain more
then twenty knights, and if there had not been so many of them, he would by
the help of almighty God, and his great strength, quickly have cleared himself
of them, but by reason that there were so many, and more and more they
increased, that he found himself in great peril, and at the point to be
slain. But at this time that valiant Rosicleer, who seemed to come like unto
a whirle wind upon his great and swift Horse, when that he came unto the
place whereas they made that cruel and perilous battle, and seeing in what
great danger and peril they had brought his friend, he straight way put
himself amongst the thickest of them, like unto a rauishing Lion, some he
cloue their heads a sunder, and some he cut of their arms, and other some he
cut a sunder by the wast, and did so heehaue himself amongst them, that in a
small time, he had overthrown the half of them dead to the ground.

Then when the king Sacridoro, knew the great aid and succor which he had,
with a new fore he charged so his enemies, that beetwixt the^ both they did so
much, that there was not a knight in all the field that durst abide them, but
only the Prince Don Siluerio, who being wounded with mortall^sorrow and
grief, for the carrying away of the Princess Oliuia, with more courage then
strength or force, he did combat with both of them, charging them with very
great and heavy blows. Then Rosicleer, who seeing that that one Knight did
disturb them of their journey, without knowing him, he stroke him so terrible
a blow upon his sine healme, that all amazed and astonished from himself, he
fell from his horse to the ground. That being done, these two good and perfect
friends would not make any long staying, but set Spurs unto their surions
horses, and ran wit^ so great lightness, that there was none that could
ouertak^ them, till such time as they came unto the sea side. Now a^ this time,
came the king Oliuerio, out of the city, with more then ten thousand
knights, as well strangers, as of hi^ own Country, and followed the pursuit
of their enemies And when they came unto the place where-as the battall was
fought, they were greatly amazed to see that great slaughter and e^usion of
blood, and could not beeleeue that any humane Knight should have so much force
and strength for to make so great slaughter as there was done, and helping up
the Prince Don Siluerio from the ground, who lay a long upon the earth as
though he had been dead, without moving of hand nor foot, they all together
in an ambushment followed the pursuit of their enemies, those two Knights, but
for all the great have which they made in their running, at such time as they
came unto the Sea si^e, they were all entered into their ship, and the Greek
master of the same being all in a readynesse, brought whom his ankers, and
hoysed forth his sails, and beegan to nauigate upon the calm waters of the
Ocean sea, for that at that present they found fortune and wind favorable
unto them, there was no glory in all the world that might be compared unto
this of the perfect lover Rosicleer, when he saw so much at his ease and will,
and in his power, her for whom he had passed so great sorrow and grief. Then
when the Princess Oliuia was come again unto her self, she took him in her
arms and kissed him very often, uttering words of perfect love, and although
as yet she was not clean void of the alteration in the which she was
brought, yet finding her self in the arms of him whom she so much loved,
she received great pleasure and contentment, and much more, to see her self
free from that great force, which the king her father against all reason and
justice would have constrained against her will to marry with the Prince Don
Siluerio, and again, calling to remembrance what great sorrow and grief
which the absence of Rosicleer did cause her to ^ustayne, she therewith
received so great contentment and ^lorie to see him in her presence, that she
thought her self to be new risen from death to life, comforting and ^eioycing
her self with the presence of him that she so long ^ooked for.

Then when the king Oliuerio and the Prince Don Sil^erio, and the other Princes
and knights that came with them, when they approached unto the water side, and
saw that the ship was departed, and perfectly informed how that the knights and
the princess were therein, they received so great sorrow and grief, that the
king was at the point of death, and the Prince if they had not held him, would
have leaped into the sea, and for that they could not understand nor know in
whose power the Princess was carried away, their pain and grief was the
greater, and in great have they caused a great company of ships to be made in
a readiness to follow them, and being all in very good order, there entered
into them many knights, as well those of Lusitania, as knights of England, and
being in this preparation, there was a mariner of another ship which came unto
ye king and said: Mighty Prince, a Damsel which was in the ship that is
departed, gave me this Letter to give unto your highness, if that by fortune
you should come hither. Then the king being very much amazed, not knowing who
it should be that left that letter, he took it and opened it, and saw that
it was the firm of Fidelia, and read the contents as follows.

HIgh and mighty king of Englang, Fidelia, Damsel, and servant unto the
Princess Oliuia, does wish unto thee health, that therewith thou may put
away all sorrowful passions from thy heart, and to know how far the power of
almighty God does extend, and how subject all Knigs and Princes, and mighty
Lords, ought to be unto his ordinances and laws, as well for that they are
good and just, as also because man has not power to resist them. Thou
pretendest to marry thy one and only Daughter and heir unto all these
kimgdomes, giving her a husband unto (...) she should be continually
obedient, without any respect or consideration of her good will and love,
neither of her (...) and quietness, but only for a desire which you have to
go and take reuengement for the death of Prince Edward thy Son: Beehold king
Oliuerio, that the laws of God does not permit that thou should do this
force of matrimony, which thou have pretended to do unto thy daughter, for
that the reuengement of all things is reserved for and unto him who has power
for to do it. The sovereign creator of all things would not permit that thou
should be an homicide unto thine own daughter, as thou had ben if this
present remedy had not prevented the same, for that the princess Oliuia had
ordained to kill her self, the same night that they should have been made sure
together, but the divine providence did so ordain and provide, that the greek
Prince Rosicleer, thy very friend (who being wounded with the love of the
princes thy daughter) should come and set at liberty this great outrage of
forcing, and to take her out of thy power, and to carry her unto the sovereign
empire of his father, whereas with great majesty conformable unto her highness,
shall their marriage be celebrated: therefore they and I do desire thee for that
thy honor and the honor of thy daughter shall be by this change greatly
augmented, that thou would conceive well (...), and to have patience, for
that it can be no otherwise, always obeying as our duty is, the divine
providence.

When the king had read this letter, and well understood the ^ontents thereof,
he was one way greatly amazed, to vnder^tand that Rosicleer was alive, and
another way his pain and ^riefe did double in him, considering the two great
injuries that were done unto him by the father and the son, and as one (...)
himself with the great sorrow he received, he wept and (...) out with a loud
voice saying: Oh fortune and my great (...) how much do you show your selves
to be my eni^ie, that thou art not content that the emperor Trebasio (...) my
well-beloved son the Prince Edward, but that now (...) is come his son, and has
robbed me of my daughter, (...) only heir of these kingdom: Oh sovereign
creator, therefore dooest thou suffer so great arrogance in these (...)? why
do thou not at once destroy them, and throw (...) out of this world, as thou
threwest Lusifer out of heaven: Oh kings and princes of the world, come and
join your ^elues all together in my favor, and give me aid, for to take
reuengement of two so notable injuries: Behold that the pride of Greece does
eueryday increase, in such sort, that in time they will be Lords and governors
over all the whole world, and put you all from your mighty kingdoms and high
estates. Likewise the great lamentations that Don Siluerio made when he saw his
marriage so changed, was such, that there was none that heard him but was moved
unto great compassion. In great have was made in a readiness twelve great
ships, and diverse other small ships, in the which there was embarked more then
ten thousand knights very well armed and likewise with them did imbarke
themselves the prince Don Siluerio with the three princes, Bargandel,
Liriamandro, and the tartarian Zoylo, and in great have they made sail that
way which Rosicleer went, although the three princes had another determination,
contrary unto Don Siluerios, for when they vnrerstood that he who had carried
away the Princess was Rosicleer, they were as glad as ever they were in all
their lives, although they could not perfectly believe that he should be
alive. Then they called to remembrance all that had passed at the fountain of
the savages with them, and were fully determined that if it were certainly
Rosicleer, and did overtake him, that first they would consent to their own
death rather then he should receive any harm, for that they were all three of
them such friends unto Rosicleer, that except it were the king Sacridoro, in
all the whole world he had not the like. So they waied their ankers, and hoist
sails, and began to take their journey after the other ships, with as much
sail as ever they could make, they did nauigat through the great ocean sea
with as much speed as ever they could, and the king Oliuerio returned back
again unto his city and palace, very heavy and sorrowful, whereas straight
ways with great speed he began to gather together people for the war^* Writing
unto the mightiest kings in all christendom, desiring them for to aid and
succor him with all the people that were possible, for the furniture of his
wars, giving them to understand the great injuries which he had received of the
emperor of Greece, and his son, and how greatly he was bound for to revenge
himself of the same. Whereas the history does leave them all time does serve,
for to tell you of the knight of the Sun who remained at ye broken city of
Troy, and of ye trojan Oristedes, who was travailing toward the gran Cataia.

How the Troyan Oristedes came unto the Court of the Emperor Alicandro, and
gave him understanding of the coming of the ^rinceffe Lindabrides. Chapter. 61.
THe history says that Oristedes the Trojan, made so great speed in his
journey toward the gran Cataia, whereas the emperor Alicandro was, and after
that he had passed the first two Scithias, in the end of fifty days he
entered into the third, which did belong unto the Emperor Alicandro, and the
gran Cataia was in the confines of the third Scithia, which fallethmore toward
the Orient, under the which was the mighty emperor of Tartaria, the great, and
many other kingdoms, subject unto the emperor Alicandro, whereby he was
esteemed to be the mightiest lord in the world. Besides all this, all the
kingdoms and Lordships of the Orient were subject to him. So when this good
knight Oristedes was entered into the third Scithia, within one moonth after be
entered into the gran Cataia, where he understood that the emperor was in ^
city called Neptaia, which had above an hundredth and fifty thousand
householdes within the walls, and when he came unto the said city, he went unto
the pallaice, and entering in thereat, he found the Emperor in the great hall,
accompanied with many kings and Lords that were his subjects.

And entering in thereat he pulled of his helm, and went and kneeled down
before that mighty Emperor, for to kiss his hands: but he who knew him very
well, and very glad for to see him there, made him to arise up on his feet
again and did embrace him saying, Oristedes, my very good friend, thy absence
has not caused unto me so much sorrow and grie^e, as now t^y coming does cause
me to be glad and joyful.

Then Oristedes said, my good lord and emperor you shall receive much more
contentment, when that you do understand the news that I do bring unto
you, for that you shall understand that the princes Lindabrides, your daughter
is coming, and very nigh unto this country: and does bring in her company a
knight, the most valiant est that ever the gods did create in all the world,
and having the prince Meridian, your son, travailed throughout many countries,
till he came unto the emp^re of Grecia, and never could find any one knight,
that in bounty and force, was equal unto him. But this alone knight, who did
overcome me in equal battle, and since he has defended the beauty of the
Princes Lindabrides, with the best knights that is in the world. And when he
came unto Troy, whereas I do dwell, defending the passage of the bridge, kept
by old antiquity, having battle with him, he overcame me. And at his
commandment I am come hither, for to bring you news of their coming. And for
that you shall see and understand, how favorably the gods has been unto the
princes, in giving unto her so valiant a knight, you shall understand, that if
he do exceed in bounty, of knighthood, there is no lack in him of majesty
and high estate, for that he is son unto the Emperor of Grecia, being
accounted the mightyest Prince, that is amongst all the Christian.

So when the Emperor Alicandro had well understood all that Oristedes,
had told him, he was so full of joy and mirth, that he thought that in all
his life he never received the one half of so great comfort and pleasure, for
that he louod the princes Lindabrides, much more then the prince Meridian. And
would give a good part of his estate, so that the Princess might remain with
the whole Empire. And for that he was fully certified of the high bounty, of
Oristedes, and of the prince Meridian, his son. That he was certain and
suer, that the knight that should overcome them, in battle, should surmount
all other knights in the whole world. And so with great joy, he did embrace
Oristedes, and gave him great thanks for his coming. All the other lords and
knights that were in the great hall, they were greatly amazed when they
understood that one alone knight did overcome in battle two such valiant
knights as they were. For that they thought verily that in all the world could
not be found others that could be equal unto them. So straight ways the
Emperor Alicandro, caused these news to be published throughout all his
kingdom and lordship, commanding all his v^ssailes and subjects, to prepare
and make themselves in a redines, to be at the great triumphs and feasts which
he does pretend to make, at the marriage of the princes Lindabrides, his
daughter. All this while the knight of the Sun, went tranailing in his
triumphant chariot, and the more that ye conversation of the princes did
continue, so much the more, did his heart burn in the flaming fire of her love,
in such sort, yt he never remembered the fair princes Claridiana, neither the
em^erour his father, nor Rosicleer, his brother, neither his two perfect
friends Brandizel and Clauerindo, of all his memory he was clean void,
forgetting his own natural country, and all transported and kindled in the
amorous love of the princes, and only in contemplating himself in beholding
her great beauty, was all his joy and delight, so that he remembered no other
thing. Whereat none ought much to marvel, for that the surpassing beautye of
this noble princes, (accompanied with so high and sovereign majesty) was
such, that I do believe that there was never knight borne in this world, that
keeping continual company with her as the knight of the Sun dead, and having
before him that perilous sight, that could clear himself or withstand the
fiery darts of love (although we may well dessemble the great loyalty that it
told of other knights, for that it is to tell of things surmounting nature, or
else it is so ^ar to extol knights, for to make them to bear off to be men.)
So that if the knight of the Sun with the presence of the princess had forgot
himself, to the contrary, the princes with the presence of him was the
pleasantest lady in all the world, and received great contentment only in
thinking that at their coming unto the court of the emperor her father, their
marriage should straight ways be celebrated. So after that they had travailed
one mooneth in the mighty Asia, they entered into the second Scithia, whereas
they saw so many and so strange forms of people and customs, that the Knight
of the Sun went very much amazed, and although many things worthy of telling
happened unto them in this iourny, yet this history does leave them, for that if
he should detain himself in telling of them, he should leave off to declare
the principal, for that the greater part is untold. To conclude, in the end
they entered into the country o^ the gran Cataia. Then the emperor when he
understood that they were within a days journey of Neptaia, whereas he was,
he went forth to meet them accompanied with more then fifty kings and lords,
his subjects, and every one a crown (...) gold upon his head, and more then a
thousand knights tha^ went in guard. And when they came whereas they met the
triumphant chariot, they alighted from their horses, and wen^ and kissed the
hands of the princes Lindabrides, and embraced the knight of the Sun, and he
received them with great joy and co^tentment, and when the emperor drew nigh,
the knight of the Sun kneeled down before him for to kiss his hands, but the
emperor with great pleasure meruailed at his mighty pr^portion and gallant
semblance, would not consent therevnt^ but embraced him with great love, and
kissed him, saying: do desire the high and mighty gods, my son, to grant
you health, that you may enjoy many years your youthfulness, for that your
coming into this country has made me very glad and joyful. And I do desire
them (my good lord) said the knight of the Sun, to preserve your person and
imperial estat for that all we your subjects, may do our duties in your
service. Then Oristedes the troyan came unto him, as one that had a great
desire to see him, and the knight of the Sun embraced him with great love, and
all those kings and knights meruailed much at his mighty proportion, and
musing how that (...) knight of so few years should consist so great force and
strength. So after that all had given him entertainment, the emperor went unto
the triumpha^t chariot, and ascended up into it the fair princes did fall
down upon her knees and kissed his hands, and the emperor likewise kissed
her, and received her with great love, and passing beetweene them many words of
great pleasure, he set himself down in the triumphant chariot, in the midst
between the princes and the knight of the Sun, and all the other kings and
lords, mounted upon their horses, and compassed the Chariot round about, taking
their journey toward the mighty City of Neptaya, whereas of an infinite
number of people, as well women as men, with great solempnitie they were
received, being all much amazed at his gentle and gallant disposition. Likewise
the knight of the Sun did very much marvel at the mighty greatness of that
city, and of the great abundance of people that were therein, and said unto
himself, that not without great reason the Emperor was esteemed for the
mightiest Prince in all the world. So likewise when they came unto the mighty
palace, he was no less amazed to see the great sumptuousnes and riches
thereof, for that in all his life he never saw the like, no not by a great
deal, for that it seemed ^o be a city compassed about with very strong
walls and high towers. When they came thither they all alighted from their
horses, and entered into that mighty palace, whereas they passed away the rest
of the day that remained, and all that night in great and solemn feasts. And
it was concluded amongst the^ all, that within fifteen days they should begin
to make the great triumphs and feasts for the marriage of the knight of the Sun,
and the princes Lindabrides, at the which triumph shall be present the most
strongest king and knights in all the pagan country, for to see by experience
the great bounty that has been published of the knight of the Sun, who all this
time received great joy and contentment, for the time drew on to finish his
great desire, and although the love of the princes, and her great desert were
the principal occasion that he should be desirous to marry with her. Likewise
considered, he might think himself happy to have to wife the daughter of so
mighty an emperor, and heir unto so high estate. With this determination and
firm love he passed away that time very much honored of the emperor, and
respected of all those lords and kings his vassailes, for that they all had a
great delight and pleasure in him. Whom the historye does leave at the present
to tell of other things that happened in the mean time.

How the two Princes Brandizel and Clauerindo, departed from the Court of the
Emperor Trebatio, and what happened unto them being at the sea. Chapter. 62.
AFter the departure of the knight of the Sun, the two princes Brandizel and
Clauerindo did a bide certain days in the court of the emperor Trebatio of
whom and likewise of all his knights, they were honored and esteemed, and by
reason of the great love which the Prince Brandizel bare unto the princess
Clarinea, she could not take any rest nor be at quiet. S^ upon a^ day being in
conversation with his friend Claueryndo, he said: That for so much as the
Knight of the Sun was not there with them, me thinckes it should be good
(in the mean time till he returned again) to fly from this idleness in the
which we are, and to go and seek some adventures for to increase our honor,
and to exercise military Knighthood. The which counsel lyked the Prince very
well, and understanding the will of Brandizell, he straight ways said that
he should do all that his pleasure was, for that he should receive great
contentment therein. So both of them asked lisence of the Emperor for to
depart, promising him to return again so soon as they heard that the Knight
of the Sun was returned again. So the Emperor (although very much against
his will, and by their great importunancie) did grant leave unto them. So these
two perfect friends departed from Constantinople, and when they came unto the
waters side, they entered into a ship which they found ready to depart toward
the kingdom of Polonia. After that they were departed and had sailed on their
voyage four days, there beegan to arise a great storm at the sea, and at
midnight the wind began to blow so terrible, and the Sea to work so far out
of all order, that sometimes they thought that the waves carried the ship up
into the clouds, and other times they thought the Ship to fall down to the
deapth thereof, and the Ship received such a leake, that whatsoever the
mariners could do with the Pomp and otherwise, yet might they go up to the
knees in water above the balest, for the which cause these two good knights
made no other reckoning but to be lost, which caused them with all their hearts
to pray unto God to have mercy on them, and to forgive them their sins, and
also if it were his divine pleasure to deliver them out of that great torment.
When the day was come those boisterous winds did so beat the Ship* tumbling
and tossing it from one part to another, in such fort, that it could no longer
endure, but opened a sunder in the midest, so that these two Knights had no
other refuge, but either of them to take hold of the first planke that came
unto their hands. Then God who did reserve them for a greater effect, did
deliver them that they were not drowned in that torment, for that they had not
fully half an hour. sustained themselves upon their planks in the water, when
that those mighty high and great waves did carrye them upon the shore. The
Prince Brandizel in Polonia, and the Prince Clauerindo upon an Island that
seemed to be full of thick and green trees, who when he was upon the shore,
and saw himself clear of that great torment, he gave great thanckes unto
almighty God for his wonderful benefits showed unto him in that his
deliverance, and did very much lament the loss of his friend Brandizel, not
knowing what was beecome of him. And being very desirous to know in what
Country he was, finding a narrow and small used way, he followed the same,
and trauayling therein a mile, he meruayled very much that he could see no
people, neither any town or inhabitaunce, the Country being so fresh and
full of Trees that it seemed unto him never in all his life to have seen a
Country so delightsome. So after a great while that he had trauayled by that
narrow path, at such time as the Sun beegan to wax hot, and found himself out
from amongst those trees, he entered into a great and wide plain, in the
midst of the which he saw a mighty high and well towred Castle, the which was
of Lyndaraza, the sight whereof put him in great admiration, and it seemed unto
him yt it could not be wrought by any humane hands, and being very desirous
to know who it should be that was Lord of that meruaylous Castle, he hasted his
pace more then before, and went toward the same, and the nigher he came to
it the more he meruayled.

So when he came and saw that wide and deep ditch, and that there was no
other entry into the Castle but only by the bridge, he went thither, and
found that the gate was shut, and having at the ring thereof a very fair and
rich horn of Iuorie, with a scroule upon it which said.

Thou Knight, whose fortune has brought thee hither, if thou art determined to
know any thing of this great and strong Castle, blow this horn, and thou
shall not lack one to make thee answer, and have a great care in defending
thy self from the Porter, for that he will put thy life in great peril.

The Prince heereat was very much amazed, and could not imagine what it should
be, but having a great desire to know what should be within, without any
longer tarrying, and with a valiant courage he took the horn and put it to
his mouth, and beegan to sound it with so great strength, that the sound was
heard throughout all the Castle, and he had not scarce pulled the Horn from
his mouth, when that with a great rushing and noise the gates were open, and
there issued out at the gate a furious beast called Brama, and the most
horrible and evil fauouredst that ever was seen formed by nature, for that
his body was as big as two good horses, and his legs more bigger then a bulls
leg, and each leg had five claws, and the least of them was a span long,
and as big as a man's finger, and his mouth so big, that a man might well
go in thereat, and was all furnished with very big tuskes, and as sharp as a
rasour, and he threw out at his mouth great abundaunce of fire and smoke, in
such sort, that it seemed to be Hell mouth, and he came forth with so great
braveness, that there was no man but only at the sight of her would have
received great fear. And as soon as this Brama was come forth, it went
straight ways toward the Prince, and in his hastynesse he would have gored
him with his sharp tuskes, but the Prince who was polytike and very light, gave
a leap on the one side, and cleared himself from the fury thereof, and
passing by him with his sword he thrust so terrible a foyne at that monster,
that chancing beetweene two ribs, it entered into his body up to the hilts, and
pulling the sword out, there followed great abundance of blood out at the
wound. Then when the furious Brama felt himself hurt, with as great fury as
ever was seen, he returned unto the Prince, who bearing his head very low, in
such sort, that by no means he could defend himself, but must of force
abide his fury, who stroke him with his tuskes so terrible a blow, that he
threw him from the ground ten paces from him backwards, so that if his armor
had not been made by that wise man Lyrgandeo, at that blow he had parted him
a sunder in the midst, yet for all that, the Prince was so evil entreated with
the mighty fall, that if he had not been of so valiant a courage, it had not
been possible for him to have risen again from the ground, but by reason that
he was one of the most valiantest Knights in all the world, with a trise he
arose up again, and at such time as this furious Brama came^ toward him
again, for to claspe him beetwixt his cruel and sharp claws, he firmed
himself sure upon his feet, and took his sword in both his hands, and
determined to put his life in adventure in striking of one blow, and so he
did, for at such time as this Brama came unto him, he stroke him so strong a
blow with both his hands upon his monstrous head, and for that his Sword was
very good and sharp, and stroke with so good a will of the Prince, that it
cloue it clean asunder, and the sword entered into the ground a good span, so
that the monstrous beast fell down dead to the ground before the Prince, who
praised God greatly for that victory which he had, and remained a good while
be houlding that great beast, and was very much amazed at his strange form
and furious composition, and being very desirous to know and understand the
end of that strange adventure, without any longer tarrying he entered in at
the great gates that were open, and as he went in under the first tower,
lookeing on the one side, he saw proportioned on the wall, his perfect friend
the Knight of the Sun, and it was so arteficially done, that it seemed to be
himself in person, and being greatly amazed thereat, he stayed to he* hold
the whole circumstaunce thereof, and there he saw the three first battles
the which he made upon the bridge, painted very naturally. And calling to
remembrance that which the Emperor Trebatio had commanded to be painted upon
the fore front of the palace, he straight ways fell in reckoning what it
should be, and how that was the Island of Lyndaraza, whereas the Knight of the
Sun took out and set at liberty the Emperor Trebatio, and receiving great
joy and contentment to see painted there the mighty and wonderful deeds of his
great friend, he passed forwards, and finding that there was no door shut to
^ake any resistance, he entered into every part thereof, without any fear or
dread, and in every hall or chamber wherein he entered, (...) stayed to
beehold the brave and perilous battles that had there passed with the Knight
of the Sun, and of all them were so perfectly set forth, that it seemed to be
new done as then, and being as greatly amazed to see all this, as also the
sumptuous buildings, it seemed rather to him to be things celest^all, and not
made by the hands of any humane creature. And when he had passed through all
the doors, halls, and chambers, whereas the Knight of the Sun had made
battayls, he entered into the great and mighty Court, whereas he was no less
amazed then before at the strange making thereof and great riches. So in this
sort he proceeded forwards, and went up a broad pair of stayres into a mighty
Gallerie, whereas he discovered the door, and three steps of beaten stluer,
and coming to them he entered in at the door, where he saw the fair
Lyndaraza and all her Damsels, playing upon Harps, with so excellent a grace,
that the sweet noise of Music seemed to ascend up in^o the Heavens, and
filled his cares with the sweet melo^ie, in such sort, that as a man deprived
of his vnderstan^ing, the Prince remained at the entry of the door, and
see^ed unto him that the voice of Lyndaraza was rather ce^estiall then humane,
and therewith he was straight ways taken prisoner with her love, and never
before was there ^uer Lady or Damsel that was Lord of his heart. So then
^yndaraza tooking toward the door had spide the Prince, and straight ways
left off her playing and singing, and her damsells, took her by the hands, and
did lift her up from her state whereas she sat and with a countenance as thou^h
she had been angry, she said: Who are you sir knight, that has been so
bold, without my lysence, to enter into this my castle. Then the Prince who
was beeholding of her, as one amazed, and was very sorry, for that he had
given her occasion to be angry, with a trise he pulled of his healme: and
discovered so fair and comely a countenance, that it was strange to beehold,
and kneeling down before her, he said, Fair Lady, I do most heartily desire
you to pardon me, for this great anger which you do concei^e and show against
me, for my coming in hither, for as I was ignorant to see that which I have
now seen, so am I without fault for my coming in. And if it be so that I have
committed any offense, in recompense thereof, is sufficient the great gri^fe
which your great beauty has caused unto me. And (...) error which I have
made, cannot be compared, nor like equal unto my grief. Well said the fair
Lindaraza, if you will that I shall pardon you, sir Knight, you must tell me
who you are, and how the keeper of my castle did let you (...) come in. Then
the Prince said, at the commandment of such a fair Lady, I cannot choose but
to be obedient, and in especial, I, who in all only your good will, does
(...) my life. Therefore you shall understand my good Lady that I am called
Clauarindo, and I am prince, and right (...) unto the Kingdom of France. And
the keeper of this ca stell did consent to my coming in* for that in making
(...), I ^lew him. And being very desirous to (...) what should ^ee here
within this castle, which seemed (...) me rather to be celestial, then
human: I did prosecut my entering, and finding no disturbance, I rested not
till ^ame hither, whereas (I do b^eleeue) I have found (...) death, if your
anger (fair Lady, against me) do (...) All this time, the fair Lindaraza
was beeholding the (...) tie proporsion, and fair countenance of the Prince.
(...) so ^ar as ^hee remembered by the words of her n^kle, (...) leeued (...),
that he was the same unto whom the entry this castle was ordained for, and
causing him to arise from the ground, ^hee said: It is not to be suffered, that
against the highness of your royal estate and the great desert of your
person, that any should retain anger, therefore worthy Prince, you are
heartily welcome unto this Castle, and carrying him into (...) rich close^, her
damsels unarmed him, and was served with very fine and rich roabes necessary
at that time, (...) then the fair Lindaraza said: Worthy Knight, I do most
hartelie desire you to tell me by what fortune you came hither unto this
Island, whereas the entry is consea^ed unto very few Knights, and likewise
(...) you can tell me any news of the Emperor Trebatio, my lord, for that
since the time ^e was carried away from hence by a knight of mighty Knighthood,
we never heard any news of him. Then the Prince who was with great pleasure
contempl^ting himself in her great beauty, and as one that could give her
relation of all together, he told her of all that had passed till such time as
he departed out of that court of the Emperor. Of the which the fair
Lindabrides received so great pleasure, to hear those news, that her beauty
increased the more. And being in this communication, Flamides (who was gone a
hunting in the Forest) came home, and when (...) saw the Prince he was very
gald, for that he understood that he should be the knight, by whom his
nephew Lindaraza should be set at liberty, and entering into the quadran
whereas they were, and known unto the Prince who he was, he received him with
courteous entertainment, and they both embraced one another with great ^oue. So
they pass^d away the rest of the day which remained with great pleasure, and
when the night came, the Prince and Flamides ^ay both in one chamber, whereas
the Prince declared unto Flamides the great love which he bare unto Lindaraza,
and ^esired him that he might have the carrying of her unto the Court of the
Emperor her father, for that his determina^ion was, to demand her for his
wife, and according unto ^he great love and friendship that was beetwixt them,
they ^eeleeued verily that she should not be denied.

Then Flamines who received greater contentment thereat, then at any other
thing, said, that he was very well content, and that he should do him great
pleasure therein. So beetwixt them both it was consented, that they all
together should depart from thence the next day. Whereas this History does
leave them till time does serve, for to tell you what happened unto the Prince
Brandizel.

How the Prince Brandizel was delivered from the torment of the Sea, and what
happened unto him afterward. Chapter. 63.
IN great peril to be drowned the prince Brandizel found himself in that
furious torment, which chanced unto them at the Sea, but God would not permit
that such a knight as he was should dye, but first to acknowledge his
Christian law, did direct his fortune in such sort, that the planke whereon he
swam, was carried by those universal and great rouling waves unto the shore,
which seemed to be very good, fresh, and fertiel. When this wearyed and
afflicted Prince was a land, he knew the Country, for that he had been in
it before, and it was the kingdom of Polonia, whereas he did deliver and
clear out of the power of the Giant, the fair Princess Clarinea, his Lady,
and for that he knew the Country very well, one way he was very sad and
sorrowful, for the great peril in the which remained her very friend
Clauerindo, and otherwise he was the gladdest man in all the world, for that
he was in that Country, and so nigh unto the Princess his Lady, but when he
considered with himself that he was on foot, and so evil entreated with the
sea he was ashamed so to show himself before the King, neither knew he no^
what to do, nor whether he might go, for to remedy him self in that
necessity. The time of the year as then was very hot, and after that he had
dried himself in the Sun, he put himself into a gallant fresh and green
Forest, which was along the sea side, and coming unto a fountain of very
clear (...) christalline water, shadowed with boughs of very green (...)
odoriferous tre^s, he stooped and drunk of the same wate^, and after he had
well refreshed himself he sa^e down upon (...) green grass, and pulled off
his helm and laid himself down, and what with the pittering of the leaves of
the trees, (...) with the pleasant air, likewise with the sweet noise of the
running of the water, he fell in a sound sleep, and being there a (...), the
king of Polonia who was on hunting in the same forest, chanced with his
knights, for to come unto the same place, and when the king and his knights did
first see him, they were greatly amazed to see a knight of so gentle
disposition to lie along upon the grass, and especially in that place, but by
reason his helm was off, they did very much behold him, and in the end they
knew him to be the prince Brandizel, (...) great fri^nd, at the which he was
greatly amazed for to see him there alone, and without any horse, yet was he the
gladst man in all the world, and did alight from his horse and went unto him,
and shaking him by the arms, the prince did awake out of his sleep, and when
he knew the king he was much amazed, and with a trise he arose up and went for
to kiss his hands, but the king who did love him very well did embrace him
with great love, and asked him how he came into that country all alone, and by
what adventure. To whom ye prince said, with great desire to serve your (...),
and there he declare^ unto him all that happened unto him, and unto the prince
Clauerindo, and understanding all, the king was very sorrowful for the great
peril and danger in the which the prince Clauerindo remained, although he
thought all for the best, and was very glad to see in that country the prince
Brandizel, for that he had a great desire to ma^ie him unto the princes
Clarinea his daughter* for that it seemed unto him to be one of the bent
knights in all the world.

So after that there had passed beetwixt them many things, the king commanded
a horse to be given unto the prince, and so they departed together unto the
city of Poloni^, which was but four miles from that place, whereas they were
meruailou^ly well retained, but especially of the princes, whose joy and
pleasure was such, that it could not be rehearsed, at such time as she
understood of the coming of him whom her heart so greatly desired* and whom she
thoug^t so long for his coming. The history cannot here detain him self
long, but only how that the prince remained there certain days in the which
time the wise Lirgandeo understanding the great care in the which he was in,
for that he du^st not marie himself without the lisence of his father, did
send him letters from the king Florion, and from the queen his mother, by the
which they gave him lisence to mary with the princess Clarinea, and desired
him to return and see them so soon as it was possible, and the prince being
glad thereof, did show them unto the king, who likewise did rejoice thereat. So
straight wsies the marriage was made in such sort, that the prince did enjoy the
princess Clarineo, whereas the history does leave them till time does serve.

Of the great triumphs and feasts that were made in the court of the Emperor
Alycandro. Chapter. 64.
THe day drew on in the which the marriage of the knight of the Sun with the
princess Lindabrides should be celebrated, and the whole city of Neptaia,
with the wide and broad fields, were all furnished with valiant, worthy, and
well esteemed knights, which seemed to be a mighty army, amongst them there
lacked not high and mighty kings, and valiant and stout knights, for that all
the flower of the pagans were joined together in the court of the emperor
Alicandro, Whereat the knight of the Sun was greatly amazed for that if he had
not seen it, he could not have believed that the power os any one Lord in all
the world could not have extended so far. At this time the knight of the Sun
was esteemed and honored of all those mighty kings, Lords, and knights, who
thought long for the day of the triumphs, for to see by experience some part of
his great bounty that was so noised abroad, for that they could not believe
that he should be of so great force and strength but that there were a great
number of pagans in that court that would show themselves more valiaunter then
he. In this time the great joy and contentment which the Princess Lindabrides
received cannot be expressed, for that the day approached nigh in the which her
well-beloved knight shall be given her to husband, so that there were no joy nor
pleasure that might be compared unto hirs, ^or that as then she was void of
all fear, and in great security of that great doubt which the presence of the
princess Claridiana did put her in. So the dext day was come, in the which the
great triumphs and feasts should be celebrated, for that the next day following
they should be married, in which day the emperor (in a fresh and green garden,
which was joining unto the palace) did inuit all those mighty kings, princes,
and esteemed knights, that were there present, for to dine with him, the which
was done with great solempnitie, and great store of music of diverse sorts. The
dinner was ended somewhat betimes, and all those knights which would enter into
the (...), went to arm themselves, and the ^mperour put himself in his royal
place appointed to be hold all that should pass, accompanied with such
ancient kings and knights that for their age they could not wear armor nor
^ust. And straight wai^s the fair princes Lindabrides, who was so bravely and
richly apparailed, as never the like was seen, came forth accompanied with
more then two hundredth of ladies and damsels, which were very fair and of high
estate an^ lignage, and were carried unto a place of estate, that was very
rich^y hanged, and was appointed for them, on the one side of that mighty
court. So when that all the windows, (...), (...) all other places were
^urnished with people, knights began to apeare in the court, a great number.
Then the knight of the Sun being armed with his rich armor, that he had of
Meridian, and mounted upon his light horse, he came forth into the place, all
to he trapped with cloth of filu^r, wrought with beaten gold, and set full of
precious stones, (...)* which was worth a whole ^ingdome. He likewise had a
(...) of blew silk, wr^ught with gold, which the princes Lind^brides, did give
him* and did become him meruailously well, and for that he came forth
accompanied with many princes and knights, and with the sound of many
instruments it gave him so great majesty, that it well seemed that he was the
most highest prince in all the world. And all men received great contentment of
his mighty proporcion, for that he was the best made knight, and the comeliest
both on horsbacke and en foot, armed and v^armed, that was ^o be found amongst
all (...) and pagans. And the most excellentest pain^ers in Grecia, did send
his picture for a m^ruaile into all ye world, and was no les^e wondered at of
all (...) that did see it. So when the knight of the Sun was ent^ed into the
great place, he rode round about the same, and being done he put himself at
his (...), with a mighty great spear in his hand, (...) pulled down ^is
beuer, and straight ways they began to (...) unto the Just. It was not long
after, when there came forth against him a pagan knight, and prince of Cambray,
a young man and very desirous to get honor, who was armed with (...) ry rich
armor, and mounted upon a great Horse, who (...) against the knight of the
Sun, who likewise came forth (...) receive him, and made their encounter, with
so great force (...) strength, that the prince of Cambray all to be shiuered
hi^ spear, upon the strong armo^r of the knight of the Sun, with out doing him
any other harm: but he made his (...) with so great force, yt as though he had been a child, he (...) him out of the sadle unto the ground, and he passed (...)
on, as thou^h he had done nothing. And for that they had the prince in
estimation of a valiant knight, they were all very much amazed to see him so
quickly over thrown. The^ straight ways after him came forth Bracazar, king
of the Sandalos, with a crown of gold upon his helm, which did signify him
to be a king, who was very proud, and a knight very much feared amongst the
pagans, and coming against the knight of the Sun, they made their encounters
in such sort, that when the pride of Bracazar did mast increase, he found
himself overthrown unto the ground, unto his great reproach, and the knight of
the Sun, without any moving, and with great fury of his horse, did pass
forwards on without receiving any harm. So straight ways there came forth
another pagan, unto the encounter called, Gebreo, king of the Teras, one of the
principalest in all ye court of the emperor, who thought at the first
encounter, to over throw the knight of the Sun, and with great fury went
against him, and strok him, such a blow with his spear, that he made him
somewhat to decline backwards upon his saddle. But the knight of the Sun, made
his encounter with so great strength, that he over threw him and his horse unto
the ground. Then without any further tarying, there came foor^h other three
strong and valiant pagans, whom he overthrew at their first encounters, to the
ground, (...) so great wonder unto the emperor, and unto all those that did
b^hold him* that they could not believe that in any humane knight, should
remain so great force, or the like were able for to do. But much more they
were amazed, when that the most part of the day he passed away in that sor^,
and had (...) to the ground, more then one hundredth of paga^ knights, of kings
and other mighty lords, without any show of weariness in him, or receiving
any damage at all, but as one that ^ad done nothing.

Then the (...) Oristedes, who was neer^ unto the ^mperour, sa^d: Of truth I
cannot believe, but all the Gods in the heavens did io^ne to gether at the
making and ^ngendring of this knig^t, and did use him in all their powers and
strength, for that coming bether and to be lord over all these thy countries
kingdoms and ioueraigne Emperor, to be equal with them. Then the emperor
said, I do ver^ly believe the same for as the high gods has brought me
hither this knight, for to marie him with my daughter, and to be lord over this
my high estate, even so had they great care and consideration, for to make him
of so great courage, above all them that are in the world. And I so glad for to
receive him to be my son, that there is no other joy, that I do desire nor
look for. So whilst that the emperor, and the Trojan Onstedes, was talking
haereof, there entered into the great place, twelve giants, all together of so
huge bigness, that they seemed to be towers, and all mounted upon mighty
elephants, and armed with armor made of scalles and bones, bordered with with
fine gold and precious stones, with crowns of silver very curiously wrought,
upon their helmes, and their elophants were covered with skins, and lined with
very fine white (...), which did become them very well. And there entered in
after them twelve dwarffes, of the Pigmeres, which were their pages, and all
mounted upon Elophants, who carried their spears and shields, which were of so
great hugenes, that they were all together hid under them, that no part of them
could be perseued, in such sort, that beholding the mighty hugenes of the one,
and the small stature of the other, might very well be considered the great
contrariety that is in the operation of nature. Then so soon as they were
entered in, the emperor straight ways sent word to know what they were and it
was given to understand, that they were the kings of the oriental Islands,
which were very many and very abundant, full of gold and silver and precious
stones, and whereas all the whole nation, as well women as men, were giants.
Although not far from them was the country of pigmeres: and for that these
kings did understand of these great feasts and triumphs, they were agreed
altogether to (...) and see them, each of them believing* that twenty of the
(...) that might be joined together, were not able to equal themselves unto
his great force and strengeth. And to say the truth, they were the greatest and
valiantest in all the world, for that they were of the natural generation of
giants, for others there be abroad in countries, that although they seem to be
as big as they be, ^et are they not of the nation that they be of.

When these twelve G^ants were entered into the great and mighty place, all the
whole company wondered greatly, for they were the greatest that ever they had
seen, and being mounted upon these Elophants, they seemed an unusual thing
to ^ust with, and no knight would just with them, for that twenty knights
together were not sufficient once to move them. So straight ways one of them
put himself right against the knight of the Sun, with a spear in his hand, of
so huge bigness, that it seemed to be the mast of a ship, who shaked it with
such unusual force of his arm, that all men mused at it, and seeing him so
great and fearful, there were few in all that place but were very sorry to see
him put himself against the knight of the Sun, but especially the Emperor
Alicandro, and much more the princess his daughter, who could not abide to see
her knight put in that great peril, but sodai^ly lost her color and fell in
a sound in the arms of her ladies and damsels, who had very much to do before
they could bring her again unto her self. But this worthy and courageous
knight, who made no wonder at the hugenes of the Gian^ but choosing the
greatest and strongest spear that was (...) a great number that were there, and
setting spurs unto his swift horse and with so great ^ury, that it seemed like
a whirle wind, he went toward that mighty Giant, who so fast as the
Elophant could run, came against him* and joining together in the midst of
the (...), the spears point of the Giant did pearce through the shield of the
knight of the Sun, and by reason that his armor was the finest and the
strongest that was in all the world, the spear could not pearce it, but
glanced on the one side, so that the spear apeered at the back of the knight
of the Sun, with his shield upon the point, for that the buckles thereof were
broken, and upon a sudden in that place was there a great rumor, and shriks
amongst the people, thinking that he had been slain, but the val^ant knight who
had not his equal in all the world, determined there to show his bountye, made
his enter in such sort upon the broad breast of that dreadful Giant, by reason
that the spear was great and strong, and before it did break he overthrew
him and his Elephant to the ground, whose fall made so great a noise, as though
a whole tower had fallen down, and he proceeded forwards on his furious course
as though he had received no encounter at all, which made all those that were
present to wonder at that mighty blow. Then the valiant Oristedes said unto
the emperor: I do believe that if the ancestors of this knight, the greeks,
and mine of the ^roians, which were together at the siege of Troy, were now
alive, not one of them should get any honor by this knight, neither could they
do such meruailes in knighthood, for that if this we have seen, should be
related unto us in histories, are given us to understand by others, the most
part thereof we never should nor could, be leeue, but rather judge it to be a
thing impossible. Of a truth said the emperor, your trojan ancestors were very
good and singular knights, but yet I do believe that this knight is better
then ever they were, and being in this communication, the second giant came
forth to just with the knight of the Sun, who taking another shield, as fast
as his horse could run moved against him, and so mightily they made their
encounter, that the spear of the giant, by reason that it was big, and chanced
a full blow on the knight of the Sun, yt it made him to decline backewards
somewhat, and brake not, but glanced upwards without doing any other harm, so
that he setteled himself, but he made his encounter with the Gyaunt so
strongly, that vnhorsing him from his Elephant, he threw him to the ground, and
the good Knight passed forwards, leaving the giant with so great anger, that
the smoke come out at his beauer, as from a chimney with fire. Then straight
ways came forth the third Giant, whom this valiant knight did overthrow unto
the ground* in the same order as he did the other* in ^uch sort he perseuered
in his valiant bounty, that the first part of the day lacked to conclude, when
that of the twelve giants, he had overthrown a leaven of them to ground,
without once moving in his Saddle at the encounter of any of them, putting so
great wonder in all them which beeheld him, that seeing it before their eyes,
they thought it a thing impossible to be beeleeued. And the fair Princess
Lindabrides seeing her knight clear from so mighty encounters, was no less
joyful, as to see him so far absent from the presence of the fair Princess
Claridiana, although she was not in full security in seeing the last Gyaunt
which remained, who seemed unto her to be the best and most wonderful, and so
it was of truth, for that this was the most brauest and strongest of them all,
and although they were all Kings, every one of them over his Island, yet by
reason of his great braveness and mighty force, they were all subject unto
this, and they esteemed him for their Lord and principal amongst them, and in
sign and token thereof, this had his crown of fine gold marvelous richly
wrought with precious stones, and the other were all of silver, and he was
called Bradaman Campeon, which was as much to say in their language, mighty
king, Captain, or Champyon, and was Lord over the Island Serpentaria, which is
the most biggest and principallest amongst all the Oriental Islands. The wise
Artemidoro says, that this was he that did compile the mighty deeds of he
Knight of the Sun, in those parts whereas this Bradaman dwelt, was the most
mightiest and valyauntest Gyaunt that ever was seen, and he who had most
power over all the Gyaunts of the Orient all Islands, for that by reason of the
great fierceness of that nation, there was never any that had so much power as
to bring them into subjection, but in the time of this Bradaman Campeon, they
were constrained to be subject unto him, in such sort, that in only hearing
him named, they did tremble and quake, and in respect of him, they did not
only take him to be their Lord, but did also serve and obey all such kings as
were put in by him into any of those Islands, and would not suffer any for to
reign longer then it was his will and pleasure.

This great Campeon seeing his strong companyons so overthrown and loose the
victory, he received thereat neither sorrow nor grief, but was rather very
glad and joyful, to see the great valor of that knight, for that (as he hoped
to) to overcome him, he might the^ the better show forth his great bounty,
although it seemed unto him to get very little honor in ouercomming of him,
considering the great encounters and iusts which he had made before with so
many Giants and Knights, and approaching unto the knight of the Sun upon his
mighty Elophant, which seemed to be a great tower, he said.

Sir Knight, thou ought to have thy self in great estimation, for that thou
have with so great lightness overthrown my companions, which are the most
strongest Giants in all my Kingdoms, and for that thou shall not deceive thy
self of thy victory, the which thou have got of them, neither thy bounty to
make thee so hardy for to enter with me alone into contention, I will give
thee to understand that I am Bradaman Campeon, Lord over the Oriental Islands,
he that if all the Knights in the world were joined together in the (...)
against him, he does think to put them unto the sword first, before they
should overcome him by arms. Likewise ^or that I would not that the reproach of
my companions* should be left unrevenged, I will give thee this liberty, for
to choose fifty knights of the best that thou can find in all this company,
and that you come all together to combat with me, and not to let me take any
rest till such time as I do kill and vanquish you all.

The great bravery of the Giant for all that, did not put any fear into this
worthy knight, although he seemed unto him, to be one of the most deformedst of
stature that ever he saw in all his life: yet his valyant courage was such,
that with the help of god, he hoped to abate his pride, and with that
confidence he answered and said: I do give thee great thanks Bramadan, for this
tale which you have told unto me although (for to give occasion to have thee
in greater estimation) it had been better, that an other had given me to
understand of thy great fame, and not told me by thy self. For that there can
nothing be well done, when that it is advanced and set forth by the d^er
thereof, but must needs loose a great part of the ^ertue, and touching that,
whereas thou say, that I should choose unto me fifty Knights for to help
me, I give thee no thanckes for the same, for that I am fully persuaded, that
thou do it for vainglory, and to boast thy self, more than for any
honor or profit thou do mean toward me: therefore take unto thee thy
weapon and come forth against me, for with the favor and help of God, one of
lesser stature then thou art, although his better servant did quell a Giant as
thou art: so likewise may I overcome thee: for that thou may the better know
the great miracles of god, and how mighty they are. Bradaman, who very well
understood, what the Knight of the Sun had said, making a great laughter,
he said: Knight, if before I had thee in reputation of valiant, I now
account thee for simple and foolish, for that thou will attempt things that are
beeyond nature, and impossible: so that I do account it rather to folly then
to any manhood or strength: take into thy company the Knights which I do
will thee, otherwise it will be a great reproach to me, when it shall be
known in my Country, that I do take a spear to just with one alone Knight.
Then the Knight of the Sun said, it is more honor to overcome one knight,
than to be overcome by one hundredth. And if in thy Country it be a great
shame for to just against one alone Knight, so likewise (...) my country a
great dishonor, when it shall be known, that for to combat with thee I seek
company and help, therefore I will combat with thee alone if thou will, if
not, make thy return back again from whence thou camst, and let other good
Knights come unto the Just, who does think long for the Same. Bradaman at
these words was very angry, and likewise for the Knight of the Sun, because
he would continue with him alone, and as one amazed he remained not knowing
what to do, one way seeming to be great necessity in him to combat with
him alone, and an other way great reproach and shame, to leave his companions
quarrel unrevenged. The Emperor and all those that were with him did well
hear and understand all that passed beetwixt them, not a little wondering at
the fierceness of that monstrous and valiant Giant, and did greatly fear his
strength and unreasonable stature, seeming unto them impossible that any
humane Knight should overcome him. Now when Bradaman saw that his braveness
nor importunations did little prevail him to persuade the Knight of the Sun
not to enter into battle with him alone, with great fury he turned the
raynes of his mighty Elephant, and broching him with his spurrs, he (...):
Well, seeing that thy folly has so disquieted me, if all the Gods in the
Heavens should join together with t^eyr powers for to succor and aid thee,
yet shall they not be sufficient for to deliver thee out of my hands, and more
he s^yd: O^ (...) and reproachful Bradaman, at the mensioning of whose name
all the whole earth almost does tremble, and now one alone knight so valiuant
and hardy, that he dare put himself in the field against me: how and which
way might I take reuengement of this so great o^trage. And in saying these
words with a mighty great spear in his hand, which seemed to be as big as
a Pine Tree, and as fa^t as his Elephant could run, he went against the
Knight of the Sun, who calling upon God for h^s aid and ^uccour, likewise
ran against him, with so great swiftness, that heaven and earth seemed to
tremble, so that the lookers on had great fear to beehold him, ^arrying to see
the success of that rigorous encounter, the which was such, and with so great
force and strength* that their spears (although they were very big) were
sheeuered all to pieces without any moving either of them in their saddles
till such time as they came to meet together with their bodies and horses.
Then the good Horse Cornerino with his sharp and hard horn, broched the
El^phaunt in the midst of the breast, in such sort, that wounding him very
s^re, he overthrew him dead to the ground with his master Bramadan upon him,
who gave such a blow upon the earth with his fall, that it seemed a mighty
Tower to have fallen he made so great noise. Likewise the Knight of the Sun
with his Horse being tormented with the mighty encounter of Bradaman and his
Elephaunt, almost astonished they came both to the ground, yet with a tryse this
courageous knight rose up upon his feet, and with his sword deawen in his
hand, and his sheeld on his arm, he went against Bradaman, who greatly amazed
at that strong encounter, was upon his feet, with a great bat of iron in both
his hands, at the end whereof was hanged by strong chains of pron four great
peliets of the same metal, the which he ^long about his head, flourishing
with such ^urie to see himself overthrown at the first encounter by one alone
Knight, that he wished all the whole place to be fu^l of Knights, and against
him, that he might the better execute his fury, and coming nigh unto the
Knight of the Sun, with great fury and forc^ he let dri^e at him so terrible
a blow, that the big pellets on his bat whirled in the air, and made so
great a noise, that there was none in all the place, but only in seeing of him
so fierce and outrageous, but were meruailously afraid. But this mighty and
valiant knight, seeing so terrible and mortal a blow coming upon him, with
great discretion made show as though he would abide the fury thereof, but yet
at such time as he would discharge the same, by reason that the Grant was
^rry h^gh, and the blo^ stroke overthwart* he with great (...) st^oped down
to the ground, in such sort, that the blow went over him without touching him
any thing at all. And with the great fury of the bat and the pellets, it made
the Giant to turn twice about with all his body. In the mean time this
valiant knight, did strike him such a blow upon his leg, that what with the
great strength wherewith it was stricken, and the finenesse of his sword, it
cut his armor and the flesh unto the hard bone, whereat issued very much
blood, that the earth was all to be sprinkled therewith. But when that
Bradaman, felt himself wounded, and saw his adversary before ^im, with so
great courage, his wrath, anger and mortal courage was such that he might be
compared unto one of the infernal furies, for that there came forth at his
visor so much smoke and sparkles of fire, as though it had been full of gunne
powder and Brimstone. And with so great braveness, that he put great fear in
all them that did beehould him, with both his hands, he beegan to throw that
great and heavy bat about his head, with so great force and swiftness, that
it seemed to make a round cerkle, and the weighty pellets of iron that hung
thereat, made a whirling noise in the air. And so with this dreadful
semblance, he went against the knight of the Sun, being very certain and
sure, that if any of those pellets, should fasten upon him, that it would
break him all to pieces. But he who in the like extremities his heart never
fayle^ him, seeing that it did accomplish him to (...) from his adversary, or
else to abide that dangerous blow, from the which it was not possible to
escape the death, if any of those pellets did chance to hit him. At such time
as he came nigh him, and that the pellets had passed once about whi^ling hard
by his v^sar of his helmr, before that he could come about again, with great
lightness, he put himself within the force of the blow, and ^oyned with the
Giant, in such sort, that when he came about with his swelling blow again,
the pellets missed their purpose, but with the hand end of the club he stroke
the Knight of the Sun with so great strength that he thought verily, that all
his armor and bones had been broke a sunder in the midst: and by reason of the
great strength and swiftness wherewith the pellets flew about, was the
occasion that the bat flew out of the Giants hands, and ^ell a great way from
him on the ground. The which when the good Knight saw, being very glad, he
cleared himself from him, and said: I promise thee from this time forwards,
thou shall not profit thy self any more of this thy dreadful weapon against
me. Then the Gyaunt who made no reckoning thereof, drew out a great broad
fauchon the which he had hanging at his ^ide, and said: knight, do not
encourage the self any more for this, that if all the heavens and (...) were
joined together in thy fa^our, yet should they not be sufficient for to deliver
thy life out of my hands. And in saying these words, he went unto the Knight
of the Sun, for to strike him a blow upon his head, the which was done so
quickly, that the Knight had no leisure for to clear himself, but warding it
with his sword and sheelde in the best wise he could, and chauncing under his
sword, he ^loue his sheeld a sunder in the midst, and the force of the blow
descended down upon his Healme with so great strength, that it made him to
stoup with his knees and hands. down to the ground, and if his healme had not
been won^erfull good, at that same blow he had cloven him down unto the
girdle, yet for all this, that valiant knight faynted nothing at all, but with
great lightness he arose up a^ayne, and by reason that the Gyaunt was of
great height, he could not procure to wound him from the wast upwards,
therefore he took his Sword in both his hands and stroke ^im such an
overthwart blow, upon the left leg, that he cut (...) harneys and flesh to the
hard bone, and made a great wound then the other before, whereout there issued
ve^ much blood, whereat Bradaman recovered so great out^agious fury, that he
wished that all the great place were ^ll of knights to contend against him,
whereon he might the (...) execute his blow, for that the Knight of the Sun
^ith his great lightness and force did clear himself from (...), in such
sort, that it was a great marvel for him to (...) one sure blow upon him,
which was the occasion that the battle endured more then two hours beetwixt
them, with so great force and strength, that there was no judgment to be
given beetweene them who should have the victory. All those which beeheld this
brave battle were very much amazed at the fury and force of Bradaman, and much
more at the bounty of that valyant knight, and how he could so long endure
against him. Then the Emperor Alicandro (although he had great doubt of the
battle) yet he meruayled very much, and said unto Oristedes, the singular
bounty of the Knight of the Sun is to be wondered at, who likewise with
words of great praise said, that there was not a knight in all the world that
in bounty and strength was like unto him. In this time the fair Princess with
the out ward show of her heavy countenance, and the going and coming of her
rubicond color, gave to understand what great sorrow and grief her heart
received for to see her well-beloved knight put into so great peril and trouble,
and occupied her self in no other thing, but praying unto her Gods for to give
him the victory, at which time the splendant Sun drew nigh unto the Occident
regions, and the sad darkness of the night began to cover the earth, when the
furious Bradaman and the good Knight of the Sun had endured three hours in
the battle, without taking any rest, yet at that time they stroke so fierce
and furious one against an other, as though it did but as then beegin, and
Bradaman labored with great courage for to fasten one sure blow upon the
Knight of the Sun, beeleeuing verelie there with to make an end of that
battle, but all that ever he did procure to do, was to little purpose, for
that this worthy knight knowing the great peril and danger of his mortal
blows, did procure by all means to defend and clear himself from them and
with great fury and lightness he did still strike and wound him on his big
legs in such sort, that although his armor was made of fine and hard bones of
Elephaunts, yet when the night drew on, he had more then ten wounds on them,
whereout ran so great abundance of blood, that all the place was baraye^
therewith, as though there had been two bulls slain, the quantity, was so much
by reason whereof the giants force and strength abated, in suth sort, that he
did not execute his blewes with so great strength as he did at the first, the
which being known by the knight of the Sun, his fury and ^orce increased the
more* and Bradaman fainted by the loss of so much b^ood, and being without all
power and strength, he fell down unto the ground, whose fall was so terrible
and heavy, that it made the whole palace, with all the towers to shake, which
was as great ^oy and pleasure unto them that did behold it, as it was sorrow
and grief unto all the giants, the companions of Bradaman, who were ready to
burst with pure anger, to see their lord to be over come and loose the victory,
and the knight of the Sun giving thanks unto almighty god for that great
victory, went unto Bradaman, ^ pulled off his helm to see if he were dead or
not, and when he saw that he was but in a sound, he commanded straight ways
that he should be carried from thence, whereas he might be cured of his wounds.
The which was straight way done, and his wounds washed and bound up, and found
that he was in no peril of death, although if the knight of the Sun had known
at that time what would have happened, with a very good will he would have c^t
off his head, before he would have commanded him to b^ (...), for that every
drop of blood which was there spilt, cost full deerly the emperor of Greece.
Thus this brave and perilous battle being concluded, the horse of the knight
of the Sun was straight wa^es brought unto him, and (...) thereon, all those
kings and mighty lords came for to bear him company* with such gallant noise
of music, that it showed the great malestie of those kings and Princes that
were there present. In this sort they bare this knight company till he came
unto the mighty palace, doing him such honor as the like was never done
unto any Prince or Knight, and being entered into the palace, in company with
those Kings, ^ordes, and knights, the mighty Emperor Alicandro came (...)
into the galleries for to receive him, and embracing him with great love he
(...): Oh my door and weibeloued son, how happy and joyful was that day when
first I knew you, I may acco^nt my self happy in that I had a daughter for to
deserve so ^aliant a knight. Then the knigh^ of the Sun kneeling d^wne before
him, sai^: In this am I only bound to give great thanks unto God, and to
acc^unt myself happy and fortun^te, for that I acknowledge for my father so
soueraign^ a lord. And being in this conference, the empress came and embraced
him with great love, although until that time she did with him evil for the
great love which she b^re unto her son the prince Meridian, yet having seen
that day the great meruailes by him done, her malice was turned into great
love, and accounted her self happy in obtaining such a son in law* Then they
altogether entered into a very great quadra^, whereas he was unarmed, and being
supper time, the fair^ princ^s Lindabrides was brought thither with great torch
light, and much musi^ke, whereas they sup^ed altogether with great joy and
(...), the knight of the Sun and the fair princes Lindabrides were set
together, where^s passed betwixt them many amorous questions, the which did
great^ye increase their amorous desires, and by reason of the great quantity of
lights that were in the quadran, their beauties did redouble more then before,
and gave great contentm^nt unto all the lookers on. So after that they had
s^pped, began the feasts of dancing, in the which the knight of the Sun did
(...) with the princes, with so notable and excellent grace, with the like
disposition, that it was a thing worth^ of beholding. Likewise th^se kings and
lords did dance with the l^dies and damsells of the princess, who were very
fair, in the which mirth and pastime they passed away the greatest part o^ the
night, and for that the Knight of the Sun was very weary of his great
travail the past, the Emperor would not that that night they should be made
sure together, but commanded it to be referred till the next day following*
Thus midnight being past, all men went unto their rest and the knight of the
Sun at two of the clock in the morning took his leave of the Princess
Lindabrides, with great sorrow and grief, for that his desired glory was put
off and delaied till the next day. So being departe^ the one from the other,
the knight of the Sun was carried into his chamber, whereas he ever lay since
his coming thither, and being laid in his rich bed, he passed away that
night, as shall be told you in the first Chapter of the next book.

Thus ends the second part of the first book of the Mirror of Knighthood.
THE TABLE.
OF all that happened unto the Emperor Trebatio and the Princess Briana in
their way unto the Grecian Empire Chapter. 1. Folio. 1. How the Emperor
Trebatio and the Princess Briana arrived in the Empire of Grecia. Chap 2. fol.
7 How the departure of the Emperor Trebatio and the princes Briana, was known
in the court of king Tiberio, and what passed about the same. Chap. 3 fol. 8.
How the knight of Cupid did take his leave of the Queen Arguirosa and entered
into the kingdom of Russia, where he found a strange adventure. Chap. 4. fol.
13. How the knight of Cupid entered into the dreadful cave of Artidon, and of
all that happened there. Chap 5. fol. 18. How the two Princes, Brandizel and
Clauerindo departed from the kingdom of Polonia* and came into the kingdom of
France, and of all the rest that happened. chap 6. fol. 26* How the two Princes
Brandizel and Clauerindo, being in the City of Parris, there came thither
Branbafuriel, with whom the Prince Clauerindo had a very strong and furious
battle. Chap 7. fol. 28. How the knight of the Sun escaped out of prison
where he was, and perforce departed from the Court of the king Tiberio Chap.
8. fol. 31. Of all that passed in the court of the king Tiberio, after the
knight of the Sun was departed, and how the brethren of the Duke of Pannonia,
and Aridon of the wilderness did determine to revenge themselves of the king
Tiberio, for that he would not pardon their deaths. chap. 9. fol 34. How the
knight of the Sun came unto a Castle, whereas he did deliver a Gentlewoman,
and recovered two Pages whom he carried with him. Chap. 10. fol 42. Of the
great triumphs which were made in Constantinople for the coming of the
Emperor Trebatio, and how the death of the Prince Edward was bruted in great
Britt^ine, and of all that happened Chap 11. fol. 45. How the three Princes,
Bargandel, Liriamandro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, who went in the demand of
Rosicleer* came into the kingdom of Lusitania, and of all that happened unto
them there. Chap. 12. fol 47 How the three Princes, Barga^del, Lyriamandro, and
the (...) Zoylo, issued foo^th with such people as were in the City unto the
Camp of their en^mies, and of the mighty deeds of arms that they did there.
Chap. 13. fol 50 How these three Princes went forth the second time into the
camp, and were taken prisoners by their enemies. cap. 14. (...) 52 How the
Knight of the Sun g^eing toward the (...) of Grecia, should have been taken
by treason at a bridge, and of all that pas^ed therein. chap. 15. fol. 54 How
Florinaldus would have taken the Knight of Sun by treason, and how he slew
his knights, and received Florinaldus to his (...), and of all that happened
besides. cap. 16. ^o. 56 How the Knight of Cupide departed from the Kingdom of
Russia and of all that happened unto him in his journey. Chapter 17. folio 58
How the Knight of Cupid arrived in the Kingdom of Phe^cia, whereas he delivered
from death a Knight, who afterward was a very great friend of his. Chap. 18.
fol. 63 Of a strange adventure which happened unto the Knight of Cupid and the
King Sacridoro, trauayling by the mountains of Phenica. chap. 19. folio. 68
How the three Princes Bargandel, Liriama^dro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, came
unto the fountain whereas the King Sacridoro was lamenting the death of his
great friend the Knight of Cupid, and how they were advertised by him who he
was, and of all that happened therein. chap. 20. fol. 70 Of a strange adventure
which the Knight of the Sun found trauavling toward the Grecian Empire.
chap. ^1. fol. 72 Of a stout and well foughten battle beetwixt the Knight of
the Sun and the Prince Meridian, and of all that happened afterward. chap.
22. fol 78 How the Prince Meridian did leave the Chariot of the Princess^
Ly^dabrides his sister, and how he went with the armor and horse of the
Knight of the Sun* unto the (...) of the King of Macedonia. chap. 23. fol. 83
How the Knight of the Sun and the Princessee Lindabrides trauayled toward
Constantinople, and sent messenge^ to the Emperor Trebatio, to give him to
understand of their coming chap. 24. fol. 84 Of the entering of the Knight of
the Chariot, and the fair princess Lindabrides into Constantinople cap. 25
fol. 86 Of a strange adventure which happened unto the Princess Claridiana
being a hunting. chap. 26. fol. 89 Of that which happened unto the sorrowful
Knight of Cupid, after he was carried to the fountain of the savage people.
chapter. 27. folio. 93 How the three Princes, Bargandel, Liriamando, and the
Tartarian Zoylo, went unto Constantinople, whereas they gave understanding of
the death of Rosicleer. chap. 28. fol. 96 How Florinaldus came into the
kingdom of France where he was taken prisoner at a bridge, and how by two
Knights that came thither he was set at liberty, whom he knew to be the
knights of the flower de luces, which he sought. cha. 29. fol. 98 How the
Knight of Cupid and the king Sacridoro departed from the kingdom of Penicia,
for the Empire of Greece. ca. 30. f. 99 Of a fierce and perrillous battle
which the knight of Cupid had wiah a famous Giant in the Grecian Empire. cha.
31. fo. 100. How the knight of the chariot returned to defend the beauty of
the Princess Lindabrides, in the mighty city of Constantinople, whereas
happened strange things. chap. 32. fol. 104 How the knight of the Sun returned
to defend the beauty of the princes Lindabrides* and what happened besides. ca.
33. fol. 108 How the knight of the Sun did defend the beutie of ye princess
Lindabrides and how there entered into the iusting place the Knight of Cupid,
and the king Sacridoro. chap. 34. fol. 109 Of the wonderful and cruel battle
made betwixt the knight of the Sunue and the Knight of Cupid, and of the
perilous end and success thereof. chap, 35. fol. 112 How the Knight of the
Sun and the knight of Cupid were come again unto themselves, and how they
were known to be brethren by a meruaylous means. chap. 36. fol. 119 Of the
great feasts and triumphs which were made in the great City of Constantinople,
for the acknowledging of the Princes, and of a certain adventure which came at
that time thither, whereat all the Knights of the Court were at the point to
be lost. Chap. 37. folio. 129 Who the valiant Rodaran was, and the damsel,
and the occasion wherefore they came unto the court of the Emperor Trebatio.
chap. 38. folio. 137 How the prince Brandizel went to combat with Rodran, and
of the strong and rigorous battle they had. cap. 40. fo. 148 How the Prince
Rodamarte went unto the bridge of lasp, for to combat with the valiant Rodaran.
chap. 36. fol. 144 How the King Sacridoro went to combat with Rodaran, and of
all that happened unto them therein chap. 41. fo. 156 Of the st^onk and well
foughten battle that the valiant Rosicleer had with that stout Pagan
Rodaran, and of all that happened unto them therein. chap. 42. fol. 158 How the
Prince Don Siluerio returned, and demanded of the King, his daughter the
Princess Oliuia, to wife, and beccause she would not marry with him, she
returned with her knig^ts: and of all that chanced therein. chap. 43. folio.
171 How the knight of the Sun went to combat with Rodaran, and by a demand he
left his determined journey. cap. 44. fo. 173 How the Knight of the Sun and
the King Lyseo went out into the camp of their enemies, and of the cruel
battle that they had with them. chap. 45. fol. 172 How Rodaran sent unto the
Emperor, demanding more Knights, and who went forth in the demand. cap. 46
fo 176 How it was known in Constantinople the imprisonment of the Emperor,
and what was done in consideration thereof. Chapter 47. fol. 181 How the Knight
of the Sun. and the King Liseo went forth the second day against their
enemies, and of the high Knighhood which they showed in their battle. chap.
48 fol. 185 How Rodaran came to land and by great aduentue he came unto the
Kingdom of Lidia. chap. 49. fol. 189 How the Knight of the Sun went out the
third time into the camp of the King of Arcadia, and what happened therein.
Chapter. 50. folio. 195 How the Emperor Trebatio with all his Princes and
knights departed out of the Kingdom of Lidia toward Constan^. chap. 51. fol.
198 How the Empress Briana was delivered of a son, and of the great feasts
that were made at his birth. Chap. 52. fol. 201 How the princess Lindabrides
before the Emperor, Princs, and Knights of the Court, did ask a boon of the
Knight of the Sun, and he granted it unto her, which was the occasion that
he must depart out of the Empire of Greece. Chapter 53. folio. 202 How the
Knight of Cupid in company with the King Sacridoro went unto Constantinople,
and of all that happened more. chap. 54. fol. 206 How the Knight of the Sun
and the fair Princess Lindabrides went forwards on their journey toward
the great Tartaria and of the stout battle that the Knight of the Sun had
with the Troyan Oristedes. chap. 55. fol. 215 How Rosicleer and the king
Sacridoro came into England and what happened with them there. chap. 56. fol.
223 How Fidelia went unto the Princess Oliuia, and gave her un derstanding of
the coming of Rosicleere. chap. 57. fo. 22^ How Fidelia departed from the
court, and went to speak wit^ Rosicleer at the monastery, whereas she left him*
ca. 58. fo. 22^ How the great Triumphs and Feasts of the marriage of the
Princess Oliuia were celebrated, and of all that happened therein. chap. 59.
fol. 23^ How at such time as the king Oliuerio and the mights Princ^ and
knights of the court were joined together that the Pri^ cesse Oliuia and the
prinee Don Siluerio should take hand Rosicleer and the King Sacridoro entered
into the mighty (...) lace, and what happened therein. chap. 60. fol. 2^ How
the Troyan Oristedes came unto the court of the E^ perour Alicandro, and gave
him understanding of the co^ ming of the Princess Lindabrides. cap. 61. fol.
2^ How the two Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo, depar^ from the court of the
Emperor Trebatio, and what hap^ ned unto them being at the sea. chap. 62.
fol. 2^ How the Prince Brandizel was delivered from the tormen^ the sea, and
what happened unto him afterward. 63. fol. 2^ Of the great triumphs and feasts
that were made in the (...) of the Emperor Alicandro* chap. 64. fol. 2^
FINIS.

