AN ORATION TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AND MIGHTY PRINCE FREDERICK King of
Bohemia.

Made by Martin Opitius of SILESIA.

Translated out of the Latin.

M. D. C. XX.

An ORATION to Frederick King of BOHEMIA.
ALTHOUGH, most Illustrious King, this your hoped and happy entrance into
these Kingdoms deserve also to be celebrated with the public joy of the
whole Christian World: Yet we think that we especially, whom you have so
graciously received into your bosom, can-not without exceeding sin be
silent. Neither do I think that there is any among us of so desperate ill
nature, so auerse from the love of Peace, and such an enemy to the safety of
his Country, which does not impute this your so much wished Election unto
Heaven; and withal acknowledge with grateful mind this great Work of God.
Surely your excellent and admired Virtues, the voices of the greatest part of
the Empire, the Alliance and Friendship of so many great and potent Kings and
Princes, and a certain fatal inclination and affection of these Countries
toward you, may seem to have exalted you unto this height. Yet were there not
a few, who well weighing the miserable condition of our deplored State did
verily believe, that you would have avoided this envious Honor. Now the
Almighty Vmpier, who has the hearts of Kings in his hand, has directed your
Royal mind, otherwise inclinable enough unto Clemency, and has put us
afflicted Orphans under the wing of your protection, and chosen you to be a
Tutour and Parent unto us. And whether ever Guardian was more glorious, I
cannot say; yet sure I am, this Age affoords none more worthy and gracious. For
whether we look up to your most ancient Family, or your most honorable life,
we shall find for the first, that all Histories, all Monuments of Chronicles
do record the splendor of your most glorious House; and for the second, the
everliving God has treasured up in you so many Virtues, that unless so
Royal a Stock did claim your birth; with your very Virtues alone, might you
merit Scepters and equal Empires. Courtesy commands some one, but Majesty and
gravity does forsake him: Some one man is glorious in the Gown of Peace, but
does not so decently wear the Cassocke of War. Another extols Integrity
abroad, but he stabs it at home in the shade of pleasure. In a word, the World
never yielded any man, in whose manners was not imprinted some step of stain,
some blaine and blemish. Bnt in you, I speak freely without partial
affection, your veryest Enemies cannot pick out any thing to pick a quarrel
withal.

The whole course of your life, most renowned King, is a Mirror of Innocence,
and I may more easily express what all Virtue is, then what yours is. None
will detract from you the praise of Piety, but he that is impious; which Piety
alone has conquered your mind otherwise unconquerable, and by the which you
are so conspicuous above all other Princes, as it is above all other Virtues.
The love of Religion, withoutwhich no man ever grew great, has bin passed over
unto you from your Anceftors, with your Inheritance; the Vindication whereof
has bin the proper work of your Family, and whose succor, seat, and fortress
is your Heidelberge, an University most famous, as well for fostering you, as
it. What shall I speak of your Prudence the Empress of humane actions, in
which you do far ouer-goe the capacity of your years? Where is he that
excels you in the wise ordring of things present, in the prudent providing for
the future, and faithful remembering of things past? Who is more wary to avoid
frauds, and perils? who more circumspect in his counsels: In length of life
you do yet come short of middle Age, in depth of judgment you go beyond the
ancient. In age you profit leisurely as we do, but you post before us in
Verue. You are not yet come to ripenes of age, and yet you are full ripe for
Empire. The fewness of your years, most prudent King, has hither to excused
the infirmity of your wisdom: Now besides your divine towardness (which
admits no mediocritie of noble disposition) what shall defend your youth? how
hard a thing is it in your age to keep within the compass of your fortune?
yet have you kept within true compass. And hereof have you lately given so
much the more notable proof, by how much it is more magnificent to sue to be
eased of a Kingdom offered, then to invade it being denied. And now sithence
you have taken it upon you, what cause have we to doubt but that you will
defend it with the same moderation, by the which you did refuse it? So high and
generous a disposition cannot be unlike it self. But, O good God, how does
your gentleness even shine out of your Eyes? You are a second Traian. None
ever went out of your presence sadder then he came; none that does feel your
Justice does complain of cruelty or rigor: yea, you are another Augustus,
whom men may perceive to endure punishment himself, when he does impose it
upon others. Nothing (most clement Prince) has purchased greater praise to
your fortune, then that you are able; nothing has brought more Honor to your
nature, then that you are willing to save all you may. Hold on, O King, to
win and wear the most glorious Crown, Ob Ciues Seruatos, for saving your
Country. Go on in Gods Name with this your glory, which as it is rarer in a
royal House; so will it be more eminent in yours. I want a new Name, by which
I may express the unwonted Modesty of your Majesty. How easy is the access
of every one unto your Majesty, how joyful his departure! They come to a
Prince, and they find a Father; and when they do with good confidence present
their Petitions and Complaints before you, they end not their speech, out of
your loathing to hear any longer; but out of their own bashfulnesse to speak
any more. So marvelous is your mildness, so courteous your disposition, that
you bind men unto you against their wills. Your very Countenance so clear with
an heroical cheerfulness, what extraordinary mildness does it promise! And
yet your lenity does not lessen your authority, nor your severity lose your
love. There is nothing in you proud, there is nothing insolent; All your state,
gate, motion is amiable; you refresh both the minds and eyes of the beholders.
O modest King! O lowly Prince! Or rather high and far exceeding all height of
mortality! For never do you rise higher, then when you do thus depresse your
self. Whatsoever has weight in it self does settle it self below; but an
empty mind is puffed up with every little blast. And surely all these things
are truly great: And yet no less are those other things by which you have
attained unto these: I mean, your admirable honest behavior of life, contempt
of pleasures, and divine Temperance above the disposition of your age. Let
others show the Liberty of their power in their license of sinning; Let them
wallow in adulterous embracings; pass over the nights in Lasciuiousnes, and
their days in Gluttony: You are wholly Sobriety and Continence. Needs must
these virtues be in the height of excellence, that do issue from a Fountain
so clear, so mudlesse and so pure. To these may be added your ardent love to
Learning and Knowledge; which how much you do esteem, so many learned men
about you do abundantly testify. That I say nothing of that Sanctuary of
Learning, your Library of admired greatness, which you are not only content
to maintain, but do also as a new Philadelphus daily add unto it, and adorn
it. Neither do I touch your skill in diverse Languages, diverse of which you
speak with that facility, that every on seems to be your Native Tongue. Herein
you are far more fortunate then Alexander, who when he had subdued so many
Nations, did scarce understand the Tongue of any one of them. And let these
suffice as a small taste taken out of the infinite rank of your Virtues; we
will leave the true commendation of them to such whose ability and
assuredness in speaking is bounded within the same limits with your eternal
praise; which praise if Marbles and Books were not too hard, your self have
engraven with the golden Chesill of Love, in the most inward affections of your
Countrymen.

These Eyes of mine are witnesses how old and young, men as well as women,
followed you, departing from them out of your Pallatinate with a sad gladness:
In such strange manner did the public safety and private Orbitie set joy and
sorrow to fight together with diverse affections. One would have thought that
every man in the Country had been deprived of his Parent. You were not yet
gone away, most desired Prince, and yet we did desire your return. Neckar the
gentlest of all Rivers seemed, as in times past to the Romans, so now to it
self, barbarous. Even this Heroic Seat of thine, these Temples, these Towers
followed after their Sun in a mournful manner. That I speak not of men whose
infinite multitude powered out it self in every place, where you came, in the
very vast Wilderness: and yet every one thought himself to be sorsaken when
you left them: sighs and tears strove to break out in abundance. And whereas
in body, not very many of those multitudes did follow you, yet all with heart
and prayers (for otherwise they might not) did attend you, departing from them.
And did not your Wife the Heir of the Name and Virtues of that ever renowned
Queen great Elizabeth, seem now again to her self to leave Britain; only
glad in this, that it was with you? How had Redness, the Painter of cheeks,
dyed her face more then ordinary Milk white! how had a pious shower of tears
violated her eyes, cleerer then the Stars, shining wi thout the Moon! sighs
gave the farewell, because words sufficed not. And for your self I cannot say
whether greater Piety persuaded your stay or your journey. You left your Mother
that Princess of highest birth, who is yet higher then her birth, for that
she has borne you. You left your children, that is to say, a great part of
your heart; you left your Subjects, every of which could wish to live and die
with you. You went from peace to War, from Acquaintance to Strangers; from
the most peaceable Shore of Rheine, to Mulda, whose streams were swelled with
the blood of the Inhabitants; from Vineyards and a Garden of admirable beauty,
to Fields stained with the Robberies of savage Murderers, and covered with the
carcasses of the slain; from a most pleasant Castle, to a vast, yet desolate
and despoyled Place. An unhappy change; save that thereby you bring with you
splendour to the Place; a perpetual spring to the Fields; tranquillity to
Mulda, a friend to strangers; and peace to men in Arms. You come then into
this Scene, into this most intricate Tragedy, as a very God out of the Engine.
Piety has overcome this bard journey; the love of us has overcome the sharp
and high Mountains of Bohemia; within which Nature has entrenched it: Your
Clemency has overcome the Inclemencie of the place with much better luck then
Hannibal, the brauest of Commanders; who in old time passed his Army over the
tops of the high Alps, thorough the Clouds that seemed to touch Heaven. For
at the sight of him all Italy trembled, as at the falling of a Thunderbolt:
But by your coming the Tempest is appeased, the wind are laid, all things
are become calm and clear. He brought with him Troops of Soldiers, that he
might cut up the Romans: but you come attended with Troops for our
preservation. He had sharpened his Sword against the City; but your back does
blunt the Swords of our Enemies. Savage and sworn hatred opened the way to
him; but incredible love lays it open to you. He seemed to be borne to the
murder of men and the wasting of Cities; but you are borne to the infinite good
of the Commonwealth. His approach to the gates raised fear and horror: You,
they would be glad to bear in their very eyes, into the Throne of so many
Emperers and Kings. Him, the fearful Mothers Children, Virgins, women and
men ran away from; You they come out to meet in Triumph. His presence all did
detest with mourning and pitiful yellings; yours they do celebrate with
gladness and great rejoicing. They that have ouer-liued their former sorrow,
are now scarce able to bear their present joy. I do also verily believe that
if there be left in dead men any sense of things on earth, that the ghosts of
those men that have sacrificed their heart blood to the public liberty, are
now replenished with unspeakable joy; and do think that they have spent their
lives to good purpose.

O brave King, this is not enough, O King, worthy of the Empire of the whole
World, worthy of the favor; worthy also of the admiration of thy very Enemies!
O thou pious Prince, whom not our felicity and prosperity, but the hardness
of our fortune, and the wounds engraven in our bodies with the Swords of our
Enemies, has solicited to accept our Diadem! O most happy you, not because
you have already subdued the whole fury of our Enemies, but because you seem
to deserve happiness for us all. O happy day that brought you forth into the
World, and first designed you unto this Kingdom. Which birth day of so great a
Prince begins to be unto us also another birth day, which has brough forth
so divine a Mansion for Virtue, and did also consecrate it, to the whole
Christian World. All Hail, O Lord: For we have not cast off Rule; but outrage
and cruelty ruling over us. We can well enough obey, but we cannot bear
Tyranny; we will serve thee, that we may be freed. All hail, O King, all
hail, O Father of our Country, All hail thou Darling and Minion of Mankind.
For thee, O Illustrious Honor of our Age, for thy safety do we pray; for
under thy Government are we secure of our own safety. God grant unto thee
that by thy hand our tottering State may be underpropped and restored; that
thou may be partaker of that Vow which Octauius did once so much desire,
that thou may truly be styled, Optimi Status Auctor: The Founder of a most
happle State. And let late old Age draw in the swelling Sails of thy glorious
Reign, which in your Youth you have now hoysed up to so favorable a wind. And
bear away with you this hope, when by death you shall leave us: That the happy
foundations, which you have laid, shall abide for ever in their proper place.

God save thee, O Queen Daughter of that most Illustrious Heroes, whose Praises
cannot be pent up in the Straits of this Age, who has joined profound
Learning to incredible Wisdom of governing; who under a happy Star has
added England unto Scotland. God save thee O Wife of this Prince, who does now
couple our Kingdoms to his own Country with like glory, and I would to God
it may be with equal fortune. God bless you both, who are by consent of God
and man a most choice pair. All hail to you Sun and Moon. How sweet a
sight is it to our Citizens to see what a Lord, to our Soldiers to see what a
Leader they have with universal consent elected, and with such longing desire
expected? How pleasant, O King, is it to us to hear these words out of thy
blessed mouth? That this Acceptance of the Kingdom proceeded from the love of
Peace, and not of Empire: that you are drawn into these stirs by our
misery, and not carried by your own disposition; that the Modesty of your
refusing was overcome by the obstinacy of our offering. That you have
preferred the public Security before your own private ease. That it is but
a small matter to desire a people, but not so easy to defend them. And that it
is almost better to let go an Empire that is in right ones own, then to
purchase a new one with the blood of the Citizens: But now, since this Scepter
can neither be possessed nor forsaken without peril, that now our estate and
condition is your own; and that therefore you will now use your best endeavor
that we should not need to desire another King while God shall give you life.

We know, we know very well, most gracious Prince, that you did unwillingly
enter upon this Kingdom which was unwillingly left. We also were compelled; we
came not of our own accord to implore your fortitude and defense: who were not
ignorant of your Clemency. We call God and men to witness that by compulsion
we took up Arms to defend the safety of our Country, and that Liberty which
is allowed to the besest Nations; and lastly our Religion which is to be
preferred before all other Causes, and whose name was in time past so sacred
among the very Gentiles, that at the time that the French were spoiling Rome,
Lu. Albunius one of the common people, putting out of his Cart his Wife and
Children, took up into it, the Vestall Virgins which did follow upon their
bare feet the sacred things which fled from the fury of their Enemies. So much
at that time in the meanest men did public Religion excel private affections.

To be assailed in body and estate is grievous: but in Conscience, is
intolerable.

And such we see is the nature of Liberty, that no good man will lose it but
with his life. As courage and strength uses to increase to wild beasts broke
out of their Dens, and does become in a manner double: So is it with our
Nation; it could no longer dissemble their manly courage, the due praise of
which none could ever deprive us of, when besides the just hatred it bore to
cruel counsels and practices against us, it burnt in desire of regaining the
Liberty of the Country desperately lost and oppressed. Which it is always
lawful for them to repurchase who by nature were borne to live free, and had
also their Liberty established unto them by the fundamental Laws and
Privileges of the Kingdom, confirmed unto them with the sacred Bond of Oaths,
and ratified by the Charters and great Seals of Kings and Emperors. We do
very well know that the praise of obedience is enough in Subjects; that good
Princes are to be wished for; that evil, (if they fall to their lot) are to
be endured. But these things do in no sort concern us, this is not our Case.
We, we have taken up* Arms after incredible Patience; not with any mind of
rebelling, but at the Exigence of extreme Necessity: Not in any private
Conspiracy of some few, but with the universal and joint consent of the whole
State; not in any contempt of Magistracy, but in defiance of most damnable
practice against our Lives, Liberty and Religion: Neither did we do this
against a lawful King, but to escape the deuillish deceits of bloody
Murderers, who do openly profesle that no Faith is to be kept, whereby we
have received invaluable damage: who gain time, and coozen well-meaning people
by Perjury, as Cheaters do Children with false Dice and Cards: We have now at
length learned to distrust, being taught by too many woeful Examples. We know
very well what horrible Thunderbolts are darted from the Tarpeian Rock at Rome.
And that Romes Jupiter can by the way transfer Principalities and Kingdoms
from whom and to whom he please, like the Devil his Master: All this will I
give thee if thou will fall down and worship me. And that he does damme souls
to Hell for his Recreation, and to make his Holiness sport. Who knows not how
small protection Hus a Citizen of this Kingdom found in the safe conduct of
Caesar? No less Tempest had ouer-taken Luther at Worms, had not the brave
Emperor put on a resolution never to stamp such a stain upon his honorable
Name: Had not Lewis also, the most clement Prince of your Progenitors,
withstood the Romish dishonorable determination to break faith.

By the very like Game and foul Play should we have bin coozened, and in the
like Trap did Jesuits.
these men endeavor to have caught us, who do usually invade Lords of Nations
with Poniards and Parricidiall Arts; which grow remarkable in the World and
glorious Martyrs at Rome by the blood and murder of Kings; who by superlatiue
horrible wickedness did destroy great Henry of France, that Thunderbolt of
War; subiecting him (whom the huge weight of his whole Country, when he
stood under it, could not move,) to the butcherie of one desperate Villain:
who did their best to have dashed to the walls of his Kingdom with fire and
Gunpowder, your Father-in-Law, the matchless Monarch of great Britain: who
have persuaded themselves and others, that Salvation of Souls consists in
Murders of Kings and wasting of Kingdoms; who make it but sport and play to
murder the poor, to condemn the innocent, to take away men's lives, with
Rack, Fire, and Sword, and (because they will spare to spill men's blood) to
bury men alive; and to iumble all Divine and Humane things together. These men
first crept into the Courts, after into the Consciences of our Governors:
These were the Directors and Presidents of all the Counsels: These mingled with
them frauds, dissimulations, perfidy, without which they teach that none can
rule well. These theeuish Mates and masked Murderers were of late continually
whispering into the ears of our Magistrates against us that common Sentence of
their Sect, Ure, Seca, Burn, Cut off. With the Lies and crafty Conueyances of
these fellows, as with excellent Arts, were we governed. Unto these also were
adjoined some Seians, evil and pestilent Counselors, who itching with
Ambition and Lust of Eminence, thought no kind of perfidie against us too much.
And hence was it that our Churches were abused and shut up; Our Privileges
violated; the innocent clapped up in Prison and many ways fined and punished:
All access to our Princes shut up against us, the Decrees of Rodulph the
Emperor eluded, and shifted off. Of men, that were contrary minded to them,
some were assailed by threatenings; some corrupted with Dignities and Rewards:
All right of Nations was broken: the Commonwealth was ouer-flowne with an
inundation of wickedness, and Religion was disturbed with maruailous
Treacheries. We entreated, we besought, we wept, we were instant in petitioning
without any license to depart, and vpheld our labor without hope of ease and
redress. But all in vain! we were any where safer then at home; and we got
nothing, by our vain prayers, but only tyring of our selves with entreating,
and of them with hearing.

When then we prevailed nothing by this mild course, but saw that heavier
burdens were daily imposed upon us, as on such who by custom of bearing were
grown to bear them with more ease; all the matter and fuel of our Patience
being spent, we did perfunctorily reprehend some of them. Hence came the
kindling of those Firebrands of War which the disturbers of Peace had so long
desired and sought: Hence were Ianus his gates of War opened: Hence was it
that all things were defiled with burning, with Carcasses of the slain, with
horror and blood: or, as they please to term it, corrected, I wys, and
amended. I tremble to relate the savage immanity committed by the^, such as
Barbarism never hard of, and which perhaps shall not find credit hereafter
with Posterity. Neither could the crying of Infants, the sobbing of Children,
the tears of Matrones, or the gray hairs of the old men, any whit move these
out-ragious and savage beasts. Virgins were abused in common, strong and weak
were killed together; the Fields were wasted; the Wealth and Strength of the
Kingdom was worn out; and what the Sword had left, was consumed with fire.
Hitherto have we reckoned up things to be bewailed with sorrow; now I must
come to relate things, that are to be blushed at for shame: How a Mother hurles
her Children into the River and drownes them, because they shall not be hewed
in pieces before her face with the Swords of the Murderers. The bodies of the
dead are pulled out of their Graves in the midst of the Church: The dead
bodies of Women lately buried (let Christians shake for horror) were laid
naked upon the Altars, tied by the hands and feet, and set upright with
proppes to stay them at the doors of the Churches. And many other things,
with as much abominable outrage, were perpetrated. O Age more ingenious then
Mezentius his, Tiberius his, Neroes, Domitians, and other Monsters of Men to
devise Cruelty! Our live men suffice not to these shames of Mankind to act
their abominable barbarousnesse upon; the dead must be pulled out of their
Graves to endure their villainy. We thus provoked with their unspeakable
villainies do then first fly to War; and then do we let them know that
we can fight for our Country; and that we that had ceased to fear them,
did begin to hate them. That these things freed us from our Oath to the King
none will deny, but such as are altogether ignorant of the Rights and
Privileges of this Kingdom. Men will rather laugh at our Lenity; and all
men fret at our folly, who have so long digested such intolerable outrage.

Now do we, not without heavenly instinct and inspiration, retire our selves
into the bosom of thy Clemency, whose very * Name Frederick which signifies
Rich Peace, or Rich in Peace.
does now promise Peace unto us. God be merciful unto thee, most loving
Prince, and revvard this thine extraordinary gentleness unto us: We will show
our thankfulness unto thee in Service and Observance, if we can do no more. He
that hereafter calls us Bohemians, Morauians, Silesians, Lusatians, shall say
much; but more if he call us thine; we are thine while we are. And to go away
and dye for thee whenever God please, we wlll esteem it a happy sign. They
say that the Sardi by taking the juice of a certain Herb do laugh at their
passage out of life. For you, dear Prince, we will willingly and cheerfully
go out to meet Death it self if need require. We long to fight for you; We
shall want no courage that fight under so valiant a Prince, no will under so
undaunted a Captain, no good success under so just a King: We shall have the
better in Arms that have the better Cause. It shall not be our wearines but the
death of our enemies, that shall put an end to our pursuit. And our Arms, that
we took up so slowly, we will lay down as leisurely. If our number be
less, our courage shall be greater: They are never many which be slain with
the Sword.

In the mean time, we have a Suite to thee, O Prage, which art the Nurse and
Hostess of so many Emperors and Kings, that thou vvilt no longer detain this
best Prince from our Silesia, which without question does even now earnestly
expect, and ardently desire to see his face. Enter into our Country O King,
enter; Thou shall come most welcome unto all, who come for the good of all.
Enter environed with Guards and Armies; we will never be afraid of them,
who have learned to live under so modest and just a King. Enter without them,
if you please: here shall you find your own people your own Servants.
Surely, me thinks, I see that most pleasant Country wholy rising up and
coming to meet thee. Me thinks I behold the great affection, of the Princes,
the emulation of the Nobles, the Assemblies of Senators, and those innumerable
multitudes of people powered out to behold you; some going before, some going
by, some following after, all eagerly pressing to enjoy your presence; and the
walls of the fairest City Vratislauia, receiving with long-vvished embracings
their so much desired Prince, and the tops of the highest Turrets, as it were,
bending down themselves to do you Honor; and the City not a little proud
that it has the Honor to entertayne thy Majesty. But all these things I leave
to the Learned, whereof we have very great plenty: And well knovving and
vveighing both your greatness, most mighty King, and the weakness of mine
own wit, I will reverence thy heavenly Virtues with admiration only and
silence.

Now let us all with public voice humbly beseech the Lord of all, which
alters the times and courses of times, which pulls down and sets up Kings, that
He would keep, preserve and protect thy Majesty, and govern thy Counsels
and Cogitations. Long and much may Religion flourish under thee, and let it
receive increase and credit from thy Piety. Let be rooted up all stemmes of
Superstition and doting toys of traditions, abominations before the eyes of
God. Let thine Enemies be confounded, and come following those Banners that
they came out to meet in the Field: Be more victorious in Battle then that
brave Zisca, that rock and terror of evil men. And excel your self in
Peace, and increase that Kingdom gowned, which you have set at Liberty armed.
But if thou O God do prepare some heavier cross for us, and wilt not yet, by
reason of our sins, put an end to our labors, yet grant that for the defense
of thy Name, for our Prince, for our Liberty, for our Country, we may either
ouercomevaliantly, or dye blessedly, or both. Defend his Government that
defends thy Glory, and after He has happily passed through a long Race in
this mortal life, and shall have laid aside this most happy burden of the
Commonwealth, translate him from this mortal Scepter to a Crown of life which
shall not be taken from him for evermore.

And let all that love Christ's Truth, say AMEN.
FINIS.

