THE THIRD PART of the first book, OF THE MIRROVR of Knighthood.

wherein is set forth the WORTHY DEEDS OF THE knight of the Sun, and his
brother Rosicleer, both sons unto the Emperor of Grecia: with the valiant
deeds of arms of sundry worthy knights. Very delightful to the reader.

Newly translated out of Spanish into English by R. P.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East.

To the right courteous Gentleman, my especial good friend, Master Richard
Morris: health. etc.
THE famous Philosopher Aristotle being demanded what benefit he had
obtained by the study and practice of Philosophy, answered, This, that
uncommanded I can do that I ought, and avoid the doing of that I should not.
For (says he) the ignorant and ruder sort abstain from evil, compelled, for
fear of punishment: but the wise and learned do shun the same, of their own
accord, because it is evil. A worthy saying, and well beseeming the
excellency of so noble a Philosopher. For what is there that can more
effectually express the benefit that arises by the study of any thing, then
to show the effects that it works in them that apply themselves thereunto?
And what effect is there equal unto this when a man uncommanded, can conform
his judgment, frame his will, and order his actions, according to the rule of
reason, and avoid whatsoever is contrary to the same? And as the study of
Philosophy works this in the followers thereof: so does the study of other
laudable things also, bring forth very commendable effects, each one in
their own kind. For which cause sundry men in times past have penned with
great labor, the laudable works of antiquity, and some also in these our
days, imitating the painful diligence of those ancient writers, have with
no less travail written Histories of later years, which by the reading of
the^ might be as well profitable to repel other vain delights, as pleasant to
pass away the tediousness of the time. Among which, I have caused this [Third
part of the first book of the Mirror of knighthood] to be translated out of
the Spanish tongue, moved thereunto with the earnest request of sundry persons,
as also being willing of my self to further so worthy a work, adorned with
all good examples of honor and magnanimity, that may serve to the exalting of
virtue and weldoing, and to the repressing of vice. Which being done, I advised
with my self where I might find out an English Patron of conformable
quality, and having heard of your virtuous and every way Gentlemanlike
disposition by others, as also had trial of your great and singular courtesy
in my self: I thought good to Dedicate this work unto you, Master Richard
Morris, in lieu of better, to testify my thankful remembrance of your great
good will showed unto me, desiring you to accept in worth the presentation
hereof, if not for the worthiness of the thing offered (and yet I trust you
shall not find it altogether unworthy of the good favor and acceptaunce) yet
as a testification of my affection which by this I here present unto you,
declares what I would if I had better to give. Thus hoping that you will
friendly accept of this my doing, I take my leave.

Yours to use, Thomas East.

TO THE READER.
GEntle and friendly Reader, I have caused to be translated (according to my
promise) this work, entitled, The third part of the first book of the
Mirror of Knighthood: which I doubt not, will be delightful unto thee, for
that it concludes the Hystories of these three parts of the first book,
following orderly one after another: after which three parts before
mentioned, follows the second part of the Mirror of Knighthood, which book is
divided into two parts: so that now is extant in the English tongue five
books. Desiring thee to accept my labor in good part, which I present unto
thee, wherein thou shall find the strange and wonderful prowess of the
worthy Emperor Trebatio, and his two sons, with sundry other courageous
knights, mixed with many lamentable and sorrowful Hystories.

Thine, T. E.

WHat happened with the knight of the Sun the night before he should be married
unto the Princess Lindabrides. Chap. 1. Fol. 1. What happened in the court of
the Emperor Alicandro, when they understood of the departure of the knight of
the Sun. Chap. 2. 4 How the Princess Claridiana departed from
Constantinople, and returned unto the Empire of Trapisond, for certain news
which were brought her. Chap. 3. 7 What happened to the knight of the Sun and
Oristedes, travailing through Tartaria. Chap. 4. 9 How the Empress Claridiana
being in Trapisond, there a^iued her damsel Arcania, and declared unto her
news of the knight of the Sun, which brought her almost to the point of death.
Chap. 5. 11. How Rosideer carried the Princess Oliuia by sea, where they met
with a great storm, and were in peril, and how meruailouslie they were
succored. Chap. 6. 17 How the knight of the Sun, Rosicleer, and the rest went
a land, and were meruailoustie received by the Emper^^ Trebatio, etc. chap. 7.
25 How the Prince Don Siluerio, without all hope of recovery of the Princes
Oliuia, her return, and what happened in the court of the king Oliuerio. Chap.
8. 31 How the Princes Lindabrides did crave of her father reuengemen^ of the
knight of the Sun, and how the Emperor at her request did call a Parliament,
and what happened in the same. Chap. 9. 32 How the Emperor Alyca^dro did
consult with his Nobles about his journey into Grecia, and what Bramarant did
concerning the same. Chap. 10. 36 How there came to the Court of the Emperor
Trebatio a strange knight, and did defy the knight of the Sun, and of the
stout battle fought betwixt them. chap. 11. 42 How the knight of the Sun came
again unto himself, and as one desperate for the battle he had with
Claridiana, departed the Court. Chap. 12. 49. How the knight of the Sun was
found lacking in the court, and being all very sorrowful, there came Letters
from the wise Lirgandeo which amazed them all. cha. 13. 54 How the knight of
the Sun came forth of the wilderness of Grecia, and sailing by sea, was by a
storm carried into the solitary Ila^d, where the devilish Fauno was. chapter 14.
57 How the knight of the Sun arrived at the Island of the possessed Fauno, and of
the perilous battle that he had with him. chap. 15. 79 What the Empress
Claridiana did after the knight of the Sun was departed from Constable. cha. 16.
78 How the great army of the Emperor Alica^dro joined in the port of Tenedon,
and of diverse sorts that went into Grecia. chap. 17. 84 How the Emperor
Trebatio had news of the coming of the Pagans, and of his preparation. ca.
18. 85 Of the mighty army the king Oliuerio prepared to go into Grecia.
Chap. 19. 86 How the great fleet of the Emperor Alicandro came to
Constantinople, and forcing to go a land, the Pagans had with the Christians a
great eucounter. chap. 20. 86 Of the great succor that came to the Emperor
Trebatio, etc. c. 21. 93 Of the second battle the Greeks had with the Pagans,
etc. chapter 22. 94 How the Prince Meridian had understanding of the coming of his
father into Grecia, etc. c. 23. 99 How the king Oliuerio with his host arrived
in Grecia, and what else happened. Chap. 24. 102 What Rosicleer did after the
battle, and how by his means the king Oliuerio was reconciled, etc. Chap.
25. 11 How it was concluded in the ca^p of the Pagans to challenge the Greeks,
and how it was accepted, and by what knights. chap. 26. 18 How that Claridiana
came unto the cave of A^tidon, and what happened there. chap. 27 112 How the
Princess Claridiana went a land at the Island of the devilish Fauno, and what
she did there. Chap. 28. 126 The life the knight of the Sun lead in the
solita^ie Island, and how he was found by his Lady. c. 29. 130 Of the stout
battle fought between fifteen knights of the Emperor Trebatio, and fifteen
of the Emperor Alicandros. chap. 30. 1^8 How the Pagan Bramarant being angry
at words spoken by Meridian and Brandimardo, departed, etc. Chap. 31. 146 How
the knight of the Sun and the princess Claridiana after they were departed
from the solitary Island, did deliver, etc. chap. 32. 150 How the knight of the
Sun with out knowing Meridian or Brandimardo, made battle for the^ with
Bramarant. Chap. 33. 154 How Bramara^t after he was come unto himself,
returned again to seek the knights, and what he did when he found his father
dead. Chap. 34. 160 How the princes Li^dabrides had understanding of the
coming of the knight of the Sun, etc. c. 35. 166 How Bramarant destroyed all
the Idols in the camp, and how the Emperor Alycandro to appease him, caused
to be brought with honor the gra^ Capio^, etc. c. 6. ^72 What the Greeks did,
and how the king Lis^. and the fair queen Radamira came to aid the Emperor
Trebatio, etc. chap. 37. 174 Of the rigorous and bloody battle that was
between the people of the Emperor Trebatio, and those of the Emperor
Alicandro, etc. Chap. 38. 176. How the Emperor Alycandro sailing by sea, was
through a tempest, by the which he was driven unto the strong Island, whereas
they were taken prisoners, he and the Princes Lindabrides, etc. c. 39. 198 How
Rosicleer departed out of Constantinople in the demand of the knight of the
Sun, and how the knight of the Sun in following the Emperor Alicandro arrived at
the strong Island, etc. chap. 40. 201 What happened unto Rosicleer after his
departure from Constantinople. chap. 41. 210. How the Emperor Alicandro and his
company departed from the strong Island unto the Grecian Empire, etc. chap. 42.
215 How Rosicleer and Liriamandro at the commandment of the Emperor Trebatio
went into Hunga^a, to make themselves known to the king, and to give him to
understand of all that had passed in Grecia. chap. 43. 220 Of the great treason
that the duke Roberto or^ained to have the fai^ Polisena to be his wi^e. ca.
44. 226 How Rosicleer and Liriamandro, and the gentle Lusiano had battle with
the Duke Roberto and his companions. chap. 45. 229 How the king Tiberio, with
the Queen Augusta, Rosicleer, and Liriamandro, departed out of Hungaria, and
took their journey toward Constantinople. ca. 46. 235 How the Prince
Claramante was nourished in the court of the Emperor Trebatio, and of other
things that was spoken by the wise Artemidoro and Lirgandeo, with other things
that happened. ca. 47. 238. How the fair Lindabrides by art of the two wise
men Artemidoro and Lirgandeo was enchanted, and the order of the incha^tme^t.
c. 48. 240. How the valiant and worthy princes did prove the adventure of the
disloiall tower, and what happened of the success thereof. ca. 49. 243 How the
Emperor Trebatio with all those high Princes and worthy knights, Ladies and
damsels that were in Constantinople, went to sport themselves a hunting into
the wilderness of Grecia, etc. c. 50. 246 How the stout Pagan Bramarant came
unto the place whereas the Empress Briana, with all those fair Princesses and
Ladies were, etc. chap. 51. 250
FINIS.
THE THIRD PART of the first Book of the Myrror of Knighthood.
What happened with the Knight of the Sun the night before the day that
he should be married to the Princess Lindabrides. CHAPTER. I.
IN the second part of the first book of this History, it has been showed
unto you, how that the Princess Claridiana, at such time as the knight of the
Sun departed from her, gave unto him a Damsel called Arcania, for to go with
him, and ^o bear him company till such ^ime as he should return again. And
the great charge which the Princess had given unto her, as well in the
discovering of the great love that she bore unto the knight of the Sun, as
also to have a great care of all things that should pass with the Princess
Lindabrides in that journey, that afterward she should thereof give certain
and just relation.

The History does now say, that Arcania did never depart nor was absent out
of the company and conversation of the knight of the Sun, so that she did
see and understand all that did pass, and how that the marriage was concluded
in such sort, that there was no remedy. Her sorrow was great ^ caused in her
much heaviness, to think of the great grief that her Lady should receive
when she should understand the news thereof, and it seemed that her estate
would little profit to pacify her, hearing that the knight of the Sun is
married to the Princess Lindabrides. This damsel Arcania determined that
night to depart toward her own Country, and thinking that she should do
well first to give the knight of the Sun to understand of her departure. At
such time as he was in his bed with great light in the chamber, she entered in,
and finding him all alone, she said: God bless the good knight of the Sun.
He answered: Thou art welcome my good friend Arcania, what make thou here at
this time of the night? I come (said she) to take my leave of you, for that I
mean to return unto the Princess Claridiana my Lady and mistres, for
whereas she is forgotten and no memory of her service, I know not what reward
I shall look for of my part. How is this, said the knight of the Sun? Have
thou no hope that I will gratify thee for all thy good service? Do thou not
know, y^ if I should forget my self, there is the Princess Lindabrides my
Lady, who will reward thee in ample manner. Hope I have none at al in you, said
Arcania, for he that has falsified his faith made unto the most highest and
precious damsel in all the world, he will ill observe and keep it with so
base and poor a damsel as I am. Of the Princess Lindabrides I request no
payment at her hands, for being a damsel of the Princess Claridiana, I think
it a great reproach to receive reward of any other. Oh knight of the Sun, how
may the fame of thy great deeds from this day forwards cease, and the praise of
thy high knighthood, with the continual report of thy great virtue: and
increase the news of thy disloialtie, when the falsifieng of thy lord shall be
known abroad, all men will judge of thy little understanding, and will say
that thou lackedst reason for to acknowledge the good. How is it, good knight,
is your memory past, have you lost your understanding, do you not remember
how the royal. Princess Claridiana only for your love, left her own
Country of Trapisonda, and came into Grecia, at such time as you did offer
your self to be her knigh^^ she accepted you as her own, discovering unto
you the great excellency of her beauty, whereby you did understand that you
were by her beloved, and thought at that time that there was not borne in all
the world one so happy as you were. How is it now that there remains in you
so little force, and so great villainy, that the presence of the Princess
Lindabrides can work more in effect than the memory of the Princess
Claridiana. Do not you remember, how that in the Court of the Emperor
^rebatio, they were both present together, whereas they did manifest their
great beauties, being with rich ornaments adorned, who was then of you most
esteemed and best beloved? Call to remembrance the good will which you had at
your departure out of Grecia, and join it to that which you have at this
present, then shall you see and understand, how all things is changed clean
contrary, not for any other thing, but that you do more esteem the things
present, although they be small, than those which are to come, though they be
more higher and of greater valor, the which proceeds of base thoughts and
conditions. Oh how frail and miserable is humane nature, that whereas is so
much force and strength for to overcome and conquer so many knights and
giants, does lack heart and strength to make resistance against one thought
and appetite. If that you upon the sheeld of memory of my Lady and mistres,
did receive the blows of the presence of the Princess Lindabrides, neither
could the blows be so strong, nor the sheeld so weak, but that with great
ease you might remain with the victory. But as you have forgot your faith and
promise, so have you forgot the remembrance of her great beauty and high
valor, and very easily you were overcome with the presence of the Princess
Lindabrides, I do therefore mean to return unto the Princess my Lady and
mistres, and make manifest your great disloialtie, therefore the Lord be with
you. When that Arcania had concluded these words, without tarrying ani^
answer, she departed out of the chamber, and went down the stairs, whereas
she had left her Palfraie in a readiness, and taking his back, she departed
out of the City, and took her journey toward Trapisonda. The knight of the
Sun received great grief and sorrow for that the damsel would depart, and
rose out of his bed, and went after her, but seeing that she was gone, he made
little account of her, for that the love of the Princess Lindabrides had so
inueigled him, that although he did well understand her words, yet they did
work no more effect in him, than in one that had been clear of all cares and
passions, till such time as he was laid again in his bed, whereas it did not
let somew^at to alter his profound imaginations, to remember what Arcania had
said of the Princess Claridiana, and of his faith and word given her to be
her knight: which was the occasion that there grew in his thought a very great
alteration, and troubled very much his mind, in such sort, that it disturbed
him from sleep or taking any rest, but tumbling and tossing from one side of
the bed unto the other, which did increase in him by little and little the
remembrance of the Princess Claridiana. So after a while, being somewhat in
quiet by reason of the great disquietnesse that he had suffered, his mind
receiving some ease, and being in a slumber neither sleeping nor waking, having
all his senses occupied with the Princess, it seemed that she appeared before
him with so great majesty and beauty, that it dazeled the sight of his eyes,
equal unto the shining of the Sun when he appears out of the Orient, her
body al armed, saving her head and face was wholly discovered with her yeolow
golden hair, which was disparsed behind her ears, and hung down unto the
ground like threeds of gold, she had her sword naked in her hand; and with
an irefull semblaunce, lifting up her arm for to strike him, she said.

Oh false and traitorous Knight, thou art now at the extremity and point to
receive the guerdon for thy great disloialtie. Then the knight of the Sun who
did behold her, contemplating himself with her strange beauty, accompanied
with her great majesty, was straight ways overcome with the force thereof, so
that the Princess Lindabrides in her presence seemed to be very foul, and
caused the sparks of love new to kindle within him, which before were put out
by the long absence from her, and began so much to repent himself of that
which was past, that he fell prostrate upon the ground before the Princess,
craving pardon at her hands, but she unto his seeming came very irefull,
making no account of that which he had said, but always seemed for to strike
him with the sword she had in her hand: who being meruailously amazed thereat,
did suddenly awake out of that imagination or dream, with so great shaking
and quaking, that all the bed shook therewith. So when he was come wholly unto
himself, and considered well of all that had passed, the presence of the
Princess remained so graued in his heart and mind, that it seemed unto him
that she was so naturally before him in presence, as when he last saw her in
the City of Constantinople, and the old wound wherewith he was wounded at the
first sight of her, did now work so much effect in him, y^ the remembrance of
the Princess Lindabrides was clean forgotten, and the love of the Princes
Claridiana so grassed in his heart, that by no means he could take any
quietness or rest within his bed, but calling to remembrance all y^ was past,
and the marriage that was ordained for the next day following, he fell into a
great perplexity, and abhorred himself. Wherefore upon a sudden and in great
ha^^ he arose up from his bed, and put on his apparel, and looked about for
his armor, which he found hanging in a corner of his chamber, wherewith he
armed himself in all assaies, and took the light Torch that was in his
chamber burning, and descended into the great Palace, and so into the Court,
and coming unto the stable, he found that the horsekeepers were a sleep, and
waking one of them in great secret, he commanded him in great have for to
saddle his horse. The horsekeeper when he knew him was greatly amazed, and
said: My Lord, whether is it your pleasure to go in this sort, and at this
time of the night? I go (said the knight of the Sun) after a damsel that is
gone away from me, therefore hold thy peace and be quiet, for I will return
again by and by. This young man without any farther replying, did saddle his
horse with a trice, and lead him out at a poster^te gate, on whom the knight of
the Sun leapt with great lightness, and so departed out of the great City,
and took an unknown way by a valley, for that if any should follow him,
they should not find him. So he travailed so long by that valley, that it
brought him unto many rocks and hills which was at the foot of the mighty
mountain called Taurus, which is one of the largest in all the world, and
entered into the said mountain at such time as the Sun appeared, and for that
he found himself weary with the great travail that night, he determined
there for to rest himself, supposing that no man would come to seek him in
that place* wherewith he alighted, and pulled off his horse bridle, and
committed him unto the green field to feed at pleasure. Then did he lay
himself down upon the green herbs, the which were so delightful, that it
yielded occasion unto his afflicted sorrow, to contemplate himself in the
highness and beauty of the Princess Claridiana, which caused him for to
tumble and toss upon the green grass without taking any rest, yielding
forth great sighs, forced by repentance of all that was passed, and shedding
many sorrowful and ^itter tears, the which distilled from the veins of his
heart, he spoke as follows.

Oh cruel and false traitor that I am, how does it behoue me now to shun the
company of people, that do understand and know the occasion of this mishap,
but to conclude and end this my sorrowful life amongst the rocks. and
mountains, in the company of brute beasts that does not understand my
disloialtie and great treason. What was become of my reason, and where was mine
understanding? Where did I loose my wits and memory, that being blinded with
folly, and forgetting my self, I should use so great treason against that
royal Princess Claridiana, whom I do honor? Oh evil traitor that I am, how
can I be so bold for to mention in my mouth the name of so high and mighty a
Princess, endowed with so great beauty and virtue, whom all that now live in
the world does not deserve to serve, much less I, wretch as I am. Alas what
shall become of me? From this day forwards may I frustrate my self of all
hope even for to see her, having so great reason, that justly I cannot present
my self in her presence. Ah wretch, at such time as by her damsel Arcania she
shall understand all that has passed with me, how blindlie and foolishlie I
have used my self, then will she make no more account of me than of a base and
vile knight, and with just reason according unto her high bounty take
reuengement of me. But alas, the punishment that I do justly deserve,
according unto my desert, shall I abide to receive it at her hands? No
surely, but first I will take it with mine own hands, for that I could not
consider the great benefit that God did show unto me, the high throne whereunto
I was exalted, the great glory that I did receive when I was accepted and
received for knight unto the royal princess, what joy might have been
compared unto mine? If I had not been foolish and out of my wits, I had been
equal with those that does continually recreate themselves in the presence of
the almighty, without desire of any other pleasure. But alas and woe, even
as so high a name cannot be comprehended in so base a knight as I am, so in
short time I have lost the pre-eminence, and am deprived of all. Oh that my
fortune were so happy, that the course of my natural life were come to
conclusion, to make an end of this my sorrowful torment, for that living I
might not feel and suffer so great misfortune. In saying these and many other
words, very dolorous to hear, this passiened knight remained a good while
ashamed of himself, with great repentance of all y^ was past, and wished that
he had never ben borne, especially when y^ he called to remembrance what the
Emperor Alicandro with all the mighty kings and Princes of his Court would
do, when that in seeking of him he should not be found, likewise when y^
they shall understand of his departure. So considering his own shame, and the
reproach y^ would be imputed to him for disturbing the court, the story leaves
him for to declare what passed in the Court of the Emperor Alicandro, when his
departure was known.

What happened in the Court of the Emperor Alicand^^, when they understood of
the departure of the knight of the Sun. Chap. 2.
THe next day being come, wherein should be celebrater the solemn marriage
of the knight of ^he Sun with the fair Princess Lindabrides. The Emperor
with all those mighty kings and Princes, took the vantange of the morning,
and did apparel the^selue^ very richly, in such excellent sort, that it
seemed all the (...) of the world was there joined together, and for that the
knight of the Sun seemed to tarry long in his chamber, the Trojan Oristedes,
and many other that did love and bear him good will, did repair unto his
lodging for to seek him, but when they came thither and found him not there,
they were greatly amazed, and the more, for that there was none y^ could tell
them any news of him, but searching for his armour^ and horse, and not
finding them, they straight ways understood that he was departed. This news
was published throughout the palace, which brought them all in a maze, at
which report the horsekeeper that did saddle his horse came before the
Emperor, and told him of his departure, and what words he expressed at that
time, whereat the Emperor greatly meruailed (and entering into his cogitation
some spark of suspision) he straight ways commanded many of his knights and
Gentlemen, that they should follow the quest of seeking him, which commandment
being published, there was with a trice more than ten thousand knights armed,
and separated themselves diverse ways, some one way, and some another, and
amongst them went Oristedes, with the two Princes of Cambray and Candaria, unto
whom it seemed that the knight of the Sun would not follow nor take any known
or beaten way, but rather toward the mountains, the better to have his
travail in secret. So being departed, they took their way toward the mount
Tauro by unknown ways, and fortune did so serve them, that they followed the
right way whereas the knight of the Sun had gone, and in many places they
discovered the steps of his horse, which seemed to be new trodden, and followed
the same so long, till in the end they came unto the place whereas they found
him lying all along the green grass, with his face and eyes swollen with
weeping, and seemed to be so weary that he had no power to arise, but when
they saw him, and were fully satisfied of knowing him, they were very glad
because it was their fortune to find him, and yet not a little amazed to see
him in that trance. Then Oristedes came unto him, and did awake him, saying:
Sir knight of the Sun, my good Lord and very friend, what urgent cause has
moved you at such time to depart from the Court of the Emperor. The Knight of
the Sun knowing them, was very sorrowful for that they had found him, and
being ignorant what answer to make them, he kept silence, but in a great
confusion, imagining how he might separate himself out of their company. Then
they all three together, with great love requested him to show them the cause
of his departure, and the occasion of this perplexity into the which he was
brought: who determining to give them to understand the whole effct thereof,
began to declare to them as follows.

My good friends, if heretofore you have had any experience in love, then are
you not ignorant, that his power is such, that it does deprive men of all
reason and understanding, in such sort, that they cannot feel nor know any
thing, and especially them that be conformable unto their amorous desires and
disordinate appetities, which is the occasion that we have apparent before our
eyes, so many thousands of disastres in this world, and love the only cause
thereof, and for to declare them, time does not now serve: Even so I being
taken prisoner with the love of the Princess Lindabrides, and blind without
any discretion, had not so much reason for to consider nor to allow more than
that which was conformable unto my will and amorous desire, being bound unto all
inconveniences and perils resistant unto my will, by the which I was brought
unto the point, as you my Lords have seen and vndersfood, how that this night
past was dilated the marriage between the Prin^^sse me, for the which I
received great grief, but that mighty God and redeemer of all the ri^^es, and
maker of heaven and earth, who has power over all things, against whose
infinite power there is no resistance, by his great mercy did permit y^ al my
corporal senses which were inchaunted, and prisoners unto the love of the
Princess, was this night set free from all subjection by the which I was
awaked out of that blind dream wherein I lay, so that I did see and consider
the great error that I did commit in taking the Princess Lindabrides unto my
wife: for she being a Pagan and I a Christian, it is the most reproachful thing
that can be used in all Christian religion, so that either she must return to
be a Christian, or else I must forsake my profession, and become a Pagan. The
other, for that I being a Christian, should evil preserve so great a multitude
of Pagans, as is in the whole state of the Emperor Alicandro, for that they
will not have a Christian knight for their Lord and governor, neither should I
be in security amongst so many Pagans. Besides all this, the great grief
which the Emperor my father and all his subjects shall receive, when they
shall understand how that I am married in a strange Country so far distant from
his, with great reason they may all desire and wish my death. So my very good
friends, I considering of this and many other things which I omit to declare,
determined this night past to depart, because I would not heap one error upon
another, for y^ there is amendment in that which is past, so that I am fully
determined not to return any more unto the Court of the Emperor Alica^^^o,
and therefore I desire you in my behalf; to declare (...) him, that I crave
pardon at his hands, and to consider the just occasions that moves me not to
accept the high proffer offered me, and how that in whatsoever place I shall
become, he shall always find me his true and faithful servant. These three
knights were very much amazed at these words of the knight of the Sun, and
were very sorrowful for that which he had given them to understand, who
replied upon him with loving requests for to return again unto the Court of
the Emperor, and to put all such thoughts out of his mind. Who hearing those
new replies, he arose up upon a sodain^, and finding his horse at hand, without
any more tarrying, presently he br^deled him, and with great lightness he
took his back, saying.

My good Lords and friends, I do most heartelie desire you that in this
matter you will not importune me any more, for that I will first consent to
die rather than to accomplish or fulfill your request, and rest you in the
power of good fortune, for I will depart. And in saying these words he set
spurs unto his horse, and like unto the wind he ran up a high and mighty
hill. Oristedes when he saw the knight of the Sun depart in that sort, he
set spurs to his horse, and said unto his companions: My Lords, may it
please you to carry these news unto the Emperor Aly^andro, for that I will
not leave the company of the Knight of the Sun, and therewith he forced his
pace after him so fast, that in the end of an hour he ouertooke him at the top
of the mount Tauro, whereas they found very fair plains and pleasant
Forests, but when the knight of the Sun saw him follow all alone, he was
very glad and tarried for him, who certified him how that his companions
remained behind, and how that he would not leave his company, if it were his
pleasure to accept it. The knight of the Sun gave him great thanks,
gratifying his good will, at which instant there was confirmed between the^ so
great and perfect love, that it endured until their deaths. These two knights
travailed together many days upon the mighty mountain, whereas they did not
lack of all sorts of meats for their diets, in Castles and houses which they
found upon the mountain, whereas this History does leave them, for to
return unto those two Princes that came with Oristedes, who remained in great
confusion with that which the knight of the Sun and their companion had done,
in such sort that they knew not what to say. But in conclusion they Agr^^^
together for to depart, and at such time as the night approached, they came unto
the mighty City of Naptaria, whereas they found the Emperor meruailouslie
tro^bled, and all the whole Court in great alteration. But wheir they had
declared all that the knight of the Sun had said unto them, his grief was
such, that he tore the hair from his head and beard, and smote himself upon
the face, that it was great pity to behold, how the great love that before he
bare unto him, is now charged into mortal hate, and swore by his high Gods,
that he would utterly renounce and deny them, if he might not be revenged of
that injury which was done unto him by the Knight of the Sun, in which rage,
he straight ways called together all those mighty kings and noble men of his
Court, unto whom he did declare all which had passed, and made manifest unto
them the great anger the which he receiu^d, and said that his honor
conformable unto his (...) not receive just satifaction, except the knight of
the Sun be taken prisoner, and punished according unto his desert, and for
the accomplishing thereof, he knew no other remedy, but to join together a
great host and number of people, and with them to pass into Grecia, and to
destr^ie all that Empire, full such time as they have taken prisoner the knight
of the Sun, and the mighty Emperor his Father, upon whom he might execute
his wrath, and take reuengement on their persons for the injury done unto him.
And as amongst friends, and such as be private unto noble men, there never
lacks one or other that will rather be conformable unto their wills, and aid
and help them in the executing of their wrath, sooner with any reason to make
resistance to avoid inconveniences: even so it fell out in this assembly
(although there were some there present that did not like well of the Emperors
words) yet there were many other y^ did commend his pretense in saying y^ it was
well done, and to the contrary, if the Emperor did not seek reuengement of
the knight of the Sun, that for ever after he should remain injured and
infamous. Also there was added thereunto by certain young brains and gr^ene
heads (who were very desirous to get honor) that unto the Gods they should
do great honor and service, for to destroy that Emperor of Grecia, for that
they were Christians, and enemies unto their law, and the better for to
accomplish the same, they did offer themselves i^ person with their goods and
vassals, with pretense to join together the greatest army that ever was made
in all the world, and for that these young Knights took the vantage in
speaking first, others y^ were there present (who had other things in their
thoughts) held their peace, and almost perforce did consent unto all y^ which
the Emperor would do, who being somewhat comforted in that he saw how every
one received part of his anger, he forthwith commanded that it should be
proclaimed throughout all the Court, that all noble men and principal
governors in all his Realms and dominions, should assemble together in his
great City before the end of two months, pronouncing great penalties upon
them y^ did not perform the same. So for y^ the news of the departure of the
knight of the Sun was thoroughly known amongst the people, it could not be
hidden from the fair Princes Lindabrides, who having an inkling of the same,
commanded to call before her the Prince of Cambray, and declared all that
passed with the knight of the Sun in his presence, but when the Princess had
well heard and understood the effect of his tale, she straight way suspected
what was the occasion thereof, and understood very well y^ the remembrance of
the Princess Claridiana was the cause of his departure more than any other
thing, which was the reason that her sorrow increased so much, y^ there was no
evil in all the world that might be compared unto hers, which was in such
sort, y^ after she had remained in a trance for the space of more than one
hour, in coming again unto her self, she gave such terrible shrikes, y^ it
seemed to penetrate the heavens, tearing in peers her kerchers and head attire
which was very fine, pulling her golden and rubicond hair, uttering words of
so great dolor and grief, y^ all those that heard them were moved with great
compassion to weep, and there was not one that could give her any comfort, for
that they were all oppressed with sorrow, and could not speak unto her one
word, but the passioned princess amongst other lamentations, said: O high and
immortal Gods, let my sorrowful complaints ascend unto your divine majesty's,
and let your ears be pertakers of these my passions, and let these my griefs
be manifest before you, y^ with sudden death I may be taken out of this world,
and let not your sovereign providence consent that I live any longer, for to
suffer so strong repuise of fortune: Oh disgrace so unhappy, and fortune so
terrible, I would I had died a thousand deaths before I had known so great
^isaster, and who would not first desire to die, rather than to live and see so
great evil: oh destiny, signs, and planets, under whom I was borne and
subject, with none could you dse your cruelty so much as you do with me, it
had been better that I had never ben borne, than under so cruel constellations
to maintain life, but what do I say, unhappy that I am, for according unto my
misfortune, and the greatness of my grief and sorrow, the high Gods, who does
exceed the operations celestialls, did make the knight of the Sun of so
great valor, that my misfortune should exceed the influence of the signs
and planets celestialls, and in saying these words, the fair Princess fell
into a sound, and was so far out of all remembrance that her Ladies and
Gentlewomen did think verily that she was dead, yet had thy great care, and
took great pains for to comfort her, but all did profit very little, for
that she suffered a long time, and never entered into her breast any joy or
comfort, but many times to the point of death she was brought, she grew to be
very heavy and sad, always hoping of the reuengement which her Father did
promise to take of him, which was the whole occasion thereof. Whom the History
does leave at this present, for to tell you of the Princess Claridiana, who
remained in the Court of the Emperor Trebatio.

How the Princess Claridiana departed from Constantineple, and returned unto
the Empire of Trapisond, for certain news which were brought her. Chap. 3.
YOu have understood by the History, how that the Princess Claridiana, at such
time as the knight of the Sun departed from her, remained in the City of
Constantinople, with determination not to depart thence, til such time as he
should return from the gran Catayo. Now says the History, that she being in
the Court of the Emperor Trebatio, with great joy, for the high honor and
good entertainme^t which she received of al persons, although with much grief
for the absence of her knight. Upon a day it hapried, that there came unto her
twelve ancient knights and of great honor from the Empire of Trapisonda, all
apparelled in black, which did signify great heaviness, who with sorrowful
countenance did humble themselves on their knees before her, and did kiss her
hands, as their Lady and mistres, and they gave her to understand, how that
the Emperor her Father, and Empress her Mother, were both departed the world,
upon a sickness that took them both together, and so ended their days, and
how that all the nobility of her Empire did request her, y^ out of hand the
should depart, to put in quietness* and set in good order her high estate, for
her absence (being without Lord) might be the occasion of some great peril.
When that this doleful news was heard by the Princess, she received great
sorrow at her heart, for the death of her parents, whom she loved very much,
and considering of her departure from Grecia, which was of compulsion, her
sorrow did double increase, yet was she somewhat comforted by the parents of the
knight of the Sun, who did honor her in all respects, then she seeing y^ of
necessity she must depart out of hand, she went unto the Emperor and Empress
Briana, and gave them to understand thereof, craving lisence for her departure,
promising the^ to return again as soon as she had put in order her estate,
and set it in quiet. The Emperor and the empress received great grief at
those doleful news, and also that the departure of the Princess was of pure
necessity, for that the love which she had recovered amongst them in the small
time y^ she was there, was very much, but seeing the just reason that she had
to (...), in lamenting the death of her parents, they said that it was in her
choice to use her pleasure as she should think best, and how that they were
all at her commandment, in any thing she would imploie them. This good
Emperor did not alonelie offer unto her knights of great renewin for to bear
her company into her Country, but also did contend that himself in person
would do the like. This royal Princess surrendering great thanks for the
same, would not consent that the Emperor neither any of his knights should go
with her, but alonelie her own Ladies and Gentlewomen in company with those
knights ye came from Trapisonda. So taking her leave of them all, where amongst
the^ was shed many tears, the royal Princess departed out of the great and
mighty city of Constantinople, accompanied with the Emperor and the most
principal knights of his court they did conduct her unto y^ sea side, whereas
they did embrace her and commend her unto God. She straight ways did embarke
her self with all her company, and began to sail toward the Empire of
Trapisonda, and the Emperor with all his knights returned again unto the
City, whereas he feit great grief for the lack of his sons, and of the good
knights that were absent for their respects from the court. Now does the
History return unto the Princess Claridiana, and says, that they found the
wind so prosperous, that in a short time they arrived at the mighty Empire of
Trapisond, whereas she was received of her nobles and vassolls with great joy
and pleasure unto the^ all, who received great content, for y^ they had so
noble and fair a gouernesse, y^ in all the world they believed was not her
equal, as truth is she was, as well in beauty as in customs and comlie
grace, that she had not her peer in her time. So after y^ the funeral was
concluded for the Emperor and Empress, as did appertain unto their high
estates, the royal Princess was crowned for Empress, and in the time y^ she
remained, her government was such, y^ in y^ as well as in all other things,
appeared y^ God did use great bounty in her behalf above all other, who with
great care did p^sse the time many days, always awaiting when she should
hear news of the knight of y^ Sun, whose long absence was cocasio^ of her
great sorrow and grief, in such sort, y^ whatsoever pastimes and pleasures her
subjects did ordain to give her content, yet could she not receive any
comfort or joy, neither could she put him out of her remembrance a moment, for
that she was not in quiet: neither could she not refrain from the great
oppressions of her thoughts, suspecting the great peril wherein the knight of
the Sun was, with the continual presence and conversation that he had with
the fair Princess Lindabrides, which seemed unto her such, that according
unto the great valor and desert of the knight of the Sun, with the
sovereign beauty and grace of the Princess: it were a thing impossible but
that the one must needs lone the other. So with thi^ great care and troubles
of mind, the story does leave her, for to tell you of the knight of the
Sun, who in company with the valiant Oristedes, was travailing through the
gran Tartaria.

What happened unto the knight of the Sun and Oristedes, travailing through
the gran Tartaria. Chap. 4.
WIth great travail and have did these two great friends the knight of the
Sun, and the trojan Oristedes, make their iourneies, over the mighty feeds
of the mounre Tauro, which was very fresh and delightful, and polished with
many Castells, and fair houses, in which travail for the space of many
days, they did sundry feats of arms, by reason that the inhabitants there,
were very barbarous, so that every day they were driven to armore and to
make their defense. And in all places wheresoever they became, they had
contention with the dwellers there aboutes, and although all that mountain was
replenished with Castiles and houses, somewhat apart the one from the other, yet
did they pass the greatest part thereof with little danger, till upon a
night it happened being very dark, and they in the field where as they could
not discover neither castle nor house, whether they might go to lodge
themselves, and being in such a constillation, as was very cold, so that the
first part of the night they passed with great trouble, till such time as from
far of they discovered a light of fire, which seemed to be in a great and deeps
valley, they thinking that it was made by some shepherds that kept their sheep
there, being very glad, went thither wards. And when they came nigh unto the
place, they saw that it was a company of more then thirty barbarous people of
y^ country, being of a high and large stature, and either of them had but one
eye, and that was in their foreheads, as big as a small looking glass. They
were al apparailed with the skins of bears, and of other beasts, sitting
round about a great fire which they had made, and some of them were rosting of
certain Uenison, and of other beasts (which they had taken) upon spits of
wood. Their talk which they had was very barbarous and strange, so that these
knights could not understand them, for it seemed to be a kind of howling or
bleating: but when they came nigh unto them, they were greatly amazed to see
people so brutish, and stayed themselves, not knowing what to say. These
barbarous monsters when they saw them upon the Horse backs, and so richly
armed, straight ways one which seemed to be the principal amongst them, began
to speak in their barbarous tongue, making signs that they should alight, and
come unto the fire to warm them, and to take part of their supper, which was
there a dressing. So when the knights understood their meanings, the knight of
the Sun said unto Oristedes, my very good friend what do you think best
that we do: Then Oristedes said, Sir it seems unto me requisite to do that
which necessity does constrain us, that is, that we alight and go unto the
fire, and suppe with this people, for that cold and hunger, will not consent
that we do any other thing. And afterward if they demand of us payment for
the shot, then is there your fine cutting sword which will pay for us all.
Be it done as you have said, my very good friend Oristedes, said the knight of
the Sun, for that your bounty, in what soever peril, does put us in
surety: but yet me thinks it not requisite to sleep much among this people.
And in saying these words, these two worthy knights did alight, and pulled the
bridles from their Horses, and gave them leave to feed on the green grass,
of which there was great store, so they came unto the fire and sat themselves
down by the principal of them, with their beuers lifted up. But when these
barbarous people did see them so fair and of so gallant disposition, they all
had a great good will for to kill them and to eat them, for that they had
rather feed upon human flesh when they may get it, then of any other beast.
So that in their bleating speech, they concluded amongst them for to execute
their pretense. And these knights for that they did not understand them, held
their peace, warmeing themselves by the fire, making have by signs, that the
supper were made ready, for that (...) were veris cold and hungerie. So that
when their ^^^ison and other meat was roasted, all these company of barbarous
people did set themselves upon the ground round about their vittailes, and
began to tear it in pieces with their hands, and to eat with lusty
courages. The chief captain of them, gave unto these knights of the Uenison
for their parts, who at that present made little account of the great abundance
that they were wont to have, at the Emperor Alicandro his table, and at the
feasts of the Emprour Trebatio, but fell unto their vittailes with tooth and
nail: Yet that supper had cost them very dear, if that the sovereign creator
had not remembered them. For that in the best and chiefest time of their supper,
when most contentment these perfect friends received, two of these barbarous
Tartarians dissembling to serve the rest, arose up from their company, and
took each of them a mighty great and heavy clubbe, which they used for their
weapon, and very softly without making any noise, they came behind y^ two
knights, and with all their sorce and strength of both their hands, they
discharged their blows upon these two knights, which did astonish them, that
they were out of all remembrance, and fell presently to ye ground, whereas they
moved neither hand nor foot, but lay as though they had been dead. Then these
barbarous Tartarians arose up alogether and came for to vnarnie them, very
glad for that which they had done: but for that they had no experience in
armor, and never before had vnlased any, in more then a quarter of an hour
there was not one of them, that could lose any piece thereof, nor knew not
where nor which way to begin, but tumbling (...) round about from one place
unto an other, vewing of all parts, but yet were they never the nearer, in
which time ye worthy knight of y^ Sun receuing air, was wholly come to
himself, and of perfect rememberaunce, and considering in what state they were
brought, with a trice, in spite of all those barbarous people that did hold
him, he arose upon his feet, and finding by him his good sword (which was
the best in all the world, and that which he won of the Prince Meridian) he
took (...) both his hands, and stroke such a blow at him that (...), that he
cut him a sunder by the wast, that the two parts fell the one from the other,
dead to y^ ground, and there with he stroke at an other that was vnarming of
Oristedes, that his right arm with the whole quarter of the body he made fly
to the earth, not staying with that, but with great courage and fury, he put
himself amongst the thickest of them, wounding and killing all that he might
fasten blows upon: but these Tartarians, recovering their clubbes, with loud
cryings they did assault him on every syd, charging him with mighty and
terrible blows, but by reason that they were clean without armor, and this
valiant and stout knight, in the heat of his fury, in short speace, by
kiling of some, and wounding of other some, the rest ran away, for fear of
his mortal blows: so that not one of all these barbarous Tartarians did
remain in sight. This being concluded, he was going toward his friend the
Troyan Oristedes, for to succor him, who at that instant was come unto
himself, and with great courage and fury, he arose up, thinking that his
enemies had been there still: but loking about for them and seeing so many
slain, and none in presence but the knight of the Sun, with great joy and
pleasure he went unto him, and embracing him with great love he said: now am I
fully certified and persuaded, (worthy and valiant knight) that the high
mighty and sovereign gods have not forgot you, but have great and special
care of your great valor, the which is made maniefest unto me, in the
preventing of this present peril, otherwise this supper had been full dear
unto me. Then the knight of the Sun embracing of him said. The living god,
who knows the secret of all things, would not consent that so worthy a
knight as you are, should be slain by so great ^reason.

And his pleasure was, for to deliver me by his bountiful goodness, whereby
I should make defense to save us both from so great rebuke and shame. And now
seeing that here is none for to disturb us: Let us sit down and make an end
of our supper, and take our rest here till to morrow morning. Let it be as you
do command, said Oristedes, seeing that here is none to trouble us: therewith
these two good companions did set them selves down, and did eat of the
vittailes that was there, till they were satisfied. But yet they durst not
sleep all y^ night, fearing that those Tartarians, which fled away would
being some other of their companions and trouble them, so that they passed
away that night in walking round about the fire, discoursing of that wherein
they receued most content, always haueing an eye unto the maine chance, least
any should come upon them on a s^daiue. But they might very well have taken
their ease without any care, for that those which were fled away were so
scarred with the mighty great and terrible blows of y^ knight of the Sun,
that they thought it not for the best to return back again, and although
they were fled very far, yet did not they think themselves in any security.
So when the day was come these two knights did bridell their horses, and
mounting upon their backs they departed from that place, and after travailed
many days upon the skirt of the mount Tauro, wherein chanced unto them
many notable adventures, the which the auctor does omit for to make brief
conclusion of this first part, but the History says, that after great
travail and strange adventures which happened unto them in this journey: in
the end they came unto the distroyed Troy, whereof Oristedes was Lord,
whereas they did repose and take their restes many days: In the end whereof
it was agreed betwixt the^, not to soiourne there any longer, but from thence
to embarke themselves for the Empire of Grecia: they straight ways commanded
to rig a ship that was in the port of Tenedon, and to make her ready well
furnished with all things necessary, wherein they determined to make their
voyage. So being all furnished and ready to depart, they put them selves
within the ship, their sails were hoysed, and the master directed his ship
toward Grecia, whereas the knight of the Sun thought for to find the
Princes Claridiana, having her beauty so printed within his breast, that he
thought every day a whole year, till he came unto her presence.

Here the History does leave these two companions sailing on the Sea, for to
return to tell you what happened to the Princes y^ time y^ the remained in
her empire of Trapiso^da.

How the Emprisse Claridiana, being in her Empire of Trapisonda, there arrived
her Damsel Arcania, and declared unto her the news of the Knight of the
Sun, which brought her almost to the point of death. Chap. 5.
WIth no less care then desire for to hear news of the knight of the Snime,
remained this sovereign Emprisse Claridiana, in her Empire of Trapisonda,
which time seemed unto her so long, that there entered into her heart no kind of
joy nor pleasure, although she did exercise her self in hunting, and feats of
arms, procuring to put away y^ pensiveness of her thought, but nothing would
serve, to put the remembrance of the knight of the Sun one minute of an
hour out of her mind. And there was nothing so acceptable unto her as
solitariness, the better to use her conceit in thinking on him, always
wishing that y^ day were come that the might s^e him. And as she was one
morning in her chamber at such time as the Sun did spread abroad her beams,
out from the Orient, upon the whole Earth, she addressed her face y^ way
beholding the Sun, and with a pitiful sigh which proceeded from the bottom
of her heart, she said. Oh beams of the selestial Febo, which comes from y^
place where as my heart is fixed, Oh that I were now in thy celestial course
and mouings, that I might every day see him whom you do see and behold. Oh
that the divine providence were so pleased, that I might now have some news
brought from him, wherewith my soul should receue no less joy then the
immortal souls, which do comfort themselves continually in thy divine
presence. Oh that I were fully certified, that he were now beholding the
brightness of the Sun with his eyes, as I do with mine, which thing alone
would be some comfort, and give me in part ease of this great sorrow the which I
do feel, whereof his absence is the only occasion.

Oh you invisible and swift winds that comes from the Oriental Heavens, blow
some comfort into these my eyes, if that peradventure with your face you have
disperied abroad any of his golden locks, Oh what comfort and pleasure should
it be unto me, if that I were fully certified that you did encounter with him.
Oh you clear and resplendant lights celestial, whose course does compass
round about the whole world, Oh that I had in one of you mine eyes fixed, that
I might with great ease, behold the valor of my knight.

How swift should those celestial mouings seem unto me at their departure,
and how short should your return seem to the contrary. Oh happy country of
the Scitas, that the valiant and worthy deeds of such a knight does deserve
to see, and happy Princess that had so much power for to carry him out of my
presence. Oh Princess of the Scitas, how many days, nights and hours, have
thou enjoyed the sight of the knight of the Sun. Suffer now patience, if that
he do depart from thee to come and see me. Consider that God has not created
me of so base and unseemly beauty amongst all other ladies and damsells, but
that I should deserve y^ knight of most valiancie, amongst all other knights.
Oh that I were now fully certified that the knight of the Sun were departed
out of thy presence, there is nothing in all the world that could give me so
great contentment. This and many words more like in effect, did this Empress
utter, making her complaint, every morning when she did see the Sun to
appear in the Orient, and at night when as she saw the Moon and the Stars,
where in many times she did contemplate her self, immagening that the Knight
of the Sun did likewise behold them.

Likewise, many times her immagination was occupied with suspection, that the
great beauty of the princess Lindabrides, with the continual conversation
had with the knight of the Sun, should be an occasion by the force thereof,
to bring him in such captivity, that forgetting all other, he should remain
in her presence for ever.

And having this in her remembrauance, was the occasion of great sorrow, and to
shed from her christalline eyes great abundance of tears, watering all her
fair face and rubicond cheeks. Yet otherways to the contrary, she did
comfort her self, when that she called to remembrance the word and promise
that her knight had made unto her, and said within her self, that he could
not be of so small discretion and lack of reason and understanding, to forget
her for any other Lady in all the world, and in especial, the Princess being
a Pagan, and he a Christian: so that in this and in other diverse and contrary
thoughts, did y^ Empress Claridiana occupy her self, looking every day
when that she should hear some news from the knight of the Sun, and of his
return.

In all this time the Damsel Arcania, did not foreslow her self, but with
great care and have, travailed, with desire for to come unto her Lady the
Princes Claridiana, to declare unto her y^ whole course of y^ disloialtie of y^
knight of y^ Sun, as one y^ was ignorant of all y^ succeeded afterward, but
believing for truth y^ he had been married to the princess Lindabrides. And so
not happening unto her any thing in her journey that might disturb her: in
the end of certain days after her departure from the gran Cataio, she arrived
at the Empire of Trapisonda, and she understanding how that the Emperor was
dead, and how that her Lady was crowned Empress of Trapisonda, she directed
her journey thetherwards, and came thither at such time as the Empress was
most desirous to hear news of her knight, because his tarying was so long,
thinking every day to be one whole year. So when that Arcania came into the
City, she went straight ways toward the royal palace, and entered in
thereat, at such time as the Empress was all alone in her closet, occupied
with no other thing, but with her continual anguish and sorrowful thoughts, who
being certefied of her solitariness, made no more ado but entered into her
closet, and shut the door after her, and coming before the Empress, fell
down upon her knees, and craved her hands to kiss them, with so great
abundance of tears that distiled from her eyes, that she had not the power to
speak one word. The Empress seeing her on such a sudden to enter in, she
was greatly ameruailed, and went and embraced her, saying. Ah Arcania, the
true and faithful secretary of all my secrets, what sudden coming is this of
thine, that makes me so much amazed and astonished. How is it that thou come
alone, and left the company of him that thou wentest withal, where have thou
left my knight, tell me whether he be come into this Country or not, for that
there is nothing in this world that at this present can give me more content or
joy unto my heart: tell me out of hand some news of him, make no tarrying, for
y^ every moment seems to me one whole year of thy delating. The sorrow and
grief the which Arcania had (for those heavy news that she should give unto
her Lady) was such, that ^he could do no other thing but weep, and was not
able to speak one word, the which being well considered by the Empress
Claridiana, it brought her into the greatest perpleritie and sorrow that ever
she was in, in all her life, suspecting the evil news that she brought, for
that she was so long in declaring them unto her. And having not the heart to
suffer any longer, but shedding great abundance of tears wherewith she did all
to be bathe her face, she burst out and said.

Oh high, mighty, and immortal God, creator of all the world, what is this,
that Arcania makes so long dela^e, in telling unto me her news: if they be
any that appertains unto my long hope and desired pleasure, let me hear
them. But oh vain hope of men, how can any of us live but in great fear,
seeing that so many ways and times we are deceited by you, with sudden and
unlooked for doubts: Alas, what is he dead? he, that only y^ hope that I had
to see him; did sustain my whole life? As all human creatures has their
humors, and there is none y^ lives but every hour are subject unto a
thousand evils and misfortunes, and the least of them all suffiseth to cause
death. In the high Firmament is congeled Thunderboults against human
creatures, the waters does swell by force of rain, the winds does combat and
cause earthquakes, the depthes of the Seas do roar, by force that they do
receive, and hoyse the ships at times, up unto the heavens, and straight ways
down unto the depth of the waters. The earth which seems unto us to be in
security, is full of perils, upon the face thereof the terrible lightnings and
thunderbolts has their courses. Likewise the deep and profound Rivers does
exceed their limits. Upon the earth is overthrown and does fall the mighty
Mountains and Rocks, wherein does happen great diseases. Horses does make
their course y^ one against the other, at whose encounters their riders be
overthrown: men travailing quietly by the way, upon a sudden and unlooked
for, are beset and ouerpressed with thieves and robbers. The furious Tiger and
cruel Lions, the huge Elephant and fearce Griffens, unmerciful dragons and
Basilists, with a thousand kind of wild beasts and Serpents, that lives upon
the earth, what mortal man is he that is not afraid of the^, as being the
occasion that they have not their lives in any security.

Alas, what shall I say, if any of all these misfortunes, ^auigating by Sea, or
travailing by land, has chaunsed unto the flower of all Knighthood, that my
Damsel Arcania, is afraid to utter it, and has no tongue to speak. But alas,
I suppose that none of all these perils has chanced unto him, but
considering that the world is great and wide, and the knight of the Sun has
travailed through many countries and lands, and it cannot be otherwise but
that he has had the sight of many fair Ladies and damsels, that their
presence has been the occasion to put me clean out of his: remembrance. And
wen there were no other but the princess Lindabrides, daughter unto the
Emperor Alicandro, of the gran Tartaria, in whom the sovereign creator, has
bestowed so great beauty and grace, y^ she alone were sufficient with her
presence to cause y^ empres Claridiana, to be forgotten.

This fair Empress seeing these and many other words of great dolor,
wherewith her thought was troubled, she ^une unto her Damsel Arcania, and
embrasing her, said. Ah my loving and faithful Arcania, make an end and
declare unto me this sorrowful news, for that thy delaying does cause unto
me mortal grief. But Arcania durst not declare unto her that sorrowful and
heavy news, for that she knew the great grief that would proceed thereof:
but yet she was so much importuned, that in the end she was constrained to
utter it, who began as follows.

Ah my Lady and Emprisse, I would (if that God were so pleased) that this
news that I do bring you, were of the death of the knight of the Sun, how
that the unmerciful waves of the Sea had swallowed him up, or else how that the
ground had opened and he consumed therein. For if that it had happened in this
sort, then should you have no occassion to co^plain of him. But alas, he is well
and in good health, whereas y^ sight of an other lady has made him captive,
and al your love forgotten, that y^ recovery is without remedy. For after our
departure out of Grecia, til we came to y^ gran Cataio, y^ knight of y^ Sun
never left y^ princes Lindabrides, insomuch y^ her great beauty and continual
co^uersatio^ wrought such effect within his heart, that you were clean blotted
out of his remembrance, and the promise that he made unto you clean
forgotten: so y^ in the way of our travail, he did offer himself wholly unto
her, entreating of love, and made her prontise that so soon as they should
come unto the Gran Cataia, he would marry her, the which promise, she did
accept, by reason whereof she did make her defense, till such time as they came
unto the court of the Emperor Alicandro, where as they were with great pomp
and majesty receued. So the day of the marriage being appointed, all the
nobles of the land were called and assembled together, and for the space of
twenty days that I was there, they gave themselves to no other thing but to
bankets and feasting, for the marriage of the Princess, whereas the knight of
the Sun did so high and wonderful feats of arms, that his fame will never
be forgotten in that country. To conclude, I seeing that the time was short
and at hand, for the celebrating of the marriage, with great sorrow and grief
I departed from thence, and made so great haste as possible I could, for to
come hither to give you to understand thereof. So when that y^ Empress
Claridiana had heard these news of so great dolor and grief, and understood
the whole effect thereof, there was no pain, torment and grief that might be
compared unto hers at that present, neither was there any sufficiency in her
heroical and baliant courage (wherewith she did quail and overcome those
terrible guards of the Princess, Elisea) for to suffer and to dissemble so
cruel, contrary, and peruerst fortune, but that losing the use of her
remembrance, (as one past all hope) she fell in a sownd in the arms of her
Damsel Arcanie, whereas she remained more then one whole hour, before she
came again unto her self, in such sort, that Arcania who did help her,
thought verelie that she was dead altogether, and did repent her self that
ever she did declare unto her those heavy news. In the end, the Princes came
again somewhat unto her self, who in mortal anguish did yeald out: from her
troubled breast such cruel sighs, as though her life would follow after, then
she began to say as follows.

Oh high and sovereign majesty, how is it that your divine majesty does
permit and suffer, that your Empress Claridiana should receive so great
treason, and especially of him, whom in all the world she best loved. Oh false
and traitorous knight, now am I fully certified or y^ occasion of thy long
tarrying, and thy dispitefull words and promises are manifest unto me, as also
who does detain thee: Oh knight of the Sun, what mist of darkness has
daseled thy eyes, that the sight of the princess Lindabrides could so bleare
and blot out of thy memory the figure of Claridiana. Be these the effect of
thy amorous words which thou vtteredst unto me coming by sea from Lidia, and
the fained tears that thou did impart with me. How oftentimes did thou
desire me for to receue thee to be mine, and after y^ I offered my self to be
thine: consider of thy promise made unto me, the which now thou have utterly
falsified and broken. If thou had well considered (O thou traitor) who I
was, and how that my desert is without comparison, thou would never have
changed me for any other, and that which seems unto me to be without reason
is, that thou have matched with one that is not of thy law and faith: What was
become of thy wits, and where was thy understanding, that thou did not see
and consider, how much thou have offended the sovereign creator with that
marriage, and how worthy thou art of punishment, in committing of such
wretched sin. I do not now much marvel, that thou have not kept thy word and
faith with me, when thou have not kept thy faith with the living God, neither
do I marvel at the committing of so great sin, for that not long since,
thou fainedlie did take the name to be a Christian, the which I do suspect
thou have rejected and denied. And the better to bring thy pupose to effect,
thou do publish thy self to be a Pagan. Oh that the wrath of the divine
justice might now descend upon thee, and the burning lightnings and thunder
engendered in the high clowves, might make reuengement on thee, for thy great
tniurie showed. Oh that thy misfortune had be^e such, that thou had fallen
into some of those perils and dangers, that I suspected to chance to thee, or
else that thou had died with some sudden and unlooked for death. What cruel
death, punishment, or evil fortune, might be conformable unto thy desert, in
committing so great an error. There is nothing that grieueth me so much, as y^
thou were the flower of all knights, and being gone, there is not in all the
world that is worthy of my excellency: and although I am not married, yet do
I remain a widow, and the greater my grief, to see him ye which I thought
should have been my husband, in the power of another. Oh fortune, how contrary
have you been unto me, in that you have given me so great beauty and
sovereign dignity. If thou had created me foul, evil favored, and of
base birth, then had not the one been occasion of my pardition, neither the
other had reason for to destroy me. If that my singular beauty and highness
were not, I might put remedy in my great grief, as Ariadne that was left of
Theseus, and Medea forgotten of Jason. But who is there now in all the world,
with whom I may make change of so faithful love? What woman is there in all
the world, that ever felt so great grief for love? Truly there is no
comparison to be made unto mine: no not that of Deyamir^, whom Hercules changed
for Yole, nor that of Penelope for Ulysses, nor of Phillis for Demophoon. Let
not that be spoken of Io, that was converted by Jupiter to a cow, and
presented unto Juno, and that of Biblis, that followed that cruel Cadmo.
Neither may be compared that of Tisbe and Pr^amus, nor of the Queen Dido that
built Carthage, for Aeneas. Great reason had Gero for to bewail her well-beloved
Leander, when she saw him drowned and lay upon the sands of the huge river,
but yet comfort thy self with me, for that thy great dolor and grief should
I receive for glory, if that I did see the knight of the Sun to die for my
love, and with a great deal more speed than Gero, would I bear him company
in death. Comfort thy self with me than Gofreda, which was the occasion of his
death that loved her best. And if that File and Laudonia, were comforted with
their sudden deaths: Comfort your self with me, by y^ evil fortunes of
locasta, whose misfortunes were such as was not in the whole world to be
compared, yet may it not be compared unto mine. Oh fortunate Eucuba, and
sovereign Queen, who alonely remained for to see the sorrowful sight of the
destruction of Troy, and the death of thy husband, and valiant sons and fai^e
daughters: and after for the same cause, thou were of thy enemies stoned to
death: Comfort thy self with my misfortune, for that it is not less dolorous
then thine. Oh Sophonis be Queen of Numidia, who being with thy husband
prisoners in the power of thy enemy, and being comforted to marry with him,
first before that thy marriage was selebrated, thou were slain by poision: I
consider with great grief, thine not to be equal unto mine, for that thou
did lack time to acknowledge thy hurt, and in me it remains for to suffer
so great grief. Oh Cornelia, wise unto Crasso, and of that mighty Pompey of
Rome banished with thy husband, let our sorrows be joined together, when that
with great hope for to see thy Pompey thou were lost, and were comforted by
Cato Vticense.

Happy werte thou Cleopat^a Queen of Aegipt, seeing that thou werte forgotten
by Caesar, in so short space, thou did quench so great a fire, thy fair
breasts being drawn or sucked by Snakes, till such time as they sucked thy
blood, which made an end of thee.

Oh how pleasant should thy death be unto me, (if that in the service of God
so great cruelty might be permitted.) I should think my self happy, if that
the blood of my breasts with those cruel Snakes, were drawn out, so that
jointly therewith, the furious anguish of my heart should be expelled.

Oh pitiful tears of Licurgus, for thy Arquimoro, and those of Atalante, for
her Partenopio, how far do mine exceed yours, and with much more just cause
I do shed them.

Oh falce and disloyal knight, what reason could constrain thee to falsify
and break thy word and promise given to be wholly mine. It appears that
thou do follow the law Gentilica, of the god Mercurio, that does not observe
and keep their word: they say that it is more polesie then disceit. Oh how I
do know now to be true, that there is nothing so difficil to be understood,
as the human heart.

Who would ever have thought that so great cruelty and disloyalty might be
comprehended in a knight that does surpas all other knights in the world. What
man has been in the world so cruel and peruerst, as thou (traitor) have been
unto me, of truth none: no, not Jupiter, god of y^ Gentiles, whom thou do
worship, that banished out of his kingdom his Father, the king Saturno.
Neither that Ptolomeo king of Egypt, that slew his own father and brother,
and in the end, his wife Euridice, only for the love of his friends. Orestes
was not so cruel that slew his mother Clitemnestra, nor Nero for Agripina, nor
Antipater for Thesalonica, nor Theseus for Hipolito, nor Phelipo for Demetrius,
nor Constantine Emperor of y^ Romances, for his son Chrisippo, nor Marco
Ca^taginense, that did crucify his son Cartalon, neither that Phaces king of
Parcia, the most peruerst of all kings, who slew Herodes his old and afflicted
father, with thirty of his brethren, and his only son: nor any whatsoever,
that has been cruel in the world, so cruel as y^ knight of the Sun has
been unto Claridiana: for unto them was given the death, and afterward they
felt nothing, so that their cruelty was but in slaying of them, but this is
more cruelty unto me then the death, for that from hence forth, I shall wish
to die, because I deserve not to live, for to feel so cruel grief and pain.
How can I living, suffer one moment so great dolor, to see the knight of the
Sun in the power of an other Lady. Oh that he were now in this country,
surely I would be slain in battle with him, or else his great disloyalty
should be revenged by me.

In saying these words, the Empress Claridiana her sorrow was so great that she
receued, that many times she fell in a sound in the arms of Arca^sia, and all
the comfortable words which she spoke unto her, were not sufficient in any
point to appease her great grief, and certainty guish and dolor was so
great, that it cannot be imagined that the grief of any woman whom she have
named, might be compared unto hers, for as in wisdom, reason, and discretion,
with sovereign bounty and highness, she does exceed all other in the world,
even so is her grief the more, and the greater reason she has to complain,
for that she knowing to be without comparison in beauty and estate, with all
other excellent gifts that should be in a noble Lady, and having set her mind
upon the knight of the Sun (as one that alonlie did deserve her) and now to see
her self forgotten and changed for another, not leaving in all the world any
conformable unto her highness, with whom she might marry, so that she desired
no other thing but to die the death, for to euitate the suffering of so great
evil, and from that day forwards her life was clean changed over that it was
before, neither did she exercise her self in armor nor (...) hun^ing, as at
other times, but as one that was past all hope ever to be marrried, and as a
widow, she spent her time in her closet all alone, occupying her self always
in prayer, leading the life more of a religious woman, than of so high a Lady
as she was, always waiting the coming of the knight of the Sun for to be
revenged on him. Whereas the History does leave her, for to tell you of
Rosicleer that was sailing by sea with the Princess Oliuia.

How Rosicleer carried the Princess Oliuia by sea, whereas they met with a
great storm, wherewith they were in (...) and how meruailouslie they were
succored. Chap. 6.
THe History has declared unto you how and in what sort Rosicle^r in company
with his good friend Sacridoro did carry the Princes Oliuia but of England,
and how that they sailed on the sea with prosperous wind, in the (...) in
being so much before the other Fleet. All the diligence of the Mariners, nor
the great desire of the Prince was sufficient for to overtake them, for that
they were a great way before, which was the occasion that with great anger be
cursed the winds because they did blow stiffer, and lifting up his eyes unto
heaven, shedding many tears he said.

Oh divine majesty, how do you permit that so great force and injury should
be done unto me, and that my loving spouse should be carried away from me in
this sort. How is it that thou do not execute thy justice, and let thy wrath
to fall upon this robber^ Oh that thy divine majesty were so pleased, that the
same ship might strike upon some rock, or else that that little (...) called
Remora; in climbing unto the ship, might stay the fury of their sailing, that
I might revenge this my great wrath and ire upon him that has offered me this
iniure*

So in uttering these and other words of great grief, sailed Don Siluero,
making so great ^^mentation, that his knights by no means could give him any
comfort. And to the contrary sailed Rosicleer, as one from himself, with
great pleasure, having in his arms her whom he so much loved, with so great
glory, that it was wonder and always thought to be worthy of so excellent
(...) well. Likewise the Princess Oliuia, although she was not as yet in quiet
of the great trouble in the which she was brought, but yet seeing that she was
clear from the (...) of Don Siluerio, and in the company of him whom she
loved more than her self, she was satisfied of all those troubles and griefs
past, and received great contentments; and thought it better to be drowned in
that deep sea, in the company of Rosicleer, than to live upon the land with
so great importunances of her father and Don Siluero. And as these two faithful
lovers were together with great contentment, making manifest by words the great
glory that they received in their hearts. Then fortune who never is content
that men should remain in one manner, but mingling sorrow with pleasure, like
unto the wheel of Amyl she turned about, in such sort, y^ she did show her
self enemy unto Rosicleer, in the midst of all his pleasures, y^ in a small
time he was driven without repentance of his sins to yield unto death. For that
being his ship, with all the whole fleet of the Prince, entered into the
Tirreno sea, at such time as the one after the other sailed with prosperous
winds. Out of the parts of the Leuant, there arose upon a sudden so mighty
a wind, and with so great force, that (...) not only against them in staying
the swifte course of the ships, but also did move the waters in such sort,
forcing the waves to swell and to rise of so great height, that it did
signify unto them great danger and peril, the which (...) a little time did
so much increase, that the deep waves did show themselves cruel^ and (...)
against the (...) beating their sails to the ^asts, tearing them in pieces
with so great force, that they could not take them in, but tumbling (...) ships
from one part to another, (...) toward that place, whereas the force of that
outrageous wind would carry them. This tempest endured with them one whole
day and a night, in the end whereof all that were in the ships committed
themselves unto the f^rie of the sea, and employed themselves in no other
thing, but in p^aying unto God to deliver them from that great peril. In this
sort they passed all that day and the next night, till in the morning at the
break of the day the tempest ceased, and the ship of Rosicleer and the Fleet
of Don Siluerio, were all together driven into the port of Cerdenia, be whole
Navy of the Prince were twelve great ships, besides other small Princes,
whereof four of them with the tempest were driven into some other parts, and
were not there present. And for that there were in the eight ships more than
four thousand knights, Don Siluerio received, so great joy, for to see by him
the ship of Rosicleer, as though he had been made Lord over all the world,
and commanded straight ways that all the whole Fleet should be put in order,
the which was done, and began to assault the ship on every side with so great
alarm, that it had been sufficient to have terrified a great many of more ships
than they were. But when Rosicleer saw himself compassed round about, and
assalted with so many ships, he left the Princess Oliuia in a cabine in the
poope, being the highest part of all the ship, in so great confusion, that he
thought she would have died, and he with more courage to die in the defense of
his pray, than any fear that he had of that great multitude of his enemies,
took unto him his armor, and descen^^d into the wast of the ships, whereas
he found the good king Sacridoro, all armed^ with his swoorde in his hands, in
a readiness to make his defense, but when that he saw him, his heart was ready
to break with the great grief he received, and the water ran down his
cheeks, calling to remembrance how many times that good knight had put his
life in adventure for him, and how that he never came unto that estate, whereby
he might have made him some part of recompense for the same. He went unto him,
and embracing him with great love, he said.

Oh my good and perfect friend, how perverse and contrary has fortune showed
her self unto me, that so many times my friendship has put you in danger of
your life, God does know whether we shall be slain or no in this conflict, yet
iurelie your death shall be more grievous unto me than mine own. To whom this
good king Sacridoro with a valiant courage did answer, saying: My very good
friend, this is the greatest glory that I can receive, and the thing that I
have in most estimation, and seeing that death is ordained for all mortal
creatures, wherein may I better emploie the same than in your service. Come on
let us go and make defense that our enemies enter not upon us, and let us
venture our lives, and offer it as a sacrifice for to accomplish that which is
due and does appertain to our honors and high estate. This good king had not
so soon spoken these words, but the knights of the Prince had grapled their
ships together, and boording the one the other, in such sort, that they might
well leap out of the one into the other, Don Siluerio accompained with the
most valiant knights that were with him, with his sword in his hand and his
sheeld on his arm, he put himself foremost of them all to the ship side, and
with a loud voice he said: O Rosicleer yield thy self straight ways unto my
courtesy, and surrender the prise that thou have in thy power, for that fortune
cannot so much favor thee, for to escape out of my hands. But Rosicloer being
ready for to receive them at the ship side with his sword in his hand,
answered never a (...), but yielded him self unto fortune. At that time the
Princess Oliuia by the importunity and good dicretion of her damsel Fidelia,
put her self upon the poope of the ship, in such sort, that she might be seen
of all that were there in the Fleet, with a naked sword in her hand, and with
a high voice that it might be heard of all the people, she said.

O all you knights that appertains to the king Oliuerio my father, if there
be any in these ships, do not show your selves at this present so contrary
unto me, but to favor and help the G^eeke Prince, for that many days past I
have chosen him to be my natural spouse and husband, and do you not consent
unto his death, for if you do, I do here make a vow unto God, that at the
very instant that he shall receive his death, with this sword I will cleave
mine own heart asunder. At which words Don Silue^io made no account, although
it was a grief unto him to understand the great love that she bore unto
Rosicleer, by her outward semblance, yet notwithstanding there were in that
company knights of the king Oliuerio that did rejoice to hear those words,
for to have the better occasion to help Rosicleer, without any color to
attempt any thing against the king their Lord, amongst whom was the valiant
Zoylo, Bargand^l, Lyriamandro, and Almades of Cornwaile, all which did bear
good will unto Rosicleer, and were in the fore part of the ship ready to give
the first assault unto the expectation of the rest. At this time was Don
Siluerio with thirty of his knights entering into the ship of Rosicleer, who
received them with such mortal blows, that quickly they overthrew six of
them dead into the water, and Don Siluerio had been one of them, if that his
inchaunted armor had not defended him, but yet for all that, with his terrible
blows he was so terri^^ed, that he withdrew himself back, and put his knights
forwards, and by reason that there were so many of them, and every one did
procure to enter into the ship of the two knights, there was such a noise
amongst them, that they could not one hear another.

All this time was the Princess Oliuia beholding the ^^ttaile, lamenting very
much to see her Rosicleer in so great peril, in such grievous wise, that it
would have moved any man to compassion to have seen her, and with very
anguish she had v^ed there, if that her damsel Fidelia had not been, who did
comfort her in the best wise she could. But this vali^nt and worthy Rosicleer
seeing that they did in great have compass his ship round about for to enter
in, with so great strength and courage as ever was seen in Knight, he
besturred himself from the one part unto the other, defending the enterie of
his enemies with such mortal blows, that he might account himself unhappy
that was within the reach of his sword, which was that of the Queen Iulia, and
so noble a cutter, and he so valiant who flourished therewith about him with so
courageous a strength, as one which next unto God hoped to set his life at
liberty, for that he never stroke blow, but that either he slew or
overthrew a knight, so that all his adversaries were wonderfully amazed at
him, and not one amongst them all that was so hardy, that durs^ come nigh the
place whereas he was.

Likewise that good king on the other side, did meruailouslie defend the
enterie, and gave them well to understand by his terrible blows, the great good
will that he bare unto Rosicleer, who did not esteem to ven^ure his li^e for
his good friend, and did so behave himself amongst his enemies, dealing such
mortal blows, that he slew and overthrew a great number of them, in such
sort, that all those which did behold him, by reason they knew him not, were
greatly amazed.

At this time the three worthy Princes, with the King Alamades seeing that it
was high time for to succor and favor Rosicleer, with great lightness they
leaped into his ship, and returned against Don Silue^io with their swords
drawn in their hands, and said: Enforce and courage thy self valiant knight,
^or we that be here are (...) friends, And all together with a ^oude voice
said, ^a^taria, Tartaria, Hungaria, Hungaria, Bohemia, Bohemia, Cormual^a,
Cornualia. So when Rosicleer by the naming of their Countries did know them, he
received great comfort, and not having space for to answer them, he did no
^ore but humble himself, and for that his sheelde at that time was shieuered
and broken all to pieces with the mighty blows he had received, he took his
sword in both his hands, and put himself amongst his adversaries, and did so
great meruailes, that all that did behold him wondered greatly, and they
which did not see them, afterward did think it a thing impossible, and in
declaring of it, very hard to be believed. The three Princes, with the king
Alamades, all four together did defend the entry of the ship, killing and
wounding many of the knights of Lusitania, and likewise received many blows on
every side. The number of their adversaries were so many, that they were
driven into a marvelous exsegent. But when that Don Siluerio saw that the
four knights were on his contrary part, he received great dolor and anguish
at his heart, and with the great desire that he had to take reuengement of
them all together, he encouraged and enforced his knights all that ever he
could for to enter the ship and vanquish them, and by reason that there were so
many, and very valiant knights, and continually entered in a fresh, (although
that Rosicleer and his friends did incredible wonders, yet in the space of one
hour after that the battle was begun, they were put in a great extremity)
for that Don Siluerio was very wise, and his knight valiant and experimented
in the wars and battles, and did assalt their ship on eueri^ side with
great strength, so that there was not one so soon slain, but another entered
into his room straight ways, in such sort, that the other valiant knights
had no time for to ease themselves, which was the occasion, that in the end of
two hours after that the battle was begun, all the water round about the
ships was dyed red with the blood of the dead knights ^f Lusitania, and the
strong arms of Rosicleer and his friends, (as of mortal men) began to ware
weary, and their force and strength did abate, and they could endure no
longer, yet their valiant and courageous hearts were prompt and ready for to
receive the death, and never moved counteance thereat, but determined there to
die all together like valiant knights, without yielding or surrendering in
any point, but amplisying their forces with their valiant hearts, making their
defense in such sort, that their adversaries did not perceive that any
weariness were in them, so that the battle at that instant was very cruel
and wonderful, and the noise very great which they made, in such sort, that
the inhabitants of Cerdenia came forth and did behold that cruel and well
foughten battle, dread^ullie beholding the sea, how it was stained with
blood, and could not believe they should be humane knights that did defend
themselves (in (...) ship alone) against so many. At this time were the good
friends of Rosicleer very weary with the oppressing of so great a multitude
of their contraries, in such sort that they could not lift up their swords, at
which time many knights of the Prince Don Siluerio began to enter their ship,
of the which Bramides was the first, with a great number of other valiant
knights, who with great fury and shouts began to lay upon their adversaries,
and saying, Upon them, upon them, for they be overcome. But when Rosicleer
hear^ those words, and saw no other thing but perdition, he began greater to
lament y^ death of his friends more than his own, but that which did grieve
him most was, that after so many troubles and sorrows the which he had passed
for the Princess Oliuia, and had her in his power, alwai^s hoping at her hands
to receive reward for the same, he should now be constrained therefore to die,
and to leave her in the power of another, having this in his remembrance,
lifting up his eyes unto heaven to ask mercy of God for his sins, he saw
his well-beloved mistres in a sound in the arms of Fidelia, as she which made no
other reckoning but to die, the which did cause unto him so great dolor and
grief, that it kindled in him mortal wrath and ire, determined to sell his
life very dear unto them that so much desired his death, wherewith he took
his sword in both his hands, and stroke so terrible a blow at the Captain
Bramides, upon the wast, that cutting him in two pieces, he overthrew him dead
to the ground, and therewith at other six blows he slew other six knights,
behauing himself so amongst them, that they fled from him as from the death.
But he as one that had his death certain, without any care of his life, all
alone he maintained the battle against the knights of Don Siluerio, for that
his friends could not do any thing in his defense they wear so weary. And
although the knights of Lusitania were valiant, and did charge him with many
heavy blows, that had been sufficient to have cloue amanfield in pieces, yet
did he defend the entry of the ship alone, for the space of half an hour
against all the company, and had about him on every side a great number of
dead bodies, showing so great wonders among his adversaries, that it was scarce
credible to the beholders. Whereat Don Siluerio received great grief to see so
many of his knights slain, but yet he durst not come nigh him himself, but
forced his knights forwards with reproach, that it was a shame to him, that one
alone knight should make his defense so long against so many. Who hearing
those words made no more a do, but put their lives in adventure for to
accomplish that which was their deaths, and therewith they leaped into the ship
of Rosicleer, and charged him so much and with so many terrible and heavy
blows, that it had not been possible for him to have endured long, if that by
the wonderful miracle of God he had not been succored.

You shall understand that fortune did serve him so well, that the ship wherein
was that valiant and worthy knight of the Sun, and that stout Oristedes was
constrained by the force of the storm and tempest past, to enter into the same
port of Cerdenia, and entering in thereat, they straight ways did see the
execution of that cruel battle, and were greatly amassed to see all the
water so stained with blood, and how that one alone ship did make his defense
against all the rest: but when they saw so few knights did maintain
themselves against so great a multitude of their enemies, their marvel was
the more, and remained astonished for a great space to see the incredible acts
that Rosicleer did, as one that was desperate of his own life, which was with
so great courage, that if he had seen it with his own eyes, he could not have
believed that any humane creature could have done it. And as he was with great
attention beholding them with great good will for to aid and help them. The
knight of the Sun did know him by the device of his armor, although that
they were all to be rai^d with blood, as also by the comely proportion of his
body, and therewith upon a sudden with a loud voice he said: O good God, it
seems unto me, that yonder knight should be Rosicleer my brother, or else my
sight does deceive me: Oh my good friend, now show forth your great bounty to
defend and save the life of the person of him that I love best in all the
world. Come on let us go, said Oristedes, for^with* very good will I will
offer my self in any thing that does appertain unto you or to your brother.
And in^saying these words, these two good friends did cause their ship to be
grapled unto the ship of Rosicleer, and with their swords drawn in their
hands they leapt into the said ship, and said: Courage, courage, good knight,
and take a good: heart, here is come unto thee thy brother the knight of the
Sun. And therewithal turned against his adversaries, and made so great a
slaughter amongst them, that in a short space all the hatches of the ship lay
full of dead bodies, and the knights of Lusitania being greatly amassed at
such sudden and str^^ge succor, they fled before them with all the speed
they could into their own ships, and in making such have, many of them leaped
short and fell into the water, so that by this means their ship was quickly
rid of their enemies. But when that Rosicleer heard those comfortable words
of his worthy brother, and knew him as well by his wonderful blows given, as
by the device of his armor, what joy and pleasure might be equal unto his, I
say unto you, it was much more than it was, at that time when that he was
succored by him in the Island of Can^^marte, for that his death at that time
should not have been so grievous unto him, as at this present the death of
his good and perfect friends, and having in his power the fair Princess
Oliuia. And as one who by the aid and succor of his Brother was in good hope
to be set free and at liberty of so rigorous and cruel a trance, with a new
and unlooked for joy, did so hearter, and encourage himself, recovering so
great force and strength, that he began to make so great a destruction among
his enemies, as though the battle were but as then begun, and coming nigh
unto the knight of the Sun, he said: Oh my Lord and well-beloved brother,
what great benefit is this that God has showed unto me, that it has pleased
him that I am succored by your great power and strength, and now that I find
my self in your company, if that all the whole world were against me, I
should not have any fear. At this time the knight of the Sun could not make
him any answer, for that he was so occupied amongst his enemies, where he
did so great slaughter, that there was none that durst tarrie^ before him.
Likewise the Trojan did so defend his party, that it was wonderful to
behold, at whom Rosicleer was greatly amazed, not knowing who that valiant
and worthy knight should be. Then the king Sacridoro and the other Princes,
when they saw that sudden and sovereign favor which was come unto them, and
how that their enemies were brought into a greater straight than they were
before, although they were very weary and overcome with labor, yet the joy
which they received did renew in them so great strength, that they returned
upon their enemies, and slew many of them with their terrible blows, and the
fear which the knights of Don Siluerio received by the great prowess of the
knight of the Sun and the Troyan was such, that there was not one that durst
give any attempt, but withdrew themselves all that ever they could, for which
cause Oristedes in company with the king Sacridoro, and the other Princes,
remained in the ship as sufficient for to defend the same, and the two brethren
leapt into the ship of their enemies, as in (...) and contention the one of the
other, they began to wound and to slaie their enemies, and kept such a stur
amongst them, in killing some and making other some to fall into the water, and
other some to run away for to save themselves, that in a small time there
remained in the ships none for to make any defense. Then Don Siluerio who did
behold all this that passed, with great sorrow and grief of heart he
complained against fortune, for that she was so contrary unto him, and for
that he knew not the knight of the Sun, but saw with his eyes the great
wonders and valiant deeds done by him, he thought verily that it was some
devil of hell that was come to aid and succor Rosicleer, in seeing the fear
that his knights had of him, y^ there was not one that durst appear before
him, but ran away, so that he was without all hope of the victory, which
caused him with deep sighs to say: Ah Oliuia, now I see that it is not Gods
will that thou shall be mine. At which time Fidelia had her in her arms in a
sound, and seeing the good success which happened unto them, and how that
fortune did show her self favorable, with such diligence as she ministered
unto her, she brought her again unto her self, and said.

What is this my Lady and mistres, arise and comfort your self, and behold
the great succor (which God having compassion on us) has sent us in such sort
that the victory is very certain on your knights behalf. Then the Princess
who was as one half dead, beholding the battle, when she saw that there was
none so hardy that durst abide before Rosicleer and his companions, but ran
away from them as from their deaths, she received therewith great consolation
and comfort, and had great hope of the victory, and being greatly amazed at
the high bounty of the Knight of the Sun, she asked of her damsel Fidelia
who that valiant knight should be: Ah my good Lady and mistres, said Fidelia,
in this thing only may you consider of the good fortune of Rosicleer, for
according unto the words which he said at his coming, he should be his
brother the knight of the Sun, who as I have heard many times, is the knight
that in all the world is not his like, but the other that is come with him I
know not, but his valiant demeanor does show that he is one of the best
knights that I have seen. At which words the Princess received great joy and
pleasure, and with better comfort than she had at any time before, she arose
up and put her self to behold the battle, ^he which did not endure long,
for that after that the two brethren had entered into their ship, they almost
did yield unto them, finding not one that durst abide their fury, for the
which Don Siluerio fearing ^he encounter, and seeming a thing impossible for
his knights to have the victory, he determined to depart, without all hope of
good fortune, finding her at that time so contrary in all points. So with
great sorrow and grief he commanded his ship to be vngrapled from the ship of
Rosicleer, and the Pilots to hoise up sails, and to depart, the which was
nothing grievous unto his knights, (...) greatly at the mighty valiantness
and (...) blows of their adversaries. The ship wherein was the knight of the
Sun and Rosicleer remained, but the other seven departed with such people as
were lost, there were slain more than half of them that came in company with
the Prince, Don Siluerio So when these two breth^^ saw th^msel^e^^^ (...) of
their o^imies, they did embrac^ one another with great love, and their joy was
such, that they could scare speak. At this time came unto him Oristedes, and
the knight of the Sun declared unto Rosicleer who he was, by who^ he was
embraced with great joy and pleasure, but the good Troyan was greatly amazed
at the great beauty of Rosicleer and how boistrous and stout he seemed; when
that he was beholding the great wonders the which he did alone in the ship*
which caused him to say within himself, that not without great mystery were
these two brethren borne and created with such high bounty, resembling another
so much. Then straight ways came unto them the three Princes, and y^ king of
cornualia, who were very desirous to see Rosicleer, as those who sustained
great travail in his demand, he received the^ with great joy, and embraced
them, yielding thanks for the great pleasure which they had done for him at
that present* Then came unto them the good king Sacrido^o, who^ they did
embrace, with great joy amongst them all to meet together at that present,
whereas they gave one another to understand what they had passed, and by what
adventure they came thither but when the knight of the Sun understood all that
was done and passed with his brother Rosicleer and the Princess Oliuia, he
gave great thanks unto God, for that it was his will to bring him thither at
that instant, and having great desire for to see and know her, he said, that if
it were their pleasures he would go and speak with her. So therewith they went
unto the cabin whereas the Princess Oliuia and her damsel Fidelia were, who
received no less joy (to see her knight free and at liber^e of that great
peril and danger) than if she had been made Lady over all the world. And the
knight of the Sun and Oristedes very much meruailed at the great bounty and
beauty of the Princess, who seemed unto them to be one of the fairest Damsels
that was to be found in all the world. Then the knight of the Sun would have
kissed her hands, but she would not consent thereunto, but did embrace him with
as great love as though he had been her own natural brother the Prince
Edward, and the gave unto him great thanks for that which he did in her
succor. To whom the knight of the Sun answered, that not he alone does owe
that duty, but also all the world in consideration who she was, ano that he
gave great thanks unto almighty God, in that he did know her to be his
sovereign Lady and sister. Then the good Troyan Oristedes went and offered to
kiss her hands, and yielded himself wholly unto her grace. The Princess did
surrender unto him thanks, and received great contentment to have in her
company so high and valiant knights. For with just reason might be said, that
there was joined together all the bounty and prowess of the whole world. So
all together with great joy and pleasure, they commanded their ships to be
made in a readiness, and sailed together toward the Empire of Grecia. And
being at sea, they met with a great and mighty ship, wherein came the
worthy and valiant Prince Clauerindo, who with the company of his uncle
Flamides, brought with them the fair Princess Lindaraza, And when they knew
the one the other, there was great rejoicing of all their parts, bu^ in
especially, being given to understand by what strange adventure the Prince
did bring her, and of the good will which he had for to marry with her, at
such time as they should ariue at the mighty City of Constantinople, in the
presence of the Emperor, the joy of the brethren was the more, and they
received Lindaraxa with great love, unto whom she seemed to be in all points of
great valor, and she likewise with more joy and pleasure than ever she
received before in all her life, went along with them, and gave great thanks
unto God for that good fortune she had to meet them. Then she embraced with
great love the Princess Oliuia, who with great joy did receive her, being
either of them very much amazed at the strange beauty the one of the other,
and very glad that they should enter together into Grecia. So with great
joy and delight they sailed on their voyage, and had so gallant conversation
amongst themselves, that they never felt the travail of the sea. There did the
Princes, Zoylo, Bargandel, and Lyriamandro understand of Rosicleer all his
adventures, and what he had passed in them, after that he departed out of
England, who received great pleasure to hear him* although to the contrary
they did complain much of him, for that they taking so great pains in seeking
of him, with great desire of his company, he would not discover himself unto
them.

So passing the time with these and other such like sports they sailed toward
Grecia, and in few days with prosperous winds they arrived at the port of
Constanstinople, and thinking it great reason before that they did dis^mbarke
themselves, to give the Emperor Trebatio understanding of their ariuall, it
was concluded and agreed amongst them, that the king Sacridoro should go unto
Constantinople, for that he knew the whole discourse of Rosicleer, and saw by
experience the most part of his valiant worthiness, that he might declare the
same unto the Emperor and Empress, and in what sort he does bring with him
the Princess Oliuia and Clauerindo, and Lindaraza, and how they are all
together in the port of that City, ready for to come a shore, and by reason
that the day was far spent and the night drew on, they did infer it till
the next morning when that the king Sacridoro went a land and did his message.

How the knight of the Sun, Rosicleer, and the other Princes and knig^tes,
with the Princesses Oliuia and Lindaraza, went a land, and were meruailouslie
received by the Emperor Trebatio, and the Empress Briana. Chap. 7.
WHen the next morning was come, the good King Sacridoro went a land, being
armed with his whole armor very richly, alonely with one Squire, and entered
into Constantinople, who finding the Emperor Trebatio and the Empress Briana
in the great hall together, without any dolor he came in whereas they were,
who when they saw him, received him with great joy and pleasure, as well for
that he was so great a friend unto their son Rosicleer, as also because they
hoped to hear some news from him, the which they longed very much for, for
of long time they had not heard from him. Then the king went to kiss the hands
of the Emperor, who did embrace him with great love, and said: King Sacridoro,
my very good friend, you are heartelie welcome into this Country, for with
your coming I do receive great joy and pleasure. Therefore tell me what is
become of your greatest friend Rosicleer, for that I marvel greatly that he
is not come in your company, and I am fully persuaded that it is a great
thing that should depart you a sunder. Then the king after that he had done his
due reverence, answered him and said: Mighty Emperor, I came in the company
of Rosicleer, and God forbid that so long as I live, I should separate my
self out of his company, for therewith I receive more honor and contentment,
than with all the whole kingdom of Antiochia, the which I hold by his valyant
worthiness. And here I give you to understand (most high renowned princes)
that your mighty valiant and most worthy sons, the knight of the Sun and
Rosicleer, are in the port of this City, accompanied with worthy and valiant
princes and knights, and do bring in their company, the most excelent and
fair princess Oliuia, daughter unto the puisant king Oliuerio, whom
Rosicleer, falling in love with, did by force of his strong arm, take out of
the court of the king her father, and with one alone ship (in the which we
are come) made his defense at the sea, against more the^ sire thousand knights,
and there did he show unto him a great part of all that had passed in that
enterprise, and of the great sorrow which he receued for the worthy knight of
the Sun and of Oristedes his friend, as also how by fortune at the sea they
met with the prince Clauerindo, who brought in his company the fair
Lindaraza, with her uncle Fla^nides, with the whole discourse how he brought
her out of the castle, in such sort as he told them at the sea. But when the
Emperor and the Empress heard these news, they receued great joy and comfort
thereat, and as those who have great experience in cases of love, did not
greatly marvel at that which Rosicleer did for the love of Oliuia, likewise
they receued content, for that he had accomplished his desire, being fully
certified that the princess should inherit the kingdom of great Britain,
after the deceace of the king her father, and how that Rosicleer could not
marry with a damsel in all the world of more higher estate. Also their joy
did encreace at the news of the coming of the knight of the Sun. Then the
Emperor and the Empress did render unto the king Sacridoro great thanks, for
that he would come to bring them so joyful news. And the Emperor did
straight ways command his nobles and worthy princes and knights that were
then present in his court, to be in a readiness for to go and receue them, who
in company with them all with great pomp and majesty, went forth of the City
with so great a troop, that all those wide and broad fields were full of
people, for that when the coming of these two princes were published and
known, there were few or none that remained, but all went forth for to receue
the^. The Emperor went in the midst of all those Princes and knights, and
by him the good King Sacridoro, with so grave and severe countenance, that he
did very well manifest his high estate. So when that they came unto the sea
port, at the sound of Trumpets and other kinds of instruments, these princes
did disembarke themselves a land; Rosicleer brought by the hand his well-beloved
princess Oliuia, who was of so great beauty, that all that did behold her
were greatly amazed, so that there grew betwixt diverse great contention,
whether that the beauty of the Princes Claridiana did exceed the beauty of
the princess Lindabrides, but all in general said, that Rosicleer had great
reason to put himself in such peril, for the love of so fair a lady.

Then straight ways came forth the fair Lindaraza, whose beauty did work no
less admiration in the beholders, then the princess, and was lead by that
worthy knight of the Sun her brother, accompanied with those renowned
princes Clauarindo, Bargandel, and Liriamandro, likewise with the Tartarian
Zoylo, and the good Troyan Oristedes, and the valiant king Alamades of
Cornewaile, all the which came forth so seemly and richly aryed, that it put
in great admiration all them that did behold them.

So when they all came before the Emperor (who receued great joy and pleasure
to see his two worthy sons and those two so excelent Princesses, he went and
embraced them with great pleasure and delight, but in especial, the two fair
Ladies, saying, I am much more bound unto God then any other man in the world,
and to give him greater thanks, for that he has not alone brought me to the
sight and knowledging of my two so valiant sons, but also by them I have
recovered and obtained for my daughters, two so worthy Princesses, as the like
are not to be found in all the world. How is it that by my desert I am worthy
to see in mine Empire of Grecia, so high and sovereign beauties, as these
worthy peers are.

Then they did humble themselves upon their knees before the Emperor, and
would have kissed his hands, but the Emperor would not consent thereunto, but
returned and did embrace them a new, and caused them to arise from the ground,
and then with exceeding joy and pleasure he gave entertainment unto his sons,
and unto those high Princes and Knights, saying unto Bargandel, Lyriamandro,
and Zoilo: now my very good friends am I satisfied, seeing that with so
joyful coming you will requite me the evil news, the which you gave me in
Constantinople, of the death of my son Rosicleer.

In this shall your highness see, said Zoylo, how far your good fortune does
extend, and the more to esteem the acknowledging of your son, Fortune would
first present before you those so sudden and heavy news of great dolor,
that after when it should be found unto the contrary, the joy and pleasure
might be the more. Then the Emperor did embrace them all one after another,
and received so great contentment to see those so worthy knights that brought
his sons, that he never rested, nor could not be satisfied in giving thanks
unto almighty God, for exalting him unto so high estate. Likewise they were no
less amazed at the surpassing and gentle disposition of the Emperor, and the
great majesty that he did represent in his person, they did behold him with
great attention, and said within themselves, that he was worthy to be
Father of those two Myrrors of knighthoode throughout all the world. And the
Princesses Oliuia and Lindaraza received marvelous great contentment to see
what great love and humanity he showed unto all people, and what great joy
and pleasure he received of their coming. So after that there had passed much
communication, in this their first meeting, then the other Princes Rodamarte
and Rodofeo, and other noble men that came in the company of y^ Emperor, went
and welc^mmed their noble Princes, who did embrace and receive them with great
joy and love. This being done, the Emperor and all the rest mounted upon their
horses, and the two princesses upon their palfraies, which were brought thither
for the^, well garnished, and took their way toward the mighty City of
Constantinople, accompanied with so many knights and Citizens, that all the
mighty wide and broad fields seemed to be covered with them. In this sort
they entered into the City with great majesty and pomp, whereas was so
marvelous sweet noise of all kinds of instruments and music, that it was
thought (that the entering of Caesar into Rome after his great victory) was not
equal unto this, and passing through the streets of the City, the windows
were furnished with Ladies and damsels, who greatly meruailed at the strange
and excellent beauties of Oliuia and Lindaraza, and praised God of all parts
for seeing that day, in the which the Emperor received his so worthy sons,
who brought so great joy, contentment, honor, and pleasure unto that mighty
Court. So when they came unto the mighty palace, Lindaraza was alighted from
her Palsraie in the arms of the knight of the Sun her brother, and the fair
Oliuia in the arms of the Emperor, who would not consent that any other
should do it, and at their ascending up into the great hall, there the
Empress Briana accompanied with all her Ladies and Gentlewomen came ^orth and
did receive the two Ladies, embracing them with so great love, as though they
had been her own natural dauhters. But when she saw the great beauty and
sovereign grace of the Princess Oliuia, she received within her self a
marvelous great contentment, and thanked God for the good fortune that
Rosicleer had obtained for the recovering of her. Then the Princesses both of
them did kneel down before the Empress, and would have kissed her hands, but
she would not consent vnthe same, but caused them to arise, and with great love
she said. Ah precious and dear daughters, what great pleasure does my heart
receive, and how joyful unto me is this your coming into this Country, and
turning unto Oliuia she said: How much am I bound unto God, that in loosing
the name of a sister in law, I do enjoy you for my Daughter. So passing
betwixt them many amorous and loving communications, came unto her the knight
of the Sun and Rosicleer to kiss her hands, but she did embrace them with so
great love, as unto so noble and worthy persons did appertain. The^ gave she
entertainment unto all the other Princes and knights, with so gallant grace and
demeanor, that al were contented therewith, and said, that of so high and worthy
parents, reason is, that they should bring forth so worthy suns. So after
that they had spent a good while in these their greetings and receiuings, they
entered into a marvelous fair and great quadran, where al these knights were
unarmed, and had given unto them rich and precious robes to cover them, the
which being done, with great joy they sat down to dinner, whereas they were
served with so great majesty, as did well agree unto their high estates. Thus
with great delight unto them all, they remained certain days making great
triumphs, and exercising marvelous feats of arms, whereas the stout Troyan,
the king Sacridoro, and the Tartarian Zoylo with the other worthy Princes,
gave such testimony of their bounty, that from that time forwards they were
esteemed as their worthinisse did deserve. In this time was Rosicleer in so
great joy and pleasure, as before he saw himself in sorrow and sadness, for
he had his well-beloved Oliuia in his power, and that there was concluded and
finished all his cares and mortal griefs that he had received for her cause,
so that there ^as no pleasure in all the world that might be compared unto his,
wherewith he went as one from himself, thinking himself not worthy to enjoy
so great glory. The Princess Oliuia likewise received no less contentment,
for calling to remembrance the great travail and afflictions that she had
sustained and passed for her well-beloved friend, and now seeing her self free
and clear from them all, and put in so high estate, she thought verily that
there was not a Lady nor Gentle woman in all the world so fortunate as she,
so that the joy of them both was without comparison, which was clean contrary
unto the knight of the Sun, for that he found not there the Princess
Claridiana, her absence caused unto him great anguish and grief. And being in
such sort, that he could not suffer nor abide it, he determined straight ways
to depart toward Trapisonda, at such time as he saw that the Emperor his
Father was most in quiet, and when that his departure should less grieve him,
otherwise he would not for all the world do that whereby he should receive
any displeasure. For you shall understand that this knight and Rosicleer his
brother, amongst all other virtues with the which they were endued, this did
surmount all the rest, for that there was not a knight in all the world that
better did love their Father than these two, for that they did not alonelie
serve and honor him, but the more to exalt his majesty, not one of them in
his presence would make any estimation of themselves, but would that all
honor and reverence should be given unto him only, who for the worthiness of
his person did deserve the same. So that the knight of the Sun, for not
displeasing him in his departure, did pass away his anguish and griefs as
well as he could, thinking every hour a whole year till such time as he
might see his Claridiana. This might be a spectacle unto all such as has
Fathers, for to procure and do as this knight did, for to make equal his
pastimes and pleasures unto the troubles and necessities of his Father, always
desiring and procuring his honor more than his own, having before his eyes
never to have quietness nor rest, at such time as his father is in any
trouble, for that the gift of the father, although it be not profitable to his
possessions, yet is he most excellent to give counsel, and profitable unto
the son: and is never well known till such time as he is lost, when that
with many sighs and tears it ought to be bewailed. Who is he that would not
seem to be a good child unto his parents, if he do well consider how
troublesome his bringing up has been unto them, and how that his life is but a
burden of anger and sorrows, sons of great grief, a continual labor and
timorous care? How many times are we the occasion to make frustrate their
desires, and a breaking of their sound sleeps, taking away their stomachs,
y^ they cannot eat, and with our fained tears, disturb their p^^sures? How
many sudden fears and griefs caused by y^ va^^ance of our actions, and many
times the disgrace and death of the sons, is cause of the death of their
mothers. And y^ which is more, many with the overmuch pleasure and joy
received, to hear how that their children be alive, dies suddenly, as it
chanced unto those two, the same day that they returned unto Rome, that did
remain and escaped from the loss of Trasimeno, when as they saw their sons
alive, whereas before it was certified them that they were slain, and having
no measure to eschew so great and sudden joy, did die presently therewith.
Therefore seeing that the love of the parents is so great unto their children,
he is worthy of great punishment that does not honor them, and shall have
less reason to leave undone, that which is a common Proverb, that the whole
fault consists in the Father, for that many times the hardness of the Father
is profitable unto the son, and alwaie the cockering of them is hurtful,
because we that be sons and youthful, be always stubburne, and cannot be
mollified but by stubburnnesse, as many times it falls out, that the pitiful
Chyrurgion leaves the wound evil cured, whereof did grow the old custom that
was used amongst the Romans, that not alonelie Princes and Consulles, unto
whom was given the whole power over the common wealth against such as did
offend, but also all particular fathers had jurisdiction over their children,
to punish them, and to put them in prison, tormenting them, yea, and to put
them to death. The cruelty of Cassio and Fuluio was much esteemed in putting
to death of their sons, not for that they did hate them* but because they
could not correct their customs. So that the son must understand that the
good Father must not seek who should cocker and make much of him, but one that
may do him good. And many things does seem unto the son to be very hard
and terrible, which seems unto the Father to be very profitable. Neither is
he deceived therein, for that his affection is not with passion, and youth has
no more consideration^ than that which is before his eyes, and waring riper in
years, he sees many things a far^e of, and always the severity of the
father, is more profitable unto the son than meekness. It is a strange thing
to consider, that a man can better suffer the hardness of a tyrannous master,
than of his own Father, the which although they be not alowable, yet should
not they reprove their fathers, but rather suffer them. We read that Alexander
did never incurr^ so great reproach, as in that he did not only rebuke his
Father, but that he was also envious, and received grief at his ertollings.
Wise men say, that there is no superiority on the earth more iuster than that
of the Father, nor more honester subjection than that of the son, therefore
let children honor their parents, and show their due duties unto them with
reverence: and not doing the same, it is a just sentence that rebellious sons
does suffer. And this punishment is not so small, but unto him that suffers,
it seems very much, for that there is nothing that does so much afflict and
torment the mind of man, as an injurious word spoken by a rebellious child.
And as by these two worthy knights, all children may take an ensample, so
likewise there is to be noted, the great part that is their fathers, as
appears by this Emperor, that deserved to be so esteemed and beloved with so
great reverence of his sons, considering his excellent virtues, and the great
love that he bare unto them, did constrain them for to love him, and show him
humble reverence. Also when that their sons do not prove to be good, then
ought their Fathers to suffer and bear with them, til such time as their
childhood is past, then after as they do increase, to correct their unbridled
nature, forcing them to leave their vice, whereto they are inclined, and to
learn to embrace virtue, which is the badge of all Christians.

David and Methridates king of Pontus, and Seuerus Emperor of Rome, did suffer
and bear with their rebellyous sons. Affricano did heartelie love his son,
although in nothing he did resemble him, but clean contrary to him in his
virtues. Here we will leave these admonitions unto ancient and old men, who
has greater authority to give them. Returning to our History, which says,
that the Emperor Trebatio and the Empress Briana, received marvelous great
joy, contentment, and pleasure, to see in their company their two so valiant
and obedient sons, accompanied with so high and (...) ^ompanie. Likewise they
were joyful that the Prince Clauerindo was so desirous to marry with the
fair Lindaraza, and thereto asked the good will o^ the Emperor and the
Empress, who at the request and desire of the knight of the Sun did grant
it unto him, whereat Clauerindo received great joy and pleasure, and showed
himself very pleasant and gallant for the same, and wrote unto the king
Oristedes his father, that he would think well thereof, and to request the
Emperor Trebatio to think well of the same.

Thus as the Court of that mighty Emperor was in great joy and pleasure, with
this gallant company, came thither at that present the wise Artemidoro, and
being known who he was, he was meruailouslie well received of the Emperor,
and of those Princes and Knights there present, but in especial of Rosicleer,
who calling to remembrance what he had said and done for him, did bear him so
great love as unto his natural brother. Here did the wise Artemidoro ask the
Empress Briana, if she did remember at such time as she was first troubled
with passions, how that a Nymph out of the Fountain of water, did give her
comfort and consolation, giving her to understand that it was done by his art,
and how if she did call it well to remembrance (that next unto God) she was
by that consolation comforted at that present, who seeing that all that which
the wise man had said was already fulfilled and come to pass, she knew not
how for to gratify him for so great a benefit done unto her: but he was
meruailouslie honored of her, the Emperor, his sons, and of all that were
there present.

Then did Artemidoro (as one that did know it very well) make manifest all
that had passed with Rosicleer, from the time of his first birth unto that
present, jointly with all that which had passed by the Emperor with the
Empress Briana, collected into one book, which did declare all things
perticularlie, as though he had been present at the doing: whereat the
Emperor was meruailouslie joyful, and gave unto the wise man great thanks
^or the same. So that the Emperor and all the (...) Princes and knights that
did read those wonders, meruailed greatly at the strange things which
Rosicleer had passed, and were very glad that all his travails and troubles
for love were brought to so good an end. And for that there was not written,
nor any mention made of the wonderful acts done by the knight of the Sun,
the Emperor did ask of the wise man wherefore they were forgotten? Who
answered him in the presence of all the nobles in the Court, that he did leave
off the writing of them, for that there was another great wise man who had
better intelligence thereof than he, and had the charge for to write and put
in memory all things that touches the knight of the Sun, and how that
before long time do pass they shall see him in that Court, who will discover
by writing so many wonderful and strange acts, that never shall be forgotten
so long as the world endures. And although the mighty Emperor Trebatio and
all that were with him, did not understand who that wise man should be of whom
he spoke of, yet did the knight of the Sun know that it was the wise
Lyrgandeo, and was very glad to hear him say that he would come unto that
Court, for that he desired much to see him, with his nephew king Florion, and
did not forget that which for him he had done, and was very desirous to have
opportunity to gratify him for the same. But when the Prince Clauerindo had
told unto him the misfortune at sea that happened unto the Prince Brandizel
his sorrow was so great, that many days after he very heavy and sadd^,
thinking verily that his very friend Brandizel had been lost. But the wise
Artemidoro who knew it to the contrary, to put remedy to his sorrow, told
him that he was safe and sound, and in a place greatly to his contentment,
and how that he should see him very shortly.

The knight of the Sun gave him great thanks for the same, and the wise man
in the mean time that he was in the Court did write with his own hand in the
fore front of that mighty Palace, in great Letters, that all men might read
it, a Prophecy, which said as follows.

At such time as the mighty shepherd has best kept and gathered together his
^locke, shall come the brave and stout Lions with ravenous and hungry wrath,
and between her and the most stout Lion, shall pass a very cruel and
perilous contention, and being put a sunder by the mighty shepherd, the
stout Lion shall fall at the roaring of the furious Lions, and for a long time
shall loose his name, till such time as the roaring of the said Lions does awake
him, and with her strong arms raise him up again. At that time shall the
mighty shepherd be very heavy, and there shall come upon him the great she
Bear very irefull, and in her company so many Wolves and dreadful Tigers,
that shall make all the world^ to wonder, and the ^locke of the mighty
shepherd by them shall be scattered abroad, and the green and flowred fields
shall be turned into red color, and the earth shall seem as though it had
rained much blood. The huge and mighty rivers shall burst out of their course,
and the wide and broad seas shall change the color of their profound
waters, showing the great earthquake that shall come. Then afterward the day
shall come, that the Sun at noone tide shall be (...), loosing the greater
part of his light and brightness, a^ which very instant, the mig^tie
shepherd shall be in great care and perplexity, and all his slock dispearsed
abroad, and at the point to be lost, but straight ways the San shall (...) his
whole brightness, and the Lion brought by the stout Lions, by her immortat deeds
shall recover his lost name, and by his coming, the mighty shopheard shall
gather together his good ^locke, and with ^o great courage shall return upon
those hungry Walu^s (...) Tigers, that they (...) kill the most part of them,
and those withshall remain, shall sly and leau^ the Country desolate. And
here the Griffins that came (...) the new world against the mighty shepherd,
shall lose their furious wrath and betwixt them and those of his ^lock, shall be
made great friendship and very profitable. The she bear with the mighty he
bear, shall be taken prisoners by new enemies, and being delivered by the stout
Lion, shall be made friends with the mighty shepherd. And at the request of the
Lion and Lioness, they shall come together, and of that society shall
proceed one that the deeds past, shall make all mortality ^e forgotten.
Bear this in your mind, for as I have said, so it shall come to pass.

This Prophecy being written by the wise Artemidoro, the Emperor and all
those worthy Princes and Knights did behold it. And as they understood very
little what it did signify, they were greatly amazed at the great
understanding of the wise man: and desired him to declare somewhat the meaning
thereof, but he excused himself, saying, that it was not given unto him for to
declare that which was to come, but to make manifest unto them by figures: for
that if it should fall out to prove to the contrary, it would be the occasion
of great danger, harm and peril. But yet notwithstanding all shall come to
pass in such sort, that the time shall declare it, and make it most manifest.
These and many other things did this wise Artemidoro declare unto them, that if
they had not been of noble courage, his prophesies had put them in great wonder
and fear. So they being in great joy, pastimes and pleasures in the mighty
City of Constantinople, (although to the contrary great sorrow and grief unto
the knight of the Sun, for that the Empress Claridiana, his mistress, was
not there present) this History does leave them, till time do serve, for to
tell you what Don Siluerio did, that returned unto great Britain.

How the Prince Don Siluerio, without all hope of the recovery of the Princes
Oliuia, her return unto great Britain, and of all that was determined in the
court of the King Oliuerio. Chap. 8.
THE wrath and anger was very great that Don Siluerio receued, in that he was
past all hope of recovery of the princess Oliuia, by reason that the most
part of his knights were slain, and she remaining in the power of Rosicleer,
the thing that he most loved in all the world, without any hope of recovery.
And again, seeing that the princes his friends with the king Alamades, that
went in his company, became his enemies, and likewise remembering the great
fury and stoutnesse of them with whom he had the battle, with great
complaints wepings and lamentations, he bewailed his misfortune, which was unto
him so contrary, and so favorable unto his enemies. So in the end of
certain days after his departure, he arrived in great Britain, and going a
land he sent the king word of his ariuall, appareling himself and all such
knights as came with him in black and mourning apparel, and so entered into
the mighty City of London, whereas the king did receue him, to whom with
great sorrow and grief he gave the King to understand of all that had happened
unto him at the sea. And because at that present the rancour and malice which
he had against the Emperor Trebatio, was great in him, for the death of prince
Edward his son, he was very glad that he had so good occasion and opportunity
to arm himself against him, and therefore did not only comfort y^ prince Don
Siluerio to follow his poisoned enterprise, to take reuengement against him, but
did rather procure to kindle his wrath the more, in saying, that unto them both
it should be a perpetual dishonor, if they did not procure the reuengement,
the injury offered was so great, and that it were better for them to dye in
the quarrel, then to live in so great dishonor for ever.

Then the Prince who desired no other thing, but very joyful to see that the
king was wholly of his mind and determination, made a great Oath, that he
would never take to him wife in marriage, till such time as that great injury
done by Rosicleer, were revenged. So that straight (...) it was agreed betwixt
them both, that it should be (...) pra^^ise to take reuengement.

The King commanded all the nobles of his Court to come together to a parle,
and being come together, he put them in remembrance of the death of his son
prince Edward, how he was slain by the Emperor Treba^^o, and then of the
spoiling and carrying away of the Princess Oliuia, done by his son Rosicleer:
showing and persuading them by many reasons, how much they were bound to
procure reuengement of that great injury. And although that there were some to
whom the determination of the king seemed nothing good, yet in the end they
all concluded and agreed, that all should be done as he thought best, and that
out of hand they should begin to muster and procure soldiers and men of war to
be made in a readiness, for to pass the seas, and to enter into Grecia.

And although Don Siluerio had there with him many knights of Lusitania, yet
did he promise to return into his country, and to bring from that kingedome,
and also o^t of Spain, a great number, for that he that was King^ of Spain at
that present, was a very great friend unto his father, and he was very
certain that he would not deny to help and aid him with all the force and
strength he could possible.

He being willing to put all things in effect, took his leave of the King and
departed straightwaies from great Britain, and put himself unto the rough and
boisterous Seas, taking his voyage toward Lusitania. In the mean time King
Oliuerio, did ordain and made in a readiness all the people that possible he
could, and writ his letters unto all kings that were his friends, as well
Christians as Pagans, giving them to understand of the great injury and wrong
done unto him, in murdering his only son and heir of his kingdom, and
then his daughter to be stolen and carried away: requesting of them all favor
possible, to help him to take reuengement for the same.

(...) that to conclude, some there were that for very friend^^ip and love,
did aid him. And other some for the ill will they bare unto the Greeks, of
very envy of their prosperi^i^es, did aid and help him, and not only with
their people, but with their own proper persons, (...) unto the King Oliuerio,
and there was so great have and diligence made in the executing thereof, that
many days was not past, when that in great Britain there was joined together
more then ^ne hundred and fifty thousand knights, where as the History does
lea^e them, putting all things in good order, as appertained unto so valiant an
enterprise, for to tell you of other things that happened in the mean time.

How that the Princess Lindabrides did crave of her father the Emperor
Alicandro, reuengement of the knight of the Sun, and how the Emperor at her
request, did call a Parliament, and what happened in the same. Chap. 9.
IN great confusion and alteration remained the whole Court of the Emperor
Alicandro, for so sudden departure of the knight of the Sun, but above all
the rest, was the fair Princes Lindabrides, whose life was so full of sorrow
and grief, that many times she was at the point of death. And there was
nothing that could comfort her* in seeing that y^ knight of the Sun was
departed and returned to his own country, and was very certain, that if
once he came into the presence of the princes Claridiana, it were past all
remedy for him to have her any more in his remembrance, so that she might
v^rie well abandon her self of all hope, ever to see him any more: the which
was more bitter and grievous unto her, then death. And considering with her
self by reason of the great love she bare unto him, that it should be great
comfort unto her, and remedy for her grief, if that she did once again
return in^^ Grecia, by what manner of means so ever it was she cared not,
thinking by that means for to disturb the knight of the Sun, that he
should not have a^ie time nor space for to serve the Princess Claridiana,
neither for to marry with her, for the which to put in effect the (...)
nothing so good as for to crave reuengement of the Emperor her ^ather, for the
injury done by the knight of the Sun, which might be the occasion that he
with all his power should pass into Grecia, and to tarry her with him thither
to be crowned Empres of Grecia, seeming by those means the knight of the Sun
shall be constrained to do perforce, y^ before he would not by his free will,
the which she put in ure according unto her thought. And as many times the
Emperor her father came into her closet to visit and comfort her (whereas she
continually remained and never went abro^e) upon a day when that he was
fullest of grief comforting her, whose sorrow pricked him to the very heart,
for the great love he bare unto her. The Princess shedding many tears from
her christaline eyes, said.

It is lost labor, my Lord and Father, for to comfort or give any consolation
unto this unhappy and unfortunate Damsel your Daughter, for that there is is
nothing that can remedy nor help me but only the death, the which if the
high Gods were so pleased, were so high ^ee, that I could not make an end of
this my speaking, for that death were a great deal better unto me, than to
live, for to feel and suffer so great an injury as tha^ which the ^nigh^ of
the Sun has done against you and me, for if you my Lord would consider
thereof as is right and reason, you would leave off com^orting of your
Daughter, and (...) by all means that this our reproach may be (...),
wherewith if p^esenc^ie I should depart out of this world, I should g^e with
comfort, but of the (...) that from their high Thro^e they ^ill yeel^e (...)
seeing that you do so little este^me it. (...) should other Damselles of base
birth look for, (...) that a Damsel of so high estate as I am, (...) owes
participate with the divine (...) of the h^gh Gods, and being (...) by one
alone (...) grief of her great wrong, nor any that will take upon him to
answer the quarrel. With great reason therefore from this day forwards,
may your vassalles and subjects take heart at grass, and be bold to rise up
against you, seeing that you will put up such an injury and evil proffer,
done against you by one alone Knight, and an enemy unto your law, and will
suffer me that am your Daughter to live without reuengement. My Lord and
Father, I pray you behold and consider your high estate, which is such, that
all the kings and Lords of the Orient are obedient at your commandment and
service, and does honor and reverence you as a parent and kinsman unto the
immortal Gods, and if now you do dissemble this great injury which unto you
and me has been committed, without making cruel reuengement, you shall
neither be feared nor esteemed, but had in less reputation than heretofore
you have been, and your honor overthrown from the throne, which your
predecessors until this present day has maintained and vpholden. And that
which seems to be worst of all, is, that the divine providence will feel
and acknowledge part of this great injury, the which I do most earnestly
pray and desire, that they do not execute against you their wrath, in that
you have neglected to take reuengement. For this cause only has the divine
Gods given unto you this high estate, exalting and placing you above all other
that are in the world, because you should execute justly here upon the earth,
as they have ordained in their divine Consistory.

This fair Damsel had not so soon concluded these her words, when that the
Emperor her Father understanding the effect of her ^omplaint, with great
grief and sorrow unto his heart, being full of anger and wrath, arose up,
and laid his hand upon his head, as upon a precious relike, and said these
words following.

Here I do swear unto thee by this sacred head, and by the divine Deity,
that I do participate of the immortal Gods, for to go with all my power into
Grecia, and in reuengement of this great injury to me done, I will destroy
the Emperor Trebatio, and give a cruel and dishonored death unto his wife
and children, and crown thee my daughter, for Empress of that Empire. So with
this conclusion, and without speaking any more words, he went forth of her
Closet, and calling together certain of his counsel, he concluded that a
Parliament should be proclaimed throughout all his kingdoms and dominions,
commanding all Kings, Princes, and Nobles of the same, to come unto the said
Parliament in pain of death. Likewise he did write Letters of great love
unto other Islands that were not subject unto him, which were inhabited with
Giants and furious people, requesting them to come unto his Court of
Parliament. Among all, he wrote a Letter unto Bradaman Campeon, who was
returned into his Country again, the effect thereof was as follows.

GRan Campion, Lord of the Oriental Islands that are in the Octian Sea, I do
believe that it is manifest unto thee the injury done by the Greek Prince
unto our sacred estate, and the great offense that he did unto the immortal
Gods, therefore now thou shall understand that by the virtue of that part of
the divine deity that is in us, it is concluded in our divine Consistory,
that order should be taken in such sort, that reuengement may be taken for
the same, in such ample wise, that the whole Empire of Grecia may be destroyed
down to the ground, and not to leave one stone upon another, as a just
punishment for the offenders, and an example to all others, how they shall
offend against the divine majesty. For the (...) end, to the executing of the
same, we do desire (...) in this enterprise thy favor may be the first,
for that as the diui^^ Gods have created thee so strong and mighty over (...)
all mortal creatures, so ly^^wise art thou (...) maintain and defend their
divine honors, (...) to make reuengement of this (...) Prince has done unto
us.

Herein I do enlarge no farther, but abiding thy coming, for to have thy
opinion what were best to be done herein. Written in our sacred Court, etc.

When that Bradaman had received this Letter, in all his life he was not so
glad and joyful, for that occasion did so ^erue, that he might execute that
great anger and wrath that he had conceived against the knight of the Sun,
because it was a great shame unto him that he was overcome by him, and he
could not forget that great iniarie received, but had as much desire to be
revenged for the same. And you shall understand that this Bradaman had at that
time a son of twenty years old, the most brauest and ^iercest creature
that ever was seen by men: of whom shall be made more mention in this
History. Bradaman had not this son by a fair Gentlewoman, but of the
cruellest and furious in condition amongst al women, for that after y^ by the
mighty power of his person he came to be Lord over the Oriental Islands,
which was a kind of people which for their fierceness never before could be
brought in subjection, he determined within himself, for that he would not
that that Segniorie should be lost after his death) to procure to have so
valiant a son, who for the worthiness of his person should be sufficient to
sustain that estate, as he did get it in his life time. And with this
determination and desire, he made many sacrifices unto the Gods, desiring them
to give him such a son to be his heir, of no less force and strength than
he was for the defense of those kingdoms. At the same time there was in one of
those Islands a woman of so stout and furious condition, and of so great
strength, that with her own hands she slew a great number of giants, and
other terrible and dreadful beasts. Bradaman did know her, in such sort, that
nature working in her by the will of the high Gods, she was delivered of that
furious and fierce son, and gave him to name Bramarant. At whose birth
Bradaman his Father was very joyful, and caused him for to be nourished with
the milk of Lions and Tigers, and other ^arious beas^es, such as were to be
found in those parts, and would never consent that he should prove of his
mothers breasts, for that he would his son should be the more fierce and
strong. In this sort he was nourished, so that afterward it appears that the
double strength and fierceness of the Father and o^ his mother, was
comprehended in him, with the aid of the milk that he sucked, which did work
such effect in him, that when he came to twelve years of age, he would go
alone into the deserts and mountains, without any armor more than certain
sodden skins hardened in the Sun, and would seek out the strong Lions and
fierce Tigers, with other furious beasts, and all that ever he could take, he
would tear them to pieces with his hands, as though they had been young and
tender Kids. He would eat no other meat in all the time of his hunting, but
the milk of those she wild beasts that he met withal, and sometimes of the
flesh of the most fu^ious be^st that he killed, and that should be raw. But
when that he grew unto more years, he left of his hunting of wild beasts, and
fell to exercising himself in armor and feats of arms, in such sort, that
his great force and strength was very dear unto a great number, for that he
would never hear reason in the trial of his strength, as did become good and
courteous knights, but without any occasion in the wo^lde, ^ee would have
contention with all them that he met withal, being armed, without any fear,
if they were two, twenty, or thirty, with them all he would contend and
kill them, tearing them in pieces with so great c^uelt^e, that he was feared
of all, and could find none that was able to make r^sistance against him,
although all the (...) of those Islands were very stout and courageous, and
almost all Giants. And ^or that Nature did show her self ^uch ^auourable unto
Bramarant, the History says that he was not in stature of his body so
(...), but he was as big as any knight might (...) Giant, and of so
mighty, huge, and great members, that whatsoever he lacked in his height, he
(...) it comprehended in his bigness, and was of so great force and strength,
that there was no equality in that of Milo, of whom they say, that there was
not his like in all the whole world, for that he did things that seemed to be
incredible to all that did see them, and besides his great strength, he was so
swi^t and light, that he would overtake Lions, and other wild beasts in the
plain running after them* This young Bramarant seeing himself to be so
pu^sant and mighty above all others, was so stout and proud, that at such
time as he came to twenty years of age, there was not one (if he were
displeased with him) that durst come into his presence, so y^ in all those
Oriental Islands he was feared, and more esteemed tha^ his Father, and was not
content that they had him for their Lord, but also would be worshipped of his
as their principal God, and said that all the Gods the which they did
worship, had no power over him, neither were they equal in valor. And
Bradaman his Father seeing him so feared and reverenced of all, and how great
and mighty his strength and fierceness was, was thereof exceedingly (...)
joyful, believing of a certain, that it was not possible for him to loose his
kingdoms, having so valiant and strong a son. So at such time as the Letter
of the Emperor Alicandro came unto his hands, there was present with him his
son Bramarant, who when that he heard the Letter read, he took a great
desire for to go with them into Grecia, and thought the time long to see
himself on the journey, and requested his Father that he might go with him,
for that he would that his mighty power were manifest unto all the world.
Then Bradaman who desired no other thing did grant him lisence, and out of
hand they entered their journey toward the Court of the Emperor Alycandro,
Bramarant caused to be made for himself armor all of little bones of small
fishes that they find in those seas, of so great hardness, that neither sword
nor any other weapon could cut or break it, it was of the same making that
the Princes Meridian his armor was, which afterward the knight of the Sun
^ad, yet this of M^^idian was more ^i^er and of greater ^orce. Bramarant caused
his armor to be garnished with gold and precious stones, wherewith after they
were made, he was so proud and furious, that he had neithe^ sear nor dread
of all the world. Then Bradaman called before him twelve kings, Captains of
his Islands, who were as the History declares great and mighty Giants, and
in the company of them and his son Bramarant took his journey toward the
Court of the Emperor Alycandio. So when they came thither, they were of the
Emperor meruallouslie well received and entertained, as of him that seemed to
have great need of their help. In the mean time y^ they there tarried, till
all the whole host were joined together, Bramarant did many and mighty feats
of arms, wherein he gaue^ful testimony who he was, putting so great wonder in
all them that did behold him, that with great admiration they said, that the
Gods did put upon that knight all their powers and strengths, for the
punishment and destruction of the Christians. Wherewith the Emperor was very
joyful, and did them all great honor, and it seemed unto him, that if they
alone with their people should pass into Grecia, they were sufficient to
destroy the whole Empire and power of the Christians.

How the Emperor Alicandro did consult with the Nobles of his Court, about
their journey into Grecia, and what Bramarant did concerning the same. Chap. 10.
AFter that the Parliament was proclaimed by the commandment of (...) Emperor
Alicandro, there were few (...) Lords amongst the Pagans in Asia but came
thither, and b^eing all together in the great City of Neptaya, the Emperor
entered into the Parliament house with all his whole assembly of Kings,
Princes, and other noble men, whe^eas there was placed his Imperial seat in
his room appointed, hang^^ round about with cloth of gold, and somewhat more
below was the places for the rest made, of very fine and shining silver,
whereas this mighty Emperor when he was set in his Imperial seat (which was
all of fine gold and precious stones) and all the other kings and Lords, every
one in his degree, which was to the number of more than one hundredth, silence
being commanded, with great majesty of his royal person, he did pronounce
unto them these words following.

LOiall subiets, true vassalls, and my very friends, immortal thanks I render
unto the high Go^s, not only for that it has pleased them to place me in this
high and sacred estate, in making me Lord over so many Countries and
innumerable riches, but also for that it has pleased their dit^ne majesty's to
consent (which is a thing more to be esteemed than all the rest) that amongst
so many mighty kings and noble Lords that are here present, and subject unto
this sacred Empire, there is not one amongst you but has been (and I suppose
will be) loiall and faithful, which is the thing that Princes ought to have
in greatest price, for that it is no less perilous and dangerous unto a King
that has a perverse and an unreasonable subject, than for a man of meaner or
baser sort to have a strong and mighty enemy. So that now for that I am
fully persuaded and certefied of the great fidelity and truth that you have
always used unto me. I have requested you al to come unto this assembly and
Court of Parliament, for to communicate with you couching a matter whereof you
are not ignorant, not for that therein you should do ought to accomplish my
will, but that you should aid and help me with your good counsels, for that
in great and profound matters one must propone, and many must determine. I
think it is not needful to make much relating thereof, because it is well
known unto you all, how the knight of the Sun, and son unto the Emperor
of Grecia came into this land, and was received and entertained by us, with so
great love and good will, as though it had been the Prince Meridian our son.
Likewise how that it was our pleasure to marry him unto the Princess
Lindabrides our daughter, the which was almost concluded and celebrated,
whether it was his evil hap, or unhappy fortune, upon a night he departed, and
left our daughter flouted, and us astonished and ashamed, in recompense of the
great honor that we did and showed unto him. All the which does not grieve us
so much for our part, for the evil sact done unto us, as it does for the
great offense done therein unto the immortal Gods, believing that a greater
could not have been invented upon the earth, nor a thing more contrary against
their divine majesty. What Emperor, King, Prince, or Knight amongst mortal
men, that durst be so bold as to refuse or take unto his wife the Princes
Lindabrides, being successor, descending from the divine stock, but this
only knight of the Sun. Of truth and with great reason may the divine Gods
execute their wrath upon us, if so be that we do not revenge this great
injury done unto us, and offense unto their divine majesty's: and with no
less reason their divine justice may fall upon you, if that (not only with
your subjects and goods) but also your selves in person do not procure to make
this reuengeme^t. A man ought to have a respect unto the griefs and offenses
done unto themselves, but much more the wrongs which are done against the high
Gods. We do well understand, that for to take reuengement of the knight of the
Sun, it cannot be so easily done, but it will cost us many people and much
treasure, yea, and our own persons in the performance thereof, but yet
considering your mighty power, strength, and valiant hearts, we do believe
that it does not astonish you, neither do you fear to take upon you this
journey, for that great delays does proceed of little prudence, and fear,
of great cowardnesse, but heroical knights, such as do procure to have a
fame in all the world, with equal courage ought to offer their persons in
doubtful attempts as well as in prosperous affairs, and with like constancy
to harden themselves against afflictions, as unto delights and pleasures. Of
our own part, we do say, y^ although our years does require more to take
rest and ^ase in our own Country, than to travail into another, yet if it so
be concluded that we shall take this journey upon us, so far off, and so
costly, we will that you do no more therein, than you see us to do, as
travailing by the way, nauigating by Sea, clearing our passage, assaulting our
enemies, in all these we will be the first, and not the last. To conclude,
our very good friends are desirous to be revenged of this great injury done
unto us by the knight of the Sun, and that you would not think (agreeing
heereto with us) that these our white hairs shall lack good will for to pass
into Grecia, for that if once we come thither* we hope in the immortal Gods,
(not alonelie to be revenged of this injury done unto us) but also to make
subject unto our consecrated estate that whole Empire. And we are fully
persuaded that the divine providence has permitted this offense to be done,
that we should have occasion for to destroy the whole power of the Christians.
We do not mean hereby to bring unto your remembrance, how oftentimes it
happened in times past in this Country, the Emperors and Captains of Rome
came, not only to make reuengement of the injuries and offenses done unto
themselves, but also for them that were their friends and subjects unto y^
Empire of Rome, in executing whereof, they did neither respect the largeness
of their journey, expenses of their treasures, neither the travail of their
persons, so y^ their camps and armies were as common in Asia, as in Italy or
Rome: so that in consideration, if those only for the honor of their friends
did little esteem^ their long travails into those Countries, wherefore should
we think it much, in revenging of our own injuries, to pass into Grecia. We
desire the high Gods y^ no such cowardnesse may be found in your noble minds,
neither so many mighty kings and Princes as be here present to consent to the
contrary, but y^ this great injury should be revenged. Now seeing that we
have declared unto you the occasion of calling you together unto this our court
of Parliament, we do desire you so let us have your judgments upon this that
we have proponed, hoping to have it in so ample sort as always we have
received at your hands.

When all those that were present with the Emperor had well heard the words
that were spoken, and that concerning the same he had asked their counsels,
yet his determined purpose was for to pass into Grecia, so that there was
amongst them some that were very glad and joyful for the same, and other some
that did not like of the journey, as it is a natural thing amongst men, in
like affairs to be of contrary opinions. The Emperor at that time did look
for their answer, but nothing was supplied, til such time as they did all
together desire the old king of Gedrosia in the name of them all to answer
unto the Emperors proposition, for that he was esteemed in all those kingdoms
to be wise, and one that was well seen in the wars, and as it has been
told you in this History, he was well seen in Astrology, who being by them
very much importuned, arose up and spoke as follows.

The speech which the old king of Gedrosia made unto the Emperor Alicandro
before all those high kings and nobles concerning the passage of their army
into Grecia.
MOst high and mighty Emperor and our Lord, I would very feign excuse my
self to give my judgment, considering this grievous case, which you have
declared unto us, for that you have it for custom to ask counsel of your
nobles in causes of importance and things requisite. And yet in the end say
they what they can, yielding their judgments according unto reason, all things
must be done according unto your desire and will, whether it be good or bad,
giving to understand, that the counsel which you do ask of your nobles and
subjects, is more to complie with them, than any good will you have to be
counseled. But yet for all this, although I do know, that my judgment in
this case will be as much as nothing, and will be conceived to another intent
and purpose contrary unto my meaning, yet will I declare it, for that
hereafter you shall not complain at any time of the old king of Gedrosia,
in that he did not advise you in time that you might prove your fortune. And
here I protest before the immortal Gods, that this which I do pretend to
say unto you, is not so much for the fear and dread the which I have of the
Greeks, as it is for the great love and good will which I do bear unto you and
to al our Country. I would not (most mighty Lord) that you should put so great
confidence and trust in this your puisant and high estate, thinking therewith
to be very firm and sure, void of the subjection of uncertain and immutable
fortune, and never to slide or fall from the high throne in which you are
exalted, if you do believe this to be true. There are many things past in this
world long since of mighty Princes, that if you will enter into judgment of
them rightly, as you ought for to do, you shall plainly see and perceive
that it is all false and contrary, as a spectacle of many Caesar's Romans, in
which time past were Lords and rulers over all the world, as Julius Caesar,
Caio, Caligula, Nero, Claudio, Galba, Oton, Vitelio, Domiciano, Comodo,
Pertinax, Basiano, Macrino, Heliogabilo, Belusiano, Valeriano, Galiego, Probo,
Iuliano, Bauio, Constantio, Valente, Graciano, Valentiniano, and an infinite
number more, which has been overthrown from the imperial throne in the
which Fortune did exalt them, and no other occasion to the same, but that all
humane things has no security nor firmness, and he that is exalted and set
in the highest of the wheel of mooueable Fortune, the same is most apt and
readiest to fall. And in this thing you may believe me, that look how much the
humane power does surmount, so much is the Empire, or what estate so ever it
be, subject unto fortune, and all the great fire laden with wood, is charged
with the mighty winds in the highest parts: even so likewise (most mighty
Emperor) this estate is not so high, but it has with it great peril, so that
you need not to go and seek other dangers in strange Countries so far
from this, that when it shall fall out, all thing to succeed and be prosperous
unto you, yet shall it be great marvel, if you do return back again
alive into your own country, how much more the victory against the Greeks
is so uncertain, and as you may make just account thereof, although you think
it to the contrary, without any consideration of perverse fortune, which may
so fall out, that they shall remain al liberty, and you deceived: although
the host of men which you may carry, will be a great multitude, mighty and
strong, yet many times it falls out, that the greatest host is overcome by
the lesser, as it happened unto Xerxes, and unto Darius, and a great number
more, who with hosts of innumerable company of people were destroyed and
overcome. Likewise before that this shall come in effect, if you do well
consider, and have an eye into the great angers and molestacions, presumptions,
alterations, and contrarieties, which does happen daily in these mighty
hosts. I believe that you will think it better to remain and live at home in
your own country, then to pass into Grecia with so mighty an host, for that
there is no injuries nor cruelties that may be compared unto the conditions of
men of war. And these which you do think to be your own, it may so fall out,
that for a little occasion, they will change their copy, and perhaps betray
and ^el them, so that of knights and subjects, they may become thy enemies.
Behold and consider of that great and mighty Alexander, who in his time
accounted himself of no less estate then you do now at this present, yet
that which all his enemies could not conclude and bring to pass, was finished
by his own knights, in killing him by poison. If you will that I shall declare
unto you many other examples by Emperors of Rome: behold who slew Pertinax,
and the two Maximos, father and son, Baluino, Maximo, Probo, Graciano, and
Valentiniano, the least of all these were good and valiant men, and yet slain
by the hands of those of their host. Likewise I will declare the great perils
and misfortunes that happens at the sea, by y^ which you must of necessity
pass this your great multitude of people, I would it were not my fortune to
speak, but could excuse my self, for that it is well known unto all men, how
ready y^ mighty winds are to augment perils, the mighty, great and
unmerciful waves, the hidden rocks under the water, the continual tempests
and whirle winds. What is that so strong, that the power of the heavens and
the sea do not rent and tear all to pieces, and carry away by sudden
storms and tempests of the winds, and therefore it is said that the going to
the sea is easy, but the coming from the sea is perilous, but putting all
the perils and dangers a part, and that Fortune will show her self
favorable unto you in all these affairs, and that with prosperous winds and
times you are entered into the Empire of Grecia, yet I would you should
consider and know, how doubtful is the victory at that present, for that in
all things hope is doubtful, and much more in great wars and contentions.
Uerie prudent and well experimented in arms was he that said, that there is
nothing that has his end more uncertain than the war, and that it is far
better a certain and sure peace, than the hoped victory. One thing all you
may believe of a certain, that very few or none enters into battle
without hope of victory, but yet consider if it be not a thing that has
often happened, the loss of the overcome to be less than of the ouerco^mers.
How many times does men go unto the wars in hope to have the victory, and
to the contrary, remains overcome, and that which is worst, they remain dead
in the field, so that they return not back again to their houses overcome,
nor with victory. And yet will I say more in contradiction of your hope, that
if you did know of a very certainty and truth, that the victory should be on
your parts against the Greeks, yet for all that I will not let to give you
counsel for to remain in quiet at home in your own Country, for as the
victory is always doubtful, even so many times it is sorrowful and bloody,
and is not got with ease, that which is sought with peril of their lives, and
dearly sold y^ is bought with blood, and more deerer, if it cost their lives.
We have seen many times an host to have the victory, and yet their general
slain in the battle, and this is without all doubt, y^ some shall be slain
on your part, and possible it may be your lot before any other, for that your
enemies (as upon the principal stay of your host) will seek to procure your
death. How suddenly and unlooked for may you meet with the knight of the Sun,
he that was here in your court, at which tune you would willingly give all
that now you do possess, for to be as far distant from him as you are at
this present. Of truth according unto his fury and great worthiness, bravery
and stoutnesse, the which experience has showed me, by the incredible things
done in sight of al men in this court, surely I should think no security in
my life, although I were in the midst of your great and mighty host, if I
were certain that he were against me in the field. And here I do desire and
pray the almighty and immortal Gods, to save and keep thee from his furious
hands, for surely my heart does tremble to hear you say that you will go
and seek him to contend with him. Here is now in presence Rodaran king of
Arabia, and the king of Media, who has proved the experience of his mighty
blows. I do desire your highness to ask of them, if they have any good
will to return and prove them again, as also if Rodaran be in the same
opinion that he was before he went into Grecia. Therefore O high and mighty
Emperor, conserve and maintain this sovereign estate into the which the high
and immortal Gods has exalted you, and leave off this enterprise, for to go
and seek perilles and dangers in other strange Countries, for that
innumerable be the misfortunes that we are daily subject unto. And you shall
not do little for to conserve and keep that which you do now possess. Wise
men in times past did not think it to be done with ease (who said) that it
was great travail to suffer prosperity, and that it was necessary to learn
to suffer, having Fortune at will, for that it is more difficult to govern
himself therewith, than in adversity.

Here therefore I think not amiss to stay my talk, for that in this which
I have said you may very well understand my judgment, not only that you
should restrain from executing your will, but also that you should separate
and blot it clean out of your thought and mind, and never more remember it.
For that if the knight of the Sun had done unto you any injury (as hitherto he
has not, for that possible he would not accept at your hands the thing which
he thought himself not worthy of) it were much better for you to pardon the
same, then to seek reuengement. For an injury done unto so mighty a prince
as you are, it is a small satisfaction the death of one knight, and there is no
forgetfulness so generous and noble, as is of him that has offended.

This old king of Gedrosia, had not as yet full concluded these words (with
pretense to go forwards with his talk) when that, that furious youth,
Bramarant arose up upon his feet, from the place where as he sat next unto
Bradaman his father, with so yreful a semblant, which put great wonder in all
them that did behold him, he began to say these words following.

With great pain and grief have I suffered the conclusion of these thy words,
thou light and folish king of Gedrosia, do thou think that in such sort
should be entreated the use of arms amongst knights, as you (who do call your
selves Philosophers) does use them in your scooles and universities. Do thou
think that the variety in their causes must of force follow one rule, as you
do imagine, or is your understanding so simple to conceue that, the judgments
and strength of men should be equal, and that there should not some be more
stronger and courageous then other.

Thy counsel were good and profitable for a king that were foolish, and a
coward, as thou art, but not for so mighty a prince as the Emperor is. What
fear or inconvenience may that be, to be sufficient to withdraw him from his
will, although it were for to conquer y^ whole world, how much more for to
destroy the Empire of Grecia. By the immortal gods I do swear, that if we
do go thither, I alone do think for to destroy all the Greeks, although
they come forth altogether in the feelde to battle against me, neither w^ll
I for all their force and strength, step one foot back. This does proceed of
courageous hearts, and any thing else to the contrary, is of cowardnesse, and
although I have spent my youth in exercise of arms, more then in reading of
Philosophy: yet do I know that he that is fearful can give no good counsel
for the wars, neither he that is timorous do any good act therein. And I am
fully persuaded that Alexander had not been Lord over all the world, if there
had been any spark of cowardnesse within his heart, neither should Agamemnon
have destroyed Troy, nor Hanibal, Sagunto, nor Cartago, nor Numancia the
Affricano, if they had followed the counsel that thou have now given unto the
Emperor. Believe me, that as commonly fortune does show her self favorable
unto those that be generous and valiant of mind, even so unto cowards and
weak people, fear is an ill prognostication, as it was of that Flamineo in
Trasimeno, and of Crasso in Cannas, and of Pompeo in Tessalia. To conclude, for
that the Emperor our Lord does in these actions that which is nedeful and
requisite, he must not follow the judgments of fools and cowardly
Philosophers, but take the counsel of them that be stout, valiant, and
courageous knights, unto them should be committed matters of Justice, and unto
us the state of the wars. For my part, I do say, that if the Emperor will
pass into Grecia, I will serve him with my own person: and this knight of the
Sun (of whom the king of Gedrosia has so much fear) I will be bound to
apprehend him, and to bring him prisoner before his presence, that he may take
reuengeme^t of him at his pleasure, yea, if he were a se^ond Jupiter, yet
should he not be so mighty as to clear him self out of my hands.

So when that Bramarant had concluded these words, he sat himself down again
in his place. There was present at that time one Graco, son unto the king of
Gedrosia, a young knight, very valiant and gallant, and very (...) unto many
kings that were there in that Court: who seeing with what injurious words his
father the king was entreated, arose up from his seat and said, as follows.

Bramarant, if thou werte so valiant in thy deeds, as thou art discourteous in
thy words, then would not I think much but thou would accomplish all this
which thou have said against the Greeks: but I hope in the high and immortal
gods, that if we go thither, thou shall meet with one alone amongst all the
rest, that will make thee for to know, that thy pride is more then thy deeds,
and will revenge the injury which thy words has done unto my father.

This valiant Graco had not fully concluded these words, when that the fierce
Bramarant kindled in wrath, with a devilish fury, arose up from his seat, and
went unto him, clasping him with one of his hands by the arm, lifting him up
in the air (without having any power this young knight to withstand it) he
threw him out of the window of that great hall, and said, herein shall thou
see whether my deeds be confirmable to my words or not. And for that the
windows were very high from the ground, this unfortunate Graco fell with his
head downwards, where as he was slain, which was so great sorrow and grief
unto his father, that he wished the misfortune had chanced unto him and not
unto his son. This king was mighty and puisant, and had many kings in that
court present, which were his kinsemen, who seeing that which was done by
Bramarant, for that they had no armor, (neither could they be suffered to
enter to that court of parliament with any) they altogether arose up and went
toward him, thinking to have thrown him out of the same window, that he threw
out Graco, but their determination fell out contrary: for although that they
were more then twenty, and Bramarant had neither armor nor sword, yet with
both his hands he took tw^ of the^ that came first unto him, li^ting them up
in the air, he threw them against a wall that was over against him, with so
great strength, that their ribs were br^ken, and they fell to the ground
half dead, where as they lay a good wh^le and could not ar^^e. And not staying
with this, but with a d^^lish fury and quickness, he threw other two out at
the window. Then arose up his father Bradaman, with whose help, not one y^ was
in that great hall, which was against his son, had (...), if that the
Emperor in great ^ast had not (...) himself in the midst amongst (...) with
prayings, desires, and sweet words, (...) commandment, did put them in
peace, (...) Bradaman and (...), whole eyes (...) with great fury and wrath
(...) was quickly concluded amongst them, (...) they received was such, that
every (...) his friend.

So when that the Emperor had (...), he began to reply a new, touching
(...) he had said: and the ^urie and (...) Bramarant was such, in procuring
that (...) should be accepted, that some for (...) they had of them, and other
some for (...) thereof. In the end, they did conclude, that the (...) should
go forwards.

Then after certain days that they remai^^d in that Court, all those kings
and mighty Lords (...) own Countries, for to ordain and (...), all such
people as they would carry with (...) wars. But first before their departure
it was concluded amongst them, that at a certain day (...) all meet with
their people at the port of (...) whereas the Emperor had commanded for
(...) to be made in a readiness, a mighty great and (...) of Ships, for to
carry their (...): and being all occup^ed in these (...), the History do^th
leave them, till time (...) to tell you of other things that passed in the
Court of the Emperor Trebatio.

How that there came to the court of the Emperor Trebatio, a strange knight,
and did defy the knight of the Sun and of the stout and well foughten
battle that was betwixt them. Chap. 11.
With great content and joy, did this History leave the Emperor Trebatio,
and the Empress Buana, for that they had with them their exelent and worthy
sons, accompanied with those high and worthy Princes, who were no less glad
and joyful, for that they were in that Court, as well for the great friendship
which they had with the Greeks, as for the affable conversation that they had
with the good Emperor Trebatio, who seemed unto them to be the most exelentest
and noblest Lord that ever they had seen or known. But yet above all the rest,
the joy and pleasure that those ^oyall lovers Rosicleer, and Oliuia received,
did far surmount: who being at quiet, resting themselves, of those great
troubles and mortal anguishes, the which the one for the other received, that
verelie they did seem to recreate themselves with all sovereign glory, and
unspeakable joy.

The princess Oliuia, received so great contentment for that she had with her
Rosicleer her love, and also to see the great majesty and highness of the
Emperor, with the great love and good will which he bare unto her, that in a
short time she had clean forgotten great Britain, and the court of the king
Oliuerio, her father, and was never satisfied in giving thanks unto almighty
God, for that he had brought her unto so high estate.

The knight of the Sun was he alone that lived not to his contentment,
neither received any joy nor pleasure, in seeing himself absent from his
Lady the Empress Claridiana, all pastimes and pleasures that were there
ordained, were unto him great anguish and grief, thinking himself to be
always in darkness, pensive, and imagining when the day should be that he
might rejoice and comfort himself with her precious sight, but yet calling to
remembrance his disloialtie past, it seemed unto him that he was void of all
desert, and could not imagine how ^ee might excuse himself to come into her
presence. So all (...) Court being in their contrariety of thoughts and
dispositions, upon a day being all together in a fair hall of the mighty
palace, after that dinner was done, they saw entering in at the gate a knight
all armed with black Steel, which was of so great finenesse, that it seemed
to be christaline glass, he was of a gallant stature and well made, and of so
gentle disposition, that it caused great admiration in all them that beheld
him, his helm was on his head, and the beauer down, so y^ none could see his
face, he brought leading by the hand a very fair Lady, with a rich crown
upon her head, and after them came other two Dam^ells, the one of them bare the
train of the Lady, and the other brought the sheeld of the Knight, which was
^^wise of black steel, all apparailed in black, seeming to be mourners. So
when they entered into the hall there was great silence, then the Lady which
had the Crown upon her head, without doing any reverence, said.

Who is he amongst you that is called the Knight of the Sun? He being
there present, arose up and said: Fair Lady, what is your demand? Here I am
he that you do ask for. In good time, said the Lady, and I am very glad
that I have found you here, although our coming can turn no goodness unto
thee. Thou shall understand that I am Media, daughter unto that Raiartes, whom
thou traiterouslie and falselie did kill in Babilonia, whose strength as thou
do well know, was no less than divine, nor could not be slain by humane
hands, ex^^pt it were by great trason and falsehood. I remained a damsel and
of tender years at the time of his death, and by reason that my beauty was
such as thou do see, there did not lack many Princes and Knights that did
request me in marryage, from whence I did defend and excuse my self, (...)
that straight ways upon the death of my Father, I made a solemn oath and
vow, never to marry with any knight but with him that first of all shall make
me reuengement ^or the death of my father. And for that the fame of thy great
bounty is so blown throughout the world, I have found none y^ is desirous to
marry with me with so great a charge, but this alone knight, who by fortune
arrived at the Island of Zardo, whereas I am gouernesse, who falling in love with
my great beauty, did bind himself to come and make battle with thee, and
give me reuengement for the death of my Father, the which I do so much desire,
and I seeing with my own eyes the great bounty and valor of this knight, in
a certain contention which he had with certain knights of mine, received
great contentment for to come with him, and according unto the great wonders
that I have seen him do, I suppose that there is not a knight in all the
world that is equal unto him, so that the reuengement of the death of my
Father, I have it so certain as though it were already done. This is our
demand Knight of the Sun, and the occasion of our coming hither, and to
know why this my Knight does not speak unto you, is for that he is a
stranger very far from this Country, and cannot speak nor understand any
Greek. And in conclud^ng these words, the Lady held her peace, and the
strange knight who was very attentive unto that which was said, beholding
the knight of the Sun, did decline his head downewardes, in sign that he
did grant unto all that which the Lady had said. So this demand being
understood by the knight of the Sun, without any change of countenance,
but with a severe semblaunce answered and said.

Lady Medea, I would that your demand were some other than this which you
do bring, not for that I would excuse the battle that this knight will make
with me, for as I am clear and without fault of the death of Raiartes your
father (as is well known) so do I little esteem the great bount^e of this
knight, having right and justice on my part, but yet I wish, if it were your
pleasure, that you would command me some other thing wherein I might do you
service, that should more import the satisfaction of the a^ger which you have
conceived against me, the which I would accomplish with a better will, than to
enter into battle with your knight, for if it should so fall out that I
should g^t the victory over him, yet must I needs serve you, but seeing it is
so, that you do demand of me the death of you^ father, I cannot but must
needs make my defense, for that I slew him not by treason or falsehoode, but as
I accustom to do, in equal battle and orderly law of knighthood,
therefore from this time I do accept the battle, and any other thing that
shall be demanded.

This being said, the Lady answered for her knight, accepting the same, then
they took their hands together in sign of gages to the battle, which
being done, the strange knight departed from thence with the Lady by the
hand, giving them to understand that he would abide the knight of the Sun,
in the place appointed for their combat, who straight ways took his leave of
the Emperor his Father, and went unto his chamber to arm himself. In the
mean time that the knight of the Sun was arming himself, the Prince
Cl^ue^ndo did declare unto all them that were in the great hall, how Raiartes
was father unto Medea, and in what sort the knight of the Sun slew him, as
^ne that knew the effect thereof very well, for that he was present and did
see the whole battle. So when the knight of the Sun was armed with his rich
and strong armor, that was sometimes the Prince Meridians (as this History
has told you, which did not a little stand him in (...) that day, being
accompanied with his Brother (...), and all the troop of those valiant
knights, he descended from the Palace, and went whereas the strange knight
was, tarrying his coming, (...) upon a (...), with so gallant proportion and
semblance, that he seemed to be one of the best knights that ever he had (...),
and mounting upon his mighty horse Cornerino, who was all trapped with cloth
of gold full of precious stones, with a plume of white feathers bespangled
with gold upon his helm, which was a gallant sight to behold, for as in
this history it has been told you in many places, that over and above that
this knight was of a high stature, he was therewith so well proportioned of his
body, that when he mounted upon his horse being armed, there was not a thing
of more wonder to be seen, and all they that did behold him were greatly
amazed, whose presence alonelie did declare that he should be a knight of
great force and strength. So after that he had moved his courser once about the
place, the Emperor and the Empress, with all the rest of the Court, being at
the windows and battlements of the mighty palace, and all the whole place full
of people. Then the strange knight began to move his mighty courser with so
gallant disposition and fury, that all men did judge him to be a knight of
great force and strength, and said that in his semblance he did resemble much
to Rosicleer, who showed no less gallant proportion and grace than the Knight
of the Sun. And the Emperor Trebatio who was beholding him, and pleased at
his gentle disposition, said unto them that were with him: The gallant order
and gentle demeanor of this Knight, does make me beleene, that this battle
will be better fought, and more doubtful than we thought for, and we shall
see great meruailes therein. So it seems unto me, said the good Troyan
Oristedes, and I do not look for an end of this battle till it be almost
night, at such time as the day draws to an end, till that time the fury of
the knight of the Sun does not begin to kindle. The bounty of this worthy
Prince is so strange, that the more the battle does endure, and the stronger
he is assaulted, it seems that his force and strength does the more
increase. When that ^ristedes had ended these words, all the whole place was
in quiet and attentive, waiting for the rigorous battle that should be made
betwixt those two Knights, who firming themselves i^ their Saddles with their
spears in their hande^, they stayed the sound of Trumpets, which was ordained
for their beginning, at the sound whereof they set spurs unto their coursers,
and ran the one against the other with great impetuous force, the swiftness
of their horses was such, that quickly they met together, and made so strong
incounters, that by reason their armor was so excellent, that the sharp point
of their Spears could not enter, their staves were shieuered all to pieces,
and they passed the one by the other so upright and well setteled, as though
they had not received any encounter at all, but turned their horses about in
the air, and came the one against the other with their swords in their
hands, and began to lay on such unreasonable blows, that their sheeldes
(although they were of fine steel) were quickly broken all to pieces, and
their guilt mailes were scattered upon the ground, and with the fury of their
blows, there proceeded so many sparks of fire, that it seemed that they
burned, and the sound of their armor rang like an echo, throughout the whole
City. Being more than one whole hour ouerpassed, that these two valiant
Knights began their combat, yet in such sort did they so double their strong
blows, as though they did but as then begin, and no vantage was known of
either part, but either of them began to feel the great strength of his
adversary. And the knight of the Sun, who was marvelous full of wrath, for
that one alone knight did endure so long against him in that combat, in the
presence of his Father and mother and those high Princes and knights, said
within himself, that he never combatted with knight before, that did so
strongly strike his blows, and with so valiant a courage did defend himself,
but only Rosicleer his brother, who was he that brought him into the
greatest peril and necessity above all other. Likewise the strange knight
did not so little feel the great force of the knight of the Sun, but that he
thought it impossible to clear himself well of that battle, but he as one
that little esteemed his life, for to revenge some part of the great anger
which he had against his adversary, did so enforce and animate himself, that
the battle endured three hours betwixt them, without any knowledge of
vauntage of the one part or of the other. The blows which they stroke were of
so great force and strength, that many times it did astonish and amaze them,
and brought them so far out of remembrance, that their horses carried them
round about the place, and all those that did behold that stout and rigorous
battle, were greatly amazed, and judged it to be equal unto that combat
which before he had with Rosicleer his Brother. Likewise the Emperor Trebatio
and all those high Princes and knights that were with him, did not a little
marvel at the great bounty of that strange knight, saying that he showed
himself to be one of the valiauntest knights that was to be found in all
the world, for that he had so long sustained battle against the knight of
the Sun: and Rosicleer who was at a window next unto the Emperor his
Father, with the Princess Oliuia, with great admiration did behold the
battle, (and as one that had well experimented the strength and force of his
brother,) did greatly praise the strange knight, for that he did so we^l
defend himself against him, yet he said, God deliver me from the fury of
my Brother. It is now four hours since the battle began, and now is the
time that his wrath will b^gin to kindle, then is there no resistance to be
made against his last blows.

So when Rosicleer had said these words, it was not long after that it fell
out true as he had said, for being more than four hours since the
beginning of the battle, at such time as the Sun would set, the knight
of the Sun seeing that the day would pass away, in such sort he began
to rage and burn with ire, that seemed unto his adversary, that his force did
ren^e and augment, and that he began the battle a fresh, for that his
blows were such and so thick, that many times it made him to loose his
remembrance, so that at that time the battle was more terrible and cruel
than it was all the day before, yet nevertheless the strange knight was
such, that he abated not one point of his mighty and sovereign force, but
with renewed strength he so charged the knight of the Sun, that many times
he was without all hope of the victory.

In this sort the battle remained in ballaunce almost all the day without
knowing any vauntage betw^^t them, til^ such time as the Sun had left his
orisent, and the night began to appear, then the strange knight began to
ware weary, and little and little his strength did abate, in such sort, that
it was well seen that he had not the courage that he had at the first, for
that he lift up his arms with great pain, and his swoorde turned in his
hand: the which was clean contrary to the knight of the Sun, who at that
present was more stout and courageous than at the beginning, and in such sort
did lay upon his adversary, that as one amazed, he chased him round about
the place, (but he seeing that the vauntage of that combat was on his part,
and how the strange knight was the best knight that ever he met withal, next
unto his Brother Rosicleer) he withdrewe himself and left off his striking,
in such sort, that the strange knight might take air and breath himself,
which was the occasion that after he returned unto the battle, he showed
himself so valiant and strong, that it seemed the day would clean pass
away before the battle would be ended, if they had let them alone: but
Medea who was meruailouslie in love with the strange knight, as she was
beholding this brave battle all day, thought it impossible for her knight to
have there any victory, and being very desirous to part them, she went
unto the Emperor, and requested him, for that the night ^yd approach, for to
command that the knights should cease their battle, for that they had
the next day following at their commandment, for to conclude the same. Then
the Emperor who esteemed much of the strange knight, with great desire that
the battle might not come to conclusion, for fear of evil, withdrew himself
from the window, and descended into the great Court, whereas he mounted upon a
mighty horse, and being accompanied with all those high Princes and knights,
he went unto the place whereas those knights made their combat, and putting
himself between them, he said.

Worthy and valiant knights, I do most heartelie desire you, y^ for this
time you would cease and leave off your battle, for that it is now night, and
neither of you has hitherto lost any point or jot of your honors. Then came
thither also the fair Medea mounted upon her palfray, and put her self in the
midst of them, and said: Here openly I do profess and say, that I hold
my self very well contented with the prowess of my knight, and I do set him
free and at liberty of the promise that he made unto me, in reuengeing of the
death of Raiartes my Father, and without any other condition, I will straight
ways receive him for my husband. So when the Emperor and Medea had said
these worde^, the knight of the Sun did straight ways withdraw himself
(for that he did very much esteem of the strange knight), saying, that it was
great pleasure unto him to obey their commandment, and not to contend for the
end of that battle. Then the strange knight when he saw the Emperor in the
midst betwixt them, and also heard the words which Medea had spoken, seeing
that it could be no otherwise, also withdrew himself, although it was with
great sorrow, anger, and grief, for that he had rather have been slain in that
battle, than to escape with life. So when that their battle was separated,
the knight of the Sun went unto the strange knight, with determination to be
his friend, and to know him, and being very nigh unto him ready for to
speak, the strange knight without the hearing of any other said: O Traitor
and false Pagan, how does God permit that the earth does sustain thee? S^e
that thou do return hither again to morrow in the morning, for that here
in this place I will abide thy coming, and will never depart from hence till I
have bereft thee of thy life, for that it is against the divine providence thou
should live any longer to deceive others.

The strange knight had not well concluded these words, when that in his spech
and utterance of words, as also in his proporcion and gentill deme^^or, the
knight of the Sun did know of a very certainty, that it should be the royal
Princes Claridiana, for whom he had passed so great sorrow and grief, theu
knowing her, and considering of the cruel and r^gorous battle that he made
with her, and being by her known and defied, he received so great sorrow and
grief at his heart, that he fell in a s^^nd, and clean from all remembrance,
wherewith he fell from his Horse to the earth. Then the Emperor and all the
princes and knights that were with him, not knowing the occasion of that
sudden alteration, but being greatly amazed to see that sudden ^al, alighted
from their horses, and took him up in their arms and pulled of his healme that
he might receive air, but it did little profit, for that he was so far gone
that he seemed to be dead, and although they threw water in his face, yet could
they not bring him again unto himself, for the which the emperor and all the
rest were very sore troubled, and was the occasion that there arose in that
place a great tumult, saying that it could be no other thing but that he was
dead. And the Empress his mother which was a^ the window beholding all that
passed, as astonished and full of anguish and sorrow, withdrew her self into
the palace, and fell down in the arms and lap of the Princess Oliuia, who
was by her, where as she remained a good while as one from her self, till such
time as the Emperor came and comforted her: but yet in all this time the
knight of the Sun was not come unto him self. Then the Emperor communded that
he should be carried into the palace, so Rosicleer his brother and those
worthy princes, did carry him in their arms into his chamber, vnarming him
and pulling of his apparel, they laid him in his bed, whether came straight
ways the best doctors in Physic and Surger^e that were in all
Constantinople, and perusing him in all parts of his body, they ^ound that in
no part he had receued any such blow that might be the occasion of such dismay,
the which they made manifest unto all that were there present, saying, that it
should proceed of some other thing in secret, and not of the battle passed,
for that he had be received no such-blow that should cause him so much grief,
requesting to comfort themselves, for that that trance would soon pass away,
if that they would let him alone and suffer him to take his rest. So when the
doctors had said these words, the Emperor and all the rest were very glad, and
having intelligence how that the Empress was very ill with that sudden
chance of her son, they left the knight of the Sun in his bed, and went
unto her and comforted her saying, that the malad^e of her son was nothing,
and that spedely he should be well again. By reason of all this trouble with
the knight of the Sun, the Emperor had no time for to speak unto y^
strange knight for to know him, although he had a great desire thereto: but
remembering him, he co^m^unded certain knights for to go and seek him, but he
could not be found in the palace, neither in all the city, for that straight
ways at such time as they had carried the knight of the Sun out of the place
into the pal^ace, the royal Empress Claridiana, (who was of certain^ that
strange knight) went forth of the city, in the company of Medea, and her
damsels, and although it was mght and ^erie dark, yet did they not let to
travail three miles from Constantinople, and in a fair green forest they
passe^ away the rest of the night that remained, whereas she was required of
love, by Medea, for that she loved her meruailously well, thinking y^ she had
been a knight. For as the (...) faith, that as the Empress Claridiana remained
in ^rapisonda, very dolorous and heavy, for the news that her damsel
Areania had brought her, she did somewhat quiet her self (...) such time as
she might hear of the coming of the knight of the Sun into Grecia, for that
then (by reason of the great anger she had received against him) she would with
her own hands take reuengement, of the faith which she thought he had
^alsified, and the love was not so great which before she bare unto him, but
now the evil will and hate did far surmount the same.

And when she understood that he was come into Grecia, she armed her self with
black armor, and alone with the company of those two (...) she departed out
of the mighty City of Trapisonda, and being at Sea, her fortune carri^d her
unto the kingdom of the Sardos, whereas was this Medea, daughter unto
Raiartes, who had a mighty strong Castle whereon the sea did beat, hard unto
the port whereas her most abiding was, and had continuall^^ in her company one
hundredth knights, who al her commandment did arest all that came unto that
port, and carried them pris^uers before her, whom she made to swear to aid ^
help her for to make reuengement upon the knight of the Sun for the death of
her father, with all their force and powers possible, and if they did deny,
r^^using to (...) that oath, she caused them to be put pr^soners into a deep
dungeon, till such time as they should by force do that which she commanded.
So likewise she made a vow, never to marry till such time as she were
revenged on the knight of the Sun. So as soon as the Empress was entered
unto the port, straight ways her ship was ^oorded on either side with two
mighty great (...) full of knights, and willed her to yield her self
priso^er, with whe^^e she had a rigorous battle in the defense thereof,
wherein she slew many of those knights, the contention went forwards, and she
meruailously defended her self, at which time Medea was at a window of the
Castle, and did behold all that did pass, the strange knight did content her
very much, and she greatly meruailed at his mighty bounty and worthiness,
and fearing the great slaughter y^ might happen, she called unto her knights
with a loud voice, commanding them to withdraw themselves, and to leave their
battle with the knight* Who when they heard her, they straight (...) r^t^red
and left him. Then Medea spoke unto the (...) her to go a land, and (...) come
before her, for that she h^ped to conclude with her with reque^^^, that which
her knights could not by ^orce, so as it (...) unto her in (...) her r^quest,
could not pro^^de nothing but good, she went a land, and entered into the
castle where as Medea was, who received her very courteously, and showed her
the occasion wherefore her knights labored so much for to take her prisoner.
Then she who at that present desired no other thing but to be reue^ged on the
knight of the Sun, straight ways said, that if she had known thereof
before, she would never have maintained that contencion against her knights,
for that she likewise came forth of her country to seek the knight of the
Sunn^, with the like demand for a certain anger and grief conceived against
him. But when that Medea heard that, with so great joy and pleasure as ever
she received in all her life, she embraced the Empress and requested him to
pull of his helm, who at the great request and importance of her, did pull it
of. And for that she had her rubicond hair knit up in a call of gold, Medea
did believe verily that she was a knight, and was with the sudden sight of her
so stroke with love and prisoner thereto, that she could not refrain but must
needs discover the same unto her, and promised to marry with him, if he made
reuengement on the knight of the Sun: the which seemed unto the Empress to
be a good occasion and color for her to enter into Grecia, and to defy the
knight of the Sun, she would not discover her self unto Medea, but did
dissemble with her, saying, that ^he did her great pleasure therein, and would
straight ways depart for Grecia. But Medea, who was meruailously in love with
her, and loath to leave her, said, that she would bear her company, for that
she would be present to see her make the battle with the knight of the Sun.
The Empress was very glad thereof, and betwixt them was appointed the time of
their departure. So after that she had remained there two days, they went to
sea and arrived in Grecia, and came unto the city of Constantinople, in the
order as you heard before. In the mean time that they were in the forest,
after the battle made with the knight of the Sun, Medea was still deceived,
believing that the Empress had been a knight, and for that they should remain
there all that night, after they had supped, with certain vittailes brought
thither by her damsels.

Medea did never ^eace requiring the Empress of love, offering her self to be
her wife, and said, that she would take her to be her husband, without any
other consideration, and that it was not her will that she should return any
more to combat with the knight of ye Sun: at the which words the Empress
would have laughed very much, if the great grief which she had receued in her
heart, would have consented to the same, but by reason that one way her mind
was occupied, in considering what she was of her self, and to be forgotten for
an other damsel. And again calling to remembrance in what estate the knight
of the Sun remained at their departure out of Constantinople, she was so full
of anguish, sorrow and grief, that she little minded the amorous words y^ Medea
spoke unto her, neither could the wrath and anger that she conceived against
the knight of the Sun, do so much, but that y^ love which was printed within
her heart could do much more, and caused her to repent her self for that
which she had done, and to receive great grief for y^ estate in the which she
had left the knight of the Sun. Likewise in that she had proved his mighty
force and courage, her love did so double and increase, that she thought verily
that there was not in the whole world but he alone that did deserve her to be
his wife, which was the occasion that her grief was y^ more, by reason that
she was without all hope. And it is to be bel^^ued, as the wise Li^gandeo
says, that there was never sorrow of a damsel for love, equal unto this of the
royal Empress Claridiana, for that she seeing her self to be without
compari^on, as well in beauty and fair^nesse, as in all other graces which
should be in a gentlewoman, likewise in blood and highness, none did pass her:
and seeing that a knight, whom she did love with all her heart, and with whom
she alonely might marry, confirmable unto her highness, and he receiving her
for his own, and now to have forgotten her and changed her for an other of
meaner estate. And again seeing that there remained not in all the world a
Prince nor knight that is worthi^ of her lou^, so that the had i^st cause to
receue grief and sorrow, more then any other, and as her cause is great, so much
more should her grief be, in especial having (as she had) so excelent and
clear understanding, for to conceive the same. So with this mortal anguish
does the History (...) her and Medea, for to tell you of the knight of the
Sun, which was in his bed.

How the knight of the Sun came again unto himself, and as one desperate
for the battle that he had with the Empress Claridiana he departed the court
of the Emperor Treba^o. Chap. (...).
GReat part of y^ night was the knight of the Sun so far out of all
remembrance, that it seemed to be mortal, till such time as was passed the
dolor of his senses, the which y^ sudden grief did cause unto him, and
transported unto a very ^ound and sweet sleep, in such sort, that all men
did see that he slept very q^^ietlie, which was the occasion that the Emperor
and those high Princes and knights went to take their restes, and le^^ him all
alone with his two squires, Biniano, and Aurelio, In this order he ^l^pt a
while, and being past midnight, he dremed that he was in battle as the day
before, with the which he awaked and started us, as one that was scared, but
when he saw him self in his bed, and by him certain torches burning, he
straight way called to remembrance the battle that he had had with the
strange knight, and how that it was his i^^stresse the Empress Clarid^ana: The
remembrance whereof did cause so great sorrow and grief, that as a furious man
and one from himself he threw all the clothes from him and arose up from his
bed, and ^inding his apparel he put them on, and began to arm himself
without y^ h^lp of any, till such time as his squires (w^^ ^ere a sleep) with
the noise thereof did awake, and seeing what their Lord did, with great
marvel they asked him why he did arm himself, but the knight of the Sun
made them no answer, but made have to be armed. The^ they seeing that he made
no account of their (...) and did help him, till that he was wholly (...)
being done, he comma^nded (...) horse in a readiness, and ^o bring him (...)
the palace, who seeing his Lord with so (...); durst not ask him any other
question, but (...), and went and made his horse in a readiness, and (...) were
sadled and brydled and brought to the palace gate, the knight of the Sun
descended out of his (...) when he saw the horse of his squires (...) asked
Biniano wherefore he had (...) own, who answered him and (...) with him. I
will none of (...), there shall none of you go with (...) you remain here
with the (...) may g^atifie you for the gread good (...) unto (...), for that I
d^e go^ thither (...) have no power to do you any good: neither (...) whether
ever I shall return again into this (...) no, any more.

When his squires heard him say these words, sor the great good will that
they did hear him, they began to lament and weep for very grief, and their
tears were so great, that almost they could not speak, yet A^^cho sake, at
such time as our father did give us unto you to be our Lord, he did not give
us for that you should make us either Kings or Lords, neither to give us any
recompense for our service, for that he did not know you as then to be s^ noble
a prince, but a travailing knigh^, but his gift of us unto you was only to
serve you, and ^^at We (...) take you for our Lord, all the days of our (...)
of any other reward, but to learn of you good manners and conditions, and new
seeing it is so, we do (...) pray and desirs you, that you would not leave us
(...) tute of your campanie, with this excuse y^ you have told us, for that we
had rather die with you, in what place soever it be, then to have all that the
Emperor our Lord can give us, and we shall have great reason to complain of
you, if that in the end of so long time that we have been in your service, you
will leave us, for surely our father will think no other occasion, which
drives you to leave us, but only that we are not for to serve you* With no
less (...) then Aurelio, his brother Biniano said as much unto the knight of
the Sun, desiring him that he would think well of them, and to take them with
him in his company: who when he saw their great ^^portunatie, without speaking
any word he mounted upon his Horse, and departed out of the palace, and his
squires followed him, and being forth of the City, they made so great haste
in their travail, that when the day did break, they were a great way of
from Constantinople, and fearing that some would follow after them, they left
the high way and put themselves into a fair green and fresh forest,
merua^lously full of trees, and in a part of the wilderness of Grecia, very
famous and nota^^^, as well for the mightiness thereof, as to be very plain,
for that in one hundredth miles travailing, you could not find any one
mountain or hill, the which was very fresh and delightful, full of orchards
and gardines, and thick trees, that few times they that does enter into the
same, can find the way out again. And travailing in the same this valiant
knight with his heart so furious and full of sorrow, grief and anger, that he
thought it would break within his body.

His squires seeing him so full of anguish and grief, they kept themselves a
good way behind him, for fear of his wrath and displeasure, but he was so
pe^s^ue and heavy in his heart and mind, that his Horse carried him at his
pleasure, for that he made no account to rule him to the one side nor unto the
other: and as he rode all alone, in these pensine cogitations, as you before
have heard, they heard him say as follows.

OH traitor and false knight, whether do thou go, and what do thou ^eeke,
how is it th^at thou do now live in the world, having committed so great
treason: O^ earth why do thou not* open and swallow me up into thy
profoundnesse, for that such a traitor as I am does not delexue other
sepulcher: Oh if it were Gods will, that thou did now open, and that all
the four Glements might fall together upon me, as the fire did against
Ale^b^atl^s the good Captain of Grecia, and the air and water as against
Pompeyo, being drowned in the deep seas of Egypt, and Alexander horn in
Epiro, and drowned in the ^iuer Lucano, Likewise that the earth might be
against me, as it was against him, who with a great and mighty army was
drowned ^n the sants: Oh high and coniealed clouds, how sweet and in
peaceable sort should ^ound in my ears the timorous noise of your wonderful
and sudden thunders, if that from them might descend upon me the beams of
burning fire, as they did descend upon Carro Emperor of Rome in the wars of
Tigre, and upon Hosti^^o king of the Romans, who being in his palace, was
slain by two sudden lightninges: Oh that my force and strength were so
contrary now unto me, as was the force of Milo, and that this my horse might
draw me through this forest, or that by some other occasion I might end my
life, so that I did it not my self for the safeguard of my soul, and when that
all these disasters does fail me, then do I desire God that my wits may
fail me, and my understanding, as did Hercules and Ajax Telamon the Greek,
for y^ I being mad and furious as they were, might not feel my misfortune and
unhappy lot. What is he in all the world that ever felt any anguish, sorrow,
and grief, that may be compared unto mine? What shall I do, and whether shall
I go? Why should I live any longer upon the earth, for that I have not
alonelie been a traitor unto my Lady and mistres, but also as a mortal
enemy I have laid upon her with my sword? What misfortune may happen worse
unto me than this, to see her desire my death, in whom stands all the state
of my life, yet have I committed against her so great evil and error, that
she has just cause to procure my death, and I lack of reason for to excuse
me, but now seeing that it is so, that I am abhorred of my Lady, I will not
kill my self, for the safeguard of my soul like a faithful Christian, but I
will thither whereas none shall know nor hear any news of me whether I he
ali^ie or dead, yea, there whereas the brute beasts cannot live, for that so
false and distoiall a man as I am deserves not to live, whereas they do
receive comfort of the Sun and the sweetness of the air.

So saying these and many other things, this good knight travailed, being very
furious, not desiring any other thing, but wherein it might cost him his life.
And as he travailed a space in this sort, and being entered a good way into
the wilderness, looking before him that way which his horse carried him, he
saw come forth out of a narrow path, from amongst a bushment of thick trees,
a mighty big knight, mounted upon a mighty horse, all armed in black
armor, so big membred, that he lacked little to be a Giant, and as he drew
nigh unto him, he saw that he carried his ^eauer lift up, and that he was of
so furious semblaunce, and brave countenance, and by his big stature and
well proportioned members, he seemed to be very valiant, and seeing him come
in this manner, he said within himself.

Oh that my fortune were such, that this whom I now meet, were that Milo, or
that mighty Hercules, or some other of no less force, strength, and
valiantness than they, that might so ^orment my strength in such sort, that
this my body so dis^oial, might remain in these fields for ^oode, unto the
brute beasts: but my soul into the place of ease in eternal glory, for whom
it was created.

In saying these words, this big knight mer^ailing very much at the brave
and gentle disposition of the knight of the Sun, did stay his mighty horse,
and beholding him he said: Tell me Knight, art thou by fortune of the court
of the Emperor ^rebatio? I am, said the knight of the Sun: Then tell me, if
thou come from thence, if there remains a knight that is called the knight
of the Sun, said this big knight? Wherefore would thou know this, said
the knight of the Sun? I would know this, said ^he other, for that I come
from a far Country in his demand, for to kill him. The knight of the Sun was
so far out of order and angry, that it grieved him nothing to hear him say
so, and therefore he said: Tell me who thou art, and what is the occasion that
thou will kill him, for that I am he that in this world does most desire the
death of this knight, and if thou do tell me this which I do ask thee, I
will tell thee where thou shall find this knight of the Sun, and not far
from this place thou shall meet with him. Then the great knight who was glad
of these news, said: Thou shall understand that I am called Brandimardo, and
son to Affricano that was king of Media, he that the knight of the Sun
slew in Babylon, and I am come for no other thing into this Country, but to
revenge the death of my Father, and travailing toward the mighty City of
Constantinople, there were certain Knights which did misuse me, and having
battle with them, of seven that were together I slew four, and the other
three fled, and harbored themselves in this wilderness, and I following them
lost my way, in such sort, that I have been four days wandering herein
without eating any other thing than such wild fruits as these trees does
yield. This is the whole resolution of thy demand, therefore tell me now that
which thou promisedst unto me, for that I shall receive so great pleasure as
though I were made Lord over all the world, to meet with this knight so
quickly as thou have said. Then Brandimardo (said he) thou shall understand
that I am this knight of the Sun whom thou do seek, and truth it is that
I slew Affricano in a valiant battael that we had in the mighty City of
Babylon, but I slew him in equal battle being defied by him first, so that
thou nor none other has any reason for to demand his death at my hands.

Oh immortal Gods (said Brandimardo) what great courtesy is this that your
divine majesty's has showed unto me this day, in that I have met with this
knight, which is the thing that I have most desired in this world. And in
saying these words he put down his beauer, and having never a spear, for that
he brake his with the seven knights that before ^he did combat with, he drew
out a very heavy and (...), and laid (...) the Knight of the Sun; Come (...)
and let us begin the battle, for that I am determined not to depart from
hence till such time as one of us does remain here dead in this wilderness.
Then the kni^ht of the Sun being determined not to make battle with him
with (...) word, for that he had stricken therewith the (...) Claridiana his
(...), supposing that there was no knight worthy to receive any blows
therewith, he went unto an ouer-growen Oak, whose branches were very big, he
set both his hands unto a branch thereof, and did tear it as though it had
been a great willow, and cutting off the ^^al branch^s, and reteining it with
his hands, he made (...) full of knots, and of so great weight, that sonie
other knight had enough to do to lift it from the ground. But Brandimardo
seeing that he would enter with him in (...), not knowing what should move him
thereunto, having other weapon, he said: Knight of the Sun, wherefore have you
done this, having at thy girdle a sword? It see^eth unto: me that thou had
rather make thy bat^aile with bat^es like a base Country man, than with thy
sword, as becomes a good knight. Then the knight of the Sun said: Thou
shall understand Brandimardo, that I do refuse to make battle with my sword
for no other thing ^ilt this, for that few dai^s past (without any knowledge
thereof) I made battle with a damsel who is of high estate (...),
considering that I did strike and oppress her ^here with, there is no mortal
knight that is worthy to (...) blow therewith, and here I do tell thee, that
first I would consent to be torn in pieces than to vn^heath it to strike
thee. This Brandimardo was a young knight, (...) Affricano was slain, he had
not (...) the order of Knighthoode, and was one of the most valiantest and
strongest that was to be found in all the Pagan Country, and as it seemed
afterward unto the (...) of the Sun, he was of ^reater force and strength
than his Father, and was of more dexterity in battle. Also with this he was
very furious and s^^ut, that at such time as he was ang^ie, there was none so
hardy as durst abide before him, although they were a thousand knights, yet
he feared not them for that he was so valiant and hardy, who seeing that his
adversary would not make battle with the sword, because he would not have
that va^ntage, he shea^hed his sword again, and went unto that great Oak
whereas the knight of the Sun had rent off his branch, he set both his hands
unto another of no less greatness than his, and renting it off with great
facility, as one of great s^rength, after that he had dressed and righted it
in the best manner he could, with great fury he went against the ^night of the
Sun, who was abiding his coming, at which meeting, they did the one charge
upon the other with so (...) fury. that before has not been seen a battle
in such order and of so unusual weapons, so well foughten, for y^ the^r blows
were very thick, and stroke with outrageous ^urie, in such sort that there
was none that ^id behold them but had great fear and dread only in the
sight of their blows. In this sort they (...) more than one hour, and never
(...), charging one another that it was wonderful to behold, and no advantage
known of either part, yet were they greatly am^zed e^^^er of them at the force
and (...) in e^peciall Brandimardo, for that before ^^me he had (...) the
force of many knights and s^out (...) did he never prove the like in all
points, (...) in him which was before him, and that not without great reason he
was so praised and e^alted amongst all the (...), yet notwithstanding of his
person he was (...) and furious, that not one point of his courage did (...)
him in that battle, but he did in such sort enforce (...) and charge the
knight of the Sun, that he gave him very well to understand, that it was
convenient to use the vtterm^st of his courage, and the two Squires that were
present did tremble for very fear to see with what great fury these two did
make their terrible combat, but both these knights being very full of wrath
and anger because the battle endured so long betwixt them, they stretched
themselves upon their stiroppes, and took their knotted battes in both their
hands, and stroke each other such terrible blows upon their healmes, that
all astonyed they both fell down upon their horses necks forwards, and
their bat^es being broken al to pieces flew into the air and made a terrible
noise, but when these noble warriors came unto their remembraunces and found
themselves without weapon, either of them laid hands upon his adversary,
and did embrace other with so great strength, that it seemed their breasts and
backs would meet together, if their good armor had not defended the same. In
this sort they were wrestling the one with the other a good while without any
advantage, so that in conclusion they were constrained to separate themselves,
and with great fury either of them ran unto a mighty Oak, and laying hold
on bigger branches than before they had, with great swiftness they fore them
off, and dressing them in the best wise they could, they returned unto their
former battle, striking the one upon the other so strong and mighty blows,
that all the wide and great wilderness did sound at the fury of them. But yet
this second battle did endure but a while, for that although that Brandimardo
was very valiant, and showed himself to ^ee exceeding stout and furious, yet
the knight of the Sun being wrathful and kindled in ire, at his terrible
blows there was no resistance to be made, for that he stroke them in such
order and so thick, that this stout Brandimardo did plainly see that his
strength did increase, and repented himself that ever he came from so far
Countries to have contention with him, yet notwithstanding because he would
vauntage himself of his great strength, he raised himself in his stiroppes,
and with both his hands he stroke such a blow at the knight of the Sun,
that he astonished him, and his horse carried him about the field: but
Brandimardo did not long glory in giving this blow, for that the knight of
the Sun came straight ways again unto his remembrance, abandoned with
wrath and (...), he returned his horse with great fury, and with both his
hands he stroke him so furious a blow upon the his healme, that he made it
fly from his head a great way from him, and gave a ^ound like a Bell, and his
mighty bat fell to the ground all to shieuered, Brandimardo remaining so
astonished and from himself, as though he had been dead, and lay a long^
upon his horse neck, voiding from his mouth, nose, and eyes great abundaunce
of blood, his horse being tormented with the force thereof, did carry his
master into the wood amongst the thick trees, in such sort, that not
making any staying, he ran more than two miles with him before that ever
Brandimardo came again unto himself. Then the knight of the Sun seeing him
in that case, did leave him, without making any account thereof, but forthwith
set spurs unto his horse, and rode forwards on his journey, saying unto
himself.

Oh that I had met with Brandimardo at some other time than now, then would I
have made more account of him, and would have done him more honor than I did
at this present, for that he seems unto me to be a merua^lous good and
valiant knight. But what account can he make of another, that esteems not
his own life? In this sort travailed the knight of the Sun four days in
that wilderness, wheresoever his horse would carry him, and not by his
government, maintaining himself with such wild fruit as were there nourished,
no more than was sufficient to nourish nature, because he would not kill
himself despera^lie. It was one hour after the battle was ended before that
the stout Brandimardo came again unto himself, who finding himself alone and
without his healme, his no^e and face all swelled, and his ears full of blood,
he straight ways ^ell into reckoning in what perplexity and misery h^^ was
brought, then like a mad man, ^urious, and from himself, he did blaspheme
against his Gods, and against all their powers, for that they had showed
themselves so contrary against him, and returning to seek his healme, the
History does leave him and the knight of the Sun, for to tell you what
passed in this time in the Court of the Emperor ^rebatio.

How in the Court of the Emperor Trebatio was found lacking the Knight of the
Sun, and being all very sad and sorrowful, there came Letters from the wi^e
Lyrgandeo, which made them all amazed. Chap. 13.
THE night being past in which the knight of the Sun departed, early in the
morning the next day, the Emperor Trebatio with his son Rosicleer,
accompamed with those worthy Princes and Knights, went unto his chamber for
to see him, but when they could not find him, his armor, nor his squires,
they were all very sorry for his sudden departure, yet were they glad because
he was escaped and void of peril: but the Emperor commanded straight ways
that many knights should go forth and seek him, as also the strange knight,
for that he was very sorrowful that he departed in such sort without knowing
him, because he showed himself to be a valiant and worthy knight. So by
reason of the departure of the knight of the Sun, they were all that day in
suspense, being all together in a quadran that was in the great hal, after that
dinner was done, there entered in at the door of the palace, a Gentlewoman of
very strange attire, contrary unto that Country, and after her entered a
savage Giant, f^erce and terrible to behold, without any other apparel or
armor, but a very thick and bushie hair wherewith he was covered, with two
great horns like a Bull on his ^orehead, and a great tail behind him like an
Ox, who brought upon his shoulder a chest fast locked, and made no more a do
at his entering into the hall, but set it down on the ground, and so departed
again that he was never more seen, whose strange (...), caused great laughter
unto the Emperor and all those worth^e Princes, and to the contrary, great
fear and dread unto the Empress, the princess O^uia and Lindaraza, and unto
all the rest of the Ladies and damsells that were there present, for that his
savage countenance was very terrible to behold. Then the strange gentlewoman
making great reverence unto the Emperor, said as follows.

HE that does rule and govern the high Heavens and Earth, save and increase
thy high estate, most mighty Emperor Trebatio: the wise Lirgandeo, and the
king Florion of Persia, (who greatly desires to serve thee) as well for the
highness of thy person, as for the great friendship that they have with thy
son the knight of the Sun, do send greeting, and do kiss thy imperial
hands, and does most heartily request thee by me, that you would take and
accept them as your own subjects, for that thou shall find^e them always
faithful and loyal unto the death: and besides all this, y^ wise Lirgandeo
does send thee this packet of letters, by the which, as one that has atchiued
by his wisdom, the acknowledging of things for to come, does give thee
aduisement o^ some that is requisite and does accomplish very much thy honor,
as shall appear by the same. And in saying these words, the gentlewoman
kneeled down before the Emperor, and kissing his hands she delivered unto him
the letters. Then the Emperor with great love did cause her to arise, and
took the letters and gave them unto his son Rosicleer, for to read them,
who did open them and read them, that all that were present, might hear it,
the contents were as follows.

HIgh and mighty Emperor of Grecia, although these my letters be strange and
new unto thee, yet is it no new thing, in the good will which I have to serve
thee, for that above all Princes in the world thou do deserve the same, as
also for the great duty and service in which we are bound unto thy son,
does constrain us to acknowledge thee to be our Lord, and to give the
counsel as unto our v^rie good friend. The hearts of valiant and stout barons,
there is nothing suffi^ient to disturb them, and therefor in few words I will
show thee the cause wherefore I do write unto thee. Thou shall understand
good Emperor, that all the Pagans of the (...) against thee, and in a short
time there will (...) together so great an army, that those of Darins and
Xerxes, altogether were not so many, and the chief Captain and general of
them all is, the Emperor Alicandro, father unto the Princess Lindabrides,
Emperor of the (...), king of the Scitas and Lord over the oriental region,
who as thy (...) will pass into Grecia; with determination and good will for
^o destroy th^e. He has in his company so many (...) and valiant knights
and other of mighty stature, that it shall be requisite, thy great power and
valiant courage, with the aid and help of all thy friends. On the other side
does arise the (...) regions, who with great and mighty armies, shall (...)
all the Grocian fields against thee, but have a good heart i^ all things, and
make thy self readie^ for that these mighty things are not ordained for hase
stomachs, but for the mighty and generous as thou art. Neither does the
valiantness of the heart show it self so much, as it does in receiving the
(...) blows of Fortune, who always shows it self most contrary, at such
time as he is exalted unto the highest of her whole. And for that all that ever
I can declare unto thee in this matter is spoken of in a Prophecy, which the
wise Artemidoro writ upon y^ fore front of this palace, I will enlarge no (...),
but say, that all shall come to pass as it is there written. Also my nephew
king (...) and I, will be shortly in Grecia, with so much people as possible we
(...), and take you no sorrow and grief^ for the (...) of the knight of the
(...) for although many daie^ sha^^ pass before you see him, yet the time
will come, that his sight shall be more acceptable unto thy royal person, then
at this present, wherewith* I conclude in kissing thy Imperial hands.

This Letter being read by Rosicleer, it caused in them some alteration, save
only in the Emperor Trebatio, and in him that did read it, for the which
they (...) moved semblance, neither did appear in their faces that they
received any trouble thereat, although the Letter did import much matter of
great importance, because in equal sort they could suffer both adversity and
prosperity. This being done, the Gentlewoman did straight ways open the
coffer that the savage brought in, and took out thereof a suit of armor all
red, of so fine a color and glittering steel, that all the pieces thereof
seemed as though they had been made of fine Rubies, and upon the ^reast of the
(...) there a crown of very (...) and rich s^ones, that (...) them very well
to understand for whom it was. And when she had taken it all out, she turned
her self unto the Emperor and said: This armor the wise Lyrgandeo does send
unto thee, for that considering the great dangers and perilles that are
ordained against thee, he has nothing at this present to send thee, that
shall be more profitable, and he does desire thee that thou will put on no
other armor but this, for that he has made it with his own hands, and used
therein all his knowledge, only for the safeguard of thy person. The Emperor
Trebatio was very glad and joyful of that armor the which the Gentlewoman
brought him, but much more of the good advise and warning the which the wise
Lyrgandeo did write him, as from his good and perfect friend, and knew not how
to gratify so great friendship and good will as the wise man did show unto him.
Then those mighty Princes and worthy knights which were there present, said
unto the Emperor, that it was good he should understand in putting remedy to
prevent that which the wise man did give him warning of, and to put all the
people of his Empire in a read^nesse that he be not taken tardie, and also to
write unto his friends for their ai^e and help all that was possible. So
amongst them all, ^he first that arose up was the Prince Clauerindo, and
offered himself to depart out of hand into the kingdom of France, and to
bring from thence all the people that ever he could make. Then straightwaies
arose up the good king Sacridoro, and said as much: and after him Bargandel of
Bohemia, and the two princes Rodomarte and Rodofeo, and many other mo that were
there present, and subject unto the Emperor, whom altogether did offer unto
him aid, with their own persons, and with all the people that they might well
bring out of their countries.

Here the valiant Tartarian Zoylo, could not offer any aid or help unto the
Emperor, for that he was certain and sure, that the king his father, and all
his people would not be against the Emperor Alicandro, neither could not that
worthy Oristedes, for that the people of that destroyed Troy, were very few,
neither could not the king Alamades, for that hi^ kingdom of Cornwall, was in
great Britain* Likewise the Prince Liriamandro, for that he was fully
certified, that his Father the King of Hungaria, came in the favor of the king
Oliuerio, against the Emperor Trebatio, but yet all four of them did offer to
aid him with their persons, promising never to fail him, so long as life did
last. At which friendly offer, the Emperor Trebatio, received so great joy
and pleasure to see with what good will they did offer themselves, that his
joy did much more surmount the anger that he receued, when he heard the news
sent him by the wise Lirgandeo, and gave unto his son Rosicleer, the charge
in aunswering of the wise man, gratifying him very much for his good advice, as
also for the aid of his person and people, as he wrote unto him. So^
Rosicleer, took the charge upon him for to dispat^h the Dainsell, unto whom
the Empress his Mother gave many rich and precious jewels. And he wrote unto
the wise man a letter, in the name of the Emperor, such a one, that he receued
great pleasure in the sight thereof. So after that this Damsel was departed
from the City, within few days after the prince Clauerindo departed for
France, and Ba^gandel for Bohemia, and the other princes every one into his
own country.

Then the good king Sacridoro at such time as he should depart toward his
Country, he went to take his leave of his great friend Rosicleer, who as unto
the best friend he had in the world, did embrace him, and not without
shedding of many tears, he said.

Ah my good friends, I had thought that all my evil fortunes had been
concluded, that you might have gone, as is great reason, to have taken your
rest and ease, whereas you have been so long looked for of that worthy ^^eene
Oriselua, but now I see my fortune to be such, that wh^^ a man does think
himself to be at most quietness and ease, then does she begin a new to
give me troubles, to that new I have more need of your help and aid th^n
heeretof^^e, desiring of God to gratify you for the same, for that of my self
I am not able, and he does well (...) how ^^^uous it is to me as now to leave
your (...) considering the state of all things, it is (...) I should be absent
one day from the Court. Then the good king Sacridoro with great love did
embrace Rosicleer, and said.

My good Lord, in nothing can fortune show her self more favorable unto me,
than to of^er occasion wherein I may imploie the good will that I have to serve
you, only to pay part of that wherein I am so greatly bound unto you, and
these which you do call misfortunes, are unto me good and happy fortunes, as
well to have occasion not to loose your company so soon, which is so
acceptable unto me, as also the more for the extolling of your fortune: and my
good Lord, you ought not so greatly to (...) that things should so fall out
to make you careful, and put your friends to trouble, for that being your
Father and brother and you of so great highness, of pu^e force you should
show your self stout against envy, and enemy unto them of the world, for
that the most highest Pine (...) are more assaulted of the winds than the
other low tr^es, and the highest mountains more subject unto the thundering
and tempests that are conicaled in the Clouds. Thus these and many other
things passed between these two good and perfect friends, till such times as
with many tears they took their leave the one of the other. So after that the
king Sacridoro had taken his leave of the Emperor, the Empress, and of all
the rest of his friends, he departed out of the mighty City of
Constantinople, and coming to the sea side, he did embarke himself in a good
ship, and made sail toward the kingdom of Antiochia, and Rosicleer
remained in great solitariness for lack of his company, for that the love
which he bare unto him was very great, who seeing how much it did touch him,
that which should happen, although his father the Emperor Trebatio, with
great diligence did understand in the providing of all things necessary. He
likewise on the other part did all that ever he could for to join together the
army, and in writing unto his friends, giving them to understand of the great
need that he had of them. But the absence of the knight of the Sun was unto
him very grievous, for that he would not that at that time he should be
absent from the Court, and for to tell you what passed with him, the History
does leave the other till time.

How the knight of the Sun came forth of the wilderness of Grecia, and sailing
by sea, was by a mighty storm carried unto the solitary Island, whereas was
the devilish Fauno. Chap. 14.
With great sorrow and grief did this History leave the knight of the Sun,
travailing through that wide, long, and thick wilderness of Grecia, after
that he had made the battle with Brandimardo, in the which he travailed many
days, and could never find the way out, in which time there happened unto him
many great and notable adventures, the which the author does leave to rehearse,
for to make short this first part. So after a good while that the knight of the
Sun had travailed in that wilderness alone with his two Squires, in the end
he came unto the sea side, whose fortune was such, that at the same instant
there was come a land out of a boat certain Mariners y^ came to seek fresh
water for a ship that was at the sea a good way from the land, in the which
ship was to the number of thirty knights that came from the Island of Cand^a,
and were bound unto M^fia, which is now called Transiluania, unto certain
triumphs and feasts that were there ordained, and as the Mariners were
returning for to imbarke themselves, the knight of the Sun did request them to
receive him into their boat, for y^ it stood him (...) upon to pass into y^
Country. The Mariners seeing him of so gentle disposition and well armed, they
durst not say to the ^entrarie, but said they were very well content
therewith. So this good knight did alight from his hor^e, and also his squires,
and entered into the boat with their horses, the which being done, the
Mariners began to row with great force till such time as they came unto the
ship, whereas they were very well received of the knights, for y^ the
comeliness of his person, jointly with the strange riches of his enchanted
ar^^or, caused all them that did behold him to have him in great estimation,
and to give him the honor that he deserved, but when that he did lift up the
beauer of his (...), they were all meruailouslie amazed to see how nature had
wrought so great perfection in his face. Besides all this, in his co^^senance
he showed so great grau^tie and (...), that as he was tall and very well made,
that there was (...) one, as the wise Arte^ndoro says, that ever did see him,
but his heart did alter, and waxed timorous. And this was (...) of the
excellentest virtues that was in this Knight, that he never saw knight in the
face, although he were a stranger; or otherwise known, that he would (...) or
make any evil account of him, and this virtue did increase in him from his
youth, till such time as he came unto the perfectness of his strength, which
was at such time as he had battle with that stout and valiant Bramarant, as
shall be showed you in the sequ^ale of this History, for until that time,
his force and strength, as also the bigness of his members did daily
increase. So having very good entertainment by the knights that were in the
ship, one of them asked him of whence he was, and he said, that he was of
Grecia, and for that he said no more unto them, there was not one of them that
asked him any other questian, although it seemed unto them by his semblance,
that there was some thing that did trouble and grieve him very much he was so
heavy. Thus they travailed two days together with prosperous winds, passing
away the time in the best manner he could, but the third day there arose a
great torment in so terrible sort, that the ship wherein they were was in
great peril to be lost. The winds did increase every moment more and more,
in such furious sort, that all the cunning of the mariners did not serve for
the government of the ship, but were driven of necessity for to yield her
unto the courtesy of the wind and seas, driving wheresoever it pleased them.
In this sort were they tumbled and tossed with that tempest all that day and
the night following, without any semblaunce of calmness, and looked every
minute for to be cast away, which put great fear amongst them all, saving
unto the knight of the Sun, who seeing the Sea so troubled, and the mighty
waves caused by those terrible winds, fighting one with another, he was not
alonelie without all fear, but also did like well thereof, and it was
agreeable unto his mind, as unto one that was weary of his own life, but the
next day following, at such time as they were without all hope to escape that
danger, fortune did so serve them, that the storm began to assuage, in such
sort, that the Mariners might govern their ship, but they found that they
were put a great way leward from the place whether as they were determined to
go, and sailing forwards on their journey, they discovered a far off an
Island, and out of the midst thereof they might perceive ascend up into the
air at times, great flames and sparks of fire, with a terrible dark and
thick smoke, as though they had been burning of some dry things. And when
they came nigh unto the same Island, the knights were all desirous to go there
a land, for to ease and refresh themselves for that they were out of quiet with
the storm passed, but the Mariners knowing the Island, haled iackes aboard,
and ran of from the land all that ever they could, crying out and saying, they
would not go thither, for that it was the Island of the devil, called the
solitary Island, and how that if they went thither they should all die the
death.

When the knights of Candia heard these words, they were all greatly amazed,
for they had heard before time very much of that Island. But the knight of
the Sun who was inclined by his valiant heart to attempt high and mighty
things, with great desire for to see what it was that they so greatly feared,
he asked of the Mariners wherefore they called that the Island of the Devil,
and why they feared so much the death if they should go thither? And although
all the knights that were there present had heard very much of the great
peril and danger of that Island, yet there was none that could declare the
certainty thereof, but an old Pilot that came as passenger in the same
ship, who had heard the whole truth thereof by certain men which left the
said Island in respect of the great danger, and he seeing that the knight of
the Sun had great desire to know the mystery thereof, in the presence of all
the knights that were there present, began to declare the same as follows.

YOu shall understand (gentle Knight) that this Island was called in times
past, the Island of Artimaga, for that it was governed by a woman so called,
who was so abominable and evil, that never the like was seen nor heard of
amongst women, for that after she came unto the age of fifteen years until
the time of her death, which was more than thirty years, she never believed
in God but in the devil, and there was no day that passed over her head, but
she saw the devil in the figure of a man, and had talk and conversation with
her, as though he had been her husband, and she did every day twice humble
her self unto him and did worship him. The father and mother of this Artimaga
were very evil and perverse, and being Lords and governors of this Island at
their death, they left this Artimaga of the age of ten years, little more or
less, and for that there was no heir male at their decease, she was forthwith
accepted for Lady and gouernesse of the whole Island, who when she saw that
she was absolute of her self, and all in her disposition, she gave her self
so much unto all the (...) and vi^es of this world, that for her abominable
sins and wickedness, God did permit that when this Artimaga came unto the
age of fifteen years, she was deceived with the devil, and would never
consent unto marriage, for that she would not submit her self under the
obedience of her husband, but yet she had more than thirty gallants at her
commandment, and had a great delight to change every year so many more,
and with the great conversation that she had continually with the devil, she
came to be so wise and cunning in the art Magic, that there was none in all
her time, although he were never so cunning, that might be compared unto her.
She used so many and diverse sorts of inchauntmentes, that all those of the
Island did fear her very much, and although her abominable and horrible li^e
seemed very evil unto them all, yet durst they do no other thing, but to
obey her for their Lady and gouernesse. It so fell out that this cursed woman
was never brought to bed, nor never was with child, although (in
consideration thereof many times she would not for the space of two or three
months together use the company but only of one man, for the which she
received great sorrow and grief at her very heart, in seeing that she
could not have any issue of her body that might succeed her in the
Lordshippe of that Island, and many times when she was in company with the
Devil, she did complain very much thereof, praying him earnestly with
great devotion to do so much for her, that she might have a son, with whom
she might comfort her self, and put some remedy unto the great sorrow which
she received at her heart, for lack thereof. Then the deceitful devil, full
of policy, and enemy unto all human generation, having great desire to
bring unto end that evil fortuned woman, the more surer to make his pray upon
her soul, bethought himself of a marvelous eu^ll, and said, that unto that
time he would not consent that she should have any generation, in consideration
that she loved him so well, he would not that she should conceive by any human
creature, but only by him, and that he determined to lie with her, certifying
that she should fully persuade her self that y^ son that should be borne of
her, should be the most strongest that should be found in all the world, and in
respect of her love, that Island should be spoken of in all the world.

These words of the devil, caused so great joy and pleasure in Artimaga, that
as one from her self she fell down prostrate at his feet and kissed them,
for that great benefit offered unto her, and with great importuna^ie she
desired him straight way to put it in ure. Then the devil having no other
determination but only to deceive her, said: thou shall understand Artimaga
that there is not given unto me so much power, for to know thee nor no human
woman, in the form of a rational man, but in some other figure and form of a
wild beast that is furious and wonderful, the which is only for to show the
difference that is betwixt our great power, and that of men. And again, that
which shall be begotten by me, to be of much more force and strength.

When that Artimaga heard him say these words, with the great joy which she
received, she was void of all care, and said unto him, that she should
receive great contentment and pleasure therein, although he came in the most
vgliest and fearefullest form that might be.

So the devil fell at agreement with her, that upon a certain day she should
go into a Park that was in that Island, being full of marvelous great and
thick trees, (whereas she did many times go a hunting) and that he would
there tarry her coming. Then the devil for to accomplish and bring to pass
that which he had promised, went unto the deserts of Africa, and out from the
most highest and aspar parts of all the mount Atlas, he brought forth a
monstrous beast called Fauno, the most terriblest amongst all beasts, and they
say that by reason of the great abomination used in times past by men, having
copulation with monstrous beasts, did so alter humane nature, that in process
of time it concluded in this so terrible and monstrous beast, the fashion and
form thereof was as I will declare unto you: His body was as big as a great
bull, in form and shape like a Lion, with his feet full of rugged hair, and
the claws of his feet as big as twice a man's finger, and a span long, his
breast as big as of a horse, and necked like an Elephant, and from that part
upward both head and face like a man, with a long beard of hard and thick
hair, but the head was very big, and out of the midst of his forehead
came forth an horn as big as a man's arm and as long, whose force was such, as
also in his arms, that there was no beast so furious and fierce, that was able
to endure before him. Almighty God showed great favor unto mankind, for that
of these beasts there are but a few in the world, and they are not to be found
but on the highest parts of the mount Atlas, which is all desert and no
inhabitation, for if they were whereas ^here is people, one of these beasts
alone were sufficient for to destroy a whole kingdom. So the devil finding
out this monstrous beast, he entered within him, and brought him unto this
Island, and tarried within the Park till the coming of Artimaga at the hour
appointed, who with the great desire that she had to conceive by the devil,
detracted no time, but kept her hour, and although she had great astonishment
at the fierceness and terrible semblance of that monster, yet for all that it
did not abate her courage, believing of a certainty that it was the devil,
and for that the devil was within the monster, he spoke by the mouth of y^
Fauno all that was requisite. To conclude, he deceived Artimaga, and by the
permission of God, for her sins and abominable desire, she was conceived by
that devilish Fauno, in such sort, that she remained with child. Then she
returned again unto her house, and the devil carried the monster unto the
place from whence he brought him, and in the end of three months she felt her
self with child, for the which she received so great joy and contentment as
ever she did in all her life, believing of a certainty that the son that
should be borne of her, should be the most strongest and mightiest in all
the world, and never ceased giving thanks unto the devil, for that he was the
author and father thereof. But in consideration that his original is evil,
and has no other desire nor delight but to deceive all humane generation: even
so all his works and deeds cannot be but evil, and in great danger and
prejudice unto our souls. So the time was expired and the hour come that
Artimaga should be delivered, and she was so big, broad, and swelled, that she
could not move her self from one place unto another, in such sort, that all
that did see her were greatly amazed, for that she seemed to be four times
so big as she was before, and by reason that the fruit of her cohabitation
was deformed, monstrous, and devilish, they had no hope of any natural birth
by ordinary course, but rent and tore the belly and entrails of the mother,
wherewith she dyed and yielded her soul unto him whom she so much believed
and worshipped, and the child came forth, the most horriblest and terriblest
creature that ever nature formed. This child was scarce out of his mothers
womb, when that with a devilish fury he tore in pieces all that ever were
before him, and ran out o^ the doors and took the field, destroying and
killing all that ever he met withal, and never ceased till he came unto the
Park and wood whereas he was begotten, and there he remained certain days,
and never came forth till he was grown to a bigger stature, although then
when he was borne, he was as big as reasonable Lion. He had not remained full
half a year in these woods, but he increased so much, that he seemed to be
as big as an Elephant, his form and figure was much more horrible than that
of his father, although he did resemble him very much, and besides all this,
he had a whole legion of devils within his body, who in a figure of armed men,
many times came forth at his horrible mouth, and did great harm whereas they
went, so that for this occasion he is called the devilish or possessed Fauno.
So afterward when that he was come unto his full strength, which was within
half a year, he left the woods, and went throughout all the Island, and did so
much harm, that he left none alive where he became, some slain, and other
some hearing the report of his cruelty, fled away, so y^ the Island is left
desolate, and no inhabitants therein, neither any other living thing. So all
those y^ have any notice of this Island, do not only refuse to land upon
it, but also they dare not come nigh it with their ships, for that many times
this possessed Fauno has been seen enter into the sea a great stones cast,
when that any ship or bark were nigh the shore, and if that by misfortune
those unhappy trauailers do fall into his hands, there is none that escapes
with their lius, for that with the horn that he has in his forehead, at one
only blow he teareth a ship in pieces, then after with his strong arms and
unmerciful teeth he rents and tears in pieces all that is before him, and
there is no strength of man, nor armor so strong, that can withstand his
^urie, for that his hoarie skin is of so great hardness, y^ it is not possible
for any weapon to enter it. This is y^ occasion (gentle knight) y^ this Island
is so much spoken of, and so fearful unto all sailers that passes this way,
and why it is called the Island of the devil, and that fire which we do see,
with that thick smoke that ascends into the air, is all that which
proceeds out of the terrible and horrible mouth of that devilish Fauno, for
that it is full of infernal devils. By this you may judge what the monster
should be, that throws from him such wonderful and terrible infections.

This worthy knight of the Sun at this discourse of the old Pilot was greatly
amazed, and so were all the knights of Candia that came in the same ship, the
which thing seemed unto them to be one of the straungest that ever happened in
all the world, yet the strangeness thereof was not so terrible unto all the
rest of the hearers, as it gave great desire unto the valiant and worthy
knight of the Sun to go a land at that Island, and to go and seek out that
possessed Fauno, for that the hearing thereof did not cause any fear or dread
in his courageous heart, as he who for such like attempts (above all other
stout knights) was created, and did little esteem the venturing of his life,
whereas the honor and glory of such worthiness is put in adventure, and in
especial in that time abhorring himself in consideration of his fact, he was
so furious and desperate, that he neither feared nor dreaded the entry into
hell, much less the Island. Thus he being fully determined to go a land,
called unto him Aurelio and Biniano his squires, and calling them apart, in
shedding many salt tears which ran down his grave countenance, he said these
words.

My good friends, God does know what great grief it is unto me for to declare
this which I have to say, and what sorrow I do feel at my heart before I do
utter it, not so much for that it does touch me (although my misfortune above
al other in the world is most strangest) as it is for that I do see, at such
time as I should do some thing for you, and to give you reward for your great
good service done unto me, I am constrained to abandon and leave you alone,
without any hope ever to see you more, this is the thing that does so grieve
me, jointly to consider how my loss will be lamented of my father and
mother, my brother, and all my friends, that to declare it my tongue does fail
me. Ah my good friends, you shall understand that my departure out of
Constantinople was for no other intent but for to leave the world, and for to
go whereas I might shorten my days, and thither whereas it might not be
known unto any whether I be alive or dead, for that my evil fortune is such,
that it does not atcomplish me for to live any longer here amongst men,
and in consideration hereof (I did at our departure) so much request you that
you should have remained with the Emperor my Father, for that he and my
brother Rosicleer might reward you for the great service done unto me, for that
I am not able to do it, and being at that time so much importuned by you, that
by any means I could not leave your company, but now the time is come that
my sorrowful destiny has permitted, that from this day forwards I am
constrained to leave you, and to make reckoning that of you nor of my father
and brother I was never known. The occasion thereof I will not declare unto
you, for that alonelie my heart (who does suffer the inconvenience) shall know
it. But thus much I will say unto you, that if the peril in loosing of my
soul did not disturb me, I have sufficient cause to give my self a thousand
deaths with my own hands, and for that my life is so heavy and grievous unto
me, and that my force and strength is not sufficient for to suffer the same, I
am determined for to go a land on this Island of y^ Fauno, and there to end my
unhappy days, and if it so fall out, fortune to be favorable unto me, in
that I do overcome and kill the monster, I shall do great service unto God, in
taking out of the world a thing so fierce and abominable, then afterward
shall that Island be very solitary and fit for my purpose, where I mean to
end my sorrowful days. And if my fortune be such that I die in the power of
the Fauno, (as sure I am that I owe a death) then shall I there pay the death
that is due unto this my mortal body, and the debt that is due unto this
unhappy and troublesome world. Therefore my good friends, I do most heartelie
desire you, for the great good love which you did always bear unto me, that
at this present you will show it to be more than heretofore, and to be
conformable unto my will, and to think well of this my pretense, and to have
patience, and persuade with your selves in this my departure, and to comfort
your selves in that it is a great grief unto me for to leave you, and to
conclude, the life of man is brief and short, and full of misery and anguish,
and I pray and beseech the universal creator, that we may in the other world
with more joy, quietquietnesse, and pleasure. So my will is, that after I am
departed, you go with these knights unto Transiluania, and from thence to
return into Grecia, and there to establysh your selves with the Emperor my
father, without giving him to understand of any thing that has happened unto
me, since my departure out of the mighty City of Constantinople, but say
that you lost me in the wilderness of Grecia, and remain with him, for that I
am sure that he and my brother Rosicleer will do as much for you, as though I
were there my self: and if at any time by fortune you do meet with the
Empress Claridiana, you shall say unto her, that at such time as I departed
from you, I left your company, for that I went out of the world, because that
in living I should not be odious unto her, nor cause her any more anger, and
of one thing she shall be sure, that so long as she lives, she shall never
have any news of me.

When the knight of the Sun had said these words, these two his good Squires
did weep so bitterly, that they had no power to speak in a good space, in the
end they caught him by the armor, and held him fast, saying: Oh our good Lord,
wherefore is it you pleasure for to leave us in so great sorrow and care, and
to cause your father and mother, brethren, and friends, always to live in
great heaviness and grief. What great grief is this that you have conceived,
which is the occasion that you do desire the death? What greater evil may
happen unto the world, than to have the lack, and sustain the loss of such a
knight as thou art? Consider our good Lord, that if you do perform this which
you say you will, you do not alonelie loose your life, but also your soul,
for in conclusion, it is a desperate death. For the love of God (our good Lord)
let not such things pass once into your thought, for that no man in all the
world can imagine a thing of a worser determination, and herein you shall also
loose both body and soul, and shall be the occasion of the death of the
Emperor Trebatio your father, and of the Empress Briana your mother, for as
they do love you more than themselves, they will die with very anger and
grief, when they shall hear of your perdition, and unto none it will be so
griouous as unto the Empress Claridiana, who is the occasion of all this your
sorrow. What shall we do (unhappy as we are) when that we shall find our
selves all alone without your company? How can we return unto Grecia, when
that the subjects does lack their so great^ esteemed Prince? With what
semblance or countenance can we come in the presence of your Father, not daring
to declare the loss and death of his son? Ought not we greatly to be
sorrowful to think how our hearts must be hardened, that when your brother and
friends shall demand of news of you, and we knowing the conclusion, dare not
be so hardy as to utter it? What is he that can suffer so great grief, or
dissemble so great sorrow? God forbid that ever any such thing should be
permitted, we will first consent to be drowned in this deep sea, than to
return into Grecia without your company. And if you do still contend to go
a land on that Island of the devilish Fauno, we will go with you and bear you
company, for that we shall think our deaths happy to loose them with yours,
and had rather jointly to die with you, than to live one moment in this world
for to lament and feel the grief of your death.

These and many other things in effect, said these good Squires, shedding many
salt tears for to withdraw their Lord the knight of the Sun from his
determination, but all did profit nothing (for although it was great anguish
and mortal grief unto him for to depart from them) yet was he so firm in his
determination to accomplish that which he had said, that if all the whole world
had been there present for to dissuade him, yet had they not ben sufficient for
to withdraw him from the doing thereof. And therewithal he requested the
Mariners to launch out their skiffe on the water. But when the Mariners and all
those knights of Candia did understand his determination, and saw how
pitti^ullie his Squires did weep for him, they were greatly amazed thereat,
and thought him to be a desperate knight, and one that was weary of his life,
that would give attempt to so strange adventure, having heard the wonderful
thing that the old Pilot had told them of that Island, who being there
present, and saw with what determination, he would go unto the Island, and with
what efficacy he did demand the skiffe for to go a land, before them all he
said these words.

I greatly marvel at you (Sir knight) having heard the wonderful things
that I have told unto you of this Island of the devil, and yet you have so
great will to go thither, of truth I cannot judge that it does proceed of any
strength or courageous heart, but of some desperation that you have with you,
whereby you do abhor your own life, for that stout and courageous Barons
do never put their lives in adventure, but whereas they have hope to get
honor and victory, but that man which does put himself there whereas he does
adventure no other honor, but to die the death, it may be well said y^ it is
more of desperatio^, than of force or courage. What account do you make of
your own strength? I say, if it be equal with that of Hercules, and that of
Thebano, yet were it not sufficient to escape from the hands of that possessed
Fauno, if once you go a land, and it is well known that all the people of the
Island could not make any defense against him, although there were amongst
the^ more than three thousand knights, besides other common people very stout
and clubbish, and yet will you take upon you alone the enterprise, surely it
is a plain thing to understand, that you will kill your self, for that you
will put your self in that adventure, whereas it is impossible to save your
life, the which is a thing most abhorred before God, and this proceeds only
of the lack of wisdom, weakness, and want of patience, and to the
contrary, each one where wisdom remains with equal heart and valiant
courage does suffer all humane troubles, and not for every little trouble,
does straight ways abhor themselves, and so from a little evil fall into
another far greater.

What other thing have you in all this world that makes a man more to abhore
and hate himself and his own life than afflictions and troubles? And it is
manifest unto us, as it is spoken by the wise, that troubles appertains
only unto men. Likewise that holy and afflicted Job says, that for
travails and troubles man was borne, but those which have no patience nor
strength for to suffer adversities, thinks (that al things that does not fall
out according unto their desire and appetite) that they have just occasion to
desire and procure the death, and upon the sudden they are in such a rage,
that for every light thing they do not only anger themselves against
fortune, but also against themselves, and that which is worst of all, they are
out of patience with God that did create them, using against him words of
great abomination, as though that if God did not all things unto their
wills, then does he them great injury, but unto them that be wise, what
state so ever God does send them, they accept it in good part, if it be with
prosperity and joy they accept it with a good will, and if it be sad and
sorrowful, they suffer it with suffer it with patience, and when that with the
occasions they cannot be merry, then do they comfort themselves with
patience, for that there is nothing so comfortable and pleasant as is patience:
therewith heavy and sorrowful hearts are made glad and joyful, wrongs are
brought to perfection, it mollifieth hard hearts, and do mitigate
difficultnesse, aspar things it makes plain, and cease all quarrels and
sudden motions, and finally there is nothing of more quietness and comfort
than is the life of the patient. These weepinges, these complaints, these
clouds and storms, that causes the weak bark of our humane life to be
dashed and broken in pieces against the rocks, proceeds of no other thing
but of the folly and impatience of men. So that (gentle Knight) if you did
suffer with patience the troubles and afflictions of this life (considering
that in the end there cannot be found a thing more common amongst men) then
should no perverse fortune, although it did never so strongly assault you,
be able to cause you to be weary and abhor your own life, neither to go
and put your self into the hands of that devilish Fauno, whereas you do
adventure no other thing but martyrdom to your body, and perpetual
condemnation to your soul. Let the Lord dispose of thy body according unto
his will, seeing he made it, there is no reason to the contrary, do not
procure to destroy the Castle, whereas thou laied^^ neither stone nor timber,
and no other thing is thine but only the compassion? Do not abridge God of
that work, whereas he did not only create the flesh, but also bones, blood,
and spirit. And it seems unto me (as it is most true) that there is no other
Lord over celestial and terrestrial things, but he that made all things? Well
then, seeing that of our selves we are nothing, but all is of God, and comes
from him, wherefore do we humane creatures think that we may liberally we all
things unto our (...)? Courteous Knight, if you have any sorrow and grief,
possible God does it to prove you, the which although it be now troublesome
unto you, may yet so fall out, that another time it will be profitable, and if
it be intolerable, it cannot endure long, tarry the voice of the Lord, for
that he will call you, and make no answer before he call you, for that it
is determined not only the day but the hour of thy end, the which thou
ought not to abreuiate and cut off, for that thou art not able to dilate it,
for it is impossible. There has been some that has taken it before their
time, thinking thereby to eschew a little brief and momentarie trouble, and
drowned themselves in that which never shall have end. A mighty King or Lord
leaves in a Castle or fortress a lieuetenant to guard and keep the same, who
thinks that he does commit great treason to depart from thence without
lisence of his Lord. Why then shall we not think that the treason is far
greater that the soul does against the king of heaven, for to depart from the
body, whereas he put it to be his liefetenant and guard.

We read that there was never wise man y^ did so evil a fact, as did Cato in
killing of himself, for that he would not look Caesa^ in the face. Let not
so much be spoken of you (gentle knight) it will seem much worse, because you
are a Christian, and it (...) thing prohibited and forbidden by God, whereas he
says. Thou shall not kill. Why should we then kill our selves? Likewise he
does bid us love our neighbors as our ow^e selves. Therefore have a good
confidence and trust in all ^^^ng, for that it is not the part of a (...), but
to bear a good (...) unto the double face of (...), and to the contrary, a
woman's heart that does yield for fear. Therefore touching this matter (gentle
knight) I will say no more, for that unto them that has a better understanding
than I have, I have said nothing but to put in remembrance. Likewise it is
needful, for that if you have your witt^s occupied in passions, the same does
blind the understanding, in such sort, that you cannot discern things at
hand. With this the old Pilot concluded his talk, and although the knight of
the Sun at that time was in better plight to ^ight against fifty knights,
than to take counsel of one man, yet for all that he did conceive well of the
words of the Patron, as of him that was endued with no less wisdom and
understanding, than with force and strength, and for that his determination was
so firm to accomplish his desire, and again the knights that were there
present, as also the Pilot should not judge him to be an imp^tient man and one
of ^^^all discretion, he said these words following.

If so be that the life of man might be perpetual and endure for ever, as
immortal, and the soul to die, then with great reason ought we to cherish and
make much of our bodies and ^^ie from all such perils as might give an
occasion unto death, for that he that should so die, might certain^^^ account
himself unhappy, for whereas before he was some thing, he should be converted
into nothing. But as it is a thing natural to be borne and to die (as wise men
says) that the entering into the world with life, is the beginning of death,
and the same life is the path way thereunto, and we ought to fear death more
than to be borne, and we ought to fly from the death, yet both of them makes
nature perfect, and nothing of necessity does accompany Nature which ought
to be feared, and he that does abhor and fea^^ things natural, it follows
that he should likewise fear^ and abhor nature, which was the occasion of
life and to be borne, (saving if you think that in part you ought to praise,
and in part to despise and abhor) but all men of small discretion do fear
death, and I do not marvel thereat, for that all their felicities is in
their bodies, the which without al doubt does end with death, and with great
reason they do fear^ that, which they esteem as their chief delight, for
that humane nature is such, that it will not refuse nor lack their felicity:
but that Baron which is wise and courageous, and ^^^^^meth of his body, no
more th^n of (...), and has all his desire set upon the (...) of the ^oule,
who when it departs from the body, makes no more account, but as one that
in the morning departs from an heavy and combersome lodging where he
remained all night. If man dread death, fear is not to be (...), for that the
soul is immortal and cannot die, but the body only: is it not (...) man's
duty to have care of his (...), and if he fear it proceeds of folly, but
yet it is more foolishness for to desire the thing ^he which he cannot obtain,
and to put from him that which is impossible to leave. All creatures borne, as
well as those that are to be borne, although there be a great (...) of living
and of their deaths, yet to die is natural unto them all. What do you think
to fly from that which your fathers and grandfathers, and their predecessors,
y^^, Emperors and kings could never escape? let us turn our backs all that
ever we can from death, and avoid the perils thereof, yet in the end it shall
happen unto us, as unto hint th^^ s^utteth his ^ies at the blow of his enemy,
suffering the grief thereof because he would not see it. And whereas you
say, that it is good for me to live longer, and not to procure my death
before my time, I (...) unto you that there is none that dies before his time,
for that all men dies not at one time, and as wise men say, every one has
his time appointed; the which being accomplished, he concludes his fine, and
for that we have not so much lisence to call time back again, neither to
stay of necessity we must proceed forwards* No man ran die but at his time
appointed, saving (...) he take the time for him, that himself has assigned,
and not by him that does assign nature and fortune. It is a small matter
touching the immortality of the soul, some to live four score ^eeres, and
other to li^e eight years, the time being past, it seems the one to be no
(...) than the other* Men do deceive themselves in many things, but in
especial concerning their death (not for that all men do think to die) but
because they hope the time will be long, seeming to be far of, that which
one way by the briefnesse of life, and swiftness of time, and another way by
the force of fortune, and by the diversities of humane chances, being always
at hand. Death unto a young man should never seem grievous, although he made
reckoning of no other goodness, for abiding the time of ancient years, there
proceeds thereof nothing but sadness and miseries. The young man does
well-knowe what he has passed in his time, but yet he knows not what he
shall pass if that he endure long. In this cruel and inconstant kingdom of
Fortune, he that first dies, does deceive and mock his fellow. You will
now say unto me, that seeing that death is necessary and of force, it were
better to abide the time of natural death, than to go and receive it of that
devilish Fauno. Then you might well say, if that I were certain thereof,
that the death that I should die, should be more happy than fortunate, but
whosoever does know it, for that many a one have hoped to die in their beds,
when that afterward they were hanged, and some thrown from the top of a
mountain, some torn with Lions, and some eaten with wild Bores; yea, that
Euripides, the light of al great policy* next unto Homer, was cruelly ^^rne
in pieces with dogs. Likewise Lu^recio Prince of Poets, by drinks that were
given him by his concubine, did rave in such sort, that he thought it the best
remedy to kill himself with a knife: with what great good will would the
Emperor Adriano suffered himself to have been torn in pieces of a furious
Lion, if his people would have suffered him, rather then have abidden that
terrible sickness whereof he dyed. Many other mo as is well known, did hope
to die of their natural deaths, and yet in the end they died of very
desperate and cruel deaths, and possible before they eschewed far worse.
And you who does give counsel for to fly from death, I would you would tell
me how far you are from it your self, of truth if you do consider very
well, you shall find that there is but a thin board betwixt you and death: and
not yet two days past when that you thought the hour was come. Oh false and
folish world of men, that flies with great diligence from one little peril on
the land, (in resisting whereof, there is no honor to be gotten) and yet
puts not doubt to put themselves unto these deep seas, whereas their lives
is at the courtesy of the winds to overthrow them, and of the terrible waves
to drown them, they fly from one folly on the land, and puts their lives
in four far worse upon the seas, in a ship that is always moving, the
mariners never in one accord, the water that never stands still, and the
wind that never rests.

What Dragon or fury is upon the land that does fear us more then upon the
^ea, whereas it is well known an innumerable sort of men has been drowned.
There is no fury nor wild beast upon the land, but that it is possible by
the force and strength of man, to make defense and resistance: but upon y^ sea,
if you join together all y^ strengthes of the most valiantest men in all the
world, yet are they not able to make any resista^ce against one storm or
tempest, but if they please they may make thrusts with their spears into the
water, and strike with their swords against the winds. And now seeing that
there is all these perils on the sea, wherefore my good friend, do you not
take the counsel for your self, the which you do give unto me? What do you
think that it is not more possible for me for to overcome the devilish Eauno,
then you to have y^ victory of two so terrible Elements, as is the water and
wind. Finally, to conclude, when that man thinks himself most farthest
from death, it is then nighest at hand: therefore barons that be stout and
courageous, in nothing they should fear the death, whereas they do venture
themselves to get honor, and not to apart themselves from perils and dangers,
for that they be always ready at hand, and in the end when that it shall
please God that they shall die, it is no other thing but a clearing of the soul
out of this miserable captiuitie^ and prison, and to leave this troublesome and
weary world, where in I do see that there is no pleasure, without sudden
misthi^ousnesse, no peace without discord, no love without suspicion, no ease
without fear, no abundance without lack, nor no estate without complaints,
all does weep, all does sigh, all does complain, all does shrike and sobbe,
and all things does end. I see none that lives content, I see nothing that is
firm and stable, I see all in confusion and tossed vpside down, as well in
things living, as insensible, as well the brute beasts as reasonable creatures,
the high and mighty towers be torn and rent with thunderboults, walls be
overthrown with Canon shot, great floods does carry away Cities and towns,
Trees be eaten with worms, and the green corn with the Grassehoppers, Timber
does rot and moulder away, the brute and wild beasts does fight (...) with an
other, between the Ownce and the Lion there is great contencion, and the
Rinoceront with the Crocadil, the Egle with the Estridge, the Elephant with the
Minotauro, and one man with an other, and that which is worst, women against
men: besides all these, the continual wars and contencions that is amongst us,
for that we have the perils of death continually before our eyes. What a
number of things there is that does put us in great ieperdie, and threaten us
every moment, unto death: the earth does open against us, the water does
drown us, y^ fire does burn us, the air does diste^per us, the winter does
run through us, the su^mer does trouble us with heat, dogs does bite us,
Spiders does poison us, Gnats does prick us, Flies does ouerpresse us,
Serpents does ^eare us, and above all, travails and cares does over watch us,
none can go with security upon y^ earth, for yt every pace men does five
stones to stumble at, bridges whereof they fall, brook^s whereas they are
drowned, hills from whence they tu^ble and be overthrown, thunder cracks y^
makes them afraid, deep (...) that does stay their passage, and thunde^
bolts that both kill them. And now seeing that both land and sea be all full of
per^lls, and whether so ever we do fly, death will overtake (...), I will say
no more unto you, but that I am determined to go a land on the Island of the
Fauno, ^or I had rather die whereas I do adventure to get honor, (making my
defense with my sword in my hand like a knight) then to be drowned in the Sea,
or to keep my bed with sickness: therefore my good friends I do desire you
to hoyse out your bote on ye water, and procure no further to disturb me in
this my pretense, for that I will not let to accomplish this my desire, ^or any
thing that is in all the world, and these my squires I pray you to carry them
with you, and not to let them to follow me, neither to give the^ any ship or
bote, for yt their deaths shall be unto me much more grievous then mine own.

Uerie autentiue were all the knights of Candia, and the old pilot, unto all
that which the knight of the Sun had said, by the which they judged him to be
discreet and wise, and by the uttering of his words as also in his semblance,
they judged him to be valiant, wherein he showed so great gravity of his
person, that there was not one amongst them all that durst speak any more unto
him in y^ matter, neither to disturb him of his will and determined purpose,
for that there was not any that could say any thing unto him, but that he
understood it better th^n they: yet they s^^ing the peril he put himself in,
they all grieved very much thereat, in such sort, that with their weepings
they co^ld scare speak, but in especial his two Squires, who having heard all
his speech, and saw the resolute determination of their Lord, did beat their
heads against the ships sides, and gave such shrickes and cries, as though
they had been cut of their wits, and although the knight of the Sun did
comfort them, with many sweet and loving words, yet all would not serve, for
the more he spoke unto them, the more did increase their sorrow and grief. Then
he seeing that all which he did, did little profit to go with their good
wills, and how y^ the longer he stayed, the worse it was, he desired the
mariners to hoise the boat into the sea, who were not willing thereunto, the
which being by him perceived, as one which had as great forc^ and strength as
any man in all the world, he took the boat in both his hands, and without
the help of any other, he hoised it into the sea, and caused his horse to be
put therein, the which being done, he would have taken his leave of the^ all,
but his squires when they saw that he would depart, they gave such shrickes and
cries, that it seemed the noise to reach unto the heavens, and fell down at
his feet, shedding so many tears, that it was great compassion to behold
the^, desiring him that he would not leave them in so great heaviness, and for
that it was so manifest that he went to loose his life, that he would take the^
in his company, for to dye with him, for y^ his life was no longer then he
abode in their company. They complained very much of him, for paying the^
with such reward, after so long time, that they had served him: but the grief
of this good knight was such, for his two squires, that with the great
abundance of tears that fell from his eyes, he could scant speak unto them
one word: especially, considering with what intencion he departed, which was
never to see them again in all his life, neither return any more into
Grecia, for that he was determined if God did give him victory against the
Fauno, to remain in that solitary Island, and there to end his days: But
for that he loved his squires very well, and likewise knowing the great love
that they bare unto him, his heart was ready to burst in pieces for to apart
himself from them. Likewise all those knights of Candia, and ye old pilot,
did labor all that ever they could, for to break him of his purpose, but all
would not serve, and he seeing that his tarrying did him no profit, he went
unto the ships side, and with a light heart he leapt into the boat, and
taking the oars in his hands, he began to row toward the Island, leaving so
great sorrow and grief amongst all them that were in the ship, that there was
not one of them but wept bitterly to see him depart in that sort, as one
desperate to receive a cruel death, and being a knight that seemed unto them
all not to have his like in all the world, yet all the grief which they
received, was nothing unto that of his squires, when they saw their lord
depart, who like desperate men would have thrown themselves into the sea, if
those knights had not let them, and seemed unto them to be true and loyal
unto their lord, and of a good disposition, so with the great care that they
had of them, they did keep them from destroying themselves.

After this good knight was departed, within a short space he arrived at the
Island, and those of the ship lost sight of him: but there were some of the
ship that said that it were good to tarry there a few days, for to see what
should become of him, to whom the pilot said, that it was great folly so to
do, for two causes, the one for that he was certain, so soon as the knight
should come a land with a trice he should be torn all to pieces by that
devilish Fauno, so that it were lost labor to abide any more news of him,
and the other, for that all they should be in great peril of their lives, if
that the Fauno should discover the ship, and before that we could do any
thing for to sail from him, he would overtake us, and give us all cruel
deaths, as he has done to many others heretofore. In conclusion, at these
words, the knights consented not to ^^aie, but to depart, and according unto
the great fear which they receued, they thought they tarried to long, but the
two squires when they saw that they departed, and carried them in their
company, leaving their Lord in so great peril, it cannot be declared the
great complaints that they made, requesting y^ knights and pylot, for to carry
them unto the Island, wherewith they should receive great contentment, and be
joyful, but all their requests were in vain, for that they would not consent
that they should dye so desperate a death, as also for the great pe^ill which
should be unto them all, they would not consent thereunto, wherewith these good
squires were so desperate, that if time had served them thereunto, they would
have thrown themselves into the sea, and by swimming as well as they could,
they would have gone to the Island of the Fauno, but the knights caused them to
be kept in the ship, and put into a cabin and locked the door, and carried
them in their company, till in the end of certain days they arrived at
Transiluania, whereas they did disembarke themselves and went a ^and, but the
Squires were so lean and so feeble, for that they would not eat any thing,
and again by shedding of so many tears, that they could scarce stand upon
their feet.

And now to return to the knight of the Sun, the History makes no more
mention of them, but when they came unto Transiluania after that they had
remained there two days for to refresh and strengthen themselves, they sought
an other ship, where in they returned to seek the Island of the devilish
Fauno, with determined good will there to dye with their Lord, in which
journey they were taken prisoners, so that they could not accomplish their
desire, as shall be declared unto you in the process of this History.

How the knight of the Sun arrived at the Island of the possessed Fauno, and of
the wonderful and perilous battle that he had with him. Chap. 15.
SO when the knight of the Sun was departed from the knights of Candia, he
made such have in rowing with his great and mighty strength that small bote,
that in a short space he arrived at the solitary Island, and surely it was a
thing of great marvel, and worthy to be put in memory, all that happened
with this valiant and happy knight, for one way the water stood in his eyes,
and his heart was re^die to break with so^^w, grief and pity, to see his
Squir^s remain so sorow^ull and without all comfort, and an other way,
acknowledging in what peril he was of his life in that journey, and how he went
to put himself in the greatest perplexity that ever was man, he rem^mbred and
armed himself with so great hardiness and courage, that he thought the time
long till he did see that devilish Fauno. When that he came a land, he saw
that all the Island was plain, and very fragarant and fresh, replenished with
green Trees, although there appeared many buildings the which were destroyed
and fallen down to the ground, in such sort, that it well appeared that the
people that there dwelled to be devilish and abhoiminable. And as he was
beholding ye country which seemed to be very good and fertile, he straight
ways discovered where the devilish Fauno was, yet was he not nigh him but a
great way of, neither did he see him, but that which proceeded from him, which
was an infernal fire, which seemed to reach up unto the Skies, with so great a
noise, as though it had thundered, (and as y^ wise Lirgandeo says, that there
was no humane heart of so sufficient courage for to seek out so terrible and
wonderful attempt, as was this of that worthy and valiant knight) in whose
heart never entered any fear, but with so valiant and courageous a stomach,
determined to seek that misshapen and infernal beast, ^ull of so many legions
of devils.

And for that he would not that there should remain any thing that might
carry him out from that Island, he drew the b^te that brought him thither a
land, and with one of the oars with the which he rowed, he broke it all to
pieces, and scattered them abroad along the water side, that the force of
the waves might carry away the pieces. But before he departed from that place
where he arrived, he fell down upon his knees, and with many sorrowful sighs,
and triikling tears, which ran down his cheeks, in sign that he was a
true and faithful Christian, he said as follows.

OH sovereign creator, both of heaven and earth, without whose good will there
is no devil that has any power, neither without it can men, fowls, nor brute
beasts live upon the face of the earth, nor be sustained nor governed, without
it the Elements would be confounded, and the heavens lose their course and
natural mouings. The earth would quake, and the high and mighty mountains
would fall: The waters of the Seas would over flow the land, and no living
thing should find where to be sustained, but thou by thy infinite goodness and
mercy, do ordain and sustain all, not for that it is to thee necessary,
but for the profit of man. Therefore seeing that thou do use so great pity
and mercy with them, here Lord I do desire thee, that in this perilous
danger, thou would not leave me, and if I have any desire herein to get
the victory, it is not for any honor nor vain glory that I hope to maintain
thereby, but only to have a little more time for to live in this dispeopled
and solitary Island, whereas I may fully repent me for the life which
hitherto I have lead, and for to do some penance for the evils which I have
committed against thy divine magestie: But if it be thy will that I dye in this
trance, I do most heartily desire thee, not to look upon my sins and
wickedness, but to have mercy upon this my soul, which is immortal, and by
thee created to thy similitude and likeness, for eternal li^e, and did
redeem it with thy most precious blood, the which I pray thee to pardon and to
receive, at such time as it does depart out of this wretched body: my death
does not grieve me so much, as that I have not time enough to serve thee.

When this good k^^ght had said these words, he arose up upon his feet, and
looking toward that part the which was toward Grecia, with deep and profound
sighs he said.

OH Empress Claridiana, how joyful would it be unto my heart, if y^ I did
know of certainty, that thou were acquainted with this my dangerous attempt,
with the which I am bestead, for that seeing that my fortune has not given
place in my life time to do you any service, it may be that the
acknowledgeing of my death might do you good, for that I am fully certefied
you take great pleasure therein. Oh that my fortune and cruel desti^ie had
permitted, that in the battle the which you made with me in Constantinople, I
had been slain, sure it had been a crown of martyrdom unto me, for to have
received the death by your sovereign hands. But alas, in this do I know
that my misfortune is great, and in the end cannot be denied of this glory, to
know that you take pleasure in my death, for that taking so great pains for
to give it me with your own hands, I cannot believe that in so short space
you have repented you. And seeing (good Lady) that it is so that you desire so
much my death, let not god permit that against your will I live any longer in
this world. Oh Princess Lindabrides, how joyful will it be unto you to hear
of my death, knowing that she alonly was the occasion for whom I forgot the
great love that I bare unto you, and verify the sentence to be just, and
according unto my desert to be abhorred of her, for whose sake I forgot you,
and worthy to receive the punishment of her that was the occasion to leave so
high and sovereign a Lady. But what do I say? I did neither leave her nor
forget her, and is no other thing but my fortune to be so base, that I did not
deserve to marry with the one, nor to serve the other. Oh Emperor Trebatio my
Lord, and my Lady and mother the Empress Briana, I desire you to pardon me,
for the Lord does know that the greatest grief that I have in this world, is
to consider of the great sorrow that you will receive, when that the news of
my death shall come unto your ears, let this be account of comfort unto you,
to make ^eckoning that you never heard of me, since the time that I was carried
away in the bark by the force of the river when that I was a child, and here
I beseech the almighty God and loueraigne creator to comfort you, and put this
aforesaid in your minds. Oh my good brother Rosicleer; oh how much is the
sorrow that I do now feel, for that I so quickly do apart my self out of
your company, and a great grief to consider, how sorrowful the news will
be unto you when that you shall hear that I am out of this world. Ah my good
brother, you that are the flower of all knighthood, comfort our father and
mother that are so mentioned amongst all Nations, for whereas you are in
person, my presence will not be thought upon. Oh my very good and perfect
friends Oristedes, Brandizel, and Claueryndo, the Lord does know how much it
does grieve me, to see my self separated from your company for ever, but
alas what shall I do, seeing that fortune will that I shall show my self
unto you and all the world in this condition. And now I do desire you never
more to seek me, for that in brief I shall out of this world. Take for your
friend my Brother Rosicleer in my place, as well for that of your own persons
is meritorious, as for the great good will which always I did bear unto you,
he I am sure will be unto you a very good and perfect friend.

These and many other things spoke this good knight, in shedding so many
tears, and uttering so many sighs, that whosoever had heard them (although
his heart had been so hard as any Diamond) yet could he not have refrained but
wept there at. And as he would have put himself in the way to go toward that
devilish Fauno, he bethought himself how and in what sort he might make
battle with him, and it it seemed that if fortune should show her self in
any thing favorable unto him, it should be to make the battle better on
foot than on horseback, and now according unto his determination, whether he
did live or die, he had no more need of his horse Cornerino, therefore he
determined to let him loose, and go at his free liberty, in recompense of his
good service done unto him, and because he might more at his plasure take his
repast of the field and go whether he list, he pulled off his bridle and
saddle, and set him at liberty, the which was done with shedding many tears,
saying.

Oh my good horse, what a great grief it it unto me ^or to leave thee, not
for that I have need of thee from henceforth, but only for that I would it
were known the great good service which thou have done unto me, and that thou
should be entreated, dressed, and cured as thou do deserve. If that
Alexander of Macedon did make so gorgious a tomb for his horse, to bury him
when he was dead, and commanded a city to be called after his name, I should
have greater reason to honor thee being thou alive and his dead, and much
better than ever his was. Augustus made a grave for his horse being dead, for
y^ he would not that the souls of the air should eat his flesh. Dido Iulio
did consecrate in the Temple of Venus, the image of his horse made in marble
stone. Anthonio Vero made the image of his horse being alive in gold^ and now I
having done nothing for thee being far better than ever any of those were,
what can I do but set thee at liberty whereas thou may take the pleasure of
the fields as other beasts do, therefore go thy ways good horse, for thou art
the last company that I do leave in this world.

In saying these words he drove him from him for to depart, but it was great
marvel to see the nature of this horse, for although he was loose and at
liberty without any incomberance, yat would he not depart, but drew nigher and
nigher his master, and trembled meruailouslie with all his body, and the more
he did procure to drive him away, y^ more he did approach unto him, trembling
as with fear, then the knight of the Sun knew not what to do, for one way
the great peril of his horse if that devilish Fauno should see him, and
another way he could by no means drive him away for any thing he could do,
but in the end he bethought himself, y^ if he left him there loose, possible
when he did see the devilish Eauno, he would run away, and therewith he
left him, and began to travail a foot into the Island, and as he passed
through a company of great and ouergrowen Oaks, he remembered himself of the
battle which he had with Brandimardo in the wilderness of Grecia, and how
that he made the same with a club made of a branch he tore off from a tree, for
that he would not strike him with y^ sword wherewith he did make the battle
with the Empress Clarid^ana, and calling this to remembrance, with great fury
he sa^d unto himself.

God forbid that the sword wherewith I did strike so high and sovereign a
Lady, should now be defiled in the blood of so foul and infernal a monster.
And in saying these words, with great fury and force he laid hold with both
his hands upon a great and knotted branch of one of those Oaks, and tore it
from the body of the tree, and trimming it in the best manner he could, he
laid it upon his shoulder, the which was so great and heavy, that many other
knights should lack strength to lift it up from the ground. And as he
travailed in this sort, he thought within himself, that if he should be
slain in that battle, that then his good swoorde should remain in the
field, and then afterward it might so fall out, that in time that Island might
again be peopled, then ^oulde it not be other wise, but that sword must come
to the hand of some knight, wherewith he might shed the blood of others, and
for that he would not do so great injury unto so precious a Lady, he
determined first for to break it all to pieces, in such sort, that afterward
none might profit himself therewith. Then considering how and in what manner
he might execute his determination to break the sword in pieces, he saw by
him a little rock the height of (...), although it were far bigger, and of
very hard stone, and thinking thereon to break it to pieces, he drew out that
^^ne sword, and laid upon that rock so many strong blows, that it seemed to
burn with the great quantity of fire that flew out thereof, but by reason of
his great goodness, for that it was one of the best that was to be found in
all the world, all the strength that he had, neither the hardness of the rock
was sufficient to break it, it was the sword the which he had of the Prince
Meridian, whereat this worthy Prince was in so great fury and wrath, that
with double strength he assaulted again the rock, and in a short space he did
cut and break it all to pieces, and the swoorde never the worse. (In this,
says the wise Lyrgandeo, that this knight had the greatest force and strength
that ever humane creature had before or after him, and an evident token to
consider, y^ in so small time he should cut and break to pieces such a rock as
that was, the which no humane force was able to do it, but he only) then this
good knight seeing that all that ever he could do was not sufficient to break
that sword (although he made it many times to double and bow the point unto the
hilt) he determined to leave it there, and for that afterward it should be the
better esteemed of him whose fortune it should be to find it, in the highest
part of pea^e of that rock that remained, with the point of his sword he
engraued in Greek vearse these words following.

IF hereafter in any time it chances any knight to find this sword, you
shall understand that it is the knight of the Suns, son unto the Emperor
^^rebatio, who coming to this Island in the demand and seeking out of the
devilish Fauno for to battle with him, and because he would not have the
said sword defiled on him, he left it, and would not carry it with him, and for
that after his death he would it should not come into the power of any other,
he did procure to break it upon this rock, the which was cut and broken
therewith in such sort as you find it, and yet the sword could not be broken,
therefore I desire thee, whose fortune it is to find it, never to strike or
wound any therewith, because his owner in the time of his greatest necessity
did leave the same, in consideration that he stroke therewith the most highest
and soueraigntest Lady and Damsel that ever was borne amongst humane
creatures.

(...) Thus when the knight of the Sun had engraven these words, he put the
sword into the ^ich scabbard, and hanged it girdle and all of gold upon the
said rock, and took his knotted club upon his shoulder and began to go
forwards his way a good pace, his horse followed after him a good way off. In
this sort the knight travailed, and did discover from a far the fire that
proceeded out at the mouth of this devilish Fauno, whereby he might discern
where he was. So half an hour after that he departed from the rock, with the
large pace in his going he came within an arow sh^t of the place whereas the
Fanno was, from whence he discovered the wonderful and misshapen figure of that
mons^er, whose force and furiousness, no humane creature was able to discern,
but that which made this knight marvel most, was to see come forth at the
mouth of this beast, with the fire and smoke, so infinite a compaine of devils
in the shape of: armed men, yt it (...) all the devils in hell to be joined
the^e together, and of them he saw coming toward him a bushment, which
seemed to the number of two hundredth, making so great a noise, as though the
whole Island would have sunk, his good horse Cornerino till that time did
follow him, but at that great noise he returned back again like unto a whirle
wind, unto the place from whence he came, and although y^ infernal company
came against him with so great force, yet this valiant and courageous knight
did dismaie nothing there^t, but with an irefull semblance he larged his pace
toward them for to work his fury on them, who when they came unto him, did
first assalt him with infernal visions, and then did lay upon him with their
shod clubs and iron mases, so thick and terrible blows, y^ it seemed to be
the forge of Vulcan, but this valiant knight taking his club in both his hands,
began with so great fury to besturre himself amongst them, that all that ever
was before him he overthrew to the ground, and by reason that they did
ouerpresse him very much with their thick and terrible blows, he waxed very
w^athfull, and did redouble his furious blows, in such sort, y^ in a short
time y^ infernal company began to fly and return unto the place from whence
they came, making such houllings and shrikes, y^ it would have feared any man
to have heard them: This infernal company had scarce returned, when there
came forth at his mouth another legion of devils, such as y^ first were, all
armed^ with mases of iron in (...), and did resemble giants and came toward
the good knight, making a greater noise than it does when it thundieth and
throws out some thunderb^lt, and when they came unto him, they assalted and
compassed him (...) about, and charged him with so many heavy and terrible
blows, that three times they made him to stoup with knees and hands down to
the ground, but commending himself unto almighty God with his heart, he
likewise charged them with so terrible blows with his knotted club, that in a
small space he made them to shrike (...) dog when they are hurt, and not being
able to suffer (...) force and strength of the knight, even as the other did
they returned in great have unto the place from whence they came, and
altogether they threw themselves into the mouth of that devilish Fauno, who at
this tune (as one that did awake out of his sleep) turned about and stretched
himself, gnashing and grinding his unmerciful teeth, stretching out his
cruel nails both on hands and feet^e, and brist^ed up his hair wherewith he
was covered, as does the wild Boar when that he is chased with dogs, he did
also increate the fire that proceeded from his mouth, making it to fume up into
the Clouds, whose sparkles scattered abroad, as does in the Smithes forge, at
such time as blowing he throws sand into his fire, and after a while that he
had thus roused himself, he arose from the ground whereas he was laid, and
looked toward the place whereas the knight of the Sun was, with such
terrible eyes, that at noone days they did show as much light as does two
torches in the night, there was not to be seen in all (...) world a thing of
greater marvel and fierceness, and the wise Lyrgandeo (who did see this
monster after that he was slain) says, that he supposes that there was no
humane creature that had so much courage as once to behold and look upon this
infernal monster, who lay on a green place which was betwixt a^ mountain
and a water brook that ran (...) him, but when that he had seen the knight
of the Sun, he gave a mighty leap into the air, and passed therewith over
the brook with so terrible a noise, that it seemed all the wh^le Ilan^e would
have sunk, and therewith he went toward the knight, and bare his head very
low for to strike him with his horn, (as does the Bull against the furious
(...)) thinking therewith for to wound him, if he had fastened that blow he had
stroke him all to pieces, but this courageous knight, who was as light and
nimble, as hardy and bold, with a light leap cleared himself of that
perilious encounter, without doing him any other harm, but that he thought he
should have been burnt with that (...) fire that he threw out of his mouth, and
as this infernal Fauno did pass forwards with the hastiness of his running,
the knight of the Sun had no time for to strike him, who was not scarce well
(...) when that with another impetuous course he returned upon him, and the
fire and smoke that he cast out before him was of so great abundaunce, as also
the great fury of the beast, that this valiant Knight had no time nor space
for to clear himself from that encounter, but it fell out very well with
him, that his horn chanced betwixt his arm and his left side, and did him no
other harm, but with his head he gave him so strong an encounter, that having
no power to sustain himself, he fell backwardes unto the earth, and passing
over him, he was meruailouslie tormented as well with the blow of the fall, as
with the fire which did secalde him very much. And su^elie till that time this
good knight never saw himself in so great perplexity, but by reason that he
was of so great magnanimity in all things, his courage did increase, so that
without any whit of fear and dread, he arose up again with great
lyghtnesse, being very furious and angry with himself, for that he could
never fasten one blow upon the Fauno, he then firmed himself very
strongly, and took, his clubbe fast in both his hands, abiding when that he
should return again upon him with his accustomed fury, he putting him
self with great policy on the one side, at such time as he should pass by,
the beast missing his purpose, he stroke him such a blow with his clubbe upon
his horn with so great fury, force, and strength, that he brak^ it from the
scull, and it fell down to the ground. Great was the pain and grief that
this infernal Fauno felt by that terrible blow, and it could not be imagined
the fierceness that he as then used, and roared and houled with so great
noise, that in ten miles compass it might be heard, but little profit was this
unto the knight, for when the Fauno found himself without his horn, he used a
new means (and no less perilous than the other) to assault the knight, and
procured by all means for to catch him betwixt his (...) and strong arms, and
sharp nails, throwing out at (...) mouth great flames of fire, as though his
body had (...) ^ull of gunpouder, wherewith this good knight had been burnt to
ashes with that infernal fire, if it had not ben for that good armor (which
was of Meridian) the which had a marvelous property, and it was this, y^
those great and small bones whereof it was made, were extreme cold, and made
great resistance against the fire. Likewise his helm was garnished full of
very fine rubies, and those (as says the wise Lirgandeo) does resist the
overmuch force and strength of the fire, in such sort, that he was not much
troubled therewith, yet for all y^ the soultring heat was such, y^ if it had been
any other knight of less strength, he could not have suffered it, so as this
devilish Fauno labored by all means possible to get this knight betwixt his
arms: even so did he with all lightness y^ might be, procure to defend and
keep himself out of his claws, many ^^mes striking him with his mighty club
upon y^ deformed body, but it did him no more harm than if he had stroke upon
a rock, yet had he a great advantage of him, for out of his forehead from
whence he stroke his horn, there issued great abundance of blood, which ran
down over his eyes, and troubled him very much, but by reason y^ he had
within him so many legions of d^uels the which did aid and help him, that
this good knight could not make his defense in so good order, but that he was
caught betwixt his big and hairie arms, which was of so great strength that he
could not imagine ^ thing of greater force, and meruailed much how that with
his nails he was not rent and torn all to pieces, but here at this present,
might the knight of the Sun esteem his good armor of great price, as of the
best that were to be found in all the whole world, for although the force and
strength of that in^ernall Fauno was sufficient to destroy a whole army of
soldiers, yet lacked he strength for to break or buckle one piece of all that
armor, and his strong and sharp nails that could tear in pieces a stith of
steel, could not enter into this armor, so that this Fauno carried him from
one place unto another, and did him no more harm, but that which he received
by the heat of the fire, for as he carried him nigh unto his mouth, he thought
verily to have been burned, but y^ which the knight of y^ Sun was most grieved
at, was, that he held him so fast betwixt his arms, that he had no power to
put forth his arms, neither to use his own strength. In this sort the monster
carried him up and down a good while, till at the last the knight felt that he
might firm his feet on the ground, at which time he stretched his legs, and
made so strong resistance against the Fauno, that he made him somewhat to
recoile, whereat giving a hasty and strong turn, he wrong himself out of
his claws, and with great lightness took again his club (the which was
fallen from him) and as the Fauno with great impetuositie returned upon him,
he was in a readinenesse with his bat in both his hands abiding his coming,
but before he approached nigh him, he stroke him so terrible a blow with his
club upon his head, that although his scull was more harder than a stith, yet
he made him to tumble on the earth more than half amazed, and before he could
recover himself for to rise up, he redoubled another blow, and stroke him in
the same place, that he made him to join both head and breast unto the ground
clean out of remembrance, at which time there was so timorous a noise of
shrikings and howlings which those infernal devils made, coming forth of his
mouth, showing such ill favored figures and misshapen visions, that no humane
creature y^ should behold it, but would have received great fear and dread,
but this knight the flower of all other, if all hell had risen against him (with
the favor of almighty God, upon whom he did call) would not have feared them,
so that he was not only without dread, but also with a greater force and
strength than before, he lift up his heavy knotted club, and at such time as
this infernal Fauno would have risen up, he with all his force did strike him
such a blow upon the head, that by reason that before his scull was crazed, he
now did beat it into his brains, and made them to run abroad, wherewith
this devilish Fauno fell altogether to the ground, and shaked with all his
body, and scrawling with hands and feet^ he made the earth to fly from him a
great way with the pangs of death. This monster was not so soon fallen down,
but all that infernal crew that were within his belly began to come forth at
his mouth, with so great quantity of fire, that they seemed all to burn
therewith and upon a sudden, (the Sun which shined as then very clear) was
as though it had been covered with a cloud, and all the heaven was so darkened,
that throughout all that Island it seemed as though it had been night, and
therewithal it thundered and lightened in such terrible sort, as though heaven
and earth would have sunk, and there appeared unto this good knight many
infernal visions, in as horrible manner as might be, all full of fire, in such
sort, y^ although it was as dark as night, yet there appeared a marvelous and
an innumerable number of the^ so light as firebrands, that he thought verily
that all the devils of hell had been there joined together. In this sort they
continued a while, and then upon a sudden he saw together a mighty legion of
devils in a bushment, who brought in the midst amongst them a naked woman,
whom they tormented in as cruel sort as might be imagined, she gave great and
pitiful shrikes, and complained in such sort, that the knight well understood
she should be the wise Artimaga, who was brought thither by those devils
whereas her son lay dead, and as they carried her round about the place,
some of them did strike her with s^rebrandes, that every blow seemed to burn
her unto the guts, and other some did whip her so cruelly, that every gyrke
did make the blood to spring out of her body, and she with great shrikes and
cries (that seemed to be heard unto the heavens) said.

Oh Artimaga, cursed be the day and hour that thy father and (...) begot thee,
and the day wherein thou were borne, and cursed be that day wherein the devil
did deceive thee, and the day that first thou did put thy trust and
confidence in him, these be his promises, and this infernal fruit is that
which he promised thee, this is he that I so much desired, by whom I and all
this Island should be so much spoken of, all has fallen out to be true, for
that the son which was borne of me, did prove to be such, that the
remembrance of him shall not be forgotten* so long as the world endures.

These and other such words uttered this Artimaga, in the time that these
devils carried her round about, where as her son lay with continual torments
of her, that it moved the good knight (that did behold all this) unto great
compassion. So after a while that this endured, it began to lighten and thunder
much more then before, in which terrible noise, all this infernal company
began to vanish away, and all those devils that brought Artimaga likewise
returned, never ceasing in tormenting her one minute of an hour.

So when they were all vanished and departed, the day began to clear up, and
the Sun to shine as bright as before, and was nothing seen in all the Island,
but this good knight standing by the Fauno, who was altogether stark dead, but
Cornerino his good horse being scared with that great noise of thunder, ran
and put himself into the sea, whereas he remained swimming up and down, till
all was past and gone, and then he came a land again: after that all this was
finished, the knight of the Sun kneeled down upon the ground, and gave great
thanks unto almighty God, for the (...) which he had given unto him, and
finding himself all sowltering hot with the fire of the Fauno, he pulled of
his armor, and with the water of the brook he did refresh himself in
drinking thereof, and washing his body, this being done, he returned to behold
the Fauno, whereas he lay dead, and in seeing him, he began a new to marvel
at his wonderful and misshapen form, and thought it a thing impossible that
nature should bring forth to monstrous a creature.

Then after that he had vewed him a while, he went and vewed all the Island, and
found it to be solitary, and not one left in all the whole compass, whereas
before it was meruailously replenished with all manner of beasts, and as then
not one remaining, for that this infernal Fauno, had eaten and destroyed them
Likewise he found y^ all the edifices and buildings were ou^^throwen with
weather, and broken down, which seemed before time to be meruailously well
peopled, where at he received great grief, and moved unto great compassion, to
understand that for the sin of one woman there should come so much harm and
damag^ unto that Island. He saw likewise that it was replenished with many Trees
full of diverse so^ts of fruit, as well for the Summer as for the Winter, and
such as he might very well sustain his life, without dying desperately for
hunger. So when y^ he had very well perused all these things, he received great
contentment, for that the place seemed unto him very necessary and aparant
for him to live out of the world, and there to end his days, wherefore he did
determine to remain there, and for the defense of rain and storms, he
thought it good to make himself a cottage for his continual habitation, to
keep him self from the fury thereof, and that farther within the Island, for
that the stink and evil savor of the dead Fauno should not trouble him, but
first before he would begin to put this in prose, he thought it good to leave
some remembrance, where the infernal Fauno was slain, for that if it should
so fall out, in time to come, the Island to be peopled again, the inhabitants
thereof might know and understand who had slame him, and as a man that as then
had no more need nor necessity of his armor, he laid them down by the
Fauno, upon a great stone, whereupon he wrote with the point of his dagger in
Greek, these words following.

This is the diuilish and infernal Fauno, the devils son, and begotten on
A^timaga, and slain by the knight of the Sun, Prince of Grecia, who being
determined to leave the world, would end his days in this solita^ie Island:
this was his armor, the which he does leave hear in sign and token that it
was the last victory that he made in his life time.

Then when that this was done* he went from that place a good mile farther, and
came where as he found a very fair and fresh fountain under the side of a
little grove, full (...) h^ge and great Trees, the which place seemed very good
and convenient for his determined purpose, he stayed there, and after that he
had dronk of the water of that fountain, the which was very clean and clear,
he determined under those trees to make himself a little cottage of ^oghes,
wherein he might harbor himself at such time as it was foul and contagious
wether. Then he ^ore and rent from those trees, branches and boughs,
wherewith he made him a little cottage, greatly unto his contentment, and at
the entry thereof he set a cross so high as himself, and kneeling down
before it, he lift up the eyes of his heart unto heaven and said as follows.

O Lord the creator and maker of all things, thou which do permit to be
crucified upon a cross (as this is) for to redeem all human lineage, here I
do desire thee to give unto me force and strength to suffer with patience
here to end my days, in thy holy service, and to be heartelie sorry for my
sins: even as thou did give unto those holy Fathers, (who for to clear
themselves from the crafts and deceites of this wicked world) went and lived
in the deserts. And in saying these words and other like, (not without
shedding of many tears) he remained on his knees a good while prostrating
himself on the ground.

In this sort lived this worthy knight many days, not rating any other thing
but wild fruits, and drunk of the water of that fountain, because he would
not desperately destroy himself: he sustained himself with such herbs and
fruits, as were in the Island, which was in so strange and straight manner, that
if the zeal which moved him thereunto, had been coress^ondent unto his
sufferance, his patience might have been accounted equal unto the ly^e of
saints. But oh Lord, how mighty is thy force, for that unto him that did tame
the most strong and furious beasts that was to be found upon the earth, and he
that did abate the courage and pride of the most valiantest knights and
mighty Giants that were to be found in all the world, neither all the legions
of internal devils were sufficient to abate his courage, and put him in any
fear, yet with one alonely dis favor of his love and mistress, was overcome
and overthrown, in such sort, that he did abhor his armor and his own
life, forgot his parents, brother, and friends, and took and those unto
himself this solitary and straight life, with determined good will there to
end his days, without seeing any other living thing, but only his horse, who
many times did pass that way whereas he was, where this History does leave
him, for to tell of other things that happened in the mean time.

What the Empress Claridiana did after that the knight, of the Sun was
departed from Constantinople. Chap. 16.
WIth great sorrow and grief this History did leave the Empress Claridiana,
in the company of Medea, daughter unto Raiartes, by whom she was continually
required of love, as she that was marvelous fair, which was the occasion that
her love was the more fervent and kindled in her, till such time as the
Empress (being very desirous to leave her company, the better to complain
her self) put her out of all doubt and declared unto her who she was, at which
sudden and strange discovery, Medea was greatly discomforted and ashamed, and
after certain days that she there remained, in the end she returned into her
own country, whereof she was Empress.

(...) Empress had (...) in the Country of (...) certain days, with the
company of her damse^, (...) determined to return unto Constantinople, with
(...) sort of armor, whereby she might not be (...) Lirgandeo says, that he
knew not whether it was to return to make battle again with her knight, it
was forced by love that she bare unto him, as it is a thing natural amongst
lovers, that when they have an occasion more to hate than otherwise, then does
love more increase in them, and although she desired to have and take,
reuengement of the knight of the Sun, yet it was unto her a great grief to
be absent from him one hour: the damsells (...) the Empress carried always
with them choice of armor and apparel, so leaving that armor which she had,
she armed her self all in Azure full of flowers of gold, and took her way
toward the City of Constantinople, and when she came nigh unto the same, she
was greatly amazed to see all the field thereof round about peopled full of
armed knights, and amongst them seemed to be a great preparation for the
wars, and furniture for a great army: the occasion of all this was, by
reason y^ the letters of advise were come from the wise Li^gandeo, giving to
understand of the coming of the Tartarians, into Grecia, the Emperor
commanded to join together all knights possible at that present, and at such
time as the Empress brew nigh unto them, the Emperor and Rosicleer, with all
such worthy Princes and knights as were at that present in the Court, were
assembled together in y^ field, mustering of such knights as were th^r prese^^,
which were a great company in numb^r, very gallant, stout, and brave, and
coming nigh unto them, she new the Emperor and those y^ were with him, but
she saw not the knight of the Sun in their company, whereat ^he meruailed
greatly, and being ignorant of the occasion of that great preparation, she
commanded one of her damsels to go and to inform her self of one of those
(...) whereore that mustering was, and whether the knight of the Sun were in
the Court or not. In the mean space that her damsel went to inform her
self, she put her self a horseback in close manner under the shadow of a
great and mighty Pine tree, which was nigh unto the army, and for that she
was of a gallant proporcion and well armed, the Emperor and such as were with
him, seeing her, judged her to be one of the best armed and well proporcioned
knights that ever they had seen. So her damsel put her self amongst those
knights, and calling one a side, (he which she thought most fittest for her
purpose) the demanded of him that which her Lady had commanded her. Then y^
knight perceiving that the was sent from that gallant knight (who was a my^our
unto all the company to look on) and he very desirous to show him that
courtesy, said as follows.

YOu shall understand fair Damsel, that the occasion wherefore our Emperor
and Lord does join together all this gallant company of knights, is for that
he does look daily for the greatest war that eu^r was made against
Christians, for that few days past he was given to understand, that the
Emperor Alicandro, father unto the Princess Lindabrides, does come against
him, and brings with him almost all the Pagans of Asia the great, and almost
all the nations of y^ Oriental Islands, that are in the Ocean, the occasion
that moved the Emperor Alicandro to make this war against the Emperor
Trebatio, (as we all do well understand) has been y^ knight of the Sun, for
at such time as he went with the Princess Lindabrides unto the Gran Tartarin,
at his coming thither, the Emperor and kings of his estate, when they
understood that he had overcome the Prince Meridian, were willing that he
should marry with her, as it was ordained in their demand, the knight of the
Sun, not being willing thereunto, at such time as they thought y^ marriage
and all things to be fully concluded without any interruption. Then he
secretly departed in the night from the court, without taking any leave of the
Emperor, or giving any (...) thereof: what for this anger, as also for the
great desire that the Princess Lindabrides, has to return into Grecia, by
her means they were indused, so that the Emperor Alycandro is fully
determined to make this war, with p^etence to destroy the Emperor Trebatio,
and to crown the princess Lindab^ides, for Empress of Grecia. This is the
answer of that you asked me, touching the first, and to the other concerning
the knight of the Sun, you shall understand that he has not been in this
court many days since, for after that he had made battle with a strange
knight that came hither in the company of Medea, he departed and was never
seen sinc^, neither is there any news of him, for the which the Emperor and
the Empress his brother and friends, are very heavy and sorrowful. Herewith
he concluded, and the Damsel being certified of her demand, did gratify him
with thank^s for the same and returned unto her lady and mistress, unto whom
she declared all that which y^ knight had told her, she understanding the same
and considering well thereof, in her life time before she never felt her self
so troubled and in so great confusion, for that before she was crediblye
informed how that the knight of the Sun was married unto the Princess
L^ndabrides, and now to find it contrary, by that which at y^ present she
heard, she knew not what to say nor what to do, neither which of these
contraries she might believe, and being dobtfull to give credit unto that which
the knight had told unto her Damsel, neither could she put her self in any
security of the thing that she so much desired, the better her self, she
commanded her damsel to go^ unto Rosicleer, and in her part, as a strange
knight that was very desirous to serve the Emperor Trebatio, to request him
to give her to understand, the occasion wherefore the Emperor Alicandro, does
come (as they say) against Grecia, and the truth if they do abide the
coming of all these Pagan enemies aforesaid.

So the damsel departed with this demand unto Rosicleer, and by reason that
he was meruailouslie virtuous, and full of courtesy and good manners, he
received the Damsel, and himself gave the answer, wholly in effect as the
knight before had (...) sent her word, that whenever it was his pleasure to
come and offer himself unto them, that then the Emperor his father and he
would receive him to their friend. Therewith the damsel doing her duty with
reverence, departed from him* and coming unto the Emp^esse, declared unto her
all that which Rosicleer had ^olde her, the which lacked nothing unto y^ which
the other knight had advertised her. But when that the Princess understood
that the wars with the Emperor (...) was certain, and of truth, she knew not
what to say nor to do in ^ thing so confused and incertaine as that was, for
that one way she believed to be true that which her damsell^ Arcania had told
her, and another wai^ it seemed very strange and contrary, that the Emperor
Alycandro should come into Grecia with determined wars and displaied Ensigns,
if that the knight of the Sun were married unto his daughter, and as she was
in this great doubt and confusion, she thought upon the words that Arcania
had told her at her return from Tartaria, and did argue* within her self,
finding great diversity and doubtful understanding, for that sometime it
seemed that she had told her that she left the Knight of the Sun married
unto the Princess, and straight ways a contrary opinion, that she said that
she left him at the point to be married, and being so, it might be that it
was left undone, for that the knight of the Sun would not consent thereunto,
and this might be a great occasion that the Princess Lyndab^ides did procure
and induce her Father thereunto, oneli^ for that she would re^ourne again into
Grecia. And being not fully certefied^ of the great doubtfulnesse that she
had in either of these contraries, she thought it the best remedy for her,
(for that Arcania as then remained in Trapisonda (for to return thither
forthwith, and there to certefie her self thoroughly of al y^ she had seen
pass in y^ gran Tartaria, and in what order and point; she had left y^ knight
of the Sun: this thought was not (...) considered of, but straight ways she
put it in ure, and departed from thence, and took her journey toward
^ropisionda, and coming (...) sea side, she with her Damsells embarked
themselves in a good ship, and made sail toward her own Empire, not
without great sorrow and grief, to see that her knight was departed from the
court of the Emperor Trebatio, and there was no news heard of him since the
time that he made the battle with her, which gave her to understand that
that should be the ^ust occasion of his departing, as one desperate, for that
unknown he made that combat, he would depart thither whereas they should
never th^re hear any news of him, at this time was abated y^ great anger that
she had against him, and her self was determined to go and seek him, if that
her damsel. Arcania did not fully satisfy her of that confused hope that she
had. With these and other like thoughts they sailed four days with fair
wind and wether, in the end whereof there arose a great and furious tempest,
by (...) whereof the good ship was put in great hazard to be lost, if God for
his infinite mercy and goodness had not delivered their, and having no
government in the ship by for^e of that great tempest, they were driven to
sea, a great (...) distant from the place, whereas they desired to go, and the
storm endured three days and three nights without any (...), but caused the
seas to arise up in so furious sort, that the mariners could do no good
therein, but yielded themselves and the ship unto the mercy of the wyndes,
seas, and fortune, who in the end, seemed to show her self favorable. The
fourth day they were launched into the great and sure port of the kingedome of
(...), wherein they saw other two ships y^ were driuon th^ther by force on
the same storm, and by the (...) of the sanguine water, she saw the conclusion
of a great battle that was beetwixt the people of the said two ships,
likewise she saw in the ships that there was dead knights, and heard the
shrikes and (...) of Ladies and Damsels: the which being heard by Claridiana,
she commanded her ship to be grapled unto those two, where by she might be
fully certified what it should be, and she found that there was a knight of a
very big body and well armed, and in his company other ten which seemed
to be his vassalls and subjects, that came in one of the two ships, and by
force made a conquest of the other ship, and slew diverse that came therein,
and took prisoner the principal that was amongst them, with a very fair
damsel, and other three ladies that were in her company, whom they had in
their arms for to put them into their own ship. And these ladies seeing
themselves to be carried in that forcible sort, began to give great shrikes and
cries, lamenting in such sort, shedding many tears, that it moved the
Princess Claridiana unto great compassion. And as she would have demanded of
that big knight (who seemed to be the chiefest amongst them) what should be
the occasion of that their great lamentation, he straight ways came against
her, putting him to the ships side and willed her to yield her self
prisoner: soft said the, we are not yet come unto that, but tell me wherefore
do thou apprehend them, as thy prisoners. Then the great knight answered,
with great wrath and anger, the mighty Cleonidas should seem to have great
space and leisure, if that at every ones demand he should stay for to give
him an account wherefore he does apprehend and take his pray. Thou shall
understand that I am a sea ^ouer, and I never as yet met with ship that I
could overcome, but I did take it, and did apprehend all that were therein, and
if they be Christians, I do sell them unto the Pagans, and make them slaves,
and if they be Pagans, I do sell them unto the Christians and make them
likewise slaves, so that I am friend to none of them both, and in all the ports
and havens of the Mediterraneo sea, they are in confederasie, league, and
friendship with me, and do suffer me in great quietness to make sale and
the best of my merchandise.

And I do tell thee, that I do more exteme and have in greater price, this
damsel which this day I have taken, then any prise that ever I made in all
the days of my life, for that I hope to make a present of her unto a mighty
pagan Lord, who will give me for her, all that ever I will demand. And now
seeing I have told thee that which thou did request to know, do now out of
hand that which is my pleasure, for that the ritchnesse of thy armor, and thy
gentle disposition, does give me to understand, that thou will be unto me as
precious a prisoner, as ever came to me since I used the sea.

You shall understand that all was truth which in this History has been
declared, for that this ^ouer was called Cleonidas, and with great reason he
took to himself this name, for that he was no less a rouer then that famous
Cleonidas, which was in the time of king Tolomeo, who did take the king, and
commanded him to be glystred or boxed with bags of scalding oil, for that
he did the like unto all such as he did take. This was called the second
Cleonidas, he continued more then fiftene years upon the Seas, and never went
a land, but took and robbed all that ever he met with all, and used no other
office but as before is declared. He went not alone with one ship as he was at
that present, but always had with him more then twenty, that were very good,
and fortified with all necessaries and people, but by fortune of a great
tempest, they were scattered abroad, and separated the one from the other into
diverse parts, and his ship alone chanced into that port, whereas he met with
the other ship, and made his prise, as before has been told unto you.

Then Claridiana, when she heard of the evil life of this rouer, and how
without all shame he did boast and advance him self of his ill doing, she was
very glad and joyful for that it was her fortune to come thither at that time,
and drawing out her sword, she said these words following.

CALL to remembrance Cleonides, that an other of thy name, and aunswerable
unto thy conditions, who had a greater power at the Sea then thou have, with a
cruel and desperate death he received his payment a land for all his evil
deeds done: likewise that Dionides who was also a rouer in the Leuant seas,
and of great power in the time of Alexander and Darius, yet in the end, was
taken prisoner, and punished for his evil deeds by Alexander. Also E^tilcon
was a famous rouer, yet was he taken and put to death by king Demetrius. But
yet more famous was that valiant and worthy Febatio, who with one hundredth
Galleys and thirty great ships, was served by all the kings of the Leuant,
and was feared of all them that dwelt toward the Ponients, yet in the end he
was taken prisoner by king Cirus, and in one hour he had his reward for all
the evils that he had done in all his time. The rouer Militas, with Curreo,
which were both in y^ time of the first Dionisius the Siracusian, the one
destroyed Sicilia, and the other did rob and spoil all Asia, but after y^ they
had used this trade y^ space of xxx. years by sea, in y^ end, the rouer
Militas was taken prisoner by them of the Rodes, and when that he was brought
into the place of execution, he did advance and rejoice in himself, for that
with his own proper hands, he had cut of the heads of five hundredth men, and
threw forty into the Sea, and thirty thousand were slain in battle with
his Galli^s, and in the end, was executed by them of the Rodes, according unto
his deserts. This and many other more, which I could rehearse, were famous
rouers, yet when their hou^e was come of their sorrowful destiny, they were
rewarded for their sin and wickedness, and never inioyed the riches that
they had stolen. Therefore I do believe, Cleonidas, that thou in all thy
actions, being so conformable, that the Justice which happened unto them,
cannot be lacking unto thee. Consider from whence thou come, and what thou
have been, and then I hope in God that thou will leave of to be a rouer, or
else thou will go to receive the reward of all the harms which thou have done
in this world, unto the devil of hell, who is author and guide of such as thou
art.

Then Cl^onidas hearing y^ princes Cla^idiana utter these words with so great
boldness and courage, burst out in a great laughter and said, Now of my faith
knight, I tell thee, that I never knew a more foolish man then thou art, that
in this sort do threaten Cleonidas, and tells him Histories of Rouers, as
though that he were less in force and strength then Dionedes, and thy self of
more power then ever was Alexander. Stay a while, and I will make thee to:
understand and know who I am, and likewise will teach thee to know to whom
thou speak: and in saying these words, he drew out his sword, and went
against Claridiana, then there began between them a very fierce and cruel
battle, and they laid the one upon the other such strong and heavy blows,
that in short space their shields were hewed and broken in pieces, and all
those that beheld the^, were greatly amazed, at their great force and
stoutnesse, and it seemed unto them that they were two of y^ brauest and
strongest knights that ever before they had seen. This battle was so
rigorous, that in a short space Cleonides began to feel and know the high
bounty of his adversary, as he that never in all his life, met with any that
did charge him so strongly, neither brought him into the like extremity, and
the more he strined against her, the more he felt the weight and fury of her
blows.

This battle endured betwixt them more then a whole hour from the
beginning, at which time the royal Empress Claridiana was more fresher and
fought more stronger then at the beginning, and Cleonidas began to wax werie
and faint, and would very feign have had the aid and succor of his knighte:
but the Empress perceiving it, fearing all that might happen, did so enforce
her self, y^ striking three mighty blows at him on his healme, all in one
place, in great have the one after the other, she made him to fall forward upon
his hands to the ground, and before that he had any time to recover himself
again, she stroke him so terrible a blow between the gorget and his helm,
that she stroke and cut of his head clean from the body, so that they fell
both together down to the ground.

Then the knights of Cleonidas, which were to the number of ten, when they saw
their Captain headless, they altogether assaulted Claridiana, charging her
with thick and strong blows, but she received them in so gallant and valiant
sort, that in a short space she slew ^iue of them, and the other seeing her
mortal blows did yield themselves, and craved pardon for their lives. In this
sort did this famous rouer end his days, God permitting that he should be
without the aid and succor of the rest of the Navy for that he whom all the
coasts of the sea feared, should receive his death and be slain by the hands
of a Damsel. Thus he being dead and his knights yielded, straight ways
Claridiana commanded to be set at liberty all those prisoners that he had
taken, the which being done, there came before her presenting themselves a
damsel who was very fair, and brought by a principal knight that was taken
prisoner at that instant by Cleonidas, and both of them gave her great thanks
for the worthiness the used in ^laying of their enemy, and meruailed very
much at her great bounty and valiantnes. The Empress received them very
courteously, and asked of them who they were, and of what Country? Whereunto
the damsel answered, saying.

You shall understand (worthy knight) that this Knight and I are both of the
confines of Sarmasia, and I am Lady over six Castles of mine own the which
be very strong and good, all situated in one great and fresh valley, and this
knight is Lord over other three Castles, round about mine, and being overcome
with my beauty, fell in love with me, and would have taken me for his wife, I
liked well of him, but there was one thing that did disturb me, and hindered
the accomplishing of his desire, which was, that I had some suspicion that he
bare great good will and love unto a Damsel that is very fair, and Lady over
another little valley, which is very fair and pleasant, and till such time as
I was fully certefied of this doubt, I would never consent unto his request,
for the which, seeing that there was no order how and which way I might
entirely satis^^te my self. There was a conclusion conserted betwixt us both,
that we should go together into the kingdom of Rusia, unto the cave of the
wise Artidon, who does answer a full conclusion unto all that is demanded of
him, and does know the secret of all hearts, and what they do desire,
although they do dissemble and keep it never so secret. So this seeming unto
us the best remedy, we straight ways gave order for the same, the which
being in a readiness, we embarked our selves in this ship, and departed,
bringing with us to the number of twelve knights to bears us company, and
being by fortune put into this port, our mishappe would that we should
meet with this rouer Cleonidas, who straight ways with his knights did join
in battle with us, and having slain the most part of those that came with
us, this knight being so sore oppressed with them, in the end was taken
prisoner with me and these women that came with me, according as you Sir
knight, did find us. This is all that I can declare for answer unto your
demand, and the occasion wherefore we departed out of our Country.

The Empress Claridiana rejoiced very much at the good discourse of the
damsel, and meruailed not a little of that which she heard told of the cave of
Artidon, and as one that desired no other thing, to the intent she might be
fully certefied of her knight, she requested the Lady once again to
certefie her of that cave, and to give her to understand, what is the reason
that they that entered in should know all that they demanded. Then Elisea,
(for so the Damsel was called) who knew very well the whole adventure of that
cave, declared it unto her peticularlie in such order as it was and passed,
saying that the said Artidon was the wisest that was in all his time, and
hitherto could never be found the like, he did inchaunt that cave in such
sort, that all persons may know what they will desire, and this was of a very
truth, for that she has been certefied by them that have been at the same
place, and there made the proof.

When that Claridiana understood very well the adventure of the cave, she
straight ways had a great desire to go thither, as well to see a thing of so
great marvel, as also for that it seemed that by that means she might come
unto the knowledge of that she desired so much to know of the knight of the
Sun. And so she said unto the damsel and unto the knight, that she would go
and bear them company, only for to see that marvelous cave of Artidon,
whereat they were very glad and joyful, thinking their journey to be made
with more security. And therewith they all went a shore together, and began
to travail by land, and passing by the skirt of the kingdom of Balachia,
they entered into Russia, and travailing toward the cave of Artidon, the
History does leave them for to tell you of the Pagans, that in all this time
were mustering and gathering together of their people for to go toward Grecia.

How the great and mighty army of the Emperor Alicandro were joined together
in the port of Tenedon, and of diverse varieties of people that there were
joined to go into Grecia. Chap. 17.
IN all this time was not idle the great and mighty Emperor Alycandro, for
that after he had concluded upon the vo^age into Grecia, he made so great speed
in the joining and gathering together of his people, that in a short time all
his Captains had in a readiness what he should have on his charge. Likewise
such kings as were his subjects having the charge for to join and gather
together in their kingdoms, all the people that possible they could, so that
they observed the time appointed, and met in the kingdom of Phrigia, whereas
is the great and mighty Port of Tenedon. The number of people were infinite
that were ther^ joined together of diverse nations, so contrary the one to the
other, that it seemed all the people in the whole world to be there assembled,
and if every Nation had not ben divided and separated the one from the other
in very good order, they should not the one have understood the other, which
would have been the occasion of a great confusion amongst them, by reason of
the diuer^^tie of their speeches. And for that the wise Lyrgandeo would declare
some of the Nations that were here met in this mighty army (which was the
greatest that ever was made in all the world) as he that knew it very well, he
has named some of them in this History, and faith, that there came first
thither the Emperor Alycandro, King and Lord over the^ all, who brought with
him fifty thousand knights of Tartaria, and thirty thousand knights of the
Scit^s, and twenty thousand of the Oriental Indias, he brought in his
company the fair Princess Lyndabrides, for to crown her Empress of Grecia,
who came with no small contentment, for that it seemed unto her by that order,
she might with great facility have in her company the knight of the Sun.
There came also the mighty and worthy Giant, Bradaman Campeon Lord of the
Oriental Islands, who brought in his company that most valiant and proud
youth Bramarant with two thousand of his Giants, all mounted upon Elephants,
for that in those Countries they do use them for their necessities, as in
other places they do horses. Also the king of Seras with twenty thousand on
horseback, all warlike people and gallant soldiers. Also the Prince of
Cambray, and in his company other f^ue kings of the Medias, with an infinite
number of people. Also the King of the Palibotos, who (as it is affirmed by
many authors and writers) that at all times when he pleases, he brings into
the field one hundred thousand foot men of war, and thirty thousand on
horseback, and eight thousand Elephants. Also the stout Rodaran king of
Arabia, and with him the Queen Carmania, with each of them five thousand
knights. Thither came the king of Media, the king of the Pa^tos, the king of
the Arrianos, the king of the Sandaros, the king of the Pari^anos, the king of
the Bastros, the king of the Sugianos, the king of the Suspios, the king of the
Masagetas, the king of the Corsitas, the king of the Paristeos, the king of the
Rifaces, y^ king of y^ Mardos. Also the king of Arcania, the king of Yuoria,
the king of Armenia, and all the Nations of the river ^anges and of the mount
Tauro. Also the king of Trapabona, and the king of Egypt, and the king of
Aethiopia, and the Prince of Candoria, and the old king of Gedrosia, only
for to see himself revenged on the Emperor Alycandio, who did not esteem,
but set at naught his counsel, and also of Bramarant, who slew the good
knight Graco his son. To conclude, there came these and many other nations
m^, which he let pass for to auold ^ediousness^: but yet one thing in all this
great army, is as greatly to be lamented as noted, and that is, y^ being there
joined together more than the third part of all the world, yet was there not
amongst so many thousands of people, not one that did believe in God, nor
observed his laws, for that they were all Gentiles: some worshipped Estatuas,
and other some the stars, and there were many amongst them that did worship
very foul beasts, and for their principal Gods Oxen and dogs, a very
lamentable thing, yet God did permit and suffer it for the great and
abominable sins of man. Thus when that all these people were in a
readiness, the great Navy wherein they should be embarked was assembled
altogether, the which fleet was so great, y^ it covered from the port Tenedon,
a great part of the Egean sea, and all the Hellesponto unto the Proponte, and
it was not to be meruailed, that so great and mighty a fleet of ships
should be joined together, for that many days before the Emperor Alicandro
caused all the masters and shipping that was to be found in all the coasts
of Asia to be brought thither, so that in a short space after that they were
joined together, this mighty Fleet was furnished with all kinds of victuals
and other necessaries, abiding wind and weather for to depart, the which when
that it came, they hoysed their sails, and began to take their journey
toward Grecia, with so great a noise of diverse kinds and sorts of
instruments, that every Nation brought, that it was a wonder to hear. So in
this their journey the History does leave them till time does serve.

How the Emperor Trebatio had news of the coming of the Pagans, and how he
made all things in readiness to receive them. Chap. 18.
AS the Emperor Trebatio was advertised of the coming of the Pagans before
they deuarted out of their Country, even so had h^ intelligence by certain
scouts and messengers, at such time as they were joined together, and embarked
in the Port of the Tenedon, and how that they were all at the Sea, at which
time the Emperor was ready and had all things in good order, although there
were not come unto him the aid and help^ that he looked for from many other
places, but yet of his own Countries and other kingdoms subject unto his
Empire, he had joined together one hundredth and twenty thousands of very good
knights and chosen men, for besides al Grecia, there was subject unto his
Empire the kingdom of Macedonia, and the kingdom of Epiro, and the Kingdom
of Arcadia, all Ci^ilia was his and Italia, Pannonia, Dalmasia, Dardania,
Hungaria, Bitania, Sueuia, Saxonia, the Islands Ciclades, Creta, and Rhodas,
and many other Islands which I leave in the Tirreno Sea, whose government is by
mighty Princes, all subjects unto the Empire, and are at the commandment of
the Emperor at all times when that he will call them unto the wars. So that
the Emperor Trebatio was in a readiness as well with all these people, as
also with those valiant and worthy Knights which were at that time in the
Court, and others which he looked for every day, and although he received
great sorrow and grief for the absence of his son the knight of the Sun,
in the time of so great necessity, and for that it was long since his
departure, and never to that hour he could hear any news of him, his
heart gave him that he should not hear of him so quickly, for the which he
was very sad and heavy, although his valiant heart and courage was of so
great force, that he dissembled his sorrow, and showed so pleas^nt and
joyful a countenance unto all people, that of none it was perceived. And in
all this time that they were awaiting the coming of the Pagans, he nor his
son Rosicleer were not idle, but always procured to fortify and strenthen
the City with armor, arms, and victualles, in amending the walls, and
trimming the gates, causing the fields to be made clean* for disturbing of
themselves. So that this good Emperor was always occupied, and readi^ at all
points, as he who looked for against him, the greatest power and mightiest
army that ever was seen. Here the History does leave to speak of him, and
return to speak of the great and puisaunt Fleet that was ordaining in
England.

Of the great and mighty army the which the King Oliuerio joined together in
great Britain, for to pass into Grecia. Chap. 19.
NOw says the History, for so much as the King Oliuerio had very green in his
memory the death of his son the Prince Edward, and also Don Siluerio the
robbing and taking away of that precious and fair Princess Oliuia, the which
he hoped to have to wi^e, both the one and the other did procure to make
revenge with all diligence and speed possible. So that Don Siluerio was not
contented with such (...) as he could take out of the Kingdom of Lusitania,
but also he went unto the king Zenodoro, who was at that present king and
Lord over the Godos in (...), (who were the richest and mightye^^ people that
were to be found in all Christendom) who for that they were neighbors and
friends, he gave unto him twenty thousands knights all very good and well
armed, and amongst them there were some young knights of the Godos, who for to
show forth the worthiness of their persons, thought i^ good to go forth in
these wars, and did use themselves very valia^tly, as shall be declared unto
you in the process of this History.

With these and other thirty thousand more that Don Silu^rio brought out of
his country, which made to y^ number of fifty thousand very good soldiers,
he went to great Britain* and at his ariuall the^her, the king Oliuerio had in
a readiness other fifty thousand chosen men out from amongst all other
kingedomes that were, subject unto him, as Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and
Cornwall, and other mighty Lords of (...) so that there was joined together
in great Britain, one hundredth thousand fighting men. Likewise, he received
letters from the king of Hungaria, that he had in a readiness for his coming,
forty thousand knights, very good and chosen men, and well armed in all
points: this he had besides others of great number, which would meet him by
the way, the which did give courage and stomach unto king Oliuerio, not
alonely to assalt the Emperor Trebatio, but also to conquer a great part of y^
world. So making his fleet^ in a readiness, and all other necessaries needful
for such an enterprise, the history does leave them, and return unto the
Emperor Alicandio.

How the great and mighty fleet of the Emperor Alicandro came unto the port of
Constantinople, and forcing to go a land, the Pagans had with the Christians
great and rigorous encounters. Chap. 20.
THE time is come that the great and puisant fleet of the barbarous Nations
did fail and nauigate with prosperous wind and wether, to wards Grecia, with
so great (...) and power, that it seemed they were sufficient for to conquer
the whole compass of the world, for that since the art of Navigations was
first invented, there was never so puisant and mighty a ^leete seen on the
seas, for the first onset of them did cover the greatest part of the Proponto,
besides these that remained for to pass the straights into Egeo.

Upon a day early in the morning at such time as the Sun began to spread
abroad his beams upon the earth, this great and puisant fleet of ships was
so nighe unto the land, that they were discovered by them of Constantinople,
that did abide their coming, who were not a little amazed when that they saw
the seas covered with so great and innumerable company of ships, and it
seemed unto them that there could not remain any more people in all Asia, that
was of any account, but that they were come in that fleet, and with the great
joy and contentment that they received for the discovery of the land, there
was so great a noise of diverse kinds of instruments, that it seemed all the
world to join together, as at the day of the universal judgment. They that
came foremost and first to the land, was the king of Media, and the king of the
Partos, who with an infinite number of small Pi^ises and boats made for the
purpose, began to put a land a great multitude of their people y^ came in their
great ships, wherein they used great diligence, and made all have possible,
because they would not disturb, but give place unto them that followed after.
Being a land, and not yet put in good order, neither had they taken a shore
their horse and munition, when that by the commandment of the Emperor
Trebatio, there issued out of the mighty city of Constantinople the prince
Rodomarte, armed with very good and sure armor, and in his company ten
thousand knights likewise very well armed, and went toward the sea side, who
with so valiant courage and furious force, did put themselves in the midst
amongst the Pagans that were landed a shore, that they flew many of them, and
many they overthrew to the ground very sore wounded, so that there were very
few of them but were sorry, that they were the first that came a land: but by
reason that they were very many in number and continually they did disembarke
more and more, they returned upon the Greeks, so that betwixt them there began
a mighty and terrible battle, for that the Medianes and Parts, were stout
and valiant men, and were all well armed, and defended well themselves.
Likewise, the Greeks were all chosen knights, and the great courage the which
they received by the hearing of their valiant captain, did cause them to put
the Pagans in so great extremity, that of force they retired toward the sea,
in which time there was so great have in that mighty fleet, for to disembarke
themselves a land, that all was in an uproar, and so great a noise that the one
could neither hear nor understand the other, till such time as the Emperor
Alicandro, (with great anger, for that he could not with his people go and
aid them that were a land) commanded that they should all retire back, and
that every nation in his order as he arrived, should disembarke themselves, the
which being obayed, straight ways there went a land the S^sas, Arianos, and the
Gandaros, who when they joined with the other that were before a land, were so
many in number, y^ the Gr^^kes began to loose ground, and to retire toward the
city. The Emperor seeing that, commanded to issue forth y^ Prince of
Dalmacia, and y^ Prince of the Rodes with fiftene thousand knights, who entered
into the battle with so furious ire, that in killing and slaying many of y^
Pagans, they made them to loose that which before they had gotten of the field,
and to retire back unto the sea side. There might you see these Princes do so
great acts, that they were all embrued with blood of their enemies. Likewise
the king of Media and of the Parts, and other kings, princes, and captains of
the pagans, were all a great defense unto their knights, for that they were of
great and high stature of their persons, and very valiant, strong and stout,
which caused great destruction amongst the Christians. In all this time was
Bradaman and Bramarant his son, so angry, furious and outrageous, y^ there
was no one that belonged unto them that d^rst abide their presence, for that
they were appointed for to come in y^ midst of all that great fleet in the
guard and company of the Emperor Alicandro, and they seeing so many ships
before them, (the which should first v^sembarke) and they so far from y^
those whereto they could not by any means send any of their men for to aid
and help the Pagans that were in battle and oppressed by the Christians,
were ready to tear themselves in pieces with anger and grief, and commanded
the mariners, that they should with all sails bearing, rush through the
thickest of all the fleet, with all speed possible for to come first to the
shore* and for that the passage was very perilous for to pass through, where
as to many ships were at an anchor in the port, the pylot did withdraw
himself in all y^ ever he could, not to pass forwards, the which being
perceived by the stout Bramarant, his anger was so great, that he had against
the pylot, that he took him by the heels and threw him headlong into the sea,
and said, go thy ways whereas thou shall lose all the fear and dread that
thou have of the Sea, for that mariners ought not to have any more fear at
the Sea, then knights on the land: and thereupon he took the government of
the ship to himself, who with stretched sails, thrust himself amongst the
thickest of the fleet, with so great fury, that all pylots procured to let
slip their cables for to give way unto him that he might pass, and by reason
of his first course, there were some ships that had not so much time,
received the wrack, and sunk into the Sea.

Thus by force hasting to the shoreward, launching out the ship boat, both
the father and son went to gether, and there were so great a number of them
and their barks at the sea side, discharging of soldiers, that they could not
get to the shore, and they not minding to stay for any turns or degrees,
made no more a do but leapt from one ^oate unto an other, for to recover the
land, and yet were they forced for to leap into the water up to the knees
before they could get a shore, who when they found themselves upon the firm
land, and against them a number of Greeks that did disturb their
disembarking, they did in such sort begin to besturre themselves amongst
them, that in a short time with their wonderful and terrible blows, they did
so entreat them, that of very force they were constrained to retire, for that
they never stroke blow, but that they slew or overthrew a knight to the ground,
that by their mighty force, they had place for to dise^barke the rest a land.
And in this sort being a foot as they were, they put themselves into the
midst of the battle, by whose coming, many Greeks lost their lives, and
they carried the flower of the victory, for that whereas they went, there was
not one that saw their terrible blows, but did fly away before them, as from
the death: so that by reason hereof, y^ Greeks lost a great part of the
field, and retired themselves toward the city, the which being perceived by
the captains, they did encourage and animate them all that ever they could, for
to hold their own, and to remain in the field, but they respecting the two
Paganes and saw that they were the only occasion of their retyring, and sign
of destruction, the two Princes Radamarte and Rodafeo, took to them two big
and strong staves, and setting spurs to their Horses, with so great fury as
possible was, the one made his encounter against Bradaman, and the other
against Bramarant, who although they were on foot, yet for all that by reason
of the greatness and mightiness of their persons, were seen above all the
rest: but it fell not out well with these two Princes, for although they made
their encounter very strongly, and brake their staves, yet did they them no
harm, neither made any motion of moving thereat, but passing by, they strok
either of the^ such a blow at his enemy with so great fury, on their wastes,
that they overthrew the^ to the earth, and if their armor had not been very
good, they had parted them a sunder in the midst. Forthwith these furious
Paga^s passed forwards for to put themselves in the thickest of the Greeks,
who fled meruailously before them, in which time the two Princes had space for
to recover again their horses, and with great anger and grief for that
misfortune that happened unto them, they put themselves amongst the Pagans,
requiting on them the injury done by the other two, determining not to return
any more to prove themselves upon the two Pagans that had overthrown them,
because they saw that they could get but little honor at their hands. In
this time the Greeks retired back all that ever they could, and lost a great
part of the field, so that the rest of the Pagan fleet had room and space
enough for to dise^barke themselves, so y^ all the fields were peopled with the
Pagan host. The which the Emperor ^rebatio perceiving, he straight ways
commanded the Prince of Dardania and the king of Esclauonia, y^ they with
twenty thousand knights should issue out into the battle, and do so much,
that by force they might make the Pagans for to retire, only for that they
should not think Grecia so be so ill provided of knights and defense. Then
these two Captains who were very valiant and stout knights, with those
knights that the Emperor had commanded, departed out of the city, and passing
two great fields that were between the Pagan host and them, they came unto the
battle, and seeing that the Grecians retired and were like to lose the
victory, with all the force and fury possible, they entered all together into
the battle, and slew many of their enemies, and got again the field the
which before they had lost, and made the Pagans to retire unto y^ sea side,
although they were a great number more, then there were of the Greeks, and
continually did disembarke more and more, all along the coast, some armed,
and other some tarrying for their armor and horse, yet for all this it did
well appear that those which came from the city a fresh, had not felt the
great power and infernal fury of these brave Pagans, the father and the
son, who with great ease did battle with the rest, but quickly they felt
their mortal and wonderful blows, which caused them to loose a great part of
their bravery, and seemed that those two were sufficient for to destroy them
all, who with very broad and heavy fauchins, did put themselves amongst the
Greeks, some they cut a sunder by the wastes, and othersome they cloue down to
their breasts, and othersome unto the saddle, and made great slaughter in such
sort, that amongst the Greeks, there was not one knight although he were never
so valiant and stout, that durst abide before them, but ran away from the
place whereas they saw them come, thinking them to be more like devils of bell,
then knights. At this time y^ Emperor Alicandro was come a shore, and mo^ted
upon a triumphant Chariot, such a one as the princess Lindabrides brought: out
of the which he did behold all that passed in the battle, and was very
joyful for to see the great wonders which Bradaman Campion, and his son did,
and seemed unto him that they two alone were sufficient for to destroy a whole
army, and he saw that by their force, the Greeks began to loose ground,
although every one of them did very well, by the great encouraging of their
captains. At this time the good knight Rosicleer (finding himself agreued)
would not detain himself any longer in the city, and seeing that the battle
was meruailously moved, he armed himself with his strong, rich, and glistering
armor. And although the Princess Oliuia, and the Emprisse Briana his mother
did all that they could for to disturb his going, yet did it profit the^ very
little, for that in taking lisence of the Emperor his father, he issued out of
the city, accompanied with those valiant knights, the Trojan Oristedes, the
Tartarian Zoylo, the two princes Bargandel and Liriamandro, and the king
Alamades, all these six together without carrying any other people in their
company, but only certain squires for to carry their spears. In this sort
went toward the battle a gallope with their horse and according as they were
of gallant proporcions, and very well armed, they gave contentment unto all
that did behold them, and the e^tring of these knights into the battle, fell
out euel unto a great number, for that in this day a great number of the pagans
lost their lives by their hands.

With great fury entered these six worthy knights, into the battle, and so
valia^tly besturred themselves, that unto the rest of the Greeks they gave new
force and courage to return unto the fight, and great wonder unto the Pagans
to see their bravery, with great anger they put themselves amongst their
enemies, overthrowing and killing all that ever was in their ways, in such
sort that they left all the field, (whereas they went) full of dead bodies, and
there was not one, although he were never so stout, that durst abide before
them, but in especial, that worthy Rosicleer, who had the forehand, did
charge his enemies with so great and furious blows, that the Emperor
Alicandio, and other Pagan kniges that did behold them out of the triumphant
Chariot* did think verily y^ it was the knight of the Sun, for that in his
gallant proporcion, and mightiness of body, he did resemble him very much.
And their blood waxed cold in their bodies to see how he did cut their knights
asunder in the midst, and some cloue down unto the gerdelsted: likewise they
were greatly amazed at the stout Troyan that rode by him, who overthrew and
slew with his sword, all that ever he could reach, and did in this day make
aparant unto all people, the valiant descent from whence he did proceed. Also
that valiant Tartarian, did here show the great love that he bare unto
Rosicleer, for whose sake, he forsook his own native country, and slew so
many of those barbarous people, that he was all imbrewed with y^ blood of them,
the like did the two Princes and the king, that if they had not been approved
knights, they could not have followed Rosicleer, by reason he put himself
with so great fury amongst the Pagans: but what did profit all this that they
did, for although on that part whereas they were they got the better hand, yet
in all other parts of the battle the Greeks sled away and lost the fi^ld, by
reason of the two furious Pagans, Bradaman and stood, who did such di^^lish
wonders, that there was non^ that could (...) what to make of them.

There (...) knight to Rosicleer, declaring the mischief the which those two
Pagans did, who hearing the same, turned about his horse, and went toward
that place whereas they were acompanied with their freindes: and he had not gone
far when that a far of he saw them, for that Bradaman being on foot, was
higher then any man on horseback from the breast upwards, and Bra^narant was
equal on foot with the horsemen, and these two Pagans were all to be rayed
with blood, and the place whereas they were full of dead bodies round about
them, procuring continually to press forewards in the battle, all that ever
they could, for to overtake them that fled away before the^. The which being
seen by Rosicleer, his valiant and courageous heart could not suffer it, but
took in his hand y^ biggest spear that he could find, crying out unto the
knights for to give him way: he like unto a whirle wind, made toward
Bramarant, at which noise an the Pagans and Greeks gave way for to behold tha^
encounter, then this furious Pagan when that he saw him coming, with his
broad faucheon in his hand, did abide him, and (...) still, thinking him to be
one as the other knights were, but this good knight made his encounter in the
midst of his broad and great breast, with so great force and strength, (that
although he was accustomed not to make any m^uing (...) encounter that was made
against him) yet at this present he was overthrown and fell backwards to the
ground, that he thought verily all his bones had been broken, at whose fall
there was so great a noise, as though a tower had fallen down, the which fall
troubled him so much, that almost with grief he could scarce rise again. At
which encounter all those that did behold it, were greatly amazed, for the
Pagans thought verily, that there was no human force that was able to make
the like. But much more was the wonder of y^ proud pagan, for that he thought
that all the power of those false gods in whom he believed, were not of force
to overthrow him to the ground: and as yet he was not well rais^d up (...) his
(...), when y^ this good knight (...), with aspe^re of no l^sse bigness the^
the other, with so great force and impetuositie, that he seemed a whirle wind,
returned upon the gran Campeon, and made so strong an encounter in the midst
of his breast, that neither more nor less as his son, he fell with his back
on the ground, and therewith he and his friend pressed forwards, making great
slaughter amongst the Pagans. But when that the Emperor Alycandro saw those
two most valiant Pagans (in whom he had so great confidence) to be ouerthrown
by one alone knight, he thought verily to die in that place with very anger,
and complained against the Gods, for that they did give unto one knight so
great force and strength, and more, being a Christian. But his anger and grief
did straight ways increase the more, for that the old king of Gedrosia who
was with him, and as one that received no grief at any evil y^ should happan
unto the Pagans, say.

You shall understand (mighty Emperor) that yonder knight who has put you in
so great admiration is not the knight of the Sun, as you do think, for that
as yet he is not come forth unto the battle, but this is a brother of his,
and such a one, that when that he does join with the other, there is not
people enough in all this thy mighty army sufficient for to kill them. The
Emperor did very well understand the intention of the king of Gedrosia, and
meruailing greatly at that which he had said, he did dissemble at that
present, and returned to behold the battle, to see the conclusion thereof.
It cannot be here declared the great anger and devilish fury which the two
Pagans, Father and son received, to see themselves so overthrown by one
alone knight in the presence of all the whole Camp, which caused them to do
such things, and to srike so terrible blows, that they seemed to be devils of
hell. And they seeing that they could not by any means follow and overtake
that knight which had overthrown them for that they were on foot, they
straight ways commanded that in great hall their horses should be brought unto
them, so they brought unto Bradaman a mighty Elephant whereon he did use to
ride, for that there was no horse that could bear him, and unto Bramarant the
mightiest horse of body that ever was seen, for that he was engendered by a
horse and a she Elephant. When that these two were mounted (for the evil of
many) they put themselves into the battle, killing and slaying all that ever
they met withal, till such time as they had discovered the worthy knight
Rosicleer in the company of his good friends, and for that Bramarant did show
himself of greater force than his father, by the mighty and mortal blows
which he stroke, Rosicleer would take with him the contention, and the Troyan
Oristedes with the stout Zoylo, went against Bradaman, so that between them
there began a terrible battle, that all those that might see them, forgot to
fight, and stood to behold them, and seemed that in all their lives they never
saw the like, for that they judged to be joined together there, all the force
and strength in the world, there did the good knight Rosicleer feel the great
force and fury of the Pagan, and it seemed unto him that he was the brauest
and most strongest that ever he proved in all his life. Likewise the stout
Bramarant did know his high bounty and valiant force, for feeling the mighty
blows which he stroke on him, and seeing the little harm that his blow did
unto the knight, with an angry courage he blasphemed against the heavens, and
against the earth, and redoubled his blows with so great fury, that if the
armor of Rosicleer had not ben exceeding good, every blow of them had been
sufficient for to have cloven him a sunder in the midst, and yet for all that
he many times astonished him, and brought him so far out of remembrance, that
he fell forwards on his saddle bow and embraced his horse neck, yet
notwithstanding this stout Pagan did not much advance himself of his
valiantness, for y^ this worthy Greek being kindled with ire, did with
mortal courage so charge him in such sort, that his teeth did break the (...)
against the other, by the force of his blows, that great abundance of blood
ran out at his mouth, and many times he was so amazed, y^ he was ready to
fall from his horse, so that betwixt them the battle grew so terrible, that
all those that were in the field forgot themselves, and did behold them, and
were greatly amazed that so much power and force should be in humane
creatures. No less worth for to be looked on at that present, was the mighty
battle that passed betwixt the stout Bramarant and the two good knights, the
Tartarian and the Troyan, for that Bradaman was the strongest that was to be
found amongst all the Giants in the whole world at that time. Likewise the two
knights were the best that were to be found in all that great host, next unto
Rosicleer and Bramarant, which was the occasion that the battle which was
betwixt them was the more rigorous, for that the stout Tartarian stroke
Bradaman such terrible blows on the one side, that he astonished him, and the
valiant Troyan so charged him on the other side, that he made the blood to
run out both at his nose and mouth, yet for all that the mighty Pagan did
not dismaie himself, but was so courageous, that every blow that he fastened
on his enemies, did make them to double their bodies in their saddles, and many
times to loose their remembrance, and if they had not been both against him
together, either of them alone should have passed very evil. Thus after that
this battle had endured between them the space of half an hour, the night
drew on, and then was there disembarked a land so great and infinite a company
of Pagans, that the Greeks could not suffer them, but were constrained to
retire, the which Rosicleer seeing, and considering the great peril that might
happen unto them, for to rem^ine there alone and so far from their company,
presently left Bramarant with whom he did combat, and called unto his friends,
who did the like, so that in short space with their light and swift courses,
they put themselves amongst the Greeks, and returning back in very good
order, they got into the city, the which was no grief unto the Pagans,
although the gran Campeon and Bramarant remained very angry and furious, for
that they could not be revenged on those knights that did so much abase them.
And by reason that the night drew on a pace, the Emperor Alycandro commanded
his Tents to be pitched, and all that night they had enough to do to
disimbarke the rest of the people that came in that fleet. But when that the
next morning was come, they might see all the field of Grecia so replenished
with barbarous people, that never before that time was seen so many people in
one army, there was so many that they could not be numbered, to know how many
they were, but that they might discern every Nation was divided by
themselves, and known the one from the other. Likewise to see the great
difference they had the one from the other in their tents, the fashion of their
armor, the diversities of speeches, and the contrariety of their customs and
manners, that no man whatsoever he were that should have seen them, but would
have meruailed, and received great admiration, the Emperial tent of the
Emperor was all wrought with gold and silver, full of an infinite number of
fine, prcious, and glistering stones, and was of so huge bigness, that a
thousand armed knights might walk therein. Within the same tent was the
Imperial seat of the Emperor, and round about it the seats of all the other
kings his vassals, in such order placed, as it was in the imperial hall of his
palace, and round about the same Tent was placed the tents of the Tartarians
and of the Scitas, with an infinite number of tents and pauillians belonging
unto them. In like order was placed the tents of the other kings his vassals,
every one in his degree. These Pagans were eight days, and had enough to do
to fortefie their tents and trenches, in which time the Greeks gave no attempt
against the Pagans, for that the Emperor Alycandro did send and asked truce of
the Emperor Trebatio for eight days, the which was for no other thing, but
only that the Greeks might freely enter into their camp for to see and
discern their mighty power, and so they did, for in the space of that eight
days, the Greeks did no other thing but go and come into the camp and host
of the Pagans, and were greatly amazed to see so many and so different Nations
joined together, and so conformable for to obey and accomplish the commandment
of their Lord. Likewise in this time the good Emperor Trebatio hearkened to no
other thing but to send to his knights from one place unto another, in the
demand and seeking of the knight of the Sun, and when that he could not hear
any news by them, he was very sad and sorrowful for the same, as well for
the suspicion he had of some misfortune that might happen unto him, as also
for the great lack of his aid and help that they might have in that time of
necessity. The Princess Lyndab^ides likewise in the time of these eight days
of truce, was informed by certain Greeks, how that the knight of the Sun
was absent from the Court, and that many days since they never could hear
any news of him, for the which news she was meruailouslie sad and heavy,
for that she was determined to enter into Constantinople, that under color to
speak with the Empress Briana, she might see him, who was the only occasion
of her coming out of her Country, and it seemed unto her that in only seeing
of him, her heart should receive great comfort and ease, and she had great hope,
(only for to eschew the great wars that were ordained against them) that
they would think it the best that he should be her husband, but when that she
saw that all fell out contrary to that which she thought, she began a new
to grieve her self, and to feel her misfortune, whereas the History does
leave her, to tell of all that happened afterward.

Of the great succor that came to the Emperor Trebatio, and of a cruel
battle that the Christians had with the Pagans. Chap. 21.
THE last day of the truce that was put between the two Emperors, arrived in
Grecia the Prince Claueryndo, who came in aid and succor of the Emperor
Trebatio, with twenty thousand knights, of the best proportioned and armed,
that were at that time joined together in Grecia, and they disimbarked
themselves in the sight of all the Pagans, and entered into Constantinople, at
whose coming the Emperor Trebatio received as great joy and pleasure, as the
Emperor Alycandro sorrow and grief, for that those knights came in the time
of their truce, and his will was to the contrary, for that he would have given
them a recompentibus before their entering into Constantinople, but straight
ways his grief began to double, for that within one hour after arrived there
the good king Sacridoro with eight thousand of his own knights, and in his
company came the Prince Don Lucindo, with great desire for to show the good
will that he bore unto Rosicleer, all the which came a shore in the face of all
the Pagans, and passed through the great field, and so entered into
Constantinople, whereas they were received of the Emperor Trebatio and
Rosicleer, with that love and friendship as was always betwixt them. Likewise
the last day of the truce lacked not the coming of the good and valyant king
Florion, and in his company the wise Lyrgandeo and his son, the stout
Brandizel, who met with him at the Sea, by the industry and wisdom of the
wise man, and in his company twenty thousand knights, who came to pay the
great debt in the which he was bound unto the knight of the Sun, and at
their entry into Constantinople they were received of the Emperor and of the
Empress, as such persons as they were deserved, who knew not how to gratify
the great pains and travail which they had taken, in coming from so far
Countries to favor, succor, and help them* Here the king Flo^ion and the
wise Lyrgandeo began a new for to declare unto them, how and in what sort the
young Gentleman of the Sun was found, and how he was nourished and brought up
into his company, till such time as he departed from them. Whereat the
Emperor and the Empress received great contentment to hear it told. Then the
wise man turned unto Rosicleer and did embrace him with great love and said:
Seeing that it is so (worthy Prince) that the evil fortune of your brother is
fallen out so contrary, that he is now absent out of this Country, and you
alone do remain the shield and defense, of your father and Country, show
your self now as ever heretofore you have been, and let no troubles nor
travails overcome you, nor weariness enter into your benes, for seeing that
God has created and made you so valiant and worthy, let the honor of your
mighty and valiant attempts appear in your high knighthood, and you may well
make this account, that if you go through with this enterprise, you have
conquered all the world from the Orient unto the Occident (beside the small
company that is on your part) they be all against you, and this much I can
tell you of the knight of the Sun your brother, that since his departure from
hence, he has not been greatly at his ease, for that he has passed greater
perils and dangers tha^ you can pass in these wars, and it does not beho^e us
to speak any more of him, for y^ of force he must pass the troubles the which
his destiny has ordained for him. Here did Rosicleer gratify very much the
wise man for that which he had said unto him, and after thanks giving, he said,
that having him on his side, there was nothing y^ he did fear. At this instant
came thither five thousand knights from the kingdom of Thessalia, and in their
company came the fair Queen Arquirosa, who after y^ she understood that
Rosicleer (by whom she recovered her kingdom) was son unto the Emperor
Trebatio, she was not content to send to him of her knights, but she her self
would come in person unto Constantinople, as well for to see Rosicleer, as also
because she hoped to receive and take a husband at his appointment. The Emperor
and Rosicleer thought great friendship of the coming of this aid, by whom as
also by the Empress the Queen was received with great honor. All these were
joined together in the mighty City of Constantinople, whereas the Emperor
found of the one and of the other 100. ^ four score thousand knights, so y^ if
there were not joined together so many of their adversaries, they had been
sufficient to have conquered all the whole world, yet was there of the Pagans
four for one, and amongst the^ there were the most br^uest and stoutest giants
y^ were to be found in all the world, for y^ the Emperor Alicandro sent for
the^ from the Islands of the farthest part of the Ocean seas, and Bradaman
Campeon brought with him two thousand, that he took out of the Oriental
Islands, so that all these were of so furious and stout a Nation, that the
Emperor Trebatio had here great need of the aid and help of almighty God.
All this aid and succor aforesaid entered into Constantinople in the face of
the Emperor Alycandro and all his, whereat he was wonderful wrathful, as well
for their coming to aid their enemies, as also for that they entered in the
time of their truce, so that he and all that were with him had great good will
for to distrube them of their entry into the City, and swore that after their
truce was ended, if there came any more aid and succor, that first they
would put them all unto the sword, rather than consent that they should enter
into Constantinople, for that he might better deal with them abroad in the
field than in the City, and from that day forwards the Emperor Alycandro
commanded that there should be put spies and scoutes in all places, for to
advertise them if there came any more succor unto the Greeks, the which was
no small harm unto them (as shall be told you hereafter in this History)
but God who is the author of al goodness, did so ordain, that by their own
spies and scoutes they came to p^rdition and were lost, for that he would not
that his Christian people should receive so much harm as was ordained for them
by their enemies.

Of the second battle which the Greeks had with the Pagans, and of the
notable acts that were done in the same. Chap. 22.
AFter that the eight days were past of the truce that was taken between the
Greeks and the Pagans, the next day following, which was the ninth day, the
Emperor Trebatio determined to issue out of the City with his knights into
the field, and give battle unto his enemies, who were likewise in a
readiness, and very desirous they did abide their coming, thinking it long to
see them in their clouches, but in especial those two furious Pagans the gran
Campion and Bramarant, unto whom y^ eight days of truce seemed to be eight
years according unto the great desire which they had to be revenged on those
knights which had so shamed them in the first battle, who so soon as they
saw any people begin to come forth out of the city to enter the field, put
themselves before all the whole army, for that they would be the first that
should enter into the battle. So he that came the foremost of the Greeks, was
that good knight Rosicleer, and next unto him the stout Oristedes, with the
good king Sacridoro, and with them twenty thousand of Greek knights, who
upon a sudden, did set upon a great bushment of Pagans that took the fore
frunt of the host, in the which was more then forty thousand knights of the
Seras and of y^ Medos, who had for their captains y^ king of Seras, and the
king of the Medos, both of the which were young men and very valiant knights,
and in their company came Bradaman and Bramarant, in the foreward, the one
mounted upon his Elephant, and the other upon his mighty horse, and either of
them a spear in his hand so great, that it seemed the mast of a ship, who
pricked before their company, and made great have toward the Greeks. Then
came there forth to receue them Rosicleer and his good companions, in such
sort, that he made his encounter with Bramarant, and the good Troyan with the
king Sacridoro, made their encounter with Bradaman, so that all five together
made so strong and mighty an encounter, that the noise thereof made a terrible
sound throughout all those broad and wide fields, as though some thunder bolt
had fallen when their Spears were broken, they remaining all firm in their
saddles passed the one by the other forwards, and never stayed till they put
themselves in the ^ace of their enemies, and with so great fu^ie they entered
amongst them, that they covered the fields with dead knights, and the dust that
arose into the air did c^uer all the whole host that they could scarce see
one another, and the horse ran masterlesse about the field which was a show how
many they had overthrown (...) that their first entry: At this time those
two furyous Pagans being somewhat weary in killing of their adversaries,
returned back to seek out them who had iusted with them, and they saw them
in the midest of their adversaries and enymies all to berayed with blood,
kylling and overthrowing all that they could meet with all, and when they came
nighe unto them, Bramarant went against Rosicleer, and Bradaman against his two
companions, so that betwixt them there began such a battle, that many y^ were
there did leave of their fighting, only to behold them, for that their blows
which they did strike, did make them all to wonder, and there was no man that
did behold them, but received great fear and dread. Here in this conflict
might be seen how necessary is the armor, unto good knights, such as are
made and forged by masters of Art Magic, for if they were not forged, with
their compositions and subiections, according unto Art, then were the best
knights in all the world as ready and as subject to be cloven in y^ midst
unto their wastes, by y^ terrible blows of these monsters, as any other simple
wretch and feeble person, for when their armor is not good, many times in the
breaking they loose an arm and some other joint, or receive some great wound,
when that at all times at their need they shall not find a Surgeon ^o cure
and heal them. Therefore such as were good knights in those days, and desired
to put themselves in mighty perils and dangers, did more procure to get their
armor made by art, then to get a kingedome, and in this sort they did defend
themselves the one from the other, assuring their own persons in such sort,
that all the condition of their battles did depend in their great force and
strength, and in him that most mightily and worthily with dexterity did strike
and deliver his blows. So that in this conflict, although the blows of
Bramarant were wonderful and terrible, yet did Rosicleer receive and abide
them on the finenesse of his armor, which were of the best that was in all the
whole world: likewise in the valiantness of his courage, which was not only
for to make resistance against that furious Pagan, but also he did so furiously
and so strongly charge him with his blows, that many times he made him
astonished and to sweat drops of blood, for that of truth Bramarant thought
before he made a proof of this knight, that in all the heavens and upon the
earth, there was not to be found one that durst abide his importunate fury,
wherewith he received so great courage and anger, that with an infernal
stomach he redoubled his blows against the strong and worthy Rosicleer, in
such sort that his own flesh and bones did ache, and it seemed that the other
was all on fire, with the great quantity of sparks that he made fly out of
his fine forged armor. Likewise, was no less rigorous, the brave and stout
battle the which Bradaman Campion, had with the two valiant knights, for that
the Gran Campion, next unto his son Bramarant, was the most mightiest and
strongest that was in all the whole Orient, whom the stout Troyan and the
valiant King Sacridoro, together, did so strongly charge with their blows,
that it could not be better executed, i^ that he had been assauted by the two
worthy Troyans, Hector, and Troylus. In this sort was these two so stout
captains matched with their contraries, and the other knights and soldiers did
all that ever they could for to drive their enemies out of the field, but by
reason that on the Pagans part, there was that stout and valiant knight
Rodaran, the King of Media, and the King of Seras, and on the contrary part,
there was none for to make resistance unto those, they made great slaughter
upon the Greeks, by reason whereof, as also for that there were twice so many
of the Pagans as they were, they began to retire, and to lose ground, the which
being perceived by the Emperor Trebatio, he would not detain himself any
longer in the City, but taking in his company those high and mighty Princes
the king Florion and Brandizel his son, the Tartarian Zoylo, Bargandel, and
Liriamendro, with Don Lucindo, and other mighty princes and knights the most
principal of all his court, he issued out of the city, and had with him
thirty thousand knights very good and chosen men, and so entered into y^
battle with great fury, dividing themselves into two parts, that what with
killing, wounding, and slaying, they oppressed so much their enemies, that they
forced the Pagans to retire into their trenches, whereas the Greeks in
following of them, overthrew many tents, but straight ways there came forth
against them more then fifty thousand Pagans with valiant and stout
captains, and made their encounter with the other that came upon them a
fresh, in such sort, that the battle was renewed and waxed very bloody.
Here was to be seen y^ great meruailes done by the Emperor Trebatio, in
distroying and killing all that was before him, for some he cut a sunder in the
midst, and other their arms, and other their heads, in such sort, that who
soever had seen him with that impetious fury, they could not have judged him,
but to be either his son Rosicleer, or y^ knight of the Sun, and in his
mighty deeds, he did demonstrate, that there was not a Christian prince that
with more reason did deserve to bear the name to be father of so excelent
sons. He did not content himself to kill and destroy mean knights, but did
seek out the principal captains, and knowing them by the richness of their
armor, he would assalt them, making rekoning, that in ouercomming them, he
ouerlayed the whole state and force of the battle, and there with he met with
the king of the Seras, and knowing him, by a rich crown of Gold and precious
stones which he had upon his helm, he took a spear from one of his knights,
and ran at him therewith, making his encounter in the midst of his breast,
that the spear pearsed through his body, and he fell dead to the ground, this
being done he made an other encounter against the king of the Balibotros (who
received little benefit of his thirty thousand knights, and eight thousand
Elephants, which he brought out of his country) for that at one thrust with a
spear, his heart was cloven a sunder, and the head appeared all bloody at his
back, and he tumbled to the ground: likewise with another blow^ with his sword
he cloue the head of another king of the Nidias, which had his healme more
furnished with gold and precious stones, than of strength. In this sort he
passed into the battle doing such meruailes, that whereas he passed, they all
made him room and gave way. Then the Emperor Alicand^o who saw all that
passed from his triumphant Chariot, said unto many kings that were with him.
Without all doubt this is the knight of the Sun, and new come into the
battle, and of truth his power is very great, and he would give ^s the
repulse, if there were not so infinite a number of knights in this my army to
make resistaunce. Tarry a while (said the old king of Gedrosia) for that is
not the knight of the Sun as you do say, but it is the Emperor Trebatio his
Father, who when that he himself in the midst betwixt his sons, and
accompanied with that bushments of knights which now are with him, he will not
fear all the whole world, if they were all together against him. At this time
who so had seen the great slaughter which that valiant Florion and his son
Brandizel did, as also the Prince Clauerindo with the Tartarian Zoylo, and all
the other precious and worthy knights, surely they would have said, that by
experience of the great slaughter which they did, they had been sufficient to
have destroyed a great army, that although the Pagans were almost twice so
many as they were, yet by their occasion they lost continually ground, and if
there had not been amongst them one Bradaman and one Bramarant that did
encourage them, they should have had enough to do to have defended themselves
from them with whom they were so earnest in battle withal, for that it was
good two hours since they first began fight, and at that time there was no
more advantage to be known than at their first beginning, at the which these
brave Pagans were so furious, that it seemed that they threw out smoke from
the beauers of their healmes, and being very desirous to satisfy their
hungry wrath with the blood of the others, Bramarant did leave Rosicleer with
whom he did combat, and like a devil of hell he put himself into the
battle, destroying and killing all that ever he met with, so that before him
he made a broad lane, and said within himself, that Rosicleer was very
valiant and strong, and could not believe that the knight of the Sun had so
much strength, but yet if that he might have him in place whereas they might
have more room, and time for to finish their combat, he would be wholly
revenged of him according unto his will and desire. Likewise at that time
Bradaman his Father, with his sword in both his hands stroke so strong a blow
at the good Troyan upon his helm, that being all amazed and from himself,
his horse carried him round about the field, and turning himself about, he
stroke another blow at the king Sacridoro, that he fell backwardes upon his
horse crouper, and had fallen to the ground, if that he had not been succored
by the Greeks, and without making any more account of them, he put himself
into the battle after his son, and being both together, they made so great
slaughter, that all did fly from that part whereas they went. It did not much
grieve Rosicleer nor his companions to see themselves separated from those
devils, yet with great fury they put themselves into the battle, killing
and overthrowing all that ever came into their way, in such sort, that it
went evil with a great number, for that they were separated from the battle
which they had with those stout Pagans.

At this time the Emperor Trebatio met with that strong knight Rodaran king of
Arabia, and knowing him by the device of his armor, with great anger that he
had against him for* the treason he used, he made toward him, (and for that
Rodaran was one of the valiantest Pagans that was in all the whole army) it
was the occasion that betwixt them there began a stout and brave battle, that
many had enough to do to behold them, and the rest of the day was almost
spent before that they were parted asunder, and for because there were at that
present in the battle few principal Knights in part of the Pagans, and on
the Emperor Trebatio his side there were a great number, and it seemed unto
the Pagans that the Greeks got much ground on them. The Emperor Al^candro
straight ways commanded the two thousand Gyantes of Bradaman for to enter
into the battle, who obeyed his commandment with so great impetuositie and
fury, that many of their adversaries they ^^ew and overthrew unto the ground.
At this present were to be seen the great meruailes done by Rosicleer, and by
all the other worthy Princes and knights, who being joined together with the
number of one thousand of their knights, did put themselves to make resistance
against all those Giants, and with their strong and worthy arms did resist
that impetuous company, who were sufficient to put them all to flight. Here
did the stout Oristedes very well show his manhood, and the valiant and
worthy Clauerindo, the Tartarian Zoilo, and the king Sacridoro, the Prince Don
Lucindo, Liriamandro, and Bargandel, the king Alamades, Rodamarte and Rodafeo,
every one of these did so much, that the reader thereof may conjecture of
their great bounty, but yet in the end by reason that the Pagans were double
as many as they, and again those two devils the Father and the son, against
whom there was small resistance to be made, for that these worthy and esteemed
knights of Grecia had enough to do to make resistance against the giants of
Campion, which was the occasion that all his people when the night drew on
began to retire and to loose ground a little and little, the which being
considered of by the Emperor ^rebatio, and fearing the great peril that might
happen unto his people, he (...) unto Rodaran, that if he thought good to leave
off their battle and contention until the next day, for that as then it was
very late, he would. Then Rodaran having that offer, as one y^ desired no
other thing, withdrew himself, and the Emperor perceiving the night at hand,
blew a rich horn of Iuorie that he had at his neck, the which being known by
his people, they began to withdraw themselves and to retire toward the City,
the like did the Pagans retire toward their tre^ches, saving only Bradaman
and Bramarant his son, who was so fleshed in killing and slaying and shedding
of blood, that he followed the Greeks almost unto the City before they would
retire, neither at that time would they have returned, but that the valiant
Rosicleer with all those worthy knights returned upon them, so that betwixt
them there began a terrible and cruel battle, for that Bramarant stroke such
cruel blows at the stout Oristedes and the Tartarian Zoylo, that with two
alonelie strokes he amazed and left them without remembrance, and made the
blood to gush out at their mouths and noses, at which season came Brandizel and
stroke him such an overthwart blow upon his healme, that he deprived him of
his sight, and made him somewhat astonished, but Brandizel departed not boasting
of this blow, for that Bramarant turning himself about with his sword in both
his hands so saluted him, that he had fallen to the ground if that he had not
embraced himself with his horse neck.

In like manner Bradaman entreated the strong Florion and Clauerindo, for that
at two blows he left them without remembrance, at which instant came Rosicleer
with the good Emperor Trebatio, and with them the king Sacridoro, and in such
sort they began to deal their blows upon those furious Pagans and knights
that were in their company, that it seemed to be no other thing but a Smiths
forge, for that the great noise of their blows were heard throughout the whole
army, and although it was night, yet there repaired an infinite number of
Pagans to aid and help them, but yet for all that they would not abide, seeing
how strongly they were assaulted and laid on, upon a sudden they set spurs
unto their mighty horse and Elephant, and ran through the rout of knights
like a whirle wind, and went toward their own camp as devils that came new
out of hell, meeting by the way more than one hundredth thousand Pagans that
came to help them, and being night, they all returned unto their trenches
together, but Bramarant was so far out of charity and angry because that
one alone knight had almost all that day maintained the field against him,
that he would not come in the presence of the Emperor Alycandro, till such
time as he in person came unto his tent, and taking both father and son by
the hands, he carried them both unto his tent, whereas he did them so much
honor as unto his own person, and praised very much the marvelous deeds the
which he did that day, because he would give them contentment, for that in the
great force and strength of these two, the Emperor had better confidence than
in all the kings and Captains together in all his whole army. The same night
he did inuit to supper in his Imperial Tent, all the most principal amongst
them, whereas they were together with great joy, pleasure, and pastimes,
although it grieved them very much the death of their kings which the Emperor
Trebatio ^^ew, and there was not one amongst them all that was so hardy as to
praise the high deeds of knighthoode the which were done by Rosicleer, the
Emperor Trebatio, and the other worthy knights their adversaries (of whom
they were greatly amazed) for that they would not give any occasion of anger
unto Bradaman and Bramarant that were present, who in the time that they were
at supper so frowned, and showed so ill favored a countenance and fierce
semblance, that it caused fear in all them that did behold them. At this time
the Greeks were entered into the City, and being all lodged, every one
according unto his calling, they all supped with the Emperor in his mighty
palace, whereas they had enough for to declare of the mighty power of the two
Pagans, and of the wonders which they did in the battle, which was the
occasion that of new they felt the lack of the knight of the Sun, in saying,
that he and his brother Rosicleer were sufficient for to make resistance
against those furious beasts, who had made so great slaughter amongst the
Greeks. So that night passed, and the next day in the morning the dead bodies
that appeared in the field were of so great quantity, that they were
constrained, by reason of the evil savor that did proceed from them, to take
truce for a certain time for to bury the dead and burn the other. So there
was ordained a truce for x. days, in which time the Greeks did bury the
Christians, and the Pagans did burn them of their Nation, so that the whole
field was cleared of all the dead bodies. And leaving them at this present, the
History returns to declare of man^e other things that happened in the mean
time.

How the Prince Meridian had understanding of the coming of his father into
Grecia, and how he took the Princess Floralindia out of her fathers palace,
and departed from Macedonia, and came into the camp of his father, having first
in the way battle with the stout Brandimardo. Chap. 23.
OF long time this History has not told you any thing of the valiant and
worthy Prince Meridian, not for that he in all this time was unoccupied, and
that his deeds deserved not to have any rehear^all thereof, but only for to
conclude and make an end of this first part of the mighty History of the
knight of the Sun and of Rosicleer his brother, which is the occasion that
here his acts cannot be mentioned perticularlie, but remains, and it
declares unto you all those things which are requisite touching this present
history of the knight of the Sun.

You shall understand that the Prince Meridian was one of the most noted
Knights that was amongst all the Pagans, who for the love of the Princess
Floralindia turned Christian, and did after such valyant deeds of Knighthood,
that he alone deserved a History to be written, but now that which is
requisite at this present is, that in the time that he was in the kingdom of
Macedonia doing many notable things in the service of the Princess
Floralindia, who showed him great favor, at which time they did muster and
^oy^e together many knights and soiourners for the (...) and help of the
Emperor Trebatio, whereby he understood how the Emperor Alycandro was
coming into Grecia with all his power, and meruailing very much thereat, he
abode the time to hear of his ariuall, for to go and see him, for that he had
a great desire thereunto, and for that the king of Macedonia and the Prince
went unto Constantinople with such people as they had joined together, the
Prince Meridian and the princess had more opportunity for to talk together,
so that in the end by reason that they loved one another exceedingly, it was
agreed and concluded betwixt them, that the Prince should privily in the night
take her away out of her Fathers palace, and carry her unto the camp of the
Emperor his Father, so that first he should give and grant unto her his
faith to marry her and take her for his wife. This being concluded in a night
when that it was very dark, with a Ladder he took her out at a window
which opened into a garden out of her Chamber, and having Palfraies all in a
readiness, he took her and a damsel that knew all her secrets, and carried
them away, and travailed so much the same night, that when the day came, they
had put themselves very far into the wilderness of Grecia, whereas they
were sure not to be found, by reason that it was so great, and so thick of
trees in many places. At their departure she left a Letter in her Chamber,
dedicated unto the Queen her mother, wherein she gave her to understand the
effect of their doings, requesting her to think well thereof, because she had
chosen and taken for her husband the most high and mightiest Prince in all the
world. At the which sight the Queen received great grief, yet in the end she
did comfort her self, for that her daughter did not loose any honor in the
doing of the same.

Now to return unto the Prince Meridian and unto the Princess, the History
says, that after they had travailed two days in that wilderness, and were
very nigh unto the city of Constantinople (finding themselves in a gallant
and fresh shadow under a company of thick trees, full of fragrant and sweet
flowers) they saw come toward them running with their horses as fast as
possible they could two knights, and following after them one alone knight of a
very big stature and mounted on a great horse, with his sword drawn in his
hand, and ouertaking one of them, he stroke him such a blow upon his helm,
that he cloue his head in two pieces, and overthrew him unto the ground dead,
and the other knight with the great fear he had, went unto the Prince
Meridian, and seeing him of so gallant disposition and well armed, he said.

Ah Sir Knight, save and defend me from this traitor, who has slain the rest
of my companions, and would also slaie me. Then the Prince who was endued with
all virtue, drew out his sword, and put himself before that mighty knight
that followed the other, and said. Sir Knight, stand and keep your self
aloof, and let us understand the occasion wherefore you will in this sort
kill this knight? Then the great knight said: Tarry and I will quickly make
thee account of this which thou do demand. And therewithal he stroke him
with his sword in both his hands such a blow upon his helm, that he daseled
his sight, and made him to boow forwards upon his saddle bow. Yet he boasted
not much of the striking of the same, for that the Prince stroke him such
another blow, that he declined his head to his breast, giving him to
understand his great valor, which was the occasion that betwixt them began a
rigorous battle, and they laid the one upon the other so strongly, that
all the woods did sound with the noise of their blows, and the sparkles of
fire flew from their healmes, as out of a Smiths forge. In this sort this
battle endured betwixt these two valiant knights one whole hour, and there
was no vauntage known of either part. But the Prince Meridian was greatly
amazed at the mighty force and strength of his adversary, and it seemed unto
him that they were equal unto the blows which he received of the knight of the
Sun, at such time as he had battle ^ith him* The like thought his
adversary, for you shall understand that this stout and valiant knight was
Brandimardo, who had travailed many days in those woods and wilderness, in
the demand of the knight of the Sun, for to conclude with him this battle,
and by fortune he met that day with the four knights that fled away from
him, and were thieves that ranged in that wilderness, two of them he had
slain, and the other two he chased at such time as he met with Meridian, and
as these two valiant and worthy knights had continued a long time in this
their furious battle, without resting themselves, in the end they began to
wax weary of their great travail, and withdrawing themselves a part the one
from the other, Brandimardo being greatly amazed at the strength of his
adversary, said: Knight, let us take breath and ease our selves, for that
there remains time enough to make an end and conclude this our battle. Let
it be as your pleasure is, said the Prince, but yet I would gladly know
before we do return unto the same again, what is the occasion that moves
thee to make this contention with me, and to take so much travail and pains
for to overcome me. There is no other thing that does move me (said
Brandimardo) but only because thou do deliver out of my hands that false
knight which is run away from me, who is a thief and a robber, and kept
company with other six whom I have slain, and ranged this wilderness,
forcing of damsels, and did great harm and robberies. Then am I greatly
deceived (said Meridian) for I thought verily that you followed him to kill
him without cause, as he told me, but if it be true as you do tell me, I am
very sorry for that which I have done, for I had rather he should receive the
merit of his desert, than to contend with you. These words which Meridian said
did not grieve Brandimardo any thing at all, for that he had (...) will to
return again to battle with him, but said: Sir Knight, the discharge which
do give of thy self is reasonable, and therefore there is no just cause
wherefore we should prosecute any farther our battle, I will be thy friend,
if so be thou will be mine, and I do most heartelie desire thee to tell me who
thou art, for that I cannot persuade with my self that in this Country there
should be found so valiant a knight as thou art, but only he who is called
the knight of the Sun, whom I do go in his demand and seeking in this
wilderness. Herein (said Meridian) I am very well content, and am glad that
so valiant a Knight as thou art wilt become my friend, and here I do protest
to be yours, and therefore you shall understand that I am called Meridian, and
am son unto the Emperor Alycandro, Lord of the gran Tartaria. Let all graces
and thanks ascend unto the high Gods (said Brandimardo) that a knight of so
high blood and divine generation has given himself this day to be my
friend, and therefore (worthy Prince) you shall understand that I am called
Brandimardo, son unto Affricano king of Media, who was slain in the wars
at Babilonia, (of the which wars I am sure you have heard off before this
time) he was a knight very much mentioned in all the Pagan Country.

Then Meridian who had heard great report and mention of his Father, was very
glad of his meeting, and embracing the one the other, they remained great
friends, and a conclusion was made betwixt them for to depart together unto
the Emperor Alycandro his camp, at whose coming there was great joy and
pleasure. This they put straight ways in execution, and departing from that
place they left the wilderness of Grecia, and in a few days after they came
unto the great and mighty army of the Emperor Alycandro, who were not a
little amazed to see so great a multitude of people, and of diverse Nations as
were there joined together. When they came unto the Imperial Tent, they were
known by the Emperor, who received them with so great joy and pleasure at
that present, that there was nothing that could give him more contentment, for
that many days he was very sad and sorrowful, because he could hear no
news of his son the Prince Meridian, and thought himself at that present in
so great security and quietness, as though he were in his own Country of
the gran Cataya. Likewise all such Pagan Kings and mighty Lords as were there
present, did honor Meridian as their natural Prince, giving great
entertainment unto Brandimardo, and received the Princess Floralindia as
spouse unto so high and mighty a Prince. The Emperor was very glad and
joyful at his sons adventure, whereas the History does now leave them to
tell of other things which happened in the mean time.

How the king Oliuerio with his mighty host arrived in Grecia, and how by the
industry and policy of the good knight Rosicleer, those of great Britain
had a cruel and bloody battle with the Pagans, and what happened over and
above in the same conflict. Chapter. 24.
IN the mean time of the success, as the History has told you, the king
Oliuerio ceased not to make all the speed possible toward Grecia with his
great and mighty army, for after that they had once passed the Sea, they
crossed over land through Almania and Germania, till they came unto Hungaria,
whereas the king did give and aid them with forty thousand knights, the which
he had in a readiness, more for to accomplish that the which he was bound
for to do for the King Oliuerio, for that his son was slain in his service,
than for any good will he had toward those wars, for with a better good
will he would have helped the Emperor Trebatio for to make his defense
against his enemies, than to do that which he did, but for ^onds sake.

When these two armies were joined together, with all speed possible they
travailed til they came into the Empire of Grecia, and at their ariuall three
miles from the City of Constantinople, the Emperor Trebatio had advertisement
of the same. Who seeing that almost all the whole world was risen up against
him, he prayed unto God to be his aid and succor, and that he would not
permit that in such sort the Christian Country should be destroyed. Then the
good knight Rosicleer seeing his Father in so great distress, and he himself
very desirous to know what people they were that were come from great
Britain, he went forth of the City all armed with new armor, which was
brought and given him by the wise Lirgandeo, mounted on a very good horse,
with his spear in his hand, alonelie with one Squire which did bear him
company, and went toward the host of the king Oliuerio, and when he came
within a mile whereas they lay, he went upon a little mountain which was
nigh unto the high way, from the which by reason that they marched forwards
upon plain ground, he might from thence discover and see all the whole army
of the king Oliuerio, and part of the host of the Pagans, and seeing so
gallant a company of armed knights, and so many Ensigns with red crosses, to
make war against Christians, the one against the other, he received great
sorrow and grief at his heart, seeming that all Christendom was then at the
point to be lost, and prayed unto God from the bottom of his heart that he
would not look upon the sins of the Christians, but in that great extremity
to defend them with his own hands. Thus he being in this Oration, he saw come
a far off toward that place a knight, with his galloping like unto a post,
and seemed that he came from the army of the Pagans. Then he falling into
reckoning what it might be (as he that was of a rare and quick understanding)
straight ways he descended from the mountain whereas he was, and passed to
the other side, in such sort, that y^ knight might not see him, and ran with
his horse all that ever he could toward the host of the king Oliuerio, so that
he was a good way off from the mountain, and seeing himself a good distance
from the knight, he turned his horse about, and little and little he travailed,
dissembling as though he had come from that mighty army. Then the knight
when he had discovered him, who was a valiant Pagan and king of the Masageras,
called Antipatro, and by the commandment of the Emperor Alycandro went for to
discover and know what people they were, for that it was told him that a
mighty army was entered into Grecia, with Ensigns and flags with the arms
of Christians, and he believing that they came in the favor and help of the
Emperor Trebatio, he sent the king to know who they were, and what company of
people, only for that he had heart and good will for to give them battle,
first before they could recou^r the entry into Constantinople, for that he was
very angry and wrathful for the other succor which came unto him before,
and being within the City, it was at the will of his adversaries at all times
to give them battle, and to the contrary, to take their ease at their
pleasures, without any sudden alarm for to disturb them. The which was
contrary unto the Pagans, for that it did behoue the^ at all times to be in a
readiness, because they did not know the time nor hour when that their
adversaries would assault them, for the which occasion the Emperor Alicandro
was very angry, and determined to give them battle in the field, before
they should have any time or leisure for to recover the entry of the City,
thinking they had come in the aid and succor of the Emperor Trebatio. The
king Antipatro coming in the demand, as you have heard, when that he came
unto the mountain, went unto the top thereof for to discover the whole army
that was coming, and was greatly amazed to see such a multitude of gallant
knights, but when that he saw Rosicleer come that way, who seemed that he
came from the host, with all the speed he could he descended from the
mountain, and at the foot thereof he did abide till such time as Rosicleer
should pass by, who did salute him very courteously, and the king said. Tell
me sir Knight, are you of that great army that is here before? I am thereof
(said Rosicleer) but wherefore do you ask me that question? I do ask,
(said the king) because I would know what people and Nation they are, and
what is the occasion of their coming hither. All those that you see there
coming (said Rosicleer) be Christians, and their coming is for to defend
Christendom, for that there are so many Pagans arrived in Grecia. Then the king
Antipatro hearing these words, not knowing who it was with whom he talked and
demanded that question, said: Knight, thou shall understand that the Emperor
Alycandro my Lord has sent me to know perticularlie what people those be,
and for that I will not stay for to know it at thy hands in that order, I
think it best that I carry thee prisoner with me, and then thou may
declare it better unto him, and answer him unto all that shall be demanded
of thee, whereby he shall be fully certefied of his request, therefore come
and go with me out of hand, if thou do not determine first to prove the
great force of my encounter, and the swift course of my horse.

It is folly (said Rosicleer) of him that is at liberty, to become bondsman
unto another, before he first prove a careere, having Spears in our hands,
therefore let us begin, and he that is first pushed unto the ground, let him
remain prisoner unto him that keeps himself in his Saddle.

I am thereof very well content (said the Pagan with a gallant courage) but
yet I would not that by the encounter which I shall give unto thee, that thou
should be hurt or receive any harm, whereby I could not carry thee with
me prisoner. I commit my self unto fortune (said Rosicleer) but if it should
so happen it would be the worse for me. Wherewith both of them turned about
their horses, who were very fierce and swift, and when they had taken the
vauntage of the ground as they thought best, with great fury, and like unto a
whirle wind they came the one against the other, the Pagan king with great
bravery flourished with his Spear, thinking verily to see his adversary on
the ground, but yet his great pride fell out contrary unto his expectation,
for that in the midst of his course, they made their encounter in such sort,
that he sheeuered his spear all to pieces upon the hard harneis of Rosicleer,
without doing unto him any harm at all, nor moved him in the Saddle, more
than if he had encountered against an hard Rock, but Rosicleer made his
encounter in such sort, that he pushed him out of his saddle, making him sly
into the air, and fell on his back to the ground a great way from his
horse, and as Rosicleer would have returned again upon him, he found that
he was very evil entreated with that encounter and fall, so that he could
not arise from the ground without great pain and grief, and was so ashamed
of that which had happened, that he had no tongue for to speak one word.

Then Rosicleer said: Sir knight, arise up and take thy horse, and go thy
ways unto the Emperor Alycandro thy Lord, and declare unto him all that
which has happened unto thee, and also tell him how that there is in this
army so great and infinite a number of knights, that with their help the
Emperor Trebatio will very shortly drive all the Pagans out of his Country.

The king Antipatro was very glad to see himself at liberty, for that he
thought verily he would have carried him away prisoner. So without determining
of himself any longer, he took his leave of Rosicleer, and mounting upon
his horse, with all the speed possible he could, he returned unto his
company, and coming before the Emperor Alycandro (who was in his tent with a
great number of kings and Princes) before them all he declared what had
happened unto him with the christian knight, and although it was a grief unto
them for the aid and succor which they thought was come unto the Emperor
Trebatio, yet could they not let but to laugh at that which had happened unto
the king Antipatro.

Then straight ways the Emperor with the consent and agreement of all the
principalls that were there present, commanded y^ they should put in order their
battle against the^, which they thought were come in favor of their enemies,
for that in fifteen days before they of the City never came forth, and they
without were in despair, because it was at the will of them that were within
to come forth when they thought best, but in especial those two furious Pagans
Bradaman and Bramarant, who were very hungry, and desirous for to shed
humane blood. Likewise those valiant knights, Meridian, Brandimardo, Rodaran,
and the king of Media, and other that were very stout th^r present, thought
the time long till such time as they might give a show of their great bounty
and strength, there was in that camp to the number of fifty principal
knights, such as might well be said to be the flower of all the Pagans, and
besides them there were so infinite a number of very furious and stout Pagans,
that there remained but a few more in all the Islands of the Ocian sea, and
amongst them there was twelve kings, subjects and vassals unto the gran Campeon,
and other twelve mighty Lords of other Islands that were subject unto the
Emperor, with whom the Emperor Alycand^o thought that there was no humane
force in all the whole world that might be compared unto them. Thus being put
in a readiness and good order those which should go forth unto the battle,
the gran Campeon and his son Bramarant took the foreward, and had in their
company the twelve giant kings, with all those that they brought out of their
Countries, besides those, they carried forty thousand knights of the
Tartarians, and next unto them followed Rodaran king of Arabia, and the stout
king of Media, the king of the Parts, and the king of the Affricanos,
Candaros, and Baricanos, all the other which were very valiant and stout, they
also carried with them other fifty thousand Pagans of other Nations. The third
battle was lead (...) governed by that most valiant Prince Meridian, who
carried in his company that stout Brandimardo, and the Prince of Candaria with
twelve Giants very big, furious, and terrible to behold, which went only
with him for the safeguard of his person, he carried also forty thousand
knights of the Scitas.

This being done, the Emperor would not ordain any more battles, for that
those which were ordained, served sufficient for to maintain the battle all
that day: and being in a readiness, they remained, waiting till such time as
they did appear in sight with their Ensigns, for to set upon them, thinking
them to be their enemies.

Now let us declare what Rosicleer did in the mean time, who was very
desirous to go forwards with his pretense, after that he had made the
contencion with the king Antipatro, he straight ways ascended up again that
mountain whereas he was before, he had not been long there, when that he
descouered to come from that great army of the king Oliuerio four knights in
manner of posts, who came before the rest for to discover the enemy: but when
he saw them somewhat far of from the army, and nigh unto the place where as
he was, he descended from the mountain, and put himself in the high way, and
travailed forwards til such time as he met with them, who seeing him they went
toward him, and demanded of him if he were of that countri^, I am said he,
but wherefore do you ask me this question, we do ask thee this (said one of
them) for to know how many miles it is from hence unto Constantinople, and to
know in what estate remains the Emperor Trebatio, where he has advise of our
coming or not, therefore knight advertise us the truth thereof, if thou will
not be our prisoner. To whom Rosicleer answered and said, as follows.

Of truth I am very well content to certify you of this that you do demand
of me, for that it is not a thing degressing from knighthood, but that I may
very well do it without any compulsion: You shall understand that from this
place unto Constantinople, you have two miles, and touching the estate of the
Emperor, know of truth, that he is all in a readiness and tarrying your
coming in the field, with no less mighty and puissant an army, then this
which your Lord the King Oliuerio, does bring with him, and be you assured of
this, that when you shall come nigh within a mile of the city of
Constantinople, he will meet with you in the way with all his people, and give
you a very terrible and rigorous battle. The four knights were very much
amazed at this which Rosicleer had told them, for that they thought verily that
the Emperor had not been in so great readiness, and without any more words
they left him, and returned from whence they came, for to give advice unto the
king, how that his enemies were in a readiness and would meet him in the way
and give him battle. So when they came before him, and gave him to understand
of all that had passed, he straight ways commanded to put all his own army
in a readiness, for as they were gallant and well armed knights, it was a iolie
thing to behold: he made then repetition of his army, and divided them in
four parts, the forefront he gave unto the government of the two knights of
Spain, being br^thren, and were of the principal house of the Godos, they
were both very valiant, the one of them was called Don Claros, and the other
Arcalus, and there coming unto these wars only for to prove themselves, and
give to understand unto the world, their great valor.

These two carried with them forty thousand knights, twenty thousand of them
were of Spain, and the other twenty thousand of Don Siluerio, and in their
company went to the number of twenty knights of the Godos, who did not a
little in this battle. The second battle was given unto the government of
Don Siluerio, with other forty thousand knights, and with him went the Princes
of England, Ireland, and Scotland: the third battle had a principal knight
of Hungaria, with all y^ knights of that kingdom. And the fourth and rereward,
the king had, with all the high Princes of his kingdom, and the rest of all
the people that remained. When that they were all divided and separated in
four battles, and in good order and readiness, they began to march forwards
by little and little, till such time as the scoutes as well of the one part,
as of the other, had discovered the armies, which came to the battle, and
having advice of the same, they marched on the faster, till such time as the
forewards of either part, was within a cross bow shot, the one from the other,
which might be about two of the clock in the after none. All this time was
Rosicleer beholding what passed, upon a littell hill, where at he received
great contentment, thinking the time long to see them together by the ears in
battle, his desire was not long delated, for as those two ^urious Pagans,
Bradaman and Bramarant came before all the rest, thinking the time long to see
themselves amongst their enemies, they pressed forwards toward them with so
great fury, that it s^med the earth to shake. And although their furious
countenaunces was sufficient to put in fear any good knight that did behold
them, yet those two valiant brothers, Don Claros and Arcalus, putting
themselves before all their company, went forth to meet them, and in the face
of both armies, they made their encounters very strongly, Bradaman, who did
encounter with Don Claros, lost his stirrups and declined somewhat upon his
Elephant, and Don Claros embrased himself with his horse neck, and spurring
forwards his horse, he settled himself again, and passed forwards without
falling. Bramarant was encountered by Arcalus upon the vizar of his helm, that
the sperkes of fire flew out in great abundance, and being half amazed with
that blow, it made him to lose his encoun^er which he made with ^is adversary.

So in this sort they passed all four of them, without any falling, and the
two brethren were highl^ co^^ended by Rosicleer, that did with great content
meant beholie them, and also of the Pagans that were there present, for that
they had made so strong and valiant resistance against the fury of those two
Pagans, the which f^ll out evil, for a great number, the little profit that
they had by this encounter: for being full of great courage, and encenced with
anger, in a short space they furnished the wide and broad fields full of dead
bodies of their enemies, not sparing any degree, that they dyed all the grass
with blood of the great destruction they made on their adversaries, and in such
sort they besturred themselves amongst them, that all that did see them judged
them to be diuelles of hell, for that they cut knights asunder in the wast,
slashing and cutting all that ever they could reach, and some they cloue from
the head down unto the girdell, with the which their adversaries received so
great fear, that they fled before them as sheep before wolves, on the
contrary part the two brethren did such maruailes and wonders upon the
Paganes, that their deeds were to be noted that day: therewithal the first two
battles were joined together, which was as gallant a sight to be seen as
ever was, the bravery of the knights was such, for that in the forefront came
the twelve kings Giantes, with the two thousand that came with them from their
Islands, against whom there went to receive them, twelve knights of the Godos,
who seeing them so great and huge upon the Elephants, made their encounter in
such sort, that the one and the other were overthrown to the ground: likewise,
all ye rest made their encounters, so that in a moment, there were more then
ten thousand overthrown, and their horses roming about the field, fighting
one with an other, so that betwixt them there was a new battle begun: here
in this conflict, did the knights of Spain show their great valor, for that
there was none that did make their resistance with so great force against those
Giants, killing some of them, and rec^uing their own deaths with great
courage. In this battle Don Claros slew one of the twelve knights of
Bradaman, with a spear that he thrust through and through his body, with a
forcible and strong encounter.

And Arcalus slew an other with the strength of his arm, in tormenting him
with his terrible blows upon the head, which was the occasion that they were
in great peril of death, if that the valiant knights of Spain had not come
in time to have succored them, for that a great number of those monsters had
compassed them about, who were mighty and very strong, so that those two
valiant brethren should evil have escaped their hands, but being joined
together their battle was more equal then before and better fought: yet all
did profit very little the Christians for the getting of the field, for that
the bushment of those Oriental Giants, made so great slaughter amongst them,
that they were not able to make any resistance, but to receive cruel death. On
the other side was those infernal pagans, father and son Bradaman and
Bramarant killing and slaying with great cruelty, all that ever they could
reach with their swords, they made so great destruction, that it seemed there
were not people enough in ye camp for to hold them play that day, which was
the occasion that within half an hour after that the battle was begone, the
Christians began to lose ground, and to retire toward their army, and in some
place they were not content to retire little and little, but turned their
backs and ran away all that ever they could, in especial, there whereas was
Bradaman and Bramarant and the rest of the other Giants, who were sufficient
for to destroy a whole army. Then when that Don Siluario saw that the
Christians lost ground, he straight ways commanded y^ all those of his charge
should march forwards, who straight ways with great fierceness put themselves
into the battle, at whose enter, many of the Pagans lost their lives, and the
Christians began to get ground again: but straight ways that mighty knight
Rodaran, and the king of Media, and the other kings that were with him, put
themselves ^orwards with their people, and when they came unto the battle (by
reason that they were so many, and their captains so valiant) they did make
great slaughter upon their came in the enemies, and to conclude, the power of
their enemies was so great, that they made the Christians to run away almost
round about the field, in such sort, that the valiant knights of spain, could
not succor them, for that they were enclosed in battailing with the Giants,
and had enough to do to defend themselves from them. Then straight upon that,
came in the knig hts of Hungaria, at whose entry, the battale was renewed and
began to get ground, and had put them to the foil, if that the third army of
the Pagans had not stepped forwards, in the which came that worthy prince
Meridian, and the stout knight Brandimardo, who entered into ye battle with so
great fury, that that day was wonderful unto the Christians, and knew not how
and in what sort the Emperor Trebatio, should have so great a power of knights
and giants, except they should come out of Persia, for that they knew and
understood, that all that country were in great friendship with the knight of
the Sun, and many there were that repented themselves of their coming into
Grecia, in especial Don Siluerio, when he saw so great destruction amongst his
men, and the field so full of dead bodies, the tears fell from his eyes, with
the great sorrow and grief which he received at his heart, and accused himself
of the evil counsel which he gave unto the king Oliuero.

When that two hours was passed since the beginning of the battle, all the
people of his part began to retire, for that they could not suffer the great
fury of the Pagans, so that of very force and necessity, it did accomplish
the king Oliuerio, to enter into battle with all those knights that remained
on his charge, who were many in number, and very good. And although the
Pagans were Lords of the field, yet at their coming they lost all that ever
they had got before, and the battle renewed and better fought, and the field
so full of dead bodies, that the living could scarce pass for them.

Here was to be noted, the diuelishnesse of Bramarant, and his father, and the
high knighthood of Meridian, and of Brandimardo, and of that stout knight
Rodaran, and of the king of Media, that it might be said they were sepulchers
unto the Christians: which was not a little grief unto Rosicleer, (who from
that little hill did behold all that passed) for to see so much Christian blood
so spilt and shed, with those heathenish Pagans, although he thought all might
be well suffered, for to eschew a greater inconvenience that (unto the
contrary) might happen unto Christendom. To conclude, the day passed away,
and there remained no more but one hour of the Sun setting, when that the
battle was in equal sort, and the one got no ground of the other, but
followed their entresse, the one killing the other, without all pity, at
which time the fourth army of the Pagans entered, which were many in number,
and entered with so great fury into the battle, that those of the king
Oliuerio, not being able to suffer their force, began to loose ground: The
which being perceived by Rosicleer, that by no means they could not, but be
overcome and dispersed, (as one that was a good knight and very pitiful)
would use charity with them, for that the king Oliuerio, was Father unto the
princess Oliuia, as also for to save the lives of so many Christians, which
looked for no other but death that day, and having before sent advice of all
that had passed unto the Emperor Trebatio, by his page, he then descended from
that hill, and so fast as his horse could run, he went unto Constantinople,
whereas he sound the Emperor his father, with all his knights in a readiness
to go forth, if need should require. And at his coming thither, he declared
unto him in what point and estate the battle remained, and in the end he
said, that considering in how much he was bound unto the king Oliuerio, and
the great love that he bare unto those christians that came with him, did
constrain him that with all the power possible that he could make, for to go
and succor him, for to save the king Oliuerio from death, and a great number
of valiant and worthy knights that were at the point to be slain. Then the
Emperor who was no less endued with excelent virtues then his son,
answered him as follows.

That he should ordain and do all at his own will and pleasure, for that
therein he should receive great contentment.

At which words L^iamandro, Bargandel, and the King Alamades, were very glad
and joyful, for whatsoever damage or harm should happen unto king Oliuerio,
should be great sorrow and grief unto him, and they did all praise and greatly
allow the great courage of Rosicleer. Then straight ways and in great have,
issued out of the city, the Emperor Trebatio, and carried in his company all
that valiant crew of knights, with thirty thousand other knights, all Greeks,
galopping with their horses, keeping very good array and order, they came into
the field whereas the battle was, and when they saw that all the camp of
the king Oliuerio were dispersed and out of all order and array, running some one
way, and some an other way, and all those worthy princes of the whole host,
were compassed round about with their enemies, and put in great ieoperdie, and
at the point for to lose their lives, without any hope of aid and succor for
to deliver them. At which time the Emperor Trebatio, and all those valiant
knights that came with him, with great fury and force, put themselves in the
midst amongst the Pagans, that again the whole field was covered with dead
bodies, and it seemed that all the fury of the world came there together, for
on the one part went Rosicleer, the king Sacridoro, the Tartarian Zoylo,
Bargandel, Liriamandro, and other valiant and worthy knights, that all they
found before them, they slew and overthrew to the ground: and on the other side
went the good Emperor Trebatio, and with him the stout Florion, the Prince
Brandizel, Clauerindo, and the valiant and strong Oristedes, and the good
knight Flamides, making so great slaughter on their enemies, that they were all
dyed in blood. And the desire which the good knight Rosicleer, had to kill
Pagans, that they which were with him, were not able to keep him company, but
all alone he pressed forwards and put himself amongst his enemies, doing such
wonders, that there was not one that could resist him. And as he pressed thus
forwards, he came where as he saw a great number of Pagan knights gathered
together in manner of a ring, and had in the midst amongst them, five knights
all on foot, very valiantly defending themselves with their swords in their
hands, but their adversaries were so many that charged them, that before his
face, three of those knights fell down unto the ground, as though they had
been dead, and the other two were so weary, that their deaths were at hand.
And as he ^rew nigh unto them, he saw that one of the two knights that defended
themselves was the king Oliuerio, and the other Don Siluerio, whom he might
very well know by their armor, and tokens which they had, when he saw them
first enter into the battle, and those who had compassed them about was the
king of Bartos, and the king of the Arrianos, and had crowns of gold upon
their healmes, with more then fifty knights that were about those two knights,
and none nigh for to succor and take their parts. The which being seen by
Rosicleer, with great fury, he put himself amongst those company of Pagans,
killing and overthrowing all that was in his way, and with his sword in his
hand he came whereas the two kings were, and stroke one of them such a blow
upon his right shoulder, that the whole arm with part of his back he
overthrew to the ground, and stroke the other such an other blow upon the head,
that cleaving the Crown of gold and the Healme, he cut him down to the
throat, so that these two kings fell down dead to the ground, and their
horses which were very good, remained without masters. And for that the king
Oliuerio, and y^ Prince might have leisure to mount upon those horses,
Rosicleer began to charge them with so many and terrible blows, that the most
part of them that were there together, he slew with his own hands, and the
rest which remained, for fear of death, ran away, but the king and the
prince were so weary, that they had no power to mount upon those horses, for
the which Rosicleer alighted with a trice, and took the king in his arms with
so great ease, as if he had been a child, and set him upon his own horse,
saying, take and receive this service of Rosicleer, in token of a great deal
more that he does desire to serve you, the which being said, he returned unto
Don Siluerio, and in the same order as he did unto the king, he set him upon
(...) of the horses of the Pagan kings, and he with a trice mounted upon y^
other, striking mortal blows upon his enemies, he departed from that place,
leaving the king Oliuerio, and Don Siluerio, very greatly amazed at that which
he had done for them, and how he showed himself to be on their part. Also
they were very glad and joyful to see themselves delivered from the death
which they thought verelie there to have received.

At that time the king Oliuerio, remembered the words which the wise
Artemidoro, had said unto him, when that in London he carried unto him the
gentleman Rosicleer, for to be an armed knight at his hands, which was, that
the time should come, that he should more esteem to have him by his side, then
any thing in all y^ whole world, the which words were there accomplished, in
that he clearly delivered him from death. From that place the king and the
prince Don Siluerio, did behold the battle, and were very much amazed to see
how the Christians had the better hand of the battle, and that there were so
many and so good knights in their favor, aid, and succor.

At this time the battle was so joined and knit together, that if the night
had not been so nigh at hand, it seemed that their determination was all to be
slain at that instant, for that, although on the part of the Emperor
Trebatio, there were so valiant and worthy knights that were able for to
overcome a mighty army, yet on the other part was those two Pagans, Bradaman
Campion, and Bramarant, that did so great destruction on their adversaries,
that it seemed that there remained not one before them whereas they went: on the
other part went those furious and valiant knights Meridian, and Brandimardo,
with the twelve Giants in their guard and keeping, staying so many of their
enemies, that they were all stained in blood, and made great way whereas they
went. Likewise there was that stout knight Rodaran, and the king of Media, with
other valiant kings and knights Pagans, which did great harm upon their
adversaries: and although those did so worthily on their parts, so likewise did
those valiant knights on ye part of the good Emperor Trebatio, so much harm
on their enemies, that the Pagans bagan to lose ground by little and little.
And as the worthy Rosicleer, went discovering and ranging throughout the
battle, he by fortune met with the Gran Campion, who was all alone, slaying
and killing all that ever was before him, and c^mming unto him he stroke him so
cruel and strong a blow upon the wast, that he had parted him in two pieces,
if it had not been for his good armor, which was such, that his good sword
could not enter into it, yet for all that, the blow did so bruise and crush his
bones and flesh, in such sort, that Bradaman felt that blow not to be like unto
the blows given by other knights, which was the occasion that with great
fury he turned himself about, and repaide the same with an other like, upon
his shoulder, that he had overthrown him to the ground, if y^ he had not
embrased himself about his horse neck: then began these two to strike the one
upon ye other very strongly, and the battle betwixt them endured till the
closing up of the night, when that they could not know the one from the other:
then the Pagans began to withdraw themselves a part, and these two knights were
constrained to part themselves, but Bradaman, went away with so great anger and
that one alone knight should make him so strong resistance, that no one of all
his men durst come into his presence.

At this time came more then one hundredth thousands Pagans, which the Emperor
Alicandro, did send a fresh, after that it was told him that much people had
issued out of Constantinople, but their coming was to little purpose, for that
it was night, all the troops of the Pagans were retired, and meeting the one
with the other, they returned unto their trenches, there to take their ease
until the day following, for that they meant to encounter with their enemies
with a fresh supply.

Then the Emperor Trebatio, for to retire all his people, did sound his horn,
the which he always carried with him, like a good Captain, (at the time of
war) at which sound, all the Greeks assembled together, and leaving a part
the king Oliuerio and all his people in good order, he returned unto the City
with all that noble crew of knighthood, whereas they were received with great
joy and pleasure of the Empress Briana, and of the farie Oliuia, who did not
a little rejoice when that she understood what Rosicleer had done for the king
her father, and it seemed unto her that it was a good mean to obtain
friendship, which was at that time, the thing that the most desired, and to the
contrary, it was a great grief and corasiue unto her heart, that between the
king Oliuerio and her spouse Rosicleer, should pass any contention or evil
will. Thus leaving them the History does return unto the king Oliuerio, who
gathering his people together, sound that he lacked more then the half of
those he brought into Grecia: likewise, he commanded great fires to be made,
at the light whereof he pitched his tents, and made his trenches very nigh
unto the city of Constantinople, whereas it was given him to understand that
all the people with whom his army had the battle with, were Pagans, and
were come into Grecia against the Emperor Trebatio, and of the great power
that the Emperor Alicandro had there, and how for that he thought that they
were come thither in favor of the Greeks, he sent out his knights for to give
them battle. But when that king Oliuerio and Don Siluerio understood the
truth thereof, with very anger and fretting, they were overcome, and
requested the death, for that on the one part they saw the most part of their
knights destroyed, and the power of the Pagans deminished, the which if that it
had not so fallen out, the reuengement of the Emperor Trebatio, had been very
certain. But that which grieved them most, was that which Rosicleer did for
them, and how much they were bound unto him, for delivering of them from death,
and it seemed unto them to be such a byt to withdraw them from their wills and
desires to make their reuengement, determined before they came forth out of
their own countries, who with great confusion and very pensive, in thinking
what was best to be done, they passed away that night in their trenches, and
commanded good watch to be kept, till the next day, wherein passed many
things, as shall be told you in the Chapter following.

What Rosicleer did the next day after the battle, and how by his means the
king Oliuerio was reconciled to the Emperor Trebatio, and the prince of
Lusitania and he were made friends. Chap. 25.
THE Greeks were very glad and joyful for that which had passed with the
host of the king Oliuerio, and the Pagans, and all people did allow the great
polesie of Rosicleer, which he used in causing the^ to join the one against
the other in battle, which was not a little profit unto them, for by that
means his enemies were lessened more then one hundredth thousand. The next day
following after the battle, when that both the hosts, that of the Emperor
Alicandro, and that of the king Oliuerio, were both in sight of the City of
Constantinople, being none tide past, Rosicleer had a great desire to go
forwards with that which he had determined, which was to procure friendship
with the king Oliuerio, only for the great good will which he bare unto his
well-beloved princess Oliuia, and also for that in the which he was bound unto
him, for the great friendship received at such time as he was in great
Britain. And with this determination, he did apparel himself with the
ritchest garments and robes that was possible, and likewise the princess
Oliuia, and the Queen Arquirosa, in the most gallantest manner that they could.
Then after that he had conference with the Emperor his father, giueing him to
understand what was his determination to do, he straight ways caused the
princesses to be mounted upon very gallant and well dressed palfries, and
mounted himself upon a mighty and great horse^ and put himself in the
midst between them. And being in this manner, in the great and wide court,
whereas the Emperor and the Empress with all those valiant kings, Princes,
and knights, did behold them, and a new they began to marvel to behold their
great beauties and gallant dispositions. And as it has been declared unto you
before in this History, that Rosicleer was of a high stature, and well
proporcioned of his body according unto his height, for that continually unto
that time, he did increase daily more and more, as well in the one as in the
other, and jointly with this his face was perfect and well proporcioned, very
white and fair, and of a merry couutenaunce, and there was none that did
behold him, but had a great delight to see him: he was at that time apparailed
in a Iacket of cloth of gold, garnished round about with a great number of
precious stones, and a hat upon his head after the Greek fashion, full of
very fine Rubies and Diamonds, and carried no other weapon with him but that
precious sword of the Queen Iulia, at his girdle, which was suitable unto the
apparel he ware, for that the scabbert was garnished with gold and precious
stones, he was mounted upon a big and lusty horse, all baye, saving he was
full of black spots, which became him very well, and being in this manner on
horse (...) to be a Giant, and in beauty and fairness, Narcissus. On the
other part was the Princess Oliui^, with Arquirosa, so fair and richly
apparailed, that it was very strange to behold, and Rosicleer, being in the
midst betwixt them, there could not a more gallanter sight be see^e of three
persons. So in this order they took their leave of the Emperor and of the
Empress, and departed out of that mighty pallas, being accompanied with all
those mighty and valiqnt Princes and Knights, till such time as they came into
the field out of the City, whereas at the request of Rosicler, they all
returned back again, and they three alone wont toward the compe of the king
Oliuerio, being very much looked at of at the people of the city, and with no
less admiration they were looked at by them of the camp when they came nigh
unto them, and not knowing the pretense of their coming they could do nothing
but behold them, and abide the time to understand the effect of their coming.

When they were come unto the camp, they asked which was the tent of the king
Oliuerio, and being showed by a knight that was there, they never rested nor
stayed till they came unto it, at which time the king shas within, accompanied
with the prince of Lusitania, and with the other princes of Scotland and
Ireland, consulting wha^ were best to be done in their affairs: but when they
saw them and knew Rosicleer, and the Princess Oliuia, all apparailed after so
gallant a sort, they were wonderfully amazed, and were silent to hear what
should be their demand. There was no moving amongst them till such time as
Rosicleer, descended from his horse, who straight ways alighted y^ princess
Oliuia, and the queen Arquirosa, and taking them both by the hands they entered
into the tent, then the king and all that were with him did arise from their
seats, and did salute the one the other, with such courtesy as appertained
unto so high persons: and although that Don Siluerio, was greatly amazed and
his blood did rise when that he saw the princess Oliuia, yet when that he saw
her in the power of Rosicleer, and considering the great reason she had
thereunto, he did not let to have a great regard unto the Queen Arquirosa, and
liked very well of her, and said with in himself, that next unto the princess
Oliuia, she was the fairest gentlewoman that ever he saw in all his life, and
greatly desired to know what she should be. His desire was quickly
accomplished, for that Rosicleer putting himself before the king, having the
princes and the Queen by their hands, said.

HIgh king of great Britain, I will not call you mighty, (for that according
unto the opinion of wise men) there is none amongst mortal men can attain to
so glorious a name, saving alonely he may call himself mighty, that is Lord
and governor over men, and has the power of all fortunes, he at whose will
the Heavens does move, the winds does blow, the waters of the sea does arise
and rage, and by him the earth with all beasts and plants are sustained: Here I
do give you the name of high, for that seeing your self in what estate you
are in, you may know how perilous and slipper it is, and how ready you are and
open unto the thundering blows of fortune. Many things does men begin and put
in ure, who cannot bring it to pass as they would, and according unto their
minds, but in the end it finisheth clean contrary unto their expectation,
and this proceeds only for that it is in their hands to begin them, and in
the power of God to give the conclusion unto his pleasure. Our hearts he
valiant and courageous, for to attempt against all the whole world, and do not
consider and see that human force is so feeble and weak, that one little and
hidden evil, does overcome it, and whatsoever blow of fortune does overthrow
it. This we ought to have always in our remembrance, because we should not
put our selves in difficult things, for that if afterward it does not fall out
according unto our minds, then should we not have any occasion for to be
angry, neither reason for to complain us of fortune, for that the whole fault
is in our selves, and with more reason we may be angery with our selves. You
do well understand how that the Prince Edward your son with forty thousand
good knights of great Britain, came into Hungaria, with what intent. I do not
judge, but according as it was notorious and manifest unto all, he came for to
destroy the Emperor my father, and for to make the king of Hungaria Lord over
all Grecia, and for that this was an attempt as unjust as difficult, it was in
his hands to begin the same, but in the hands of him that has power over all,
to conclude the end according unto his will. If the Emperor my father was to
be blamed herein, judge you, and then see if there be any reason for him to
make restitutio^, to whom fortune would seem favorable: but now let that go,
for that I do believe you are certified. And touching the marriage which I
made with the princess Oliui^ without your lisence, I will give you to
understand, that if you do well consider and look into all these things
passed, then should you very manifestly and cleerelie see, that it is not for
any injury toward you, but that the divine providence has ordained the same
for to euitate and cut off the great grief and innumerable evils that were
looked for between my father and you, for seeing that the harm was committed,
there was no other means for to recover and make friendship again, but only
by this marriage betwixt us, by the which my father does claim of you kindred,
and you may receive me as your own natural son, and seeing that this has been ordained by the divine providence, who is he that should grant me this
inclination, to have so great a desire as I had for to go into great Britain,
being in such delights, joy, and pleasure, under the wings of the Empress my
mother? Consider with how much honor, (you not knowing me) I received the
order of knighthood at your hands, and how favorable Fortune did always show
her self unto me in your Court? What force could be so great, that did
constrain my will, and the will of this precious Princess, so perfectly to
love the one other, in such sort that there is nothing in all the world that
may be compared thereunto? In what heart may be comprehended so great
singularity (no, that although there were here present those three worthy
and famous Captains, Iosue, David, and Judas Machabeus, and with them th^se
three Pagans, Hector, Julius Caesar, and Alexander) if it does not come of the
divine providence, neither without it could there be any such force
comprehended in me, and in my companion, for to give the enterprise of such an
attempt with so great boldness, for to take away ou^ of your power the
Princess Oliuia, and what we passed at the sea to deliver and defend her?
Here is the Prince of Lusitania who found himself present at the sport, and
can say that the resistance was not made by any humane force and strength,
for that being but five knights, we alone did defend our selves so long time
against so great a fleet of ships and men. Likewise he can declare of the
great misery in the aid and succor that came unto us in that great
extremity. I will not here enlarge nor proceed any farther in these
matters, neither would I have said so much, but only because you shall
understand that all does proceed from above, and that it is Gods will, that
this marriage betwixt me and the Princess shall be the occasion for to euitate
and take away all these inconveniences which are looked for, and likewise to
remedy and make atonement for all that is past, and do you not think that
this will be an evil mean for things past, besides, as now the doing thereof
cannot be restrained, and many times, as heretofore has fallen out, their
sons in law to be as profitable to their Fathers in law, as are their own
natural sons. As to ask the question of Caesar Augustus, and he will say
that there was never son to true and trusty unto his Father, as was unto him
Marcus Agrippa his son in law. Likewise consider of Antonius Pius who had for
his son in law Marcus Aurelius, who used so great fidelity with him all the
days of his life, which was for the space of twenty and three years, that
for his great fidelity and continual diligence, he did not alonelie deserve
to be beloved of him, and to have his Daughter, but as his own natural son
he did succeed him in the Empire. So that by these and many other examples
that might be declared, you may plainly see what a sweet spice of
friendship and perfect kindred is that which comes by the Sun in law,
and in especial this, that from the beginning unto the end, it appears to
be goue^ned by the divine providence, so that thereby there is no other thing
to be looked for, but unto you great good, and ^^rie profitable for all your
kingdom^. And that which (...) I will desire of you is no other thing, but your
pleasure (...) ^^^sider how that al these things are ordained by him, who ^ath
the rule and government of al, and being fully persuaded therein, for to join
and confirm your will unto his will, and to procure and do no other thing but
that which is agreeable unto his pleasure, which is to confirm a peace betwixt
you and my Father, for that you be both Christians, and it is the thing that
our savior Jesus Christ did leave most in charge unto his Disciples. And if
there seems unto you any fault to be in the Emperor my Father, or that I
and the Princess Oliuia have offended your Majesty in any thing, apart and
put awa^e from your heart all anger and wrath, for that you do understand,
that the most noblest manner of reuengement is to forgive, and how that there
is nothing so inconvenient and hurtful unto man as is wrath and anger, for
that it does properly appertain unto furious beasts, and not unto men, but
unto such as be most cruel and furious, and to the contrary there is nothing
more convenient unto man than is meekness and mercy, and much better and more
honor it is to forget injuries, than to revenge them, and there is not a more
nobler and generous forgetting, than is in the offense, which was attributed
unto the prince of Captains for that he did praise himself, that he did
never forget any thing but offenses done. The pleasure in taking reuengement
does pass away in a moment, and the joy and pleasure in showing mercy
endures for ever. There is nothing so necessary amongst men, nor ought to
be more common than to forgive, for that there is none but has need of
mercy, seeing that the Sun must shine upon him, the earth sustain him, and
all creatures must bring forth. The wind must have his course, the clouds
must pour out their waters, the S^ars must have their influence, the heavens
must move, and the waves of the sea must be in quiet, and not to ouerwhelme
the earth when they are in a rage and higher than it, and to conclude, all
things of the government of this world does use Mercy, and be necessari^ for
the conservation of humane life, and mercy cannot be lacking in him, or at
least ways may not, that cannot sustain himself one jot without it, and
that which is more, there is not one but that he sins, so that he cannot,
but he needs must desire mercy for his sins and offenses. What is he that
can salve and make whole the wounded consciences of humane creatures, if the
wrath of God does persevere, then shall you never have end of contentions and
troubles, armor shall never cease on the land, neither lightnings and
thunders, with cruel shaking of the heavens, therefore it is necessary (most
worthy King) that you do forgive, and refrain the ire of your heart, for
otherwise with just reason you cannot ask of God pardon, when that you will
not use pardon with your daughter and son in law. Beware, take heed, and
help your self from that which is written, That man does keep wrath and ire
aagainst man, and both does seek unto God for Physic. You are wise and
discreet, therefore you shall understand, that all this which I have said unto
you, is only to put you in remembrance, that the passioned mind can neither
see nor discern things far nor nigh hand. And as concerning Don Siluerio, I
have committed nothing against him wherein I am bound to make satisfaction,
neither he to pardon me, for if you have promised unto him the Princess
Oliuia for wife, first before that she chose me for her husband, God and my
good fortune has given her unto me, so that he has not to complain
himself but of fortune, that would not be favorable unto him for to recover
her, so that I do not take from him her that should have been his wife, but I
have taken out of your and his power, the same whom God did promise and
ordain to give me for wife. Notwithstanding for all this, I ever had Don
Siluerio for my friend, and before that these things fell out in this order, I
believed that he had me in the same profession, I do greatly desire that this
friendship may proceed and go forwards, and if so be that any lack or
fault has been of any part, let satisfaction be made for the which I for my
part will make satisfaction unto Don Siluerio, in giving unto him for wife, the
most fair and precious Queen Arquirosa, Queen of Thessalia, and is this that
is here present with me, who with all the power that she could make came into
Grecia, to the aid and succor of the Emperor my Father, and it is in my
power, for I have promised her to give her a husband, such a one as her estate
and beauty does deserve, therefore Don Siluerio consider and see if you can
like of this (...), for that there be few damsels, or not one, at this time ^o
be found in the world with whom you may be better married withal than her.
Now have you understood the effect of our coming, and here I do desire you
both straight ways to give me your answer.

The king Oliuerio was very attentive unto all y^ was spoken by Rosicleer, and
one way he liked very well of their intent, and it seemed unto him that all
things were placed in very good order, and another way, the gallant presence
of Rosicleer with the fair Princess Oliuia seemed to force and constrain his
heart to like very well of the one and to love the other, as his own natural
children, and seeing them with so great humility before him, Rosicleer being
so high a Prince, having confidence y^ in his great bounty he came to ask him
pardon and forgiveness, not mistrusting his highness, the tears gushing out
at his eyes with the great love he bare unto either of them, and calling to
remembrance that by him he was delivered from death the day before, so that if
it had not been for him he had been sla^^e and all his people destroyed, and
seeing the great clemency that both Father and son used with him (he coming
to destroy them in his Country) he found it great reason to use the same with
them, and to forget the death of Prince Edward, for that God had given unto him
in his place that valiant Prince and knight. Thus having his mind occupied in
these and other things, he remained a good while without (...) wering them,
looking always when Don Siluerio would speak, because the greatest part of y^
matter did touch him, and till such time as he did knew his will, he thought it
not good to utter his judgment, which was the occasion that he did importune
him very much to make the first answer as he thought best, who after such
time as the Queen entered into the tent, was continually with great attention
beholding her whose beauty gave him greater contentment than any Ladies or
Gentlewoman in the world, next unto the Princess Oliuia. And when he
understood the demand of Rosicleer, in his life he never received greater joy
and contentment, in seeing that without any demand or asking, he offered unto
him so high a Lady and damsel for wife, and had clean forgotten all the
anger and wrath that he had before conceived and taken against Rosicleer, with
the friendship received of him the day before in delivering of them from
death. So perceiving that the king would not answer in any respect till such
time as he had vittered his mind, he spoke these words following.

HIgh and worthy Prince of Grecia, of all that you have here so highly
declared, as also of all other things that have so prosperously fallen out on
your part, I do understand no other thing but y^ God has created you amongst
all Princes the most highest, and amongst al knights the most noblest, and in
strength the most stoutest, and amongst men of understanding the most wisest,
and above all fortune has showed her self favorable and prosperous, for
whosoever does consider the highness of your estate, shall plainly see and
perceive that there is none that comes nigh unto you, and for worthiness,
none equal, and to consider of your high knighthood, they shall see that it is
without comparison, and almost above nature, likewise considering how
prosperous all things has fallen out on your part, they will not only say
that fortune is favorable unto you, but also that you have her at commandment
to do al things at your pleasure, and seeing that you have so many and high
things on your side, what enemy is there that will resist you, or friend that
will loose your friendship. The wise man says, that there are three things
which ought to be feared: the waves of the sea, the thu^derbolts of the
heavens, and the furious wild beasts on the earth: but yet above all things (he
says) ought to be feared, the enemy prosperous and fortunable, for that he
which does not nauigate at the Sea, is out of all danger of the waves, and he
that keeps his house, is out of the danger of wild beasts, and the
thunderbolts very seldom strikath, but from the prosperous enemy, there is
none that can apparte himself, neither can he find any place whether^ to
run, for whereas he thinks himself most surest, many times it falls out,
that there is most peril, and here I say that fortune has showed her self
more prosperous unto you than unto any, and unto me more contrary than unto
any other, for that she did not content her self in giving you the victory
over me, but the more to cralt you, she brought me into that extremity, that
of necessity I must be defended from death, and receive life at your hands,
the which you gave me as a friend, whereby you got of me the greatest
victory that ever man had of his enemy. Therefore God forbid that now I
should have any enmity with him, who with the great force and strength of
your arm did overcome me, and I do yield my self unto the strength of your
worthiness, and this offer which you do promise unto me with the precious
Queen Arquirosa is of so great highness and valor, that with just reason I
may think that she will be the occasion that I shall conclude friendship
with you, yet God who does know the secrets of all things, I do take to
witness, that I am not constrained by love to take you for my friend, but
only your great virtue does bind me thereunto, and this being a mean
betwixt us, I say that this is the greatest friendship that ever I might
receive of any humane creature, this thing which you do ^ffer unto me (not
being of me d^serued) to give me so high a damsel and worthy a Princess to
be my wife, whom from this time forwards, if she be so pleased, I do receive
for my Lady and Mistres: likewise I do desire her to conceive so well of me,
and to take me for her own, and here I do desire the king Oliue^io my Lord,
to answer unto the rest y^ remains, and I hope in God y^ his answer shall
be such, as he is bound to give unto so excellent a son, and therewithal Don
Siluerio concluded his reasons, and the king with great contentment with that
which he had said: but the answer which the king made was in embracing
Rosicleer and the Princess Oliuia, with shedding many tears that trickled
down his cheeks with pure love, he said.

Oh my well-beloved children, God forbid that in me should reign so great
ingratitude against his sovereign majesty, and to let you understand and know
the great courtesy that he has showed unto me, in giving me so good fortune,
as by his own hands is come unto me so precious children, here I do receive
you, and I do love you, and will not have, neither do I look for any other
contentment in all the world. The almighty God does know, and he is a good
witness thereunto, that I came not forth out of great Britain with so great a
multitude of knights for any evil will that I had, but for to accomplish
that wherein I was bound unto the Prince Don Siluerio, and now seeing that he
is content and satisfied, there remains no other thing, but let us go unto
the City of Constantinople, whereas I may acknowledge and know the Emperor and
Empress for my brother and sister, and aid and help him with these few
knights that does remain. When the king had said these words, Rosicleer and
the Princess Oliuia did kneel down before the king, and by force did kiss
his hands, but the king with words of great love did cause them to arise,
embracing them many times, and went and embraced the fair Queen Arquirosa,
and said, I do now acknowledge that all these things are ordained by the will
and disposition of almighty God, in that I do see so excellent a Damsel has
been reserved and kept, and now at this time come hither, to the satisfacti^n
of the Prince D^n Siluerio, and I beseech his almighty majesty to give you so
good fortune as I do desire for my self, and therewithal Rosicleer and Don
Siluerio did embrace one another, and from that day forwards there was betwixt
them great love and friendship. Therewith came all the rest of the worthy
Princes and Knights, (such as knew him in great Britain,) and talked with
him, who never forgot the great friendship that was betwixt them. Likewise
the knigh^^s of Spain for the valiant deeds which they saw him (...) in the
battle, as also for the great fame which (...) heard of him, with exceeding
good will came and offered themselves to be his friends. Then he who had them
in great estimation, did offer unto them the like, and esteemed them for the
most stoutest and valiantest knights that were in all the army. Thus after
that they had been together in these ceremonies, receiving the one the other a
good while, they all mounted upon their horses, and the princess Oliuia and
the Queen Arquirosa upon their palfraies, and took their way toward the
City of Constantinople, the Prince Don Siluerio lead the Queen A^qui^osa by
the bridle, with whom he used many love tricks and amorous discourses, and
she likewise answered him with a gallant grace and courteous demeanor giving
thanks unto almighty God, for that so worthy a Prince had g^uen him unto her
for to be her husband, and received great contentment. They had not long
travailed in this order toward the City, but the^ saw a far off come out
of the City a great company of gall^nt and glistering knights coming
toward them, it was the Emperor ^rebatio accompanied with all his nobles and
valiant knights, who being advertised by a Page of Rosicleers of all that
passed, and of their coming toward the City, issued out to meet them, and
when they came nigh the one unto the other, the king and all those that were
with him, we^e greatly amazed at the gallant and gentle disposition of the
Emperor, and of all those worthy Princes and knights that came with him, and
said that all the flower and worthiness of knighthood in the world was there
joined together. Then straight ways the Emperor went toward the king
Oliuerio, and the one received the other with so great love, and with such
exceeding courtesy, as commonly is used betwixt so high persons, and at that
instant was there confirmed betwixt them such and so great friendship, that
never after so long as they lived was separated. Then the Emperor received the
other knights with so gallant grace and demeanor, that they all received
great contentment at the sight of him, but most especially the king Oliuero
that was talking with Bargandel, Lyriamandio, and the Tartarian Zoilo, and the
king Alamades, who all together went and kissed his hands, craving pardon of
all that was passed. Then he with great love did embrace them all, pardoning
all the rancour and evil will that he had against them, and it seemed very
well unto him, in y^ they had showed themselves so faithful, and had
accomplished all that they ought, could do no less but bear the like to them
again. So from thence they all returned unto the City, but when they came
unto the mighty Palace, the king and all those that came with him, were in
great admiration to see and behold upon the fore front of the same all y^ whole
Histories of the knight of the Sun, and said that by his figure he resembled
very much Rosicleer, which was very true, for that there was no more
difference betwixt them, but that the knight of the Sun was somewhat in his
face more furious, and more fatter of his body, but of one stature, and in all
other proportions of their bodies were all one, and resembled one another very
much, so that the remembrance of those valyant and worthy deeds which were
there so naturally set forth, unto them that knew not thereof, that it put in
them so great admiration, that they said with great reason the knight of the
Sun was worthy of the great fame and praise that was published throughout
all the world, and only for the sight thereof the knights of Sp^ine thought
their coming into Grecia to be well employed. Being alighted, they entered
into the Palace, whereas they were meruailouslie well received of the Empress
Bri^na and the Princess Lindaraza, and of all the whole company of fair
Ladies and Gentlewomen of high estate that came forth to bear her company,
and there passed betwixt them words of great love and friendship. With great
joy, pleasure, and pastime they passed away all that day, in the which the
Prince Don Siluerio, and the precious Queen Arquirosa were made sure and
joined hands, abiding the marriage to be made at such time as Rosicleer should
be married, and Clauerindo, with other mo Princes and knights that did abide
the same day. Then the next day being come, for that the City was
meruailouslie pestered with the great number of people that were in it, and
could not very well at their ease be lodged, it was agreed between the
Emperor and the king Oliuerio that a trench should be made without in the
field nigh unto the walls of the City, and there to pitch their tents, whereas
should be all the whole army of the king Oliuerio, and the half of all the
Emperors knights. Thus according unto their conclusion it was commanded to be
done, which was a gallant and royal thing to behold, it was strongly
fortefied with deep ditches and bars a^ the entry, so that they were as
sure within that trench as though they had been within the City. In this sort
they were lodged in sight the one of the other, and betwixt the trenches of the
Pagans and the Christians there was a mighty, great and broad field, whereas
they might at their ease make their battles. At this time were the Pagans
very glad and joyful when that their enemies were come forth of the City,
and fortefied their trenches, for that it was then in their hands to give them
battle at all times at their pleasures, and they cared not although they were
many in number, and more than before, yet for all that of their part they were
five for one.

How it was consented and concluded in the camp of the Pagans, for to make a
challenge to the Greeks, and how it was accepted, and by what knights of the
part of the Emperor Trebatio. Chap. 26.
NOw the History says, that on a day the Emperor Alycandro being in his
Imperial tent, accompanied with the most principallest of his whole host, in
great counsel what was best for them to do, there were some amongst them
that did not let for to praise the high knighthood of the Emperor Trebatio,
and of his knights, amongst whom the old king Gedrosia did praise them more
than any other, for to provoke Bramarant to anger, unto whom he always bare
ill will, after that he had slain his son the young man Graco. To the which
there needed not much matter, for that straight ways this stout and furious
Pagan arose up with so fierce semblance, that it feared all them that did
behold him, and said these words.

THe hearts of cowards and base men do fear small things, and receives
great admiration, the which does proceed because they are but for little
matters: all that does surmount them does seem unto them monstrous, and almost
above nature, and by their great cowardnesse they do fear and dread more one
enemy that is in the field prepared for to fight against them, than one
hundredth that are on their part, although every one of them can do much more
than his adversary, but unto such as be generous of heart and valiant, high
things do give contentment, and there is nothing that they do hear or see that
does make the^ to marvel or wonder. The force of a little thunderbolt y^ does
clean a tower in the midst, is much more than the strength of an Elephant
that carries a Castle of timber upon her back, and that of the little fish
called Remora, that staieth the ships against the force of the winds, than of
a man that cleaves an armed knight asunder in the midst. But you do
marvel more at the one than at the other, for two causes, the one for ^^e
fear which you have of the people at hand of your enemies, and the other, for
that you judge by your own strength all the whole power of humane nature,
seeming far to exceed yours. I do not marvel that our enemies do cu^
knights asunder in the midst, and clean them down unto the breast, for
likewise ^doe the sa^^^e, cleaning them down to the saddle, yet much was the
strength of M^lo, that with the force of h^s strong arms did clea^e asunder
hard and great Oaks, and for that you shall perceive and understand how little
I do esteem the force of our enemies, I will straight ways make and send
unto the Emperor Trebatio a challenge, (...) shall be that four of the
strongest and most renow^^^ knights that he has with him, come forth to
morrow into the field to make battle with me, for that I alone will combat
with them all together, in the face of both those mighty enemies, and if he
has not four such knights that durst take upon them to accept this challenge,
I will do the like with six or with eight, and with so many as they will
charge me withal, for it shall be all one with me, to be four, or to be fifty,
for that I will t^^t these cowards may see, how little I do fear and esteem
the Greeks.

This proud Pagan had scarce finished these words, when that the gran Campion
arose up, and said that ^ee would send likewise to challenge other four, and
make battle with them altogether, io^nthe with his son. Likewise there were
other of no less valor and valiant courage than they, who for that they
would make manifest their great and mighty power, would also enter into the
challenge, and there were of those super-valiant knights, the strong and stout
Meridian and Brand^^ardo, who had before either of them proved by experience
the force of the Greeks, and knew very well the generositie of their hearts,
which was the occasion that they would not make the challenge but against other
two, for that they knew it was but a folly to charge themselves with any more,
because the Greeks should not have the vauntage, and again, in the battle
past, they saw such knights, that gave them enough to do to defend
themselves. Then straight ways arose up that valyant Pagan Rodaran king of
Arabia, and after him the strong king of Media, and with them the king of
Trapobana, who was a marvelous strong knight, and of so big body, that he
seemed to be a Giant, he was called Zoroastes, all the which said that they
would enter into the challenge, and at that time if that the Emperor Alycandro
had not disturbed them, there were a great number that would have entered
thereinto, especially the kings and Giants that were there present, who had a
great desire for to show themselves. Thus this challenge being concluded
amongst them, it was consented to send for messenger unto the Emperor Trebatio
the king of the Gandaros, a young a valiant knight, who at the commandment of
the Emperor Alycandro straight ways departed, being very richly armed, with
a crown of gold upon his head in token that he was a king. When that he came
unto y^ trenches of the Christians, saying that he was a messenger, they did
let him pass till he entered into the mighty City, and then was carried
unto the royal Palace, whereas he alighted from his horse, and leaving him
with a page that came with him, he mounted into the great hall, whereas he
found the Emperor accompanied with all his Princes, noble men, and valiant
knights in great counsel for to give battle unto the Pagans, but when the
Pagan king entered, they all held their peace, and tarried to see what was his
demand, who without doing any reverence, said.

THou shall understand (Emperor Trebatio) that I am a messenger of the divine
and consecrated Emperor Alicandro, Lord of the mighty Asia, who does send me
unto thee to give thee to understand, that certain knights of his camp being
very desirous to pro^ie their strengthes with thy knights, has ordained a
challenge, and to be used and ordained in this sort, that the gran Campeon,
Lord of the Oriental Islands, and his son Bramarant, does challenge eight
knights of the principallest and stoutest that are to be found in all thy
host, and they two will maintain the battle against them all, likewise our
precious and most renowned Prince Meridian, and the stout Brandimardo, and
Rodaran king of Arabia, with the king of Media, and the mighty Zoroastes king
of Traprobana, do challenge as many more of thy knights as they be to come
forth and battle with them. Al these do ^aie, that to morrow being past,
they will pr^sent themselves in the midst of this great field, with their
^orses and armor, and abide the coming of those that will come forth against
them, and the Emperor my Lord says, for that all people with their ease at
their wills may behold what shall pass in this battle he concludes a truce
for two days, in the which time all such of our camp as are disposed, without
armor may freely enter into the City, and those of thy part likewise in the
same order may enter into our trenches. This is the effect of the message that
I do bring, therefore give me answer what thou do pretend heeren, and also
these thy knights to answer me unto the challenge.

The Emperor who very well understood the grea^e pride of the Pagans, at the
request of them all, answered as follows.

Of truth (King) the power of these two Pagans, Bradaman and Bramarant, is
very great, but yet their pride is much more as it seems unto me, for that
they are not content to challenge other two knights, but will that they be
eight, it does well appear, that although they have proved the force and
strength of some of these knights, yet do they not know the valiantness of
their hearts. Thou shall return unto the Emperor thy Lord, and declare unto
him and unto them that sent thee hither, that I have heard thy Embassage, and
the answer of these knights is, that to morrow at their hour appointed they
shall find us armed in the field, no more but one to one, as is the use and
custom amongst us, and this vauntage which they do offer unto us, we do
release and pardon them of the same, and give them thanks, and in all things
touching the truce, let it be done as he will command it, for I shall receive
great contentment therein.

With this answer the king would have departed, but first he desired to know
the names of those knights y^ would go out unto the battle, and called to
have a sight of them, and for that there was no agreement who they should be,
many of the most valiantest that were in the hall arose up, and offered
themselves unto the battle, amongst them was Rosicleer, the strong
Oristedes, the prince Clauerindo, the king Sacridoro, the Tartarian Zoilo, the
king Florion, y^ Prince Brandizel his son, the Emperor T^ebatio in person,
the worthy knight Flamides, the two v^liant knights of Spain, Don Claros, and
Arcalus, the Prince Don Siluerio, and the Princes Bargandel, Liriamandro, (...)
Rodamarte, every one of these requested the Emperou^ to (...) them unto the
battle, who seeing that they were so many and so worthy, it seemed unto him
that it should be a great de^asing of their honors to choose some and leave
other some, which caused him to ordain the matter in such sort, that none
should remain discontent. Whereupon he said unto the Pagan king, that
for so much as there were so many stout and valiant knights in their armies,
that they should let the battle of challenge and ^efiance be, fifteen to
fifteen, then shall it be better and the more to be looked on. Then the Pagan
king said that he would return with that message unto the Emperor his Lord,
and before night he would bring him answer thereof, and taking in writing the
names of the fifteen knights, he departed out of the City, and returned unto
his camp, and finding the Emperor in his tent, accompanied with his nobles,
in the presence of them all did declare the answer that he brought, the which
was straight ways accepted of them all, saving of Bramarant, who knowing that
there should come forth against him but one alone knight, he refused to be in
that battle, and said: Let not the Gods permit that I go forth unto the
challenge against one alone knight into the field, for that the victory that
should grow thereby, should be more unto his shame than to his honor* But
when that excellent, v^liant, and courageous knight Meridian heard him say so,
he could not (...) himself but to say Of truth Bramarant, others as good as
thou art, has gone forth and do go forth unto the battle one for one, and
it does well appear, that thou have not experimented the force and strength of
the Greeks, for if (...) did^est know them so well as ^, thy great pride
would (...) be so great (...) to the which likewise (said the stout (...))
there is one that I know and preued my self with him; (...) thou did enter
with him into battle, before two horses were finished he would make thee to
sweat drops of blood, and to loose the most part of thy br^uerie.

At whose words this br^ue, Pagan received so great ire and wrath, that (...)
of fire seemed to fly out at his eyes, and many times he was moved to buckle
with them, but considering the presence of the Emperor, (with whom he had
great friendship) and again for that he was unarmed, fearing the great number
that would ouercharge him, he refrained himself, and kept his furious wrath,
in his heart, for to revenge y^ same, when that time would serve. And although
that many that were there had great dread to see Bramarant so furious and
angry, for his eyes lightened like burning torches, yet the two valiant and
worthy knights, Meridian, and Brandimardo, made no rekoning thereof, for that
either of them were of as valiant a courage as he, and as stout.

Then straight ways there arose up many other knights that would be in the
battle, fiftene to fiftene: amongst all, at the request of the Emperor,
(although his will was to the contrary) was the gran Campion, and the two
worthy princes Meridian and Branbima^do, and the stout Rodaran, the king of
Media, Zoroastes king of Taprobana, the prince of Cambray, the king of the
Gandaros, that was the messenger, and the prince of Aegipt, all these were
very stout and valiant knights, and for to make up the number of fiftene, the
Emperor commanded that six of the most strongest giants that were to be
found in all the whole army, should go with them, they were all brethren and
Lords of the Islands Diamantinas, and are so called because there are found in
them more Diamonds then in any other part of all the whole world: they were
all sons unto the gran Thition, the most famous giant that was in all Asia,
and for the great friendship that their father had with the Emperor, they
came for to serve him in those wars, with a great number of their own
knights. When that it was fully ordained and concluded who should go forth in
this challenge: the king of the Gandaros straight ways departed, and went to
carry the answer unto the Emperor Trebatio, whereas the History does leave
them till time serves for to tell you of the fair Empress Claridiana, who
went in the demand of the cave of the wise Artidon.

How the Empress Claridiana came unto the cave of Artidon, and what happened
there. Chap. 27.
WIth great desire to come unto the Cave of Artidon, trauiled the royal
Empress Claridiana, through the mighty kingdom of Russia, in the company of
Elizea, and her knight, thinking the time very long till she came thither, for
to know the truth of that which had brought her into so great care and
heaviness: the Ca^e was greatly mentioned in all those parts, and by reason of
the great have that they made, within few days after that they had entered into
the kingdom of Russia, they attained to the cave, but when they came unto the
entry thereof, they were greatly amazed to see the wonderful fire that came
forth thereat, which seemed to be some infernal thing. But when they had read
those letters and understood the property of the fire, they straight ways
entered in thereat, but gave the pre-eminence of the first entry unto the
royal Empress, so after that they had passed the narrow lane, they came into
a fair great court, whereas they were strangely amazed, as well at the
greatness the which seemed to be in that great work, as also at the mighty
force which the bull seemed to show, being fastened unto the pillar, (who in
that order as they saw him) began to give such terrible and wonderful
brayings, that all that mighty work seemed to shake thereat. And if it had
not been for the Princes, who did animate and comfort them, Elizea, and her
knight had returned back again, with the great fear the which they
received, after a while that they had beholden the great fierceness of the
Bull, suddenly (...) their eyes aside upon an other wall almost right against
the same, the which was under the gallerie of the palace, they saw graven in
the same, very naturally, the whole history of the mighty and perilous
battles there, done by Rosicleer, and of all that had happened unto him in
that Cave, the which being well understood by the ro^all Princes, and greatly
wondered at those worthy acts, not without shedding of a few tears which
trickled down her rubicall cheeks, said. Oh high and happy Emperor
^rebatio, in how much art thou bound unto God, that out of thy noble loins,
has come forth those, that has ^^lled all the whole world with the fame of
their wonderful and immortal deeds: Oh that my destiny would permit, and my
fortune be so favorable, that our bloods might join together, that some part
of those worthy deeds of thy posterity, might be allotted in me. Therefore
come that come will, for that I cannot persuade with my self, that from the
descent of so clear and worthy a stock, may be comprehended so blind a
judgment, but that they do understand the great valor of my desert. And in
saying these words she went forwards, and Elizea, and her knight followed her,
and went all to gether up the stairs into the gall^^^es, whereas a new they
began to meruale at the strangeness of that work, as also at the delightful
gardaines and orchards which they saw out at certain windows: after a while
that they had well perused the same, they proceeded forwards, and with the great
desire which the P^inces Claridiana, had to see her self with the wise man,
she never rested till she came unto the doors of shining (...) that were
shut, which was the entry into the inchaunted hall, but so soon as she had
laid hand on them for to open them, they straight ways opened of themselves
with so great a noise, that all mighty work seemed as though it would have
sonke, when the royal Princes entered in thereat, whereas she saw the high and
rich throne, and thereon the wise Artidon, with his breast all open, showing
forth his heart which was a very pitiful and lamentable thing to behold, at
which time there chanced a great marvel, ^^e which was never seen before,
but at such time as Rosicleer, entered into that inchaunted quadran, (and it
was) that when the royal Princes beeganne to enter in at the hall doors,
there began so sweet and peaceable Music, that it ravished all the hearers
of their senses, and they seemed as though they had been transported into an
other world, and Elizea and her knights (who were without) at the sweet
melody thereof, were likewise ravished, and it seemed unto them to be some
celestial noise, they would not presume to enter into that inchaunted hall,
till such time as the princes came forth, for that they might have space for to
ask and know that which was their desire. After that the princes had a while
beholden the great wonders and strange things of that inchaunted quadran, she
straight ways conceived, that the sweet Music was made, which was the
occasion that from that time, she had a better hope then she had before, of a
good resolution of that she so long desired, for whereas with such Music she
was received, she hoped her answer at her departing forth, could not be but
very good; So with the great desire she had to talk with the wise Artidon,
after a little while that she had there stayed, she mounted up the silver
stairs y^ carried her unto the throne whereas shaking with all parts of her
body, for the sorrowful or heavy news which she looked to receive, she plast
her self before the wise man: who being in obedience of her sovereign
majesty, did somewhat decline his head, whereat the princes received great
admiration, then she humbling her self unto him, said these words following.

MOst mighty and famous Artidon, the high fame of thy great and wonderful
meruailes, has brought me into these strange countries, so far of from
mine: and if it do so fall out that I carry from hence no more then I have
brought, yet shall I think my travail well bestowed, and my self very well
rewarded, in that I have seen and understood thy great wisdom, for as Plato
the Philosopher says, for to see and know a wise man, a man ought for to
travail throughout all the whole world, which was the occasion that many
times, he passed from Athens unto Sicilia, for to see his friend the wise and
prudent Focion.

Apolonio Thianeo, departed from Rome, and travailed through all Asia, sailed
through the River Nilus, sustained the cold of the mount Caucasus, suffered the
great heat of the mountain Rifeos, and crossed over the whole countries of the
Masagetas, till such time as he entered into the great India, and all this
travail and pilgrimage was for to see and communicate, with the famous wise
(...). How much more would those have passed greater travails, for to have
seen those his marvelous works, if that in their days and times they
science and great wisdom had been manifest. I cannot say that this is the
only cause of my coming for to see thee, as it is manifest unto thee, yet I
do say, that if there were no other occasion, this should be sufficient for
to come and see thee. The great care which has been the occasion of my coming
hither, (although I do believe that thou do know it) yet will I declare it
unto thee, for that he that loved so faithfully and firmly in his time, will
not marvel at any force whatsoever it be that love does upon human hearts.
I love the knight of the Sun above all other things in this world, so that if
my fortune and evil destenie do permit that he take an other to be his wife,
I desire to know the truth thereof, for that I may remember my self, and take
order what is best to be done. It has been told me that he is made sure unto
the princess Lindabrides, and that he loved her with all his heart, therefore
(for that there is nothing hid from thee) I do desire thee for to tell me if
it be true, and put me out of all doubt, for whatsoever that thou shall tell
me, I shall believe it to be true, and conformable thereunto I will take order
with my self what is best to be done.

This being said, the royal princes held her peace, abiding the answer which
should be pronounced by the wise man, who as then opened his eyes which before
were shut, and said as follows.

OF truth, sovereign Lady and Empress, for that your highness does very
well employ, the great trau^ile the which you have passed in this your long
journey, only for the sight of those my works: much more may I think these
my travails better employed, the which I had in making of them. I being now
gratified with so high a reward, in that you are come for to see them. And I
do not marvel, that love has had so great power for to overcome your
highness, for that always against the most highest and most worthiest of
courage, there does he use the greatest force, but in especial with the knight
of the Sun, for that his fortune and destiny does promise him unto you, as
unto her that in all the whole world does best deserve him, and for you alone
is he kept and defended. And touching the truth of this which you have
demanded of me, I tell you, that the knight of the Sun was never made sure
unto the princess Lindabrides, neither has he had any more to do with her
then he has had with you, although the great and mighty Emperor Alicandro
her father did give her to him for wife, and left unto him his high and mighty
Empire of Tartaria, with an infinite number of other kingedomes, with the which
he should be made the mightiest prince and lord in all the whole world. And for
that he would not receive her and all the rest, clean contrary unto his will,
secretly in the night he departed and left the gran Cataia, almost distract of
their wits, with great desire for to enjoy the sight of your sovereignty, the
which time he thought long, and after he came to Constantinople, and had that
rigorous battle with you, the which contencion was so cruel unto him, after
that he knew you, that desperate and weary of his life, he would go seek his
death, to clear himself out of this world. So he departed out of
Constantinople, and went into the wilderness of Grecia, whereas he had
battle with one of the most valiantest and stoutest Pagans that was in all
the Paganism, and yet in all that rigorous battle, he would never strike him
with his sword, for that he had smitten you with the same.

And from thence he departed and went to sea, whereas by a rough and great
tempest, he was driven unto the Island of the devilish Fauno, where (as one
desirous to dye and receive the death) he went a shore, and had a marvelous
battle with two legious of infernal devils, and afterward with the devilish
Fauno, wherein happened very strange things, as is apparent if you please to
go thither to see, where you shall find him all alone, without any other
company, more then his horse, neither is there in all the Island any other
beast or foul.

There does he lead and pass the most sharpest and asperest life that ever
was holden by man, with desire there to end his days, and never more to
return and wear armor. All this he does for your occasion, and you are in a
great fault before God, if you do not find remedy in the recovering of him
again, for that by your occasion there does languish and dye, the best and
worthiest knight in all the whole world, and one that does love you better then
any thing therein: therefore it does accomplish your highness out of hand to
go and see him, for it is so that if your succor do stay long, it may so
fall out that after he shall have no need thereof, for that at this present
his life is in great peril.

In concluding of these words, the wise Artidon closed his eyes again, and did
put himself as he was before, without aunswering or speaking any word, leaving
the royal princes one way with so great joy and pleasure, that she almost knew
not her self, her comfort was so great, and an other way with great sorrow,
repenting her self of that which she had done against the most worthy
knight of the Sun, and blamed her self very much, in that she saw not any
further proof of his disloyalty, and giving him so malicious and evil
reward, for the great good love and often perils which he adventured for her
sake, and did think the time very long, till she departed for to have remedy
for his evil.

Moreover, she took her leave of the wise man, and he made the like in
declining his (...) at her departure, this sovereign Princes was not so sone
departed out of the enchanted quadran, but the sweet Music ceased, and
straight ways, Elizea and her knight entered in, and when they were mounted
whereas the wise man was, there they knew all that they desired. The knight was
her true and faithful lover, so that Elizea departed from thence with great
contentment and satisfied of his loyalty, they were not so soon departed out
of the inchaunted hall, but the steel doors were shut with a great noise. So
the princes and the rest went into the galaries and desended into the great
court, but stayed not there long, the joy and contentment of the princess was
such: but being forth of that wonderful and miraculous cave, they took their
journey toward the port whereas they came a shore. And at their coming
thither, the princes would have informed her self where the ylande of the
devilish Eauno was, she found many that did give her to understand of the
wonderful things of that Island, by reason of the great fame that was spread
abroad thereof, but not one that knew expressly where abouts it ^^oode,
whereby she might take her direct course thither, which caused a great desire
in her heart to commit her self unto fortune, for execution of the which, she
took her leave of Elizea, and her knight, accompanieng her self with alonelie
two damsels, with whom she meant to enter into the ship, with determination not
to come any more a shore, till such time as she had found the place whereas her
knight was, and giueing Elizea to understand hereof, she was very sad and
sorrowful so for to lose her company, for that they accounted themselves
happy and fortunate to be in her company: but when they understood that it
was her will and desire, with many tears shed, of her and her knight, they
took their leave of her, always having in mind in how much they were bound
unto her, for that she delivered them out of prison from that mighty and
famous Rouer Cleonidas. The princes being departed from them, she commended her
self unto fortune, and began to make sail, having no certain way whether to
go, but whereas the wind would drive the ship, having their sails all
abroad, for that they would that they might nauigate with the more force, all
the which she thought to be very little, her desire was so great for to see
the knight of the Sun, who for her sake, had put himself in so straight a
life. Being in the cabin of the ship all alone, she fell down on her knees,
listing up her eyes and heart unto heaven, shedding great abundance of tears
that ran down her christalline cheeks, she said as follows.

OH, Creator of all things, both celestial and terrestrial, by whose will and
power the heavens does move, the stars does give their light, the Sun the
and the Moon does give light upon the earth, and the earth does sustane all
beasts, the waves of the deep and pro^ound seas does swel and abate again,
the wyndes does rage and become calm, and all things are obedient unto thee:
here I do desire and crave of thy divine majesty and great clemency, that
the force of this invisible winds, (being governed by thy will) to direct the
full course of this my ship, through these deep seas, in such sort, that in
a short time I may ariue at Island of y^ devilish Fauno, whereas I may make
satisfaction and recompense of that great evil and wrong the which I have
committed against the knight of the Sun. Permi^ (O Lord) that I may receive
the reward of this my great offense, and not he that is without fault. Oh good
knight, if that I had had the eyes of my understanding open, no occasion nor
news had been sufficient for to have persuaded me, that in a knight of so
perfect excelencie (more then in any other man) should remain so great
treason: how is it possible that in so noble and worthy a person, should be
broken, the faith and promise which he made unto me* of truth no, for his
amorous words, and profound sighs the which he uttered unto me, he never
pretended to make so evil a conclusion of. Oh unfortunate that I am, how was I
deceived, and how lightly was I moved to do that which I did, what reason or
cause was there, to constrain me to lay hands upon my knight, and to employ
all my force upon him, striking him with my sword, to procure his death.

Oh wonderful case and horrible, how am I worthy of great punishment, the
winds and waters of this deep seas with just reason (...) ^well and rise
against me. Oh, unto this day, how much ^ell have I conceived against my
loyal friend, and how evil and unjustly have I condemned him in his absence:
surely those were small things that so lightly I should give credit unto,
neither was it in that happy knight to do them, for if that I had considered
of the great exelencie, and of the high and fortunate destiny of my loyal
friend, then had it ben apparent to have been believed, and no lack of
understanding, but that I alone was she that deserved to be his spouse, and
alone the whole conclusion of his triumphant joy.

And if that I had well considered of all those things, what great travails,
sighs, sobbes and tears, heates and coldes, had I euitated and cut of. But
alas what shall I say, for that true lovers in few things do chance of the
right, but in a great number does err, sudden chances and jealous thoughts
may be compared unto the water of this sea, being tossed with the surging waves
and blustering winds.

Lovers does believe all things, for that love is full of bread, and that
which is contrary unto his desire, he does lightly believe, and unto that
which gives joy and pleasure he gives slender credit, and this happens
most in women, for that they are more light and moveable in their actions,
which causes us to give sooner credit unto variable and contrary things.

Ah good knight, although that there ought to be in me great shame to come
into thy presence, yet the great and perfect love which I do bear unto thee,
ought to be esteemed in more, my desire is to be in thy presence, whereas thy
sight shall be as joyful unto me, and lightsome to my understanding, as the
Sun is unto all mortal creatures, whose light does beautify the Moon and
the stars, and all the compass of the Firmament, as also the whole face of
the Earth.

Alas, when shall I see the hour, that all the tears and anguishes by me
passed, and caused by your absence, I may make manifest unto you, and that your
troubles told unto me, I may excuse being heard: but alas, what does it profit
me all this desire, for that me thinks that I shall not live for to enjoy
so sovereign joy and pleasure. Let that day come quickly, and make no longer
tarying, for the death which unto this day has been so desirous of me, I
(...) not now alonely hate, but the naming thereof does make me aghast.

These and many other things said the royal Princes, and she had not fully
concluded these her words, when that she felt the winds to begin to rage, and
the waters to arise, striking against the ship sides, as though they would
break it in pieces, and the Mariners began to cry out, publishing evil
fortune, and fearing to be drowned, for that in a very short spare, the Air
which was very fair and clear, was turned to be very dark and cloudie,
and from the Heavens proceeded soorth so great abundance of thunder and
lightnings, as though the heavens and seas would join together, and the
Mariners said, that they never saw at the Sea in all their life time, so great
a storm and tempest. But this worthy Princes who was at that time upon her
knees, ^earing nothing of the tempest, said as follows.

LORD if it be thy blessed will that I shall see again the knight of the
Sun, I do verily believe, that this tempest comes by thy providence and
apointment, for that this my Ship being forced by the fury of these
baysterous winds, I may the sooner come unto the place whereas he is. And if it
be so Lord, (as unworthy) thou have not heard my prayer and petition, but that
all things does work according unto their nature: yet here I do desire thy
divine majesty, for that it is in thy power, to stay the celestial powers, in
such sort, that they may not disturb me in this my iourneie, nor be
contrary unto me.

And I am fully persuaded Lord, that if it were thy will that I should die
before that I do see y^ knight of the Sun, it were not needful the force of
the Elements, nor the noise of so great thundering and lightening for to kill
me, for alonely thy will is sufficient for to sink this my ship down to the
center of the sea. And again, if it be thy will that I shall be saved, then
wherefore should I fear fortunes tempests, or the force of the great and
furious waves? the good Prophet was in greater peril, when that he was swalowed
up by the mighty whale, and the mighty Apostle in the deapth of the sea, and
for that it was thy will for to deliver them, those perils did little trouble
them. The wrath and ire of Esau did little profit against Jacob, nor that of
the Chaldes against Abraham, nor that of Pharao against thy people, nor that of
Holophernus against Judith, nor that of the Lions against Daniel, and little
can this tempest hurt me, if it be thy will for to save and deliver me as
thou did deliver them. So in saying these words, the royal Princes it
seemed unto her that the storm increased more and more, and so did all that
day and the night following, without any hope of calmness: The next day in
the morning, whether it was by the will of God, for that his pleasure was that
the troubles and sorrows of the knight of the Sun should have end, or
whether it was by art of the wise Lirgandeo, I know not, but the ship with
that torment was arrived at the solitary Island, whereas happened unto the
royal Princes, as shall be told you in the next Chapter following.

How that the Princes Claridiana, went a land at the Island of the devilish
Fauno, and what she did there. Chap. 28.
WHen that the ship of the princes Claridiana was arrived at the solitary
Island, she, her damsels and the Mariners were very glad, and gave great thanks
unto God for that he had delivered them out of that great storm and tempest:
and being somewhat weary of the sea, the Princess determined to go a shore,
as well for to see the fertilenesse of the Island, as also for that her heart
did give her that by the hand and will of God, all those things were ordained.

Then straight ways she disembarked her self, and commanded her damsells to
tarry in the ship til^ she returned back again, so that all alone with her
horse and armor, she went a shore. And being a land she was greatly amazed, to
see the country so plain and no habitation therein, she found it void of all
people, and the foundation of certain houses, which in times past had been
there builded, but now overthrown and fallen down with the wether. She saw
that the Island was very fresh and green, and full of trees, but not a beast
nor bird she could see in all the Island, but as an unpeopled and desert place,
and being very much amazed at all this, she could not judge otherwise but that
should be the Island of the devilish Fauno, coniecturing of all things, as has
been told her before, of that Island and it did plainly appear, that it was
in all things conformable unto that which she had heard declared by the
mouth of others.

And being in this troubled thought, she saw upon the sea side somewhat
aparted from the place whereas she was, a boat broken all to pieces, (the
which was the boat that brought the knight of the Sun thither, and he brake
it all to pieces, because he would have nothing to carry him from thence) but
when she came nigh unto it, she saw the prints of the blows, which gave her
plainly to understand, how it should be broken with the oars, the which lay
by sheuered all to pieces, she being greatly amazed thereat, passed further
into the Island, whereas she discovered the saddle and bridle, with all the
trappings of the good horse Cornerino, scattered upon the ground, which
although it was evil entreated with the wether, rain, and dust, yet might
she well perceive that they were of estimation, and very rich, for that they
were all wrought with silk and gold, and the pomell and arson of the Saddle
gold, was of purefi^e set full of pr^cious stones, which caused her straight
ways to suspect, that it should be the saddle and trapping of Cornerino, for
that many times she had seen the knight of the Sun with them, and he wa^
them of the Prince Meridian. When that she saw this, with a (...) from her
horse, and the better to satisfy her self, she took the trappings in her
hands, and wipte of the dust that was on them, then did she perfectly know them
to be the knights of the Sun, for that in all her life she never saw the
like, neither was there any prince in all the whole world that had the like:
the sight whereof, did so trouble and amaze her, that she was in (...) dumpe
with great marvel, and knew not what to say, neither whether she should
rejoice, or be sorrowful, for that one way she saw plainly that to be the
Island whereas the knight of the Sun arrived, and an other way, those tokens
with the wonderful things which she had heard of that devilish Fauno, did
put her in great fear that he was slain, and it seemed unto her a thing
impossible, that any human creature could bring in subjection so devilish and
misshapen a beast.

Being in this thought, for fear and grief of the worst, she shed so many
tears, that they ran trickling down her fair cheeks, that she was all to
be bathed in them: so after a while that she had been there, she mounted again
upon her horse, and went forewards, but she had not gone far from that place,
when as she saw the good horse Cornerino, who was loose an^ at his liberty in
the field, who like a wild beast came running toward her like unto a whirle
wind, leaping and frisking in the air, and neighed as though he received
great joy and comfort at the company of the other horse, as one that many
days before had been there all alone, but when the Princes saw him and knew
him very well, she thought verily that her heart would have burst with
sorrow, where with her eyes burst out with tears, and having no power to
speak one word, she said with in her self, Oh good horse how is it, that thy
master has left thy company: surely it cannot be well with him, seeing that
he has left thee, for thou art so good a piece, that thou art to be esteemed
of all the Princ^^ in the world: and neither thy master nor thy self does
^eserue to dwell in deserts. But alas what shall I say, I am she that has
bone the occasion of all this, and I beseech the sovereign creator of all the
world, that it fall not out, that I am the occasion of his death, for if it be
so that I have been y^ author and chief instrument of his death, I will also
with these my hands be revenged on my self with cruel death, and never
depart from out of this Island, but make it my sepulture, for that one country
shall possess the bones of us both, so shall we remain in death together,
although that cruel Fortune and my evil destinies would not permit and suffer
that in our lives we could enjoy the one the other. In saying these words to
her self, the Princes procured for to take the horse, somewhat for to comfort
her self with his company, for that the knight of the Sun many times did
ride him, but by no means she could not do it, for that the horse was fierce
and courageous, and would not suffer himself to be taken of any other but of
his master the knight of the Sun, whom he did visit many times, and fed
diverse and sundry times before him, in the place whereas he abode. This
seeing, the royal Princes, all to be bathed with tears, which for her knights
sake she shed; passed forwards on her determined journey, but she had not
travailed far, when as she came unto the craggie and hard Rock that he had
so cut and sheuered to pieces, but yet such was his force and strength of his
arm, and the goodness of his sword, and upon the top of the same, she
saw where hunge the rich sword of the knight of the Sun, with the scabbard
and the hangers, which were wrought and embrodered with gold, and set with
precious stones: and knowing it very well, she was at that present more
astonished and amazed then she was before, and coming nigh unto it, she read
that which was written in a plain place of the same stone, but when she had
well understoode the effect thereof, it cannot be rehearsed what she felt at
that time at her heart, considering of ^hree strange and marvelous things that
was represented there, of the knight of the Sun. The one the great loyalty
and reverence that he had unto her, insomuch that he had stroke her with his
sword, yet in the time of that great necessity, he left the same, because he
would not defile it with any other blood. An other, in the great and sovereign
force and courage which he had, for to go fight with that devilish Fauno,
without any sword. The third, in the great and incredible strength which he
had, for to cut and clean that cragged and hard Rock, sheuering of such great
pieces, as very plainly it might be seen, that every sheuer was a blow with
the sword: all the which being by her considered, the great joy and pleasure
which she should receive in acknowledging the great loyalty of her knight, was
turned into great anguish and grief, in seeing the reward he received at her
hands in recompense of the great love and fidelity he had borne unto her. And
the more greater his wonderful and excelent deeds seemed to be, so much more
she waxed penitent, and repented her self, and with so great grief, that it
seem^d her soul would depart her body, she said as follows.

OH my very good friend, if you be a live, how dare I presume to come into
your presence, that in recompense of so great fidelity and love (which your
deeds do make manifest) you had unto me, and I to have showed my self so
cruel and contrary unto you. And if it be so that you be departed this world,
what revenge may I take of my self, to make it equal unto the great error
which I have committed: of truth no other but with this thy sword, I will open
my entrails and take out mine own heart, that jointly it may remain in this
solitary and unfortunate Island, as a sign and token of thy great fidelity
and faithful good will unto me: and contrariewise, my great cruelty toward
thy guiltless person, and yet this wilb^ but a small revenge for so great an
evil committed for the death of so high and e^cellent a Prince cannot be
revenged by my death.

In saying these words and other more of great dolor, and grief, and in
shedding great abundance of tears, she ouerwept her self, and was very
desirous to proceed forwards to know what was become of the knight of the
Sun, leaving the sword hanging whereas she found it, she departed from
thence, and as she travailed for a great space with a sudden fear that came
over her heart in such sort, that all her members shaked, that she could not
almost go forwards, still misdoubting the success of the knight of the Sun.

Then after a while having not travailed the full quantity of a mile, a great
way before she came whereas the Fauno was slain, she saw from a far off
the great bulk of the monstrous and misshapen body, which seemed to be a
great house overthrown, it was so great, and imagining what it should be,
she went that way, but when she came there she was straunglie amazed to see
the infernal figure of that misshapen beast, and yet more horrible and
wonderful it was than heretofore it has been told you, for that there was
no understanding of man that was sufficient to imagine the great deformity of
this beast, being dead as he was, but the good Princess had not much time to
pervse the great ugliness of this beast, for when she salve all the armor of
the knight of the Sun there laid upon the stone, and knew them very well
by the strange and rich work that was in them, her heart was ready to break
with dolor and grief, and almost from her selfelshe fell from her horse down
to the ground, whereas she lay a good while upon the green grass in a
sound, and could not speak any one word, but lay as though she had been
dead, but within a while after she came again unto her self, and arose up,
and went forthwith unto the armor, and embracing her self with them, she
uttered these words, with so great sorrow and grief, that she would have
moved any man to compassion to have heard her, but in especial when that she
had read that which was written upon the Stone, which was in this manner
following.

This is the devilish Fauno, son unto the devil, begotten of Artimaga, who
was slain by the knight of the Sun, Prince of Grecia, who being determined
to leave the world, would conclude and end his days in this solitary Island,
this was his armor, the which he does leave heer^ in sign of the last
victory that he concluded in his life time.

When the Princess had concluded the reading of these lines, she lacked but a
little to conclude her end, for that by those words she conceived that the
knight of the Sun was dead, especially when she looked about on every side,
and could see no other sign nor token of him, she conie^^ured evil in ^er
own imagination, and having net so much force and strength for to suffer that
mortal grief, in great rage and anguish of her heart, she embraced her self
with the armor and said.

OH good knight, what is become of thee, that in this sort thou have left thy
excellent and precious armor, God has created thee of so great magnamitie
above all other knights in the world, for to lead thy life in the deserts,
like unto brute beasts, and if it be so that I am in ^ault, and have been the
occasion of all this evil, here I do promise and make a vow unto thee,
never to depart from hence alone, except it be in thy company, here will I
end my sorrowful days, here will I for ever make my bed on this hard
ground, and never lay my head upon any other thing than the hard stones, for
that with the hardness of them I may molli^i^ my hard heart that was so
hardened against th^e, my sustenaunce shall be no other thing but griefs and
sighs, and that which I will drink shall be the tears that distilleth from
the fountains of my eyes, and I will not have any other company but alonelie
this armor, the which so many times and often has been upon the worthy body
of that good Knight, and defended him from my raging and mortal blows. These
shall be only my comfort, and the myrrour whereon I will look, for that the
memory of them shall every moment increa^e my heavy dolor. I will wander
all alone in these deserts like the Turtle dove, that has lost her loving
mate, and give shrikes in this wilderness like unto Narh^o, to see if thou will answer me, as the Nymph Eco did answer him.

These and many other things spoke the Princess, tormenting her self with
exceeding great anguish and grief. Then in the end of half an hour that she
was there, she remembered how that the wise Artidon had told her, that she
should find him in that Island, yet she doubted very much of his life, to see
all that she had seen before, although by that remembrance thee (...) some
hope. Likewise she called unto her remembrance, that he said that she
should make have in his demand, for that it might so fall out, that his
comfort might come to late, by reason that he was brought into so great (...)
and danger of his life. which doubt brought her (...) so great con^^sion,
that he heart sailed her, and it (...) that thee had neither force nor
strength sufficient for to (...) any farther forwards, but as ended did very
well behol^e that diuellishe and infernal Fauno, to see how that r^gorous
battle was (...), she saw the great and wonderful horn that was broken
off from his head, and his scull broken all to pieces, and his great and
mighty clubbe lying thereby, whereby she did understand how and after what
manner he was slain, and giving a great and deep sigh the said as follows.

Oh excellent knight, how worthy are thy deeds to be published throughout
all the world, and with great reason the deeds of all other knights ought to
be put to silence, and never more to be spoken of, for the worthiness of thy
deeds being so excellent as they are, so many, and of so great admiration, and
dispearsed abroad in so many Countries, that they cannot be seen, neither be
heard of, and those which does not see them, how can they believe them? Here
I do desire the universal creator, that now, neither in the times to come
they may not be forgotten.

After that this royal Princess had said these words in the praise of her
knight, she departed from thence, and began to go and to seek him, and for
that she could not find him there aboutes, she would have mounted upon her
horse to seek farther into the Island, but it fell out, whether it was with the
fear of the Fauno, or for to go with the horse Cornerino, by any means she
could not take her horse, but he fled from that place with so great swiftness,
that in a short space the Princess lost the sight of him, for the which she
received great grief, so by force she was constrained a foot to go and
seek her knight, the which she did on every side, but could find no mention
of him, which caused in her great suspicion to think verily that he was dead,
so that many times she stayed, and was so troubled, th^^ she thought verily
she should have dyed with sorrow.

In this (...) she passed all the day and all the night, till the next day
in the morning, and never could find the knight of the Sun with so great
sorrow and grief, as though her soul would depart from her body. And for to
tell you what passed with him, the History does leave her till time does serve.

The life which the knight of the Sun lead in the solitary Island, and how
he was found by his Lady the Princess Claridiana. Chapter. 29.
AFter that the knight of the Sun had slain that devilish Fauno, till such
time as the Princess Claridiana came unto the solitary Island, there was two
months between, as says the wise Ly^gandeo, in which time he passed his life
with sorrows and complaints, sighs and sobs, all the day long, and in the
night time to sleep upon the hard ground, although for to withdraw himself
in the time of water and rain, and from the heat of the Sun, he made a
cottage covered with boughs, compassed round about with a fountain, situated
under a company of thick trees, this place was a great way separated from
that whereas the ^auno was slain, so that by reason that the Princess was a
foot, as yet she was not come unto that place, but in all the time that this
good knight was there, he never eat any other thing but such wild (...) and
roots as he found in the Island, so that with great h^^^nesse he did sustain
his li^e, by which means, as also for the great heaviness and grief which
he had taken in his heart, he was brought very lo^^e, and wared leave and
(...) such sort, that whosoever had seen him should not have known him, all
the which he (...) with great patience, and determined in that sort to end
his days, h^e was brought very weak and feeble, and could not long have
^ndyred if remedy had not come in time* neither could (...) to straight and
weary a (...) condition and strong of nature. There was not in all the Island
any person for to comfort him, neither (...) thing to recreate his
understanding, but (...), which many times came that (...) him, who one way
gave him some comfort when he saw him, and another way he did double his
(...), in calling to r^membrance the great and worthy (...) that he did with
him. Likewise the (...) of his friends turned him to great sorrow, as ^he
Emperor ^^cbatio his father, and the royal Empress (...) his mother, his
good brother Rosicleer, and of all the rest of his friends, and he found
himself very solitary without their company, but by reason that the grief
was much more which he printed in his heart, in considering the misliking and
evil love of the Princess Claridiana, there was nothing sufficient, neither
that raging and solitary life which he suffered, for to cause him once to
change his mind for to departs from that place, for that many times he said
unto himself, seeing that the Princess Claridiana desired his death, and that
she procured to give it him with her own hands, he desired to live no longer
in this world, at least ways not in place where he might be seen of people.

Thus in the end of all this time that he was there, it chanced the final
day of all his troubles to be very hot and soultering, and being passed a
great part of the same, he went forth of the cottage whereas he was, and
went and put himself under the shadow of a company of thick trees, whereas
the water of the fountain passed by with a swift course, the place was very
pleasant and delectable, and being sitten down upon the green grass, and
the pittering leaves upon those green trees being moved with a most sweet
and peaceable wind, jointly with the clear water of that fountain, and
running out between the stones, made so pleasant and delightful a noise, that
the knight of the Sun being ouerwatched with his continual care, fell
asleep, and being in this order asleep, lying a long upon the green
herbs, it chanced to be the very same day that the Princess Claridiana
went to seek him, with great sorrow and grief because she could not find
him, neither alive nor dead, and by reason that she went a foot, and the day
very hot, she waxed somewhat weary, for in all the other day past, and in
that day she never ceased seeking of him round about in all parts, yet
notwithstanding her great weariness, the great care that she had at her
heart was the occasion that she rested not till such time as fortune brought
her whereas the knight of the Sun lay under the trees in the shadow all
along a sleep, but when she found him whereas he lay in that order upon
the ground, and knew him, there was no humane pleasure that might be compared
unto that which she received at that instant, for she remained a good space
as if it had been one transported into a new world without any remembrance,
and it seemed verily that it had not been possible so great joy and pleasure
should have entered into her breast, although to the contrary when as she saw
that good knight, the flower of all the knighthoode in the world, to be so
lea^e and wanne, and put into so asper and straight life, she shed great
abundaunce of tears which ran down her fair face, wherewith she was so
bathed, that when she came nigh unto him, she remained a pretty while as in
contemplation, and could not satisfy her self in beholding him, for although
he was unarmed, and lay along upon the hard ground, yet did he show forth
that sovereign majesty and grave semblance wherewith he was adorned, he was
apparelled in a doublet of cloth of gold somewhat worn out, and his fair
yeolow hair, which seemed to be ^kaines of gold, was spread upon the green
grass, and his severe countenance, although it were lean and wanne, did show
forth the gallant perfection wrought therein by nature. For as the wise
Lyrgandeo says, and as it has been declared in many places of this History,
the proportion of his body, he says that he had a long visage, almost a
spanae and a half long, besides his beard, which at this time was somewhat
grown, a broad forehead and big eyes, his eye brows compassing like an
arc, and almost a hand breadth from point to point, his nose was somewhat
sharp, a little mouth, and his lips very red, he was of a gallant
stature, which was about eight fo^te long, and is sufficient for a Giant, and
all his members so well proportioned, that it seemed Nature did strain her
self, and endued him with all graces. Therefore because he was so big and
well made in every part, with that great majesty in his countenance as he
lay along upon the grass, that sure it was a strange thing to behold, and
the Princess did never until that day see him in apparaile that it better
please her, and give her greater contentment, which was the occasion that she
remained there a good while beholding of him as one greatly astonished, and it
seemed unto her that his shape did very far surpass all humane
understanding, and she said within her self that God had not created that
knight of so good a disposition for to live in the deserts, and how that she
deserved all evil for that she was the occasion of his sorrow and troubles.
In the mean time that she thus debated with himself, the good knight began
to move himself and turned into another place, and began to distill from his
eyes so great abundaunce of tears, that it was a grief to behold. Then she
because she would not wake him quickly, withdrew her self on the one side,
and stood behind a tree, where she tarried to see* what he would do, but
could not satisfy her self in beholding him, and giving thanks unto
almighty God for that she had found him alive.

All this time the good knight was in a dream, and dreamed that the Princess
Clandiana his mistres was come into that Island, and how that she went round
about in seeking him and could not find him, and he having a desire to go
unto her, procured himself to arise, but by any means he could not, for his
strength would not serve him, and she seeing that she could not find him,
returned again unto the Sea side, whereat he received so great sorrow and
grief that he wept, and shed those tears which the Princess, had seen.
Likewise it seemed unto him that she was departed, which caused in him so great
anguish and grief, that in the end he awaked as one scared and amazed, but
when he saw it was but a dream, his grief increased the more, and tumb^ing
himself from one part unto another, wi^h mortal grief and raging anguish he
said.

Oh love how is it that thou art new become less pitiful and more cruel
than any fury, and more stronger and terrible than any of the elements? All
things created has but one kind of death, but against mortal men thou have so
many and so different kind of torments, for to cause them to die, as there is
difference in the diversity of thy thoughts and desires, but yet if God were
so pleased, that some of them might make an^ end and separate this soul from
this my sorrowful and heavy body, for that it might be clear from this
outrageous and burning fire, but this is thy order of cruelty, to kill him
that is living, and not him that has time to bewail his death. Let it suffice
thee (Love) this great disfavor that I have received at thy hands, and let it
content thee in that I was of the world, and now thou have banished me into
this solitary Island, and do not now give me any new kinds of tormet, in
making me believe in dreams, that the Princess Claridiana my mistres does
come to seek me, and to set me at liberty of this exile to the which I am
committed? How is it possible that she should have any care, sorrow, or
grief over me, she lifting up the sword with her rigorous arm for to kill me,
and again, so high and sovereign a Lady should come and seek a knight so
unfortunate and abased as I am? It may well be said that it is a dream, being
a thing so variable and out of all consert, and I do now well understand, that
it is a new procuration of love to call unto my remembrance, setting before
mine eyes that high and sovereign glory, that after being deceived, and
finding my self frustrate and not worthy thereof, it may be the occasion that
my sorrow and grief may the more augment. But now (Love) use thy will against
me, and let fortune show me as much cruelty as she can, for that the cruelty
of the one nor the tyranny of the other is sufficient for to make me to leave
off and not for to love the Empress Claridiana my Lady and Mistres, and
loving her, for to suffer and abide any kind of torment whatsoever for her
sake, for that the day will come that the life shall leave this mortal body,
and the burning fire which continually flameth shall cease his fury.

In saying these words, the knight of the Sun expressed so great sorrow,
throwing from him such profound sighs, that the Princess did very well
understand the great grief that he had at his heart, and thought it not at
that time perilous to give upon a sudden knowledge of her being there, for
that she could not suffer any longer to hide her self, but would put remedy
to her evil, but yet for that she would that that pleasure should enter into
him by little and little she pulled down the beaue^ of her helm, in such sort
that he could not know her, and began to go toward him, making a noise with
her going that the knight of the Sun heard it, and looking about to see what
it was, he was greatly amazed to see that knight there a foot, and one of a
gallant disposition and well armed, where withal he straight ways arose up
upon his feet and did abide his coming, then the Princess, changing her
voice all that she could, saluted him, saying.

God defend and keep thee noble and famous knight, for that as I understand,
and according unto the things which I have seen in this Island, you should be
the knight of the Sun, who has slain the devilish Fauno. So the Lord
increase in you gentilitie and worthiness, Sir Knight, (he answered) truth it
is that I am the knight whom you have named, and marvel greatly to see you
in this place, for that many days past there has not landed at this Island
any other person but I alone. I do verily believe it (said the Princess)
for that this was not a Country that any other should enter in of less
bounty and valiant force than y^ of yours, for that there is none other in all
the whole world amongst humane creatures, but only you, that was sufficient
for to clear and set at liberty the entr^e into this Island. And you shall
understand that by the force of a great storm that we had at the Sea, we
were driven unto this Island, and being desirous for to know what Country it
was, I came ashore, whereas I have seen so many strange things, that so long
as I do live, I shall have enough to do to tell of the same, and I give great
thanks unto almighty God who has brought me hither, as well for that I have
seen some part of your worthiness, as also for to importune and desire you
for to leave this solitary life (which appertains unto brute beasts) and to
depart from hence, turning a new to use and exercise your armor, for that
such a worthy Knight as you are, should not be absent from the world, and
heerin you commit great offense against God, for that he has employed in you
so great bounty, and you not to use it, you shall understand that God did not
give it unto you for your self alone, but also for to defend and succor all
such as has need thereof. Likewise it cannot be without grievous offending
of the almighte God, to cause unto your parents so great sorrow and grief,
alonelie for your absence, which is no less grief unto them than the death,
and for my part here I do advertise you, that if you do not out of hand
depart from hence in my company, that I will remain here with you and bear
you company, and will not depart from hence till that death does conclude and
make an end of one of us or both together.

The Knight of the Sun was greatly amazed as well at the gentle disposition
of the Princess, as also at the great bounty and courtesy which she offered
unto him, and believed verily, as well in the riches of his armor, as in all
other things, that he should be some knight of high estate, and being
very desirous to gratify his words, he said.

Sir Knight, I do give you great thanks for this your courtesy and great good
will which you do offer unto me, and I would if it were Gods will that my
fortune might be such, that I were able to do you any service or pleasure,
but my fortune has been so contrary, and my evil destiny has brought me
unto this estate, that I cannot affoorde my self to lead any other life than
this which I do now lead, neither have I remaining in me so much power and
liberty for to accomplish any thing of this which you have spoken unto me
off, for that according unto the great fire wherewith I am tormented, I have
not any more hope of my life, neither have I any more certain continuance
than the flame that in have consumes a candle, and he that has his end so
nigh at hand, to what purpose, (I pray you) should he go and seek his own
natural Country, for to die there, for that it is death to leave both both
the one other, and as wise men have said, That unto man there is no Country
proper, but all the whole world is a common Inn touching this mis^rable life,
and for that Grecia is my natural Country, in no part in all the world can
the death be more grievous unto me than there, the lamentations of my parents,
the tears and weepings of my brethren, the complaints of my friends, the
cryings of my subjects, all the which will be an occasion to me of greater
torment, and the grief much more greater unto them, so that for to excuse all
this I am determined to die there, whereas nothing else but my sorrowful death
shall be grievous unto me, and there whereas I shall always have it in
memory, and now seeing that my fortune will not suffer nor consent to any
other remedy, I do most heartely desire you (gentle knight) to return again
unto the sea unto your own company from whence you came, and let me remain
here alone in this Island, and although it be solitary, yet am I accompanied
with so many sorrows, griefs, and torments, that I have no need of any
other company.

Here the Princess could not choose but feel at her heart very grievous the
words of her knight, but of his great fidelity she was very glad and
joyful, and had great pity of his sorrow and grief, and willing to proceed
in farther talk with him, she said: Of truth (worthy Prince) I do not know
what evil this of yours should be, so great and so stran^e, that in this sort
has taken away your st^^ngth, that all the power you have is not able to
resist it, if it be not that the which could tame the mighty Samson, the most
strongest of all men, and that Hercules, that had so great power and force
against the Centauros, which is Love, that did bring these in subjection and
many others more in the world, if it be this which has brought your life into
this estate, I know not what she should be that against you should show her
self so cru^ll, except it be such as w^ll pervert the courses and natural
mouings, for being as you are amonst Princes the most highest, and amongst the
most excellentest, and inducd with all goodness of nature, I do believe that
there is no damsel in the world, of what estate and beauty so ever he be,
but would receive great contentment, and think her self happy to be of you
beloved, knowing the love that you bear unto her to be perfect and ^oiall,
and if it fall out not to be such (believe me) for that I know thus much of
women, that first they will consent themselves to die burning in amorous fires,
than to make any show of love unto them that they think to have their
thoughts occupied in other parts, and so far forth as I can see they have
great reason, for that the heart of a man being set upon more than one, there
is none that has any part in him, neither can his love with any be
perfect, the which you may very well judge by your self, in thinking of that
which you would do, if so be that you did see this to be in her whom you at
this present do so earnestly love.

Ah good knight, said the knight of the Sun, this is the hidden fire
wherewith I am scorched, and that wherewith the bones of this my mortal body
does consume. This is that which has me prisoner and has inchaunted me, and
that to whom all my force and strength is yielded, without having any other
thing in me to make any resistance, but to do that which he desired, and
suffer with a good will all such pains and torments as he gives me,
esteeming much of the wound, making poison to be sauourie, bitter sweet,
pain delectable, torment, joy and pleasure, and finally, death to be very
sweet and easy. And if that love has showed her self so cruel against me,
good knight do not marvel thereat, for that, that high and sovereign
Damsel, the which my fortune and destiny did permit me to love, is of so
great valor and high desert, that here I do confess that I am not worthy
of her, for that fortune amongst humane creatures did exalt her most highest,
and nature did painte her in such sort (that putting a part the power of God)
I am persuaded that there was to be done no more on her. This way has she
been cruel unto me, and not that way (Sir Knight) which you have given me
to understand, for that she it is alone whom I love, and my heart is fixed
upon no other but only upon her. It is not needful that I say any more
herein, for that my life does bear witness of my great fidelity, for i^ so
be that I had my thought fixed in any other place, then should not my
disfavor have so much force and power over me, as to cause me to receive
such mortal grief.

Then she said, of my faith (Sir Knight) according unto your words, and as
you have given me to understand by them, it can be no other for whom you
do suffer this sorrow and grief, but Claridiana, the Empress of T^apisonda,
for that she is a Damsel, as well in highness as in beauty and gifts of
nature, that does surpass all other that be in the world, and if this be not
true, I tell you that you do injury me in this which you have said, for that
I have seen her, and I do believe that she has not her equal in the world.

The great sorrow and grief of my heart (said the knight of the Sun) unto
her alone I would that it were manifest, but for that I will not do so great
injury unto so high a damsel a^ you have here mentioned, and again because
you shall not say that I lack reason in this which I have said, I give you to
understand of a truth, that she is the party, and now seeing y^ I have told
you, I most heartelie desire you, that so long as you do live, you keep it
secret, for that seeing I must die for her sake, yet I would not for all the
world that she should be accounted culpable of my death. Now will I give you to
understand, said the Princess, that there is remedy put in all this your
sorrow and grief, and that your fortune is much better than you did make
reckoning of, for that I do know this damsel, and am certain that many days
since she has travailed in your demand with great sorrow and care for to
find you, and according unto the words which I heard, and the profound sighs
which I have seen her utter, I do believe of certainty, that she does bear
you as much good love as you do bear unto her, and if it be so that you have
received any disfavor or discurtesie at her hands, it is not unknown, that
over much love many times is the occasion of jealous thoughts conceived against
them whom they love, the which she might well have, in seeing you in company
with some other fair damsel, and afterward being certefied of your fidelity,
repented her self, and then the love which before she bare unto you, to be a
new redoubled in her, for that there is nothing that does in^ame and kindle the
amorous hearts, so much as does a false jealousy, when that faithfully they
are certefied to the contrary, for then all wrath and anger is turned unto
love, and is the ocsion the more to augment and increase, and so it may be now
in Claridiana, that if so be that you alonelie do love her, then was it not
possible the truth to be hid, and now she being repented of that which is past,
it does cause her (as I have told you) to go in your demand, and with no
other intent but to ask you pardon for that which is past, the which you ought
out of hand for to pardon, and to go and seek her, for that there is nothing
more worthy to be pardoned, than those errors which are committed by over
much loving. Then he said: Ah sir knight, tell me I pray you where you did see
my Lady and mistres the Empress Claridiana, and how you do understand y^ she
trauaileth in my demand, for that of truth if it be true, I will presently
depart and go seek her unto the worlds end, only for to see her, wherein
there shall be no man in all the world so happy as I. I will tell you how I
do know it, said the Empress, for that it is not many days since that I saw
her, and if thou will that I shall tell thee true, not many hours, and you shall
understand that yesterdaie she arrived in this Island in your demand, and she
is a aland, and not far from you, and I do believe that that is she that
comes yonder. This she said, pointing with her hand toward one part of the
Forest, that ways which she came. Then the knight of the Sun all amazed
and ameruailed, as of a thing in mockage and impossible, did look toward that
part, in the mean time the Princess pulled her gantlets from her white hands,
and tooke^off her helm, wherewith all her rubicond hair, which seemed to be
skaines of gold spread abroad upon her shoulders, of so great length, that it
reached unto the ground, and showed forth that fair face with so great
strangeness and majesty, that there was nothing in the world that might be
compared thereunto, and the more her beauty showed for that she was hot in
travailing a foot, by reason whereof her color was in her face, and it
seemed in the midst of her white cheeks to be two fragrant red Roses, her
fair and rolling eyes glistered like unto two very fine and great Emerodes,
glittering with a green cleerenesse, in so profound wise, that in them it
might be naturally said, whosoever did behold them, to be converted into
stones, for that all humane understanding they did amaze and leave as astonished.
But to conclude, the sovereign Princess in all points seemed rather to be a
divine thing than humane, but the knight of the Sun, who with great attention
was looking toward that place whereas she told him that she was coming,
had not as yet seen the Princess in that order, till within a while after,
seeing that he could see no body coming, he turned his head about for to
ask the Knight where he had seen and left her, but when he saw her
healme off, and knew her by her fair face, it cannot be said and told what
that worthy knight at that instant felt within himself, but remained
wonderfully amazed, and meruailing more than any man in the world, without
any power to speak one word, neither moved he any eye lidde, but stood
still beholding that seraphicall face, out of the which he received so many
dazeling sightes and glittering cleerenesse, as though he had continually
looked upon the Sun in the morning, at such time as he spreads his golden
beams abroad upon the earth.

Then the royal Princess seeing him in that great perplexity, with the
exceeding joy and pleasure she received, clasping him about the neck, and
embracing him, she said.

Just, true, and good knight, seeing that I am she alone that have committed
this error, and has been the only occasion of all this your sorrow and
grief, I am here come in presence to make a means for the same, and to cra^e
pardon at your hands for all that is past, for if I have committed any offense,
believe me, it was by the ouerm^ch love which I did bear you, and your
troubles and sorrows has grieved me as much, and gone as nigh my heart, as
mine has been unto you, in such sort, that if God of his infinite mercy and
goodness had not permitted me to find you here, of truth I do tell you,
that I would never have departed from hence alive, for that I was determined to
end my days, leading the most strictest and sorrowful life that might be
immagined, in recompense of my great error, In the mean time that the Princes
spoke these words, the knight of the Sun received so great joy and pleasure,
in seeing him in the presence of his so desired mistress, that he embrased
her, excusing himself with such amorous and sweet words, that he thought
himself transported into an other world, and knew not whether he was in heaven
or on the earth. And coming unto himself after that he had received that
courtesy at her hands, kneeling down before her, he took and kissed her lilie
white hand perforce, receiving thereby more glory, then if he had been made
Lord over all the world. Then the Princes a new, did embrace him, and almost by
force, did cause him to arise, saying, your highness (worthy Prince) does not
consent, that you use with any this courtesy, much less with me, that am
wholly yours, Then the good knight said, ah mistress, as you are all only
she in all the world (next unto God) that may show me courtesy, so have you
now this my mortal body glad, joyful, and happy: I am not only bound unto
you to kiss your hands, but if so be that the great love which I bear unto
you do not deserve it, then is not my high estate sufficient that I deserve to
enjoy so great courtesy, and here in I do receive so great glory, that if
continuallye I may enjoy your presen^e, with a very good will I would forget
all highness and royal estates, and live and lead my life here, with as great
joy and pleasure in your company better then in any royal palace, and
think my self verily to be in eternal Paradise.

I would to God (replied the Princes) that with our honors and emperial states,
we might accomplish the same, leading our lives here together in this solitary
Island, for that for my pleasure and contentment, I request no other thing, but
only the enjoying of your company, in place whereas I might not be desturbed
one minute of an hour, but for that fortune has exalted us unto so high
estate, and that God has not created us with so great callings, only to serve
our selves, but we must (as we are bound) accomplish and perform our duties to
our subjects, and go and sustain our imperial estates, and in especially
you, having so excelent parentage, you are the more bound for to go and see
them, and to take from them by your presence, the great and long heaviness
which they have received by your absence.

Then the good knight said, Mistress, I do receive so great joy and
contentment of heart, only in beholding of you, that as the happy saints unto
whom the loss of parents, nor any worldly thing can cause them to feel any
pain, sorrow, and grief: even so I being in your presence, there is no
absence, nor any other thing, that can give or cause unto me, sorrow and
grief, but yet for all this, use you your will and discretion, for that I have
no will, but whereas is yours.

These and many other mo amorous words passed beetwixt these two true and
perfect lovers, and yet could neither of them manifest entirely, the great joy
and pleasure the which they received at their hearts. After a while that they
had passed the tune in this their joyful meeting, they sat themselves down
upon y^ green grass, in the shadow under those huge and mighty trees,
whereas with sweet words, and still more amorous then eloquent, they
discoursed the one with the other, of all things that had happened unto
them, since their departure out of Constantinople. And the princes did give the
knight of the Sun to understand the occasion why and wherefore, she made
battle with him, and how much sorrow and grief the supition thereof did cause
unto her, and how and in what sort she was put out of all doubt concerning the
same. Likewise she told him of all the great preparation to the wars which
was made in Grecia, at her departure, and how she understood that all the
whole Paganism, and a great part of Christendom, came against the emperor
Trebatio, for which cause he did put himself in a readiness to receive them,
and was very sad and sorrowful for his absence: all which when the knight of
the Sun understood, he straight ways had a great desire to be in Grecia,
seeming that in time of so great necessity, there was no reason that he should
be absent, in especial for that the chiefest occasion and greatest part of
those wars were for his sake.

Being in this communication, they could not be certified the one to hear the
other, they saw coming toward them two damsells, upon two palfraies, whom
the princes did straight ways know to be her Damsells, whom she left in the
ship, and being greatly amazed that the princes tarried so long and not
returned, came a land, and went in her demand, with great sorrow and
heaviness, because they could not find her: but when they saw her and knew the
knight of the Sun, they were wonderfully glad, as well for the joy which
their mistress received therein, as also for the strange things which they had
seen in that Island. And surely they were very sad, thinking that the knight
of the Sun had been dead, because he had not been heard of a long time.

When these two Damsells came unto them, they left and ceased their amorus
communication, and received them very courteously. Presently upon the green
grass they did eat of such vittailes as the Damsels had brought a shore from
the ship, for their Lady and mistress, whereas y^ knight of the Sun, with
the great joy and pleasure that he received at his heart, the color and
semblant of his face was chaunsed, so that he seemed an other manner of man, and
showed the true and perfect^perfection in color and presence, the which
nature had wrought in him. And the Princes for to see him in that sort was so
glad and joyful, that there was no pleasure that might be compared unto hers.
After that they had eaten and well refreshed themselves, the knight of the
Sun seeing his good horse Cornerino in company with that of the Princess,
he lured, and straight ways he came unto him, for that he had used him
thereunto, so he took him, and after that, that of the Princes, and being both
desirous to depart from thence, they took each other by the hand and went
unto the place whereas the knight of the Sun had left his good armor, and
there he armed himself again with them, being helped by the princes, for that
her Damsells, with the great fear which they had of the devilish Fauno, the
which was dead, durst not come nigh them. And the knight of the Sun, seeing
him so favored and helped by the hands of his Lady and mistress, was in that
case that he knew not whether he was in heaven or upon the earth, and being in
this glory, ready for to depart out of the solitary Island, the History does
leave them, till time do serve.

Of the strong and well foughten battle, that was betwixt the fiftene knights
of the Emperor Trebatio, with the fiftene of the Emperor Alicandro. Chap. 30.
WHen that the day was come of the challenge, and that the battle should be
tried between the fiftene knights of the Emperor Trebatio, and the other
fiftene of y^ Emperor Alicandro, they were all in a readiness, and the field
whereas the battle should be fought, was appointed, in y^ midst betwixt
both the Armies, nigh unto the City, in place whereas those of the mighty
palace might very well see and beh^lde all that passed, from the battilments
of the same. At this time was the fair princess Lindabrides very sad, and
full of sorrow, for hat she could not bear by any means news of the knight of
the Sun, and therewith was very de^irous to see the battle that was
appointed that day, (...) to the end to behold the Emperor Trepation his
father, and Rosicleer, his brother, she requested the Emperor Alicandro, to
carry her for to see it, who for to please her, received great contentment, and
commanded the triumphant Chariot of Iuorie, to be made in a readiness, the
which being done, the fair princess mounted into it, and in her company were
more then thirty damsels, all very fair and richly apparailed, and amongst
them was the princess Floralindia, spouse unto the prince Meridian, and the
wise queen Iulia, and other queens and ladies which the princes Lindabrides
had brought in her company, all mounted into that triumphant Chariot, and
twelve furious giants, with their great and steely mases in their hands, for
their guard and keeping, who plast themselves round about them.

So with great noise and sound of trumpets and Music, twelve horses began to
draw forwards the Chariot, and carried it nigh unto the place, whereas the
battle should be made, hard upon the host of the P^gans, in such sort, that
they were backed with them. Then straight ways the Emperor Alicandro, the
better for to see the battle, commanded an other triumphant Chariot, like
unto that of the princess, to be brought, and therein to place his imperial
seat of gold, with all the seats of the other kings round about it, in such
order, as they were in his Tent, the Chariot was drawn with four Elephants
very great, who had strength enough for to draw a tower. And when they came
whereas the battle should be made, they plast it hard unto that of the
princess. Then the Emperor Alicandro, and those kings his vassailes, who came
thither a horseback, alighted from them, and mounted into the Chariot, and
placed themselves every one in his seat. The Emperor set in the Empe^iall
(...) above them all, and being accompanied with so many kings, every one
with his crown of gold upon his head, and he with his Imperial Scepter in his
hand, (...) publish there his great power and (...), and about those two
Chariots were place^ all the rest of the other people for to see the battle,
and (...) the Emperor commanded twenty thousand Tartarlans to be armed for
the guard of the battle. This when all was in a readiness, it was high
noone, at which time the Emperor Trebatio with the rest of his knights were
all armed, and being ready for to depar^e into the field, they went (...)
took their leave of the Empress Briana and of the rest of the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, who with many tears did commend them unto God, and the sorrow
and grief which they received to see them depart unto to cruel a battle
was such, that they could not depart from them, neither would they let them
go, till such time as the Emperor almost by force went out of the great hall,
then straight ways all the rest followed after him, and being mounted upon
light and good horses, with twenty thousand Greeks for to keep the field,
they went out of the City, and surely it was a gallant and strange sight to
behol^e, for that the fifteen Knights went by themselves somewhat aparted
from the others, and because they were all mighty Princes and worthy
Knights, they were all armed with very strong and rich armor, bordered
about with gold and precious stones, likewise the trappings of their horses
was all of cloth of Gold very sumptuous, with gallant bunches of ^eathecs on
their foreheades of diverse colors. The worthy Emperor Trebatio rode in the
midst of them all, and was armed in read armor, these which the wise
Lyrgando had sent him before, the (...) muele of so leene metal, that they
seemed to be all of fine Rubies, he carried no crown upon his head, for that
he did ^^uer accustom the same in battles, saying that there was no (...)
of a Crown, whereas they should more profit themselves of their force end
strength, than to (...) of iuorie, which he threw at his packen which became
him* singular well, and gave testimony unto all these that he held him who
he was. On the one side went with him his son Rosicleer, then after him*
(...) all the other Knights in very good order, and for that they were all
very big and richly armed, the Ladies had enough to do to behold them,
but most especially the Empress Briana, the excellent Princesses, Oliuia,
Lyndaraza, and the Queen Arquirosa, who from the windows of their mighty
palace did behold them, as they that had their joys in that company, could
never aparte their eyes from them, and with great devotion they prayed unto
almighty God for to save and defend them from the hands of their enemies.

In this sort went this noble Emperor and his knights into the field, every
one of them with his Spear in his hand, accompanied with a gallant crewe of
most worthy knights, which was a goodly sight to behold: but yet the
tears trickled down the cheeks of that high and worthy Emperor Trebatio
and his valyant son Rocleer, because they wanted in their company at this
present the worthy knight of the Sun, as we^ for that he should be at that
time a great stay unto them in the conflict, as also for that of long time
past they had not heard any news of him. Likewise all the rest of those his
friends said, that if they had him there in their company, they would not
fear all the whole host of the Pagan Emperor.

In this order when they came unto the place whereas the battle should be
made, the valiant and courageous Prince Meridian, with the gran Campeon, and
the stout Brandimardo, withal the rest of the company of the other knights
which were of their part, were all ready armed, and mounted upon their horses
with their spears in their hands abding the coming of their adversaries and
when they (...) was in them, every one thought his adversary to be very
stout and valiant.

There come on the part and behalf of the Pagans for Judge of the battle,
that proud and valiant youth Bramarant, being (...) upon his great horse, rode
and put all things in order, apperting the people out of the field, that there
might be space enough for to make the battle. And on the part and behalf of
the Emperor Trebatio, came forth for Judge of the field, the king of
Macedonia, then the two Judges parted the field, putting every knight over
against his adversary, so his thoyse and desire. They were placed in this
order, against the great and mighty Campion, was placed Rosicleer. Against the
prince Meridian, the valiant prince of Fransia. Against the stout Brandimardo,
the mighty Troyan O^stedes. Against the stout Rodaran king of Arabia, the
Emperor Trebatio. Against the king of Media, the courageous Flo^^on, for that
it was given 0him to understand, that he was a valiant knight.

Against Zoroastes, king of Trprobana, was placed Bargandel. Against the prince
of Cambray, Liriamandro. Against the king of the Gandaros, Don Siluerio.
Against the prince of Aegipt, Rodoma^te. Against the six most valiant Giants,
sons unto the g^an T^iteon, was placed the prince Brandizel, the king
Sa^ridoro, the Tartaria Zoylo, the stout knight Flamides, with the valiant
knights of Spain, Don Claros, and Arcalus, who according unto the great
strength and power that was in the Giants, had need of no small courage and
valor for to counteruaile with them. And of truth you may be lee^e, (...)
before that the battle was (...), there was not two amongst that great number
of thousand of Pagans, that was in the whole Camp, but thought surely the
victory to be on their part, for that the fifitene Paga^ knights, next unto
Bramarande was the whole (...) and strength of all the Pagan^.

Being all in a readiness, and the people in quiet, the Judges commanded the
Trumpets to ^ound, in s^gne and token of battle: and all these knights set
spurs unto their light horses, who ran with so great force and fury, that
all the earth whereas they were, seemed to tremble, and when they came to make
their encounter, the noise was so great of their sheuered spears, as though
they had shot of great ordinance: and surely in many days before, in that
country was there not seen the like encounter, of so many worthy and valiant
knights, the good Emperor Trebatio made his encounter against that valiant
Pagan Rodaran, whose encounter was such, that they sheuered their spears in
small pieces, and passed the one by the other, but by the force thereof,
Rodaran lost his stirrups, and the raynes of his bridle fell out of his hand,
and complained very much of that encounter. The like did the two most valiant
Princes Meridian and Brandimardo, making their encounters with their two strong
and stout adversaries, Clauerindo, and Oristedes, they passed all four, the
one by the other, in gallant manner, sheuering their spears into small pieces,
but no vauntage perceived of the one part nor of the other, in this their
encounter. Then the six sons of the gran Titheon, made their encounter
against those six valiant knights that came against them, and the strength
was so great which they used in their encounters, that if their armor had not
been very good, all tw^lue together had been thrust through and through, but
by reason that the force of their armor was a de^ence against the sharpness
of their spear points, there was no more harm done, but the one and the other
with their horse betwixt their legs foundred backwards to the ground, but
straight ways they recovered again and began their battle with their
swords. The like did the stout king Florion, and the king of Media, and the
four princes Bargandel, and Liriamandra, Don Siluerio, and Rodamarte, who made
their encounter against their adversaries, in such sort, that without moving in
their saddels, they passed the one by the other, with a gallant demean^r and
stout courage.

But now hearken and be attendant, how that the gran Campion as big as a
tower upon his Elephant ^ade his encounter with that strong and mighty knight
Resicleer, who like unto a whirle wind with all the furi^ of his mighty horse
Rondarte came against him, and in the midst of his course made so strong an
encounter, that although their Spears could not pearce their fine armouys, yet
the stout Rosicleer being astonished by the forc^ of that encounter, lost the
raines of his bridle out of his hand, and if he had not well stayed himself
by the pommell of the saddle, it could not have been otherwise, but of force
he must have fallen unto the ground, but firming and staying himself very
strongly, he passed forwards on, greatly tormented therewith, but this gran
Campion received so strong an encounter of Rosicleer, that his mighty force
was not sufficient for to hold him, but doubled his back in such sort, that
he fell over the crouper of his Elephant unto the ground. If the fair
Princess Oliuia (who did see and behold all that passed from the windows of
the Palace) received any joy and pleasure at that gallant and strong
encounter, I report ^ee unto your judgment, and on the contrary, the grief
and anger which his son Bramaran^ sustained, to see his mighty and valyant
Father by the encounter of one alone knight to be overthrown unto the ground,
and having no patunce in himself, neither could his courageous hear^ (...)
him to be silent, but in a rage he ^urst out and said.

It is not possibl^; but that the Gods (being (...) against us and our great
strength (...) join (...) in a conclusion, and she^ forth (...) strengths
against us, in this stout and valiant knight for otherwis^ to the contrary,
ther^ is no humane force that is able to (...) the strength of my Father
B^ada^^^^ but (...) seeing it is so, that they will show themselves so
contrary against us, from this time forwards I do renounce them and
blaspheme them, and (...) to take me (...) enemy, and if so be that this
knight may fall into my hands, there shall be no sufficiency in his great
force be it either humane or divine, for to withdraw me to give him the death.

Then the Father with no less fury and braveness than his son arose up
from the ground, proclaiming no less injuries against their false Gods, for
that in such sort they showed themselves so contrary against them, and
therewith he drew out a mighty great and heavy fauchon which he had, and
with a hasty pace he went against Rosicleer, thinking in a short space to hew
him to pieces with his variable and mortal blows, but there was three things
in this battle clean contrary, which was the occasion that he could not
execute his furious and angry desire: the one, the great lightness that
Rosicleer had, that being on foot his Brother the knight of the Sun had no
advantage on him, so that it was a great marvel, for the gran Campion to
fasten a blow upon him in any respect, the other was the finenesse of his
armor, which was made by the wise Artemidoro of so great valor, that no
humane force, nor edge of any sword was sufficient for to cut or buckle them,
the third was the great dexterity and strength wherewith Rosicleer did strike
him, and so thick, that he did not let him rest one minute of an hour,
neither gave him any advantage for to profit himself of his great strength,
and although that Rosicleer had these three things on his part for to make his
defense against his adversary, yet could he not with so great ^ase get of him
the victory, for that Bradaman after that he had the battle with the knight
of the Sun, did always after arm himself with very strong and inchaunted
armor, and it was so exceeding good, that the good swoorde of the Queen Iulia
was not able by any means to cut it, and besides this, his blows were so
strong and heavy, that when so ever he chanced to strike a full blow upon
him, he made him to stoop with his knees and hands unto the ground, and he
had as much care for to clear himself from his terrible blows, as he had for
to strike him, so that the battle between them was very well fought and in
great doubt, and put great admiration in the Emperor Alicandro, and in all
them that did behold the^. In all this time did the other knights make their
combat very strongly, some a foot and some a horseback, the which was a
thing worthy to behold, to see what terrible, blows were stricken, the
breaking of shieldes, c^tting of harness, vnmailing of goriets, making the
fire to fly out of their steely healmes and harness, of so great abundance,
that it was strange to behold: so that the battle was so strong and well
foughten of every part, that one whole hour was passed, and there was no
advantage known nor seen of any part, amongst them, and the great
valiantness of either of them was such, that they did deserve particulerlie
their worthiness to be declared, but by reason that there were so many
together, and mingled the one with the other, they could not deser^e the
worthiness that they did. Amongst them all their blows were terrible, but in
especial those valiant Princes Meridian, and Clauerindo, who with so great
fury did strike their blows, that many times they were both astonished, and
either of them were greatly amazed at the great strength of his adversary, and
the prince Meridian said, that the knight in his blows resembled the knight of
the Sun. Likewise those stout and valiant knights Brandimardo and Oristedes,
with no less fury and redoubled blows, did charge their adversaries, and put
great admiration in all them that did behold the battle, who said, that
they twain were two of the stoutest knights that were in all the world. It was
no less worthy of beholding the great conte^cion that was betwixt the good
Emperor Trebatio, and the stout king of Arabia Rodaran, whose blows were of
so great force, that they were heard a great way of, and being an hour past
since the battle began, the strong Pagan was greatly amazed at the great
force and strength of the Emperor, and said within himself, that it was
impossible for him to get any honor in that cruel battle, for that
continually the force and lightness of his adversary increased, and a thing
to be wondered at, was his valiant courage, of whom naturally his sons had
received the like. And the Emperor Alicandro, and all those kings which were
with him, that did behold him, and knew him, being greatly amazed, said, that
he was one of the most valiantest knights in all the whole world, and one that
was most fiercest in battle. Then the old king of Gedrosia, said, My flesh
and my bones tr^^ble, when I do think of that I shall see this Emperor do,
in the field against us, he being in the midst between both his sons, and
it seems unto me, that there is no security, whereby from the fury of
their arms, we cannot make any defense: and this good knights that we have on
our part, behold how many there is to the contrary, who does make resistance
and detain them, till the other does destroy* these miserable people. At which
words all those mighty kings that were in the triumphant Chariot, laughed
very much, and imputed them unto the great fear and little force the which
the king had, for that he was old. But yet time happened afterward, that they
did feel and know that the words which he spoke, proceeded more of wisdom
and understanding, then of fear.

Likewise, it was a thing worthy to be seen, the furious and well foughten
battle, that was betwixt the sons of the Gran Thiteon, and the six knights
their adversaries, for according as they were all strong and valiant, it were
enough to do in this Chapter, only to declare of their valiantness, for the
force of the Giants was wonderful, and they stroke their blows with so great
fury, that either of them was sufficient to cleave an armed knight down to to
the wast, but yet they contended with such knights who knew very well how to
resist their great strengthes, and made them to sweat drops of blood, for
that they had amongst them that mighty and strong knight Brandizel, who by
reason that he was very big of body and of great force, and hot in courage,
brought his adversary in a great perplexity, and all his armor broken and
unbuckled, although they were a finger thick, and this was the eldest of the
six brethren, with whom he combatted, and the most valiantest and strongest:
on the other side did combat, those two valiant warriors the king Sacridoro,
and the worthy Tartarian Zoylo, and behaved themselves in such sort in their
battle, that they gave them very well to understand, who they were.
Likewise, with no less courageous force, those two most valiant knights, Don
Claros, and Arcalus, did oppress with their mighty blows, the two Giants
their adversaries, in such sort, that in the space of one hour, they brought
them in that case, that the victory appeared to be theirs, and for that those
two knights were not known, they were greatly amazed there at, for their high
and strange bounty.

The good knight Flamides, did make battle, with the younger brother of the
six Giants, and although the battle betwixt them was well foughten and very
perilons, yet for all that by reason that his armor was excelent good, and he
very light and stout, he had the vauntage of his adversary. Also the valiant
king Florion, and the king of Media, made their battle with mighty and
furious blows, but before that one hour was past of the battle, it was well
known that the king Florion, was the valianter of both. At this time the four
princes had so entreated their adversaries, that they were very weary and
faint, and they likewise were well moyled, for that they had received great and
mighty blows of them, for they were strong, stout, and valiant.

Thus in this sort was this cruel battle betwixt them all the best fought
that ever was seen, betwixt so many knights, for that all those that did
behold them, had their ears deafened, with the continual sound of the hard
and thick blows, that were stroke amongst them, and there could not have been
a greater noise, if ther^ had been a hundredth Smithes together working and
striking upon their a^^ells.

Likewise in this time it was a marvelous thing to see and behold Rosicleer,
with Bradaman, with although he lacked but one finger breadth of eight foot
high, which was a gallant stature, yet before the Gran Camp^on, he seemed
nothing, for that he was almost fiftene foot high, nevertheless the blows of
the one and of the other was equal in furiousness, for that Rosicleer, did so
charge with his furious blows Bradaman, that although he could not cut his
armor, yet did he all to torment and bruise his flesh and bones, and with more
lightness then was comprehended in him, he made him to besturre himself and
turn about on the one side and on the other: the like did Bradaman, unto him,
for although that Rosicleer, did save and defend himself from the most part
of his blows, by his great nimblenesse and lightness, yet for all that, when
he fastened a blow upon him, he made him to stoop both with knees and hands to
the ground: and the armor of Rosicleer, did make such a sound, as though it
had been a bell, and out of both their armours there flewe so great quantity
of sparks of fire, as though they should be burned in them.

In this sort the battle betwixt them continued more then two hours, in
which time some of those Ladies that did behold them from the mighty palace
of the Emperor Trebatio, were not much at quiet and ease at the^^ hearts, for
that the Princess Oliuia, seeing her spouse and loyal lover to combat so
terriblie with that furious Pagan and monster, her face began to be wan and
pale, and the blood waxed cold within her body, so that fell down in a sound
amongst the Ladies: in the like perplexity was the royal Empress Briana, for
her husband and son, and the fair Princes Lindaraza, for her loving and
faithful spouse Clauerindo, and the like had that fair Ladies Arquirosa,
for Don Siluerio.

Furthermore you shall understand, that after two hours was passed from the
first beeginning of the battle, and that there was not one of those worthy
champions that had any will or desire (as it seemed) to rest themselves,
then the good Emperor Trebatio, being very desirous to make a final end and
conclusion of his battle, with the uttermost of all his force, he raised
himself in his styrrups, with his sword in both his hands, and therewith
stroke so strong and terrible a blow upon the healme of the stout pagan
Rodaran, the which by reason that it was somewhat crazed, with that battle,
as also with other battles before: he altogether unbuckled from his head, and
breaking his skull (by the force thereof all to pieces) he overthrew him from
his horse dead to the ground, and said, Now shall it be seen if thou can
deliver thy self from my hands, and what can profit thee, the subteltie and
desceit of the queen of Carmania. The which being concluded he withdrew him
self a part, and did behold the battle of the other knights, whereat all
that were on his part received great pleasure and contentment, but in
especial, the Empres Briana, who knew not where she was, with the great joy
and pleasure she received. But the sorrow and grief of the Pagans was very
great, but in especial the Emperor Alicandro, who had Rodaran in great
estimation, for that he was one of the strongest knights that was in all the
whole Paganism, as of truth he was so. But yet the grief of his heart did
not herein end, for that the worthy prince Brandizel, at that instant
overthrew at his feet the Giant with whom he had his battle, who was the
eldest of the six brethren, wherewith he vnlased his healme and cut of his
head. And it was not long after when that the two valiant brethren, Don Claros,
and Arcalus, did the like with their adversaries, which were the second and
third brothers, and were the most fiercest and strongest of them all, and they
withdrew themselves apart, and did behold the battle of them that remained.

Then straight ways, Bargandel, did overcome the valiant King of Taprobana*
and Liriamandro, made for to yield the Prince of Cambray, and within a little
while Don Siluerio, did cut of the head of the stout king of the Gandat^s, and
not long after the king Sacridoro, and the Tartarian Zoylo, overthrew their
adversaries to the earth, who were the fourth and fifth brethren, of the
Gyaunts who as the other before did cut off their hands, of all the which the
Emperor Alycandro received great sorrow and grief, and the like did all the
Pagans, and they repented them very much in making of that challenge. Then
Rodamarte took the Prince of Egypt prisoner, for being very weary and
feeble, of his own good will he did yield himself to be prisoner, so likewise
the valiant knight Flamides did force so much upon the youngest brother the
Giant, that in the end he was slain as the rest, so that all the generation of
the gran Thiteon was slain in that bat^aile. It was not long after that the
king Florion overthrew the king of Media at his feet and pulled off his
healme, helping him to arise from the ground, he took him prisoner, and put
themselves on the one side, and did behold the battle of the other three
that remained, the which at that time were so entangled and furious, that all
those that did behold them were put in great admiration, meruailing greatly
how they could suffer so great and long travail, and make any defense from so
terrible and cruel blows which were given of all parts.

Those which remained were those precious and valiant knights Meridian and
Claueryndo, and the mighty Trojan and Brandimardo, who in force and de^teritie
were so equal, that almost there was not any one that could know any
advantage to be of either part, and being now more than three hours since
they first began the battle, and both parts agreeing thereunto, they
ceased for to take breath, and to ease themselves, in the which time they did
behold the great contention that was betwixt that valiant and worthy knight
Rosicleer, and the stout Pagan Bradaman, the which was condign and worthy to
be seen, for that without al order and measure they stroke their blows, with
so great force, that all the fields and the mighty City rong with the great
noise of their battle. All this time did the fair and precious Princess
Lyndabrides from her triumphant Chariot behold Rosicleer and the Emperor
Trebatio, and for that both of them did resemble very much the knight of the
Sun, she rejoiced greatly to see them, although another way her heart was
very sad and sorrowful; for that she did not see the knight of the Sun
amongst them, and she imagined within her self that he should be in
Trapisond with the princess Claridiana (which went unto her very heart,) and
other ways she did argue within her self that he should not be in
Trapisond, for if he should be there, it were not possible but that he
should understand the great necessity that his Father had of him, and having
knowledge thereof, there is no estate that should cause him to be absent so
long, but that he would have come thither for to have helped him. Thus having
these and many other such like thoughts and cogitations in her mind caused
only by love, she did behold the battle, the which at this time seemed to
be more kindled and better fought than at the beginning, and gave sign and
token that as that night the victory was doubtful, for that it was but almost
noone when the battle began, and now it was almost night, at which time there
was more doubt of the victory than at the beginning, and all waxed weary to
behold them, and yet in them appeared not any manner show of travail or
weariness, although all the day before they did no other thing but lay load
the one upon the other, but when that Rosicleer saw that it drew toward
night, he was so greatly ashamed in that he could not overcome his enemy,
that a new he began to say upon him with all his force and strength, but
Bradaman was of so great strength, and stroke his blows so terrible, that all
his care and thought was in vain, and brought him many times unto the point
for to loose the victory, yet at the last, having three times rested
themselves, the gran Campion with very weariness withdrewe himself aparte,
and lifting up the ^eauer of his healme, he requested Rosicleer that the
battle might remain as it did till the next day, for that it was late, and
could not be concluded except it were in the night, who for that he was no
less weary and out of breath than he, did likewise withdraw himself back,
and said that it should be as he would have it, so shall betwixt them the
battle was separated: At this (...) and Oristedes, being returned
a^newe-vnto their battle waxed faint and weary, by reason that all the after
noone they did not any other thing but give and (...) great number of terrible
and cruel blows, the appr^^^ing of the night did nothing grieve them, and
when they saw the battle betwixt Rosicleer and Bradaman to be separated,
they straight ways withdrewe themselves back, and lifting up the beauers of
their healmes, they requested their adversaries that the battle might cease
betwixt them for that day, who were so outrageous and angry because they
could not overcome them, that they would not depart from thence until such
time as the battle were concluded, but they seeing that it was night, and
how that they were very sore bruised and weary, they could do no less but
withdraw themselves, and lifted up their beauers to receive air, so that the
battle was wholly separated betwixt them. Then straight ways there was made a
great noise of instruments, that all the whole fields were filled with the
sound, in such sort, that one could not hear another.

Then the Emperor Trebatio being accompanied with those noble knights of his
part, went to speak unto the fair Princess Lyndabrides, offering unto (...)
his City and mighty palace for her lodging, for all the time that she
should remain in Grecia, and she with no less good will than if it had
been the Emperor Alycandro gave him intertainment, and surrendered great
thanks for his large proffer unto her. Then the Emperor Alycandro being
accompanied with all those mighty kings and vassals, descended from his
triumphant Chariot, and came and talked with the Emperor Trebatio and his
knights, and the one received the other with such courtesy as was requisite
between so high estates* Then after a while that they had talked together very
friendly, the Emperor Alycandro did give unto the Emperor Trebatio great
thanks, for the good intertainment which he gave unto his daughter for the
time that she was in his Court. It was then very late, so that the Emperor
Trebatio and all his knights did take their leave of him, offering their City
at their commandment, and so returned, whereas they were received of all those
Ladies and Gentlewomen, with that joy and pleasure as reason required for to
see them return safe and sound from so terrible a battle as they had
maintained all that after noone before, and every one received the praise as
his valyant deeds deserved: and to the contrary, the Pagans remained very
sad, sorrowful, and angry, for the good knights that were slain on their
parts, and Meridian and Brandimardo were greatly amazed, in that the Emperor
Trebatio had on his part so worthy and valiant knights, and praised in
especial Rosicleer, for that he endured and maintained battle so long with
the gran Campion. Then the Emperor Alycandro commanded straight ways, that
the dead bodies of all them that were slain in that challenge should be
burnt, and the dust of them to be put in vessels of gold, and so carried
into their own Countries.

In this sort they passed away that night, and other two days, wherein was
done nothing neither of the one part nor of the other, till the third day, in
the which happened all that which shall be declared* unto you in the next
Chapter following.

How the proud Pagan Bramarant being angry at the words which were spoken
by Meridian and Brandimardo, departed out of the camp, and sent to call them
for to combat with them, and what happened besides. Chapter. 31.
THE proud and insolent heart of Bramarant could not suffer nor dissemble the
anger which he received at the words spoken by Meridian and Brandimardo, at
such time as was concluded the battle of the challenge past, but as one that
was very desirous to be revenged for the same, he determined in great secret
to depart out of the camp, and to send and call them into a secret place,
whereas he might make battle with them, and none to be present for so part
or separate them, and as he determined, so he put it in ure, for that in a
morning before the break of day, at such time as the people of all the whole
camp were most at rest, in as secret wise as was possible, being armed with
his strong armor, and mounted upon his great horse, he departed out of the
camp with alonelie one man that he carried with him, and being very desirous
to find a secret place to accomplish his desire, he never rested till he came
unto the skirt of the wilderness of Grecia, whereas he finding it a place fit
for his purpose to accomplish his desire, stayed, and from thence sent his man
that he brought with him, unto Meridian and Brandimardo, for to give them to
understand how that he did tarry there for them, who when he came back again
unto the camp, went straight unto the tent of the Prince, whereas he found
them both together, for that they were great friends after such time as they
battailed together the one with the other, and there he declared unto them the
message that he brought from Bramarant, who when they heard it, were of so
valiant a courage, that they were nothing troubled thereat, but rather it
seemed to be a great shame unto them to go together, being their adversary
but one alone, so that betwixt them there grew a contention who should go
first, but in the end for that they could not conclude that point, and neither
of them would be the last, it fell out that they must go together, and
according unto the great force and strength of that worthy Pagan their
adversary that did abide their coming, afterward it did not repent them of
their so going. Thus these two friends being armed with their rich and strong
armor, without giving any knowledge unto the Emperor or any other person
whether they went, departed out of the camp, and being guided by the man who
brought the message, in a short time came unto the wilderness of Grecia, and
not having travailed long therein, they found Bramarant a foot from his horse,
lying along under the shadow of certain trees a sleep, for that the Sun
was very hot, and he laid his head upon his healme, and slept so soundly,
that although they came unto him making a great noise, yet could he not awake,
until such time as Brandimardo with his Spear stroke him a little blow upon
the breast, wherewith this mighty Pagan awaked, and seeing his adversaries
before him, as one amazed arose up, and put his helm upon his head, and with a
trice leapt upon his horse whom he had there at hand tied unto a tree, and
took his Spear in his hand.

Meridian seeing him in that case, said: Bramarant, what is it that you would
have with us, we are now come hither at thy challenge? That which I will have,
answered he with great pride, is to make you both understand together, that
my force is much more than the force of all the knights of Grecia, and to
revenge the words that you said unto me before the Emperor Alycandro, and
those that were with him.

Unto proud and arrogant persons, answered Meridian, a little occasion is
sufficient for to cause contention and strife, of little effect or profit, and
less necessary or needful, but seeing that it is so, that thou have so good
a will for to have battle with us, let us straight ways come together, and I
hope in the high Gods that either of us both will give thee enough to
understand. And in saying these words, with his Spear in a readiness in his
hand, he addressed himself unto the course, and desired Brandimardo that he
should not aid nor help him, for any thing whatsoever that he should see
pass in the battle. Thus Bramarant being in a readiness, they both set
spurs unto their horses, and made their encounter together with great fury,
and for that they were both of very great force and strength* they sheeuered
their Spears all to pieces, and without doing any more harm, passed the one
by the other with a gallant demeanor, and upright in their saddles, but they
had not gone forwards many paces, when that they turned about their horses,
with their swords ready drawn in their hands, and joining together in such
sort that they might strike the one the other, they stroke at each other such
cruel blows, that they cloue their shields in pieces, and the points of their
swords descended down upon their healmes with so great ^urie, that great
abundaunce of fire flew out of either of them, then they stroke each other
another blow, with so great fury, that they declined their hades down unto
their breasts, and then Bramarant did very well feel that the force and
strength of Meridian was very much, and he likewise on the other side gave
him to understand that his blows were wonderful, and that it was requisite
with great care to defend himself from them, for the which Meridian with a
greater courage did lay upon and charge his adversary, and with all
lightness possible did clear himself from his blows.

In this sort they executed their battle more than half an hour, making so
great a noise, that three mites compass in that wilderness the sound of
(...) great blows were hedroe. Thus they continued for the space of more than
three quarters of an hour in their battle, without any point of advantage
between them. Then Meridian with both his hands stroke such a blow upon the
healm^ of Bramarant, that he took his remembrance from him, and without any
feeling his horse carried him round about the field. But this mighty Pagan
straight ways came again unto himself, and with great fury setting spurs
unto his horse, he returned upon Meridian, and with an infernal fury stroke
so terrible a blow upon the healme of that worthy and valiant Prince, that
if it had not been so good as it was, he had cloven him down unto the waste,
but yet for all that, he made the blood to gush out both at his eyes and nose
in great abundance, and deprived him of all understanding, so that his horse
carried him about the field as though he had been dead, and having no power to
make resistance against his unbridled wrath, he went after him with great
villainy, for to strike him another blow before that he should come unto
himself, the which being perceived by that stout knight Brandimardo, with
great fury he set spurs unto his horse, and before that Bramarant had space
for to strike Meridian, he ouertooke him, and stroke him such a blow with his
sword in both his hands upon the right shoulder, that he had overthrown him
unto the ground, if that he had not embraced himself with his horse neck.
Then the furious Pagan seeing himself so entreated, straight ways settled
himself in his saddle, and returned and stroke such a blow at Brandimardo
upon his healme, that he thought verily his teeth had been all broken in his
head with beating one against another, his head was so ouerladen, and almost
from himself the raines of his bridle fell out of his hand, and his horse ran
away with him, at which time the valiant Prince Meridian was come again unto
himself, and was very sorry for that Brandimardo was come for to help him,
but with very great wrath and angry courage he returned upon Bramarant, his
adversary did the like, as also Brandimardo, so that between three the
battle was so well fought, that it was a strange thing to behold. But now let
us leave them for to tell what happened after this.

You shall understand that by and by after that these three valiant knights
were departed out of the camp, by many they were found lacking, yet there was
not one that knew wherefore they went, neither did they imagine that betwixt
them there should be any defiance, so that the Emperor Alycandro and all the
rest were without any care or suspicion of that matter, but thought verily
that they had been gone all three upon some adventure which was offered unto
them in that Country. Likewise the great valor that was in all the three, did
assure them to be without any care of whatsoever peril might happen unto them,
but that man whom Bramarant carried with him, fearing the great peril that
might come unto his Lord, for that he was assaulted with so strong and valiant
knights, straight ways after that he saw the battle begun, returned
unto the camp, and secretly declared unto the gran Campion all that passed,
who straight ways without any staying armed himself with his strong armor,
and mounting upon a mighty Elephant departed out from the army, and gave
none to understand whether he went, but all men thought that he went to
recreate himself in the Country, as the others were gone. Then taking his
way toward the wilderness, by reason of the great pace of the Elephant, in a
short space he came thither, but yet two miles good before he came unto the
place of their combat, he heard the great noise the which they made with their
terrible blows, which gave such a sound through the woods and valleies, as
though a company of pieces of Ordinance had been shot off, and following the
sound, by aim he came unto the place, he was not as yet come unto the place
of the battle by a good stones cast, when that he saw coming toward him on
the one side in great have a knight of a big stature and great members, who
seemed to be a giant, mounted upon a great horse very well armed, and his
Spear in his hand, and as it appeared by his hasty coming, he was allured
thither by the noise of the battle between the three knights, but when he
saw the gran Campion, he never rested till he came unto him, and said.

Whether art thou iourneying this way Bradaman? Then he very angry because
the knight was so bold to ask him whether he went, would not answer him
because he would not be detained, till such time as he saw in what state the
battle was betwixt the three knights, but setting spurs unto his Elephant,
he rode on, and this big knight followed him till they came whereas the battle
was made, and saw that it was the best fought battle that ever they had
seen in all their lives, for that the two Princes Meridian and Brandimardo
were very valiant knights, and of great force and strength, and charged
Bramarant with their mighty blows, very thick and strongly, in such sort,
that if he had not been of so great valor and force as he was, be could not
have prevailed against them. But this furious Pagan was so brave and
courageous, that he esteemed in nothing their mighty blows, but repaied them
with others of so great strength, that many times he made them so astonished,
that they were driven to sustain themselves by their saddle bows and horse
necks to keep themselves from falling, but by reason that they were two of
great valor, they always put him in great perplexity, which caused his anger
and wrath the more to increase. At this time the gran Campion settled himself
for to help his son, the sooner to make a conclusion of that battle, but
the big knight that came thither with him (who received great contentment to
see the three how they made that battle) did put himself before Bradaman and
said, that if he would aid and succor his son, that then he should be
constrained first of all to combat with him: who being very angry at those
words, answered and said: Sir knight, tarry a little, and I will make thee to
understand what a fool thou art for to take with me contention. In saying
these words he departed from him, and setting spurs unto his Elephant, with
his Spear in his hand, which was as big as the mast of a ship, he came
running against the knight, whose with so great swiftness as his horse could
run, came against him, whereas they made their encounters in such sort, that
their spears were shieuered in pieces, and the shieuers slew into the air,
and either of them declined somewhat backwarde upon the arsons of their
saddles, but straight ways they arose and settled themselves again, and
drawing out their swords they came the one against the other, whereas begun
betwixt them such a battle, that it was a wonder to (...) the great and
heavy blows that they stroke, that the fire ^lew out of their healmes and
harness, and many times they were very sore astonished and from themselves.
Then the fierce Pagan Bramarant, and the two knights that did battle with
him, with the great noise that the other two made in their contention, left off
their combat, and did behold the other, and were greatly amazed to see with
what great fury and force they executed their blows the one upon the other,
the gran Campion they knew, but not the other knight, yet they had him in
estimation of a worthy knight, and were very desirous to know who he was, for
that they could not imagine whom he should be, so mightelie did he behave
himself. Thus after a while that they beheld the battle of the two, being
very desirous for to conclude and make an end of theirs, they began a new to
charge the one the other so strongly, that it seemed they were more fierce and
furious at that time than they were at the beginning. And being in this angry
and doubtful battle, the History does leave the one and the other, for tell
you of the knight of the Sun, who with the Princess Claridiana remained in
the solitary Island.

How the knight of the Sun and the Princess Claridiana after that they were
departed from the solitary Island, did deliver their Pages and the knights of
Candia from the Roauer Cleonidas, who carried them Prisoners. Chapter. 32.
Very glad and joyful did this History leave the knight of the Sun and the
Princess Claridiana in the solitary Island, whereas with the company and
sweet conversation of them both, with a very good will they would have lead
their lives, clean void of all care and thought of their high and royal
estates, if they might have been free of the great bondage in the which they
were bound, but having a great respect for to accomplish their duties, the same
day that they met together, and knew the one the other, they departed out from
the Island, and embarked themselves in the Princess ship, and having a fair
wind and prosperous, with great joy they began to sail toward the Empire of
Grecia, and the fourth day after their departure from the Island being at
three of the clock in the morning, a great way from them they saw coming two
great ships, and as it seemed with all sails bearing they came toward them.
So in a short space by reason that the one sailed toward the other, their
ships met together. Then they that were within the two ships joined with the
other ship, and grapled them together, and cried out with a loud voice,
commanding them to amain, and to yield themselves prisoners. The which being
heard by those two faithful lovers, they straight ways laced on their
helmes, and came forth to the ship side, and asked what they were that would
take them prisoners? Then straight ways more than ten knights of a gallant
proportion and well armed, came forth unto them, and said. That unto two alone
knights as they were, there was no need for to make that account, but yet for
that you shall understand unto whom you shall yield your selves prisoners,
know that we are all belonging unto the gran Cleonidas, and we do pardon unto
none their lives, except they do yield unto us at the first to be our
prisoners.

Of truth (said the Princess) this cannot be, that you should be belonging
unto that rouer Cleonidas, for that he is not in this world, nevertheless if
that you be in your works and deeds as he was, you shall quickly be whereas
he is, and that is with the devil. How is this, said they, is our Lord
Cleonidas dead? It is not possible, for that there is no humane power, neither
yet divine, that is of so much power for to kill him.

Then you shall understand of a truth (said the Princess) that I did see him
slain only with one blow. But these knights would not believe it, but
thought verily that they said it because they would deliver and clear
themselves from their hands, and one of them would have laid hold upon her,
and said.

False Knight, they mocking shall little profit thee, for in spite of thy heart
you shall go with us prisoners. Then the knight of the Sun who heard and
saw all that passed, without drawing any sword, stroke him with his armed
fist such a blow upon* the head, that he buckled his helm into his brains,
and overthrew him dead at his feet. Then all the rest greatly amazed at that
blow, drew their swords and leapt altogether into their ship, and began to
charge them with their blows in the best wise they could, but these two who in
the like conflicts were very well experimented, drew out their fine and
slashing swords, and so besturred themselves, that with a few blows they slew
six of them, and the other which remained, making a great noise leapt again
into their ships, out of the which came straight ways forth more than thirty
other knights, who seemed to be very good and well armed, and altogether began
to leap into the other ship, and charged the knight of the Sun and the
Princess with their blows all that ever they could, but* it well appeared
that they did not know their great worthiness, in that they approached unto
them without order, but in a short space they lost all their bravery, for that
in the space of less than half a quarter of an hour that the battle was
begun, they overthrew more than twenty of them to the ground, with such
mortal blows, that the rest which remained alive being terrified and amazed,
retired back unto their ships, and the knight of the Sun and the Princess
followed them, whereas they found a new resistance, with certain fresh knights
and other people that were in the ships, who began to charge them very
greatly, and laid upon them many heavy blows, but the knight of the Sun
taking the foreward of his mistres, settled himself in such sort, that if there
had been a thousand knights before him, he would have esteemed them little, and
being very desirous to be revenged on the long time that he was idle in the
solitary Island, he put himself amongst his enemies, and charged them with
such mortal blows, and without all pity, that if the battle had endured
but a little longer, he had not left one alive of all that were in the ships.
Then those which remained, seeing there was no resistance to be made against
the fury of those two knights, (...) down before them, and craved pardon for
their lives. Then they who were ready to accomplish their requests, did grant
them their desires, and understanding the truth how they were rouers, and how
that they had many prisoners in their ships, they commanded them to bring them
forth before them. Then they obeying their commandment, carried them into
certain big cabbines in their ships, whereas they found many men and women
with chains and boltes of iron, and amongst them the knight of the Sun knew
his good Pages Binnano and Aurelio, and the twenty knights of Candia that
were in his company. Likewise the ancient Pilot that told unto him the
story of the devilish Fauno, of the which he was not a little glad, for that
they were delivered by his hands. But when they knew him as well by his armor
as by his face, for that at that time his beauer was lift up, it is not to be
spoken how greatly they meruailed, and what joy and pleasure they received,
and as amazed they looked the one upon the other, and could not believe that he
should be alive, and his two Squires as from themselves, came unto him, and
kneeled down before him, and began to kiss his armed hands, and the skirt of
shirt of maile, saying: O Lord God, how can we gratify this great courtesy
which thou have done unto us, in letting us see before our deaths this
excellent and worthy prince our Lord. The knight of the Sun received them
with great love, and raised them from the ground, saying: My good friends,
those who have had you in their powers did not love you so much as I have done,
and I give thanks unto almighty God that I do now see you, and I do desire
him to give (...) so much liberty that I may gratify you, these greafe
troubles the which for my sake you have sustained, for surely it was a great
grief unto my heart for to leave you alone in that case without all comfort,
when I thought to go and leave my life. Go and kiss the hands of my Lady
and mistres the Princess Claridiana, who next unto God has delivered me from
death. They hearing the same, meruailed very much thereat, and went and
kneeled down before her, and would have kissed her hands, but the Princess
caused them to arise, and received them very courteously, for that she knew
the knight of the Sun did bear them great love, and for that she would not
be known of the other, she did not raise up her beauer, but commanded that it
should not be known who she was. Then the knights of Candia and the ancient
Pilot came and kissed the hands of the knight of the Sun, giving him great
thanks for their liberty, which at his hands they obtained, who received
them with great love, and commanded their chains and shakles to be pulled
off. Then they asked the knight of the Sun what had happened unto him* in the
Island of the devilish Fauno.

My good friends (said the knight of the Sun) God of his infinite goodness
and mercy gave me power for to clear and deliver my self from him, and to
kill him, for that in that Island he may be served, being peopled, as he has been hitherto dishonored by the evil life and demeanor of that evil Artimaga.
Whereat all those knights and the ancient Pilot (as well at these news, as
also at the great destruction which they saw done in those ships on those
roaners which had taken them prisoners) were greatly amazed and knew not what
to say, neither conjecture who that valiant and worthy knight should be,
neither durst they ask him the qustion, but had a great good will all the
whole sort of them for to go unto the solitary Island, for to see the deformed
shape of that devilish Fauno which remained dead. Thus afterward all together
went unto the solitary Island, and when they came aland, they saw the rock
hewed all to pieces, and the Fauno where is he lay dead, and by the writing that
was upon the stone, they understood y^ he which did that worthy act ^as the
knight of the Sun, and son unto the Emperor Trebatio, and having a great
desire, that that worthy and famous deed should be manifest unto all the
world, they commanded the Fauno to be skinned or slaied, and filled the skin
full of straw, and so carried it unto many Countries, causing great admiration
unto all those that did see it, in the end they carried it unto Grecia, as in
the event of this History shall be told you.

When the knights of Candia understood all that they desired, they gave the
knight of the Sun to understand how that fifteen days past, as they were
all together nauigating toward Candia, they met at the sea with that roauer,
and after a long time that they had made battle with them, by reason that
they were many, they were constrained to yield and be their prisoners, and how
that long before that, they had taken his Pages, and they returned back again
for to seek the solitary Island in his demand, and there to die in his
company. Thus after a while that they had been with him, and given him to
understand of all that had passed with them, saying, that he had a journey in
hand with his companion, that he could not by any means excuse, and so
committed them to God and good fortune, and gave them the ships of the roauers,
and all the riches that was in them, which was a great quantity, for the which
they gave him great thanks and kissed his hands, taking their leave of him,
although with a better will they would have gone with him in his company. And
being departed they took their journey toward the solitary Island, having
enough to do all their lives after for to tell of the knight of the Sun. Then he
with the Princess, embarked themselves into their own ship, and having the
wind prosperous, with all sa^les bearing, they sailed toward the Empire of
Grecia, and not being troubled with contrary winds, neither with storms nor
tempests, in a short space they arrived in a port the which was but two days
journey from Constantinople, whereas they understood of the great multitude of
Pagans that were entered into Grecia, and in what state the wars were in, then
they gave great thanks unto almighty God, and departed from thence, and for
that the knight of the Sun would not be known, till such time as he had done
some valiant act worthy to be noted, they agreed y^ he should leave his armor
and his horse that he had, and to arm himself with some other strong armor,
which the princes had, packed in fardels, the which her damsels carried
always with her, for to change at all times at her pleasure, because she
would not be known. This thing they straight ways put in ure, and the knight
of the Sun unarmed himself of that good armor that was of the Prince
Meridian, and gave them unto the damsells of the princes, for to put them into
their fardels, and he armed himself with others, the which was all Asure, and
full of stars of gold, and garnished about full of fine precious Stones, and
in strength and goodness, nothing inferior unto his own, for that they were
made by the wisest men that were to be found in all the Empire of ^rapisonda,
and although they were made for the princes, yet were they ^it for the knight
of the Sun, for that in stature they were almost equal, but yet the knight
of the Sun was more fuller of flesh then she was, although she was meetelie
reasonable in all parts.

Being thus armed as you have heard, he took a big and light horse, one of
them that the Damsels brought, and left his own to be lead along by the
(...), and covered his horn that he had on his forehead, because he should not
be known. Likewise, the princes being armed with other strong and bright
armor, both of them to gether with great joy and pleasure, took their
journey towa^ds the mighty city of Cons^lantinople. And the second day after
their departure from the port, they entered into the wilderness of (...),
wherein they had not traua^led fully two miles, but they heard a great and
continual noise, which ronge and sounded throughout all the wilderness, and
it seemed unto them to be the noise of some strong and well foughten battle
or combat on horseback, And being very desirous to know what it should be,
they amended their horse pace, and rode that way from whence they thought the
noise should come. In the end of a good hour that they had travailed, the
noise brought them unto the place whereas the Gran Campion and his adversary
made their combat on the one side, and on the other side the stout Bramarant,
with Brandimardo and Meridian, and for that the knight of the Sun knew none
of all those knights, but only the gran Campion, which was by his great and
huge bigness, they all greatly meruailed to see that strong and rigorous
battle that was between them, and could not imagine who that valiant Pagan
Bramarant should be, for that unto his remembrance he had not seen a knight of
so big a stature, and one that stroke so terrible blows, neither could he
fall into the reckoning of those stout and valiant knights Meridian and
Brandimardo, who so strongly did charge their adversary, and made so great
resistaunce against the fury of that Pagan. On the other part they greatly
beheld the gran Campion and his adversary, and as they were beholding the
singular disposition of the knight, and the high bounty wherewith he made his
combat with Bradaman, he saw that it could be no other but his brother
Rosicleer, and greatly rejoiced to see with what courage and mighty force he
made his combat, as also in what feeble state he had brought him, and there
they stayed a good while to behold them, and the Princess Claridiana said
within her self, that over and above all knights that were in the world, God
had created the sons of the Emperor Trebatio to be most mightiest, and with
great reason they deserved to bear the praise above all other, for that their
high knighthoode and marvelous feats of arms were without comparison. Truth
it was, for that knight which at that time combatted with Bradaman was
Rosicleer, who being advertised by a knight how that he saw the Gran Campion
depart out of the Camp, he having a great desire to make an end of their
former battle begun, very secretly (without giving any knowledge unto
the Emperor Trebatio, went forth of the City, and rode so fast upon his horse
Rondarte, that he ouertooke Bradaman, as has been told you before.

How the knight of the Sun without knowing Meridian or Brandimardo, made
battle for them with the stout Pagan (...). Chap. 33.
WIth great desire for to know those two worthy and valiant knights, Meridian
and Brandimardo, with the mighty Pagan Bramarant, was the knight of the Sun
and the Princess beholding the strong and rigorous battle that was betwixt
them and they seemed unto them to be the most strongest and valiantest knights
that ever they saw in all their lives, and for that he was fully persuaded
that he who made the combat with the gran Campion was Rosicleer, so likewise he
thought that it could not be otherwise, but those who did combat with Bramarant
must needs be of his company, and possible to be those two Princes Brandizel
and Claueryn^o, or that mighty Troyan Oristedes, for that they ^id resemble
very much those knights.

Then the worthy knight of the Sun being very desirous for to make peace
and quietness betwixt them, for that they were all valiant and strong knights,
as also for to know who Bramarant was, left the Princess and went unto them,
and putting himself betwixt them, he said: Sir knights, I shall receive it in
great courtesy, if that at my request you will leave off this battle betwixt
you, for that it is a great grief unto me to see such worthy and valiant
knights as you are, contend to kill one another, without having any just
occasion thereunto. Then the two worthy Princes Meridian and Brandima^do
seeing the gentle disposition of the knight of the Sun, and the great courtesy
he used in his words, straight ways withdrew themselves a part, in saying
that they were very well content at his request so for to do, for that as
then they themselves knew not for what cause they did make that battle. But
this proud and fierce Pagan Bramarant, who was very furious and wrathful,
with a great desire to revenge himself upon them, with a proud disdainefull
and horse voice, faming at the mouth, said: Knight get thee away straight
ways from that place, and so that thou speak no more unto me of that
matter, for if thou do, I do swear unto thee, that in concluding of the
battle with these two, I will begin it with thee, and then thou shall quickly
pay me this anger and grief which thou haste given me. And as the knight of
the Sun did reply in requesting him again to accomplish his request. He
very furious and angerie, lift up his heavy sword, and stroke him such a blow
upon the healme, that he daseled the sight of his eyes, and said, now come you
all three against me, for I will revenge my self on you all.

Then the knight of the Sun, who received not so much grief in receiving
that blow, as in the discourtesie of Bramarant, in drawing out his good sword
said, here I do promise thee proud and discourteous knight, that this which
thou would not accomplish nor do at my request, this my mortal battle
shall make thee to do by force, and concluding these words, he turned unto
the other two knights, desiring them to let him deal alone with him. But they
for that they did not know him, and had felt by experience, the mighty power
of Bramarant, would not consent thereunto, for that they thought it a thing
impossible, for him to make defense against that mighty and fierce Pagan half
a quarter of an hour. ^ut yet in the end, he did so much importune them, that
they were constrained thereunto, with condition that they should succor him,
when that they did see that he stood in any need of either of their helps.

Here was the stout Pagan Bramarant greatly amazed to see how that knight durst
venture to combat with him alone, and to refuse the aid of the other two good
knights, could not immagine who it should be, but judged rather that his
boldness should proceed more of folly then of ^orce: but he was put quickly
out of that doubt, for that (...) as the battle was begun betwixt them, he
quickly vnd^rstoode stood that he was the most brauest and strongest knight
that ever he had proved, for that many t^mes he did depart him of his sight,
and made him to decline his head to the horse neck, making him to puff and
blow like a Lion, who waxed therewith more wrathful and furious, which cau^ed
him with mortal ire, to strike such blows upon the knight of the Sun, that
he gave him well to understand how great and mighty was the power of
Bramarant, who mused greatly who that mighty knight should be. In this sort
was shere betwixt them the brauest battle that ever was sen^ fought betwixt
two. All this while were the two Princes Meridian, and Brandimardo, in great
admiration, when that they saw the great worthiness of the knight: but the
princes Claridiana, who also did beheld them, did nor marvel at that which
her knight did, for that she had before time known his great bounty, but yet
she greatly wondered to see how strongly Bramarant, did combat with him, who
although more then two hours before he had maintained battle against the
other two knights, yet at this time there appeared no point of wearines in him,
but rather he showed himself to be more brauer and furious then at y^ beginning.

Then after when that the knight of the Sun began to be kindled in wrath, and
that his ire increased, was the battle worthy to be looked on, to see what he
did therein, for that his terrible blows were such, that eue^i^ one of the^
was sufficient for to have cloven an armed knight from top to toe, if they
had not been defended by their inchaunted armor: great abundance of sparks
of fire flew out of their armor, and slew up a great way in the air, before
they lost their light, and with the great noise which they made in striking
their blows, all that wilderness did ring there with, and Meridian and
Brandimardo that were talking together, could scarce hear the one the other,
but had their ears (...) with the noise thereof.

(...), with mortal fury and devilish wrath, stretched up himself in his
stirrups on his mighty horse, and took his sword with both his hands, and
stroke this good knight such a blow upon his left shoulder, which glaunced
down from his healme, that he thought ver^ly he had been cloven in pieces, the
pain was so great he fol^: and agine, if he hadd^ not embrased himself about
his horse neck, he had surely fallen to the ground. And as ye he had not
well righted himself in the saddle, when that this strong Pagan, stroke him
an other blow overthwart the healme, that he daseled the sight of his eyes, and
it lacked little to deprive him of his remembrance.

Then this valiant knight seeing himself so entreated of his enemy, being all
kindeled in wrath, raised himself in his stirruppes, and with his sword in
both his hands, did strike such a furious blow at this stout and devilish
pagan, upon his enchanted healme, that being deprived of his sight and
remembrance, he declyned backewards so much, that his head almost touched his
horse buttockes, in such sort, that if he had not straight ways come to his
remembrance, and with all the strength of his legs and body, procured to
bustle up himself again, with that alone blow he had been overthrown to
the earth: then with great fury and wrath, they began to charge the one the
other with their heavy and fell blows, and according unto the terrible force
with which they stroke, it seemed that the battle began anewe. Meridian and
Brandimardo, who did behold all that had passed, said, it may be that this
is the knight of the Sun, who so long time has been absent, and could not be
heard in all the country of Grecia, for that it is not to be believed, that
any knight in all the whole world, should do that which this worthy and
valiant knight has done in our presence, except the knight of the Sun.

They did also on the other part behold the cruel and (...) had with the G^a^
Campion, who likewise they did not kn^w, whereat they were greatly wondered,
and it seemed unto them, that those four which at that present did there
combat, were four of the most (...) in all the world, and they said within
(...) that the Emperor Trebatio, had not in all his court, a knight that one
to one could resist the great and mighty strength and furious rages of the two
Pagans, but only the valiant Rosicleer, whom they did judge of a truth, to
be the same that did combat with the stout Bradaman.

Now was it a good hour and a half, since the battle was begun, at which
time the stout and furious Bramarant, seeing that his adversary endured his
mighty and heavy blows so long before him, was ready to burst with anger,
and began to blaspheme and curse himself, for that at one blow he could not
cleave him a sunder, right down from the top of his head to the wast, the
which strong resistaunce, made him to think verily, that he should be one of
his false gods, or else all they together, had placed their force and
strength in that alone knight, for to battle against him: which caused his
great pride the more to increase, and being troubled with that thought, he
forced himself by his pride, for to surmount the divine Gods, he took his
heavy sword in both his hands, and raising him self all that ever he could
in his stirruppes, and like a furious whirle wind, he went against the good
knight of the Sun, and his wrath was such, that I think there was no steel
or Diamonde, nor any other hard thing in all the world, that could make any
resistance against that mortal and devilish blow, for that this fierce Pagan
for to accomplish his fury, forced himself all that ever he could, to have
bereaved the valiant knight of the Sun of life and ^im, and his wrath was
such, that the wise and learned clarke Lirgandeo, was in doubt, that against
that mighty force, should support any thing the inchauntement of the armor
which the wise man sent to the good knight of the Sun: but he who saw him
come so wrathful and furious, with a mighty and valiant courage, did abide
him. And at such time as he would have discarged his heavy sword upon his
helm, he lift up his sword with both his hands for to ward the same, and
received that mighty (...) same, and for that the edge of his swor^e was (...)
finer fi^er and sharper then his, it cut the sword of Bramarant a sunder in the
midst, and the piece which remained toward the hilt lighted upon the healme
of the knight of the Sun, and although it was not much, yet did it deprive
him of his sight. Then the good knight being greatly amazed at the mortal
fury of his enemy, did pray unto God from the bottom of his heart for to
remember him, and not to forget and leave him in that perilous conflict. It
seemed at that time that he had great need of the divine favor for to get
victory in that battle, at which time his wrath and ire increased with so
great anger to see himself so entreated before his mistres by one alone
knight, that he retired back somewhat from the place whereas they made the
battle, from whence he set spurs unto his horse and came against
Bramarant, with so great fury, that the earth seemed to tremble under him, and
his fierceness was such, that it seemed to put some dread into the heart of
that fierce Pagan, in the which before never entered any fear, for I insure
you, who so ever had seen that furious knight, with his sword above his head in
both his hands, and with what wonderful fury he came against him, would have
had no less fear of him, then of the thunderbolt that falls out of the
air: so in this sort when he approached unto the Pagan he stroke, and chaunsed
such a blow upon his great, thick, and inchaunted healme, with so great fury,
that it had been sufficient for to have cloven a Smithes stithe asunder in
the midst, and for that the fine cutting edge of his sword, could not cut the
magical art and inchauntment of his strong healme, yet did that blow so
ouercharge his head by the great weight thereof, that it took his remembrance
clean from him, and like a dead thing he fell forwards upon his saddle bow,
and horse neck, hanging down his head, and out at the joints of his helm
issued great (...) of blood, and his mighty horse being tormented with the
force of that blow, ^anne out of that place, and put himself into the
thickest of that wilderness with his Lord, then the knight of the Sun who
desired not to follow him, returned unto Meridian and Bra^dimardo, saying, Sir
knights, I do desire you to pardon me, if you have any anger against me, in
that I took upon me the battle with that proud knight, that did combat
with you, for I ensure you that his great pride would not let me to give
place, unto y^ I am bound to your great courtesy and bounty. Then did
Meridian and Brandimardo, very much behold him, and were greatly amazed at his
great strength, and said within themselves, that he was the most valiant in all
the whole world, for that he alone has done, that which the whole army of the
Emperor Alicandro could not do, and according thereunto they answered and
said.

Of truth Sir Knight, your great bounty and courtesy is such, that we should
account our selves for happy, for to know you, and thereby to serve you, and to
have you in that estimation as your great worthiness does deserve, and we do
give you great thanks for the travail and peril from the which you have
delivered us. Your bounty and worthiness is such, so far forth as I have
seem, (said the knight of the Sun) that of your selves you are a sufficient
security to deliver you from all peril: nevertheless, if I have done any
thing, it was nothing but by virtue of your great courtesy, considering the
great villainy used by that knight. And in that you do require for to know my
name, I do most heartely desire you, that for this present, you would not
request the same, for that it is not in my power for to declare it unto you,
till such time as I have accomplished and performed a promise, the which I
have made unto yonder knight, who came with me:

Then they seeing that he had no will for to declare who he was, but to keep
himself in secret, would not import^ne him any more for the (...), and (...)
themselves that it could be (...) the knight of the Sun, and that constrained
through some great occasion* he would not suffer himself to be (...), and the
more to provoke him thereunto, they ^fted up the beauers of their helmes, in
such sort that the knight of the S^nne did kn^w them, and was very glad
thereof, for that he had them in great estimation, although at that time he
would not give them ^o understand in any wise that he did know them.

In all this time the Princess Claridiana received great contentment in that
which the knight of the Sun had done, and all four together did put
themselves to behold the cruel contention and rigorous battle that was
betwixt the valiant knight Rosicleer and the gran Campion, who at the great
noise of the last blow that the knight of the Sun gave unto Bramarant, did
aparte themselves from their battle to see what it should be, and they saw
the mighty Pagan clean void of any remembrance, and his horse carrying him
into the thickest of all that wilderness.

Then Rosicleer meruailing greatly at that knight, for that he had so great
power for to bring him into that perplexity, made no more a do, but returned
unto his battle, whose blows were so many, and of great force and strength,
that it was a wonder to behold, and for that it was more than four hours
since the battle was begun, the gra^ Campion wa^ed weary, and it seemed that
Rosicleer had somewhat the vantage of him, but yet with y^ exceeding great
grief which he received to see his son Bramarant carried by his horse in
that sort, he wa^ed therewithal* so wrathful and furious, that he neither
felt travail nor weariness, and charged Rosicleer with such a multitude of
blows, that many times he did astonish and amaze him, but yet in the end, the
cruel destiny of this Gran Campion was such, and again, for that his cruel
death was ordained from above, the ire of that worthy and valiant Rosicleer,
so increased in him, that with a mortal fury, he stroke so mighty a blow at
Bradaman, overthwart his wast, that he made him decline on the other side
almost from himself, and being in this sort almost out of his saddle, his
evil fortune was such, that in his stouping, he discovered a naked place under
his arm, whereas was no other defense but his shirt of mayle, the which being
seen by Rosicleer, being very desirous to make an end of that long
contencion, he thrust at him with the point of his good sword, with so great
force and strength, that he made his sword to enter up to the hard, hiltes,
and pulling it out all blodied, the Gran Campion fell from his Elephant down to
the ground, and within a little while after he yielded his soul unto the
Devil, who had deceived him in the blind law of his false gods.

Oh false and weak foundation of man, for that they which are most endewed
with corporal force, does think their lives in most security, without
respecting that contrary unto the confidence which they have in their great
strengthes, fortune does double hers, and that many times with great anger, for
that he does find no equal contemner. And for to show what a weak animal
man is, with an unseemly weak and hidden evil, be the mighty great Giants
overthrown.

As he that slew Hercules, was very little, who was he that had the victory in
all things. Likewise Milo, the stoutest amongst men, an Oak did stay him, so
that he was torn in pieces with wild beasts, so that we may say that that
force the which was without comparison, was less then a cloven Oak: what does
he think then to do, that is but of a mean strength, what does he think to
have his life in more security, and to be more aparted from the light and
mouable wheel of Fortune, then was this stout and fierce Bradaman Campion, the
most valiant and mightiest of all Giants, one that had force and strength,
for to bring in subjection, those fierce and indomable people of the whole
compass of the Oriental Islands, and yet at this present he lacked strength
for to defend himself from one alone knight, of a great deal less stature
than he was of, who with one alonelie blow he slew him, and did abate his
p^ide, the which many thousands of Giants could (...) Likewise mortal men do
think, and do boast themselves more of virtue, than of valiantness or
strength, for that alone the force of the soul, in that which receives no
strength cannot be overcome, neither has fortune any power against it, and as
it is placed in the soul, it has no need of any corporal strength, and
according unto the saying of the wise Ly^gandeo and Artemidoro, they were not
so much moved, by the high knighthood and mortal conflicts of these two so
worthy Princes, for to write this mighty History, as they were by their
great virtues, and excellency of courage and gallant demeanours, the which in
all their life times did shine in them, for which cause (say they) they were
more esteemed and had greater fame, than for the great force and strength which
they had, and always they did esteem themselves, and delighted more in virtue
than in their strength, and therefore these wise men say, that if this mighty
History be pleasant and delightful unto the readers, so shall it be no less
profitable unto them, that with great care and diligence will note and consider
well, how these knights were given unto virtue all their life times.

Thus as it is very profitable and necessary for the taking out of any work
to have a pattern before him, even so likewise it is no less necessary and
profitable unto him that will give himself to virtue, the good pattern or
example of virtues, in especial of these so high and worthy Princes in whom
by reason of their high estates, their virtue and bounty does shine the
cleerer. But now to return to our matter.

The History says, that when the gran Campion was dead, Rosicleer did make
clean his sword, and put it up into his sheath, giving infinite thanks unto
almighty God for that victory permitted unto him, and when he saw the other
four knights coming toward him, he likewise went toward them, and received
them with great courtesy, for that he knew both Meridian and Brandimardo, by
reason their faces was discovered. And for that he had them in estimation to be
no less virtuous then worthy and valiant knights, he lift up the beuer of his
healme, and discovered himself unto them, saying, My good Lords, I do verily
believe, that the battle the which you had with Bramarant, ought more to be
attributed unto his great pride, then of any misusing committed of your parts
against him, for that it is not in your conditions.

Then Meridian and Brandimardo, received him very courteously and reioysed
very much in knowing him, and Meridian said: Worthy prince, I do give great
thanks unto all our gods, for that they have given me to know so great
worthiness, as this day I have seen in you, and in this worthy and valiant
knight. And I promise you the occasion of our battle was for a very light
matter, for that unto proud and hautie persons a little thing is enough to
bring them out of quiet^ There d^d he declare unto them all that ever had
passed betwixt them till such time as that knight came thither, and put
Bramarant in that estate as you have heard. All this time did the knight of the
Sun behold Rosicleer, his brother, and reioysed very much to see him so good,
strong, and valiant, and if it had not been, because he would not anger nor
give any coffeehouse unto the princes, he would have given him self to be
known unto him, his joy and pleasure was so great, but because it was the
princes will, not at that present to be known, it was dissembled, although
that Rosicleer, and the other princes did desire it very much, who being
greatly amazed, at the mighty and gallant disposition of both of them, could
not be persuaded to the contrary, but that one of them should be the knight of
the Sun.

At this time the knight began to approach, and the princes said that it was
time for them all for to return, they unto their camp, and the other unto
the city. And as they said, it was concluded, and they all departed together
from that place: and when that they came nigh unto their camp, Meridian and
Brandimardo, did take their leave of Rosicleer, and of the knight of the Sun,
giving thein great thanks, for that which they had done for them, offering
unto them great courtesy.

When that they were departed, Rosicleer, did ask the knight of the Sun and
the princes, if it were their pleasure for to go and take their lodging with
him in the city and palace of his Father the Emperor, who will take great
joy and pleasure for to honor such knights as they were, within his own
palace. Then they answered him with great courtesy, giving him thanks for
his gentle offer, but desired him at that time that he would pardon them, and
heareafter they shall have better opportunity of time for to go and kiss the
hands of the Emperor, but first their determination was, for to do him some
service in those wars: and how that with this pretense, they came forth of
their countries, the which is very far, and a great way out of Grecia, for
which occasion they came unprovided of things necessary to their persons,
requesting him to pleasure them so much as to send them a Tent, for to lodge
themselves, and their squires: whereat Rosicleer was very glad, for that they
would be of their part, and for to send them out of hand, the Tent, he took
his leave of them, leaving them in the field, hard by the other camp, he
entered into the City and went unto the royal palace, whereas he found the
Emperor, and all the other high princes, in a great alteration, determining
for to arm themselves for to go and seek him, for that they could not hear
any news of him, where he was become, mistrusting that some evil had happened
unto him, he was so long out of the city, but when they saw him enter in, they
were all very glad and joyful, but in especial the Emperor, who asked of
him where he had been, then he in the presence of them all, declared what had
happened unto him since his departure out of the city. But when he said that
he left the Gran Campion, dead in the wilderness, their joy and pleasure did
redouble in them all, likewise when that he told them of the battle, which
the strange knight had made with Bramarant, they were greatly amazed, and could
not immagine what knight he should be of so great power and force, except it
were the knight of the Sun, who of long time they never heard any news of:
yet they thought verily that if it were he, he would not keep himself secret,
so that the Emperor and all the rest remained in a confusion, and prayed unto
God, that it might be the knight of the Sun, for that having him with them,
they should think themselves in great security of the mighty power of the
Pagans, surely they received great grief for his absence, although the good
Emperor did make no show thereof, yet did there never enter any mirth into his
heart, since his departure out of the court, and in especial for that he had
sent many knights into diverse parts, for to seek him, but yet could he never
hear any news of him: and now was his mind full o^ suspection that it should
be he, that made the battle with Bramarant. Then straight ways, he sent unto
the two knights two Tents, very rich of gold and silk, with bedding very
good for them and for their damsels and squires, and all other things which he
thought needful and necessary for them, and sent the king of Macedonia, in his
behalf unto them, with them that carried the Tents. When that he came into
the field, he straight ways met with them, to whom the king did present
that which was sent, and said that the Emperor did send them great
commendations, saying, that if it were their pleasures for to enter into the
City and take their lodging, he should receive great pleasure and contentment
therein, for that there he could better give them such honor as unto so good
knights does appertain: the which they received with great thanks, and sent
him word that they did kiss his Imperial hands for the great courtesy showed
unto them. When that the king was departed, the squires of the knight of the
Sun and the damsels, did arm and raise up their Tents, somewhat what aparted
from the tents of the army, the which being done and made close in such sort
that they could not be seen and known, they supped together with great joy
and pleasure, whereas they passed a good part of the night, at such time as
they were most in quiet, they heard a great noise and tumult in the Camp, as
shall be told you in this History, who does leave them at this present, for
to tell you of the stout Pagan Bramarant, who remained in the wilderness of
Grecia, and of other things that happened with him.

How the stout Pagan Bramarant after that he was come unto himself, returned
again to seek the knights, and what he did when he found his Father dead.
Chap. 34.
WIthin a little while after that the four knights with the Princess was
departed from the place whereas the battle was made with the gran Campion,
Bramarant who was astonished, was come again wholly unto himself, and finding
himself alone, and aparted from the place whereas the battle was made, and
besides, that he himself was all to be raied with blood that gushed out at his
nose and mouth, and without the half sword the which remained in his hand (for
that it was fallen away) the fury and outrageous wrath which he did take
against himself was such (considering in what estate he was brought) that
many times he would have slain himself, the which he would have done in
effect, his desperation was such, to see that one alone knight should bring him
into that perplexity, but his great desire was such, for to be revenged for
the same, that he did as then withdraw himself from the doing thereof,
presupposing in his heart for to make the cruellest revenge that ever was
executed, and with that rage puffing out great abundance of smoke, he went
unto a mighty Oak, and renting off a great branch from the same, the made
thereof a huge and knotti^ clubbe, and taking it in both his hands h^ ^et
spurs unto his horse, and with so great fury that it seemed a whirle wind,
he returned unto the place from whence he came, in the demand and seeking
out of the knights that hadd^ made battle with him, swearing (...) he would
not leave one of them alive, but when he came unto the place whereas the
battle was made, and found none other but the gran Campion his Father dead,
lying along upon the ground all to be rayed with his own blood, there was no
comparison to be made with the wrath of so famished a Lion, neither that of
the firce Tiger, when that they have lost their whelps, as unto the fury and
wrath of that stout and devilish Pagan, when that he saw his Father to lie in
that sort dead, his wrath, courage, and fury was such, that he seemed rather
to be an infernal devil, than a knight, and he might have accounted himself
unhappy, that should have passed by him at that present, for at that time he
would have combatted with all the legio^s of infernal devils, and not finding
upon whom he might execute his furious wrath, he lift up his eyes unto
heaven, and said thus.

Oh false and traitorous Gods, enemies unto my generous and natural blood all
you together have been confederate unto the death of my divine Father, come
down all together upon the earth with all the power of your impetuous and
wonderful thunderings and lightnings, or else show me some way whereby I
may ascend into the celestial Regions, whereas you have your habitations and
dwelling places, that I may take most cruel reuengement upon you for the
death of the Gran Campion my Father, who was much better than all you. Descend
therefore and come down O ye traitorous and false dogs, and have a courage
to come before my presence, for that I am now here alone, I (...) that it is a
great shame and reproach unto you (...) you dare not descend unto one alone
knight. Here I do swear and promise you, that if you dare not come in my
presence, neither show me which way I may ascend into the heavens, that I
will never take any rest till such time as I have gone throughout all the
Paganism, and destroyed all the Idolles and Temples that be dedicated and
consecrated unto you, neither will I not leave one Pagan alive, that will not
renounce and deny your alse and deceivable law, and I will make them all to
turn Christians, for to scorn and burn your Idolles, for that he seems to
be a better God than all you, that gives so great strength unto Christians: Oh
my good Father Bradaman, who is he that has slain you, and so clear
delivered from my hands? Here I do promise you never to pull off this armor
from my back, until such time as I have torn him in pieces with my teeth,
and staunched my great thirst in his hot blood. But oh what ill fortune and
mishap is this of mine? What reuengement may Brainarant take, although he
destroy the whole world, in recompense of this so great harm and injury
which is done unto me.

In saying these and many other words this furious Pagan did alight from his
horse, and took the broad and heavy sword of his Father, and hung it at his
girdle, and mounted again upon his horse, determining for to go and seek
those knights that he left there, or some other, whereon he might revenge his
furious wrath, and there withal he set spurs unto his great horse, and like
unto a devil he made him a run throughout all the fields with so great
fury, that the earth seemed to tremble under him. At this time it was dark
night, and Rosicleer was within the City, and the other in their Tents at
their ease, but Bramarant not finding or meeting any for to deteine him, never
stayed till he came into the Camp of the Christians, whereas was more than
one hundred thousand of knights, and as many footmen, some lying a long upon
the green grass, and other some in their tents and pauillions, yet was there
in the guard and watch of the host sittie thou^ (...) knights and so many
footmen.

But when this surious Pagan saw so many before him, upon whom he might
revenge his outrageous wrath, with more arrogancy, pride, and hardiness, than
the hungry and ravening Lion, that thrusts her self in the midst amongst
the feeble and timorous flocks, he thrusts himself in the midst amongst
all those of the camp, charging the footmen of the watch with terrible and
cruel blows, killing and destroying so many of them, that all the way
whereas he went was full of dead bodies, and the rest who were greatly amazed
at that sudden and mortal mischief, began to cry out (...) call to
armor, so that in a short time all the whole (...) was in a^ vproare, and
thinking that they were assaulted with many enemies, they ran from the one
part unto the other for to aid and help their companions and friends, but
when they saw there were no enemies, they were worse amazed than they were
before, and knew not what to make o^ that tumult, but they were all quickly
put out of doubt, and cerlefied what it was, for that this fierce and devilish
Pagan not staying in any one place, (...) himself from one part unto the
other all to be embrued in blood, and according unto the great slaughter and
destruct on the which he made, he seemed rather to be an infernal devil than
a mortal man. But when they understood and knew that it was Bramarant, there
was but a very sewe of them which with fear did not tremble ^or to see him,
and with all the speed that ever they could make, they did aparte and separate
themselves from him, thinking that thereby they should have their lives in
far greater security and safety when that they are most farthest from his
furious and merciless hands, whereby he hadd^ opportunity and space for to
do what (...) and mischief so ever it pleased him, and none so bold for to
put himself before him, whereby to make any resistance against his outrageous
fury, except it were alonelie two knights which were very courageous and
vatiant, who were Captains oner the rest: the one was called (...) Adriano,
and the other the Earls of ^edo vassalles unto the Emperor (...), who offering
their lives, as they were bound, came both against him, and made their
encounter with their spears in such sort, y^ they were sheeuered to pieces,
but yet their appeared no more moving in him, than if they had encountered
against a strong tower, (...) at their passing by he stroke one of them such a
blow, that being very fore hurt, he overthrow him off his horse unto the
ground, and at the second blow his companion was constrained to bear him
company. This being past, the stout Pagan put himself into the thickest
amongst the, people, and overthrew all that ever he met before him, and never
stayed until he came unto the (...) whereas; he began to cut the cords
and tyonbers wherewith they were armed, in such sort, that in a little space
he overthrew twenty Tents, and as many Pauillions down unto the ground. But
all this was nothing unto the furious and outrageous wrath of Bramarant, who
thought it but a pastin^e, in consideration of the blood that he determined
for to shed, in recompense of his Father death. There were some in the Camp
which seeing the great destruction that he made, ran unto the City, and
gave advertisement unto the Emperor Trebatio of all that passed, who out of
hand with all the other worthy Princes and knights, made themselves in a
readiness for to go forth and make resistance against that proud Pagan. At
this time for that the great vproare and tumnlt that was in the Camp was very
well heard by the worthy knight of the Sun and the Princess Claridiana, who
were somewhat aparted and separated from the rest, and very desirous for to
know what it should be, with a trice they caused themselves to be armed with
their rich and strong armor, and mounting upon their horses, they rode
forthwith toward the place whereas they heard the noise of the battle, but
when they came whereas Bramarant was, they were wonderfully amazed at the
great fury and wrath of the Pagan, and supposed that in any humane man could
not ^ee comprehended such exceeding force and strength, and having great
grief and compassion for the great quantity of blo^d that was there shed, the
knight of the Sun (...), and putting himself before him, he said (...) and
r^uishing fury, leave off the shedding of innocent blood, for look what thou
do here, so much the more will the horrible pains be y^ thy soul shall
endure in hell. The night was verire clear for the Moon did shine and was at
the full, and by the light thereof this proud Pagan did know the knight of the
Sun, by his armor, to be he with whom he did combat the day before, who
with as great pleasure as ever he received in all his life (thinking at that
time to have opportunity to be revenged of that was past) said.

Art thou by fortune that knight that did combat with me this day past? I am
the same, said the knight of the Sun. Then the Pagan said: Here I do tell
thee, that all the whole power of the heaven and on the earth, are not
sufficient for to defend th^e from my fingers. And in saying these words, he
lift up his heuie and great cutting sword, and with it in both his hands, he
stroke this good knight such a blow upon his helm, that it made him to (...)
his head down to his breast, and the fire flew out thereof, as out of a (...)
stone, but the knight of the Sun required him that blow with both his hands,
and stroke him such a one upon, his shoulder, that he had overthrown him to
the ground, if he had not embraced himself with his horse neck, then began
the one to lay upon the other very strenglie, with so great charge, that many
thimes they were both astonished, and the sparks of fire were so many that flew
out of their armours, that if the Moon had not shined so bright, by the light
of the sparks, they might have well seen how to combat, at this time were all
the people of the camp round about them for to see that strong and well fought
battle, and were all greatly amazed at the high bounty and strength of the
knight of the Sun, and the noise was so great the which they made with their
terrible blows, that it was as well heard within the City, as in the camp
whereas they did combat, which was the occasion, as well for that they were
advised thereof, that the Emperor Trebatio and Roficleer, with all those
worthy Princes and knights, came straight ways forth of the City, and with
great have came unto the place whereas they heard the great noise of the
battle, and thither whereas the most people were gathered together, and when
they came thither, they saw that fierce Pagan and the knight of the Sun, how
they behaved themselves in their battle, and by reason that it was night, and
their blows strong and great wherewith great abundance of fire flew out of
their armours, it was a strange and wonderful thing to behold, so that the
Emperor and all those that came with him meruailed greatly at the strong and
mighty force of them both. Then when this stout Pagan saw himself compassed
round about with so many people, and knew that the Emperor and all the rest
of those precious and worthy knights that came with him were there present,
he saw that as then it was very needful for him to use all his whole force
and strength, and being desirous in their presence to show forth all his
great and mighty power, he charged the knight of the Sun with terrible and
heavy blows, revenging and blaspheming against himself, and this he said
within his heart.

Oh Jupiter, if it be so that thou art he that does combat with me, I do
desire thee to tell me, for that if thou be he, here I do promise to
acknowledge thee to be a God, and I will honor thee as thou do deserve,
and I do at this present confess that thy power is great.

And when he had said these words, and saw that the force and strength of
his adversary did still increase, he was very furious and wrathful against
himself, and said: Oh base and vile knight Bramarant, wherefore should thou
acknowledge him to be a God, although he were the same Jupiter, having force
and strength enough, not only for to defend thy self from him, but also for
to destroy and raze out all those false and trait^rous gods And in saying
these words his wrath and fury did increase, and he charged the knight of the
Sun in such ^ort with his terrible blows, that it did well appear how his
strength was augmented. But then his adversary seeing himself before his
Father and those high mighty Princes, as also in the presence of his mistres
the Princess Claridiana, who did behold him, he was so angry and wrathful,
that there was nothing that did abide before him, and he charged this stout
Pagan with such furious blows, that he gave him well to understand that he was
the mightiest and strongest knight that was in all the world. In this sort did
these two make their combat, putting great admiration in all those that did
behold them. Then after that they had battailed together more than the space
of one hour, this furious and fierce Pagan. said within himself, that his
aduersa^^e was so strong and furious, that he could not judge to the contrary
but that he must needs be some infernal devil, or that Pluto Prince of
devils. And more than this, I am compassed about with so many and good
knights, that when so ever I get the vietorie of this battle, I shall have
enough to do with them, therefore it shall beee better for me (seeing that I
get no honor) for to depart. And in saying these words, the stout Pagan
stretched himself upon his stirops all that ever he could, and clasping his
sword fast in both his hands, g^ashing his teeth one against another, he stroke
so strong a blow at the knight of the Sun, that it had been sufficient to
have cloven him down unto the wast, if that his healme had been as the helmes
of other knights, but the finenesse thereof, with the enchanted mixture did
withstand the sharp edge of his sword, in such sort, that it did not damage
any part thereof, but yet for all that, the force of the blow was such, that
he made him to fall forwards, and with his head to strike his horse a great
blow upon the neck, and again if that with both his arms he had not embraced
his horse neck, of force he must needs have fallen unto the ground, and with
the blow he was so amazed and astonished, that he knew not whether he was in
^heauen or upon the earth. But yet this stout Pagan had not bragged nor
advanced himself of this blow if that he had (...) a little longer, for that
the knight of the Sun came straight ways again to himself, and settled
himself in his sabbl, and according unto the anger and wrath the which he had,
it could not be otherwise but his answer to be very perillons, but he
would not hold the same, for that he had not so soon given the blow, when
that he turned his horse about and set (...) unto his sides, and with great
fury he put himself into the thickest of all the people that were beholding
the batta^le, and although they were very close together the better to behold
all that passed, he very quickly made a great and broad way, what with
killing and wounding, he o^erthrew many with his sword, and with an infernal
force he thrust himself in the midst of all the camp, killing and flaying
all that ever he met with, so that there was none that burst come before him,
and although the knight of the Sun and all th^^e worthy Princes would have
followed him, yet by any means they could not, by reason of the great number
of-people that were joined together (...) to see the battle, so that first
Bramarant escaped out of the camp: but when he saw himself clear of them;
he set (...) unto his horse, and made him run like a whirle wind toward his
own camp, and without speaking unto Emperor Alycandro he went unto his own
Tent, but when that he came shether, calling to remembrance how that he left
the Gran Campion his Father dead, the anger and wrath the which he received was
so great, that it repented and grieved him very much, for that he was depar^e^
and come from the (...), and being very desirous to execute his irefull wrath
upon join thing, with great courage he went out of his (...), and he alone
went through all the whole camp of the Pagans, seeking out all the Idols the
which they (...), and all that ever he found he brake them to pieces, and (...)
without to the ground. Many there were that found fault in (...) him very much
for doing that (...), but he answered them no other thing, but that the Gods
should come and revenge themselves if that they were agrieued. With the which
Bramarant did put the whole camp in an uproar, and many ripaired unto the
place whereas he went, and although he did raze and destroy all their Idols,
yet there was not one that was so hardy or durst make any defense against
him, till such time as he came unto Meridian, who entered in battle (...)
him, and would have perseuered in the (...) that the Emperor Alycandro,
accompanie^ with all those kings and mighty princes had not come, and put
peace between them, appeasing the great fury of Bramarant with fair words.
Now to return unto the knight of the Sun, that remained in the Camp of the
Christians, the History says, that the great desire which the Emperor
Trebatio and Rosicleer, and all the other worthy Princes and knights had, for
to know who the knight of the Sun was, and his companion, they would not
depart from them till such time as the Princess Claridiana by great
importunation did pull off her helm, and went unto the knight of the Sun and
pulled off his, and returned unto the Emperor and said: My good Lord, let
your highness behold, if that contentment and satisfaction be not made of all
the tumult and travail which has been caused unto you this night, by this
knight and that Pagan which is run away. But when that the Emperor and all
those knights did know them, it cannot be rehearsed the great joy, mirth, and
pleasure that they all received, for that there was not one amongst them all,
that desired any thing so much as to hear news of the knight of the Sun.

Then the Emperor said: Fair and worthy Princess, I was always fully
persuaded with my self, that your sovereign highness could not let but come
and succor us, and put us all in great security. Then the knight of the Sun
came for to kiss the hands of the Emperor, who received him with that great
love that he always bare unto him. Then straight ways came forth the king
Florion, and with him the wise Lyrgando, and said unto the Emperor. Lord, let
your highness give us part of the sight of this knight, whom we have all
desired so much to know, and therewith they embraced him many times, as they
that entirely and with all their hearts did love him. Then those good and
perfect friends of his, Claueryndo and Brandizel, and that good Troyan, as all
the rest of the other worthy knights. It cannot be rehearsed the great mirth
that all of them received, as also the worthy things that passed at that
meeting, especially with the royal Princess Claridiana, for that all did
receive her with that duty and courtesy as was due unto so high a Princess.
Then was there complaints made, for that they till that time would not make
themselves to be known, as also for that they were absent so long out of the
Country. Whereto the wise Lyrgandeo replied, requesting them to let that
demand pass for that time, because to give them to understand thereof, it
will ask a great time, and how that he had it all written, and when time did
serve he would show it unto them, for so much as they were things worthy to be
known and published.

After they had passed these and many other things betwixt them, they all
together went and returned into the City, and the king Sacridoro went before
to carry news unto the Empress Briana of the coming of the knight of the
Sun, and unto all the rest of the Ladies and Gentlewomen that were there with
her, who were marvelous glad and joyful at those news, but most
especially the Empress, who always was very sad and sorrowful, after that
the knight of the Sun was departed from the Court. Then at the sudden noise
of these news, great preparation was made, and an innumerable company of
Torches was light, that it seemed in the City to be noone day, and all the
streets were full of people for to see their good Prince, then at their entry
into the imperial Palace, the Empress accompanied with all those Ladies and
Gentlewomen, came forth for to receive them, whereas between the Empress and
the royal Princess Claridiana passed many words of great love. Then the
knight of the Sun went for to kiss the hands of his mother, who did embrace
him, and kissed him on the cheek, saying: Oh my welbelo^ed son, for this
your coming I do give thanks unto this royal Princess, and if it had not
been for her, your pardon at my hands had failed, in that you have forgotten
us so long time. These and many other words of great love, said the Empress
unto her son, and unto the Princess, the which this History does let pass
untold for to avoid tediousness, and tells of no more, but how that all
the rest of the night that remained, they passed away with mirth and pastimes,
whereas the king Florion and the wise Lyrgandeo could not satisfy themselves
in beholding the knight of the Sun, meruailing greatly to see him so much
grown, as well in body as in the rest, since he departed from them out of
Persia, and here began he to tell of many things that passed as well with the
one as with the other, but when he came to tell of the solitary Island, and of
all that passed there, they were wonderfully amazed, and eueuerie one did
double their good wills and love which before they b^re unto the knight of the
Sun. At this time came the king Oliuerio, with those of great Britain, and
those worthy knights of Spain for to speak with the knight of the Sun, who
would have kissed the kings hands, but he would not consent thereunto, but
said: Worthy Prince, for well employed I do account my coming into this
Country, for y^ I have seen the magnanimity of all bounty and fairness of
a knight, comprehended in your person. To whom the knight of the Sun answered:
My good Lord, how and in what sort so ever I am, I am ready at your
commandment to serve you, in as ample manner as my brother Rosicleer, for that
it is our duty unto your highness and great valor. In like sort he gave
intertainment unto all the rest of those worthy knights, who meruailed to
hear told the great wonders of the knight of the Sun, as also to see his
mighty and sovereign proportion and grace, with y^ great majesty of his
severe countenance, wherein only was sufficient for to publish and de^lare who
he was, so that after (...) departed into their own Countries they had enough
to do all the days of their life, for to tell of the marvelous and strange
things that they saw in Grecia, as well of the Grecian knights, as of she
without, comparison in beauty, fairness, gentle (...), and grace, the
Princess Claridiana, who of the (...), and of the Empress, and of all people,
was most esteemed, and had in reputation above all the rest, But when they
understood that they hoped she should be spouse unto the knight of the Sun,
with greater love and good will they did serve and honor her of all parties,
and she likewise did the like unto them, and was not a little amazed at the
great beauty of the Princess Oliuia, who seemed unto them to be one of the
fairest Gentlewomen that ever they had seen, next unto the worthy and fair
Princess Lyndabrides, who seemed to them to be a pearl in excellency. So
from that time forwards the two Princesses Oliuia and Claridiana did bear good
will and love one to another wonderfully, so y^ with great reason all those
that did behold and see them together might say, that they did deserve to be
spouses unto those two brethren the knight of the Sun and Rosicleer, as unto
the best knights in all the world.

Here was given to understand unto the knight of the Sun all that had passed
in the battles, and many other things more. In this sort they passed away
the night till the next day, in the which happened as shall be declared unto
you in this Chapter following.

How the fair Princess Lyndabrides had vnderstan^^ing of the coming of the
knight of the Sun, (...) ^home she wrote a Letter, and of other things that
to (...) in the mean time. Chapter. 35.
WHen the next day was come, all the Greeks received great joy and pleasure,
for that it was publikelie known unto them the c^mming of the knight of the
Sun and the Princess Claridiana, so that the news thereof was carried into
the Camp of the Pagans, which was sorrowful news unto all them, especially
when they understood of the death of the Gran Campion, and how that their
valiant and worthy knights did every day decrease and wax fewer in number
on their part, and how that on the part of the Emperor ^rebatio, they did
increase eu^rie day more and more, yet was all this nothing in comparison unto
that grief which the fair Princess Lyndabrides felt, when she understood
how that the knight of the Sun, in company with the Princess Claridiana,
was come into Constantinople, understanding verily that he was continually
with her in presence^ all the time that he was absent out of Grecia, and how
that he had taken her to be his wife. It cannot be here rehearsed the great
grief and exceeding anguish the which the felt within her self, in such sort,
that many times she was ready to die therewith, and putting her self in a
closet by it self in her tent, she did nothing but weep, complaining against
her self and fortune, and after that many contrary thoughts had occupied her
mind and senses, fighting one against an other, without finding any comfort
or case in thinking of them, with great wrath and anguish of heart she took
paper and Ink, and with her own hand she wrote a Letter unto the knight of
the Sun, the contents were as follows.

A Letter written by the Princess Lyndabrides unto the knight of the Sun.
IF the divine Gods and my cruel destiny had permitted, that as I am
constrained to love thee, I might I (...) had so much liberty for to forget
thee, then had not I returned again into Grecia, neither had consented that
the Emperor my Father with so infinite a number of people had enter^d into this
Country for to be revenged of thee, for that it had been a sufficient
reuengement and satisfaction unto me, for to leave thee, and not to think
that I was she that was of thee forgotten, but to leave thee as one ^nworthie
of my great beauty, not deserving to enjoy my imperial and consecrated
estate. But oh my evil fortune and mishap, which caused me so firmlie to love
and bear thee good will, that there remains no part within me, but it is
yielded to be all thine, neither have I so much power as for to put thee one
moment out of my remembrance. I know not what cruel and unjust law is this
of Love, for the more that thou did understand and know that I did love
thee, thou had the greater liberty for to forget me, and the more that
thou were cruel and forgetful of me, the more did my love and good will
increase toward thee. I am advertised that thou and the Empress Claridiana
are come together to Constantinople, the company of so worthy a Damsel is
not to be left, neither is there any reason to speak evil of her, but for
her that does love thee as I do, it cannot be without suspicion, for that my
sorrowful heart has deuined it, and mine eyes does now see, that thou do
desire her to be thy wife, and she is not displeased therewith, but when that
I do imagine with my self what thou have b^ne, and consider likewise what
thou now art, I cannot think any other thing, but that there are two
knights called of the Sun in this world, and that thou art another, and not
the same that was wont to be all at my commandment? Is it possible that thou
art he, who at the first time that thou did behold me in my tri^mphant
Chariot, ^ert troubled in such sort, that if thou had not been succored by
thy Page and my Damsel, thou had follen from thy horse unto the ground?
Art thou by fortune that same knight of the Sun, that for to defend my
justice, thou tookest upon thee that strong and perillo^s contention with the
Prince Meridian (...) brother? (...) not be that thou should be that
knight of (...) Chariot, that did so long time defend the great and
singular beauty of the Princess Lyndadrides in the Court of the Emperor
Trebatio? Of truth it must needs be some other, that did show so great and
entire love unto me, and so absolutely did publish himself to be all and
wh^lie at my commandment. What is become of those amorous and sweet words
that thou were wont to utter and speak unto me, and those deep and profound
sighs, with the which thou gave me to understand the great grief that
thou receiuedst for my love? Is it possible that thou have forgot thy self, or
have thou lost thy wits and memory? With what great joy and contentment thou
wentest in my company toward the gran Tartaria, hoping at thy coming thither
to be married unto me, and how many times I was required of thee in that
journey? Have thou forgotten that for the celebrating of our nuptials, thou
did cause in the gran Cat^ya to be joined together all the kings and
mighty Lords, almost all the Pagans, and how that my father the Emperor
Aly^andro had received thee for his son, and all his subjects for their
Lord? Of truth I do verily believe that all this thou have forgotten, and
do not remember any of these things, of the which I do not greatly
marvel, for that he who did forget the law of the divine Gods, and does
renounce the same, it is not much that he do forget and deny all this that
betwixt him and me has passed. My very heart does cleave and part a sunder,
and my soul is ready to depart my body with great grief, when that I do
think thereof, and the great abundance of water that daily distilleth from my
eyes, does declare and testify that it cannot endure long, but that my life
will likewise distill and consume away, the which I do beseech the immortal
Gods that it might shortly come to pass, for it shall be unto me a great
glory to lack life, rather than to feel such exceeding great anguish and
mortal pain. I would write unto thee more at large, for according unto the
great reason the which I have to complain my self of (...), although I did
nothing else in two days, yet should I have matter enough against (...)
things which does withdraw my hands and my will not to consent that I shall
do it: the one is, that they who have borne thee so much good will, and loved
thee as I have done, it is not good for to enlarge much with anger, for that
uttering with passion, causes for to say that, which after does repent them:
the other, for whereas does lack love and good will, many times brief reasons
does seem large and prolixious: the third is, for that I do know that all
whatsoever I shall write unto thee, thou will stop thy ears thereat, so that
all my writing shall be in vain, and therefore I am determined to be quiet
and hold my peace, and conclude with this, that either the bones of this
sorrowful and unfortunate Princess Lyndabrides shall remain in Grecia, or
else to take of thee cruel reuengement before she does depart from hence, and
seeing that thou were so hardy and bold for to offend the divine majesty,
make thy self ready for to receive the pain and punishment for the same, for
that it cannot be otherwise, but that the immortal Gods will have a regard
unto this my great injury, and for the part of kindred that belongs unto
them, will punish thee conformable unto thy deserts.

Lyndabrides.


In the mean time that this fair Princess was writing of this Letter, at
every word her eyes ran down with water, and her anguish and grief which
she felt was so great, that many times before she could conclude the writing
of her Letter, she fell in a sound. In the end when it was concluded, she
called a damsel unto her, (in whom the had great confidence and trust) and
gave unto her the Letter, saying, that incontinent she should depart unto the
City of Constantinople, and in the secretest wise that possible was, she
should give that Letter unto the knight of the Sun, and y^ she sh^^ld not
return again in any manner of wise without an answer unto the same. Then
the Damsel who was wise, and very well understood all^ her secrets did their
promise, and gave her word to do and accomplish all her request. So in taking
her leave of her, she depa^ted toward the City of Constantinople, and when
she came unto the mighty palace, the aske^ for the lodging of the knight of
the Sun, and being certefied therof^ she went thether^ and entering in, she
found him not there, for that he was gone unto the Emperor, but yet the found
there a young man, by whom she sent him word that there was a damsel tarrying
for him at his lodging, who brings unto him a message. He then so soon as he
heard thereof, did take his (...) of the Emperor and departed with the young
man, but when he came whereas the damsel did abide his coming, he was greatly
amazed to see her, for that by and by he knew her to be one belonging unto the
Princess Lyndabrides, wherewithal his heart seemed for to turn vpside ^^wne
within his breast, according unto the great alteration that he felt within
himself, but he was troubled a great deal m^re when that the damsel
delivered the Letter, and said that it came from her Lady and Mistres, and
being in a great confusion, with a pale and wan color he received the Letter,
and opening it he read the whole contents thereof. In the mean time that he
was reading the same, the damsel that brought it di^ very much behold him, for
so she was commanded by her Lady, to see that is by (...) outward semblance he
made any sign of sorrow, at which time all his whole members shaked, by the
which the damsel did very well understand that he was not a little troubled,
in the concluding and reading of the same, for that his eyes were still full of
tears, with great pity, which he conceived by the words of that Letter,
and he who had great and force, courage for to cumbat with the most furious,
fierce, and brauest knights and gyantes in all the world, had not now any
heart for to dissemble the great p^ine and sorrow manifested by that Letter,
that the fair Princess Lyndabrides received. Then after a while that he had
studied with himself what was best to be done, (...) straight ways took
paper and ink, and ^orthwith wrote her a Letter in answer unto that which he
received, the which being concluded, he gave it unto the damsel and said, that
in Gods name she might return again unto her mistres, although before she
departed he demanded many questions of her touching her estate, receiving great
pleasure to be certefied of the same, as he who sometimes did love her above
all things in the world, and as yet he could not so perfectly clear himself
from her, but there must needs remain in his heart some sparks of that amorous
fire before past, the which could not but many times trouble his conscience.
and although the royal Princess Claridiana in beauty and worthiness was
without comparison, yet was that precious Princess Lyndabrides so fair and
gracious, that there was no person in all the whole world but would have been
in love with her, in especial that continual and long conversation which the
knight of the Sun had with her, did work so much in effect, that what with
his procurement, as also with the great majesty wherewith she did always
defend her honesty and pureness, was not of so small force, but was
sufficient of it self to work so great effect in him, that he could not by
any means wholly root out the great love the which he received in his heart.
Thus when the Damsel was diparted the knight of the Sun returned unto the
place whereas the Emperor ^rebatio was, for that with the presence of the
Princess Claridiana he might e^^inguish those fiery flames which the
remembrance of the Princess did cause desire for to kindle within him, the
which did assure him in all points, for that in her presence there was not
any one so much to be desired as the royal princess Clarid^ana, because she
had so great exquisiteness and bounty, that she seemed amongst all the
whole company of the other Ladies and Damsells, as does the fragrant Rose
amongst the other small flowers.

When that the Damsel was returned into the Camp, she straight ways went
unto her mistres, who taking her by the hand, entered into her Closet, with
great abundance of tears and profound sighs, (before that she read the
Letter) the ^^ire Princess did ask the damsel where and in what place she
did find the knight of the Sun, whether he was with Claridian, or whether
he made a^ie token, (...), or alteration, when that he knew her, and received
the Letter. Likewise when that he read it, if his countenance^ did continue, or
altered in any point. These and many other particular things she did ask and
demand of her Damsel, which were caused by the hot burning love that did
molest her mind. Unto all the which her Damsel did make her answer, and gave
her advertisement of all that she had seen in the knight of the Sun. Which
was not unto her small contentment and joy, to hear how that he was troubled
in mind with the re^ding of her Letter. So that such like comfor^s (although
they be small remedies unto ^^ue lovers) yet for all that they be great ease
unto amorous passions, though in the end it be occasion of farther heat. Thus
after a while that they had passed the time in the demau^ds, the ^aire
princess would read the Letter, but she was so troubled to think what should
come written therein, that she almost wanted courage and heart for to open it,
but yet in the end with ^r^at alte^ation of color in her face, she did open
it, which said as hereafter follows.

A Letter of the knight ^f the Sun sent to the Princess Lyndabrides.
Sovereign Princess of Tar^^ria, by one of your damsels I received a Letter
of yours, with the which is that I could make manifest by words all that I
felt at my heart, I do think verily that you would hold your self for
satisfied, and not to desire to have of me more revenge, for y^ you see my
whole heart burn in bright flames, and has not so much liberty as to quench
one spark of that fire. Fair princess, do you not believe that the love
which you say I was wont to bear unto you, with the great solempnitie of
tears, and profound sighs published, is forgotten. For here I give you to
understand that it has hitherto endured, and shall endure so-long as life does
last, for that it was in such sort rooted within my heart, that first it shall
consume into dust and ashes, before the roots thereof be pulled clean out. I
am he that I was wont to be, and in no point altered nor changed unto that I
have been before now, and if you say that before I was yours, so I will now
be yours, and yours all the days of my life, and you have no reason to say
that there is in the world two knights of my name, if it were so, yet I am he
alone that does love you, and first I will consent to death, rather than any
herein should bear me company. You do say, that how is it possible that I
should be he that was so dismaid-the first time that I saw you in the
triumphant Chariot. If it were a thing that you might see and behold what I
felt, and the great alteration of my heart at such time as I saw your
Damsel, only for to know the occasion of her coming: with greater reason
you might say, that you should see me in a greater confusi^n if you saw me
now in your presence. And whereas you do say that I had battle with the
Prince Meridian in the defense of your justice, I am now more readier in that
quarrel to combat with all that are in the world, and first I will consent to
be hewed all to pieces, than in one-point to consent unto your injury, so
that in conclusion, high and mighty Princess, in all things that shall
accomplish your service, my good will at this time is more prompt than
heretofore it has been, and the knight of the Sun you may esteem him as
wholly your own, saving one thing which I do reserve from your subjection,
which is my soul, for that is immortal, and the sovereign creator did create
it unto his own similitude and likeness, the which shall loose his whole
price and estate, if I do yield it to be yours, for to obey your commandment,
and therein I shall offend the divine maies^ie, and what grea^er offense may I
commit, tha^ for to join with you in matrimony, you being a Gentile, and I a
Christian. And again, you that do presume to descend from the high original
of the high G^ds, unto whom you shall do great injury, if that you do join
issue and blood with a knght that is contrary unto your law and profession, I
do believe that you cannot long time suffer me to be your husband, neither
your vassalls and subjects obey me for their Lord, for either I shall be
constrained for to turn me unto your law, or else you and all yours unto my
posession. All this I had forgotten when that (as you do say) we travailed
together toward the gran Cataia, and nothing was the occasion of this
forgetfulness, but that it was so little past that I became a Christian, that
as then my soul was not well awaked out of that obscure and dark law in the
which I was deceived, but afterward I called my self to remembrance, and I
give infinite thanks unto almighty God, that he has given me such
inspiration, that if it had not come from him (according unto the great love
which he bore unto me) I had not ben able for to have cleared my self from
you, but that needs I must have fallen into that perilous snare. And by that
I do know that the universal creator of all things, of his own hands
created with so grea^e ex^ellencie the royal Princess Clarid^ana, who for
that she is a myrrour, without offending of the divine majesty, I may receive
her for my spouse, and with the sheelde of her beauty I will labor for to
defend the encounters of your great beauty, the which is of so great sorce
and strength, that if I had not so excellent a sheeld, there were not in me
sufficient force for to make resistance, but that needs I must be overcome.
Therefore sovereign and worthy Princess, have patience, and think (because
fortune has been so adverse and contrary unto our desires, and that our
destinies would not permit the same) that the divine providence was not served
therein, and as a thing that was neither convenient for you nor me, he would
not consent nor give that in this our purpose our wills should be
accomplished. You say that you write to me brief, for that you will not write
to me with anger, wherein I receive great courtesy, for that being as I am, so
much yours, it should grieve me very much that you should speak against me
words of great cholar. And in that which you do say, that whereas love does
lack, your brief reasons will seem unto me prolixious, and that you know to
all things I will make my ears deaf, if it were a thing possible without
preiudiee for to open these my entrails, for to show unto you my heart,
wherein you might plainly see, how you are deceived, for that there is nothing
in all the world that does delight me more than in the receipt of your Letter,
and in reading of the same, so that if it were a thing possible, I would it
should never conclude. You do conclude in your Letter, that you never will
depart out of Crecia, till such time as you have of me reuengement. I would
very feign know in what order you would have it, because I would excute it my
self, and if it be your pleasure and commandment that I put my self in your
power, give me straight ways to understand thereof, and I will be as ready to
obey, as you for to command me, and I do not much esteem that love, if you
think that with my death you should remain satisfied, with the which I
conclude, kissing your imperial hands.

The knight of the Sun.


In the mean time that this fair Princess was reading the Letter, she shed
so many tears from her fair eyes, that she was all to be sprinkled therewith,
and when the had concluded the reading thereof, all her members failed her, and
her heart was overcome, and her amorous passions were more kindled with the
loving words that he wrote unto her. But when she saw cleerelie that the
knight of the Sun did discover the love that he bare unto the Princess
Claridiana, and that her suspicion fell out to be true, she remained as one
dead, and knew not what to say nor to do, but to complain of her Gods and of
fortune, and it is to believed, that her life had not endured long, if that
she had not been wonderfully succored, as shall be declared unto you
hereafter in this History.

How the stout and furious Pagan Bramarant overthrew and destroyed all the
Idols in the Camp, and how the Emperor Alycandro for to appeal him, caused
to be brought with great honor the body of the gran Campion that was in the
wildemesse of Grecia, and what happened over and above this. Chap. 36.
THe great wrath and fury was so exceeding of that proud and barbarous son
of the gran Campion for the death of his Father, that there was not room
enough for him in all that mighty camp of the Pagans, but he ran up and
down from one place to another, like unto a mad man, or one from himself,
crying out, making a great and terrible noise, casting up his fiery eyes unto
the heavens, blaspheming and de^ieng his Gods, uttering words of great reproach
and anger, thinking thereby to provoke them unto wrath, to cause them to
descend upon the earth against him, where he might execute his wrath upon
them. As he was wholly ignorant of the immortal pains, which these false Gods
(in whom the Pagans do believe and worship) has in hell, and for that in no
place he could take any rest or be in quiet, he went into all the Tents of
the Camp, whereas he found many Idolles very rich and of great price, whom
he overthrew and cut in pieces with his sword, and left not one standing,
neither was, there any king or knight of so great hardiness, that durst make
any resistance against him, but only those two mighty and valiant knights,
the Prince Meridian and Brandimardo, who with a very good will would have
baunted the pride of that proud and insolent Pagan, if the Emperor had not
disturbed them, in requesting them not to return to renew any more their
contention and anger, so that finding not one that durst make any resistance
against him, the pride of this furious and fierce Pagan Bramarant increased so
much, that he never stayed till that he came into the Imperial Tent of the
Emperor Alycandro, within the which was a very great and rich stature of
gold full of precious stones, dedicated unto the God Jupiter, the which was
made by the devils art, in such sort, that the Devil was within the same,
and spoke by the mouth of that Idol, deceiving those wicked and miserable
Pagans, who with great reverence and duty did prostrate themselves unto the
ground and worshipped him, it was set upon a very rich Alter, whereas none
durst be so bold as come nigh unto it, except certain Priests, which were
consecrated for to do sacrifice unto him daily. Besides this, the Emperor
Alycandro had in many places round about his great Tent many other Idolles,
whom he did worship and all his subjects, and being that day in his great
Tent, accompanied with all those mighty kings and Lords of his whole Camp,
ordaining for to give battle unto the Emperor Trebatio, this mighty Pagan
armed with his strong armor, mounted upon his mighty horse, entered into the
Tent, and when he saw the stature of the God Jupiter upon the Alter, as
soon as he was entered in, he went toward the same, and in drawing out his
sword he said.

Now will I see if the power of that Christian Knight be more than thine. And
in saying these words he stroke him such a right down blow, that although it
were made of massy gold, yet he cloue it down to his breast, and falling
one piece from another, there was suddenly heard a great and timorous thunder
clappe, wherewith it seemed that the heavens would have rent a sunder, and in
the midst of the great Tent was seen a vestigell or spirit so dreadful and
horrible to behold, that it seemed to be some infernal vision, casting out
fire at his nose and eyes, and in both his hands he had a great mase of iron,
with the which he made a show as though he would have stricken Bramarant upon
the head, as those which had no more power but only for to put in fear with
those his visages and semblances, so that alone with the sight of him there was
not one in all that Tent but did tremble ansd was afraid, thinking verily
that they should be destroyed for that which Bramarant had done. But this
proud Barbarian who feared not all that infernal company, with no more
dread than if it had been a weak and feeble damsel, he did abide his
coming, and as this vestigell or devil did make a profer to strike him with
his mase, the Pagan stroke a terrible blow at him with his sword, and thinking
to have cloven him a sunder in the midst, he stroke at nothing but at the
air, for that the vestigell as a fancy consumed away, and was no more seen
in the Tent. But the Emperor and all those that were with him were very
sorry for that which Bramarant had done, and mistrusted that there would
happen unto them great evil and misfortune for the same, yet for all that
there was not one amongst them all that durst return against him in the
quarrel of their Gods, but one Meridian and Brandmardo, who because they would
not anger the Emperor were in quiet, wherewith Bramarant went out of the tent
with great fury. Then the Emperor thought within himself that it were good
(somewhat to appease his fury,) for to send for the body of the gran Campion,
which lay dead in the wilderness of Grecia, and to bury him with that honor
and solempnitie as is used in their Country: even so as he thought he put it
in ure, and straight ways commanded that thirty crowned kings, the most
principallest of all the army, should put on mourning apparel, and cause him
to be laid upon a beer, and so brought unto the Camp, and commanded to
accompany them ten thousand armed knights, and all those Giants that came
from the Oriental Islands, that were subject unto Bramarant should go with
them. And in this sort these thirty kings with all their company departed,
according unto the use and manner of their Country, which was a strange thing
to see, and when they came into the wilderness, they straight ways found the
body of y^ gran Campion, which was begun to be eaten with the fowls, and
after that they all for a while had made great lamentation and bewailed his
death, those kings (for to do him more honor) did balm him, and then laid
him upon a Beer which they brought with them, that was very rich, and covered
with a fair cloth of Tissue, and so carried him toward the Camp, whereas he
was received with great honor, by the Emperor and all those mighty Princes
that were with him, who went forth and met with them a good mile off. The
manner which they used for to give his sepulcher with more honor (according
unto the use of their Country) was, that they laid the dead corse upon a
very broad and smooth marble stone all white, whereas they burned and
consumed the body all to ashes, and in the mean time that he was a burning,
all the principallest of the whole army, were placed round about the fire, all
covered with robes of Sackcloth, so long, that it trailed upon the ground, and
made great sorrow and lamentation, and prayed unto their Gods to receive him
into their company, in which time all the prayers which his son Bramarant
made, was no other but blaspheming against all the Elements, and against
nature, for that they had power for to consume and burn the body of the Gran
Campion his Father. Thus when that the body was all consuned and burned, the
ashes remaining upon the Marble stone, the which was taken and put in very
rich vessels of gold, whereunto they put water and stirred it together, and
put the vessels upon a fair Table. Then the Emperor Alycandro (the more to
honor the Gran Campion) began first for to drink of the same mixture, and
after him Bramarant, and after them in order all those Kings, Princes, and
worthy Knights that were in the Camp, till such time as they left no mention
of the water and ashes, so the mightiest Lords that were in all the Paganisine,
made their bodies the sepulcher of that mighty Pagan, and this they had amongst
them for the most honorablest burying that could be. With these and many other
things more which the Emperor Alycandro commanded to be done for the Gran
Campion, making great lamentation for his death, Bramarant was somewhat
appeased, and lost great part of that outrageous fury and wrath which he had
conceived, and understood and procured no other thing but only how and by
what means he might make terrible and cruel reuengement for the death of his
well-beloved Father.

Then after certain days were past of the truce which was taken with the
Greeks, they began of all parts to prepare and make themselves in a
readiness against the battle that was determined, and was thought to be of
both parts the brauest and most cruellest and bloody that ever was seen upon
the earth, for that the Emperor Alycandro had commanded, that the first day
that the Greeks should come forth for to give them battle, that all the
people of their Camp should proceed against them, for that they would at once
conclude that enterprise, and not to leave their adversaries any force and
strength at all, for to return again unto the field, for although there were
many battles betwixt them, as the History has showed you, yet there went
not forth the third part of the people that was there with them which were so
many in number, that there might well be made of them three mighty armies,
and of truth there was never seen in all Asia nor buropa so many and so
valyant, stout, and worthy knights gathered together, as were at that present
in the fields of Constantinople.

Now let us leave the Pagans in readiness for the battle to come, and let us
veturne unto the Greeks that were in the mighty City of Constantinople.

What the Greeks did, and how the king Liseo and the fair Queen Radamira
came to aid the Emperor Trebatio, and what happened besides. Chap. 37.
IT was a thing of great wonder unto the Greeks, to see themselves closed
within the City, and so compassed about in their own fields, for their
enemies were so great and infinite a number of Pagans, that it might well be
said, that they had against them all the whole force of the world, for there
were in the field an infinite number of barbarous people, of different and
diverse Nations, and the most part proud and terrible Giants, that the like
were never seen in all the world, but God of his goodness created such
hearts in that mighty Emperor Trebatio and in his worthy proicnie, as also
in those high Princes, and stout, worthy, and valiant knights that were in his
company, that not only they were without all fear and dread, but also had
great force and courage for to destroy and overcome all those that had
compassed them about, and there were few or none amongst them but received
great contentment to be there at that present, for that the Emperor Trebatio
(seeing with him his sons and so many worthy Princes and knights) received so
great joy and pleasure, that he thought himself to be the most happiest and
fortunatest Prince in all the world. And of the knight of the Sun, and of the
fair and sovereign Empress of Trapisonda, it may well be said that there was
never s^^ne two hearts with so great contentment, for that having one the other
in presence, either of them thought themselves in paradise, although you must
understand that in all this time the knight of the Sun could never bring to
effect his desire with the royal Princess, for she was of so high a courage
y^ the knight of the Sun never durst in heart cause her, to receive any anger,
neither would she consent to any thing that was against her honor, the
which she had always before her eyes more than any damsel in her time. With
no less joy than they, lived those two faithful and perfect lovers, the fair
Princess Oli^ia and Rosicleer, who being in presence together, thought
themselves clear of all sorrows and griefs the which the one had sustained
for the other, whereat the king Oliuerio received no small glory and
contentment, for y^ it seemed unto him, y^ with no other Prince in all the
world he could not have married his Daughter so highly and worthily as he had
married her, neither could she have been exalted to no higher estate. So that
he and all those that came with him from great Britain were wonderfully
amazed to see the mightiness of the Emperor Trebatio, and the highness of his
Court, so furnished with a great number of worthy Princes and valiant
knights, as also with so many fair and precious damsells, that of truth it
might be spoken, that there was never seen so great highness and majesty in
the court of any Prince before y^ time. And the Pagans that came forth of
Persia with the king Florion, meruailed greatly to see the orders of the Court
of Grecia, for by the sacrifices and ceremonies of the Christians, (for that
they did see and behold them every day, to be done with great iumptuousnesse
and reverence) they were partly inclined to think well of the law and faith
of Jesus Christ true God and man, and truc^^e (although there were many that
died for this love which the knight of the Sun had which the (...)
Lyndab^^les) yet grew there not so little effect (...) of these famous wars,
but that by occasion of (...) those Pagans were saved, for that there was (...)
that came out of Persia but turned all Christans Likewise the valiant and
worthy Prince of France in this time did rejoice himself with his love, the
fair Princess Lindaraza, as two that loved together exeeedinglie The like did
all the other Princes that had their Mistresses there in the Court, as the
Prince Don Siluerio with his love the Queen Arquirosa, and Rodomarte and
Rodofeo with their Ladies, and as all these received great delight, so to the
contrary, Bargandel, Liriamandro, the king Sacridoro and Brandizel were very
sorrowful for the absence of their Ladies, although the great good will which
they had for to serve the Emperor Trebatio in those wars, did witigate the
great grief which otherwise they should have received for their lovers.

After this sort they were all in sundry and different thoughts, although for
to give battle against their enemies they were conformable, in which time
upon a sudden there was brought news unto the Emperor, how that the king
Liseo and the fair Queen Radamira were come into the port, they for whom the
knight of the Sun made ba^taile with the stout and doubtful knight Raiartes,
and restored unto him the kingdom of Lidia, the Queen brought with her four
thousand knights, and the king six thousand, all valiant and well armed, who
coming toward Grecia, by fortune did meet together at sea, and coming both
in one demand, they kept company together until they came into the port. Then
so soon as the news was known in Constantinople, the Emperor Trebatio did
so much that his sons and all that worthy crew did go forth to receive them,
and being together in the field, they went unto the sea side, whereas they
found at their coming thither, that the king and the Queen were landed a
shore, and coming unto them to give them entertainment, the knight of the
Sun said: My good Lords, from this day forwards we may have little fear of
our enemies, having your highness on our side. This fear may we all put a
part, being in your company (said the Queen Radamira) for he that delivered
me from that furious and fierce Raiartes, will deliver me from all the knights
of the world. Well then (said the king Liseo) I am no less bound unto this
happy Prince than all the rest, for that by him I have my life, and all my
whole kingdom, and there withal they embraced one another with great love,
and all that were there rejoiced of their coming, for that the king was a
very good knight, and furnished with all good manners and conditions, and the
Queen Radamira was very fair and gracious, and received wonderful joy and
contentment to see the knight of the Sun, for there was nothing in all the
world that she desired so much to see, but when she saw him so much grown, as
well in bigness as in height, more than he was at such time as he was in
Babylon, she meruailed very much. When the knight of the Sun and those that
came with him had given them their welcome, they took their way toward
Constantinople, and passed by the camp of the Pagans in sight of them all, who
did behold them, and offered them no harm nor discurtesie, for that there was
a truce betwixt them. When they came unto the City, the Emperor and the
Empres, and all those Ladies and Gentlewomen that were with her received great
joy and loved their new guests, grasifieng very much their coming. And here
you shall understand that at this present that worthy and valiant Tartarian
Zoylo, when he saw the Queen Radamira was taken in love with her, with great
good will for to take her to he his wise and spouse, if that she were so
content therewith, and from that day forwards he did procure by all means to
give her knowledge thereof, and she when she was advertised and knew him to be
so valiant a knight and high a Prince, she took great pleasure in his service.
So by reason that the time drew nigh of the general battle, with great
diligence the Emperor and all those worthy knights minded no other thing but
to visit their people, commanding that they should be provided of good armor
and and of all other things necessary for the battle, as they that made
account, that they had all that remained in the world against the^. Likewise on
the other part in the camp of the Pagans they did as much, for in all the
days and time of their truce, they understood no other thing but to make all
things in a readiness against the day appointed, being determinded amongst
themselves to go forth all the whole Camp unto the battle, for that they
would at that time make an end and destroy all the Greeks, and straight ways
enter into the mighty City of Constantinople, and so remain Lords over all
the whole Empire. Thus after this sort they passed away the days of the
truce, and afterward there happened many other things, as shall be told you
in this Chapter following.

Of the rigorous and bloody battle that was between the people of the
Emperor Trebatio, and those of the Emperor Alycandro, and of such marvelous
things as happened therein. Chapter. 38.
I Had need of an understanding and judgment much more higher than^that of
Plato, who was amongst the Philosophers had in reputation of a divine
understanding, and more prompter than that of Epaminondas, or of Cirus amongst
the Greeks and Persians, who were accounted without comparison, and also a
memory more greater than that which may be given me by the Memoratiue art of
Simonides: eloquence more eminent than Homer or Demosthenes, to declare here
the worthy and incredible deeds, and memorable acts of those heroical and
famous knights that in the last battle between the Emperors were joined
together in the field of Grecia, in the sight of new Rome, founded by
Constantine the Prince, for that if with good affection you read the History
before written, you shall see this pleasant History so entangled, and the
worthiness of renowned knights so exalted, that for to declare perticularlie
every one of their mighty acts, you shall well perceive that it were needful
of the divine favor: and again if you do remember the most part of the names
of those worthy knights, and the variety of Nations there joined together, you
had need of a good memory, and to tell of them and every thing in order, it
is for to manifest all the whole world, and all worthiness therein: So I
seeing this work to mount and ascend so high, and my small understanding not
able for to comprehend the same, was determined for to (...) last Chapter, and
not to proceed any farther, but leave this travail unto some other, that
has a more sharper understanding than I have, and remained certain days in
this determination, and occupied my wits in other diverse and variable things,
being fully persuaded that my understanding was not sufficient for to declare
and make manifest so high and worthy things: for one way the mightiness of
these two Emperors did make me to wonder, for that to bring in subjection the
whole universal world they lacked nothing, and another way, I did greatly
marvel, that the great number of so many worthy and valyant knights, who
according unto their great valor showed in the battle for to come, of either
of them might be made a particular History. But when that it comes to my
remembrance, that I shall find that shining Alphebo in the same battle, I am
then tongue tide, and my wits troubled, to think that I do put my self for
to declare his deeds, for although I had so many and more eyes than Argos,
yet were they not sufficient for to behold them. Who likewise should behold
the other son of Trebatio, and the son of the gran Campion, shall find that
their acts are not worthy of any less memory.

I know not whether you do remember or not, the names of those two valiant
Pagans, Meridian and Brandimardo, that only in hearing them named the earth
does tremble, as much more shall be done by their equals, the Prince of
^raunce and the mighty Troyan. Let not be forgotten the mighty Emperor of
Grecia, with all the remnant of the inclite and general knighthood of his
souera^gne Court, for according as they are all most valiant and stout, so are
they sufficient to make the whole universal world to be their own. What shall
we then do if we remember so many thousands of Pagans which are under the
banner, and at the commandment of the worthy Emperor Alycandro, amongst
whom (besides the Nations of strong Gyantes that came from the Oriental
Islands, of the Gran Campion) there were one thosand more of Giants, who were
so big, mighty, and strong, that they were sufficient to be accounted
walls unto a great City. I know not what you do think of this, you that do
read this History, but I for my part when that I do think of things of so
great worthiness, my memory and wits does fail me, And I am fully
certefied, that if you did see this great battle concluded, all the Hystories
that heretofore you have read and seen, treating of love and of wars, if that
they were laid before this, you would account them as nothing.

I will not contend any farther herein with reasons, but certefie you, that I
being determined to stay here and proceed no farther, yet for all that, as
the wearied horse being forced by the sharp pricking spur to be quick in
his course: even so the overmuch affection the which I have unto those high and
worthy Dames and valiant Knights, does constrain me to proceed forwards,
till such time as I do conclude the first part of this mighty History, and
in that my weak and wearied understanding cannot comprehend, let my affection
supply the same, the which has mounted my wits so high, that although with
great travail, yet have I translated that which I thought never to comprehend,
seeking it out of great volumes, from the original written by the wise
Artemidoro, who being helped by the wise Lyrgandeo and the Magitian spirit,
left it in writing, according as hereafter you shall hear declared.

At such time as the day appr^ched of that heavy and sorrowful time (wherein
was ^ought that general and bloody battle, in which was concluded the
expedition of new Rome) was seen great wonders and tokens terrible to behold,
and sufficient for to terrify the hearts of those valiant and stout
warriors, for that the heavens and the earth did manifest the exceeding great
grief which they felt of that mortal destruction, and it seemed verily unto
them that the end of the world was at hand, by manifest tokens which were
seen that day, for that there was never so great multitude of people seen
slain in one day, as appeared afterward by the great streams of blood which
was in so great abundance, that it was sufficient for to change the color of
the great Sea of ^geo into Fuxino. In testimony whereof, at such time as the
day should break, the same day of the battle all the whole region of the
air seemed to be on fire, with great abundaunce of lightnings, accompanied
with so many and dreadful thunder clappes, that all the celestial moouinges
seemed to have fallen upon the earth, and at such time as the day did somewhat
appear, the dew that was wonted to fall from heaven in the mornings, appeared
to be of red blood, wherewith all the grass and flowers in the fields of
Grecia was laden. Likewise there were that saw, that whereas the shining
stars always at the break of day did vanish and take their leave, that now
at that instant many Comets of fire did fall from heaven into the camp of the
Pagans, and did as much harm as thought they had been thunderbolts amongst
them. And at such time as the Sun should show her self, they saw plainly
how that it had lost his rubicond color, and was changed into the color of
blood, but after that this earthquake and storm of lightening and thunder was
past, yet there appeared not one cloud in all the whole region and compass of
the air, and the day was very obscure and dark, by reason of the sorrowful
and unaccustomed color the Sun showed. The earth quaked and trembled very
terriblie, which was the occasion that many edifices did fall and were
overthrown down, and many high mountains did sink and were censumed, so
that with the one and with the other all the people were greatly amazed, and
there was not one, (although he were never so valiant and strong) but at those
sighs and tokens received both fear and dread, saving only that superbious
Pagan, the son unto the gran Campion, who said within himself and spoke it
plainly that the heavens and the earth did show those signs, in token of the
great abundance of blood that should be shed that same day, (...) of the
death of his Father, and^ thought it (...) such time as the battle was
begun, and their companions joined together, that he might execute his
mortal fury, but it was not long after that his desire was accomplished, for
that, that worthy and valiant Emperor Trebatio seeing that the day was come
of the battle, very early in the morning at the day break, was in the
field accompanied with all those valyant and worthy knights, putting in order
all his people in the best manner they could, for to execute their battle,
and although they did see those wonderful signs and tokens, which caused them
to have some fear and dread, yet for all that, the good Emperor never once
abated any whit of his valiant courage, but had great hope and confidence in
the only living God, that he with his mighty hand and outstretched arm
would defend the whole state of Christendom, and did continually in his
heart call upon God, requesting him of his infinite mercy and goodness for
to grant unto him the victory in that battle, and not to permit that that
worthy crew of Knighthoode should be vanquished and lost in that battle,
and did confess and acknowledge that his great power and all that mighty
Camp was in effect as much as nothing, if that be of his benevolence did not
aid and succor him. These and such like things said the good Emperor in his
heart, and never rested in going from one place to another, putting his people
in good order, with a Tipstaffe in his hand, like a valiant and expert
Captain, wherein there was not one that did pass him, neither in his own
Camp nor in the whole Camp of the Pagans was there any did so well.

The first battalle that he ordained was of the Greeks, saying, that in the
defense of their Country it was great reason that they should have the
foreward, wherein there was four and twenty thousand knights, all very well
armed, and exceeding expert, and committed the charge and government thereof
unto that valyant and worthy Alphebo, the light of all Chi^alrie and
knighthoode, and put in his company that worthy and royal Princess
Claridiana, for that they being together y^ one for the other, would force
themselves to work the greater wonders, and on the otherside, he placed with
them, his great friend Oristides, that valiant Troyan, so that they three being
together, they were sufficient for to put fear and dread in all the whole
Pagan host.

The second battle, he did commend unto that valiant and worthy Rosicleer,
(called by an other name, the knight of Cupid) who did so great wonders that
day, that so long as the world does endure, his fame will be mentioned therein,
he gave with him in company, his very good friends the Tartarian Zoylo, and the
king Sacridoro, with twenty thousand Greek knights, of great courage, who
followed after his brother.

The third battle he gave unto that mighty king Florion, with all his
knights that he brought with him out of Persia, and other ten thousand of
his own people, and in his company that valiant prince Brandizel, being
father and son, that made great destruction amongst the Pagans that day.

The fourth battle he gave unto the worthy prince of Fransia, and unto the
king of Lidra, with all the people that they brought out of their countries.

The fifth baitaile he gave unto the government of the king Oliuerio, and unto
the prince of Lusitania, with all the people that come out of great Britain,
and in this battle went those two worthy princes Bargandel, and Liriamandio,
with other worthy princes and valiant knights that belonged unto the king
Oliuerio.

The sixth battle the Emperor Trebatio, took unto himself with all the rest
of the knights that remained, which were to the number of three score thousand
knights. There went in this battle in company with the Emperor, the king of
(...) the two princes of (...), and Transilu^nia, with the two gallant princes
Rodomarte, and Rodoteo, and the two most valiant and worthy knights, Don
Clarus, and Arealus, who in this day did not a little exalt the honor of the
Godos of Spain. There went also with the Emperor, those two good knights
Flamides, and Florinaldes, who were great friends unto the knight of the Sun.
Also, there went with him those four brethren, sons unto the gran Torcato,
with that stout Rogelio, who were so courageous, that there were few in all
the whole army that were more valianter then they, being but young youths.

There went also with him, the King of Bohemia, and many other mighty Lords,
belonging unto the Emperor of Grecia, whose names be not here rehearsed, for
to auoi^ tediousness. So that this mighty Emperor had about him such a
company of valiant and worthy knights, and of high estate, that never the like
was seen, who little and little in the order above mentioned, did begin to fill
those fields and plains, that it was a thing worthy to be seen, so great
number of worthy and valiant knights to be joined together, although they saw
before their eyes, put in good order their enemies and occasions of the great
destruction looked for, as also those fearful signs and tokens which the
heavens and the earth did show unto them, the which was a thing of great wonder
and dread to behold, in especial, for those Ladies and gentlewomen that were
in Constantinople, who seeing their husbands and children to depart in that
sort, their clamors and cries seemed to assend unto the heavens. And in the
mighty city of Constantinople, there was seen no other thing but old men,
women and children, who went bare foot and bare legged, through the streets
from one church unto as other, praying unto God to grant the victory on their
parts, and to defend his christian flock. At this time was the Empress Briana,
and the fair princess Olima, with the beautiful Linderaza, the Queen
Radamira, and Arquirosa, and many other mo very fair and beautiful Ladies
and gentlewomen, mounted up into a high tower of the mighty palace, from
whence they might at their ease, discover and see all the whole armies, but
when they saw so great a multitude of infidells, against them whom they loved
more then themselves, they received great sorrow and dread at their hearts,
which caused them to shed many tears, and to pray unto God for the victory
from the bottom of their hearts.

Now let us leave them, and tell of the Pagans, who were so many in number,
that all the night past, with good part of the morning they had enough to do
for to set all things in good order and in a readiness for the appointed
battle.

The first battle ordained by the Emperor Alicandro, he gave unto the rule
and government of that proud pagan Bramarant, who like unto an hungery Lion
or wolf, would be the first, and he had with him fifty thousand horsemen, the
most furious and fiersest that was to be found in all the whole camp, amongst
whom he carried all those giants that his father the Gran Campion, had brought
out of his own countries, which were more then one thousand and all mounted
upon Elephants, who with certain engens that they brought with them, made
them to be very swifte. Bramarant had with him in that battle all the
kings of the Oriental Islands, who as you have heard, were little in^erour
unto giants, and were the most strrongest and stoutest that was in all the
whole Islands, and being this brave Barbarian in the midst amongst them, he
thought verily that all the whole world (if they had been there together) were
not able to make resistance against him.

The second battle was governed by those two mighty Pagans Meridian and
Brandimardo, who had with them three score thousand horsemen, all of the Gran
Tartaria, meruailously well armed, although the most part of them were armed
with the hard skins of wild beasts: there were in this battle, twenty
brave and furious Giants, whereof twelve of the most furious and ill favored,
had no other charge, but to keep the person of the worthy Prince Meridian.

The third battle was given unto the charge of the king Orlan, and the king,
Tiderio, who were two mighty and strong giants, and had in their company all
the people of Arabia, Carmania, and Palibotros, for that their gouerners were
slain in the battle past, all the which were to the number of more then
three score thousand, but yet very ill armed and nothing expert.

The fourth battle was given unto the prince of Cambray, who as you have
heard, was a young knight, but very valiant: He had in his company three kings
of the India, who were very fierce giants and stout, and carried with them in
charge four score and ten thousand horsemen, but not all mounted, upon
horses, but on other wild beasts, that were very light and swift, and
strange to be seen in that country.

The fifth battle was given unto the king Balardo, Lord of all the Seras, who
was meruailously esteemed amongst all the Pagans, and feared, as well for his
great bravery and fierceness, as that he was a mighty Lord and of great
power and strength^ he had in his company five kings, with all their people,
which were to the number of more then four score thousand; he had also with
him five giants, who being in the fore front of the battle, seemed above all
the rest like unto towers.

The Emperor Alicandro, had for the guard and keeping of his person, twelve
giants, the most fiercest and misshapen that could be found in all the whole
Paganism, who never were out of his presence and company, day nor night, so
y^ the Emperor, by reason of their great force and strength, did account
himself in great security.

He was meruailously feared of all his subjects, for that who so ever
disordered himself at any time in his presence, (although he were a king or
mighty Lord) straight ways those misshapen giants with battle ares of fine
steel which they always had in their hands did hew them all to pieces. The
most principal and strongest amongst them all, was called Organte the furious,
he was all full of ha^re his body over and had so fierce and terrible a
countenance, that there was none that did behold him, but was afraid, and
therefore he was called furious.

This Organte, the Emperor took a part and gave unto him fiftene thousand
knights chosen out of all the whole army, and said, that they should put
themselves into a thick wood, which was somewhat on the one side apart whereas
the battle should be fought, and they should not go forth from thence,
neither show themselves, nor be seen, till such time as he did send them word
what they should do. So when that Organte the furious, was departed, the
Emperor took unto himself the sixth and last battle, with the rest of all
his people, which were as many as were ordained before, in all the five
battles. He had in his company many kings and mighty Lords, who esteemed
themselves to be very stout and valiant knights.

Now all you that do read the History of this battle, consider that never
before you have read, to be seen joined together in one field, so great a
number of barbarous and stout people. And likewise, what should be the hearts
of those Greeks, who with so great good will does march toward the battle,
having so great a multitude of enemies against them.

Now let us return to tell you of the first battles that was governed by the
knight of the Sun and Bramarant, who marching little and little, the one
against the other: This furious barbarian in y^ midst betwixt two of th^se
giant kings that went with him, they marc^ed a pace before all the rest of the
camp, and put themselves in the face of their enemies, abiding to see if that
an^ of the principalest knights and most valiantest, would come to receive
them. The which being seen by the royal princes Claridiana, she turned her
self unto the knight of the Sun, and said, Having so good and ^r^ed knights
by me, I will not let to prove my spear with one of y^nder three which are
come forth before the rest, although according unto their greatness, they
seem rather to be diuell^ then knights, and those spears which they bring
with them, may well serve for mastes of Barks. L^d^e and M^stresse, said the
knight of the Sun, I should have been better contented if that you had
remained in the city, and from thence to have beheld us, and not for to have
come to take all this travail: but seeing that it was your pleasure for to do
us this high courtesy, let us go whether your pleasure is to command us, for
that* I do more esteem your favor and help, then all the s^ro^gth of this
mighty army, so that and if there should come against me all the whole
infernal company, having you in pr^sence, I would not let to assalte them. I
will not refuse to be the third (said the good Troyan) for having such worthy
persons for my companions, I am fully assured of the field. And there with
these three went forth for to meet the three Pagans, that came forth against
them, so that all six made their encounters together, and their fury was so
great which they had in their swift course, that they made the earth to tremble
a good way from them.

The first encounter (by reason of the swift course of Corne^ino) was made by
the two mighty and stout warriers the knight of the Sun and Bramarant, and
by reason that either of them did put over much force to their encounters,
their spears which seemed to be mastes, were sheuered all to pieces, and the
splinters flew into the air, and both of them fell backwarde upon their horse
croupers, and so passed the one by the other, but straight ways they righted
up them selves again in their saddels, and either of them thought to have made
his encounter against some rock, for that they thought by their strengthes to
have overthrown a tower to the ground, such was the valiantness of those
worthy knights.

The royal Princes made her encounter with one of those Kings called
Bel^igro, who made his encounter so strongly, that the point of the spear with
more then half the staste had passed through her body, if that her inchaunted
armor had not made resistance against the force thereof, and yet for all that,
she lost the raines out of her hand, and her stirr^ps, and a good while she
could not settle her se^fe again in her saddle, till such time as the knight
of the Sun (retourning from his course) took her by the arm and did help
her to stay her self, and was greatly amazed at the strong encounter which she
made, for that she had with her great strength thrust her spear through the
body of that Giant, and therewith overthrew him to the ground, whereas he lay
without moving either of hand or foot.

Oristedes, made his encounter with the other King, who was called Leopardo,
and did so valiantly herein, that he did very well make apparent the high
progenitie from whence he did descend, for being very strongly encountered
with that Giant, which made him to loose the raines of his bridle and his
stirruppes, and to embrace him self with his horse neck: yet did he make his
just with so great force and strength that he overthrew him and his Elephant
down to the ground, one upon an other, and by reason of the great weight of
the fall which did bruise him so ^ore, that he could never arise, but dyed
presentlye in the place whereas he lay.

Now at such time as these encounters were made between the fire knights, the
two first battles were joined together, whereas was so great a number slain
on the one part and on the other, that the living could not pass but upon the
dead bodies: and by reason of the great dust that did arise amongst them, they
could scarce see any other thing, but the great number of horses and Elephant,
that ran loose out from the thickest of the p^eace. And sure it was a most
pitiful and lamentable thing to hear the great shrickes and cries of those
that were hurt and maimed, for without all doubt many a thousand of them might
have been cured and have lived, if they could have been by any means helped
to arise and come forth, but by reason of the great preace and multitude, they
dyed a miserable death under the horse feet.

But who so ever had seen at that present the knight of the Sun in
presence of his mistress the princes Claridiana, how y^ in a small time he
overthrew and ^^ew more then thirty of those giant knights that came with
Bramarant, some of them he cut off their arms, other he cloue their heads,
and othersome he cloue down to their breasts, in such sort, that in so small
time there was never seen so great a slaughter done by one alone knight. And
the royal Princes with Oristedes, who followed him, many times did with draw
themselves from fighting for to behold the meruaiuailous acts that he did,
and the sight thereof did so alter them, that the blood within their bodies
seemed to ware cold, to see the terrible and mortal blows which he stroke:
and although they for their parts did kill and overthrow all that came before
them, yet had they enough to do to ^olow him, his fury was so great,
wherewith he put himself amongst his enemies, and his soldiers that did
behold the wonders which those three did, took marvelous courage themselves
in such sort, that in a little time the battle had been over come, if it had
no^ been for that strong and stout Bramarant, who played y^ devil amongst the
Greeks, killing all that ever he could reach with his long and broad cutting
sword, against the which they could make no more resistance then against a
thunder bolte.

This day was the death of the Gran Campion, unto many very dear and
sorrowful, for that his son for to make cruel reuengement for the same, with
furious wrath and mortal anger, does destroy and overthrow all that comes
before him, wherewith he does increase the streams of blood in the field,
that it flowed with great abundance. The kings likewise of the Oriental
Islands, such as remained, did healpe him very much in this slaughter, for that
they were great Giants and deformed, the people fled away before them, as from
the devil of hell. Likewise, all the rest of the people that came with the
gran Campion from those Islands, by reason that they did surmount in stature and
bigness, the people o^ Grecia, and more in number, did kill and destroy many
o^ them, and in that place whereas they went, they had the better hand, so that
y^ battle was in balance, for that on the one side the Gr^^kes (...), and on
the other side the Pagans lost and had the worst. In this sort the battle
mingled together, and on both parts was done great slaughter, till such time as
they joined with the second battiles. But these worthy knights seeing how
their people were overcome and fled before their enemies, and the great
destruction that was done upon them, they turned about their horses for to
rescue them, and the knight of the Sun procured to come to that place whereas
Bramarant was, and when that he came thither, one of those Giants that was with
him, stroke so terrible a blow at the Princess Claridiana, upon her helm, y^
it made her eyes to sparkle with fire, and again if that she had not embraced
her self about her horse neck, she had fallen to the ground. But this Pagan
did not advance himself of that blow, for that being seen by the knight of
the Sun, who was all kindled in ire, with a mighty courage he raised
himself in his stirops, and stroke him such a blow upon his left shoulder,
with so great fury and force, that he cloue him down to the saddle bow, in
such sort that he fell down to the ground in two pieces, with so great
wonder unto all them that saw that terrible blow, that they could not persuade
with themselves that he should be a humane knight, and the royal Princess who
very well saw the execution of that blow, was very glad and joyful at her
heart, for that she had so nigh her so valiant aid and succor, and being
almost ashamed to see her self so evil entreated before him, she took her
sword in both her hands, and stroke such a blow at another of the Giants, (who
had his sword in the air all aloft ready for to discharge it upon her) that
she cut both his arms a sunder, that his hands, sword and all fell to the
ground, and the giant ran away and put himself in the midst of the
battle, roaring and houling like a Bull. From that time the worthy Alphebo
and the royal Princess so behaved themselves in the thickest amongst their
enemies, that what with killing and wounding all that ever they could reach, in
such sort, that they were greatly feared of their adversaries. At this time
the good Trojan was not idle, but all to be raied with the blood of them that
he had slain, and at one terrible thrust which he threw at one of the Giant
kings, he passed his sword through his body, so that he fell down dead to
the ground. But when that Bramarant saw the great destruction the which these
three knights made amongst his people, he rolled his eyes in his head as
though fire would fly out of them, and with great wrath he came toward the
knight of the Sun, (for that it seemed unto him that he was the knight that
stroke the mortallest blows of all the rest) and when he came unto him, he
stroke him such a terrible and overthwart blow upon his healme, that he made
the sparks of fire to fly out a great way off, and with the force thereof it
dazzled his eyes, and did somewhat astonish him, and this infernal Pagan had
not so soon stroke this blow, but that he stroke another at the Princess
with so great fury, that ^t might well be said, that next unto God, her
inchaunted armor did save her life, for that his great cu^ting sword could
not cut nor enter into them, yet for all that he brake them and made the
pieces to fly a great way of, so that all her one side was unarmed and left
naked. Then the stout Troyan seeing his companions so evil entreated, forcing
himself with great courage, stroke such a blow at Bramarant upon his healme,
that he amazed him in such sort, that his sword fell out of his hands, and
hung by the wrist band, the which blow made this stout and proud Pagan to
know that his knight was of noble blood and courage. Then the knight of the
Sun, when that he saw his Lady unarmed, he went unto her and requested her
to depart out of the battle to avoid the great danger and peril in the
which she was brought for lack of her armor. And therewith he left Oristedes
in contention with Bramarant, and went with the Princess to set her fr^^ out
of the battle; and did so much between them both, that quietly they cleared
themselves out of the prease, and being free thereof, the royal Princess
(with great grief for to depart from her knight) returned unto the (...),
whereas she was honorably received, and gave great comfort unto all those
Ladies and Gentlewomen. The knight of the Sun returned again into the battle
whereas he left the valiant Oristedes, and found that the stout Pagan had
overthrown him upon his horse crouper all astonished and amazed, and as the
Pagan would have stroke him again, the knight of the Sun put himself before
him, and said: With me Bramarant thou viddest begin the battle, therefore
conclude it with me before thou make any farther contention with this
knight. And in saying these words he stroke him such an overthwart blow upon
the helm, that it seemed he had been all on fire, with the burning sparks
and flames of fire that flew out thereof, and the force was so great, that if
he had not embraced himself with his horse neck, he had fallen down to the
ground. Then this furious Pagan righted up himself again, blaspheming against
the heavens and against them that gave so much power unto nature, for to create
a knight of so great force and strength, and therewith went against him, and
began to charge him with such terrible blows, that if it had been some hard
Marble rock, in a short space he had broke it all pieces, but yet the good
armor of the knight of the Sun was of so great force, that it would have made
resistance against a far greater strength than his, by reason of the
finenesse of the bones of those little fishes, which were found in the frosen
sea, as you have heard before, wherewith the armor of the knight of the Sun,
as also that of the Pagan were made, whereby we may see and understand, how
great and strange be the secrets of nature, that in so little bones nourished
in the water, should make more greater and stronger resistance than any iron
or steel, so that these two worthy warriors being in such security by
reason of their armor, did execute the fury o^ their great strengthes, and
laid so cruelly the one upon the other, that it was a wonder to behold
them, and many nigh unto them left of their own fighting for to behold them,
meruailing greatly at their terrible and most cruel battle.

Now here let us leave them for a while in this their contention, wherein
either of them had enough to do to defend themselves, and also the valiant
Troyan, who was entangled with a stout Giant in battle, and had great care
for to clear himself from him, and let us tell of that inclite and generous
knight Rosicleer, that had the charge of the second battle, who when he saw
the other battle so entangled, with great desire that he had to see himself
amongst his enemies, he and his two friends, the king Sacridoro and the
Tartarian Zoilo, did put themselves before their camp, and setting spurs unto
their horses, went against them that came in the second battle, who likewise
did move themselves to receive them. There came in their fore front the Prince
Meridian, and the stout and strong Pagan Brandimardo, and with them a king of
the Indias, called Albiro, a young knight and very proud, these three came
against Rosicleer and his companions, and in the midst between the two
battles they made their encounter in this sort.

Rosicleer and Brandimardo made their encounter the one against the other, and
sheeuered their spears in pieces, passing along without receiving any harm,
but Brandimardo being greatly amazed at the strength of his adversary, said
within himself: Out of all doubt this is he that did combat with Bramarant in
the wilderness of Grecia, or else it is he that slew the gran Campion his
Father, for that I cannot believe, that in any other knight should be so
great force and strength. The like did Rosicleer think of Brandimardo, whose
encounter seemed to be equal unto those of the knight of the Sun, and said
within himself.

Oh that God were so pleased that this valiant Pagan were a Christian, for
surely it should grieve me very much that such a knight should perish. Then
the strong king Sacridoro and the Prince Meridian made their encounters, in
such sort, that their spears were sheeuered all to pieces, but the king
declined so far back, that his head touched his horse crouper, and he stayed
himself so strongly, that he fell not, but passed along being greatly
amazed at the great agili^ie of his enemy y^ Prince, who in the same encounter
lost one of his stirops, and therewith put himself into the battle, having
his adversary in great estimation, but he that had the best luck in these
their encounters, was the valyant Tartarian, who meeting this proud (...),
strikking him in the midst of the breast, he thrust his Spear through his
body, that it appeared at his back, and overthrew him dead to the ground.
With that encounter he likewise had fallen to the ground, if there he had not
embraced himself with his horse neck. When that these encount^rs were
finished, the two battles joined together, and the noise was so great which
they made at the breaking of their Spears, that the mountains and hills
seemed to shake therewith, and the great slaughter that was on both parts was
marvelous great. But when that Rosicleer with that gallant courage (as he was
wont to have) did put himself in the midst of the guard of Meridian, who (as
you have heard) to be twelve strong Gyantes, he did that which never before
time of ancient people was the like heard of he assaulted them in such sort,
that one of them he cut off his right arm, wherewith he did govern his great
and mighty cutting sword, so that he was (...) and another he cloue his heart
asunder with a thrust he threw at him, he had not at that time (...) pulled
out his sword from the giants body, when that two of those which remained,
with their great and freely hatchets, gave either (...) a blow the one after
the other, upon his rich and precious healme, but it was forged by that wise
A^temido^^^, by his Ma^^icall art, so that it might well be said, that it
saved his ly^e, for that their (...) hatchets could not enter any, more unto
it, than if they had b^^e ^ade of (...) yet for all that, the blows were
exceeding strong (...), that it (...) him of his understanding, and (...) to
fall forwards upon hs saddle b^we, and his horse carried him about the field,
but all fell out for the best, for that the Giants having no more care to guard
the person of the Prince, for that he had put himself in the thickest amongst
his enemies, he and Brandimardo making such destruction and slaughter amongst
them, that whereas they went they left all the ground full of dead bodies. But
when Rosicleer came again unto himself, and saw that the Giants were gone,
he put himself into the thickest of them that were next him with great
fury, destroying and overthrowing all that was in the way, so that it was an
unhappy day for him that once proved his sword.

Not long after when that the third battle saw the battles so entangled,
they marched on a pace for to ioy^e together, and for that there might be space
enough for (...) one to have his fill of fighting, marched forwards straight
ways the fourth and fifth battle, for that there were such knights amongst
them, whose stomachs were so great, that they could not refrain themselves
one^minute of an hour, in seeing that others were executing their furies, and
they to be idle, so that in a very short space there were so many dead bodies
in the field, that^ the living could not pass but upon them, and whereas so
many people were joined together, it could not be but some encounters must be
made for to^bee noted above the rest. As that worthy king Florion and the
valiant Prince his son, made their encounters against the king Orlan, and the
king Triderio, whose encounters were such, that the Prince overthrew the first
dead to the ground, and although he was somewhat astonyed at that encounter,
yet he kept his saddle, and passed forwards on, and the king. Florion
overthrew Triderio from his Elephant, whereon he was mounted, in such sort,
that with great grief he could not arise again. Likewise the valiant and
worthy Prince Claueryndo, with one of those Giants that came with the Prince
of Cambray, did make their encounters the one against the other, in such sort,
that the Prince laid his adversary along^in the f^eld dead, and the stout
king Li^eo thrust the Prince of Cambray over the crouper of his horse. Also the
king Oliuerio and the^Princes, Bargandel and Liriamandro, Don Siluerio, and the
king Alamades, made their encounters against the king Balardo, and his
companions, and there had like to have been a marvelous misfortune, for that
Lyriamandro and the furious king Balardo fell both of them to the ground, and
in great peril before they could recover themselves again. Bargandel made
his encounter with one of those kings of the Indias, with so great fury, that
the point of his Spear appeared at his back. Don Siluerio and the king did
overthrow other two, but unhappy were they that made their encounters with the
five Giants that came with the king Balardo, for that they were all overthrown
dead to the ground, saving the king Alamades, who by reason of his good armor
could not receive any hurt, yet for all that he lay upon the ground more than
an hour, clean from himself, before he could come again to his remembrance.
So in conclusion of these encounters, these worthy knights did put themselves
into the battle, at whose entry the slaughter was so great, that the little
brooks were made mighty rivers with the abundance of blood that was there
shed, and for to declare perticularlie the mighty deeds and wonderful acts
done by Rosicleer, it were requisite to have an hundredth thousand eyes for to
behold them. Likewise the worthiness done by all that valiant company, as the
Tartarian Zoylo, the king Sacridoro, Brandizel, and Clauerindo, his very
friends, with all the rest of that gallant company, as the History has
showed unto you. On the other part goes those furious Pagans Meridian and
Brandimardo, the king Balardo, and the other misshapen Giants, all to be ra^ed
with blood, and killing and destroying all that comes before them. At this
time the good Emperor Trebatio could no longer abide nor suffer, seeing his
people in so great travail, but commanded incontinently to sound a great and
infinite number of Trumpettes and other instruments of war, and made
Proclamation that none should remain behind but all to enter into the
battle. And therewith they marched forwards with so great a noise, that the
earth seemed to open therewith.

Then the Emperor Alycandro seeing that (who was in a readiness) would not be
the last, but straight ways marched forwards with all the remainder of the
knights, and sure it was a thing of great compassion and pity for to behold,
so infinite a number of people slain, when that these two battles joined
together, for that the Horses of Darius, Cirus, and Alexander, being joined all
together, were not so many as were there at that present.

The worthy and renowned Emperor Trebatio made his encounter with the king
Orilardo, who was a mighty Pagan, and was almost so big of his body as a
Giant, but this good Emperor made his encounter in such sort, that he broke
his gall within his body, and th^ust him ever his horse crouper to the ground.
Likewise all other knights of fame that were in the company made worthy
incounters. After which being done they put themselves in a bushment together
round about their good Captain, and put themselves into the camp, killing and
ouer^^rowing those Pagans all that ever came before them. On the other part
g^eth the Emperor Alycandre compassed about with those mighty giants, and
other ki^gs and knights of estimation, that it was a lamentable t^ing to
behold the great de^truction that they made am^^gst their enemies, and for
that there was on both parts kni^hts of great valor and estimation. The
battle was in ^allance, although there were of the Pagans three times so many
as were of the Christians. All this while we have forgotten those two stout
warriors, the knight of the Sun and Bramarant, for to complie with other
worthy and valiant knights. But you shall understand that they c^ntinued
always in their cruel battle, and did no other thing but charge the one the
other with their terrible blows out of all order, and with so great fury,
that if they had been two Rocks, they had broke them all to pieces, and the
anger and courage of either of them was so great, because they could have no
victory, that they left one another, and put themselves into the battle,
whereas they slew and overthrew to the ground, and covered the fields with dead
bodies, as the Mower with his Since covers the sorrows with corn. The knight
of the Sun put himself amongst those monstrous Giants of the Oriental
Indias, and made so great slaughter amongst them, that those which were
living, although they were fierce and rough people did fly before him, he put
himself with so great fury amongst them, that the stout Oristedes rem^ined
behind him, and could not follow, but yet with the great desire that he had
to keep him company, he did strange exploits and of great wonder. Then the
knight of the Sun looking back, and seeing him all alone, did tarry his
coming, making a bread way in every place whereas he went, at which time
came forth against him a rough and (...), named Othibe^^, and was Lord over the
Island of (...), his armor was edged round about with gold and precious stones
of great price, who stroke so strong a (...) at the knight of the Sun upon
his helm, that he somewhat a^^^med him. But this proud Pagan departed,
advancing himself thereof, but was rewarded for his boldness, with his head
cloven asunder to his breast, so that he fell down dead to the ground, yet
there lacked not another more hardy than wise, that thought to make reuengement
for the same. There was a king called Armelion, who having a great confidence
in his strength and in the excellency of his armor, wherewith he was armed,
and was very good, went toward him, and stroke him a mighty blow upon one
of his shoulders, but he that had received so many of that furious Bramarant,
received that of him as nothing, but in payment of his great folly, the son
of Trebatio stroke him such another upon his head, that both helm and skull
he stroke into his brains, the which being done, he stayed not, but proceeded
forwards on, not finding any that did disturb him in his way, and always he
had an eye unto such as seemed unto him to be the principal of his enemies,
so it chanced he discovered two mighty great and deformed Giants, that were
both together with mighty mases in their hands, and made great slaughter and
destruction upon the Greeks, these Gyantes were two brethren, and Lords over
an Island in the Indian sea. The one was called Zario, and the other Drago, and
in all the whole host was not to be found two Giants, more mightier and
fuller of pride than they were. But as this gallant lover of the royal
Empress Claridiana had seen them, without any consideration that they were
two, and he all alone^ he took a Spear from a Pagan that was next him, and
se^ spurs to his good horse Cornerino, and with so great fu^ie, that he
seemed a whirle wind, he went toward those Giants, (who were seen above all
the rest more than two ^ubites) and in sight of all the people he encountered
wit^ one of them in the midst of the breast, in such sort (that ^^though his
armor was twelve plates thick) yet did he thr^st his Spear a good yard
through his body, that the sharp point of his Spear appeared at his back,
and this great Giant fell down dead to the ground, and made so great noise as
though a tower had fallen down, and at such time as this good knight did pass
along in his course, the other Giant that did abide his coming with his yro^
mase in his hand all alofte, he discharged such a right down blow at him,
that if he had chanced to fasten the same, it had not gone well with him, but
the great fury and swiftness of his horse Cornerino was such, that before he
could discharge the same, he was passed by with his Master, so that the
blow fell down to the ground, and entered into the earth three spans, and as
yet he had not lift up his mase when that the knight of the Sun turned
about his horse with great lightness, and joining himself with the Giant, he
cast a thrust at him with the point of his sword in the midst of his bell^e,
and put so great force and strength there unto, that without any staying it
passed through his double and thick armor, and entered into his guts up to
the hard hiltes, and pulling his sword out, his guts followed after. And
therwithall the Giant* with an infernal fury stroke such a terrible blow
with his mace on his back, that he had overthrown him to the ground, if
that he had not embraced himself with his horse neck. But so soon as this
blow was given, the mighty Giant fell down dead to the earth, and the knight
of the Sun doing the^e and many other great meruailes passed forwards on,
discouering^through all the whole battle, beholding the mighty deeds,
great meruailes, and high knighthood which was done by the famous knights on
his part, unto whom it seemed that they alone were a sheelde and defense unto
all his people, for without them they had been all overcome and dispearsed,
for that in comparison there were a great number more on the part of the Pagans
than there was on theirs. He likewise looked about for Rosicleer, and saw
where he was all alone so berayed and bathed in blood, that scarce he could
be known from another knight, but only by the incredible deeds which he
did, and seeing him in that sort all alone, without any of his confortes,
that could come unto him for to succor him, he fell greatly in love with him
and his estimation, and prayed unto God with all his heart to save and defend
him from all peril and danger.

Likewise he saw in another place the good Emperor his father in the midst
betwixt the two Spanish knights, who went all three together with equal
courage and magnanimity, and made exceeding great slaughter amongst the Pagans.

At this time the good knight would not stay any longer to behold them, but
thrust himself into the midst of the battle, and went from one place unto
another, ayding and helping there whereas he saw was the greatest peril.

At this time the day was well spent, for it was past noone and the knight of
the Sun ^eeling the wether to be hot (as he, that had travailed more than the
rest, for to refresh himself and to take some air, as also to see in what
estate the battle was) went out of the camp, and stood under a little wood
side that was there hard by the Camp, and alighted from his horse, and pulled
off his helm, and did from that place behold all that passed, and saw that
on every side all the whole fields was full of people, and by reason of the
great multitude, he could not know those worthy knights his friends from
the other, but the most that he could discover was, that those which were of
his part got ground on their enemies.

Now let us leave him in the place where he is, who for a greater destruction
unto his enemies, is refreshing himself and taking air, and let us return to
tell of them that remain in the battle, where are so many of renewmed,
worthy, and famous knights, doing and executing so great wonders and
marvelous deeds, that for to tell them perticularlie, it were needful of
another great History. On the other part goes the Emperor Alycandro,
accompanied with those kings his vassals, and his deformed Gyantes, that it is
great lamentation and grief to behold the slaughter that they do.

Again, what is to be said of those two valiant Pagans, Meridian and
Brandimardo, of truth not one that bears good will unto the Emperor Trebatio
would see it. On the other side goes that mighty king Balardo, and the king
^^hiderio, overthrowing to the ground all that comes before them, but yet for
their evil were they seen, by the (...) Princes, Clauervndo and Brandizel,
being together, for they went against them, so that betwixt them began a
rigorous and furious battle, but yet in the end the two Giants were slain,
and the two Princes proceed forwards, doing great meruailes in the midst of
the battle. As much as that does the Tartarian Zoilo, and the king Sacridoro,
who in seeking of Rosicleer does put themselves in the midst of the battle,
making broad ways whereas they went, till such time as they met with two
strong and stout Pagans, who stayed them a while, and they had enough to do
for to clear themselves from them. All this while was not idle, but did their
parts in ample manner, Bargandel and Lyriamandro, and the king Alamades,
Flamides, and Florinaldus, and the Prince Don Siluerio, Rodomarte and Rodofeo,
all these together did wonderful things, aiding and helping whereas was most
necessity, yet was there none that was with Rosicleer, for he was all alone,
and did very well clear the way whereas he would go, and did so much on
every side, that in the end he came whereas the Emperor his Father was, and
saw that he alone with those two Spanish knights were in combat with the
five Giants of the king Balardo, and waxed very faint and weary, but when
that he saw it, like a hungry Lion he went toward them, and when he came
whereas they were, he stroke such a blow at the first upon his shoulder, that
he cloue him down to the breast, and overthrew him to the earth, and straight
ways turned unto another, whom he slew, with another blow stroke off his
arm wherewith he h^ld his sword, and as he was turning for to strike another,
that did charge much the Emperor, he saw that the Emperor at one blow
ouerthrewe him to the earth, for that he stroke him overthwart the wast, in
such sort, that his sword entered into his bowels, that he fell down dead.
And when he saw the good succor that he had of his son, in the tune of so
great extremity, he was very glad and joyful.

Likewise at this time the two valiant brethren, Don Cla^^ and Arc^lus had so
wounded the other two Giants, that in the end they overthrew them to the
ground. Then Rosicleer seeing that the Emperor was meruailouslie accompanied,
for that the other Princes were come unto him, set spurs to his horse, and
put himself in the thickest amongst his enemies, and never rested till he came
whereas the stout Pagan Brandimardo was, and seeing the great slaughter that
he and Meridian made, he went toward them, and at his approaching, between
them was dealt mighty, strong, and terrible blows, in such sort, that
Brandimardo thought verily within himself that his adversary should be the
knight of the Sun, with whom he did combat in the wilderness of Grecia, for
that he supposed Rosicleer was not of so great strength, although many times
he heard him greatly praised and spoken of, which gave him great good will to
prove himself with him. And for that at that present Brandimardo did show the
uttermost of all his force and strength, it gave Rosicleer to understand that
he was one of the strongest knights that ever he had proved, he was so valiant
and full of dexterity.

You may well believe that in all this time was not that furious Pagan
Bramarant unoccupied, but with in^ernall fury he destroys and overthrows
all that comes before him, who when he saw that the most part of the day
was past, and saw that there was no advantage gotten on their part, but rather
they had lost ground, thought verily that there was no other occasion thereof,
but only the worthy, famous, and valiant knights that were of the Greeks
part, and it seemed that it did profit very little for to kill and s^aie so
many of the common people, before that first he had overcome the principal
knights. So this infernal and diuell^^h Pagan having his mind occupied
the^ewith, he presently left off the slaughter which he made before, and took
a mighty great, and big Spear from one of his men, and setting spurs unto
his furious horse, he put himself into the thickest of the battle, looking
round about where he might ^ee any knight of valor and prowess, and upon a
sudden he saw the king Oristedes, who at that present concluded and slew the
king of the Pa^tos, with one blow, wherewith he cloue his head asunder in the
midst, Bramarant ra^ne against him, and made his encounter on the one side,
in ^uch sort, that he overthrew him on the other side of his horse with his
saddle betwixt his legs, and had with that blow slain him, if that his
enchanted armor had not resisted his fury, so that he departed from thence,
and wen^ whereas he found the Tartarian Zoylo, and the king Sacridoro, and
overthrew them both to the ground in iusting, and passing forwards on, he
saw the stout king Florion, who at that instant slew a mighty Giant, and
making his encounter against him, he thrust both horse and man to the earth.

This mighty and furious Pagan stayed not in this place, but passed forwards,
and came whereas he found the two Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo, making
their combat with the king Balardo, and his companion, at which time they
obtained the victory with the death of those two Gyantes, he came upon them
vnbewares, and one of them he overthrew with the just of his Spear, in such
sort, that his valyant strength and courage could not profit him any thing
at all, and the other he iustled him with his horse, who ran with so
exceeding great fury, that he overthrew him to the ground, and as he
proceeded forwards on in the battle, looking round about him, he saw a
far off the worthy Emperor Trebatio, accompanied with a great number of
Princes and valyant knights, who did great meruailes and wonders upon their
enemies, and taking the b^g^est lance that he could find, he went toward
them, and stroke the good Emperor on the one side, vnbewares, and thrust him
clean out of his Saddle. The like he did unto the two brethren Don Clarus
and A^culus. Then the other Princes when they saw the Emperor unhorsed, they
came forthwith for to succor and help him, but their coming had like to have
cost them dear, for that at two blows which he stroke with his sword, he
astonyed and left without remembrance the two Princes, Bargandel and
Lyriamandr^o, and within a little while after he overthrew to the ground Don
Siluerio and the two Princes Rodamarte and Rodofeo, Flamides and Flo^inaldus,
and thinking that they were dead, this devilish and outrageous Pagan proceeded
farther on, till he came whereas Rosicleer and Brandimardo were combatting
together, and he seeing their battle so entangled, and knowing him for
certainty to be the same which slew the gran Compion his Father, being full
of mortal courage, as sparks of fire should fly out at his eyes, he went
unto him and stroke him an overthwart blow with both his hands upon his helm,
which was of so great force and strength, that the blood gushed out at his
ears and nose, and deprived him of his remembrance, so that his horse carried
him a while about the field. Then the stout Brandimardo, who was more virtuous
than he, saw the great villainy the which Bramarant had done, with a wrathful
courage he went against him, and said.

Oh thou discourteous villain, come to the battle with me, for that it shall
cost thee full dear, this shame and discurtesie which thou have showed unto
me. And therewith he stroke him such an overthwart blow upon the healme, that
with the sparks of fire that flew out thereof, he burned all the hair upon
his brows and eye lids. Then Barmarant, who always did bear him ill will
since the time that he did combat against him and Meridian in the wilderness
of Grecia, returned a reply against him with so great fury, that the noise of
their new begun battle betwixt them was heard throughout all the whole camp,
but their combat endured not long, for that Rosicleer came straight again unto
himself, and remembering what had passed, he went unto Brandimardo, and gave
him great thanks for that which he had done for him, and requested him to let
him to have the battle against Bramarant, who understanding what Rosicleer
had said, with great pride said: Come both of you together against me, for if
there were ten such as you are, I would not esteem you in any thing. Well
said Brandimardo, for that I will not do thee so much honor, I will leave the
battle, for that thy self alone shall conclude it with this knight, who I am
persuaded is such a one that will abase and break the heart of this thy great
pride.

And in saying these words ^he withdrew himself a back, and straight ways
began Rosicleer for to combat with Bramarant, and at two blows that he stroke
at him, doubling one after another, did entreat him in such sort, that he knew
not whether he was in heaven or on the earth, so that betwixt them there began
a brave battle, in such sort, that Bramarant did well understand that he had
enough to do to clear himself from the furious blows of Rosicleer alone.
without the help of the companion that he esteemed unto to him, and Meridian
and Brandimanrdo who stood and did did behold the (...) not a little rejoice,
to (...) how much that alone knight did (...) the great courage and pride of
Bramarant, and with the great contentment that they t^^ke to behold them in
the battle, they staid and withdrew themselves a while from fighting.

At this time all those knights that were overthrown by that monster, found
themselves in a great perpl^^itie, for that much people did ouercharge them, in
such sort, that they could not mount themselves again on horseback, but in
especial the Emperor Trebatio, and the two brethren Don Cla^os and Arcalus,
who were all a^oote together making their defense with their swords in their
hands, killing and slaying so many, that round about them lay a great number
of dead bodies. But the king of Gandaros did trouble them very much, with two
great ill favored and deformed Gyantes, that he had in his company, with
other knights, who put them in great peril. Not far from that place were
these Princes, Bargandel and Lyriamandro, Rodomarte and Rodofeo, Hamides, and
Hormaldus, all together, whereas they did great wonders, but by reason that
they were a foot, (and charged with much people) they passed great trouble.

The like meruailes did those two worthy Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo,
who were compassed about with more than twenty Giants of the Oriental Islands.
But he that was in greatest perplexity more than all the rest, was the Troyan
Oristedes, for that he was all alone and a foot, and was closed in with three
kings of the Indians, and with and infinite number of other people, in such
sort, that by no means he could get out from amongst them, except he should
fly into the air. But yet this good knight in (...) day did make manifest
the noble and valiant stock from whence he did descend, for that he slew a
great number, and made his party good, defending himself till such tim^ as
succor did come unto him, but yet they y^ did best clear themselves was the
Tartarian Zoylo, and the king Sacridoro, for that the five sons of the
mighty Torcato and the stout Rogelio, all together chanced to pass that way
whereas they were, and with the high knighthood which they used, they mounted
again upon their horses, and joined with the king Oliuerio and his knights,
so that they all together put themselves into the thickest of the camp,
whereas they did great wonders.

Now let us leave them in this sort in the battle, doing of valiant and
worthy deeds on every side^, and although the common people and soldiers
on the part of the Pagans were without number, yet those on the part of the
Christians were far better and better armed, and did great slaughter upon
their enemies, and let us tell of that dreadful Organte, who was in an
ambushment in a wood with his people.

When the Emperor Alycandro saw that the day passed away, and that it was
then time to put in execution that which he had d^termined (for that the
battle was at that time in a bal^ance) he sent out of hand a messenger unto
him for to issu^ forth. So when that Organte had received the commandment of
his Lord, like as the hungry Lion runs out o^ the thick woods for to seek
his pray in the plain amongst the Cattle: even so he with all his people
went out o^ the ambushment, and with as great expedition as might be, they
went to put themselves into the battle, but it so fell out before they came
thither, that there happened another thing clean contrary unto that which
they look^^ for. For if you do call unto your remembrance the knight of the
Sun, where we left him upon a little ba^ke under the wood side, beholding
the battle, as he cast his eye aside toward that place, he saw those
people coming out of the Forest^, whereat he was greatly amazed, and if did
not a little molest and grieve him, for that he saw they were Pagans, and in
so great exeremitie for to enter into the battle. But committing himself
unto almighty God, desiring him if it were his pleasure to grant the victory
unto the Christians. And therewithal descended from the place whereas he was,
and put himself in the plain, whereas that most dreadful Organte with his
people should pass, and being there with his spear in his hand abiding his
coming, he saw coming toward him a big knight and very well made, whose
proportion did give him great contentment, he was mounted upon a^mightie
great horse, and was armed with armor, brodered about with gold and precious
stones, so fresh and bright, that it seemed thereby that it should be the first
time that he was armed with them, and being very much delyghted in his
gallant disposition, he was desirous for to know who he was, but he had no
time for to inform himself thereof, for that at the same very instant
approached that dreadful Organte, who came a good space before his people, and
was mounted upon a mighty and strange beast, not inferior unto the bigness
of an Elephant, very strong, and as light and swift as any horse, and by
reason that he was so mighty and huge of his person being on horse back,
he seemed like unto a Tower, his countenance and expectation was so terrible
and grim, that it was sufficient for to put fear and dread in any knight,
how heroycall and valyant so ever he were. But this flower and mirror of all
Knighthood, who never made any other account, but unto that which reason and
honor did bind him, without any fear and dread came unto him, and said:
Giant, tell me whether thou do go with so great have. Then the Giant very
wrathful and angry at that demand, beholding him with a fierce countenance,
answered and said: As thou art one, if thou were one hundredth, I would make the
answer to be very dear unto thee, but yet whether is it that I should go,
but to make mighty rivers of the Greekish blood. blood.

Then the knight of the Sun said: first before that thou do attempt that
enterprise,, thou must combat with me, for I do tell th^e, that before thou
can make great rivers, thou must first make litt^e brooks. Then with great
fury, throwing out smoke from his ^ealme; this dreadful Organte tourneth
about his mighty beast, and said in this manner.

Oh Jupiter, how have thou given unto one alone knight so great hardiness,
that being armed in the field he durst challenge and dos^e the dreadful
Organte. And when he had taken of the field so much as he thought sufficient
for his course, with his Spear in his hand, which seemed to be a high and
mighty Pu^e tree, he came against the knight of the Sun, who so fast as his
Corner^no could ^unne, came against him, and according unto the great fury
that either of them brought* it seemed that the earth did thunder and quake,
but when they joined to make their encounter, the Spea^^ of the Giant was (...)
all to p^^es upon the (...) of the knight of the Sun, and considering the
(...) thereof;, and with what force and fury it was broken, it had been
sufficient to have overthrown a wall, for that it made so great a noise as
though a thunderbolt had fallen from heaven, and yet for all this it made no
more (...) that good knight, than if it had been but a small (...) but he made
his encounter, (...) in the midst of his (...) and (...) that he thri^^^
through and through, not sp^^^ing his thick and (...) of make, but with the
force thereof he made the point of his Spears to (...) all bloud^ at (...)
wherewith he ouerthr^w (...) and his beast^ the (...) that some Castle had (...)

L^kewise (...) worthin^sse of^ that (...) was suffic^ent, for (...) he was
very desirous to know who he was, she came thither in that sort out of the
City for to see the estate of all the whole camp, upon that litt^e mountain,
whereas the knight of the Sun was, as he had done before* whose generous
heart having no power to keep her self in (...) any longer* being in
presence of him whom she so much ^^ned, and knowing him, received great
contentment (...) that worthy encounter, ^he went unto him and said (...)
them, upon them my good friend, and leave not one of them a live. But when the
knight of the Sun knew her, it could not be expressed the great joy that he
received. But by reas^n that the people of Organte drow nigh unto him, he had
no time to make her answer according unto his (...) desire, but only he
said: My good Lady, having (...) good (...) and succor as I have of you, I
have no reason for to fear all these people, although they were many more than
they be. Thus they both together went toward the battle, and gathered many
people that were scattered abroad from the fight. In the mean time that they
were doing this, the people of Organte came unto the place whereas their
Captain was slain, and were very strangely amazed for to see him in that
case, with so terrible and mortal a thrust, and could not imagine that any
mortal man could give it, and being all of them very desirous for to be
revenged of his death, they went toward the camp, and with a great noise and
shouting, they put themselves into the midst of the battle, in such sort,
that by reason at that present the battle was in balance, and that to enter
in a fresh, was the occasion that the Greeks received great damage, and the
whole battle like to have been lost, for that the Emperor and the rest of
the principal knights were detained and a foot as you have heard.

But at this instant the knight of the Sun, and the most excellent and royal
Princess Claridian^, with more than three^thousand knights, such as were
dispearsed and gone abroad, and by them gathered together, pressed themselves
into the battle with great fu^ie and force making great and mighty
slaughter, in such (...) was more filled with blo^d, and all those of their
part recovered force and strength, and to the contrary part the Pagans
seeing so great slaughter and destruction of their people, began to give way
and to loose ground. Now at this time might be seen very well accomplished
the Prophecy of the old king of Gedrosis, for that according unto the great
destruction that the knight of the Sun and the royal Princess made on their
enemies, it seemed that there were not people enough in all the whole camp for
to satisfy their furious appetite, and there was not (...) one in all the
whole army that was in perfect security, from their furious and bloody
hands. Within a while the knight of the Sun came into the place whereas was
the good Emperor his Father a foot, and so weary that almost he could not
lift up his arm to his head, he and the two Spanish knights, although they
had done great and marvelous (...) and incredible wonders, yet were they at
the point to have been slain, for that they were charged and assaulted by the
king of the Gandaros, and with two mighty, great, and deformed Giants, with an
infinite number of other people, who brought them into a marvelous
perplexity. But quickly they were rescued, and their enemies deceived of
their prai^, for when the knight of the Sun knew him to be his Father, with
a new force (more than of a knight,) he str^ke one of these Gyantes such a
blow under the gorge of ^is healme, that he cut his head clean^ from his
body. The which being done, with great lyghtnesse he turned himself about,
and with both his hands he stroke such an overthwart at the other upon his
wast, that almost (...) unto his saddle bow he parted him in two pieces, and
the royal Princess stroke such another blow upon the healme of the king of
the Gandaros, that with the incre^ible force thereof she cloue his head quite
down unto h^s teeth, and overthrew him dead at his feet.

The blood waxed cold within their bodies, and their members shaked of all
them that did see these mortal and deformed blows, in especial those Pagans
that were there nigh at hand, who had compassed about the Emperor, and the
other two Princes, so that it was not needful of any other occasion for to
cause them to depart thence, for that they gave them such entertainment, that
they all fled away, and put themselves into the battle, and thought not
themselves in any security wheresoever they should become. And although the
good Emperor Trebatio had time and space enough for to mount upon his horse,
yet he was so weary, that he had no force for to do it. Likewise the two
Spanish knights were ready for to lie down with weariness. The which being
seen and perceived by that good Knight, with a trice he alighted from his
horse (...), and took the Emperor his Father in his arms, and with his own
strength he put him into the saddle, and gave unto the two brethren other two
horses, and with his own hands he mounted them. The which being done, in
spite of all those that were against them, he took unto himself the horse of
the king of Gandaros, which was both strong and swift, and with great
lightness he leaped into the saddle, and passed forwards on, leaving the
Emperor Trebatio no less amazed, than joyful and content, to see the
wonderful de^des of his son, who with new force and strength, the which he
recovered with that sudden joy and pleasure, pressed forwards into the
battle, being in the midst betwixt the two Spanish knights, and did such
(...) acts, that it seemed he had but as then entered into the battle. Then
the knight of the Sun came unto the place (with the Princess Claridiana)
whereas they found on foot the princes Bargandel and Lyriamandro, Rodomarte
and Rodo^eo, Fl^^ndes and Florinaldus, by whose coming they were quickly set
at liberty, and had space for to mount them selves on horsback, the which
being done, he did the like unto the Tartarian Zoilo and the king Sacridoro,
and never stayed til he (...) whereas the stout Oristedes was, which was a
strange thing to behold, to see the great number of dead bodies at his feet
round about him, but by reason that he was ouerpressed with so many against
him* he was very weary, and almost out of breath, which being perceived by
the knight of the Sun, with a great good will he did succor him, slaying and
overthrowing to the ground all those that he found against him, and of the
three kings of the Indias; the royal Princess overthrew two of them dead to
the ground, and the third ran away, for if he had tarried, his golden
crown: the which he had on his head, would little have auailed him.

Then the good Troyan being very glad of that aduantaged succor, took unto
him a very good horse, and mounting upon him, they all together thrust
themselves into the battle, and never stayed till they came whereas the two
Princes Brandizel and Claueryndo, who were compassed round about with those
gyantine knights, but quickly they were delivered out of their hands, and
^^^unted upon other horses.

At this time were joined together the Emperor Trebatio, with all the rest of
the worthy and valiant knights, with the knight of the Sun, and the royal
Princess Claridiana, and all was needful, for that the Emperor Alycandro,
accompanied with those Giants his guard, and with the most principallest kings
of their host; came unto that place of the camp, making such destruction and
slaughter, that they alone had been sufficient to have got the whole victory
of the field. But being discovered by this generous company, they all together
moved toward them, whose encounter was a thing worthy to have been seen,
for that the knight of the Sun, the royal Princess, with the mighty
Emperor Trebatio, Don Claros, and Arcalus, the two princes, Brandizel and
Claueryndo, the king Florion, and the king Sacridoro, with the Tartarian Zoilo.
All the together made their encounter against the ten Giants of the Guard of the
Emperor, and that which seemed not to be believed, and impossible to be
executed, amongst all them that were in the whole army, fell out n^we deane
unto the contrary, for that every one of these worthy Princes missed not,
but overthrew his adversary to the earth, either stark dead or sore wounded,
and although some of them of the Emperor Trebatios part were unhorsed, yet
quickly and with a trice they were mounted again. And of other twelve kings
that were mighty and stout, and of great valor, that came in company with
the Emperor Alycandro, there remained but two of them, but all the rest were
overthrown and slain by Ba^gandel and Lyriamandro, Rodomarte and Rodofeo,
Flamides and Florinaldus, the sons of the gran Torcato, and the stout
Rogelio. When these Pagan kings were slain and overcome (although the number
of Pagans were infinite) yet they began to loose ground, for that they had no
other Captains for to govern them, but only that mighty Pagan Bramarant,
who was detained in battle with Rosicleer, and the two worthy knights
Meridian and Brandimardo, if there had b^ne many in the camp like unto them,
before the Pagans would have yielded any ground, there had been greater
destruction and blood shed more than there was, but by reason that they were
but two only, they were not sufficient for to govern and rule them, although
they did make so great slaughter, that they seemed not to be any humane
creatures.

But now was the time come of the good fortune and destiny promised unto the
Emperor Trebatio to show it self favorable, and the Prophecy before said
by the old king of Gedrosia to work effect, and accomplish the truth thereof
in confirming of the same, for that the Pagans began to retire, and night drew
on, and it wared dark, they received great fear, in such sort, that they put
themselves unto flight, and ran away with great shame, so that a little
before the shutting of the evening, the Pagans put themselves in such fear and
have in running, that there was no force of resistance in them, but to be all
slain by the Greeks, who followed them at their heels. And the Emperor
Alycandro when that he saw himself left alone without his strong guard, and
mighty kings (his vassals that were wont to keep and bear him company, and
all his people) to run away before him overcome, and clean without any hope
of victory, he larged the raines unto his horse, and ran about the field,
complaining very much against the Gods, (whom he took to be his parents and
kinsfolk) as also against Fortune, for showing her self so contrary against
him: but most he complained against himself, for putting so great confidence
and trust in his own power, in that he would not give any credit unto the
good and true counsels of the old king of Gedrosia, and going in this sort,
he came unto his Tents, and taking the fair Princess Lyndabrides, and the
rest of the Ladies and Damsels that were with her, with other such things as
conveniently he could, he fled down unto the sea side, whereas was all his
whole Fleet, whereof the Christians had burnt a great part of them, such as
were at the Sea, for although the said ships of the Christians were but few in
number, yet when that they saw the great destruction that was made on the
land, they recovered great courage ^or to assault them that were at the Sea, in
such sort, that they set fire on many ships that were in the Fleet, in
spite of them that were there, for that they found small resistance. Thus as I
have said before, when the Emperor came unto the Sea side, there was so great
have of embarking, that with great travail he embarked himself* into a
ship with those that came with him, and being embarked, yet he thought not
himself in any security, but in great have caused the Sails to be spread
abroad, and launched themselves into the Sea, leaving all this troop and
power overthrown in Grecia.

Then the Prince Meridian and Brandimardo, when that they saw how that the
people were dispearsed, and that by no means possible they could not stay
them from flying and running away. Then went they from one place unto another
seeking of the Emperor Alycandro, but could not find him, till such time as
they came unto the Sea side, whereas it was told them how that he was
embarked into a ship, and departed with the Princess Lyndabrides, and the
other Ladies and Gentlewomen that were in her company amongst whom was the
fair Princess Floralinda, spouse unto the Prince Meridian, who when that he
understood of their departure, did straight ways embarke himself in another
ship, and followed after them.

In all this while the Greeks understood in no other thing but in killing and
slaying of Pagans as they ran away, and made such slaughter, as in all the
day before was not the like, at which time all the water in the Tirreno sea,
from the ^geo unto the Euxino, was read, and turned into the color of blood,
with the great quantity that were slain as well on the sea as on the land,
which was a thing of great terror and wonder to behold. But the knight of the
Sun when he saw that the battle was dispearsed, and how that the Pagans
sledde before them, he made no farther account of them, but went and sought
for the Emperor Alycandro and the Princess Lyndabrides; fearing that in the
moving and running of the people they should receive some damage or harm. The
which he would not that it should so fall out for any thing in all the world,
for that he considered very well in his mind how much he was bound unto them
for the great love which they bare unto him.

And when he came unto the Tents, he went from one unto another, enquiring for
the Emperor, and it was told him how they were fled and gone, wherewith he
gallopped his horse till he came unto the sea side, whereas he saw the
Pagans making great have for to embarke themselves, and many of them did swim
aboard, because they would not abide the fury of the Greeks a land. Then the
Knight of the Sun came unto one of those Pagans, and put the point of his
sword to his face, and said that he would kill him, if he did not tell him
news of the Emperor Alycandro. Then the Pagan who saw him depart for fear
of death; told him how that he was departed from thence in a ship, with the
princess Lyndabrides and all her Ladies and gentlewomen. Whereat when the
knight of the Sun heard of their departure he was very sorrowful, as well
for the peril in the which they put themselves, as also for that he would
have done unto them the honour^ and service that they deserved, and for that
his valiant courage could not suffer that they should depart in such sort,
with a settled purpose and determination full of virtue, he put himself into a
Boat, and caused the Mariners to row him unto a good ship that was there at
hand, whereas he found certain knights that did resist him at his entry,
whom he slew, and threatened the Master and Mariners that he would likewise
kill them if they did not govern the ship right that way which the Emperor
Alycandro was departed and gone.

Then they who saw the great destruction that he had made in so short a time,
being greatly amazed thereat, and with great fea^e did obey all that he
commanded, so that in company with the other ships, they hoised sail, and
departed through that bloody sea, whereas we will leave them in their journey,
and return unto them that were left in the field.

At this time the good Emperor Trebatio when he saw the night come on a pace,
and that it waxed dark, being very weary he all and his company in killing
of pagans, began to blow and sound his rich horn, which like a good Captai^e
he carried always about his neck, and he did sound it i^ such sort, that in
all those broad and wide fields it was heard, at which sound all his people
did obey his commandment, and gathered themselves together. But yet in all
this time the battle betwixt Rosicleer and Bramarant never ceased, but rather
as then was more furious and kindled in wrath, and they did no other thing but
procure to charge the one the other with their terrible blows, all that ever
they could. At which time Bramarant thought not that the Emperor Alycandro had
been spoiled and lost the victory, but rather suspected that the Greeks had
lost the field, but very quickly he was put out of that doubt, for that by
reason of the great noise which they made in their battle, the Emperor
Trebatio and all those worthy Princes that were on his part, came thither
whereas they were, for as then they were all joined together, and put
themselves round about these two warriors, with determination for to part them
from that contension: but this valiant and worthy pagan when he saw them in
that sort, and knew them, he was greatly amazed, and straight ways suspected
that they had got the victory, who as then with a hoarse voice and proud
semblant, said. Oh fortune, how is it that thou have had so great power, for to
show thy self so contrary against the pagans: who is that mighty and valiant
prince that has had so great force for to overthrow the mighty Alicandro and
the gran Campion my father, who was sufficient to set fire on all the whole
world. To whom Rosicleer answered and said, if thou will know him it is easy
to be understood, for I do give thee to understand that all which is here
done, comes alonely of him, that did create and make all things, and has
power over all men, and at his will is governed both nature and fortune. And
this is Jesus Christ true God and man, in whom all christians do believe and
worship: and it has been his pleasure to give us the victory against so many
thousands of Pagans, by the which thou may understand, how false and
deceiuable be your Gods, who were not able for to aid and succor the Emperor
Alicandro, who presumes to desend from the race, and stock. Then this proud
Pagan replied and said, I never believed in any gods, neither am I now
determined to believe in any, for that both their gods and thine, and all the
rest, I hold them for my enemies, and I will spoil them all where soever I
may find or meet with them. And in saying these words he raised himself in
his stirrups, and with his sword in both his hands he stroke so strong a blow
at Rosicleer upon his inchaunted healme, that it seemed a Thunderbolt to have
fallen from heaven, the noise was so great, which made him somewhat astonished:
But when this Pagan saw that he was compassed about with so much people, and
that it was night, he thought it not good to abide there any longer, but set
spurs unto his horse, and rushed thorough the thickest of them, and over,
threw to the ground all them that was in his way, and like a whirle wind he
runs through those fields, and never stayed till he came into the
wilderness of Grecia, with intension not to depart from thence till such time
as he had very well and to his contentment revenged the death of his father.

Rosicleer would very feign have followed him, for that he had a great
desire for to conclude and give end unto that battle, but the Emperor his
father and those that were with him did distrube him. Then when they saw
themselves together, and missed the knight of the Sun, they were greatly
amazed, and separated themselves some one way and some an other way, and went
into all places for to seek him: but when that in all the whole field they
could not find him, they could not immagine where he should be, for the
which they were all very sad and sorrowful, but in especial the royal
princes Claridiana, for that she thought every hour a year till she had
spoken with him, and travailed from one place to an other with great care in
his demand, but could not find him, nor have any news of him, till in the
end of great inquiry, it was told her by a soldier that he did see him
embarke himself in a ship, and all that he procured was for to know some
news of the Emperor Alicandro.

When she heard this, she was somewhat quieted in her self, and went and
informed the Emperor Trebatio, thereof, who with all the rest of the other
princes receued great joy, and began at that instant to celebrate and rejoice
the la^e victory won, and in very good order returned to the City of
Constantinople, where as they were in the arms of those Ladies, with such
joy, as the reader may judge, yet I must needs say, that if the absence of
the knight of the Sun had not mittigated somewhat the extremity of their
pleasure, there had never been in Grecia the like joy and triumph.

Let us now leave them in all their pastimes, for that I am sure this long
chapter has somewhat wearied you, and let us return to tell you of other
things wherein you shall receive pleasure and delight.

How that the Emperor Alicandro sailing by sea, was through a tempest, by the
which he was driven unto the strong Island, whereas they were taken prisoners,
he and the princes Lindabrides, with all her Ladies, by the Giant Roboan and
his sons. Chap. 39.
WIth great sorrow and heaviness of heart did the Emperor Alicandro nauigate
the Sea, with the fair and precious Princes Lindabrides, in company with a
small number of Knights that entered into the ship with him: who when they
considered with what great pomp and force they entered into the Empire of
Grecia, and with what disgrace they departed from thence, their hearts were
ready to break with sorrrw, for that they saw no other thing, (of so great a
number of thousands of people that they brought with them out of their
countries) but only the water of the Sea, covered with blood, and a few other
ships full of people that had escaped from the fury of the Greeks, some one
way, and some an other, without any order, but whether soever the wind and
fortune would carry them.

The night was very dark, so that the ship of the Emperor was all alone, and
fortune who would show her self more contrary for to give ^im to (...) what
small trust there was in her, it happen that in the night there arose a great
^^mpest, that did not only hinder them of their journey, but also did put the
ship many times in great danger to be drowned, so that the mariners and
such as were in the ship, had enough to do, for to void and cast out the
water, that was forced in by that tempest, and the fair princess Lindabrides,
with all her ladies and gentlewomen, received so great fear that they all
amassed remained as dead persons: although unto this fair princess, the grief
was not so much in beholding before her eyes, that great peril of death in the
which they were brought, as to see her self in that sort for to depart from
Grecia, where as remained the knight of the Sun: and again to consider how
evil her purpose and desire was brought to pass, so that she remained without
all hope or remedy. And prayed unto her gods and fortune, not to appease the
torment, but to be so contrary unto their journey, that they might return
again (by the force thereof) into Grecia, either a live or dead: for that she
thought in her heart, that there was no death could be more crueller unto her,
then to return into her own country whereas she should lose all hope ever
for to see the knight of the Sun. In this sort uttering great and profound
sighs, which proceeded from the bottom of her heart, she said as follows.

Oh my soul, depart and leave this my sorrowful and afflicted body, seeing
that my fortune and cruel destiny will that I shall leave the land whereas the
knight of the Sun does remain: Oh you wyndes and celestial mouinges, that
does carry the ships upon the Seas, here and there in all places, carry us
now into some part whereas we may be taken prisoners by some Grecian, and
carried before the Emperor Trebatio, for that it shall be unto me more
comfortable to be prisoner and (...) in his pallas, then to be Queen in the
gran Scithia or Empress in Tart^ria. Oh you blouddie waves ^ossed up and down
by the furi^^s wyndes, and forced into rivers, show your selves so favorable
unto me, that when by this torment and storm, we shall be drowned, you would
(dead as I shall be left) carry me unto some part of Grecia, for that possible
the knight of the Sun hearing of my death, will not be so cruel but that he
will give sepulture unto this my unhappy body, and at times remember me, and
be sorrowful for this my untimely and cruel death. Ah when that this shall
lack in him, yet shall my sorrowful bones take comfort, in that they shall
remain in so glorious and happy a land.

In uttering of these and many other things of great grief, did this
sorrowful princess nauigate, and with so great trouble of mind, that I do
verelie believe, if the knight of the Sun had heard them, he would have had
great compassion on her. Likewise it was of no less sorrow and grief to see
the demeanor of the Emperor Alicandro, for that the day before he saw
himself in the estate to be lord over all the whole world, and at this
present for to be a land in his own country, he would have been content to
have had the government, and to be lord of a poor castle: an estate
unlooked for, and they that do think to sleep in great security, whom
fortune has put in the highest part of her mouable and inconstant wheel, they
may well behold this Emperor, for that possible he may be unto the^ a greater
security, and cause them to loose the condition of hope that always they had
in her, for that always when that she does once begin to frown and to
turn her back unto any, she is not content to touch them with a little
adversity, but will so follow them, as their fall shall be equal unto their
first triumph of exalting, as by experience you shall see in this Emperor, who
was not content to bring him into this estate of perplexity, but straight
ways did ordain a greater and crueller conclusion greatly to be considered
of: for that the next day in the morning at such time as the Sun did arise,
the furious force of the winds and seas, did carry their ship into the port
of any land, with so great extremity, that it brake all to pieces, and they
with great travail escaped, being all wet, out of comfort, and in a place
unknown, and for that you shall be certified of the comfort and ease that they
found there. You shall understand that this was called the strong Island, the
most famous in all the Tirreno Sea, it is called strong, for that it is all
compassed round about with the Sea, and on the parts toward the sea, high and
mighty Rocks, and has no entering into it but only one part, in the which
the Emperor Alicandro and his company were driven by force of that great
tempest: at the entry of the same sort, was two great high and mighty towers,
and of great strength, and at the foot of them into the Island, a great and
large plain, in the which was many gallant peaceable and fresh fountains,
that did inuit all them that passed by, to take their ease and repast, and
beyond the same plain, there was a beautiful mountain, upon the which was
edified a very fair castle and strong, compassed round about with a high
wall* and watch towers, with a (...) very broad and deep, upon the which was
a drawn bridge of timber, and before the same a gallant little plain in manner
of and court. The highest part of the tower was full of windows and galleries*
some toward the Sea, and others toward the entry of the said Castle, so
that for strength and beauty, in all the whole Sea, was not an Island to be
found equal unto the same* but only that of Lindaraza, the which was edified
and made by art of enchantment.

The Lord of this Island was a Giant, called Roboan, who by liniall dissent does
proceed from Nemroth, he that built the high and stately tower of Babel* and
from his time to that day, has been maintained and governed, by that lineage,
as appeared by old and ancient writings which they had amongst them.

This Roboan was very big of body, and of strength more th^n any other
Giant, and he had four sons all young men, the most stoutest and grymmest
that was to be found amongst* all the Islands of the Sea. So that by the (...)
of them, as also (...) the great strength of the Island, Roboan (...) all the
whole world, if they coem against him, which was the occasion that he did great
harm^ and robberies at the Sea. And did maintain in his Island an ill custom,
which was, that every time at the wayne of the Moon, he did sacrifice two
damsells, the most fairest that could be found, and when that the Moon did
increase he did sacrifice two knights, the which they did, by the increasing of
their great sins, whereby his a^ncestours did fall into a great and
abominable Idolatry, to honor and worship the Moon, without knowing any
other God or Lord, but only her, saying, that with her brightness she did
illuminate the earth, and cause it to engender Giants, and that she wa^ the
occasion that the earth did bring forth all manner of fruits and herbs, for
the which occasion they had her for their Goddess and Mother.

Also they said, that when the Moon was in the waine, she did hide her
brightness for that she was angry with men: for which cause they did
sacrifice unto her two damsels, because with their blood as they said, her
anger was appeased. And at such time as she did begin to increase, they did
sacrifice unto her two knights, in giving to understand, that they did
acknowledge her for their Goddess. And for the executing of the same, they
had caused to be made betwixt the two towers in a very fair plain, a rich
and gorgeous throne of Alablaster, nigh unto a fair clean and clear
fountain, whereas Roboan prostrate upon his knees, and apparailed with white
garments, and a towell upon his shoulder, did make this Sacrifice, cutting of
the heads of those damsels and knights with a broad and sharp knife. This
order and custom was maintained and kept in that Island by the ancestors of
Roboan, ever since the time that they fell into that devilish Idolatry. And
this Roboan did keep and celebrate the same with greater care and diligence,
then all his auncesters had done before him, in such sort that on a time at the
waine of the Moon, having in his custody but one damsel for to Sacrifi^e,
because he would not lack the number of two, he did Sacrifice a daughter of
his own, whom he lo^ed verymuch, ^he which extremity afterward was the
occasion that he put such diligence to seek out for (...) and knights, that
always after they had still great sorrow. The sons of this Giant were named,
the first Langereon, the second Andricardo, the third Rubero, the fourth
Ac^orante* all the which were very well spoken and of good conditions, and had
no other fault amongst them but blindness in that cursed law and custom,
wherein they did so much esteem them selves, that all the world besides they
made little account off, as though they were of small valor, as well in state
of degree, as in observing their law, with valiant force and strength. And at
such time as they did ^elebrate their sacrifice unto the Moon, whom they
worshipped as their God, the higher of blood that those damsels and knights
were that they did sacrifice, the more was their joy and pleasure. And they
pardoned none although she were a Queen. Two of these his sons were always
in the two Towers at the (...) side at the port, with diverse other knights that
did bear them company, and when that any by fortune or other wise arrived in
their port, they did take and apprehend them. The other two were continually at
the Sea, apprehending and taking prisoners all that ever they did meet, and
having taken any pray, they returned unto the Island. Their father Roboan, was
in the castle with his wife, who was lady Gyantesse, and many times he would
descend unto his sons in the two towers, and they likewise unto the castle,
when that it was their pleasure for to meet. This was the Island whereas the
Emperor Alicandro with the Princess Lindabrides and all her Ladies and
gentlewomen arrived, who were scarce out of the water a land, when that they
were beset and apprehended by the two giants, Lange^eon and Andricardo. who
were in the towers with their knights. And although some that came with the
Emperor would put themselves in d^se^ce, yet did it little profit them, for
that the two brethren were such that they would not have (...) one of them
alive, if they had not yielded themselves prisoners. Then the two brethren
with as great joy and pleasure as ever they received in their lives to see
themselves possessed with so rich a pray of damsels, went up into the Castle
with them, saving one damsel of the Princesses, (for that she would not see
her self in the power of those Gyantes) would put her life in adventure for
to escape from them, and ran and put her self amongst a company of Rocks,
whose fortune was so favorable (for that there was a great number of them)
that she was not seen, so that she remained there all alone hidden amongst
the Rocks.

And here you shall understand that this was the Queen Iulia, she that forged
and made the sword that Rosicleer won in great Britain of Candramarte, who
came in company with the Princess Lyndabrides out of the gran Tartaria. Thus
when the Emperor and all those damsels were carried into the Castle, Roboan
received great joy and pleasure for the rich pray, and it seemed unto him that
the Princess Lyndabrides was the fairest creature that ever he had seen in
all his life, and he said that with the blood of so high a Damsel, their
Gods the Moon, should receive great contentment, and cause the fruits of
their Country to bring forth in greater abundaunce than heretofore it has
done, and commanded straight ways that they should be put in hold and good
assurance, their prison was ordained in the highest part of all the Castle,
whereas were great galleries and battlements, from whence they might discern
all the whole Island, and a great part of the Sea. But when that the Emperor
Alycandro saw himself prisoner unto such evil and unmerciful people, and
well understood to what end they were prisoners, you may well judge the sorrow
and grief that he received at his heart, who before was Lord over so many
Countries, and of power more than any one in all the whole world, and now to
be prisoner in the custody and power of them that at his first entry heard
the sentence of his death. The Princess Lyndabrides of this imprisonment
received no great grief, for that she was not far parted from the Empire of
Grecia, but did comfort her self very much, for that she hoped in some time
for to see the knight of the Sun, being in that place, and not in the gran
Tartaria, whether as her Father did carry her. And she said within her self,
that forasmuch as in that land they did commit and use so great cruelty
against Ladies and damsells, it could not be, but at one time or at another, it
should come unto the ears and hearing of the knight of the Sun, who was of
so valiant a courage and generositie, that he would not let, but to prove and
force himself to take away that great cruelty and disobedience against God,
and had so great confidence in his worthiness and valor, that having him
before her, she esteemed all the world as nothing.

Let us now leave them in this their sorrow and grief, for that you do well
understand hereby the small security that is in fortune, how hurtful a thing
it is for to abandon wise counsel, and to lean so much unto her who^le, as
did this Emperor in the great and overmuch confidence that he had in her, for
that she had put him in so high estate, he did esteem the wise counsel of
the old king of Gedrosia as nothing, and for that he would not use thereof,
he was brought into the estate whereas we now left him. Let us now tell of
such other things as happened in the mean time.

How Rosicleer departed out of Constantinople in the demand of the knight of
the Sun, and how the knight of the Sun in following the Emperor Alycandro
arrived at the strong Island, and what happened about the same. Chap. 40.
THe next day after the fierce and bloody battle, which was the whole
expedition of Constantinople, all such Pagans as remained alive (which was but
the third part of those which came from the gran Tartaria) fled and ran
away toward the sea coast, whereas they embarked themselves, so that there
remained but certain kings and nobles, such as were known, and were prisoners
unto the Greeks. At which time the Emperor Trebatio with all his nobles,
having a great good will to celebrate with triumph the great and joyful
victory which God had given them, were greatly disturbed by the absence of
the knight of the Sun, for without him it seemed that they could not rejoice,
nor take any joy or pleasure, for which occasion at that instant departed many
knights from the Court, in the demand and seeking of him, amongst whom
Rosideer was one, who departed al alone from Constantinople, and in such sort
that he was not known, neither would he carry any body with him, for that
he had great desire for to meet with Bramarant, and to conclude with him the
battle, before that any knight be present for to separate or part them, and
coming unto the sea side, whereas he could not hear any news of him, he
straight ways there embarked himself into a ship, whereas we will leave him
and all the rest in Constantinople, for to tell you of the knight of the Sun,
who being very desirous for to overtake the Emperor Alycand^o and the
Princess Lyndabrides, na^^gating by Sea, was likewise the same night
constrained with the torment (that took the Emperor) for to loose his way.
But whether it was by the will of God it should so fall out, for that the end
thereof was very good, or else by the art of the wise Ly^gandeo, or else by
good fortune that governed his ship, in such sort the worthy knight of the
Sun was thrown by force of the said storm and tempest into the port of
the strong Island, the which being perceived and known by the Mariners, they
would straight ways have departed from thence, having that quiet p^rte far
more perilous than to be at the Sea, with that great storm and tempest,
whose great fear being manifest unto the Knight of the Sun, he was very
desirous to know the occasion thereof, and they declared the cause, very much
extolling the force and strength of Roboan, and of his sons, as also of the
great cruelty that was used there, with such knights and damsells as they did
take. And although the knight of the Sun would first have accomplished his
voyage in following of the Emperor Alycandro, and have left that enterprise
until some other time, yet for all that, seeing that it would little profit
for to return unto the Sea, by reason that the waves were greatly increased
with the force of the storm, he determined with himself to go a land, and in
the mean time till it pleased God to appease the rage of the weather, he would
put in practice to see if he could do any thing against those people, for to
cause them to break that evil and devilish custom, and as he was
determined within himself, he put it in ure, but the mariners would not
enter into the Port, nor board their ship aland with a good will, but he did so
threaten them that he made them by force to do all that he commanded.

When that he was a land, and had not well mounted upon his horse, (which was
that which he won from the king of the Gandaros in the battle,) there came
forth against him ten knights on horseback, and as many on foot, all armed,
with their hatchets of arms in their hands, and bad him to yield to them as
prisoner, and some of them approached to lay hands on his horse bridle. But
this good knight answered not one word unto these villainous people, but having
his Spear in his hand, stroke one of them such a blow therewith, that his
strong armor did not profit him, but he overthrew him backwardes stark dead
unto the ground, and as one that as then was not to learn to shed the blood
of such unhappy wretches, in a short time he made such slaughter amongst
them, that there escaped no more alive but three of them, who fled and ran
with all have possible unto the Castle, which was upon the little mountain,
whereas were the two oldest brethren, Langereon and Andricardo, with Roboan
their Father, for that after that they had carried prisoner unto the Castle
the Emperor Alycandro, and his company, until that time they had not
descended unto their Towers, whereas they were wont to be continually, which
was the occasion that the knight of the Sun was not assaulted, but by their
Knights and footmen, who remained below in the Towers for to keep and defend
them, for that all the rest were gone into the Castle with their rich pray.

But when the knight of the Sun saw himself clear of all those that came
forth against him, and that there came no more people out of the Towers, he
imagined within himself that the Gyantes should be in that high Castle,
which he saw before him somewhat a far off, which caused him to take the
way thetherwardes, and it seemed unto him to be one of the most fairest and
strongest that ever before he had seen, and as yet he was not come unto the
plain that was before the entry, which was in manner of a Court, when that
he saw come forth of the Castle by a false door one of the Gyantes, all
armed with thick plates of steel, and mounted upon a mighty, great, and
strong horse, with a great cutting hatchet of Steel in his hands, who seemed
unto the knight of the Sun to be one of the best furnished, and well made
and proportioned Giants that ever he saw in all his life. And this was
Langereon the eldest and most valyantest of all the four brethren, who being
advertised by one of them that ran away, of the great slaughter and
destruction that that alone knight had made amongst his people, he issued out
to seek him, for to take reuengement of the same, and at such time as the
knight of the Sun came into the plain ground, by the Castle, the Giant
approached nigh unto him, and lift up the beauer of his healme. But when he
saw him of so big and gallant proportion, and considered the news which his
men had declared unto him, he held him straight ways in reputation, and
thought him to be a knight of a most singular and valyant courage, but making
no account of him, he said.

By thy unadvised ariuall and coming hither (Sir Knight) I do understand that
thou know not who is Lord of this Island, neither the use and custom that is
here maintained, for if thou had been advertised thereof, then would
thou not have come hither to seek him, whom thou have so much grieved and
angered in the slaying of his knights. With as little fear and gallant
semblaunce as he spoke, the knight of the Sun answered him and said.

Giant, I do very well know, that this is the strong Island, and how that
Roboan is Lord of the same, who jointly with his sons does maintain so
evil and abominable a custom, that whatsoever good knight he be, he ought
for to adventure his life for to cause the same to be broken, as well in the
great Idolatry used in the worshipping for God his creatures, as also in the
great cruelty used against all knights and damsells, so that I am come
hither, and have so great hope and confidence in the divine justice, to do so
much, that you shall not persevere with this great violence, and if that thou
art Roboan or any of his sons, determine and put order to amend thy life, or
else come presently with me to battle.

Then Langereon with great laughter and disdain, said: Of truth (Sir Knight)
thy great boldness and courage is the greatest that ever I have heard or
seen, that thou have so valiant a heart for to approach and give attempt in
that which all the whole world is not sufficient, but because thou shall see
and understand that thy attempt is more of folly than of any valiant courage
or fear, do now what thou can against me, for that I am one of the sons
of Roboan, whom thou have named. And in saying these words this worthy and
valiant youth did lift up his great trencheant and steely hatchet, and
therewith went toward the knight of the Sun, with so terrible and dreadful
semblance, that it was sufficient to put great fear in any good Knight. But
unto him who had been accustomed unto such like enterprises, it was not only
without fear and dread, but also a Sp^are which he had in his hand, and
taken from one of those knights which he stew, he threw unto the ground, and
drew out his sword, and went toward Langereon, who was greatly amazed at
that which he did, so that these two the one against the other charged each
his adversary with such terrible blows upon their healmes, that with the
great force thereof they caused per^orce their horses to stoop down to the
ground, and by reason that the healme of the Giant was not of so fine metal
as it should have been, it was cloven by the knight of the Sun, in such
sort, that he made a little wound in his scull, out of the which proceeded
great abundaunce of blood that fell in his eyes, and about his face, the which
did disturb him very much in this battle, and this Langereon meruailed
exceedingly at that terrible blow which he had received, which was the
mightiest that ever in all his life he had felt, and being very desirous
^^raight ways and out of hand to be revenged of the same, for that in
continuing in battle, it might fall out unto him very perilous and
dangerous: he flourished with his steely hatchet about his head, and with it
in both his hands he stroke so strong a blow at the knight of the Sun
overthwart upon his con^^aled healme, that he thought verily a whole Tower
had fallen upon him, it so amazed and astonished him, and with a trice he
redoubled another blow with no less force and strength, with the which the
knight of the Sun had passed great danger, if that he had stroke it full and
right, but with the force and strength that he put in striking of the first
blow, the blood of the wound in his h^ad burst out a new, and fell with great
abundaunce down about his eyes, in such sort, that whereas he thought to
have stricken the worthy and valyant knight of the Sun, he was deceived, and
stroke his horse hard by the po^^ell of the saddle, that without any staying
he cut him clean asunder in the midst, so that he parted him in two pieces,
and he straight ways fell down dead unto the ground, whereby he was
constrained to overthrow his Master: but this valiant knight was not so soon
fallen, but he arose up again on his feet, and meruailed greatly at the
mighty force of the Giant, and seeing himself so entreated, he said within
himself, that it did well appear, that there was not present his Lady and
Mistres the Princess Claridiana, for that one alone knight had brought him
unto that extremity. And in saying these words he did abide the coming of
Langareon, who approached with his hatchet above his head for to strike him
another terrible blow, and at such time as he would have discharged the same,
he stepped on the one side with so great dexterity, that the blow fell down
to the ground, and as the Giant by reason of the force wherewith it was stroke,
did bow his body and arms after the same, the Knight of the Sun laid
hold on the gorget of his healme with so great strength, that he brake the
lacings and buckles thereof, and pulled it from his head, and overthrew him
from his horse to the ground, and before that he could arise, he stroke him
with his healme upon his unarmed head, that he astonished him, and laid him a
long upon the earth, and not willing to do him any farther evil, he left
him, and took his hatchet and mounted upon his horse, the which was both big
and very swift. And looking toward the Castle to see if another did come
forth, he chanced to cast his eyes up unto the battlements thereof, whereas
he discovered the persons of the Emperor Alycanidro, and the fair Princess
Lyndabrides, and some of her Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were beholding and did
see all that passed in the battle with the Giant, and by reason that all his
armor was berayed and imbrued in blood, and never made clean since the great
battle that was fought in Grecia, and again, that he had not his horse
Cornerino, they could not imagine or devise who he should be, but the
Princess Lyndabrides said within her self.

Oh how I would pardon and forgive fortune all these travails and adversities
which she has given unto me, that my fortune might now be so good and
happy, that this might be the myrrour of all knights, or his brother
Rosicleer, or some of his friends, that might do so much, in this Island, as
to carry us prisoners into Grecia. But when that the knight of the Sun did
see that fair and rubic^nd face of the Princess, he was not so greatly
troubled with the mighty and terrible blows which he had received of the
Giant, as he was for to see her, who some times was gouernesse of his heart, in
that place: wherewith he trembled and shaked, striking himself upon the breast,
as one that walks by night in security and without fear discovers upon a
sudden, some vision or fantasy before him. And being somewhat amassed, he
remained a good while, beholding her, without moving of hand or foot, that he
thought all his senses were disturbed, with the sudden sight of this fair
Princess, whose beauty was so rooted within his heart, and the old sore so
festered, that of truth it was very hard and evil to be healed, if that the
wisdom of Lirgandeo and Artimidoro, with others more auncienter then they,
had not put remedy in the same, for that the valor of this precious princess
was such, that the knight of the Sun in her presence, could never have his
free liberty. And being in this maze Andricardo, the second brother came forth
out at the castle gate, all armed with very thick armor of hardened steel,
and mounted upon a mighty horse, who was of no less stature and bigness then
the first: but when that the knight of the Sun did see him, he said within
himself, that never in all his life he saw giants of so gallant proporcion,
nor of so great force and strength as Langereon seemed to have. But when that
Andricardo approached and saw his brother lie along upon the earth, thinking
that he had been dead, it could not be immagined the great sorrow and grief he
received, which caused him with so great fury and lightness, as the arrow
that is forced out of abowe, to throw at the knight of the Sun a mighty
great boar spear which he brought in his hands, that if his armor had not
been that of Meridian* it had passed his body through and through to the other
side, for that it stroke him in the midst of his breast with so great
strength, that it made him to double his body backwards upon his horse
crouper, and for that the steely point could not enter into his armor, it
doubled and recoiled back again, and the sheeuers flew into the air, making
a great noise, but this good knight with great lightness did settle himself
again in his saddle, and remembered that the fair Princess Lyndabrides did
behold him, and therewith went against Andricandro, with his hatchet in both
his hands, and stroke him so mighty a blow upon his healme, that if it had
chanced to be a full blow, he had cloven him down unto the wast, but it
chanced somewhat aside, in such sort, that it cut away a piece of the helm
with one of his cares, and from thence descended his fine cutting hatchet along
his breast, cutting all that was before it, till it came to the saddle bow, the
which it cloue asunder, and cut his horse almost in two pieces, so that he fell
down dead to the ground with his master, and caught one of his legs under
him, in such sort, that what with the wound that he had on his breast, and
the doubling of his leg, he could not by any means arise, but was the
greatest amazed man in all the world, to see that terrible and wonderful
blow the which he had received, and it seemed to be done by a knight of the
biggest force that was to be found in any part of the universal world.

Then Roboan who was all armed, and at a window beholding the battle, when
that he saw his sons overcome and in that perplexity, it could not be
expressed the great sorrow and grief which he received, for that he thought it
a thing impossible, that ten of the best knights that were to be found in all
the world, were not able to do that which was there done, and thinking in a
short space to be revenged for the same, he mounted upon a mighty horse, and
took a great spear in his hand, and went forth at the Castle gate with so
furious and terrible a semblance, that the knight of the Sun did very well
perceive that he was of no less force and strength than his two sons, for
that he was higher of person, and bigger of members, and when that he came nigh
unto the knight of the Sun, with a hoarse and terrible voice, he said.

Knight, tell me who art thou of such courage and hardiness, that having
slain my two sons, dare abide me in the field? I am a knight (said he)
that in the name of Jesus Christ, in whom I do believe and worship, do hope
to destroy thee, and all those that are obedient unto thy law, for that the
divine justice being angry at the great sins and evils by thee done in this
Island, is now come to punish thee according unto thy deserts, in the deepest
parts of hell. Oh Goddess, the creator of all Gyantes, and the bringer forth
of all the fruits upon the earth, (answered Roboan) how can thou suffer
that one alone knight shall say that he will destroy thy law, and makes a
mocking stock thereat. In saying these words he spurred forwards with his
horse, and stroke him such a blow with his spear in the midst of his
breast, that he would have sworn, that the point with half the staff would
have appeared at his back, but it fell not out according unto his thought, for
at the force thereof he made no more mention nor moving thereat, than if he had
stroke against a tower, but with his mighty hatchet he repaied him in such
sort, that a mighty great and thick sheeld, that he had, wherewith he would
have warded that blow, he cut in two pieces, and the blow descended upon his
healme, cutting the same, and also a steel cap which he had under it, and
made a cruel wound in his head, and as they joined with their bodies very
nigh the one the other, the Giant laid hold with his arms about his neck,
thinking by his great force and strength to hoise him out of the saddie, but he
that was endued with no less strength than he, and with more dexterity, laid
hold on him by the wast, and held him so fast, y^ by reason their horses
pressed forwards, they both ^ell to the ground, and let go their holds, and
rose up upon their feet. The knight of the Sun drew out his sword and the giant
a great fauchon, so that they began the battle a foot, and made so great
noise, y^ they were heard throughout the whole Island, and it seemed that there
were in battle together, more then one hundredth knights. Here was to be seen
the great fortitude and strength of Roboan, who did combat in such sort with
the knight of the Sun, that he troubled him very much, and many times his
unmeasurable blows did put him in great peril, and had brought him into much
more danger, if that the great strength and goodness of his armor, and his
great lightness, had not helped him. There was also an other thing that did
profit him very much, which was y^ great fury of his temerous blows, which
made the Giant to besturre himself from one part unto an other, for to clear
himself from the fury of them, with more lightness then his big and great
body required. So that after half an hour that the battle was begone, his
unwieldy body not being able to endure any longer, waxed weak and feeble, by
reason of certain wounds which he had received, out of the which issued very
much blood, in so great abundance, that all the ground was stained there with.
At which time the knight of the Sun considering, that if the battle should
go forwards, it would not be well with Roboan: and again, for that he had him
and his sons in respect of strong and valiant knights, and for such would
esteem them, if that he might cause them to leave this great error the which
they had maintained a long time, he there with all withdrew himself aback, and
lifting up the beauer of his healme he said. Hear me a little what I will say
unto thee Roboan, first before that this our battle be finished, thou shall
understand that I do esteem thee and thy sons very much, as well for the
great valiantness that is in you, as also you do seem unto me to be good
and courteous knights: my will and desire is, that this our battle betwixt us
may cease, and that remedy be put in the curing these thy wounds, and the
wounds of thy sons, in case that thou will leave this law Gentilica,
wherewith thou have been so much deceived, and from this day forwards not to
observe nor maintain the evil and most cruel custom, as hitherto thou have.
For that if thou will see and behold with the eyes of thy understanding, and
consider of the law in the which thou do live, thou shall clearly see and
perceive the great error and deceit wherein thou art wrapped. Tell me I pray
thee Roboan, who ought to be honored and worshipped for God, but he alonely
that created and made all things both ce^estiall and terrestrial, and has
power over all things, for to punish the wicked, and to gratify and reward the
good and just. Well then, if he alone that has all this power, ought to be
esteemed, honored and worshipped, for God, what reason is there for to believe
that the Moon is the Goddess. Thou shall understand for her to shine and give
light, has need of the cleerenesse and brighnesse of the Sun, without the
which, of her self she is very dark and obscure, and cannot be seen. God
created the high colored Rubies, the green Emeralds, the blew Saphires, the
white Pearls, the shining beams of the Sun, that gives light unto the
Moon, the Stars, the green trees on the earth, and her Plants, the
quietness of the heavens, the roundnesse of the world, and the marvelous
course of the celestial mouings, not for that we should occupy our wits and
understandings in these things: but by the great beauty and sight of them, our
spirits may be moved unto the beauty and love of the creator and maker of all
them, from whom like as from a fountain, proceeds all that is fair and
delectable unto the sight of man. In the mean time that the knight of the
Sun was saying these words, Roboan was very attentive, taking as great
pleasure, at that he said, as at his great force and strength, and looking
upon himself, he saw that he was berayed with blood and his armor broken in
many places, and his adversary not to have received any wound, but rather was
more stronger and lighter then at the beginning, which was unto him apparent,
either to be slain, or to loose the victory. Likewise he well understood to
what end the knight of the Sun had spoken those words, which did proceed
more of virtue and good will toward them, then for any fear or dread he had
in the conclusion of the battle: but by reason that he saw his sons lying a
long on the ground in the field, the eyes of his understanding were so blinded,
that he could not see the great profit which might come unto him in leaving of
his law and custom. And said unto the knight of the Sun, that he should not
speak any thing more thereof unto him, for that he was determined to follow and
take his fortune, whether it were good or bad, against him, or with him. And
therewith they both returned again unto the battle, and for that they had
somewhat breathed and rested themselves, it was then a thing worthy to be
seen, the strong and terrible blows which the one stroke at the other. For as
I have said, Roboan was a stout and strong giant, and sufficient of himself to
destroy and kill one hundredth knights that should contend against him
altogether in battle. The knight of the Sun had great desire quickly to
conclude and make an end of that contension, to see what the Emperor
Alicandro and the Princess Lindabrides did in the castle, who being greatly
amazed at his great force and strength, could not immagine who it should be,
except it were the son of Trebatio, he who had done great marnailes in his
presence. And he that should at this instant have certified the fair
princess, how that it was the knight of the Sun, you may well believe that
he should have caused her to receive greater joy and contentment, then if they
had given her all the whole world for a present, as she who should not receive
so great grief, if her soul should depart from her body, as she should
receive in departing from the country whereas does remain her knight of the
Sun, who did so much against Roboan, that in the end of one hour, that the
battaele was begun, he fell down a long at his feet, so seeble and weak, by
reason of the great quantity of blood, that he had lost, that till such time
as the knight of the Sun did pull of his healme, and gave him air, he could
not come again unto himself. But when that he was in his remembrance, the
knight of the Sun flourishing with his sword above his head, said, with this
sword will I separate thy head and body a sunder, if that thou will not amend
thy life, and apart thy self from the law, wherein thou have lived hitherto.

The fear of death (said Roboan) shall not make me to do any thing that is
against my honor, but thy great virtue and force, does make me to believe
that thy law and faith is better then this, the which I have hitherto
maintained, in the which I do confess greatly to have erred and been
deceived. And here I do promise thee in the faith of whom I am, and by the
high blood from whence I do descend, never to maintain any longer this evil
custom, but will esteem and worship for my God all the days of my life,
him whom thou have told me off, who universally did create all things.

Then the knight of the Sun who was very glad and joyful for to hear him so
say, did healp him to arise from the ground, and embrasing him with great love,
they went both together unto Andricardo and Langereon, whom they found both a
live and without peril, but that they were very weak and feeble, with the
great quantity of blood the which they had lost: but when the sons had
understood all that which had passed with their Father, God had inspired his
holy spirit within them, in such sort, that they were very well content
therewith, and premised him that from that day forwards, they would hold him
for their Lord and very friend, and requested him to tell them, who he was,
and how he was called. Unto whom he said, that they should go unto the
castle and there in the presence and before his prisoners he would give them
to understand. And therewith they went all four together unto the castle, and
being within they mounted up unto the battelments whereas the Emperor, and
fair princess, with her damsells were. And when they came unto them, the
knight of the Sun pulled of his healme, and kneeled down before the Emperor
and the princess y^ were together aparted from the rest, and with that grave
and merry countenance y^ he was wont to have, he spoke these words. If the
errors don by the knight of ye Sun could move the generositie of your hearts,
to come with so great wrath accompanied with so mighty a number of knights,
into Grecia, for to take reuengement of me alone, behold me here now under
your obedience, for that with this sword straight ways you give me my reward,
as my desort does deserve, for greater force to this effect has the great
love and good will which always I bear unto you, then all the great and
mighty armies, which you ordained to pass the Seas, for that to counteruaile
them an other force equal is sufficient for to destroy them, but against the
good will which always I had for to serve you, there is no force, nor perverse
fortune sufficient for to oppress the same: and if hitherto my Lords, I have
seemed unto you to use the contrary, for that I made resistance against your
in these battles passed, it was not for to excuse me to be yours, but to
withstand that the Emperor of Grecia were not wholly destroyed: and again,
that they should not suffer and abide the smart, that were nothing in the fault
hereof. In the mean time that the knight of the Sun was saying these words,
the fair Princess did behold him as though she had been transported, or from
her self with the sovereign joy and pleasure which presently she received,
to see before her with so great humility, him whom she loved much more then
her own self, and his fight so greatly wished and desired for. But when that
the Emperor Alicandro did know the knight of the Sun, and had well
understood his humble and courteous words, who could immagine or conjecture
the great admiration and wonder that he received in his heart, with the
variety of diverse things that occupied his mind and understanding at one
instant. For one way he called to remembrance, that once he thought that this
knight should have been his son, and how that he gave unto him his daughter,
Empire and high estate. Likewise he remembered to the contrary, how that for to
be revenged on him, he left his own countries, and departed with a great
number of people into Grecia whereas happened unto him all his ill fortunes and
overthrows. he remembered also how that he saw him in the field against him
with so great fury and fierceness, that he alone did make to quake all his
great and mighty army, and how that by his rigorous arm the most
principallest kings and Lords of all his host were destroyed and hewn to
pieces, and now likewise he saw him upon his knees before his presence with
so great humility, that more could not be done by his son Meridian, if at
that present he had been there. In this sort was his mind troubled and tossed
withal these thoughts, which was the occasion, that he stood and did behold
him without speaking of any word a good space, till such time as coming unto
himself, and remembering that he was the Myrrour of all Princes and knights in
the world, and as then thought him to be equal unto the eternal Gods, and
that his great valor and estate would not suffer that he should continue in
that sort before him, he determined to consent and to suffer with patience, all
that was ordained by fortune, and to accept and receive the liberty of his
imprisonment at the hands of him, who has been the occasion of all his
evil, but in especial the necessity in the which he was brought, would not
give way unto any other thing, so that he went unto him, and did embrase him,
and kissed his cheek, and in shedding of many tears that ran down his
cheeks, he uttered these words.

Worthy Prince and well-beloved son, I am he that alonelie have erred, and
most worthelie does deserve the punishment, for the great quantity of blood
which I have caused to be shed of those that were without fault or blame,
for I may well know and understand, that whom the Gods did make of so great
magnanimity above all others in the whole world, it cannot be but Fortune
must be favorable unto him and unto me the contrary, for that I will
maintain against him the war and contention, yea, and besides all this, the
destini^s has been favorable unto thee, in that by thy great force and
strength, we shall be set al libertis out of this prison in the which we were
committed, therefore I will acknowledge the great^ subjection and submission I
owe unto fortune, and give her thanks, that although in the one she has been
unto me contrary, yet herein has she been favorable, in bringing you
hither into my presence in this great need and necessity. Therefore I will
(if you be contented therewith) return with you unto Constantinople, for to
conclude an entire and everlasting friendship with the Emperor Trebatio your
Father, and to do that now by peace, which I could not before conclude or
finish by wars.

Here did the knight of the Sun take great pleasure and contentment, in that
the Emperor Alycandro would return into Grecia, for the which he offered to
kiss his hands: but yet the joy and pleasure was much more, that the fair
Princess Lyndabrides received, in that the journey should be such, that she
might not so quickly depart out of the presence of the knight of the Sun.
And more it is to be considered of them that in the like operations has had
experience, for to give judgment of the imagination of those two, when they
saw themselves together before the Emperor Alycandro, whereas they could not
manifest any part of that which they thought within their hearts. At this time
approached unto them Roboan and his sons, and when they understood who they
were that were their prisoners, and also the knight of the Sun, they fell
down upon their knees at their feet for to kiss their hands, and craved
pardon of them for all that was past. Then the knight of the Sun said unto
the Emperor: My Lord, may it please your Highness for to honor these
knights, for that they do deserve it, for the great bounty and courtesy that
is in them. Then did the Emperor embrace them, and caused them to arise from
the ground, and offered himself to be their friend ever after, and for that he
saw them sore hurt, he caused them to be cured and laid in their heds, whereas
we will leave them, to declare of other things that happened in this time, and
is needful in this History for the accomplishing of the Prophesies past.

What happened unto Rosicleer after his departure out of Constantinople. Chap.
41.
IN the beginning of the Chapter past, it was told you, how Rosicleer was
departed from Constantinople, as well to seek the knight of the Sun his
brother, that was departed from the battle past, as also for to meet with
Bramarant, for that he had great desire for to combat with him, for that he
seemed to be the most strongest and mightiest Pagan that was to be found in all
the Paganism. Now the History says, that after he was gone to sea in a
little ship that he found in the port, the passed storm and tempest did carry
them so far, that they were in sight of the strong Island, and being
discovered, the Mariners did declare unto him whose it was, and the evil
custom that was there maintained. Which when he heard it did give him a great
good will for to go thither, and when that he came nigh unto, the Island within
a bow shoot, he saw upon the tops ^^certaine mighty rocks amongst the
cliffes, a damsel which made great have in running away, giving great shrikes
and cries, and following after her two mighty, great, and deformed Giants,
with great desire to overtake her, the which when he saw, with great good will
for to succor her, he caused the small ship to be carried to the shore,
whereas this worthy knight leaped a land, and began a foot to climb upon
those rocks, with all the speed possible he could, not respec^ing the manifest
peril that was ordained, with them whom he went to seek, but only that
whereunto he was bound by justice and honor. And when that he was thus
arrived, at the top of those rocks, he saw come forth from amongst those
cliffes the two Gyanted, who brought betwixt them the Damsel that before he
sow^, giving great shrikes and lamentations because that she was carried
prisoner after that sort. These two Giants were Rubero and Acorante, the two
younger sons unto Roboan, who ariuing at the Island, had seen the damsel
upon the top of the rocks, looking out if she could discover any ship wherein
she might have saved her self. This damsel was the Queen Iulia, and damsel
unto the Princess Lyndabrides, who for to deliver her self from the prison
whether as they carried her mistres, did fall into another danger as ill,
whereas all her wisdom and cunning could not deliver her, although she did
divine and prophecy of the same, who when the Giants did see her, and that she
seemed to be very fair and well proportioned (as of truth she was) they
straight ways followed after her, and took her prisoner, and carrying her in
that sort as you have heard, Rosicleer did put himself before them and said.

What is the occasion that you do carry this Damsel prisoner in this sort?
Then the Giants who had not seen him before he spoke unto them, did very much
behold him, and seeing him of so gallant a proportion and so well armed, the
elder of the twain called Rubero went against him, and said. Thou shall be
prisoner with her, and when the time does serve, thou shall have (...) answer
of this thy bold demand, with the sacrifice that shall be done with both of
you. And as he would have taken him in his arms, Rosicleer stroke him with his
close fist such a blow upon the stomach, that he all to buckled the plays of
steel wherewith he was armed, and without breath overthrew him backwards to the
ground, whose fall was so great, that his brother Acorante thought verily he
had been dead, who like a ravening Lion, giving a great shrike, went against
Rosicleer, and with a great fauchon that he had, he stroke so strong a blow
upon his sheeld, that he cut it clean asunder in the midst, and the fauchon
descended down upon his helm, and having no power against the inchauntment
thereof, it made him to stoop with his knees to the ground. Then Rosicleer
drew out his sword, which was the same of so great value, forged by the Queen
Iulia, who was present, wherewith he made him answer, in such sort, that he
cloue his sheeld asunder that he had on his left arm, and also his thick and
strong armor with the flesh, unto the hard bone. Then betwixt them two began a
brave and stout battle, striking the one the other so great and furious
blows, that they were heard throughout all the whole Island, in such sort,
that the Emperor Alycandro and those that were with him in the high Castle of
Roboan were greatly amazed, and could not imagine what it should be. After
this sort their combat endured betwixt them more than a quarter of an hour, in
the end whereof, the fine cutting sword of the Queen Iulia, being flourished
by the furious arm of Rosicleer, brought the st^ut Acorante into that
perplexity, that he was all berayed in blood with the great number of wounds
that was given him on all parts, that if he had not been so stout and
courageous, and of so great force, he could not have sustained himself upon
his feet, the which was to the contrary in Rosicleer, that although the
blows of the Giant were very strong, and caused him many times to stoop with
his hands and knees to the ground, and gave him great pain and grief whereas
he did fasten any blow, yet for all that, his excellent armor did assure him
from wounds, and his great lightness did make him to strike many of his blows
in vain. Thus in the mean time that Acorante was so feeble and saint with the
loss of blood, and waxed weary, Rubeo the other brother was come unto
himself again, and remembering what had passed him, and seeing the great
peril whereinto his brother was now brought, with a trice he arose up from
the ground, and taking his sword in his hand he began to lay upon
Rosicleer such great and mighty blows, (that by reason he entered in a
fresh, and the other being samewhat weary) he put him into great extremity,
so that all his valor and worthiness was very needful at that instant.

Then when the Queen Iulia saw how that that knight did all alone combat for
her against the two Gyantes, she straight ways called to remembrance that
which many days before she had prophesied, and beholding the swoorde, which
the knight had, she knew it to be the same which she had forged with her own
hands, and then she thought all her ^raua^le to be well bestowed, having great
hope that the knight should have the victory against those Gyantes, for that
she saw him very nimble and light, and that he wounded the Giants in many
places of their bodies, and all the ground was beraied with the blood that
ran out of their wounds, but by reason that they were so boistrous and so
stout, they so doubled their blows with so great fury upon Rosicleer, that it
had been sufficient to have hewn a rock in pieces, so that in a short time
they made him very faint and weary, brusing his flesh and bones, although
their swords could not enter nor cut his enchanted armor. And of truth, if
that this battle had endured long, he had been brought into the greatest
peril that ever he saw himself in, in all his life, for that these two Giants
were youngmen, and the most strongest that were to be found amongst all Giants.
But yet at this instant Acorante was so weak and feeble by the loss of much
blood, that he could not stand on his feet, but fell down to the ground as
though he had been dead. Then he finding himself alone with Rubero, the
battle was more indifferent, and the one did charge the other very
strongly* striking whereas they thought they should do most harm, each to
his adversary, but Rubero for the death of his brother was so full of wrath
and ire, that he made little account of the blows that Rosicleer did strike
him, although his ^ine cutting sword had so sore wounded him in many parts,
that his death could not be long dilated, by reason of the great quantity of
blood that ran out of them.

These Gyantes had certain knights which always went with them, who at this
very instant came unto the same place whereas they made their battle, but
yet in any manner of wise they durst not help their Lords, for that many
times before they had plagued them, and given them warning, that whenever
they were in battle with equal knights, that none of them should aid or
succor them, for which occasion they stood still, and were in quiet, till
such time as they saw one of their Lords lie along upon the ground as though
he had been dead, and the other so sore wounded, that he could not long endure,
neither could they any longer refrain themselves, but all together (who were
more than fifteen) all well armed, went against Rosicleer, and began to charge
him with very thick and strong blows, but Rubero when he saw this did put
himself before them, and cried out that they should depart and let him alone,
but they would not retire, but still pressed on all that ever they could. Then
he returned against them with his sword, and did so much, that against their
will he made them to retire. Then would he have returned again unto the
battle, but Rosicleer li^t up the vizor of his he^me and said.

God forbid that I should be overcome at thy hands more than at one time, for
this which at this time thou have used with me, has rendered me so much, that
I will put my self wholly into thy power, ^or to do with me according to thy
pleasure, upon this condition, that you give unto this Damsel free and whole
liberty, who was the occasion of this battle which has been begun and
continued betwixt us.

You shall understand, that all the sons of Roboan were by nature well
conditioned, and this Rubero the third son was the best of them all, who
acknowledging the great vantage that Rosicleer had of him (although all the
knights had h^lpen him) and how that his words which he had spoken
proceeded of great virtue, he then unlaced his healme and said.

Let not my fortune permit, that against him who has so great vauntage on me,
as well in virtue as in strength, that I make any more contention or farther
(...), for that in the end both in the one and in the other, I cannot choose
but needs must be overcome and loose the victory. This damsel is thine and
thou have won her, and now look what is thy pleasure to be done with us,
for that all shall be accomplished as you will command. Then Rosicleer did
embrace him with great love, and both of them together went to help up
Acorante, who was so feeble that he could not move himself, but when that they
had pulled off his healme, and given him air, he began to come better unto
himself, and gather some strength. Then the Queen Iulia with a piece of a
veil which she had, bound up his wounds and stanched the blood, by virtue of a
stone which she had in a ring, as one that in all things was a damsel very
wise, and of great discretion. When all this was done, the Queen said unto
Rosicleer.

Happy and fortunate knight, if you do well remember the condition wherewith
you got this sword that you now possess, in great Britain, it was, that you
should combat with two Giants together for the delivery of a Damsel. When
Rosicleer heard these words, being greatly amazed how she should come to the
knowledge thereof, he said: I do well remember the same. Well then (said she)
now may you well understand and see, how that the condition is well
accomplished, for that you have had the battle with these two Giants for to
deliver me that am the Queen Iulia, she who with her own hands did forge the
sword that you now have at your girdle, having experience before, how much it
should profit you in this battle for my delivery. Good Lady (said
Rosicleer) what fortune has brought so wise and high a Damsel in this sort
into this Country? That fortune (said the Queen) that could overthrow the
mighty Alycandro from the high throne whereunto he was exalted, and bring him
to be prisoner, ^oyntlie with the Princess Lyndabrides his daughter, in the
power of two Giants, who carried them yesterdaie unto the high Castle that
stands upon yonder mountain. This is she that no force nor humane wisdom
is able for to deliver from the subjection of her tumbling and tourning wheel.
And as I came with the Princess, thinking for to escape from the prison
(whether as they carried her) I ran away secretly and put my self amongst
these Rocks, but yet in the end I chanced to fall into a danger no less
perilous then that, out of the which I thought to have escaped. At which words
Rosicleer was greatly amazed and said, is it possible to be true, that the
Emperor Alicandro and the Princess Lindabrides are prisoners. It is of truth
said the Queen, for that two Giants did carry them unto yonder castle. Well
then let us go thither out of hand, said Rosicleer, for with a very good will
I will adventure my life for to ^et at liberty, so high personages. It shall
not be needful said Rubero, for that those two who did carry the^ be our
brethren, and sons unto Roboan our Father, therefore let us go straight
ways thither, for by your intercession they and all those that be prisoners in
the castle shall be set at liberty. Rosicleer received great contentment at
that which Rubero had said, and gratifying him, they all together went toward
the castle, and their knights did carry Acorante in their arms, for that he
was very sore wounded. And it fell out in this sort, that as those that were in
the castle did hear the great noise that was made in the battle, with
clittering of their armor Roboan and his sons were in their beds very sore
hurt, and could not arise, but the knight of the Sun being very desirous to
know what it should be, for that it seemed unto him, to be some contension or
cumbat fought by valiant and worthy knights, he went forth of the castle,
and all alone on horseback he rode that way, whereas Rosicleer and the giants
should come. And when that he saw them coming a far of, he straight ways
understood that they should be the sons of Roboan, that came from the Sea,
and brought with them some prise, but when that he came nigher unto them, he
was greatly amazed to see those Giants so sore wounded, and could not immagine
who should do the same, till such time as he asked of one that came foremost,
with whom they had had battle, but they were all so sad and sorrowful, that
they would not answer him any word, but passed forwards on without making
any reckoning of him, for the which the knight of the Sun being somewhat
ang^ie, took one of them by the horse bridle, and said that he should not
depart thence till such time as he had told him. Then this knight who was more
proud than courteous, without speaking any word drew out his sword, and
stroke the knight of the Sun a mighty bl^we upon his helm, thinking
therewith to have parted his head in two pieces, but it had been much better for
him not to have begun that contention with him whom he did not know, and to
have answered him to his demand, it would have hindered him nothing at all. But
the knight of the Sun being very angry at his great villainy, stroke him
such a blow with his armed fi^t upon his armed head, that he buckeled his
healme to his scull, that his brains flew out, and he fell from his horse dead
unto the ground, so that it cost him his life, because he would not speak,
but use villainy. And the rest which were of his company when they saw their
companion thus overthrown, straight ways began to make contention with the
knight of the Sun, in drawing out their swords, and charging him with their
blows on every side, but before that they could fall in the reckoning of the
great error the which they had committed, the most part of them were slain
and overthrown to the ground, and not one of them had remained alive, if that
at this instant had not come Rosicleer, who was behind all the rest, who when
he saw the great slaughter that the Knight of the Sun had done in so short
a time, he was greatly amazed, and for that he could not know who he was,
and was very desirous to prove himself with him, for to be revenged for the
death of those knights, he caused the other for to aparte themselves, and with
his sword in his hand he assaulted him, charging him with those strong and
heavy blows which he was wont to use, and the knight of the Sun not knowing
him, but believing within himself that he had been one of the company of the
other knights of the Gyantes, did receive him after such manner, that in a
short space the wrath and anger both of the one and the other was greatly
increased, and as mortal enemies they laid the one upon the other, making so
great a noise, that it seemed al y^ whole Island would have sunk, where at the
Emperor Alicandro and the princess Lindabrides did put themselves at the
windows of the castle, and were greatle amazed when that they saw the
battle between the two knights, not knowing who he should be of so great
^orce and strength, that could endure so long the blows of the knight of the
Sun: a good half hour in this sort they endured, charging one the other
with their thick blows, and had no time to breath themselves, and seemed to
be all in burning ^ier, with the great quantity of sparks that flewe out of
their armor. Either of them were greatly amazed at the great force and
strength of his adversary, as they who never had seen themselves in so
terrible and furious battle, for that, although they did combat together in
the great court of Constantinople, at that time they had not their force and
strength so perfect, neither were they so big grown in parsonage.

And now if it were not for that neither of them would seem to be the first,
they would both have withdrawn themselves, for to have known each others
contrary, before they would have proceeded in executing their furious
battle: but this point of honor was the occasion that they would not
withdraw themselves, but procured to ouerpresse each his adversary, all that
ever he could, with their mighty and furious blows. Amongst a great number
that was struck Rosicleer se^led one blow at the knight of the Sun with his
sword in both his hands overthwart his healme, that it deprived him of all his
senses, that he was as one dead, till such time as he redoubled an other blow
on him, whose force was of such strength and might, that it made him to come
again unto himself, so amazed, that he knew not where he was.

Then he forthwith settled himself firmly in his Saddel, very furious and full
of courage, he gave him his payment in such sort, that Rosicleer in all his
life before received not so mighty and terrible a blow, except it were that
the which concluded their contencio^s battle in Grecia. His nose gushed out
with blood, and he fell forwards upon the pomel of his saddle, and his arms
hanging down as though he had been dead, and his horse turned round about
twice in the field with him, in which time the knight of the Sun would not
strike him, till such time as he was come again unto himself. Rosicleer
called upon God for his aid and succor, as he who found himself in so great
extremity, that he thought it impossible to escape from death, if he should
receive such an other blow, equal unto that he had received. He then settled
himself again in his saddle, and prepared himself, to be revenged on his
adversary, and did abide his coming with his sword in his hand, with
terrible and furious semblaunt. In the mean time whilst they were recovering
of more fury and courage for to charge the one the other, it so fell out that
the Queen Iulia being very desirous to know who those knights should be, that
seemed unto her to be the most biggest of proporcion and most valiantest that
ever she had seen in all her life, took out a little quadrangel, (the which
continually she carried in her bosom wherewith she did use to make her
cuniurations) and thereby she found that these knights should be both sons
unto the Emperor Trebatio, and being certified hereof, with a trice she went
unto them, and at such time as with furious courage they began to strike the
one the other, she put her self betwixt them saying: I do most heartelie
request you sir knights, that you would stay your fury a little, and to
grant unto me a bowne the which I will crave at your hands, for as it will be
unto me great joy and pleasure, so will it be unto you profitable.

Then they who were indewed with no less virtue the^ force and valor,
withdrew themselves a part, and said, that either of them for their parts, did
grant her request. Well then said the Queen^, seeing that you have granted me
my request, here I do demand of you, that first before you do return any
more unto the combat, that either of you do pull of your healme, for that I am
desirous to know who you are before you proceed any further. She had not so
sone spoken these words, but these knights without any longer tarrying did
unlace their healmes, and pulled them of, being greatly amazed at that bowne,
which she demanded. But when their healmes were off, and they knew them selves
to be brethren, it could not be immagined the great and unlooked for joy and
pleasure that they received. For in place of their mortal blows which they
had given before, they embrased the one the other, as they which did love the
one the other exceedingly. And giving great thanks unto the Queen for that
which she had done, they declared the one unto the other the whole discourse
what had happened unto either of them.

Then the knight of the Sun spoke unto the two brethren Rubero and Acorante,
and told them of all that had happened, who were not a little amazed, to hear
how that their Father and brethren were overcome by that alone knight, and as
a thing impossible they would not believe it: then they went all together unto
the castle, whereas they were well received by the Emperor Alicandro, and the
Princess Lindabrides, when they knew that that was Rosicleer, brother unto the
knight of the Sun, they could not satisfy their eyes in beholding of them,
seeming that nature did very much strain her self in the forming of these two
brethren. After a while that they had passed away the time in treating of
many things, they sat down and did ease themselves, and determined to stay
there till the next day, whereas they were very well (...) of the wife of
Roboan, who was Lady (of the Giants nation) very honorable, and never took
pleasure and contentment of the evil custom that was maintained in that
Island, by her husband and sons. The Queen Iulia did cure the wounds of them
that were hurt; as one that was experimented and knew more in that art then
any other. So they s^ept and took their rest all that night in the castle:
but the knight of the Sun, was not very much in quiet, for that with the
presence of the fair and beautiful princess Lyndabrides as also the
remembrance of the royal princes Claridiana, his mind was so troubled, that
he thought there was the greatest contention that might be immagined with in
his breast.

And again, for to declare the profound thoughts with their varieties which
the fair princess was troubled with, it may be equal in numbering the sands
of the sea, and for that her remedy draws now at hand, the history
concludes this Chapter.

How the Emperor Alicandro and his company departed from the strong Island
unto the Grecian Empire, and of a strong battle that the knight of the Sun
and Rosicleer had with two knights at the Sea, and how they were parted, and
after went together to Constantinople. Chap. 42.
THE next day after that the Emperor Alicandro was taken prisoner, they al
made them selves in a readiness for to depart toward Grecia, the which being
don, they all together entered unto Roboan and his sons for to take their
leave of them, who lay in a great quadran, every one by himself, in very fair
beds. Then he, (who received great sorrow for that they would depart so
quickly) requested them to hear certain matter that he had for to say and
tell them. Who being attendant, held their peace, and he said. My Lords, it is
notorious unto all people, how long time here, I, my sons, and forefathers,
have lived in this law which hitherto I have kept, and the evil custom which
always we have maintained. It has now pleased God (and as I believe for a
farther benefit unto us) that this happy and fortunate knight of the Sun as
came and arrived at this Island. In the which he did not only overcome by force
of arms, my self and two of my sons, but also by the ^orce of his
surmounted virtue does bind us, from this day forwards for to accept and serve
him, as our proper and natural Lord, jointly with Rosicleer his brother, unto
whom has fallen part of this victory. At such time as I saw my self mortal
in the battle, and that by no means I could not escape, but be either slain
or overcome, I did promise at that time, that which now I do a new confirm,
and will perform, which is, that I and my sons do here promise and vow
before your high personages (for that none of us hereafter shall fly from the
same) for to leave this law Gentilica, in the which we have lived hitherto,
blind and deceived, and also the evil and cruel custom the which hitherto
we have maintained, and of our proper and free good will, become christians,
and believe in that true God maker of all things, in whom the knight of the
Sun does believe, in the which law I do promise to believe, so long as my
life shall last.

When that Roboan had concluded these words, straight ways his sons did
promise to perform the same. Then the knight of the Sun and Rosicleer being
very glad and joyful for the same, did gratify them very much, and did
promise unto them that so soon as God did send them into Grecia for to send
unto them Preachers and Ministers for to instruct and teach them in the law,
and minister unto them the holy Baptism, the which every good Christian is
bound to take.

Passing betwixt them these and many other things, they all of them took
their leave of Roboan and his sons, and of the Lady Giantesse, who received
no small grief of their departure, and yet afterward it grieved her much more,
for that there passed not many years, there came unto that Island a Pagan, a
young man, who all a lone did put them in great extremity, in such sort that
they were driven of necessity for to send unto the good knight of the Sun,
(who never failed to help the distressed) to crave of him favor and help. As
shall be ^ould you more at large in the second part of this history, whereas
shall be made manifest, the immortal acts and deeds of this knight.

When they came unto the Sea side, they all embarked themselves in a ship
that was there made ready, and having the wind prosperous, they hoised out
their sails and began to nauigate toward Grecia. And here you may well
believe, that the fair princess Lindabrides did not think long this
nauigatorie, although it had been more longer then that of the Greek Ulysses:
for that she did there wholely recreate her self in the sight and sweet
conversation of the knight of tho Sun. Yet for all that she feared very much
(at the coming to Constantinople) the presence of the princess Claridiana,
with the which she should be clean wipte out of the heart of her knight. So
nauigating in this sort, the next day in the morning, two hours before day,
it chanced that by their ship there passed an other ship hard aboard, in the
which was certain knights, and one of them, who seemed to be of a very big
stature and members, and being above hatches, and the ships joining very nigh
together, commanded to cast out his grapple into the other ship, because we
should not depart till such time as they had demanded what it should be, and
who was there within. Then he asked of a knight that was the Emperor
Alicandros, if that he could tell him any news of the Emperor Alicandro, and
of his daughter the fair princess Lindabrides, or of any damsel of hers. Ah
sir, yes said the knight, for they are in this ship, and certain Greek
knights does carry them unto Grecia. At which words this big knight and an
other, made no longer tarrying, but leapt into their ship with their swords
drawn in their hands, and straight ways met with the knight of the Sun and
Rosicleer, who when they understood of the grapling of their ships, lased on
their helmes, and went forth to see what it should be, and when they saw the
great have that the two knights made to enter, with their swords in their
hands, they straight ways drew out their swords and put themselves before
him, and said: What is it that you would have (Si^ knights) that you make so
great have to enter? We would said one of them, that out of hand you do
deliver unto us the prise that you have in your ship. That shall you not have,
nor carry with you, said the knight of the Sun, for that we have it in great
price and estimation. In this sort it shall be full dear unto you, answered
one of the other knights, and straight ways without any more speaking, they
began to strike at the two brethren, each of them a blow upon their helmes,
that caused either of them for to sto^pe with their knees to the ground, and
made them very well to understand that they were knights of estimation and
prowess, but yet things did not fall out on their part as they thought, for
that they, as those that in all the whole world were without comparison, gave
them their answer in such sort, that they were forced to step backwardes
three paces, to sustain themselves from falling, and were wonderfully amazed
at the great force and strength of their adversaries, so that then betwixt them
began the battle to be well fought with charging each other with mighty
blows, that it was a very strange thing to behold, and with the noise of
their mighty and timorous blows, it seemed that those long and wide seas did
sound of them, much like unto the forced waves, being driven by tempest into
the hollow caves of the rocks. And by reason that it was before the break of
the day (being at such time as there is silence with all things) the mighty
noise of their terrible blows seemed more great and timorous. Neither at that
time had they need of any Torches, or of the cleernesse of Diana for to make
their combat, for that the innumerable sparks of fire the which flew out of
their fine armor, gave such exceeding great light and cleerenesse, that if
there had been ten knights, they might have seen to have fought by the
brightness thereof.

All the which battle and contention did the Emperor Alycandro and the fair
Princess Lindabrides behold, with all her damsells; amongst whom was the
fair ^loralindia, daughter unto the king of Macedonia, who were all greatly
amazed, and could not imagine who those worthy knights should be, that against
the knight of the Sun and his brother could make so great resistance. Thus
after one whole hour that the battle was begun, those two brethren, the
sons of Trebatio were half ashamed that their adversaries should so long
endure before them, which caused them to wax very furious and wrathful, and
to redouble their blows in such sort, that I believe there was no strength
nor finenesse of Diamond that was able to resist their terrible blows, and
their adversaries feeling the force of them were greatly amazed, and it seemed
that their vigor and strength was increased half so much more as it was at the
beginning of the battle, for that they never stroke blow, if it chanced
aright, but it made them to stoop both with their hands and knees unto the
ground; and gave them no spate for to breath themselves, so that they were put
in the most greatest travail that ever they were in all their lives, but yet
these knights were such, that first they would consent to be hewed and cut
all to pieces, before they would yield, and if their adversaries had not been
the myrrour of all the world, they should have had enough to do to have
escaped out of their hands, and although they seemed to be weary, yet was it
in such sort, that they could not judge or discern any point of weakness in
them, but rather made hearts of their guts, and so charged their adversaries,
that many times they were in doubt of the victory, and it had been a battle
very long and well foughten, but that at this instant the day did break, and
as the cleerenesse came on, the Emperor Alycandro and the Princess
Lyndabrides and Floralindia did know those two knights by their armor, who
were Meridian and Brandimardo, the which being known, with a trice they went
and put themselves betwixt them, saying. Worthy and valiant knights, let this
^our rigorous battle cease, for that there is no reason that it should
proceed any farther. Then those knights when that they saw (...) betwixt
them, did straight ways withdraw themselves, and made unto them great
reverence. The Emperor straight ways went and embraced Meridian and
Brandimardo, naming them by their names, the which the knight of the Sun and
Rosicleer hearing, they pulled off their helmes, and with great joy and
pleasure went and embraced those two knights, for the love was great that they
bare unto him, the one for that he was brother unto the Princess Lyndabrides,
and the other for that which he did when that he took the battle for
Rosicleer with Bramarant, and besides all this, for their great valor and
bounty they were to be esteemed amongst all in the world. But when that these
two understood with whom they had made their battle, it was no small joy and
pleasure that they received, for that they desired very much their friendship,
after such time as in the wilderness of Grecia, they saw the one to kill the
Gran Campion, and the other did combat for them twain with Bramarant, but more
was their joy when that they understood what they had done in the delivery of
the Emperor out of prison, with the Ladies and all their damselles from the
power of Roboan and his sons, they knew not how to gratify that great
goodness, but offered themselves to be their friends, and craved pardon of all
that was past. And when they understood that the Emperor of his own good
will went unto Grecia, for to conclude a league of friendship with the mighty
Emperor ^rebatio, these two valiant knights were exceeding glad and
joyful, for that they had a most earnest desire to he in that Court.

Thus after there had passed betwixt them many things, their joy and pleasure
was such, that it seemed to make void the remembrance of all troubles and
adversities past, and so did prosecute their voyage ^owardes Constantinople.
The Prince Meridian was more joyful than the rest, and received greater
contentment for that he had with him his well-beloved spouse the Princess
Floralindia, and again, for that he went toward Grecia, whereas was the
king of Macedonia forth unto the Princess, with whom he hoped to make
friendship, in such sort, that he might have her to wife, which was the thing
that the Princess most desired. After this sort they did nauigate by sea four
days with prosperous winds, in the end whereof they arrived at Grecia in the
mighty Port of Constantinople, whereas straight ways they gave to understand
unto the Emperor Trebatio of their ariuall. With which news, he and all
those of his Court were exceeding joyful, for that they lacked no other thing
entirely for to celebrate the triumph of that victory which they had got.

Then straight ways the Emperor Trebatio being accompanied with those
mighty kings and Princes, and worthy knights that were with him, went forth
of Constantinople for to receive them at the port, and the quantity of people
was so great that went forth with them, that all those wide and broad fields
and mountains seemed to be peopled with them, and although the dead bodies by
the commandment of the Emperor were burnt, yet for all that, all those
f^eldes and plains were stained with the blood that was there shed. When the
Emperor Trebatio with all that royal and worthy company came unto the Port,
straight ways the Emperor Alycandro and all those that came with him, went a
land, whereas their receiving was as unto such personages did appertain, but
in especial with those two Emperors, for in a great space they were embraced
together, and did not loose the one from the other, in which time there passed
betwixt them many words of singular great love, as though they had been
always before great friends, and the Emperor Trebatio did give him great
thanks, gratifying him for his coming into Grecia, offering him great offers
by word of mouth, in such sort, that the Emperor Alycandro thought himself
fully satisfied, and received more pleasure at that return, than he did at
his first coming into that Country. Then straight ways the Emperor ^rebatio
received with great curtesse the two Princes, Meridian and Brandimardo, and did
embrace them with as much love as he did his own sons that came with them.
For you shall understand, that he was a Prince, that in all the world could not
be found his equal, in maintaining and honoring of good and valiant knights,
which was the occasion, that whatsoever knight he was that once came into his
company, could never find himself in any other place, but only in his
Court. Then he received the fair Princess Lyndabrides, in doing unto her
great courtesy and honor, as unto the highest damsel in all the whole world,
and unto one that did deserve it. But when the king of Mae^donia did see the
fair Princess (...) his daughter, and the Prince M^rridian to demand his
hands for to kiss them, there was no ^oy and pleasure that might happen unto a
Father, to be compared unto ^is, and he went and embraced them, keeping them
betwi^t his arms a great while before that he would let them loose. Thus
after one whole hour that there had (...) betwixt them many (...) at their
meeting, they all together with (...) triumph took their way toward the
City of (...). And it was a wonderful thing to behold, and wo^thie to be
noted, to see so noble and worthy ^nightes to accompany them, that it might
well be said, that there was never seen so high and worthy a company
joined together.

Likewise at this present it was needful of a better Painter than ever was
Appelles, or that worthy Pirgotiles, for to paint and set forth the fair and
rubicend face of the Princess Lynd^brides, by reason of the differences of
variety of colors which went and came, at such time as she remembered how
that the Princess Claridiana should receive her in the Palace of the
Emperor Trebatio, and also of that which the knight of the Sun would
conceive in his heart when he saw the same, the which thoughts did make her to
go in so great confusion, as to your judgment I do refer it, her love was
so great the which she bare unto him, that she could not be without great
iuspition of alteration, when that she considered of the great worthiness and
desert of the Princess Claridiana. So that the whole world was nothing in
comparison, that she would give, on condition that the knight of the Sun
might never see the Princess. If she were sure thereof, then were she fully
certefied that the knight of the Sun would not change her for any other
Lady or damsel in all the whole world. When they were entered into the City,
and came unto the palace, those worthy Princes and knights did descend from
their horses those fair Ladies and damsels, and being mounted into the great
hall, the Empress Briana with the Princess Claridiana, and the Princess
Oliuia and Lindaraza, with all the rest of those high and worthy Ladies and
Gentlewomen that were with them, came forth and did receive them with that
honor that was requisite unto so high and mighty personages. And the Emperor
Alycandro, with Meridian and Brandimardo, meruailed greatly to see the
sovereign beauty that was there assembled together, which seemed unto them,
as it was true, that in all the whole world could not the like be seen, but
when the fair Princess Lyndabrides went to embrace the royal Princess
Claridiana, Good Lord how her heart was troubled, to see in her rubicond face,
all the beauty in the world to be comprehended, and al^o how that her knight of
the Sun had his eyes fixed on her. At that instant she thought verily her
soul would have departed from her body, and almost she could not go forwards,
neither scarce speak a word she was in such a trance. The which was all
contrary in the Princess Claridiana, for as she was sure of the love of the
knight of the Sun, ^o did she show her self very merry and content, and
gave the princess to understand that she received great joy at her coming
thither.

Likewise with no less joy and loving embracings did the fair Princess
Oliuia receive her well-beloved Rosicleer, as though they had not seen
themselves together in one whole year. Then the Empress Briana took by the
hands the two Ladies Lindabrides and Floralindia, and having done their
salutations the one unto the other, they altogether entered into a very fair
and great qu^dran, whereas the Empress and all those Ladies and damsells did
sit down in a place by themselves, and the two Emperors with all those
worthy Princes and knights on the other part by themselves, whereas they
passed away the time in gallant and pleasant conversation, till such time as
it was time to go to dinner, and sitting down, they were served very highly
and suniptuouslie, as in the palace o^ so mighty a Prince was requisite, and
in the mean time that they were at dinner, there was he^rd no other thing but
the sweet noise of many instruments, and in all the whole City was there so
great triumph and pastimes, that it se^med at that instant the G^eekes did
celebrate the victory of their won battles.

How Rosicleer and Lyri^mandro at the commandment of the Emperor Trebatio
went into ^ungar^a, to m^ke themselves known unto the king, and to give him to
understand of all that had passed in Grecia. Chapter. 21.
WHen the next day was come, and the Emperor saw his Court of so great
sonera^gntie, as never was the like seen by Prince in all the whole world,
he thought that there lacked nothing (...) for to rejoice the victory of
their triumphant battles won, but only the presence of the king of (...),
Father unto the Empress Briana, his loving and well-beloved wife, and for to
entreat with him of that concord and friendship as ought to be between Father
and son in law, and also that he might see the great magnisicence and high
throne, into the which Fortune (governed by the will of God) has mounted him
unto, so that if he did see that his Court in so great abundance of riches, and
adorned with so sovereign Princes and knights, he would think himself
very well contented and satisfied of the change that was made for the Prince
of great Britain, and also that he might recreate himself in that joy and
glory which should proceed of the sight and acknowledging of his worthy
newness, by the which he should receive great contentment, and account
himself to be the most happiest and fortunate Prince in all the whole world.
And having this in his mind, he straight ways went unto the Empress (...),
for to communicate with her about the same, who was in the same determination
and care, as she that desired no other thing but to see her Father present, for
that he might be pertaker of her great triumph and glory. Thus being both of
one mind and determination, they straight ways gave their valiant and worthy
sons to understand thereof, betwixt whom there straight ways grew a great
contention, which of them two should be the messenger. The knight of the Sun
said, that in times past (without knowing any kindred to be betwixt them) he
did him a great grief and anger, and that now he would make a recompense for
the same, in carrying him this message. And Rosicleer said, that he was
nourished and brought up in the Monastery of the ^iuer, and how that there
remains his fained parents Leonardo and his wife, whom he thought to have
been his natural father and mother, and had great desire to see them, and to
recompense them the great benefit that he ought them, and more he said, how
that Lyriamandro was so much his friend, that he left his Father for his love,
for the which his perfect friendship will not consent, but that he must bear
the Prince company, for to give him that great joy and contentment which he
shall receive at the seeing of him, seeing that by his occasion he has been so
long without his company. The contention was so great betwixt these two
brethren, which of them should go upon this message, that in the conclusion
they should go both of them together, if that the Emperor Trebatio had not
stayed them, in saying that it did not seem well that in the time of great joy
and pastimes, accompanied with so many strange and worthy knights in this
Court, they should both be lacking, or at least ways one of them.

In conclusion, seeming unto (...) that Rosicleer had greatest reason for to
go and acknowledge the king his graunfather, for that he had never seen him,
they were content that he should go on the message, and that the knight of the
Sun should remain in the Court, for that he should have time enough to be
known of the king, and that he was fully satisfied of his great beauty.

These two knights were such and of so great obedience, that they had no other
delight but to give contentment unto their parents, so that Rosicleer prepared
himself for the voyage. But first he went unto his very friend Liriamandro,
and told unto him all that the Emperor his Father had ordained, who received
great pleasure thereat, as he that had great desire for to see the king his
Father, whereby he might acknowledge his neuewes, and understand of the good and
happy fortune of the Empress his sister, who above all the Ladies in the
whole world is most exalted, and therewith he embrased Rosicleer very much, and
was very glad of that which was determined, and straight ways they both
together went and did take their leave of the Emperor and of the Empress, who
did recomend them unto G^d, and gave them great charge, that their return
with the king might be short, for that till their return they should not
rec^iue any joy or contentment. So having taken (...) leave for to depart, such
as did love him, as the king Sicrido^o, and the valiant Ta^ta^o, with
Bargandel, were very desirous for to bear them company, as his perfect and
good friends, came unto him and offered their service. But Rosicleer whole
desire was for to go that journey alone, with courteous words did gratify
their good will, and desired them to pardon him, at that instant, for that by
the help of almighty God, his return should be very shortly. And there
with these two worthy princes with alonely two Squires, departed out of the
mighty City of Constanti^op^e, and having passed through all the whole Empire
of (...), that came unto Danubia, the which descends from Hungaria. (And when
they should pass the mighty bridge wherea^ the knight of the Sun was taken
prisoner by the parents and friends of Florinaldus they were strangely amazed
to see the great and mighty edifices of the Castle that ^eemed we^e burned and
destroyed* and such relikes as remained, as pieces of towers and wall^s with
their foundations, did put great admiration in all them that passed that^ way,
and being ve^ie desirous to kno^e what was the occasion of so great
destruction, they stayed and procured ^o see if they could fi^de any (...)
that could give them relation thereof, and by c^aunce they found certain men
that did dwell in the some place, w^o declar^d unto them the whole circumstance
of that which the knight of the Sun had there done, from the first contention
that he had with Flo^^naldos, till after he was cl^^re out of prison whereas he
was, and how the Castle with all the towers were destroyed, and left in that
order as they ^aw it, the which when they understood, without lac^ing any
part thereof, they were wonderfully amazed, as well a^ the strange buildings
which seemed to have (...) at the valiant and worthy (...) of the knight of
the Sun, and they who had seen by experience many of his wonderful deeds,
said that with great reason they ought to put in oblivion the acts done by the
ancient and f^m^us knights, of whose worthy deeds the world does resound, for
that the knight of the Sun was such a one, that not one of them might be
compared unto him. In this sort, when they had heard the whole discourse of
their desire, being very glad and joyful thereof, they gave great thanks
unto him who had made it manifest unto them, and departed from thence, and
having understanding how that the king was in a ^itie called Viana, which was
upon Danubia, they took their journey along the river vpwardes, toward the
said City, and having traua^led many days thetherwards, in the end they came
within three miles of the mighty City, about the hour of one of the clock
in the after noone, at which time the great heat of the Sun unto such as do
travail is most troublesome, and being troubled with the great heat, these
two knights determined to put themselves out of the high way, and to enter
into a very fair and fresh Orchard that was there at hand, and there to rest
and recreate themselves till the force of the heat were past, and looking
toward the City, they saw coming toward them a damsel mounted upon a
Pal^^aie, with so great speed as her palsraie could run, and as one that
made have to accomplish some great necessity. And seeing her to come with so
great have, they were very desirous to know the occasion thereof, which made
them for to stay until her coming thither, and drawing more ^gher unto them,
they ^awe that the wept and made great lamentation, in such sort, that she
was all wet with tears. But when she saw the two knights, she began to
weep more pitifully, and to lift up her lamentable voice, saying after this
sort.

Oh ius^ice of God, how do you permit that so great treason be done unto so
high a damsel as she is, and that there is not a knight in all the world that
will defend her justice and q^arr^ll? Th^se two knights when they heard these
words were more desirous than before, to understand the effect thereof, and put
themselves before the damsel, and staying her ha^^ie iou^ney, one of them
said: Damsel, we pray you to let (...) a while this your complaint and
weeping, and declare unto us the occasion of this your great sorrow, for that
we are knight^ that with a very good will, will offer our persons to put
remedy therein, if it be a thing that with reason and with our honors we
may perform. Then the Damsel when she heard those courteous words did very
much behold them, and saw that they were knights very strongly and richly
armed, and of a gallant and stout proportion, she coniectured that they
should be kn^ghts of great bounty, and strangers in that Country, for that
at any time she had not seen in the Court of the king, (...) of so gallant
and warlike disposition, and having more hope than she brought with her, she
answered them (...) said.

Sir knights, a heavy thing it is that you do demand of me, to cause me
now for to stay, and declare unto you the dolorous care that I have within me,
the which only for to express, will cause my grief to renew and increase,
and I do believe that there is no heart so hard, but of my sorrow will take
great compassion. But for that you have used unto me so great courtesy in
your words, and again the good disposition of your persons, do give me to
understand that my labor shall not be in vain, for to give you to understand
of the greatest treason that ever you have heard of, the which was done unto a
fair Damsel of high estate, and is the occasion of all this my sorrow. You
shall understand sir knights, that in the court of the king T^berio of
Hungaria, who is at this instant in the city of Viana, the Queen Augusta,
wife unto the king Tiberio, ^ath in her company many Ladies and gentlewomen
of great beauty and high estate, of all the principallest of Germania, amongst
whom, there was one, who as well in beauty as in riches and estate, did pass
and surmoun^ all the rest, and is the Duchess of Austria, called the fair
Polisena, for that her great beauty and faireness^e (as they say) is equal
unto that, that was of the daughter of P^^a^o. When this damsel came unto the
age of twelve years, her father dyed, and for that she was so young and tender
of age, (although heir unto that high estate) the Queen Augusta did take her
into her company, and it is now full four years since her first coming into
the court. In which time as she increased as well in beauty as in years,
many worthy knights of high estate and renown that saw her, did procure by
all means possible, for to marry with her, amongst whom there was none that
she could fancy or bear any good will, or perfect love unto, but the gallant
Lusiano, prince of Su^uia, who was the gallantest proporcioned and stoutest
knight, that at this present is to be found in all the provinces of Germania.
It is now more then three years since this Prince did begin to love and serve
her, in which time, for her sake, he did many valiant deeds worthy to be put
in memory. Likewise the fair Polisena being no less overcome and vanquished
with his love, did not love him with any other entension but to marry with
him, thinking that with no other knight she might better match her self then
with him, so that these two, were very conformable together in their wills and
desires, as I who was a third person betwixt them, do know and am a witness to
the same, and also do justify, that betwixt a knight and a lady, there was
never so perfect love, as was betwixt these two, or that more entirely did love
the one the other. And yet not being satisfied nor well content with this, but
the more to be in security the one of the other, I was as a mean betwixt
them, that this Lusiano should come on a night appointed unto a window that had
a grate of Iron, out of the chamber of the said duchess, whereas he should
find her, and there the one unto the other to assure the bands of Matrimony
by word and promise betwixt them, in such sort, that from that day forwards
they might live in more security. It fell out that all was done as it was
agreed, that this gentle Lusiano in a dark night came unto the windo whereas
he found his fair Polisena, and betwixt them was concluded the bands of
Matrimony by word of mouth, in my presence, and in the presence of an other
damsel of the Duchess, (who I do believe is not clear of this treason that I
will tell you.) This being done, the duchess for that she would not that they
should be discovered or spyed, did desire the gentle Lusiano that he would
straight ways depart, and she likewise did withdraw her self and caused the
window to be shoot: and being very fearful that it should be discovered unto
the Queen, she never after durst speak unto her knight, neither be with him
in company in any suspicious place, as one that was fully persuaded of the
love to be perfect that was between them, in this sort all things did prosper
very well between these two lovers, but yet their love was not so perfect, as
their fortune was contrary; to apart them from the joy and glory that they
hoped to be betwixt them. For that (Sir knights) you shall understand, that
little more then half a year past, there came unto the court of the king
Tiberio, the Duke of Saxonia called Roberto the mighty, for that he was so
big of his body, that he lacked but a little to be as big as a giant, and
of so great force and strength, that there was not a knight to be found, that
man for man durst enter with him in battle, but alonely this gentle Lusiano,
who feared not the bigness of his body, neither his great fame. At such time
as this Duke Roberto came unto the court, the king gave him good entertainment,
and did him great honor, as well for y^ he was of high estate, as for the
great fame the which he had. This Duke so soon as he had seen the fair
Polisena, was so far in love with her, that straight ways he thought to have
her unto wife, which was the occasion that straight ways he labored all that
ever he could to bring his determination to effect. But she that nothing did
more abhor and hate, (as well for the love which she bare unto Lusiano) as
for the boisterous and braveness of his person, for that he had a fearce face,
and terrible countenance, by no means she could not abide him, but did refuse
his offer, and many times she said unto him in my presence, that he should not
come any more before her, for that his presence should be grievous unto her, yet
for all that would he not give over his suit, but still did contend to
importune her, in such sort, that she was determined for to give the King to
understand thereof, if that I had not persuaded her to the contrary.

Then the Duke Roberto, seeing that nothing whatsoever he did profited any whit
for the obtaining his purpose and desire, determined to seek some other
means, how and which way he might make the Duchess for to do by force that
which now she would not of her good will. I promise you I know not, neither can
I immagine how and which way the devil did help him, for to cause three
knights of the court of the king, for to suffer themselves and be (...), such
as were in bounty of arms, as also of good cr^dit (...) their persons, have
not their equals to be found in all the land, that I promise you the king
would put them in trust with all his riches, he and all people had such
con^iden^e in them.

The one is called Ricardo, and Duke of Barbaria, the other Anibardo, Lord of
the Albios, and the third, Carmelio, Lord of Marehomandia, all three subjects
unto the king Tiberio, and norished and brought up in his court from the time
of their tender age. Then Duke Roberto having these knights on his part,
watched his time, and went before the king at such time as the Queen was
present, and made a great complaint unto them saying, that of long time he
loved with true and perfect love, the Duchess of Austria, and how that by the
good will and consent of them both, they were made sure together, so that he
was her husband and she his wife. But now since the conclusion of this
matrimony, the Duchess does deny it again, and has sworn never to marry
with him, not knowing wherefore she should be thus angry with him, to deny
that which she before has promised, requesting him as his king and sovereign
Lord, to do him Justice therein, and to command the Duchess to perform the
matrimony the which she promised unto him, and to deliver her into his power,
for that she was his natural wife. The king received no content, but was very
sorry at this embassage of the Duke, for that the king had better good will
to marry her unto the gentle Lusia^o, then unto him, but because he loved
justice, and was a very good Christian, he straight ways commanded to come
before him the fair Polisena, and asked of her if it were true which the Duke
had said. Then she who understood the devilish intent of the Duke, was so
amazed, that for a good space she could not speak a word, (whereat the king and
the queen had great suspicion) but when that she came unto her self, with
great anger she said unto the Duke, that he lied in all that he had said,
and how that there never passed any such thing by word nor in thought. At
which answer the Duke was very angry and furious, whi^^ was the occasion y^
the king commanded the fair ^olisena for ^o depart, (...), the Duke straight
ways presented before the king, the three knights before rehearsed, who swore
in the presence of the King, that Duke Roberto and the fair Polisena were made
sure together, in so ample manner, as man and wife ought to be, and how that
over and above all this, they had been together: and that it was of a truth,
for that they were present thereat, in a garden that is next adjoining unto the
lodging of the Duchess. Ah lamentable case and a thing never the like before
heard off, that so great falsehood should be found in the mouths of such three
knights, whose credit is so great with the king, that he does believe th^^ more
and better then if all the knights in his court had spoken and sworn it. And
as a thing verified to be most true, the King commanded the Queen that
straight ways she should deliver unto the Duke the fair Polisena, for that
she had chosen him to be her husband. Now sir knights I pray you judge what the
gentle Lusiano might feel in his heart, who found himself present at all that
passed, and had more con^^dence in the love and loyalty of the Duchess, then
of the credit, of those knights, and with great pain did suffer that reproach
for that he would not discover the secret between them. But when that he
understood that which the king had commanded* he as then could not suffer it
any longer, but put himself before the king and said. Lord and sovereign, here
I do say that all which the Duke Roberto and these knights has said against
the Duchess of Austria is the greatest treason and falsehood that ever was
said or invented: For that that she is my legittimate spouse, and she never
gave her faith neither her love unto any other knight (in all her life) but
unto me, and this will I prove upon the Duke, or upon any of these three
knights. This Prince had ^^arce concluded these words, when that the Duke and
these three knights, laid hand upon their swords against him, and he did the
like against them, so that there had been done great harm, if that the king
had not put himself betwixt them, and parted them and commanded that either
of them should keep his house and not to come abroad. Then the king being
very desirous to know whether it were true or not, which the Prince Lusiano
had said, commanded that the Duchess should be brought before him, and asked
her if that the Prince Lusiano were her husband or not? Then she seeing that it
was not at that time to keep it in silence, said that it was true, that he
was her spouse and none other. When the king understood that, he commanded
that the Duchess should be put prisoner in a strong tower, believing verily
that she had made her self sure and given her word unto both of them, and the
great good will which she bare unto Lusiano, was the occasion that she did
falsify and deny that which she had promised unto the Duke Rober^o, and for
that he would clear this doubt by justice, he gave straight ways sentence,
that the Duke and the three knights that were his witnesses should maintain
and defend that which they had spoken and sworn, and that Lusiano and the
Duchess should in the space of one month bring knights, such that upon
their just quarrel should take and make combat with them, in this sort, that
if those which are of the Dukes party do get the victory, that then the
Duchess should be his, and straight ways to be delivered unto him, and to
the contrary, if the Prince and ^is knights do get the victory, that then
the beautiful and fair Polisena should be his, the which sentence being
declared unto them, they were all consent therewith, for that the Duke thought
that in all the whole world there were not to be found four knights, that
against him and his companions were able to wage battle. And Lusiano hoping
in his justice as much as in his strength, presupposed the victory to be on
his part, but alas Fortune has fallen out clean contrary unto his
expectation, for that this is the last day of the month, and in all this time
he could never find any knight that durst take his part in the battle, one
way, for that the other four knights were commended to be so strong and
valiant, and feared of all others, and other ways, for that they thought of a
truth, that the Duke Roberto had reason, for that it was verified and affirmed
by three knights of so great credit, so that now the Prince seeing himself al
alone, is determined all alone to go forth unto the battle this day against
those four knights, for that first he will suffer himself to be slain, rather
than to see the fair Polisena delivered into the power of the Duke, so that
this evening the battle shall be tried, the which cannot otherwise be, but
that the gentle Lusiano must be slain, whose death unto all people will be
very grievous, and he shall not be so soon slain, when that the Duchess
will kill her self with her own hands, for so she is determined to do, if
that in the mean time God does not ordain some remedy for the same. This is
the occasion (gentle knights) of all this my great sorrow, which causes me to
come forth into these fields and high ways, making my cries unto the heavens,
and because I do know the truth hereof better than any other, I cannot
suffer to abide in the City, to see before my eyes slain such two persons by a
treason so manifest and evil, but come to see if that in this short space I
could meet with any knight that would have compassion on them, and now seeing
God has permitted that I have met with two such knights as you do seem to
be, here I do desire you by the great obligation in the which you bound your
selves at such time as you received the order of knighthood, that you would
take compassion of that gentle knight Lusiano, and of that sorrowful and
afflicted Lady the Duchess, and if it so fall out, that you show them any
courtesy, they be persons that will very well gratify the same, and because
you shall be fully certefied of their justice, here I do swear unto you by
that God that created and made both heaven and earth, and afterward by his
death and passion did redeem us, that all this which I have told you is the
very truth of all that has passed, and again, the more to certefie you
herein, you have need of no other thing, but to behold the ill favored face
and barbarous countenance of the Duke, and the great beutie of Polisena,
whereby you may judge the great unlikelihood, y^ the duchess should treat of
love with him in secret.

When the damsel had concluded the whole discourse of this treason, the two
knights who were replenished with all virtue, were moved unto great
compassion, and gave thanks unto almighty God that he had brought them
thither at that instant, and thought it long till they saw themselves in
battle with the Duke, and said unto the damsel that they would go with her,
and take (...) with Lusiano for to defend his right toward the Duchess. And
she who very well noted their gentle dispositions, and the great riches of
their armor, by the which she was fully persuaded with her self that they
were knights of great estimation, and that her travail and coming thither was
well employed, for that there was some hope by their aid, on the part of
Lusiano, much better than to battle alone, for the which she asked their
hands for to kiss the^, for the great courtesy they offered unto her, and
therewith she returned with them toward the City again, and said.

Oh that it were Gods will (Sir Knights) that my fortune might be this day so
happy and prosperous, as it was unto another damsel in times past, who
brought unto this Court a strange knight, for to defend an honorable Lady
from the power of the stout Aridon, who alonelie did not kill him in battle,
but afterward had so much power and force for to defend himself from all the
power and force of the King (...), maintaining battle a great part of the
day with more than two thousand knights, till such time as night drew on, and
they all thought it best to leave him, so that he went free away, and none of
them all able to hurt or do him any outrage, who afterward was told us to
be the knight of the Sun, and son unto the Emperor ^rebatio and of the
Empress Briana, daughter unto my Lord the king T^berio, and if it were not for
the great wars, as is told us, that does detain him, and also for the
great (...) that the king has against him, the Duchess would have sent unto
him in commending her whole cause, in hope that he would have had some
compassion on her.

All this time Rosicleer, and Lyriamandro did greatly rejoice to hear told
the wonderful acts and deeds of the knight of the Sun, for wheresoever they
went, they found all the world full of his great fame. Thus in travailing, they
talked of these and many other things, till at three of the clock in the after
noone they entered into the mighty City of Viana, at such time as the great
place was full of people, tarrying for to see the battle that should be made
betwixt the Prince Lusiano and Duke Roberto. Then they put themselves into such
a place whereas they were very secret, and commanded the damsel to go forth
at such time as the Duke and his knights were in the place, that then she
should come and tell them, for that they would not be seen till such time as
they were in the field, and for that in this next Chapter you shall understand
the whole truth of all that which passed, I do conclude this and refer me
to the next.

Of the great treason that the Duke Roberto ordained, for to have the fair
Polisena to be his wife. Chap. 44.
NOw the History faith, that all that which the damsel had told unto
Rosicleer and Liriamandro was most certain true, but yet there was another
secret vnknownen, and known unto none but unto the Duke, and another damsel
of the Duchess, which was this, insomuch as the Duke Roberto had lost all his
hope for to have at his will the fair Duchess Polisena, he determined within
himself to use some other means, which was the worst that ever was procured
or done by any knight, for when he saw nothing could prevail him, he then
labored with all diligence, for to know which of the damsels that waighted
upon the duchess, was y^ basest of lineage and poorest, for y^ these two things
in inconstant minds be easiest to accomplish their lusts and desires. And when
he had learned out this, and found that there was one (amongst them that
served the Duchess) which had these qualities (or better to say
inconveniences) he did secretly practice to talk with her, the which being
done, what with requests, and gifts, and fair promises, in the end he brought
her unto the bent of his bow, and having her at his commandment, and as he
would wish, upon a night, at such time as the Moon did shine most cleerest,
he practiced with her, that she should apparel her self with the same
apparel and attire of her head, that the Duchess her Lady did wear the day
before, and being so attired she should come forth into a gallant fresh
garden, which was under the window of the Duchess, whereas many times she
would recreate her self with her damsells, and could not be seen of any, by
reason that the walls were so high, and being there, she should present her
self to be the fair Polisena, and he would meet with her in the said
garden, whereas betwixt them they would plight their faith and troth of
matrimony, and how that he would take her into his arms, as though she were
his spouse and lawful wife. When this and all the rest which the Duke
requested was concluded with that damsel, he then began to increase the
friendship which before he had begun, with those three knigh^s, Ricardo,
Carmelio, and Ambardo, who were three of the principallest knights and of most
credit that were in all the Court, unto whom many times before (because he
would have their friendshippes more surer) he did impart the secret and great
love which he ha^ with the Duchess, and did not only declare unto them the
sharp answers which she gave him, but rather said, that he was very well
beloved of her, and how that she had promised him many times to receive him for
her husband, although she did delaie the time from one night unto an other.
Then after a while when that they were partly persuaded of the truth, the day
before the night that he had con^orted with the Damsel to come forth into the
garden, he went unto these three knights, and in great secret he said unto
them these words.

It is not unknown unto you my Lords, how long time I have travailed with
sorrow for to conclude this love that I have always had with the Duchess,
and to no other intent and purpose but to marry with her, and to have her in
that honor as her high estate and great worthiness does deserve, she has
driu^n me off from day to day, dilating the time, and hindering me of that
great glory and contentment, the which I hoped long ere this to have inioyed,
as you do very well know, but now by the good success that always I hoped
for of this my Matrimony, it has pleased God, that the Duchess has now
conserted with me, that this next night that comes, she will come forth into
a garden that is on the back side of her lodging, where as she wills me to
meet her, and there she will accomplish all that I have desired, and for that I
do know and have proved by experience the inconstancy and variety of women's
hearts, I am very desirous that you (my Lords) would show me so much
pleasure, as to go with me thither, and to be in secret there whereas you may
hear and see all that passes, because if it should so fall out by my evil
fortune, that the Duchess of Austria for fear of displeasing the king or
Queen, or by any other occasion that should move her now: pretended purpose,
shall deny and fly from this her promise, that then you (if occasion did so
serve) as witnesses of that ye saw, may declare the truth of all that which
you have seen and heard. And again, I being in my glory with the Duchess in
the garden, should chance to be discovered and bewraied, to have your help
and succor, as of my very perfect and good friends.

When the Duke had concluded this his fained protestation, the three knights
who were so much his friends, did promise unto him for to accomplish all his
request. Then when the night was come, about twelve of the clock at midnight,
at such time as the Duchess and all the rest were in their found sleep, the
Duke with the three knights went unto the garden, and although the walls were
very high, yet by Ladders they went up to the top thereof, the wall was
somewhat broad above, and on the inside toward the garden, hard unto the wall
did grow a great number of thick^ and high Cypres trees, which shadowed all
the wall, in such sort, that the three knights might remain upon the wall,
and hear and see all that should pass in the garden, and they not to be seen
and discovered of any. In that place did the three knights remain, and the
Duke descended down by those trees into the garden, whereas he remained till
within a little while after he heard a little pos^erne to be opened, whereat
came forth that false damsel, who by reason that the Moon did shine so
bright, yea nigh hand she did seem to be the Duchess, for that she was
fair, and of her own stature, and was apparelled with a gown of green
velvet, set full of brouches of gold, wherein was set many fine presious
stones, she also had her hair hanging about her shoulders, which reached
down to the ground, and upon her head a garland set full of Diamonds and
rubies of great price, with the which garment and garland the three knights
did see the Duchess the day before, in certain bankets and feasts that were
made, and by reason that it was night, although the Moon did shine very
clear, yet because she was somewhat a far of, they could not discern any
other but that she was the Duchess. Likewise she had in her hand a bunch of
feathers, wherewith this Damsel did dissemble and hide her face, in such
sort, that she could not be known. Then so soon as the Duke had spied her
to come forth, he straight ways went and kneeled down before her, and said.

Oh my Lady Polisena, what Prince or knight in all the world, was ever
worthy to receive so great courtesy and favor as this is? Give me these your
fair and white hands, that I may kiss them, as one unworthy to receive so
great honor and glory, and yet I cannot think but that it is a dream. My
Lord (said the Damsel) give thanks unto almighty God, who has done so much
for you, that you do deserve this at my hands, the which I have done for your
sake, arise up from the ground, for that your state (...) courtesy vento any
damsel, in all the the whole world, much less unto the Duchess of Austria,
who is altogether yours, and in saying these words, she took him by the hand
and caused him to arise from the ground, and the Duke straight ways began to
embrace and kiss her, and took their way^ toward a fresh fountain there at
hand, compassed round about with Iasmires and Musk Roses. And before that
they could come thither, the Damsel said. My Lord, you do well know, that I
do not come hither for any other thing, but to plight unto you my faith and
troth, to be your wife, and you my husband and spouse, and that to the
contrary, I would not come for all the world into this place, so much against
my honor. My desire is, that this should be done out of hand, and that we
might depart, for that I fear to be discovered. My good Lady and Duchess
(said the Duke) this is that the which I so long have looked and hoped for. And
now seeing that we are both agreed, and conformable in our good wills, now I
do say that I do receive my Lady the Duchess Polisena, for my well-beloved
spouse and wife, and that I do renounce all other and cleave my self only
unto her, so long as we shall live.

Well then my good Lord, said the Damsel: Here your true and faithful
Polisena, do receive and take Roberto Duke of Saxonia, for her spouse, and
will that no other shall be her husband, but you alone.

All this that passed betwixt them, was very well heard by the three knights
that were in secret: and surely they were out of all doubt to the contrary,
but that should be the Duchess of Austria. For if they had known otherwise, or
had any other thing in their thoughts, they were such knights, that they would
not have affirmed that which they had said for all the kingedome of Hungaria.

When that this communicacion of matrimony was concluded betwixt them two, the
Duke went with the Damsel toward the Fountain, and at their coming thither
she making the matter somewhat strange, so that it might be heard by the three
knights, although they could not see any thing, by reason of the thickness of
the trees whereas they were, there the Duke did accomplish his will with the
Damsel. And when it was hour and time for to withdraw themselves, they went
hand in hand together unto the posterne where she came forth, and there the
duke with many imbracings and kissings, did take his leave of her, and she
entered in, and went to sleep, leaving the apparaile of the Duchess in the
place whereas she took them, and was not seen by any: And the Duke returned
unto the three knights, and departed from thence.

It fell out within a while after happened all that this History has declared
unto you, the which fell out to be unto the Prince Lusiano great sorrow and
grief, for that he did love the Duchess so entirely, and was so fully
certified of the good will and love she bare unto him, that it brought him into
a great alteration of mind, and almost from him self, to see the witness
that was brought against the Duchess, by those three knights, whom he had in
estimation to be loyal, faithful, and of great credit: and believed verily
that they would not but tell the truth, in that behalf, if that to either of
them should be given a whole kingdom. And to the contrary, he had so great a
confidence in his lady and mistress, that he was fully determined first ^o
be s^aine, then to consent, that any such shame should be offered unto her.
But his great bounty did little profit, for to deliver him from the death, for
that every one of the four, were so strong and valiant knights, that in all
Hungaria was not to be found one that could match any of them. But yet for that
above al things Justice is of greater force, God did permit, for that Lusiano
had Justice on his part, that he should be succored in this his great
extremttie: as shall be told you in this Chapter following.

How that Rosicleer and Liriamandro, and the gentle Lus^ano, had battle with
the Duke Robert^ and his companions. Chap. 45.
AFter that the Damsel of the Duchess was departed from Rosicleer and
Liriamandro, she went straight ways into the place appointed for the battle
whereas she kept her self very close, till such time as the Duke and his
companions came forth all four together, and armed with rich and glittering
armor, mounted upon a great and gallant horse, and had with them so gallant
semblance, that they seemed to be knights of great valor and worthiness, as
well in their armor, as in their gallant proporcion. In this ^ort they rid
about the place, and when that the king Tiberio and the Queen Augusta with all
the principallest of the court were set in their places at the windows of the
mighty palace, then straight ways came farther the gentle Lusiano, all armed
in blew armor, garnished about with gold and rich stoones, which was
conformable unto his estate, and was mounted upon a mighty horse trapped with
blewe velvet and bordered with gold, and was in all things of so gallant and
gentle disposition, that there was not one in all the place, but when they saw
him, did receue great sorrow and grief, in such sort, that there was amongst
them a great sound in manner of a lamentation, for that they made rekoning that
he was a dead man, and there were few amongst them but would have given a good
part of their goods, upon condition that the gentle Lusiano might clear
himself of that enterprise, in especial the king and the Queen, who loved him
almost as well as though he had been their own son, and would have been
very glad if y^ the prince (...) would give over that demand, for that they
believed y^ the Duke Roberto had reason on his side, and again (as it was
likely) they thought it impossible that he should escape from that battle
with his life. Then the king commanded that the Duchess should be brought
forth for to see and behold the battle that was ordained for her sake, who
very much against her will, was brought unto a window of the pallas: but when
she saw her gentle spouse, her heart was all covered with sorrow and grief,
and as dead she fell down to the ground, whereas her life had been in great
peril, if that within a short space she had not been comforted with the
coming of the two knights.

So soon as the damsel saw that it was hour and time, with a trice she went
unto the In whereas she had left Rosicleere and Liriamandro, and giving them to
understand of that which had passed, and how that they were ready to go to
battle. They straight ways mounted upon their horses, and with all the
speed possible, came unto the place, at such time as the Judges did part the
Sun and the field unto the knight, ready to leave them to their battle.
And as they pressed to enter into the place, all the people did make them large
and broad way, for to pass, as well to clear themselves from the fury of
their great have, as also for that they saw them to be armed with so precious
and rich armor, and of so gallant proporcio^, that straight ways they thought
they came upon some set purpose and determination.

When they came unto the place whereas the knights were, without speaking ever
a word, they plased themselves the one on the one side, and the other on the
other side of the Prince, with their spears in their hands, ready for to go
unto the battle. Then the Damsel who was well known went unto the king and
said: You shall understand worthy and mighty king T^berio, that I this day
going forth of this city, because I would not see the death of the prince
Lusiano, by my good fortune I met with these two knights, who when as they
understood by me, the occasion of my sorrow and grief, having no other
occasion, but as they are bound by reason and Justice, are come hither with
me, and will defend the cause on the part and behalf of my Lady the Duchess.
Therefore on their parts I am come unto your highness, to request you to
grant the^ license for the same, for so much as they be strangers, and would
not err in any thing that is dewtifull unto your service.

The king, who all this time did very well behold the two knights, and lyked
them meruailously well, was very glad and ioyefull at the words of the Damsel,
and having some hope (more then before) of the delivery of the Prince, by the
aid of those two knights, answered and said, that the Duke and his
companions were four, so that Lusiano might likewise take unto him other three
companions, and that there was no reason in him for to deny them, therefore
the knights might do what their pleasure was, and that he should be well
content therewith.

The Duke and his companions when that they saw how that Lusiano had
companions, made no rekoning theroff, for that if they were ten of them, they
hoped before an hour were ended, they would bring them unto their ends. But
the Prince when that he saw himself in the midst betwixt two such knights,
received no small contentment, for that they seemed to be of high estate and
great renown, as well in their rich armor, as of their gallant and stout
proporcions. But in especial Rosicleer, for that there was not a knight in all
that place, but he had four fingers vauntage of him in height, so that it
seemed unto him that in all his life he had not seen a knight of a gallanter
disposition. And having no time for to speak unto them, he bowed down his
head, in token of humility, giving them thanks for the great courtesy which
they showed unto him.

At this time the hour was come, and the trumpets began to sownde, making a
great noise, whereat the Duke and his companions, with their spears in their
hands, set spurs unto their horses, running with all fury possible. The other
three knights s^acked no time, to run and receive them, so great fury, that
it seemed a whirle wind, and made their encou^ters the one against the other
in this sort. The Duke Roberto and the gentle Lusiano made their encounters
together all alone, in such ^ort, that by reason they were both ^rong and
valiant knights, they brake and sheuered their sp^ares all to pieces, but
iustling together with their horse and bodies they both fell down unto the
ground, who with great lightness arose upon their feet, an^ as mortal
enemies, made battle together with their swords, Liriamandro made his
encounter with Ricardo, who was a gallant knight. And now whether it was for
that he was in presence of his parents, or by his great bounty and
worthiness, Liriamandro overthrew the stout Ricardo, horse and man to the
ground. And although by the force thereof he lost his stirrups, yet like a good
knight he passed forwards and kept his saddle: and for that he seemed to have
the vauntage on his adversary, he did alight from his hose, and made his
battle on foot. Then against Rosicleer (for that he seemed to be the biggest
and most valiantest of them all) he was encountered by the two most valiantest
and stoutest knight of the four, who was Carmelio, Lord of the Alb^^^, and
Anibard Lord of Marchomandia. And for that never at any time before they met
with their equals, they thought verily at that encounter, to lessen the number
of their adversaries, by one. But it fell out unto them contrary, for that
(...) of them brake their spears upon Ro^^cleere, without moving him any
thing in his saddle, but he made his encounter upon the stout Carmeli^, in such
sort, that thrusting him out of his saddle, he bare him to the ground over his
hor^e crouper, and he had enough to do afterward to arise again he was so
tormented with the fall.

The king was wonderfully amazed, and all those that did beh^lde (...) to see
those gallant encounters betwixt them, and could not (...) that the (...) of
Lusiano were of so great force and strength, that so lightly had overthrown
their adversaries, and from that time forwards had a better hope of the
victory. Then the Duchess who was as one half dead, being comforted with
those news, with a better good will then before, put her self at the window
for to behold the battle.

Then the worthy Rosilceere finishing the fury of his swift course, with
great lightness, he turned his horse about, and returned upon Ambardo, who
remained on horseback, and stroke at him such a blow with his sword, that the
shylde he lift up for to ward the fury thereof (although it was of fine and
hard steel) he cloue it in two pieces, and from thence descended upon his
helm with so great fury, that it made him to stoop with his head, declyning
it to his horse neck. And this stout Ambardo, when that he felt him self
ouercharged with that mighty blow, being greatly amazed, he said within
himself, what is this, me thinks I feel all the fury of the world against
me, is this by fortune the son of Trebatio, that passed this way when he
slew Aridon, or else is that strong Achilles, son unto Peleo, risen again
from death to life, or that first begotten of Priamus: for according as I do
feel the great force of this knight, it is not possible, but he must needs be
one of the^. And in saying these words, for that he was a valiant and
courageous knight, with all the fury of his arms he stroke such a blow at
Rosicleere upon the head, that he gave him well to understand that he was a
very valiant and chosen knight.

All this time Liriamandro and Ricardo combatted together, in such sort, that
the battle was worth the beholding, they were both stout and valiant knights,
and charged the one the other with so great power and strength, that it made
them all to marvel. But he that was most oppressed and had greatest travail
in this battle was the prince Lu^iano, for that being in battle with the
Duke, came also against him the stout Carmelio, and although he was of great
bounty, yet had he enough to do for to clear himself from either of them:
and he had passed great evil betwixt them two, if that at this instant had not
chaunsed that the worthy Rosicleer being in battle with Anibardo, seeing
himself before his graundfather, his courage so increased in him, that with
the fury of all his force, he stroke so mighty strong and furious a blow upon
his helm, that he had cloven him down unto the wast, if that his helm had
not been the finer, and forged by art magic, which was the occasion that his
fine cutting sword could not enter nor cut it, but yet by the great force of
the valiant Anibardo, clean from himself fell from his horse to the ground,
not without great wondering unto all them that saw that terrible and furious
blow: and looking on the one side, he saw the Prince Lusiano, how he was in
fight against both the other knights, who then with a trice leaped from his
horse, and went and put himself before the Duke, and stroke his first blow at
him in such sort, that he made him to stoop with both his hands to the
ground. Then the Duke, who was of a valiant and stout courage, let Lusiano in
battle with Carmelio, and began to charge Rosicleer with such mighty and
strong blows, that he made him to understand, that he was a valiant and
worthy knight. And it grieved Rosicleer very much to think that in the Duke
should remain so great treason, he being a knight of so great bounty and
valor in arms. And being very desirous that the truth thereof might be
known, he forced himself all that ever he could, for to overcome the Duke,
who for a while did defend himself very valiantly, being greatly amazed at the
strange bounty and force of his adversary, and could not immagine who it
should be, except he were sent from heaven for to punish the great treason
which he had done against the Duchess, as one worthy thereoff. All this time
the prince Liriamandro seeing himself in the presence of his father and
mother, and desirous to get honor before them, did so ouercharge his
adversary, that in a small time he abated the courage of Ricardo, y^ the
vauntage was on Liriamandros part. Likewise y^ gentle Lusiano and the stout
Carmelio who were almost equal in bounty, with great force charged the one y^
other with such blows, y^ they seemed to be all on fire, with the great
quantity of sparks that flew out of their armor, and although for a good
while there was known no advantage betwixt them, yet in the end the
courageous force of the Prince endured longest, and he did so entreat his
adversary, that he would have given a great part of his estate, so that he
might have been cleared of that battle with honor. The which grieved
nothing at all the fair Polisena, who seeing her knight so stout and light in
the battle, received great joy and pleasure, and with shedding of many
tears praie^ unto God for to deliver him clear from that battle, as one
that made no reckning to live any longer than the saw him alive, but quickly
she was brought out of that care, for that the inclite and worthy Greek that
did combat with the Duke ^ charged him so fast with his terrible and furious
blows, that he made him all astonished and amazed, that he knew not whether he
went, nor where he stroke his blows, and ^eeing him in that perplexity, with
his right hand he took him fast by the goriet, and pulled him with so great
strength, that he overthrew him at his feet, and before he could arise again,
he put his knee upon his breast, and pulled his healme from his head, and put
his swoorde unto his throat, and said thus.

Duke, thou art but dead, if thou do not confess the truth of this treason
which thou have raised against the Duchess of Austria.

Then the Duke seeing himself in that extremity, thought of truth that the
divine justice was come upon him, and that he was some Angel sent from God
for to destroy and kill him, and fearing least both body and soul should be
destroyed, he determined to tell the truth of all the whole treason, so that he
said unto Rosicleer, that he should hold his hands and not kill him, not for
that he feared to die, but to save his soul, he would tell him the truth
thereof.

Then Rosicleer did assure him his life, and gave him his hand, and did help
him to arise from the ground, and when he saw the other knights in battle,
he and Rosicleer went and did part them, and put themselves between them, and
said.

Sir knights, let this your contentious battle cease, for there is no reason
wherefore you should receive any harm, but I alone who is in the fault and
worthy to be blamed. At which words saying, Liriamandro had overthrown the
stout Ricardo, and Lusiano had brought Carmelio into a great perplexity, so
that they had not much a do to part them, the which being done, the Duke with
an high voice, that the king and all that were there about him might hear,
declared all the whole treason, how and in what sort, in all points as he did
it, and as you have heard. But when the gentle Lusiano saw the honor of his
spouse so clear, and the great fortune and victory that he had in the
battle, whereas before both the honor of his Lady and his life was clean
lost, it cannot be expressed the great joy and plea^ure that entered into his
heart, and how thankfully he gratified Rosicleer and Liriamandro, desiring
them to show him so much pleasure as to tell him who they were, and to take of
his treasure all that was their pleasure and wills, for that was too little for
them, in consideration of the great pleasure that they did for him. But the joy
and contentment which the fair Polisena received, no man is able to express.
Likewise the King and the Queen were very joyful, for they loved marvelous
well the Prince Lusiano and the Duchess, and meruailing very much at the
strange bounty of the kni^^tes, they thought it long till they knew what they
were, for that they understood they were not of that Country. The king then
commanded that they should come before him, who straight ways with Lusiano
went before the king, and when that they had done their duty, and before that
they pulled off their healmes, or treated of any other matter, they craved of
the king that both the Duke and the Damsel might be pardoned, and although
the king determined to punish them as they had deserved, yet in the end at
their request he did pardon them, with this condition, that the Duke with the
Damsel should out of hand depart the Court, and never more in all their lives
to enter into the same. The Duke straight ways gave great thanks unto the
knights for that which for him they had done, and the same day after that
they knew who the knights were, he departed from the Court with his damsel,
and the reward which he gave unto her for her labor, was, that the same night
he slew her in a Forest, being ashamed of that which with her he had done. And
this is the reward that all such ought to look for, for although there be many
that would profit themselves of the treason, yet in conclusion (by great
fortune) there are few traitors that do escape their reward, and surely they
ought not to be suffered amongst men, for that there is no peril or danger
that may be compared unto the mischievous practice and pretense of a traitor no
not the raging waves of the sea, earthquakes, whirle winds, thunder boltes,
storms, wars, no nor the fury of the elements, for the proof whereof I do
refer me unto the mighty Alexander, whose ^lying in the air, and
travailing on the seas, whose conquests of the whole world, with wars and
battles, none of all these were sufficient for to bring him unto his end, but
only a traitor, one of his own retinue, by treason did kill him. If this
example be not sufficient, consider of Darius that was before him, and of
Priamus the mighty, Achilles, Minos, Nisus, Agamemnon, Romulus, Tarquinus,
Seruius, and the minor (...), the mighty Bompeus, Julius Caesar, and many
other Emperors and kings, unto whom no peril was so dangerous, as treason,
ordained and wrought by their own servants, so that with great reason the
traitor ought to be abhorred, as well as they that do enjoy the benefit of
treason rewarded, as well the Damsel as the Duke Roberto, who thought she went
for to be rewarded for her travail, yet she received the just punishment for
her fault.

But now to return unto that which did remain, the History says, that after
the king had pardoned and forgiven the Duke, he had great desire for to know
whom the knights were. Then Rosicleer and Liriamandro pulled off their helmes,
and kneeling down before the king, Liriamandro said: Let your Highness know
and be acquainted with this knight, who is Rosicleer, son unto the Emperor
Trebatio, and of the Empress Briana, whom all the whole world for his great
bounty ought to honor, and me for Liriamandro your son, and of the Queen
Augusta my Lady and mother, who with news of great joy and pleasure do come
to kiss your hands. When the king knew to be in his presence his so long
desired son, and the other to be Rosicleer his nephew, it cannot be expressed
the great joy, contentment, and pleasure he received at his heart, as he that
in all the world desired no other thing, and as one from himself with great
joy he went and embraced them, saying: Oh my sons, what joyful and happy
news is this unto me, for that in it is accomplished the thing that I most
desired before I should die, how is it that you have consented so long time to
keep from me this great joy? The king had scarce concluded these words, when
that the Queen with incredible joy and great have came unto them, and threw
her arms about their necks, whereas she remained embracing of them both a
great while, and could not speak one word for joy. Thus after there had
passed betwixt them many words of great joy in this their joyful meeting,
straight ways the Prince Lusiano came and kneeled down before them, and would
have kissed their hands, as well for the great courtesy which they had done for
him, as also for y^ Liriamandro was his Prince and natural Lord, but they who
had him in great estimation, did receive and embrace him with great love and
joy. Then after him came unto them the three valiant knights, Ricardo,
Carmelio, and Ambardo, and offered great courtesy unto the two Princes, who did
them great honor, and made them friends with Lusiano, as persons that were
without blame in the treason (...). But when these news were published in the
court, there came so great number of people to s^e Rosicleer and Liriamandro,
y^ the palace would not hold the^, and al people meruailed at their strange
dispositions, but in in especial of Rosicleer, for that they said that in all
things he did resemble the knight of the Sun his brother, he that was so
famous and feared in that Court, for that they partly understood and heard of
his wonderful acts and deeds, and unto the king it was notorious all the whole
History of Rosicleer, from the time of his first creation and bringing up,
with his daughter the Princess Briana, till such time as he was known unto
the Emperor his father and Empress his mother. Of all the which the king was
very joyful and pleasant, and loved the Emperor Trebatio and his sons, as he
did his own son Liriamandro, and for that he had not until that time heard
of the success of the wars that he had against the Emperor Alycandro, he was
very sorrowful and full of care, and thought long till y^ he had heard some
news thereof, and if he gave any aid and succor of knights unto the king
Oliuerio, it was not for any hatred or ill will that he bare unto the Emperor
Trebatio, but for to accomplish that wherein he was bound unto the king
Oliuerio, because his son Prince Edward was slain in his service, and was
fully persuaded that all the whole army of the king Oliuerio was not of
sufficient power for to do any harm unto the Emperor Trebatio, yet
afterward when he understood of the mighty power of Pagans that were come
upon Grecia, it grieved and repented him of that he had done, so that if it had
not been very much against his honor, many times he was moved in conscience
for to go and succor him in person, with all the power that ever he could
make, and being very desirous to know the whole success thereof in all
points, he requested the Princess for to tell him, who (as those that knew the
truth thereof) in the presence of the Queen, and all those worthy Princes and
knights of the Court, did give him to understand as well of the success with
the king Oliuerio as with the Emperor Alycandro, y^ which being published
amongst them, they al received great joy, in as ample manner as though it had
touched either of them in particular, but in especial y^ king and the queen,
in y^ they saw how much to their honar they had accomplished their promise unto
the king Oliuerio, as also of the high estate whereunto their daughter the
Empress Briana was exalted, so that they could never satisfy themselves in
giving thanks unto almighty God for those great benefits showed unto them.
When these things were passed, straight ways came thither Leonardo and his
wife, the fained parents of Rosicleer, with whom Rosicleer received great
pleasure, as he that had great desire for to see him, and for that which he was
indebted unto them, the which he did meruailouslie well gratefie in all points
their great service done unto them, for he carried them with him unto Grecia,
whereas the Empress Briana did make them owners of great possessions, so that
they were very well content, and thought their travail very well employed
the which they had in the bringing up of Rosicleer. Likewise Rosicleer rejoiced
very much with those Gentlewomen, with whom he was brought up in the
Monastery of the River, and the most part of them he carried into Grecia,
whereas he did very much for them all. Then for that the king did bear great
good will unto the Prince Lusiano, and had him in high estimation, he straight
ways commanded that his spouse the Duchess of Austria should be delivered
unto him. After this sort within few days that their nuptials were celebrated
with great honor and triumphs, which those knights his friends did ordain,
in the which the gentle Lusiano did so much, that he got unto himself honor
for ever after. And in the mean time of all these sportes and feasts,
Rosicleer and Lyriamandro did declare their message unto the king, desiring him
in the part and behalf of the Emperor Trebatio, and of the Empress Briana,
that he would think well for to go with them unto Constantinople, for to
reioyie themselves of the victory and joy, the which the Emperor and the
Empress do receive.

Likewise they gave great and lawful excuses, wherefore the Emperor Trebatio
did abstain from coming into y^ Country, for that he had in his court such
mighty Princes and Lords, that there had been no reason for him to leave the^.
Then the king and the Queen, as they which desired no other thing, commanded
Straignt ways that all things should be put in a readiness needful for their
journey, and for that we have other matters to declare for the conclusion of
the first part of this History, there is here no more to be said, but that
Rosicleer and Liriamndro did pass away the time in Hungaria, till such time
as they were ready to depart, as shall be told you in the next Chapter
following.

How the king Tiberio with the Queen Augusta, Rosicleer, and Liriamandro,
departed out of Hungaria, and took their journey toward Constantinople. Chap.
46.
WHen the day appointed was come of their departure, the king and the Queen,
with all the other worthy Princes and knights of his Court departed out of
Viana, and took their journey toward the mighty Empire of Grecia, in the
which they travailed many days, without happening any thing worthy the
telling, in the end whereof they arrived within two miles of the mighty City
of Constantinople, and when the Emperor Trebatio had knowledge of their
coming, with great joy and pleasure, he and all those mighty Princes and
valyant knights together went out of Constantinople with so great majesty,
that it seemed all the whole world were joined together, the number was so
exceeding great, so that the king of Hungaria and the Queen Augusta his wife,
with all those that came with them, were wonderfully amazed to see so royal
and worthy knighthoode to come forth of Constantinople, for of truth they
never would have thought that so many as there were, might have been received
in the court of any Prince whatsoever he were in all the whole world. But when
the king and the Emperor saw one an other, they both went and met together,
and did embrace the one the other, with such great love as ought to be between
Father and son, and as though they had known one another long time before.
And if before the king Tiberio and the Queen Augusta did account themselves
happy and fortunate to have so high a Prince for their son in law, yet now
they did much more when they saw his person and presence to be so strange and
wonderful, for alonelie by his semblance and proportion they knew him for
father of the two brethren, the knight of the Sun and Rosicleer; above all
other Princes that came in that worthy crew. The king and the Emperor had not
yet fully concluded the loving words of their first meeting, when that the
Queen Augusta came unto them, and with the self same love wherewith she did
embrace her son Liriamandro did embrace the good Emperor* Then came the
knight of the Sun (who above all the rest might be seen, he was of so
gallant and tall statu^e) and offered to kiss the kings hands, but the king
would not consent unto it, but embraced him, and the king clasped him very
hard between his arms, saying: Oh happy and fortunate kinsman, I do now
find my self in great security, for that I am in the arms of him that alone
did defend himself from all my power, and made my kingdom to tremble and
quake, tell me I pray you, if that you have forgotten that anger or not, if
you have not, then am I fully persuaded that I have no security in my own.
Country of Hungaria, much less in Grecia? My good Lord and grandfather (said
the knight of the Sun) your highness in whatsoever place you are, is in
great security from my hands, for although I would procure any outrage, yet
am not I sufficient to do you any harm, and if I were fortunate against your
knights, it was nothing else but the will of God to save and deliver me, for
that afterward when you should know me you should not have so great reason to
be sorrowful, as now you should be, if I had at that time been slain.

Then the king said: Ah my son, if that had happened, my life could not have
endured so long, but God who does know the secret of all things that should
happen unto us, did guide and govern all things, in such sort, that it is come
to this point and instant, wherein I do account my self the most fortunatest
Prince in all the whole world, not only in knowing thee to be my son, but
in recovering you to be my friend.

The king had scarce concluded these words, when that the Queen came to
embrace the knight of the Sun, but he did offer to kiss her hands, and there
passed betwixt them many sweet and amorous words, such as might pass
between the mother and the son, at such time as of long time they had not
seen the one the other. The Queen Augusta received so great joy and
contentment to have him in her presence, that she knew not almost where she
was. Then approached unto them the king Oliuerio, with the Emperor Alycandro,
and all those mighty Princes and Lords, whereas passed betwixt them great
courtesy, with such duty as appertained unto so high and worthy estates. In
this noble meeting they spent a good while, the which being finished, the
Emperor Trebatio accompanied himself with the king, and every one those his
companion as best liked him, and began to return toward the mighty City of
Constantinople. The knight of the Sun and Rosicleer did carry between them
the Queen Augusta (who went with so great joy and pleasure that she knew not
were she was) to see her self in the midst betwixt so worthy nephews. When
the Emperor Trebatio had opportunity, he said unto the king: Now is my desire
fully accomplished, in that I do see your Highness in this Country, for
although all other things succ^eded unto me prosperous, as I have desired, yet
had I no conclusion of all this my victory, neither could I receive any
glory therein, till now I have your Highness in my presence, and do honor
and obey you as dutifullie as your own natural son. And if the great
obligation in the which you were bound unto the king of great Britain, had not
been betwixt us, I and the Empress Briana many a time long ere this, had come
unto you to have craved pardon for that which is past, with lisence and
consentment for that which was to come. For although the Empress Briana seemed
to receive contentment to be with me in Grecia, yet received I great grief,
for that I could not accomplish of my part, the duty which I owe unto your
highness. When that the Emperor had concluded these words, then the king (who
received great pleasure thereat) said: Sovereign Emperor, if that you have
received great joy, contentme^t and pleasure, at my coming into Grecia, how
much more reason have I to rejoice and receue pleasure to have so glorious a
sight of your person and presence, being accompanied and honored with the most
highest and mightiest Emperors and kings of all the world, and mounted unto
the highest estate of honor that fortune may extend, the which is apparaunt
before my eyes, and also endued with such sons, that there is not the like
knights in all the whole world. And here I do acknowledge that I am not
worthy of so high a kinseman: and in that you have said (of my consentment)
it might have been excused, for that I do see it clearly before mine eyes, to
be the will and permission of God, by whom all things has been governed, for
the which neither I, nor any of your adversaries could withstand or resist. And
seeing my daughter has brought unto me the highest and worthiest Prince of
all the world to be my son in law, and that this marriage was made by the
divine will and permission, from whence has proceeded so excelent, (...) what
have I to say unto it, but give unto the sovereign creator infinite thanks,
for his great goodness showed unto me. And do most heartelie desire him to
let you enjoy for many years, this high estate into the which you are
exalted, and also the high and worthy progeny that he has given you. With
many sweet and courteous words the Emperor Trebatio did gratify with
thanks, all that which the king had said. So passing betwixt them, these and
many other things in communication, which were to long here to rehearse, they
came unto the (...) of Constantinople, whereas the king of Hungaria and the
Queen Augusta were wonderfully amazed, for to see the great knighthood of
that Court, for that with great difficulty, they might pass the wide
streets, the multitude was so great, so that it was a good while before they
could come unto the mighty pallas: but when they came thither, they all
alighted and entered into the mighty broad court, whereas the Empress Briana
did receive them, with that joy and pleasure, as you may immagine, and there
passed betwixt them many loving and sweet words, as betwixt Fathers and
children, the which I do let pass, to eschew tediousness. And the royal
Empress Briana was so gallant and fair, that her Father did not know her, she
was so changed. Yet they well perceived in her the joy and pleasure she
received, and the more to manifest her glory, she did show unto the king
Tiberio and unto the Queen Augusta her Mother, her third son, who was the
fair Prince Claramante, and at that present was norished in the court with his
Mother, with so great care, as in this next Chapter following shall be declared
unto you, for the which this History does leave of all the surplus of this
receiving and coming of the king of Hungaria and the Queen Augusta, for that
they remained a long time after in the court, whereas they declared at large
the one unto the other, the whole circumstances of all that had passed, and
from that day forwards, the king Oliuerio and the king of Hungaria were great
friends, as well for the kindred that was beetwixt them by the marriage of
Rosicleer unto the Princess Oliuia, as also for y^ in times of necessity,
these two kings did very much the one for the other. But in especial the king
of Hungaria, setting apart the great love that he bare unto his son in law
and neuew, he would accomplish his duty bound unto the king Oliuerio, and aid
him with his people to go against Grecia, as has been told you in this
History.

All this noble crew remained certain days in the City of Constantinople, in
which time they spent their time in no other thing but in mirth, pastimes and
triumphs, which were made as well by strange knights as by them of Grecia: and
might well be said that there was joined together all the magestie of the
world.

How the young Prince Claramante was nourished in the court of the Emperor
Trebatio, and of other things that was spoken by the wife Artimidoro, and
Lirgandeo, with other things that happened. Chapter. 47.
IN all the time that the Emperor was in Constantinople, there lacked not the
two wise men, Artemidoro and Lirgandeo, who were of the Emperor Trebatio and
of his sons and of all that were in the court, very much esteemed and
honored, for that their great wisdom and understanding did deserve the same,
and they knew that they had in charge to write and put in memory all things
that should pass. And although for that as then it was not time for to
discover the secret loves of the knight of the Sun, they would not in this
part make them manifest, neither of the Prophesies before said, although the
most part of them has come to effect: yet in all that ever these two wise men
did write, they never writ any thing of this fair youth, the Prince
Claramante, son unto the Emperor Trebatio, but only one chapter, which was
written by the wi^e Artemidoro, of his wonderful Nativity. The occasion has
been as I believe, the great trouble which they had in penning of such things
past, as seemed to be most necessary in this part of y^ History. And now for
that it seemed they were all occupied in tr^umphes and feasts, these wise men
were at more leisure, so that both of them did write of the young prince
Claramante, as of a person, whom they knew afterward should be made great
account of. They said, that at the season that the Emperor Alicand^o remained
in Constantinople, Claramante was nour^^^ and brought up in the pallas of the
Emperor his father, and was of the age of three years, the semeliest, whitest
and fairest creature that was to be found in all the world, for that his force
seemed to be a celestial Seraphin, as may be immagined here amongst men, and
his hair was like unto thrids of gold. Likewise of stature tall, such as did
well appear in him, y^ when so ever he should come to his perfect groth, he
should be iof big stature, he was of a gr^cious semblaunt and merry, yet
had he therewithal so great severity, that of himself he seemed to have the
deity of a Prince. But to conclude, what shall we say of this child, the
wise men say, that in all things he did so much resemble his brother the knight
of the Sun, that many times (as shall be declared unto you in the second part
of this mighty History) the one was taken for the other. Oh happy and
fortunate Claramante, (says Li^gandeo) that unto such a knight and sovereign
Prince thou art compared, wherein can we more eralt thee, but in this thy age
to attribute ye excelencies which thy brother had being but a child. But after
y^ he was an armed knight, this fair child was of all knights Ladies and
damsells so welbelo^ed, that none would willingly depart out of his company.
And now for that he was so amorous, all people recei^ed with him great pleasure
and sport, but above all other he was esteemed and beloved of the precious
princess Lindabrides. For that he did resemble so much that figure the which
she had printed in her heart, she could never leau^ him out of her arms, so
that when the child should depart, he conceived a displeasure, and the
princess an inward sorrow for his absence, equal to the absence of the knight
of the Sun. The occasion thereof was, for that she did cocker and make more
of him, then any other, the child conceived a greater love unto her then unto
the Empress his mother that nourished him with her breasts, so that the child
could never be from her, whereat the Emperor and the Empress received great
pleasure, and it was the occasion that they loved and bare a greater good will
unto that royal Princess.

And as upon a day, in the mighty quadran, were joined all those mighty
Princes and knights, and all the Ladies and damsells of the court, sh^wing
great joy and p^stime, there was amongst them the old king of Gedrosia, for
that he and other five kings, vassailes unto the Emperor Alicandro, after the
blouddie field was done, were taken prisoners, by reason they were overthrown
from their horse, they could not fly out of the camp as other did: and as it
has been toulde you in this History before, that this king was very wise, and
well seen in deuinations, and partly knew of things to come, and told many
things unto the Emperor Alicandro, before he departed out of the gran Tartaria,
that afterward came to pass, that if they had given credit unto his good
counsel, the Emperor had not been brought unto that extremity in the which
he was. Not for that those things which are ordained by God may be eschued, but
for that all men has free will, to apart them selves from such things as be
evil and hurtful: but if God do first determine and predestinate any thing,
it is for that he does know to what end the free will of man will ^row unto.

Being there in that conversation with the king of Gedrosia, and seeing the
great pleasure and pastime that was amongst them, giueing a great sigh that was
heard of them all, he said: Oh miserable world, that for one pleasure alone,
thou do give and return two thousand griefs and sorrows. In saying these
words he hild his peace and would say no more, till such time as the Emperor
Trebatio (who had him in reputation of a man of understanding, and greatly
meruailed at those his words, being spoken at that time) asked of him wherefore
he spoke those words. I do speak them (said the king) for that the world
does ^se us as children, at sometimes singing, and at other times weeping, and
many times a fair and clear morning, is turned into a clowdie and sorrowful
evening. And there is no pleasure or pastime can be so great, but that sorrow
and heaviness does disturb i^, we be like unto the air, that being so clear
and fair that we cannot almost discern it from the firmament, upon a sudden,
with a little wind that does arise, is troubled and darkenot: so likewise when
that unto our judgments we are most joyful and merrie^ upon a sudden, not
knowing from whence it comes, we find our selves put in great sadness and
tears. This does proceed for that all our felicity and prosperity; we do
build upon things that of themselves do perish and decay. We are also like
unto trauailer (...) Seas, whose fair and calm wether is upon the (...)* who
of it self is moveable and of small foundation, and look so many times as
they be assalted with the wind, so many times their pleasure do abate, and
their sorrows double. Even so do we put all our felieitie in thirgs wherein
is no stabilitie, but like unto the loa^es that is carried away with every
wind, as it apeareth in high estates and dignities, for the higher he is the
greater is his fall. In riches, difficulty in the getting, with care in the
keeping, and sorrow in the losing: unto many it causes death, and depriueth
all of their case. The most fairest in a short time does (...) and fade a way
like a flower, and he that is of most force and strength, is overthrown with a
little Fever.

When a friend does dye or is lost, in especial of children, then sweet
mingled by-tternesse, Honey mixed with gall, miserable fortune, rarefull
pleasures, and many times sorrowful, successors of folly, unto them that
alonely does recreate themselves with the blossom of the tree, we our selves
do it, in that we do rejoice and show so much pleasure and pastimes unto
little children, who are no less subject unto misfortunes, then the delicate
flower. Of many things, that I have spoken of, you have had experience, so
likewise, very shortly, you shall see the proof of the rest that lacks, if
that Nature or Fortune, does not disturb or let it.

I will say no more unto you, for that it is not given unto us to affirm that
which we do divine, but to declare that which the order of Nature does show
us, to (...) the incon^eniences* which might happen ^f that peradventure we
should be deceived.

Heerewith the old king concluded his reasons, and for that all those Lords
that were there present were wise and of great understanding, they well
understood that his words did extend unto some thing that should happen unto
that fair and young child Claramante, and could not let but receive some
trouble of mind, but yet for that his Father and brethren were or noble and
valiant hearts, they did not only with equal and quiet mind abide that
which the stars did permit, but also referred all things unto the
determination of the sovereign creator, so that they answered nothing unto
that which the king had said, but the wise Artemidoro, that had more
understanding in the art Magic than the king answered unto his words and
said. By your word we do understand (wise king of Gedrosia) that you would
declare some things that should happen unto this fair child Claramante, as of
truth it is so, for that his parents shall sustain great sorrow and grief for
him, but according as his good fortune and destiny does promise unto him, it
shall be for a greater glory and extolling of the Greekish Empire, and so much
more joyful shall his prosperity and good fortune be, than his sorrowful and
perverse fortune which is ordained, great reason has his father to rejoice of
such a son, for the excellent fr^it which shall proceed of so worthy a
blossom, and yet there is no perverse fortune that can be so contrary unto
him, to be compared in equality unto that which happened unto his brothren in
their first age, who having now passed all their misfortunes, with more joy and
pleasure do enjoy the time of their prosperity. So shall it be of this fair
Claramante, for that his high and strange birth does not prognosticate any
other thing.

When the wise Artemidoro had concluded these words, it gave great conteatment
unto them all, whereas before the words of the king of Gedrosia did cause in
them great sorrow, thinking that some evil hap and misfortune had been
ordained against that most singular and gracious child, Claramante, but most
especially, the beautiful and exouisite Princess Lindabrides, who scarcely
did shed many tears, as one that did ^ou^ him more then her own parents,
only for the love of that figure that he did represent. And for that it is now
time that the great grief and overmuch sorrow of this precious Princess
should cease, this History does declare what the two wise men Artemidoro, and
Lirgandeo did for to put remedy in the same.

How the fair Lindabrides by art of the two wise men Artimidoro and
Lirgandeo, was enchanted, and the order of her enchantment. Chapter. 48.
NOw says the History, the Emperor Alicandro remaining many days in the
Court of the Emperor Trebatio, was the occasion that the grief of the fair
Princess Lindabrides did every day increase more and more, one way for that
the presence of the very fair and worthy Princes Claridiana did make her
suspect that which her knight (he of the Sun) had determined within his
heart: and an other way, in remembering that in the end the Emperor her Father
would (...) into his country again, and that forseably she must (...) with
him; all the which she could not suffer with patience, neither immagine that it
should be possible for her to depart out of G^ecla (...), ^ that in thinking
hereof, her dolor and grief was such that many times it brought her ^o the
point of death. And for that all this was not hyd from the two wise men
Li^gandeo and Ar^einido^o, and unto the Queen (...) her damsel, many times
having great compassion on this fair Princess, they did determine amongst
themselves to put some remedy in the same, in such sort, that she might not
live in so great sorrow and grief. Being fully persuaded in their
determination, and knowing what afterward would happen and come to (...)
together all those worthy Princes and knights, Ladies, and damsells, in the
imperial palace, the day being very fair, and the Sun clear and bright,
upon a sudden there came over the City a great cloud, that was so black and
dark, that being together they could scarcely see one another, out of the
which proceeded great thunderinges and lightninges that were terrible to
behold, in such sort, that all the whole City trembled as though it would have
sunk, and not one amongst the^ all, he of most courage, but was in great
fear, because they knew not what it should mean. This storm and tempest
endured half an hour, and was so dark as the night, at such time as when the
Moon is in her conjunction, and all those worthy Princes and knights were
together in a mighty quadran, and would not depart from thence, for that they
would not leave that gallant and fair crew of Ladies and Gentlewomen alone,
who was meruailouslie afraid and in great dread of that which they saw. Being
in this sort, and dazeled with the darkness, they saw out of the mighty
windows (which were open) coming toward them in the air, a great burning
fire which did lighten all the earth, and extinguish the darkness, the which
when it drew nigher unto them, they saw that it was two furious dragons that
did throw out all that fire which they did see, at their mouths, noses, and
eyes, and seemed to be infernal devils, that it did surmount y^ noise of
thunder. These two dragons were yoked together, and brought with them a Coch
all of bright and shining Crystal, in the which were set two (...) of the
same Crystal set full of bliew Saphires and Rubies, the one of them was
empty, and in the other was set a Damsel or great beauty, who seemed unto
them all to be the wise Queen ^ulia, and she brought in her hand a little
violl of Glass, full of very fair and clear water.

When these Dragons came unto the windows the which were as though they had
been very wide gates, they entered in thereat, and straight ways put
themselves with their Coch into the midst of the great Quadran, whereat all
y^ were there present received great fear and dread, but in especial the
women, who remained as dead persons. Then the knights seeing the great
perplexity and fearful estate of the women, would have drawn their swords
and made contention against the dragons, but the Queen I^lia who came in the
Coch, said unto them: My Lords and worthy knights, hold your hands a while,
for that you are in security, and you shall understand that I am not come for
any other thing, but to ask and crave a bound of the Princess my Lady and
Mistres. At which words they were all in quiet. Then the Queen descended
down out of the Coch with her Glass violl in her hand, and went unto her
Lady the Princess (who was in great fear of the Dragons) and kneeled down
before her and said as follow^th.

Madame, if any part of my service does deserve any reward at your Highness
hands, let me crave now in recompense of the same, that your Highness will
grant unto me a bowne, the which I will demand. Then the Princess being
greatly amazed to see her in that order, with great curtes^e and gentle grace,
said: I do grant it unto you. The Queen then kissed her hands for the great
courtesy showed unto her, and showing unto her the little Glass violl she had
in her hand, said: The bowne which your Highness has granted unto me is this,
and no other thing, but only y^ you drink up this water which I bring in this
viol, whereby your Highness shall receive no harm nor inconvenience. Of truth
(said the Princess) to do this at thy request is a small recompense, to that
which they service does deserve. And in saying these words she took the violl
of her, and without any more circumstance she drunk up the water, which was
not much, she had not so soon drunk it, but straight ways she forgot her
self, and remembered nothing that ever she had done, the water was of so
merua^lous virtue, and brought from the Fountain of forgetfulness, that
Merlin made in the highest part of the mount Olimpus, there whereas neither
wind nor weather does trouble it, but the air is always clear and calm, of
the which we w^l declar^ more at large in the second part of this History, for
that many learned Hystoriographers do say, that this marvelous Fountain is
situated in another place. When this fair Princess had forgot her self, and
was ^epriued of all remembrance, she straight ways forgot all that was in the
Quadrans, as though she had never seen them, and took the Queen Iulia by the
hand, and went with her to the Christaline Coch, and going into it, they sat
themselves down in the two Chaires, then straight ways the Queen made the
Dragons to mount into the air, for to go forth whereas they entered. The
which being seen of all that noble crew, and thinking that it was some treason
pretended against the Princess, in great have the knight of the Sun and the
worthy Prince Meridian her brother, arose up with their swords drawn in their
hands, and went against the Dragons for to take the fair Princess out of the
Coch, yet were they not able to approach unto them, for that the Dragons ^lung
their tails about them, in such sort, charging the two knights with such
terrible blows, that they made them to recoile backwards with more speed than
they pressed forwards, and before they could recover to assault them a new,
they were out of the window with the Coch, and being out, straight ways
ceased all the tempest of thunderings and lightnings, and the cloud vanished
away, so that the day was as fair and as clear as it was before.

And as these worthy princes did put them^elues at the windows for to see
whether this wonderful Coch was carried, they discovered in the midst of the
mighty Court a piece of work, the straungest to behold that ever was seen,
which was a great Tower four square, and of twenty paces broad every way,
cut out of one stone, of so great cleerenesse and brightness, that it soomed
to be of Diamonds, and upon the top of the Tower there was an exceeding
fair steeple, which shined like unto burnished Steel in the shining Sun,
and was of so great height, that the top could scarce be discerned from the
ground, very strange and the like never before seen, which did declare it to
be a thing never made by humane creatures, and in all the tower there was no
other window nor loope hole, but only the door the which was open, wherein
they might discern the stairs, the which was turning, the steps very
broad and of shining Crystal, and although there were no wi^dowes for to
give light unto the stairs, yet was it so light within by reason of the
brightness of the walls, that it seemed to be more brighter than abroad.
There was at the entry of the door two Images of Brass, as big as Gyantes,
the one on the one side and the other on the other side, and had in their
hands each of them a great Fauchon of f^ne steel, and had them above their
heads ready for to strike them that should give the attempt for to enter in
at the door, and had so furious and fierce semblaunce, that they caused great
fear in all them that did behold them, and above over the door were written
Letters, which seemed to be of gold, which afterward were read by those
worthy Princes, who were meruailouslie amazed in beholding that strange and
wonderful work, and looking for the Coch wherein the fair Princess was
carried, they saw it of so great height, that it was equal with the Clouds,
and within a little while after, in the sight of them all, the two Dragons
descended down out of the air, and lighted upon the T^wer, who jointly with
the Coch consumed into the Tower, and could not any more be seen. Whereat
all that were there present meruailed greatly, and for that they knew not what
it should mean, they requested the two wise men Lyrgandeo and Artemidoro to
tell them, who answered them to nothing, but said: Let us go and read the
writings that are upon the gates, and then afterward they would declare unto
them the whole circumstance of that remains. Then straight ways the two
Emperors with those worthy Princes and knights, descended out of the palace
into the Court, and when they came unto the gates of the tower, they saw in
three parts written in Greek letters, on each side one, and in the midst the
third, which was as follows.

The first said.
This is the disloiall tower, into the which, let none attempt the entry,
except his heart be void of all love, for if he do, you shall understand that
the first Porters will defend the entry.

The second said.
Here within is the precious Princess of the Scitas, who above all other
Ladies in her time does deserve to be Lady of this tower, and shall not go
forth of the ^ame till such time as comes a knight, who with his great force
and strength shall conquer the entry, and mount into the tower, and conclude
this adventure.

And the third said.
He had need of great force and strength that is able to comprehend to see the
great meruailes of this tower.

When that these writings were read, they were all greatly amazed, but the
wise Lyrgandeo seeing them in that dumpe, said.

My Lords, here is nothing to be mused at, but if it be your pleasures that
the fair Princess Lyndabrides shall come forth of this tower, it is
convenient that you prove this adventure, for it is a thing without remedy and
not to be spoken off, that she shall not come forth hereof till such time as
all things be accomplished according as these writings have declared, and
here I do say unto you, that so far as I do (or can) vnders^and by this
adventure, that long time shall pass before any shall come for to finish the
same, although on the part of the Princess there shall no time be lost, for
that she shall go forth out of the Tower according unto nature, of the same
age that she is now of, although she remains there one hundredth years, and
in all this time she shall not want any thing, but of all joy, pleasure, and
pastime, she shall have unto her contentment, for that the Queen Iulia,
(knowing what should happen and come to pass hereafter) for the good will and
service that she did owe unto the Princess her Lady and mistres, did ordain
this adventure, the which will fall out more for her honor and glory.

But when the wise man had concluded his words, it grieved much the Emperor
Alycandro, for that he loved the Princess very much, and doubted whether he
should live so long as to see the delivery of his Daughter. The like care
received the valiant and worthy Prince Meridian her Brother. The like grief
received all the rest of the whole crew that were there present, for that they
loved her very much for her great valor and desert, but in especial it
grieved the knight of the Sun, as of one that to forget her needed the
process of a long time, yea, and the travail unto the mount Olympus, and if
it had not been that there was in his presence his well-beloved and royal
Princess Claridiana, he would have detracted no time, but have been the
first to have given the attempt to prove that adventure of the Tower, but for
that he would not give any suspicion of that which he felt in his heart, he
brideled his affection and desire, till time some other knights went and armed
themselves, and proved the entry of the Tower, as shall be declared unto you
in the next Chapter following.

How the valiant and worthy Princes did prove the adventure of the disloiall
tower, and what happened of the success thereof, Chapter. 49.
WHen the knights began to come forth armed for to prove that adventure of
the disloiall Tower, straight ways the Emperor Trebatio, and all those high
Princes and knights, went and put themselves at the windows of that mighty
palace. The like did the Empress Briana, with the rest of those principal
Ladies and Damselles, for to see what should be done with those knights in y^
attempt of y^ tower. The first knight that came into that Court, was that
valiant and worthy Prince Lyriamandro, brother unto the Empress ^riana, who
was armed with guilt armor set full of rich stones, and alighting from his
horse, with his sword drawn in his hand he went toward the gate of the
tower, without receiving any fear or dread at the furious and fierce
countenance of the two Gyantes, but as one whose amorous effects toward the
fair Princess Rodasilua did make him more courageous and bold. But yet
nothing might be more contrary unto him, as now it happened, than for to see
the secrets of this fair Tower, for that as he would have put his foot
upon the thresholde, before he was within, one of these Images discharged
upon him a terrible blow, with such force, that it astonished him, and
overthrew him to the ground without the gate, that he seemed to be dead.
Whereat they all meruailed greatly, as well at the mighty blow which the
Giant stroke, as to see the Prince in that perplexity, but quickly their
fear that they had of the Prince was quieted, for that so some as they had
pulled off his healme; and gave him air, he came again unto himself, and was
as well as he was before, but having no will to approve the attempt any more,
he withdrew himself.

It was not long after when that his good friend Bargandel came forth into the
place, who as one that loved with all his heart the fair Princess Rodasilua,
did no more in that a^tempt than the prince Li^iamandro, for that at the first
blow of the Image, he was overthrown to the ground, without the gate, so that
it was very well understood by them all (according unto the letters that was
written,) how y^ these two knights were amorous, which was the occasion that
the enterie of the Gate was denied unto them. The like happned unto the worthy
Tartarian Zoilo, and unto the valiant king Sacridoro, and unto other valiant
princes and knights that presumed to be amorous. Whereat they were greatly
amazed, and had much sport and pastime to see how these knights were
overthrown by the two Images.

The first unto whom was granted the entry of the disloiall tower, was unto
the stout knight Flamides, uncle unto the princess Lindaraza, who being clear
of such passions, and never subject unto love, went unto the gate, and entered
in thereat, without receiving any harm of the Giants (as the other did) but
the Images did rather humble themselves in declining their heads, whereat they
all meruailed greatly, but although there was no defense made against him at
the entry of the gate, yet there lacked not them that made resistance against
him for the going up the stairs, for that so soon as he put his foot upon
the first step of the Crystal stairs, very suddenly he felt himself
charged with many thick and strong blows, that it seemed he had twenty
knights upon him. But by reason that he was valiant and of great courage,
he drew out his swoorde, and going up the stairs he laid about him on
every side, striking such terrible blows that it was a gallant thing to
behold, and by his mighty prowess he did win part of the stairs,
although that every step he ascended, it seemed unto him that the resistance
did double, as truth it was, for as he mounted, so much more did the thick and
strong blows ouercharge him.

After this sort when that he had ascended ten stairs, not being able for to
suffer the mortal fury of those unreasonable blows, waxing faint, and his
strength failing him, he came tumbling down the stairs, and as one dead was
thrown out at the gate, but his sheeld remained behind, and was hanged up at
the tenth staire, which was so far as he mounted, and unto that place might
all men see through the walls all that was within, so cleerelie, as though
they had been of Crystal, and there was nothing to hinder their sight, and
so was all the whole stairs afterward so far as any knight did ascend,
and all that did behold the same, received great contentment, and were
wonderfully amazed thereat, for that it was the strangest that ever they had
seen.

Then straight ways came into that mighty Court, the two valiant and worthy
knights, Don Claros and Arcalus, being armed with their bright and rich armor,
and for that they were two knights of a gallant (...) gentle disposition, they
gave great contentment unto all them that did behold them. But the first that
gave the attempt unto this adventure, was Don Claros, who alighting from his
horse, with his sword drawn in his hand, went toward the gates of the tower,
and for that he was void of love, and had not his heart troubled with any
amorous passions, he entered with in the gate, and the Images did bow themselves
unto him, but when he came unto the staiers and began to ascend, he felt
himself charged with many and terrible blows, yet for all that defending
himself and laying about him on every side, he ascended up the stairs, and
although the resistance was great, and the blows increased (at every step he
ascended) double, yet for that he was young, valiant, and of a good courage,
and in spite of them that did defend him, he mounted fiftene stairs, the
which being seen of all that were in the court, they gave him great praise,
and said, (as they had great reason) that he was one of the valiantest
knights in his time. And as he did pursue and strive for to ascend higher, the
resistance was so strong, that spite of his heart he was forced to defend two
stairs of that which he had got, he procured all that ever he could to get
the^ again, but it did profit him little, whereby it was convenient for to
leave the demand, and depart out of the Tower, leaving his shilde at the
fiftenth stayre, so far as he assended. Then straight ways his brother
Arcalus, entered in the demand, and to conclude, he did very well, and with
great travail he ascended so high as his brother Don Cla^os did, but in the
end he was overthrown down the stairs, and his shield remained and was
hanged next unto his brothers, in the same place. Not long after came (...)
that mighty court, two knights, who by their gallant disposition and rich
armor, were known to be the two Princes, Brandizel and Cl^uerindo, who came
for to prove y^ adventure of the Tower. But straight ways as they would have
put their desire in execucion, it did little profit them all that ever they
could do, by reason that the one was in love with the Princess (...), and the
other with the fair Lindaraza, so that with two blows that was struck at
them, they were both overthrown to the earth without any remembrance, and
therefore they returned into the pallas, somewhat abashed, and understood
very well the secret of the disloyal tower. Then the last that came forth
that day, was the valiant ^royan the stout Orist^des, who by the judgment of
all that were there, should by force of arms make a conquest of the stayres,
and assend unto the ^oppe: for that as this History has told you, he was one
of the best knights in all the world, and did well apeare in him the worthy
stock from whence he did proceed, who being alighted from his horse, with his
sword in his hand, went toward the gate of the Tower. And for that he never
knew what love meant, the porters did let him go in, doing their reverence. And
when he was within, he straight ways went up, the stairs with so great
lightness, as though there had been made no resistance against him, but when
that he had assendid so high and came unto the place whereas the other knights
had been, he was put in great trouble and care, for that he thought all the
whole world had been against him, the blows were so many and strong where
with he was charged. But this valiant and courageous Troyan seeing himself in
the presence of so high princes, forced himself all that was possible, and
ascended more higher, laying about him on every side, and it seemed unto him
that he stroke his blows upon armed knights, so that all that ever he did was
for to get unto the top of the stayres. And although they that were without
did see but Oristedes alone, yet did they hear the noise of the great
battle, whose thick and mighty blows did resound thoroughout all that
mighty pallas, as though a thousand knights had combatted together: in this
contempt was Oristedes, and they were all greatly amazed how he could fer so
great travail, and thought verily that he would conclude and make an end of
that adventure. But it fell out otherwise, for that before he came unto the top
of the stairs by four steps, the blows were so many wherewith he was
charged, that he was constrained of very force to lose two steps of those
which he had gotten, and never after could recover them again, but in the end
he tombled down the stairs clean out of all remembrance, and was thrown out
of the gate, but his shield remained and was hanged above all the rest. But
when that he was come again unto him self, he was very sorrowful, for that he
could not conquer the whole stayres, of the Tower.

At this time it waxed late, and night drew on, so that for that day it was
convenient for to give over the (...) of that adventure, so they went al and
unarmed themsel^s, and the Emperor Trebatio with all those high Princes, did
suppe together in the royal pallas, having enough to occupy themselves in
talk of the strange adventure of the Tower, and according unto the conditions
of the same, they thought verily that there was very few to whom was granted
the ascending to the top of those stairs, for that so worthy knights as
there was received the repulse, for the which the Emperor Alycandro did not
let but receive some grief, for that of necessity he must be constrained to
leave there his worthy and well-beloved daughter Lindabrides, yet did he comfort
himself very much, in that she was there in great security, and also of the
words which the wise Lirgandeo had told him (not long before) of her delivery.

The night being past, the next day in the morning came forth the stout and
strong king Brandimardo, for to prove the adventure of the Tower, and did so
much that he lacked but two steps for to conquer the top of the stayres,
and for that he was mighty boned, big and very fat and heavy, when that
he came thither he was with his great travail (for want of exercise) so weary
and faint, that he could not go any whit farther at all but was constrained
to (...) back again, so that he was thrust out at the gate, but his shield
remained above all the rest, with great honor, as to him (that next unto
Bramarant) was the most strongest Pagan that was in all the Pagan countri^. At
this time, the two brethren, the knight of the Sun and Rosicleer would not
prove the adventure, for knowing the condition of the disloyal Tower, they were
f^lly (...) that the entry should be defended unto them, by the Images that
kept the gate, yet for all that in the mean time that all those high Princes
were (...) together, there were many knights that did (...) adventure, of whom
for that they were not so ^rincipall as the other, this History does make no
(...).

(...) that the Emperor Trebatio with all those (...) Princes and worthy
knights, Ladies and damsells that were in Constantinople, went to sport
themselves a hunting into the wilderness of Gre^ia, and what happened therein.
Chap. 50.
ALL the care which the Emperor Trebatio had was, that all those high Princes
and worthy knights that were in his Court, should be well served, and have
great contentment, for herein (as this History has told you) he had the
vauntage of all other that was in his time: and as he did always procure to
seek out new inventions and pastimes for to give them pleasure and
contentment, he determined one day for to carry the^ a hunting into the
wilderness of Grecia, along the Sea side, and to carry in their company the
Empress Briana, and all the rest of the worthy Ladies and Damsells, for that
the place was gallant, fresh and delightful, and great store of game, of
Bear^s, Dear, and other wild beasts. He being fully determined, gave them to
understand ther^f, who when they heard it, they all received great pleasure


