Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY HIS OBSERVATIONS IN HIS TRAVAILES UPON THE STATE OF THE
XVII. PROVINCES AS THEY STOOD ANNO DOM. 1609. The Treaty of Peace being then
on foot

Printed. M.DC.XXVI.

SIR THOMAS OVERBVRY'S OBSERVATIONS IN HIS TRAVELS UPON THE STATE of the 17.
Provinces as they stood Anno Dom. 1609. the Treaty of Peace being then on foot.
And first of the PROVINCES United.
ALL things Concurred for the rising and maintenance of this State* the
Disposition of the people, being, as mutenous, so industrious and frugall; the
Nature of the Country, every where Fortifiable with water, the Situation of
it, having behind them the Baltique Sea, which yields them all materials for
Ships, and many other Commodities, and for Men, hard before them, France, and
England, both fearing the Spanish greatness; and therefore, both Concurring
for their Aid; the remoteness of their Master from them; the Change of
Religion falling out about the time of their Revolt, and now the Marquise of
Brandenburgh, a Protestant, like to become Duke of Cleue. The discontentments
of the Low Countries did first appear, soon after the going away of the Kings
of Spain, while the Duchess of Parma Governed; to suppress which
beginnings, the Duke of Alva being sent, inflamed them more, upon attempting to
bring in the Inquisition and Spanish Decimation, upon the Beheading Count
Horn, and Count Egmont, persecuting those of the Religion, and undertaking to
build Cittadels upon all their Towns, which he effected at Antwerpe, but
enterprising the like at Flushing, that Town revolted first and under it began
the War.

But the more general revolt of the Provinces happened after the Death of Don
Lewis de Requiesens, and upon the coming down of Don John of Austria, when
all the Provinces, excepting Luxenburgh, upon the sack of Antwerpe and other
Insolences, Proclaimed the Spaniards Rebels and Enemies to the King; yet the
abjuring of their obedience from the Crown of Spain was not in a year or two
after.

Holland and Zealand, upon their first standing out, offered the Sovereignty
of themselves to the Queen, then the Protection, both which she neglected,
and that while the French sent greater aid, and more men of quality then we;
but after the Civil War began in France, that kept them busy at home, and
then the Queen, seeing the necessity of their being supported, upon the
pawning of Brill and Flushing, sent Money and Men; And since that, most part of
the great exploits there have been done by the English, who were commonly the
third part of the Army, being four Regiments, besides eleven hundred in
Flushing, and the Ramekins, and five hundred in the Brill. But of late the King
of France appearing more for them then ours, and paying himself the French
that are there, they give equal, if not more Countenance to that Nation. But
upon these two Kings they make their whole dependancie, and though with more
respect to him that is stronger, for the time, yet so as it may give no
distaste unto the other.

For the manner of their Government; They have upon occasion, an assembly of
the general States, like our Parliament, being composed of those which are
sent from every Province, upon summons; and what these Enact stands for Law.
Then is there besides, a Counsel of State, residing for the most part at the
Hage, which attends daily occasions, being rather employed upon affairs of
State then of particular Justice. The most potent in this Counsel was
BARNAVILL, by reason of his Advocates of Holland. And besides both these, every
Province and great Town have particular Counsels of their own. To all which
assemblies, as well of the general States, as the rest, the Gentry is called
for order sake, but the State indeed is Democraticall, the Merchant and the
Tradesman being predominant, the Gentry now but few and poor; and even at the
beginning the Prince of Orange saw it safer to rely upon the Towns then them:
Neither are the Gentry so much engaged in the cause, the people having more
advantages in a free State, they in a Monarchy. Their care in government is
very exact and particular, by reason that every one has an imediate interest
in the State; Such is the equality of Justice, that it renders every man
satisfied; such the public regularity, as a man may see their Laws were made
to guide, not to entrappe; such their exactness in casting the expense of an
Army, as that it shall be equally far from superfluity and want, and as
much order and certainty in their acts of War, as in ours of Peace, teaching
it to be both Civil and rich, And they still retain that sign of a
Commonwealth yet uncorrupted, Private Poverty and public Weal: for no one
private man there is exceeding rich, and few very poor, and no State more
sumptuous in all public things. But the question is; whether this, being a
free State, will as well subsist in Peace, as it has done hitherto in War,
Peace leaving every one to attend his particular wealth, when fear, while the
War lasts, makes them concur for their common safety; And Zealand, upon the
least security, has ever been envious at the predominancie of Holland and
Vtrich, ready to Mutiny for Religion: and besides, it is a doubt, whether the
same care and sincerity would continue, if they were at their Consistence, as
appears yet whiles they are but in rising. The Reuenew of this State arises
chiefly from the Earl of Hollands Demaynes, and Confiscated Church livings,
the rising and falling of Money, which they use with much advantage, their
Fishing upon our Coasts, and those of Norway, Contribution out of the Enemies
Country, Taxes upon all things at home, and Impositions upon all Merchandises
from abroad. Their expenses upon their Ambassadors, their Shippings, their
Ditches, their Rampires and Munition, and commonly they have in pay by Sea and
Land 60000. men.

For the strength; The nature of the Country makes them able to defend
themselves long by land, neither could any thing have endangered them so much
as the last great Frost, had not the Treaty been then on foot, because the
Enemy being then Master of the field, that rendered their Ditches, Marshes, and
Rivers as firm ground.

There belongs to that State 20000. Vessels of all sorts, so that if the
Spaniard were entirely beaten out of those parts, the Kings of France and
England would take as much pains to suppress, as ever they did to raise them:
For being our Enemies, they are able to give us the Law at Sea, and eat us out
of all trade, much more the French, having at this time three Ships for our
one, though none so good as our best.

Now that whereupon the most part of their Reuenew and strength depends, is
their Traffic, in which mystery of State they are at this day the wisest;
for all the Commodities that this part of the world wants, and the Indies have,
as Spice, Silk, Jewels, Gold, they are become the Conueyers of them for the
rest of Christendom, except us, as the Venetians were of old; And all those
Commodities that those Northern Countries abound with, and these Southern
stand in need of, they likewise convey thither, which was the ancient Trade of
the Easterlings: And this they do, having little to export of their own, by
buying of their Neighbour-Countries the former, and selling them again what
they bring back at their own prises, and so consequently live upon the
idleness of others. And to this purpose their Situation serves fitly; for
Rivers of the Rhene, the Maze, and Skeld end all in their Dominions; and the
Baltike Sea lies not far from them: All which afford them whateuer the great
Continent of Germany, Russia, and Poland yields; then they again lying
between Germany and the Sea, do furnish it back with all Commodities
foreign.

To remember some pieces of their Discipline as patterns of the rest; The
Watches at night are never all of one Nation, so that they can hardly concur
to give up any one Town. The Commissaries are no where so strict upon Musters,
and where he finds a Company thither he reduces them, so that when an Army
marches the List and the Poll, are never far disagreeing. Their Army is ever
well Clothed, well Armed, and had never yet occasion to mutiny for Pay or
Victuals. The Soldiers commit no where fewer Insolences upon the Burgers,
fewer Robberies upon the Country, nor the Officers fewer deceipts upon the
Soldiers. And lastly, they provide well that their General shall have small
means to invade their liberties: For first their Army is composed of many
Nations, which have their several Commanders, and the Commands are disposed by
the States themselves, not by the General. And secondly he has never an
implicit Commission left to discretion, but, by reason their Country has no
great bounds, receives daily Commands what to do.

Their Territory contains six entire Provinces, Holland, Zealand, Virick,
Groninghen, Oueriscell, and Ariezland, besides three parts of Gelderland, and
certain Towns in Brabant and Flanders; the ground of which is for the most
part fruitful; the Towns no where so equally beautiful, strong, and rich,
which equality grows by reason that they appropriate some one Staple Commodity
to every Town of note; only Amsterdam not only passes them all, but even
Civil, Lisbone, or any other Mart Town in Christendom, and to it is
appropriated the trade of the East Indies, where they maintain commonly forty
Ships, besides which there go twice a year from it, and the adjoining Towns,
a great Fleet to the Baltique Sea: Upon the fall of Antwerp, that rose rather
then Middleborough, though it stand at the same Rivers mouth, and is their
second Mart town, to which is appropriated our English Cloth.

Concerning the people, they are neither much devout, nor much wicked, given
all to drink, and eminently to no other vice; hard in bargaining, but Just,
surly and respectlesse, as in all Democracies, thirsty, industrious and
cleanly, dishartened upon the least ill success, and insolent upon good;
Inuentiue in Manufactures, cunning in Traffic, and generally for matter of
Action, that natural slownesse of theirs suits better, by reason of the
aduisednesse and perseverance it brings with it, then the rashness and
changeableness of the French and Florentine wits, and the equality of spirits
which is among them and the Swissers, renders them so fit for a Democracie,
which kind of Government, Nations of more stable wits, being once come to a
Consistent greatness, have seldom long endured.

Observations upon the State of the Archdukes Country, 1609.
By Sir THO. OVERBVRY.
AS soon as I entered into the Archdukes Country (which begins after Lillow)
presently I beheld works of a Province, and those of a Province distressed
with War; the people heartlesse, and rather repining against their
Governors, then reuengefull against the Enemies, the bravery of that Gentry
which was left, and the Industry of the Merchant quite decayed; the Husbandman
laboring only to live, without desire to be rich to another use; the Towns
(whatsoever concerned not the strength of them) ruinous; And to conclude, the
people here growing poor with less taxes, then they flourish with on the
States side.

This War has kept the King of Spain busy ever since it began (which some
38. years ago) and spending all the Money that the Indies, and all the Men
that Spain and Italy could afford, has withdrawn him from perseuering in
any other Enterprise; Neither could he give over this, without forgoing the
means to undertake any thing hereafter upon France or England, and
consequently the hope of the Western Monarchy. For without that handle the
Mines of Peru, had done little hurt in these parts, in comparison of what they
have. The cause of the expensefulnes of it, is the remoteness of those
Provinces from Spain, by reason of which, every Soldier of Spain or Italy,
before he can arrive there, costs the King an hundred Crowns, and not above
one of ten that arriues proves good; besides, by reason of the distance, a
great part of the Money is drunk up betwixt the Officers that convey it and
pay it. The cause of the continuance of it, is, not only the strength of the
Enemy, but partly by reason that the Commanders themselves are content the War
shall last, so to maintain and render themselves necessaries, and partly
because the people of those Countries are not so eager to have the other
reduced, as willing to be in the like state themselves.

The usual Reuenew of those Provinces which the Archduke has, amounts to
1200000. Crowns a year, besides which, there come from Spain every Month to
maintain the War, 150000. Crowns. It was at the first 300000. Crowns a
month, but it fell by fifties to this at the time when the Treaty began*
Flanders pays more toward the war then all the rest, as Holland does with
the States. There is no Spaniard of the Counsel of State, nor Governor of any
Province, but of the Counsel of War, which is only active; There they only
are, and have in their hands all the strong Towns and Castles of those
Provinces, of which the Governors have but only the Title.

The Nations of which their Army consists, are chiefly Spaniards and Italians,
emulous one of another there, as on the other side the French and English, and
of the Country, chiefly Burgundians and Wallons. The Popes Letters, and
Spinola's inclination keep the Italians there, almost in equality of Command
with the Spaniard himself.

The Governors for the King of Spain there successively have bin the D. of
Alva, Don Lewis de Requiesens, Don John d'Austria, the Prince of Parma, the
Archduke Ernestus, the Cardinal Andrew of Austrich, and the Cardinal Albert,
till he married the Infanta.

Where the Dominion of the Ach-Duke and the States part, there also changes
the nature of the Country, that is, about Antwerp: For all below being flat,
and betwixt Meadow and Marsh, thence it begins to rise and become Champion, and
consequently the people are more quick and spiritfull, as the Brabanter,
Flemming, and Wallon.

The most remarkable place in that side is Antwerp (which rose upon the fall of
Bruges) equally strong and beautiful, remaining yet so, upon the strength of
its former greatness; twice spoiled by the Spaniard, and the like attempted by
the French. The Cittadell was built there by the D. of Alva, but renewed by the
Prince of Parma after his 18. months besieging it, the Town accepting a
Castle rather then a Garrison to mingle among them. There are yet in the Town
of Citizens 30000. fighting men, 600. of which kept Watch nightly, but they
allowed neither Cannon upon the Rampire, nor Megazins of powder. In the Castle
are 200. pieces of Ordnance, and commonly seven or eight hundred Soldiers.
Flanders is the best of the seventeen Provinces, but the Havens thereof are
naught.

Observations on the State of France, 1609. under Henry the Fourth.
By Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY.
Having seen the form of a Commonwealth and a Province, with the different
effects of Wars in them, I entered France, flourishing with Peace, and of
Monarchies the most absolute, because the King there, not only makes Peace and
Wars, Calls and dissolues Parliaments, Pardons, naturalizeth, Innobleth,
Names the value of Money, Presses to the War; but even makes Laws, and
imposes Taxes at his pleasure: And all this he does alone: for as for that
form that his Edicts must be authorized by the next Court of Parliament, that
is, the next Court of sovereign Justice; first the Presidents thereof are to
be chosen by him, and to be put out by him; and secondly, when they concur
not with the King, he passes any thing without them, as he did the last Edict
for the Protestants: And for the assembly of the three Estates, it is grown
now almost as extraordinary as a general Counsel; with the loss of which
their Liberty fell, and when occasion urges, it is possible for the King to
procure, that all those that shall be sent thither, shall be his Instruments:
for the Duke of Guise effected as much at the assembly of Bloys.

The occasion that first procured the King that Supremacy, that his Edicts
should be Laws, was, the last Invasion of the English, for at that time they
possessing two parts of France, the three Estates could not assemble, whereupon
they did then grant that power unto Charles the Seventh during the War; And
that which made it easy for Lewis the Eleventh and his Successors to continue
the same, the occsion ceasing, was, that the Clergy and Gentry did not run
the same fortune with the people there, as in England; for most of the Taxes
falling only upon the people, the Clergy and Gentry being forborne, were
easily induced to leave them to the Kings mercy. But the King having got
strength upon the Pesants, has been since the bolder to invade part of both
their liberties.

For the succession of this Monarchy, it has subsisted without intermission
these 1200. years, under three Races of Kings. No Nation has heretofore done
greater things abroad in Palestine and Egypt, besides all parts of Europe; but
for these last 400. years, they have only made Sallies into Italy, and often
suffered at home.

Three hundred years the English afflicted them, making two firm Invasions
upon them, and taking their King prisoner; the second greatness of
Christendom, next the Emperor, being then in competition betwixt us and them;
And to secure themselves against us, rather then the House of Austria, as it
then stood, they chose to marry the Heir of Bretaigne before that of Burgundy.
And for this last hundred years, the Spantard undertaking them, has eaten
them out of all but France, and endangered that too. But for this present,
France had never, as France, a more entire greatness, though it has often
been richer. For since the War the King is only got before hand, the Country
is but yet in recovering, the War having lasted by spaces 32. years, and so
generally, that no man but had an Enemy within three miles, and so the
Country became Frontier all over. Now that which has made them, at this time,
so largely great at home, is their adopting into themselves the lesser
adjoining Nations, without destruction, or leaving any mark of strangeness
upon them, as the Bretons, Gascoignes, Provincalls, and others which are not
French; toward the which Unions, their nature, which is easy and harborous to
strangers, has done more then any Laws could have effected, but with long
time.

The King (as I said) enjoying what Lewis the 11. did gain, has the entire
Sovereignty in himself, because he can make the Parliament do what he
please, or else do what he please without them. For the other three Estates;
The Church is there very rich, being estimated to enjoy the third part of the
Reuenew of France, but otherwise nothing so potent as elsewhere, partly
because the Inquisition is not admitted in France, but principally because the
Popes ordinary power is much restrained there, by the Liberties which the
French Church claymeth; Which Liberties do not so much ensranchize the Church
it self, as confer the Authority the Pope loses upon the King, as first
fruits, and the disposing of all Spiritual preferments. And by reason of this
neutralitie of Authority, the Churchmen suffer more there, then either in
England, where they wholly depend upon the King, or in Spain and Italy, where
they wholly subsist by the Pope; because the Pope is not able totally to
support them, and the King takes occasion ever to suppress them, as being not
entirely his Subjects: and to him they pay yearly both the tenth of all their
Tithe, and of all their Temporal land.

The Gentry are the only entire Body there, which participate with the
Prerogatives of the Crown; for from it they receive Privileges above all
other men, and a kind of limited Regality upon their Tenants, besides real
supply to their estates, by Governments and Pensions, and freedom from Tallies
upon their own Lands; that is, upon their Demaines, and whatsoever else they
manure by their Servants; but so much as they let to Tenants is presently
Tallie-able, which causes proportionable abatement in the Rent; and in
recompense of this, they owe to the King the Ban and the Arriereban; that is,
to serve him and his Lieutenant three Months within the Land at their own
Charges. And as in War they undergo the greatest part of the danger, so then
is their power most perremptorie above the rest, whereas in time of Peace, the
King is ready to support inferior persons against them, and is glad to see
them to waste one another by Contention in Law for fear they grow rich,
because he fore-sees, that as the Nobility only can do him service, so they
only misapplyed can do him harm.

The ancient Gentry of France was most of it consumed in the Wars of
Godfrey of Bulloigne, and some in those of Saint Lewis, because upon their
setting out they pawned all their Feifs to the Church, and few of them were
after redeemed; by reason whereof the Church possesses at this day the third
part of the best Feifs in France; and that Gentry was after made up by
Advocates, Financiers, and Merchants innobled, which now are reputed ancient,
and are daily eaten out again and repaired by the same kind of men.

For the people; All those that have any kind of profession or Trade, live
well; but for the mere Peasants that labor the ground, they are only Spunges
to the King, to the Church and the Nobitie, having nothing to their own, but
to the use of them, and are scarce allowed (as Beasts) enough to keep them
able to do service; for besides their Rent, they pay usually two thirds to the
King.

The manner of Government in France, is mixed, betwixt Peace and War, being
composed as well of Military Discipline, as Civil Justice, because having open
Frontiers and strong Neighbors, and therefore obnoxious to sudden Invasions,
they cannot (as in England) join ever Peace and security together.

For the Military part, there is ever a Constable and a Marshall in being,
Troops of Horse and Regiments of Foot in pay, and in all Provinces and places
of strength, Governors and Garrisons distributed, all which are means for the
preferment of the Gentry; But those as they give security against the enemy, so
when there is none they disturb the enjoying of Peace, by making the Countries
taste somewhat of a Province. For the Gentry find a difference betwixt the
Governors favor and disfauor, and the soldiers commit often Insolences upon
the people.

The Governments there are so well disposed by the King, as no Governor has
means to give over a Province into the Enemies hand, the Commands thereof are
so scattered: for the Governor Commands the Country, and for the most part the
chief Town; then is there a Lieutenant, to the King, not to him of the same,
and betwixt these two there is ever Jealousy nourished; then has every Town
and Fortress particular Governors, which are not subalterne to that of the
Province, but hold imediately from the Prince, and many times the town has
one Governor and the Castle another.

The advantages of Governors (besides their pay from the King) are Presents
from the Country, dead pays, making their Megazins of Come and powder more
then they need at the Kings price, and where they stand upon the Sea,
ouerseeing of unlawful goods: Thus much in Peace: In War they are worth as
much as they will exact. Languedoc, is the best, then Bretaigne. Province is
worth by all these means to the D. of Guise 20000. Crowns a year; but
Province only he holds without a Lieutenant.

Concerning the Civil Justice there, it is no where more Corrupt nor
expencefull. The Corruptnesse of it proceeds, first by reason that the King
sells the places of Justice at as high a rate as can be honestly made of them;
so that all thriuing is left to Corruption, and the gain the King has that
ways, tempts him to make a multitude of Officers, which is another burden to
the Subject. Secondly, the Presidents are not bound to judge according to the
written Law, but according to the Equity drawn out of it, which Liberty does
not so much admit Conscience, as leave wit without limits. The expencefulnesse
of it arises from the multitude of Laws, and multiplicitie of forms of
Processes, the which two both beget doubt, and make them long in resolving. And
all this Chiquanerey, as they call it, is brought into France from Rome, upon
the Popes coming to reside at Avignion.

For the strength of France, It is at this day the greatest United force of
Christendom; The particulars in which it consists are these: The shape of the
Country, which being round, no one part is far from succouring another; The
multitude of good Towns and places of strength therein are able to stay an
Army, if not to waste it, as Metz did the Emperors; the mass of Treasure
which the King has in the Bastile; The number of Arsenals distributed upon the
Frontiers, besides that of Paris, all which are full of good Arms and
Artillery: And for ready men, the 5. Regiments bestowed up and down in
Garrisons, together with the 2000. of the Guard; the Troops of ordinary and
light Horse, all ever in pay; besides their Gentry all bred Soldiers, and of
which they think there are at this present 50000. fit to bear Arms: And to
Command all these, they have at this day the best Generals of Christendom,
which is the only commodity the Civil wars did leave them.

The weakness of it are, first the want of a sufficient Infantry, which
proceeds from the ill distribution of their wealth; for the Peysant, which
contains the greatest part of the people, having no share allowed him, is
heartlesse and feeble, and consequently unserviceable for all Military uses, by
reason of which, they are first forced to borrow aid of the Swissers at a
great Charge, and secondly to compose their Armies for the most part of
Gentlemen, which makes the loss of a battle there almost irrecouerable. The
second is the unproportionable part of the land which the Church holds, all
which is likewise dead to Military uses. For, as they say there, The Church
will loose nothing, nor defend nothing. The third is the want of a Competent
number of Ships and Galleys, by reason of which defect, first the Spaniard
ouermasters them upon the Mediterranian, and the English and Hollander upon the
Ocean, and secondly it renders them poor in foreign Trade, so that all the
great actions of Christendom for these fifty years, having been bent upon
the Indies, they only have sat idle. The fourth is the weakness of their
Frontiers, which is so much the more dangerous, because they are possessed, all
but the Ocean, by the Spaniard: for Savoy has been always as his own for
all uses against France. The last is the difference of Religion among
themselves, which will ever yield matter of civil dissension, and consequently
cause the weaker to stand in need of foreign succors. The ordinary Reuenew
of the King, is, as they say now, some 14. Millions of Crowns, which arise
principally from the Demaines of the Crown, the gabell of Salt, tallies upon
the Country, Customs upon the Merchandise, sale of Offices, the yearly Tithe
of all that belongs to the Church, the rising and falling of Money. Fines and
Confiscations cast upon him by the Law; but as for Wardships, they are only
known in Normandy. His expense is chiefly Ambassadors, Munition, Building,
Fortifying, and maintaining of Galleys. As for Ships when he needs them, he
makes an Embarque; In Pay for Soldiers, Wages for Officers, Pentions at home
and abroad, upon the entertaining his House, his State, and his private
pleasures. And all the first, but the Demaynes were granted, in the beginning,
upon some urgent occasion, and after by Kings made perpetual, the occasion
ceasing; and the Demaynes it self granted, because the King should live upon
their own without oppressing their Subjects. But at this day, though the
Reuenew be thus great, and the taxes unsupportable, yet do they little more
then serve for necessary public uses. For the King of Spains greatness and
Neighborhood, forces the King there to live continually upon his Guard; and
the treasure which the Spaniard receives from his Indies, constraines him to
raise his Reuenew thus by Taxes, so to be able in some proportion to bear up
against him, for fear else he should be bought out of all his Confederates and
servants.

For the Relation of this State to others, It is first to be considered, that
this part of Christendom is balanced betwixt the three Kings of Spain,
France, and England, as the other part betwixt the Russian, the Kings of
Poland, Sweden, and Denmark. For as for Germany, which if it were entirely
subject to one Monarchy, would be terrible to all the rest, so being divided
betwixt so many Princes, and those of so equal power, it serves only to
balance it self, and entertain easy War with the Turk, while the Persian
withholds him in a greater. And every one of those first three, has his
particular strength, and his particular weakness: Spain has the advantage
of both the rest in Treasure, but is defective in Men, his Dominions are
scattered, and the conueyance of his Treasure from the Indies lies obnoxious to
the power of any Nation that is stronger by Sea. France abounds with Men, lies
close together, and has Money sufficiently. England being an Island, is hard
to be Invaded, abounds with Men, but wants Money to employ them. For their
particular weakness: Spain is to be kept busy in the Low Countries: France
is to be afflicted with Protestants, and England in Ireland. England is not
able to subsist against any of the other hand to hand, but joined with the
Lowe-Countries it can give Law to both by Sea, and joined with either of them
two it is able to oppress the third as Henry the Eight did.

Now the only entire body in Christendom that makes head against the Spanish
Monarchy, is France; and therefore they say in France, that the day of the
ruin of France, is the Eve of the ruin of England: And thereupon England has
ever since the Spanish greatness, inclined rather to maintain France rather
then to ruin it; as when King Francis was taken prisoner, the King of England
lent Money toward the payment of his Ransom: And the late Queen (when the
Leagers, after the Duke of Guise his death, had a design to Cantonize France)
though offered a part, would not consent. So then this reason of State, of
mutual preservation, conioyning them, England may be accounted a sure
Confederate of France, and Holland by reason it partly subsists by it; the
Protestant Princes of Germany, because they have Countenance from it against
the house of Austria, the Protestant Swissers for Religion and Money; the
Venetians for protection against the Spaniard in Italy: So that all their
friends are either Protestants or enclyning, and whosoever is extreme
Catholic, is their enemy, and Factors for the Spanish Monarchy, as the Pope,
the Cardinals for the most part, and totally the Jesuits, the Catholic
Princes of Germany, and the Catholics of England and Ireland. For the
Jesuits, which are the Ecclesiastical strength of Christendom, France,
notwithstanding the many late Obligations, has cause to despair of them: for
they intending, as one Pope, so one King, to suppress the Protestants, and for
the better support of Christendom against the Turk, and seeing Spain the
likelier to bring this to pass, they follow the nearer probability of
effecting their end.

No addition could make France so dangerous to us, as that of our
Lowe-Countries: for so it were worse then if the Spaniard himself had them
entirely. As for their hopes of regaining Italy, it concerns the Spaniard
immediately rather then us.

Concerning the state of the Protestants in France, during Peace they are
protected by their Edict: For their two Agents at Court defend the General
from wrong, and their Chambresimpartyes every particular person: And if
troubles should arise, some scattered particulars might be in danger, but the
maine body is safe, safe to defend themselves, though all France join against
them, and if it break out into Factions, the safest, because they are both
ready and united.

The particulars of their strength are, first their Towns of surety, two of
which command the River of Loyre.

Secondly, their Situation, the greatest part of them lying near together, as
Poictou, Zanningtonge, High Gascoigne, Languedoc, and Daulphin, near the Sea,
so consequently fit to receive succors from abroad, and remote from Paris, so
that the quality of an Army is much wasted before it can approach them.

The third, is the sufficiency of their present Governors, Bulloigne and
Desdeguiers, and other second Commanders. And for the Princes of the Blood,
whom the rest may, in show, without emulation obey, when they come once to open
action, those which want a party will quickly seek them.

The last, is the aid they are sure of from foreign Princes: For whosoever
are friends to France in general, are more particularly their friends.

And besides, the Protestant party being grown stronger of late, as the
Low Countries, and more united, as England and Scotland, part of that strength
reflects upon them; and even the King of Spain himself, which is Enemy to
France in general, would rather give them succor, then see them utterly
extirpated: And yet no Foreign Prince can ever make further use of them, then
to disturb France, not to invade it himself. For as soon as they get an
Edict with better Conditions, they turn head against him that now succored
them, as they did against us, at New Haven.

Concerning the proportion of their number, they are not above the seventeen
or eighteenth part of the people, but of the Gentlemen there are 6000. of the
Religion; but since the Peace they have increased in people, as principally in
Paris, Normandy, and Daulphin, but lost in the Gentry, which loss comes to
pass, by reason that the King when he finds any Gent. that will but hearken,
tempts him with preferment, and those he finds utterly obstinate, suppresseth:
And by such means he has done them more harm in Peace, then both his
Predecessors in War. For in all their assemblies he corrupts some of their
Ministers to betray their Counsel in hand; and of the 100 and 6000. Crowns a
year, which he paies the Protestants to entertain their Ministers, and pay
their Garrisons, he has gotten the bestowing of 16000. of them upon what
Gentleman of the Religion he pleases, when by that means he moderates, if not
gains: and besides, they were wont to impose upon him their two Deputies which
are to stay at Court, but now he makes them propose six, out of which he
chooses the two, and by that obliges those; and yet notwithstanding all this,
in some occasions he makes good use of them too. For as toward England he
places none in any place of strength but firm Catholics; so toward Spain
and Sauoy he often gives charge to Protestants, as to la Force in Bearne,
Desdeguiers and Boisse in Bresse.

Concerning the King himself, he is a person wonderful both in War and
Peace: for his Acts in War, he has manumized France from the Spaniard, and
subdued the League, being the most dangerous plot that has bin laid, weakening
it by Arms, but utterly dissoluing it by wit, that is, by letting the Duke of
Guise out of Prison, and Capitulating with the heads of it every one a part, by
which means he has yet left a continual hatred among them, because every
one sought, by preventing other, to make his Conditions the better; so that now
there remains little connection of it amongst the Gentry, only there
continues some dregs still among the Priests, and consequently the people,
especially when they are angered with the increase and prosperity of the
Protestants.

For his Acts of Peace, he has enriched France with a greater proportion of
Wool, and Silk, erected goodly Buildings, cut Passages betwixt River and
River, and is about to do the same betwixt Sea and Sea, redeemed much of the
Mortgaged Demaynes of the Crown, better husbanded the Money, which was wont to
be drunk up two parts of it in the Officers hands, got aforehand in
Treasure, Arms and Munition, increased the Infantrie, and suppressed the
unproportionable Caualry, and left nothing undone but the building of a Navy.

And all this may be attributed to himself only, because in a Monarchy,
Officers are accordingly active or careless, as the Prince is able to Judge
and distinguish of their labors, and withal to participate of them somewhat
himself.

Sure it is that the Peace of France, and somewhat that of Christendom it
self, is secured by this Princes life: For all Titles and Discontents, all
factions of Religion there suppress themselves till his Death; but what will
ensue after; what the rest of the House of Bourbon will enterprise upon the
Kings Children, what the House of Guise upon the House of Bourbon, what the
League, what the Protestants, what the Kings of Spain, and England, if they
see a breach made by civil Dissension, I choose rather to expect then
Conjecture, because God has so many ways to turn aside from human
foresight, as he gave us a testimony upon the Death of our late Queen.

The Country of France, considering the quantity, is the fairest and richest
of all Christendom, and contains in it most of the Countries adjoining. For
Picardie, Normandy, and Bretaigne, resemble England; Languedoc, Spain,
Province, Italy, and the rest is France.

Besides, all the Rivers that pass through it, end in it. It abounds with
Corn, Wine, and Salt, and has a Competency of Silk; but is defective in
Wool, Leather, Metals, and Horses; and has but few very good Havens,
especially on the North side.

Concerning the People; Their Children at first sight seem Men, and their Men
Children, but who so, in negotiating, presumes upon appearance, shall be
deceived, Compassionate toward their own Nation and Country; loving to the
Prince, and so they may have liberty in Ceremony, and free access to him, they
will be the better content that he shall be absolute in matter of substance;
impatient of Peace any longer then whiles they are in recovering the ruins of
War; the presentnesse of danger inflames their courage, but any expectation
makes it languish; for the most, they are all Imagination, and no Judgment,
but those that prove solid, excel; Their Gentlemen are all good outward men,
good Courtiers, good Soldiers, and knowing enough in Men and business, but
merely ignorant in matters of Letters, because at fifteen they quit books,
and begin to live in the world, when indeed a mediocritie betwixt their form
of education and ours would do better then either. No men stand more
punctually upon their Honors in matter of Valor, and which is strange, in
nothing else; for otherwise in their Conversation, the Custom and shifting and
ouerspeaking, has quite overcome the shame of it.

FINIS.

