How and whither a Christen man ought to fly the horrible plage of the
pestilence. A Sermon out of the Psalm. Qui habitat in adsutorio altissimi.

By Andrewe Osiander.

Translated out of hye Almayn in to English.

1537.

A Sermon out of the Psalm, Qui habitat. etc. how and unto what place a
Christen man ought to fly the horrible plage of the pestilence.
FOr as much as Almighty God does vyset, handle and punysh the contry and
region with the horrible and fearful plage of the pestilence, and many folks
(after an unmannerly fashion) are so afraid thereof, that there be herd and seen
of them al manner of vncostumable words and works, which become not well a
Christen man: And seeing that all the deeds of charity which one Christian man
is bound to show unto another (no less then unto Christ himself,) are
perlously omytted, whereby then ryseth all manner of sklau^der to the weak, and
mysreporte unto the holy Gospel: I thought it profitable and necessary to
bestow upon your charity in this case a short instruccyon and comfort out
of the holy scripture, to the intent that the ignorant may be taught, the
weak strengthed, and every one counseled after his calling to serve his
neighbor. And I will take for me the.xci. Psalm, which sou^deth after this
mane:

Who so sytteth under the defense of the highest, and abides under the shadow
of the Almyghtye.

He says unto the LORD: My hope, and my strong hold: my God on whom I
trust.

For he delyuereth me from the snare of the hunter, and from ye noy some
pestilence.

He shall cover the with his feathers, and thy trust shall be under his wings:
his truth is spear and shylde.

So that thou nedest not to fear for the horriblenesse of the night, for the
arowes that fly by day time.

For the pestilence that comes preuely in the dark: for the syckenesse that
destroys in the noone day.

Though a thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousa^de at thy right hand, yet
shall it not come nigh the.

Ye with thine eyes shalt thou se thy desire, and behold, how the ungodly
shall be rewarded.

But before we come to the understanding of these comfortable words, your
charity shall first know that it is not my meaning to forbid or inhibite any
man to fly or to use phisycke, or to avoid dangerous and sick places in
these fearful airs, so far as a man does not therein against the belefe, nor
gods commandment, nor against his calling, nor against ye love of his
neighbor. For though some will say: Such plage touches no man, but those
that be ordained of God thereunto, like as there be certain ensamples thereof
found in the holy scripture* Namely, how ye Ezech. 9. and Apoca. vii. there was
sent an angel, which aforeha^de marked ye virtuous and elect, or ever it was
charged and commanded ye second angel to smite with pestilence or other
plages) those yt were not marked. Nevertheless against that it might be said:
Good sir, though it went so at such a time in such places, who makes us
sure yet now, that it shall therefore chance so in all other deaths of the
country? Therefore will I now at this time let all such things continue in
their worthynesse and fre, like as all other natural things, which be
subject and committed unto our reason to rule. But as for the christen,
which (by reason of office, or for pouerte sake, or for other reasonable
causes) can not, or be not minded to fly, I will here withal show them their
best and highest comfort that they have.

In like manner, I will not enter against them, that speak naturally thereof,
and say: Such plage comes out of the influence of the stars, out of ye
workynge of the Cometes, out of ye unseasonable wether and altering of the
air, out of the Southe wyndes, out of stynkynge waters, or out of foul mystes
of the ground: For such wisdom of theyrs will we leave unto them vndespysed,
and not fight there against: But (as Christen men) we will hold us unto the
word of God, the same will we suffer to be our most hye wisdom, and give
credence unto it, and follow it: and so shall we find much better and surer
instruccion: Namely, that this horrible plage of the pestilence comes out of
Gods wrath, because of the despysynge and transgressynge of his godly
commandments. For thus says the holy prophet Moses in the fyft book,
the.xxviii. Chapter:

If thou wylt not harken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and
keep all his commandments and ordynaunces which I command the, then shall
all these curses come upon the. etc. And it follows: The LORD shall cause
the pestilence to endure long with the: the LORD shall smite the with
swellyng, fever, heat, burning, blastynge, drouth. etc. and shall persecute
the till he utterly destroy the, and bring ye to naught.

And certainly this is the plain truth and the very original of these plages.
No man ought to doubt thereon. For though the foresaid natural causes do
somewhat also thereto, yet is it sure and undoubted, that the same causes be sent
and stered up out of Gods wrath for our sin and unthankfulness. And truly
that it is even so, the holy scripture declares, not with bare words only,
but shows it also with notable ensamples. For in the fourth book of Moses the
fourtenth Chapter, when all the spies (except Joshua and Caleb) spoke evil of
the land of promise, and made the people impatient and vprourysh, so that they
chose the^ a captain, and thought to go again in to Egipte, and to stone
Moses and Aaron, (which commanded them the contrary) we read thus: Then
appeared the glory of the Lord, and spoke unto Moses* How long does this
people blaspheme me? And how long will they not believe me, for all the tokens
that I have done upon them? there fore will I smite and destroy them with
pestilence, and make of the a grater nation the^ this.

Likewise also when David caused the people to be nombred against Gods
commandment, he displeased the Lord God horribly therewith. Therefore laid he
the punishment upon him, so that he was feign to chose himself whether he
had rather have seven years derth, or three months myschaunce in battayll,
or three days pestilence in the land. And when he chose the pestilence, there
dyed in three days seuentye thousand men, as it is written in the last
Chapter of the.ii. book of Samuel.

Seeing then yt out of the word of God we know the very cause of this horrible
plage: Namely, that it is the defaute of our sins, as unbelief, disobedience
and vntha^kfulnesse. Therefore before all things it shall be necessary, that we
refrain from the same, repent, and amend our lives. If we will else be
preserved and delivered from this horrible plage. For if God punysh us because
of sin, it is good to consider that we must first knowledge and eschew our
sins, in case that he shall withdraw and take away his wrath and punishment
from us. For if we continue in our evil sinful and culpable life, certainly
he shall not cease with ye punishment, but go forth more and more, till he give
and recompense according to our works. But if we knowledge our sin, refrain
from it, repent and axe grace, the^ shall he also take away his wrath. And this
horrible wrath (with other heavy burdens as war and derth that lie upon our
neck) shall he mercyfully take away from us again. As holy Paull says.i.
Cor. xi. If we judged our selves, we should not be judged: But when we are
judged, we be chastened of the Lord, that we should not be damned with the
world.

And out of all this may your charity well perceive, how unwisely and
vnchristenly they do, yt out of inordinate fear, of this plage leave their
calling and office, maliciously wythdrawyng the love, help, and
faythfulnesse, which they (out of gods commandment) are bound to show unto
their neghbours, and so do sin grievously against the commandment of God.
For certainly they do but stere up the wrath of God more earnestly against
themselves, that he may the sooner take hold upon them and pluck them away
with this plage. For men may hear on every side, that some do shone and fly
not only the syck, but also the whole: Ye (that yet more foolyshe is) even
the platters and candelstyckes which come out of strange houses, as though
death did surely styck therein. And (out of such fond chyldyshe fear) it
comes, that not only some syck folks be suffered to dye away with out all
keeping, help and comfort, but the women also great with child be forsaken
in their need, or else comes there utterly no man unto them: Ye a man may
hear also, that the children forsake their fathers and mothers, and one
household body keeps himself away from another, and shows no love unto him:
Which nevertheless he would be glad to se showed unto himself, if he lay in
like necessite.

Howbeyt I suppose there come not many such chaunches to pass, nevertheless I
must speak thereof that it be done no more from henceforth. For certainly it is
unwisely and vnchristenly handled: and we need not think that the same is the
way to escape this plage, but rather an occasion that it raygneth the more
myghtely over us. For seeing it is sure (as ye have herd before) that such
plage is sent for punishment of our sins, and Christ has given us a new
commandment that we should love one another (as he has loved us) it
follows, that the farther we depart from the love of our neighbor, the mor
we lade sin upon us, and deserve this plage but the more. Again the more
diligently that we take heed unto the love of our neighbor, the surer shall
we be from this plage: No man needs to doubt thereof.

But here withal will I also counsel or compel no man, to any vnnedeful
danger, (that he is not bound unto by his calling nor by love) but only
warn those, which for fear leave that which they are bound to do before
God: To the intent that for such naked fears sake, they do not transgress nor
omytte the commandment of God, and hope by sin to escape this plage, which
nevertheless comes because of sin. For that were a foolysh unadvised
counsel, if one would go about to escape the wrath of God by transgressio^,
and by sin to avoid the punishment of sin.

Besides this, does experience show also that they which be so sore afraid,
do co^munly miscary. Again, they that wait upon their offices and serve their
neghbours, be delivered: As it is well seen in ye ministers of the church and
other mo, that shone not the syck, but must vyset and comfort them with Gods
word, and provide for them with the holy sacrament: For we se no where, that
they therefore must also be soon syck and must dye. Ye how must the higher
powers of the world do, which (by reason of their calling, and for the
common profyt and regimentes sake) abide also in the ioperdy, and must
mynistre because of love? Specially the chefest, on one whereof there lies more,
then on a thousand of other? And yet does God co^munly preserve them also that
they be delivered, left still on live, and dye in a good quyete age.

Therefore certainly such inordinate fear and flyenge against Gods
commandment is nothing else, but a declaryng of a great and sore unbelief,
that men do not believe and trust in God, that he can and will deliver. And thus
is verified the saying: The ungodly have no peace. Esa. lvii. For if we will
fear and fly where no parell is, when will we then bestow our lives for
our neghbours, as Christ has done for us? and we also be bound to do
likewise.i. Io. iii.

Who so now desires to escape ye wrath of God and this horrible plage, let him
not axe his own reason how he shall do, but believe and follow ye word of God:
which teaches him, not to fly euel air and infecte places (which he may
well do: nevertheless he remains yet uncertain whether it helps or no) but
it teaches him to leave of from sin, as from the very original cause of
this plage and punishment, and (by true repentance and amendeme^t of living)
to walk again in the right way. For yt is the only sure and wholesome flyenge
in this dangerous time, whereby a man may escape this plage. also and defense
of God, is set forth unto us every where in the scripture, as an ouershadowynge
and coueryng with wings. For like as ye two Cherubins spread out their wings
over the Arc Exodi. xxxvii. Even so does God sprede out the wings of his
protection over his elect. Therefore says Moses Deutero. xxxii. Like as an
Aegle stereth up his nest, and flies over his young ones: so spredde he out
his feathers, and bare his people upon his wings. After this manner spoke the
holy angel Gabriell also unto the most blessed and pure virgyn Mary, when she
should be the mother of God: The holy ghost shall come upon the, and the power
of the highest shall ouershadowe the. Luc. i. In like manner spoke Christ also
unto Jerusalem* How often would I have gathered thy children together, as an
hen gathers her chekens under her wings, and ye would not? Mat. xxiii For
though a true beleuyng man be in deed the temple of god, and god dwells in
him yet uses ye scriptur often to speak thereof, as though he did fly above us
(in as much as he does ouershadowe, cover and defend us) and that because ye
heaven and the heaven of all heavens (as Solomon says) can not co^prehende
nor co^teyn hi^.iii. Reg.iii. But though he dwells in us, yet flies he wide,
hye and low, not only on the outsyde of us, but also on the outsyde and over
all creatures. And so in all these words there is nothing else said, but: who
so ever is a right beleuynge Christen.

Mark now then that he says not: Who so is wise, strong, rich, whole, or
well frended. Nether says he also: who so keeps himself thence, or flies
thither, holds himself well, or uses good phisycke, but who so puts his
trust in God. Not that the foresaid good things be evil, or may not be had
or used with profit: But that they (where faith is not) may even as soon do
harm as good, are in no wise able to deliver from the wrath of God. But what
does the beleuer: He says unto the Lord: my hope. But this do not ye ungodly
and unbelievers, but set their hope in the forsaid points, put their trust in
them, and boast thereon, and so commyt spiritual whoredom therewith, and make
ydols thereof. But to God do not they lift up their eyes, another think they
upon him, nor fear him. And when he comes then with his wrath, and
ouertaketh them with a plage, so yt of necessite they must needs think upon
him, then fear they, and be afraid of him, fly away and know not where to
abide: Then vanysheth away their hope and boastynge, which they (in time of
prosperity) had unto the creatures. And so comes it to pass, that their
wisdom has been plain foolyshnesse: their strength, their own mysfortune:
their riches, their own destruction: their health their own harm: their
fre^des their own ypocrytes and traitors. And al y^ which they trusted unto,
can not help the^. When they would hyde themselves on the backsyde thereof, it
is even as much as when one hydeth him behind a ladder. And wha^ they would
seek help thereby, it is even like as if a wolf should defend a sheep or a
goose

But thus goes it not with the beleuer: for who so puts his trust in ye
Lord, shall not be confounded. Therefore says he not only that the Lord is
his hope, but also his strong hold, which he may fly unto, in the which he
may shut himself close, and be delivered therein. As Solomon says in
the.xviii. Chapter of the proverbs: The name of the Lord is a strong castle,
the ryghteous flies unto it, and shall be defended. For the unbelievers have
their hope even in their goods, but in necessyte they find no refuge, as the
faithful has a strong hold and hye castle in God the Lord.

And though the unbelievers have their whole will all their life long, yet has
it an evil end, as it had with the rych man, which was buried in the hell.
Luce. xvi. For who so believes not, shall be damned. Again, though the faithful
be plaged and persecuted all his life long, so that he can not se how he may
be delivered, yet has he this comfort, that the Lord is his God: that is
that he can help and deliver him as an almighty Lord, ye after such a
fashion and way, as another he himself nor any man's reason can think or
deuyse. And though he do it not, yet does not the faithful despair, but
lets the Lord be his God, on whom he hops: that is, at whose hand he
looks for all good in the life for to come and everlasting. For hope seyth
and looks on that which is to come, which as yet is hyd. As Paul says Roma.
the.viii. Chapter. Hope that is seen, is no hope: for how can a man hope that
which is seen. But if we hope that which we se not, we look for it by patience.

And so is this meaning: The unbelievers have their hope in the creatures, and
are afraid of God. The faithful has his hope to God, and is lord over the
creatures. The unbelievers myscary, and by the creatures find they no help in
need. The faithful myscary not, but God is unto the^ a strong hold. The
unbelievers may well have their wylles aslonge as they live, but at the last
(through their despair) there follows everlasting damnacyon. The faithful
may their life long have disquyetnes and temtacion, but at the last (through
their hope) there follows everlasting life.

Such hope should they have, and they have it in deed, that though they must
lie under aslonge as they live, yet after death they shall enherete
everlasting life. But certainly it comes not to pass, that they must always
lie under: For God is faithful, and suffers not his to be temted above their
strength, but makes the temtacion so to have an end, that we may bear it.i.
Cor. x. Therefore says the prophet moreover: For he delyuereth me from ye
snare of the hunter, and from ye noisome pestilence And in these words does he
shortly show unto us, that almighty God can and will deliver his own from all
mysfortune ye even in this life. For all the myschaunces that we be troubled
wythall in this temporal life, are of two sorts: Some come out of the wicked
deuyce of the deuell and of men, as shame and persecucion: Some plainly of
nature and out of the ordinance of God, as tempest and pestilence. The
faithful now believes and makes his boast, that these myschaunces can not be
so great and mighty, but God shall deliver him there from.

And it is a goodly natural similitude, that he lykeneth the evil wicked
deuyce of the ungodly against the faithful, to a net or snare of the hunter.
For like as an hunter proves the kind and nature of every wild beast,
comes privily after him, seeks out the course and habitacion thereof, and
afterward sets the net, that he may drive it therein: Even so do the
ungodly also unto the ryghteous: First, they look how they be minded. If any
one be fre of langage, then set they him on fire, that he may speak somewhat
sharply, as saint Steven did. Actu. the.vii. Chapter. If he be gentle and
friendly, then ymagen they some foolyshe thing upon him, and flatter away his
heart from him as Dalila did unto Samson. If he seek the salvation of the
people, then sklaunder they him, as ye Jews blasphemed Christ to be a
wynesupper and a companyon of publicans. If he be simple, then lie they upon
him behind his back, or ever he be ware thereof: Then follow they upon him,
cry, lie, and complain, that the virtuous Christen man woteth not what point
to be at, or how he has deserved it. Nevertheless they think the bell is so
cast, yt at the last it must ring as they will, but it fails them.

For the Lord on whom we believe, which is our hope, refuge and God, can not
only preserve us from their snares that we fall not therein, but also when we
fall in to them, and they think we be their captives he can and will deliver
us yet therout. In like manner does God the Lord preserve his faithful, not
only from the noisome sycknesse of the pestilence, but also when they be taken
therwyth and infecte already he delyuereth them from it and makes the^ whole
again. But how that comes to pass, and how we shall understand it, it
shall follow here after more clearly.

This is now well to be marked also, that the pestilence is a noisome
sycknesse, not because it brings death (for that do al other mortal
sycknesses likewise, and death is no loss unto the faithful, but auau^tage,
as Paul says, Philip. the first Chapter) but because that it takes away
the people very suddenly unlooked for and unawares: Wherout the^ there follows,
strife, lawyng or busynes among sinners and of the comune wealth, as every man
by himself can lightly perceive and understand. Therefore is it also an
horrible punishment over the sin of the world, which concerns both them
that dye, and them that are left alive, as hereafter it shall follow.

Where as is now such a faith as gives credence unto God, he shall preserve
him from all wicked ymaginacions of me^, likewise from all noisome syckenesses.
And at the last shall he save him, that continues not without fruit, but
breaks out with right love and faythfulnesse toward his neighbor, and
desires also to bring him unto that point, that he may believe and be
partaker of all such goods and benefits of God. Therefore does the prophet
turn his words now also unto his neighbor, and says farthermore:

He shall cover the with his feathers, and thine hope shall be under his wings.
That is: If thou also wylt put thy trust in him, thou shalt find it so
likewise. For he shows such his benefits unto all and every one that put
their trust in him. As for the covering of his feathers and hope under his
wings, your charity has herd enough before what it is.

Now though all faithful look for such help at God, and it happens unto
them, yet is it not done without a specyal battayl of faith. For such help
does he promise us in his holy word, that we should believe it. And if we
believe it, it happens unto us according to our faith. Therefore says the
prophet moreover: his truth is spear and shylde. That is, his godly promyses,
which are sure and true, and another lie nor deceive: Those be our wapens
wherwyth we fight, and overcome al aduersyte. But like as spear and shylde are
not profitable unto him that can not use them, nor will: Even so also do not
the promyses of God profit him, that can not fight therewith, and will not
believe thereon. For that is the right science in this battayll when mysfortune,
aduersite or tentacio^ comes, that we look about us according unto Gods
word: Namely what comfort and promise he has made unto us in such a case, and
with a right belefe to take hold of the same as of a shylde, and to comfort
and defend our selves therwyth, so can there no mischaunce do us harm, as the
holy Saint Paul in the last chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians
teaches and says: Before all things take the shylde of faith wherwyth ye
may quench all the fyrie darts of the wicked.

Against the same (namelye against Satan our head enemy) is such word of
God, even the right spear, wherewith we wound and overcome him. For no bodily
wapen hurts and hyndreth men so sore, as the word of God stops and
hyndreth Satan. If it be thrust under his nose against his venymous dealing
and temtation. For if a servant (that deals wrongeously and vnthriftely in
his masters goods and businesses) be afraid, vexed, and persed through the
heart, when a simple man sayethe unto him: Thou unthrift why do thou so. That
is not thy masters will and meaning, he did not so command me. How much
more goes it through Satan's heart, when a virtuous Christen man holds the
word of God under his eyes, and brings witness over him, that he as a
wicked creature handles against his maker, and against his chosen children?
Therefore does holy saint Paul call Gods word also the swearde of the
sprete: And the Lord Christ defends himself only with the same against
all tentacions of Satan in the wilderness.

Now when thou take hold thus of Gods promyses through faith, and use the^
for spear and shylde to defend thy self, and to smite Satan, then out of the
same it follows as the prophet says farther:

That thou nedest not to fear for the horriblenesse of the night.

For the arowes that fly in ye day time.

For the pestilence that comes privily in the dark.

For the sickness that destroys in the noone day.

For these four aduersites set forward and shorten the life of the
unbelievers: But the faithful has such consolacion and promise, that he needs
not to be afraid. First for the horriblenesse of the night. That is, for all
manner of tentacion and deceate, that happen unto men by night in the darkness.
For this we all perceive, that in the night and in the darkness we are weaker
minded, of more despare, and more afraid them in the light. The blood runs
to our hearts, and the heeres stand vpryght, and all the body waxes cold for
fear. Out of this comes it then, that we think we se, hear and perceive
somewhat, which in very deed is not so. Then goes there one astray, another
leseth his color, the thyroe falls syck, the fourth is become crocked, the
fyfthe goes out of his wit. And so men think, that the deuell has done it,
where as it is yet a plain natural workynge of the exceadynge great fear,
which would destroy a man even by day time, if it were so great. Howbeyt
true it is that the deuell causes such fear, and prynteth it in, that he may
begyle and destroy us by fear as by a natural workynge. Yet is it nothing
but a fear: for the prophet calls it not an euel or good sprete, but planely
the horriblenesse of ye night. Another is it any thing else also but an horror
and fear, and continues an horror and fear.

Therefore where a right belefe is, there is no fear. Where no fearfulness is,
there is also no horror, nor fantasy of spretes, or deceatfulnesse of the
night, but plain courage and boldness. If onye thing else be seen (as fire or
light) they be but natural things, out of the heat of the ground, like as
lyghtenynges, draggons, falling stars and cometes be in the air and in the
heaven. But herewithall will not I speak against the wonderful visions and
tokens, which god sends for a warnyng before great my schaunces to come.

Secondarely, is the faithful sure for the arowes that fly in the day time.
That is all manner of mischaunces which overtake a man openly in the day: and
yet so suddenly and unawares, that he can not escape them. As when a tyle falls
from the roof of an house, when a wicked beast does evil, or when an
ungracious person does hurt in body, name or good. For such misfortunes come
for the most part so suddenly, that a man can not preuente them, but must let
them hit as with an arowe, and afterward restore and heal the harm with
great travail and labor. But now will God preserve his faithful from
such misfortune, if they have his promyses before their eyes, believe thereon,
and order their lives thereafter.

Thyrdly, a faithful person needs not also to be afraid for the pestilence,
that slippeth in preuely in the dark. This is verily a confortable promise in
this dangerous time, for the which we should by right put our trust in God,
and thank him therefore for as much as it is one of the most perlous and
horrible plages, wherwyth he visyteth and punysheth the sin of the world.
For it takes hold of life unawares, and plucketh a man away in two or three
days (or ever he can order his business and house, and make his testament)
crepeth in preuely in ye dark so that no man knows what it is, or whence it
comes, or whyther it goes, therefore can ran no man keep himself surely from
it: For if it were in meat or drynk, it might be eschued: If it were an euel
taist, it might be expelled with a sweet sauoure: If it were an evil wind,
the chamber might with diligence be made close therefore: If it were a cloud
or mist, it might be seen, and avoided If it were a rain, a man might cover
him self for it. But now is it a secret misfortun that crepeth in preuely, so
that it can another be seen nor herd, another smelled nor taisted till it have
done the harm.

Therefore the more dangerous and noisome that the plage is, the better and
more excellent is the promise, that no man should have cause to despare. For how
might God make us a more excellent and fayrer promise, then that he promyseth to
deliver from the pestilence, us that be his children, and that we need not to
be afraid thereof, though a thousand dye of the same at our leftsyde, and ten
thousand at our right side Yet shall it not reach unto us, if we do but believe
this promise, and let it be our spear and shylde. For if we so do, then shall
such poisoned arowes either not hytte us at all, or else not wound us to death.

Fourthly, God will also preserve his children from the sickness that
destroyet^ in the noone day: For the noone day (wha^ the Son is at the
strongest) is cause of much heat and feuerous sycknesse, specially in those
countries where the Son ryseth hye and comes nigh over men's heads. For
great heat brings much sweat, consumes and alters the blood causes
inordinate drinking, and makes that the people are glad to cool them
selves again folyshly: Wherout then arise all manner of perlous diseases,
which be not very unlike the sycknesse of the pestilence.

Now whether it be frare of the night or arowe of the day, whether it be
pestilence or sickness, that comes by the evil Southewynde, or what plage
it will that lies upon the world because of their sins, God the Lord will
preserve his faithful therefrom, or deliver them from it: and that shall come
to pass so certainly and so wonderfully, that (as the Prophet says) though
a thousand fall at thy left side, and ten thousa^de at thy right side yet
shall it not touch the. This is doutlesse a loving, mercyful, comfortable, and
fair promise, where on our heart by reason should trust, and chefely rejoice in
the same: For he that speaks it, is Almyghtye and true therefore should we by
reason give credence unto him. For we can do God no greater dyshonoure, then to
dyspayre in his holy word. We ought therefore to be much more afraid of that
inordinate fear then of death it self: for death can not hurt us, in as much
as we (through baptyme) are grafted and buried unto like death with christ. But
fearfulness (which is nothing else but an unbelief) may harm us, and bring
us in to imprudence. Wherefore my most derely beloved, take these promyses to
heart, strength your heart, mind and understanding therewyth, and be not
faint hearted. So shall ye prove by experience, that God is true, and faithfully
perfourmeth that which he promyseth.

And that ye may ye more easily believe it, I will declare it unto your
charity by a similitude how it comes to pass, and whence it spryngeth, that
a right faithful Christen man can be so safe and fre from all these plages:
For it is good to understand, and comfortable to know.

Your charity sees and proves daily by experience, how mighty and horrible
a thing the darkness of the night is. For wha^ it falls, it covers all ye
whole world darkeneth the color and fasshion of a^^ creatures, captiuateth
all men and beasts living, that they must be still and rest, ye and makes
them fayntharted and fearful, and so of all things it is a mighty invincible
tyrant, whom no man may withsta^de Nevertheless it is not yet so mighty,
that it can darken, ouerwhelme, and quench the least light that is found in
the world. For we se, that the darker the night is, the clearer do the stars
shine: Ye the leest candle light that is lyghted, withstandeth ye whole night,
and suffers not only the darkness not to cover or oppress it, but gives
light even in the mids of the darkness, and smyteth it back a certain
space on every side: and thither as it is borne, must darkness depart, and
give place unto the light: all the power and fearfulness thereof, can not help
against it.

And though a light be so weak, that it gives not light far about it,
another can smite the darkness abacke (as the spark of an whote cole) yet can
not the darkness cover it, much less to quench it: but it gives light it
self alone, so that it may be seen a far of in the darkness, and remains
un overcome of the same, though it ca^ not help other things, nor give light
unto them.

Ye (that yet more wonderful is) a rotten shynynge piece of wood, which
nevertheless has the fayntest light that can be found, remains invincible
of all the power of darcknesse: and the more it is compassed about with
darkness, the clearer light it gives, so little can darcknesse over come or
hold down any light: but it rules vanquysheth and expels the darkness,
which else ouerwhelmeth, snareth and puts all things in fear.

Even so likewise does a well spring also, for there may we se, how a little
vain of water breaks out of the ground, somewhere scace so great as a
finger. And when it is closed in round about that the water may gather
together, and must needs be a dych or a pyt, yet spryngeth it nevertheless And
though the water be certain hu^dreds weight above the spring, yet may not it
drive the spring back, but the spring dryueth the whole burden of the water
back, and above it self, and spryngeth still more and more, till the pole
flow over. And if the other water be foul and unclean, it ca^ not myxte it
self under the fresh clear water of the spring, but it remains clear till
it come farther abroad from the first head thereof, as it may all be seen
with eyes, and also be proved by daily experience.

If a natural light then be so mighty against the darkness of the night,
and an earthen well spring so strong in strynynge against all standing
waters, how much more does it then the true everlasting and heavenly light,
and the only invincible spring of all life, namely, God the Lord our maker
and Saueoure?

That God is the true, everlasting and heavenly light, witnesses Ihon the
evangelist in the first Chapter, and says: God was the word, in him was the
life, and the life was the light of men. Likewise also in his Canonical
epistle in the first Chapter: God is light, and in him is no darkness.

In like manner, That he is the only invincible spring of all life, witnesses
the prophet Jeremy in the second chapter For there says the Lord: My
people commytteth a dubble sin, they forsake me the living spring of life,
and make themselves fair wells, which nevertheless give no water. And David
says in the.xxxv. Psalm: With the is the spring of life and in thy light se
we light.

If God the Lord the^ be the true light, it follows, that all they which
put their trust in him, be as a brennynge candle: for by faith does God dwell
in our hearts, and we are the living temple of God, as Paul to the Corinthians
does witness more the^ once. Therefore says Christ of his discyples. Math. v.
Ye are the light of the world And of Ihon the baptyste: He was a burning and
shynynge light. Ioh. v. Likewise if God be the everlasting and living
fountain, it follows, that the faithful be eue^ flowynge sprynges. Therefore
says Christ also, Ioh. vii. Who so believes on me as the scripture says,
out of his body shall flow streams of living water: But this he said of the
sprete, which they that believe on him should receive.

Like as the darkness of the night now can hurt no earthly or worldly light,
but must give place and fly from ye light: Even so Satan also which is a
prince of spiritual darkness, can do no harm to a true right beleuynge
Christen man; but must fear and fly from him: For God, which is the
everlasting light, dwells and shyneth in his heart, and dryueth and
expels far from him all the works of darkness. And like as no heap of
water ca^ drive back any fou^tayne of the ground, and hinder the quycke
spring thereof, and like as no uncleanness can make it soul, even so also can
no aduersite of this world take away or shorten any christen man's life. For
God which is the fountain of al life, dwells and lives in his heart, and
dryueth all hurtful poison and mortal sycknesses far away from thence, so
that not only it can not harm him, but he also helps other people, and
delyuereth them by his presence: even as a light that shyneth far about it,
and as a spring that always flows, runs and makes the ground, moist and
fruitful.

And this is it that the Lord says in the Gospel, in the last of Mark: The
tokens that shall follow them which believe, are these: In my name shall they
cast out deuels, speak with new tu^ges, drive away serpents: and if they
drink any deadlye thing, it shall not hurt them: They shall lay hands upon
the sick, and they shall recover. So is it red also in the Acts of the
Apostles the.v. Chapter, that the syck were made whole only of saint Peter's
shadow. So utterly must vanysh every thing that it is contrary and against the
everlasting light, and spring of life, where a right Christen man is, in
whom God dwells by a true belefe, and out of whom the holy ghost shyneth and
flows.

Let Satan then preasse in here with all his darkness and with all his
hurtful infectio^, yet shall ye se in belefe, that he can not take nor
destroy any Christen man therwyth if he continue in faith, and kept God in his
heart: But he shall be smytten back and driven away by force, as ye wonderful
works of Christ and of all saints do manyfestly declare. Therefore is it a
great shame for a Christen man to be so afraid for the plage of the
pestilence, as to fly from them whom he is bound to serve by Gods
commandment. For by reason he should without all fear make haiste unto them,
not only to fulfill Gods commandment, but also by his presence to help
them, if their faith do else work with all. But if it come not to pass, yet is
he sure, for as much as God dwells in him, and he walks and goes in Gods
commandment For certai^ly this promise shall not fayl hi^

Though a thousand fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right side, yet
shall it not touch the.

But with faith must these words be taken hold upon, for natural reason does
not comprehend them, in as much as in deed it appears far otherwise. And
no man needs to think nor judge, that they which dye of this plage, be all
unchristian and faythlesse: but we ought not to doubt but that there dye thereof
many virtuous men, and leave many ungodly. This is done, because that death
may happen to a man two manner of ways.

One way, after the commune course of nature, according as every man's death
is appointed him of God: and we have consented unto it in baptyme. Of this
says ye prophet Job in the.xiiii. Chapter. A man has his appointed time,
the nombre of his months stands with the: you have appointed him his bounds,
which he shall not ouerpasse

Another way may death happen to a man before the time, by reason of his
great and grievous sins: As the Lord has threatened by Moses, that if his
commandment be not kept, he will cause pestilence to reign. Wherout it is
certain, that when they be kept, ye plage abides out. Likewise says he in
the commandments: Honor father and mother that thou may live long etc.
Out of the which it is certain, that his life which does them not, shall be
shortened. In like manner says David in the.iv. Psalm The blood thyrsty shall
not bring their life to the half nombre. Wherout it is sure that they should
live much longer, if they shed not innocent blood. Likewise says Christ
Luce. xii. If ye do not repent, ye shall all peryshe, as they that the tower in
Siloa fell upon. Where by it is certain, that who so repents not, may look
for all mysfortune.

And of this untimely death only speaks this Psalm, and promyseth the
faithful christen men, that they shall be fre from it. For from the right
appointed death in to the which we have consented in baptyme, we can nor shall be
delivered. Wherefore if a virtuous right Christen man dye of this plage, it is
certainly his very hour appointed unto him of God, which he can not preuente.
But doutlesse there dye of it many sinners also beside, which might well live
longer if they repented. And though some be taken because of their sins, yet
be they not therefore damned: but if they axe forgiveness of sins and believe,
they shall be saved. As Paul says: When we be judged, we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

Thus goes it then together, that just men dye their own right death, but ye
wicked dye an untimely death, and therwyth does God punysh the world sorest of
al because of their sins, but spares his own for their faythes sake.
Therefore should they not be fearful nor fayntharted, but (as the prophet
says) they should look and behold, how the ungodly are reco^penced: For
whether the wicked dye before the time, or the just in the right season, yet
is it done both for the punishment and plage of the ungodly. If virtuous
fathers and mothers dye from wicked disobedient children, then be the children
plaged, for they are afterward evil nurtoured, hanged or slain. If young
children dye from wicked fathers and mothers, then be the children delivered,
and the fathers and mothers punished, in that they have gathered their goods
for those that they wysshe them not unto. If tyrau^tes dye, then be they
punished, and the persecuted Christen delivered. If good rulers dye, which with
their wisdom have maynteyned peace and good governance, then be they in
peace: And so the ungodly which are left alive, raise up war and sedicion,
and be always punished worse and worse. Shortly who so has eyes of faith,
seyth that true beleuers dye in a right season but the ungodly before the time.
Wherefore whether good men dye or live, it is done for their welthe. But whether
ye wicked dye or live, it is done for their punishment, and be al ways shall
they be plaged, and their wickedness shall be rewarded them.

Wherefore my most derely beloved, take ye such doctrine and comfort to heart,
and follow the same. Fly in good ernest (by true repentance and amendemet)
from sin, wherewith ye world has deserved this horrible plage: And fly by a
true vpryght faith unto gods word wherein is the fountain of life and ye light
of men: Then shall ye be whole and safe from this and other plages, and so live
to the honor of God and wealth of your neghbour, till the appointed time come,
wherein God the father (in the death of Christ that we be baptized in) shall
send for us out of this miserable life to his own everlasting kingdom:
Which God grant unto us all. Amen.

Translated by.M.C. out of hye Almayne. Anno.M.D.xxxvii.
A conforte concerning How wife children and other friends shall be conforted
the husbonde being dead.
Seeing now that God has called your husbonde, father or other good friend out
of this mysery into ever lasting joy, therefore shall ye receive it wyllyngly:
for it is his work. Repyne not therefore at his work, another weep against his
will, but commit the cause unto him: take it of his hand as a fatherly
proving, and say with Job: God has given us him and has taken him again,
the name of the Lord be blessed: as it was the Lords will, so is it happened.

God almighty will prove you as he did Job how ye will behave your self as he
takes out of your syghte the thing that ye love. He will admytte well
enough that ye be sorye. For it is seldom seen but a man (be he never so
vile, or of so little reputacio^) has ever a sondery gift wherewt he served
and profyted other. And the same gifts were not greatly regarded in a man
while he lived: for we regard little communely such things as are present, but
as soon as the man is gone, so soon as the vessel is spylte than begin we
to want the gifts that where contained therein.

Therefore is it no maruayle that we be sorry for such a gift of God, if it be
taken out of our syghte.

As long as we use men and the gifts according as they be ordyned of God for
our necessite, than do we well, and that can God suffer well enough: But that
we mysuse them and make an ydoll of them, that can not God suffer. For when we
put our trust and confort in man, or any other creature, tha^ do we wrong and
mysuse the same and the curse comes upon us whereof it is written Ieremye.
xvii. Cursed is the man that puts his trust in man.

For all man's help is to be suffered only when they be present and that we
have need of them: but as soon as they are gone, than must we look for other
help, namely: God lettynge go it that passes away thynkyng it to be
temporal, faydyng at the twynklyng of an eye, and vanyte that is in this world.
We have here no abiding thing, but must look about for the thing to come
that endures for ever.

For this cause does God draw and pulle us so from the creatures. And seeing he
is our true father, brydegrome and husbonde he can not (for he is strong and
gelous) abide that we set our hope, love or trust upon any creatur. This is
the cause then that he does take us from the^, and caryeth us upon him, self.
For look on what creature we have most hope, love and affection, that will he
soonest take out of our sight: if he does love us. And when he has such
gelousy upon us than does he most chefely declare his love toward us.

By this also it comes that Christ Mathe. xviii. forbyddeth us to call any
man father upon earth, for we have only one father in heaven, namely God, which
will nor can suffer us to call or to have any man upon earth father: and that
because we should depend and hang only upon him, lokyng for all good of him. For
he will be ye same that we may hardely trust unto: seyenge he can not nor
will fail us, and that because he is no earthly but an heavenly father. For
this cause tha^ is that man blessed and happy, that puts his trust, hope
and confidence in the Lord, as the prophet says.

Finally if when nature fulfylleth her course, man has but continual trauayll
and mysery, and after that this course of nature is ended and at rest, man is
eased of so great trauayll: we seem to hate rather tha^ to love them that be
departed, if we would wysh the^ to be in this wretched world again. Moreover
in making so much of our friends departed, and setting so great affection
upon them, wyshynge Gods work not to be fulfilled upon them, we blame God in
his will and workynge: as though he knew not better what were best both for
them and us than we.

Let us therefore set our will in Gods will, and suffer him to work at his
pleasur. For he knows best what is both our friends and our souls health.

FINIS.
Printed in Southwarke by me James Nicolson. For Ian Gough

Cum Priuilegio.


