A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS THE SEVENTH OF MAY, M. DC. IX.

By GEORGE BENSON, Doctor of Divinity, sometimes fellow of Queens College
in OXFORD.

Imprinted at London by H. L. for Richard Moore, and are to be sold at his shop
in S. Dunstans Churchyard. 1609.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, though we live in an age which is more merciless to ink and
paper, then the ages of our forefathers have bin; and therefore it might seem a
Stulta est clementia cum tot vbique vatibus occurras, periturae parcere
cha^tae. Iuuen. Sat. 1.
foolish pity in me to spare that which will be spent: yet have I ever
dedicated my poor labors to the ear only, that thereby (if God would) they
might be conuaied to the heart: not unto the eye with a desire to have them
exposed to the censure of the world. Notwithstanding mine own private judgment
and resolution, mistake me not, I can very well digest the publishing of other
men's labors. Plut. Symp. lib. 3.
For as Simonides seeing a man silent at a feast, said unto him; If thou be
a wise man, thou art a fool for concealing thy wisdom: if a fool, then thou
art wise for not revealing thy folly: So, I hold it wisdom in them which are
enriched with extraordinary gifts, to impart their graces unto the world: But
as for those to whom knowledge has either not dawned, or not so plentifully
shined as upon their fellows, I advise them as Seneca in Troa.
Ulysses did Andromache (when her son Astyanax was in danger of the enemy)
Lateat, haec vna salus: let them silence their labors, if they would not be
traduced, and censured by those that love them not. I justly rank my self
amongst the later sort, and would have followed the counsel that I give to
others, but that I am weyed against my own mind by such reasons as I hope will
pass for weighty in the judgments of others as well as of my self. When by
the commandment of the right reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of London
(by whom I was and ever will gladly be commanded) I was called unto this
service, and delivered this sermon in that honorable presence where it was
bestowed, I found that it was swollen far too big for the time allotted to
that exercise: which might by me have been more fitly proportioned to the time,
if I had endeavored (as heretofore I have done) to draw my speech into knots
and borders, and set my words checkerwise for the delight of the ear only. But
I thank my good God, who has set me in the country to be schooled by
experience (which teaches fools and all) at whose hands I have learned to
intend not mine own credit, but the glory of my great Master, and the souls
health of the Lambs of his little flock. We, who strive not to amaze the
world with curiosity, but having the timber of our building ready reared up,
wait for such vanes, and turrets, and earnings, and embellishments, such words
as God shall enable us withal Math 10. 19
in illa hora, we (I say) cannot digest our matters by the clock: and therefore
(my case being such) I was forced to cut off much of that which I had provided,
and to mangle that which I spoke, because I breathed with an eager desire
toward the end of my text. Neither was it my length only that crossed my
desire: but I was checked by those infirmities, which I cannot truly say were
painful, but so dangerous (God is my witness) that I feared oftener then once
or twice, that that my labor would have proved my Genesis 35. 18.
Ben-oni and my self like Rabel to have dyed in travail of that Sermon, if
God (blessed be his name) had not spun out and continued his love toward me,
which has bin Cant. 2. 4
a banner over me Psalm. 22. 10
ever since I hung upon my mothers breasts.

These are the reasons which induce me to present that unto the eye, in his
full shape and proportion, which came maimed unto the ear, and much abbridged
for want of time. Unto mine own purpose, for publishing hereof, there has not
wanted the concurrence of the desires of men of good sort and rank. Neither
could I want one to patronize it being published; for God has given me some
honorable and worthy friends: among the rest, the right reverend Father in God,
the Lord Bishop of Hereford my Diocaesan, to whom (under God) I am indebted for
much of my liuelihood in this world: Job. 29. 4
The providence of God ever be upon his tabernacle. Yet shall not this small
and weak issue of mine, presume to take sanctuary, under his or any other
great name, as though it would dare and defy the world by virtue of that
protection: but rather think that I tender it to thy courtesy and favorable
censure; humbly entreating thee, when thou meetest any obliquity, to remember
that I am a man, and thy brother, and not free from error: when thou meetest
with any thing worthy thy view, give the glory unto God Iam. 1. 17.
the Father of light from whom comes every good and perfect giving, John 14. 6
who is the way the truth and the life: let him have the praise for what I
have, and me thy prayers for what I want. Thus I leave thee unto Gods mercy,
and this small Treatise to thy favorable censure: and I send it out with that
prayer or benediction that Jacob sent with his sons into Egypt; Genesis 43. 14
God Almighty give thee mercy in the sight of the man: in the sight of the
great man, that thou may make him humble: of the poor man, that thou may
make him content: of the stubborn man, that thou may hammer and supple him:
of the penitent man, that thou may bind up his wounds and sores. Of every
man, that thou may touch his conscience and win his soul: especially of
Joseph, our puruayer against the time of dearth, especially that man, the man
CHRIST JESUS, that thou may win his favor, Amen. From the Rock in Worcester
shire.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, GEORGE BENSON.

Errata.
Page 13. line 23. meditation for mediation.

Page 50. line 23. nerer for never.

A SERMON PREACHED at Paules-crosse the 7th day of MAY, 1609.
Hosea, Chap. 7. Ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 7. They are all hot as an oven, and
have devoured their Judges: all their Kings are fallen: there is none among
them that calls upon me.

8. Ephraim has mixed himself among the people: Ephraim is like a cake on the
hearth not turned.

9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: yea, gray
hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it not.

10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not return to
the Lord their God, nor seek him for all this.

11. Ephraim also is like a dove deceived without heart: they call to Egypt
they go to Ashur.

12. But when they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, and draw them
down as the fowls of the heaven: I will chastise them as their congregation
has heard.


RIght Honorable, right Worshipful, dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: If the worth of this Prophecy of Hosea could be rightly valued,
we should find that herein is embarked as great riches of grace, as ever yet
the word of God, the silver stream of the water of life, has landed unto our
souls, since first we sinful men had traffic with that renowned King Zach.
9. 10
Whose dominion is from sea to sea, and from the river unto the end of the
world. Among all the Prophecies, especially this of Hosea; among the chapters
of this Prophecy, this the 7. and in this 7. these verses that I have read unto
you, do aim principally at the kingdom of Israel, not of Judah; at the 10
tribes committed to the government of Jeroboam, not unto the two tribes left
with Rehoboam, the son of Solomon. In the handling of which words I desire your
minds as well as your bodies, and that my words may rather diue down into your
hearts, then swim in your ears; therefore I will not entangle you in the maze
of any curious division, but plainly I will observe these three things:

1. The sin of Ephraim and al Israel. 7. 8. which is, 1. Bred at home. All
like an oven. Which sin had 3. effects. 1. The devouring of their Judges. 2.
Slownesse in not returning. 3. Their not calling upon God.
2. Borrowed abroad. Ephraim mixed himself. etc. which borrowed sin had one
effect, and that wss this: he was as a cake on the hearth not turned.
2. The dullness of Ephraim: of which dullness I observe 1. The arguments or
evidences: which were 1. Wilful ignorance in not knowing, ver. 9. 2. Slownesse
in not returning. ver. 10. 3. Simplicity and credulity in being ouerreached. v.
11
2. The aggrauation: and that is by these circumstances or for these causes. 1.
Strangers devoured their strength. 2. Gray hayres were here and there upon him.
3. The pride of Israel testifies to his face.

3. Gods alarm to rouse them out of their slumber, and awake their dullness.
ver. 12. but when they shall go, etc. where I observe these five things: 1.
Gods providence: he will see them as they go. 2. His wisdom: he will spread a
net. 3. His power: he will draw them down. 4. His justice: he will chastise
them. 5. His truth: he will make good what he has said in the congregation.

As if the Prophet should have said, O ye men of Israel, especially you of the
house of Ephraim, concupiscence boiling within you has made you hot as an
oven. Kings, and Judges have been your fuel, you have not called upon the
Lord: by reason of the mixture of your selves among the people, you have been
tainted with idolatry, partly raw and partly roasted, you have had a knee for
God, and a knee for Baal: you might have been warned by the invasion of
strangers and by the approach of old age, yet you have been possessed with
blind and lame, and lumpish spirits, for I observe your dullness, and your
slownesse, and your simplicity: you have been without eyes not knowing:
without feet not returning: without hearts, and as a dove deceived: yet (says
God by the Prophet) when you go, I will see you by my providence, and spread a
net for you by my wisdom, and draw you down by my power, and chastise you by
my justice, and make good the truth of that which you have heard affirmed in
your congregations.

They are all hot as an oven. Which is a borrowed Oven.
speech, implying their sin bred at home. There is a fire wherewith Christ
baptizeth, Matthew. 3. and wherewithal, the Apostles were enriched, Acts 2. (I
mean the virtue of Gods holy spirit) which when it takes possession of a man,
it makes his heart hot within him Psalm. 39. 4
, and while he is musing the fire kindles, and he speaks with his tongue. But
his words are like the words of Nepthali Genesis 49
, Who is like a Hind giving good words: they are either praises unto his God,
or charitable comforts unto his brethren, or holy meditations unto himself.
Yet the same devil that had a flood of water to send out of his mouth to drown
the Church and her children, Revel. 12. has water also to quench this holy
fire, and in stead thereof he hurls balls of wilde-fire into our souls, he
fanneth them with the blandishments of the world, that the sooner Iam. 1. 15
Lust might conceive and bring forth sin, that sin when it is finished
might bring forth death. Such is the form of an oven, that by reason of the
vault and damming up thereof, the inward parts thereof are black and unclean, and
the fire works more vehemently then in ordinary places: so it is with sin.

It takes possession of the heart (the strongest hold) Vncleaut.
which is the throne of the mind, and by degrees surpriseth the other parts of
the body: Psalm. 14. 5.
The tongue by dropping the poison of aspes under it: the hand by making them
the hands of iniquity: the feet by making them swift to shed blood: the eyes
by making them swell with lust: the ways by making them exorbitant from the
ways of peace: So that when God sees the garment of righteousness, which he
has bestowed, rent and torn, the work of sanctification out of reparations,
and his own image canceld, he may say as his son our Savior did once say of
the Roman coin, Mar. 12. 87
Whose image and superscription is this? It is Caesar's: then give unto Caesar,
that which is Caesar's, and unto God, that which is Gods. Whose image and
superscription is this? It is the devils, or the worlds, or the fleshes; then
give unto them that which is theirs: they are not stamped with my seal, I
acknowledge them not to be mine own.

When Plut. and Suct.
Caesar was wounded unto death by the Senators of Rome, it grieved him much,
but much more when he perceived himself to be hurt by Brutus, whom he loved
above the rest: therefore his doleful tongue copied out of a more doleful
mind these words, Et tu fili? And thou my son also? So no doubt but it
grieves God to be pierced through with the sins of Atheists, and irreligious
men: but it grieves me more (may God say) when thou that art my child rebelst
against me: thou whom as mine own son I have created, whom I have
redeemed, whom I have justified, whom I have sanctified, whom I mean to
glorify: For, where the more debt is forgiven, there the most love and
obedience is due, says Christ to Simon, Luke, 7. The world is old and very
sickly: and one (we see) is distempered with a consumption of envy, an other
with a hot fever of malice, another with lunaticke and rauing fittes of
swearing, an other with a tympany or swelling of ambition, an other so loses
himself by drunkenness, that a man may seek a man in a man and not find
him. Yet, if you in this sinne-sicke world, can avoid the tinctures and
staynings of concupiscence, and make wrack neither upon the Rocks, nor upon
the Sands, neither upon open nor secret sins, Psalm. 91. 5
then neither the arrowe that flies by day, nor the Pestilence that walks in
the darkness, nor any evil that destroys at the noone day, shall do you any
harm.

I exhort you therefore unto that warmth of the holy Spirit, which softened the
hearts of the Luke, 24. 32
two Disciples as they went unto Emmaus, or if you will to that higher degree of
zeal for God and Gods house John 2. 17. Psalm. 69. 19.
that eat up DAVID. So may your Souls (Salamander-like) live by that spirit
of burning which purged the blood of Jerusalem. Esaias, chapter 4. So being free
from staynings and blackness by that smoke of that other fire, you may be
clean, and fit to stand before the Lord your God. Say therefore unto
concupiscence I will not nurse thee up: harbor not that smooth faced enemy
which will not only pollute (which first I noted) but it will make your own
affections rebels and mutinous within you, it will work violently.

Witness the three effects of this home-borne sin. Violent.
First. Their Judges were devoured. Secondly, Their Kings were fallen. Thirdly,
They did not call on God. Behold how they were infatuate: in all their
difficulties whither were they to fly? To their Judges: yea but their Judges
were devoured. Their Judges being gone, whither then? to their Kings: yea but
their Kings were fallen. Their Kings being fallen, whither then? to God; there
was their highest Court of appeal: yea, but they called not upon me (says
God). Lo here, with their own hands they have pulled down all the
sanctuaries they had, and 1. their Judges.

Judges and judgment Ex. 18. 21
(to avoid confusion) are blessings given unto kingdoms by God, who is the God
of Judges.
order and not of confusion. Therefore Micheas groned in spirit when he 1. Reg.
22. 17
saw all Israel as sheep without a Shepherd: and our Prophet Hosea thought
it a curse unto Israel when they should remain many days Hos. 3. 4
without a King, and without a Prince, and without an offering, and without an
image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. Machiuel, who for his
villainy is exempt from comparison, though he have long since spawned in the
world, and dipped in his opinions much of Christendom, sets down a rule, how a
Conqueror may weaken a subdued kingdom, vnioint the sinews thereof, and make
them fall by their own weight, that is See Simon Patrichs answer to Match.
part. 3. maxim. 5.
; by taking from them order and government, by laying the reanes on their own
necks, and allowing them to live lawless. But lift you up your voices in
praise and thanksgiving among such as keep holy day, because you live in a
kingdom, where 1. Cor. 15. 41
one star differs from another in glory, where the Judges in their several
ranks, have their mouths as oracles, and their bosoms as treasuries of good
counsel: who when they see Hos. 4. 2
blood swelling to touch blood, they give it Job. 38. 10
bars and doors: saying, Hitherto shall thou come, and thou shall come no
further, here shall thou stay thy proud waves. They are vines, and olives and
fig trees, Judge. 9. They leave their fatness, and their sweetness, and
their wine, to reign over the trees of the forest, both ease and pleasure for
the good of Gods people. Prize at no low rate these jewels in your own
ground, let not your sins serve as brokers to embeazle these commodities, and
convey them from you; but rather by good meditations and endeavors, husband
your grains of mustard seed, that from the less you may grow to more grace,
and become so lovely in the sight of God, that your case may never be as
Ephraims was, who for their sins had their Judges devoured, and Zecha. 11. 10
the staff of beauty (that is, comely government) broken among them. And you
the reverend Judges of this land, who are ordained to lance the impostumes, and
prune the luxury of this kingdom, weigh well your high standing, look upward,
and downward: upward, and consider that Psalm. 81. 6.
you are Gods; downward, and consider also that you shall die like men. There
be two sins, whose forges, and anuils are never cold, but like Pyoners they are
ever undermining your seats of justice: they are bribery and partiality
brethren in evil, Genesis 49. 6.
into their secrets let not my soul descend.

Bribery is marked in the forehead for a sin, and therefore Bribery.
dares not approach near your seats of justice: but I pray God it play not
the usurper, and take possession of some about you, by unlawful intrusion. If
it be true which is commonly received in the world, then there have been many
belonging unto men of great place, who have deceit and nimblenesse of wit, and
bribery, and other sins, like as many porters to bring them in Pretium
sanguinis, the price of blood. Yet have they cried like the siluer-smith in the
Acts: Acts 19. 18
The great goddess Diana, great is Diana of the Ephesians: the great goddess
Justice, great is she: when their care was not for justice, but for their own
gain, by pretending justice, as the siluer-smithes intended their own thriuing
by making images in Dianaes temple. These things I have heard, but I hope for
better things in you, and yours, else may the servant break the masters head
with precious balmes, and make them (like Rehoboam) 1. Reg. 12 14
whippe with Scorpions in stead of rods, and by turning Amos 6. 12
Justice into wormwood, become like Soph. 3. 3.
the wolves of the evening, that leave not the bones until the morrow. Mean
while the Clyent finds his physic worse then his disease: poor seafaring
man, he coming toward the Judge (who like a goodly promontory, or land mark
gives assurance of calm and harbor) makes wrack unawares upon the sands,
secretly by the way before he can have audience in open court. Whosoever they
be that by such vnder-working do abuse their Lords and masters, and tire out
the poor subjects, let them know that their hands taking bribes, are like the
wind Arist. Metor. 2. cap. 6.
Caecia which draws clouds of witnesses against themselves.

Now though Bribery dare not be seen in the place of Justice, yet Partiality
is not such a stranger to flesh and Partiality.
blood: and the more acquaintance, the more danger. The mother of all laws,
(that is, the law of Moses) would have Judges the masters of their affections,
neither Exodus 23. 3.
fearing the rich, not favoring the poor, and therefore Justice (the mistress
of the laws) is described blindfolded, as discerning neither friend nor enemy,
and being too holy to consult with flesh and blood in matters of so great
consequence: which rule while Pilate did not observe, he would, but could not,
Matthew. 27. 24
wash the filth of his impiety from his hands. Peter Martyr 1. Reg. 10 18
allegorizing upon the seat of Solomon, says, that the height, and the gold,
and theiuory of the seat must put the Magistrate in mind of his eminency,
purity, and spotless innocence. Wherefore, let your hands be ever at the
stern, and your eyes be fixed on the star, the bright morning star: and
consult Iehesophat 2. Chr. 19. 6.
who told his Judges, that their judgments, were the judgments of God, and
not of man: and be it (ever to be remembered) written upon your walls, that you
are the nursing-fathers of the Commonwealth: and therefore ought to hold out
to the kings Subjects the breasts of consolation. To have such Judges it is a
blessing, indeed a blessing which this people of Israel was not worthy of,
for by their sins they devoured their Judges: whither then could they fly for
succor? up to their Kings? no, for their Kings were fallen.

It were much to tell you how, and how many kings of Israel fell: but if you
look unto the 2. of Kings the Kings.
15. Chapter, you shall see it described by a better pen. You shall see a
rank of many, whereof one supplanted and spread a net for an other, by treason
and conspiracy: one of them inherited an others impiety. Eze. 18. 2.
The fathers eat sower grapes, and the childrens teeth were set on edge: with a
false key they opened the door for vengeance unto themselves: Ezech. 33. 11.
Why will you do o house of Jacob, why will you dye? Had they pleased God, he
would have clipped the wings of peace, and plenty, and prosperity, and
victory, that they should not have flowen out of their borders. They had
Peace, the child of heaven, and Plenty the child of Peace, and the daughter
devoured the mother: their opulency brake their peace, and made them rebel
even against their Kings. Their confused state makes me remember the
blessedness that ouershadowes our own. In the time of Queen Elizabeth our
Sovereign of blessed memory, several Popes authorized several disloyal
subjects to reach at her crown and person; being all, as it seems of that
opinion that Cardinal Baronius was of, when of late upon a controversy
betwixt the Pope and the Venetians, he made a foolish gloss upon a good text,
A book called variance between the Pope and Venice page 42.
telling Paul the fifth, that whereas the vision came to Peter of things clean
and unclean, and a voice that he should kill and eat, it was a warrant to
Peter's successor, that he should first kill, and then eat: his principal
office was to kill, to excommunicate, to depose. How this is racked above the
highest pin, and beyond the meaning of the H. Ghost, let Divines judge. I
insert this new occurrence with matters that are far ancienter, because I would
have the world know that though there has been a change of Popes, yet there
has not been a change of the minds of Popes: This that now is, is animated to
kill, and so were those in the time of Queen Elizabeth. But yet she outliued
many of them; to prove (in them) that of the Prophet David, that the
bloudthirstie shall not live out half their days, and (in her) that of
Solomon, Prou. 3. that wisdom (which she embraced) carries length of days in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory. The Ministers of the
word of God are commanded to baptize and preach: those Popes baptized not in
water, but in blood, and their preaching was nothing but a denouncing of war
unto Christian Princes; planting and rooting out: planting, but their own
opinions: and rooting out those Kings and Princes which God has planted.
Witness Cardinal Comensis his letter unto Doctor Parry, for killing that
gracious Queen, who was ever a mark for the enuenomed arrows of them, who
forgot that saying of Solomon, Eccles. 10. Curse not the King, no not in thy
thought, neither curse the rich in thy bed chamber: for the foul of the heaven
shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall declare the matter.
The Popes commanded, and they obeyed; cruel Fathers, and too too forward
sons. Virg. Ecl. 8
Crudeles natimagis, an pater improbus ille?
Improbus ille pater, crudeles vos quoque nati.


She lived (for all their plots) till she was old and mellowe for the
kingdom of God: and when we lost her (though many wished their eyes might be
closed up before they saw a change) yet of our Commonwealth we may say as
does the Prophet Esaias 66. 7. Before she traveled she brought forth: and before
her pain came, she was delivered of a man child: we changed almost nothing
but the Sex: after a David we have a Solomon: after a David the youngest of
Ishaes sons, and ashepheard, Elizabeth the youngest of King Henry's
daughters, not a shepherd, but one that desired to be a milke-mayde in
Woodstock park, we have a Solomon, who has spoken and written many parables
and wise sentences, and can skill (witness all the learned of the land) of all
the 1. Reg. 4. 33
plants from the cedar of Libanus, unto the hysope that grows upon the wall.
And now I speak of things pertaining to the King, for such an argument Psalm.
44. 1
my tongue should be the pen of a ready writer. God no doubt said unto him,
well done good Steward Luke 19. 17. Iacobus Steward.
Thou have been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much, thou
have well governed one country, thou shall be governor over an other. So he
was brought unto us with acclamation, as it were upon the shoulders of all the
kingdom, not ferried over upon the waves of blood: So that if ever March came
in like a Lion, and went out like a Lamb; it was then, when, in the beginning
of that month, the sickness of her Majesty, made us fear her death, and
after her death, Lion-like deuourings by our enemies, and in the end thereof
the inauguration of our gracious King, and his hopeful issue, gave us
assurance of an everlasting lamb-like calm. The authority that runs like
lesser streams, through all courts and offices of this land, fills up the
banks in him, yet has his anointed person (since Popery was a mint of treason)
bin a mark for traitors. When I recount all their hellish machinations, the
thought of the powder treason takes up all the room. That, that may say with
the devil possessing the man in the Gospel, Mar. 5. 9.
My name is legion; for we are many: many devils, many treasons, many heads,
many devises were in this one devise, which shot at the king the anointed of
the Lord, the Queen the mother of our hope, the Prince the branch of our hope,
the Council the brain of the kingdom, the Bishops the charets of Israel and
the horsemen of the same, the nobility and gentry the flower of our country
and commonwealth: They, they of that confederacy were like to 2. Reg. 9. 20
Iehu the son of Nimshi, they marched furiously, they marched as they had
been mad. And how could it otherwise be? they must needs run whom the
devil drives.

Wonderful closely was this snare laid by the Prince of darkness: Ps. 129. 3.
The plowers would have plowed upon our backs, and have made long furrows: but
abyssus abyssum inuocauit, one deep called an other, the depth of Gods mercy
called danger out of the depth of the vault, his love was Cant. 2. 4.
a banner ouervs, we were not buried in the bowels of confusion, misery scarce
knocked at our doors, scarce touched the hemme of our garments, mercy has
embraced us on every side; whereas Ephraim was compassed about with the
iniquity of their own heels, for by their sins they devoured their Judges,
by their treason their Kings are fallen: Kings and Judges being gone, whither
could they fly for succor? up unto God? no, for it follows, There is none
among them that calls upon me.

The language of the Prophet is all and none, all are like an oven, none call
upon God, they went all with one accord down the stream: they were either
possessed with None calls upon God.
a dumb spirit; they did not call; or with a frantic spirit, if they called,
they called not upon God: they did not, but we must call, and call upon God:
we must call, or else we are sluggish: call on God, or else we are foolish: in
the name of Christ, or else we are presumptuous: for things lawful, or else
we are impious: zealously, or else we are but like warm Christians.

We must ask if we will have, seek if we will find. Luke, 11. for the
blessings of God are not the Tul. off. li. 1.
spoils of Salmacis Call.
without sweat and blood: though they be cheap yet they come not always
without our own indeauors: which indeauors of ours if they be used, O with what
joy may we expect Gods blessings upon us, Iam. 5. 7.
as the husband man waits for the former and the later rain. Israel sinned (as
they did often) God was angry, Moses prayed, God said unto him Genesis 32. 28
Stay me not Moses: as if prayer had been a cord to bind the hands of God,
that he could not smite: Mark well the words, Stay me not Moses, but let me
smite the people. Iam. 5. 13
Is any man afflicted, let him pray. Yea but God many times seems not to
hear, but makes his children, like them that go down into the pit. Yet, tarry
thou the Lords leisure, be strong, prescribe him no time: but as Nu^. 20. 11
Moses stroke the rock twice, and the waters gushed out, so be not you weary of
prayer, but with your prayers beat at the rock of your defense again and
again: and if not at the first, yet in Gods good time the waters of comfort
will issue out, and make your souls like unto a watered garden; you shall be
changed from Genesis 32. 28
Jacobs to Isreal's, that is prevailing with God. Pray you must, and not be
sluggish; and when you pray you must be wise and call upon God. Upon God.


Such was the practice of Constantine the Emperor, (when his enemy Licinius
begun his wars with exorcismes and charms) he undertook Eusebius de vita
Co^st. 2. 4.
all with prayer and holy meditations, and therefore the Lord of heaven made
him Lord of the field, and he found such comfort by prayer, that he stamped
upon his coin the Idem de vita Constable. 4. 15
image of himself kneeling unto his God. Pray to God you must, and not be
foolish: in the name of Christ, and not be presumptuous.

For Phil. 2. 10
the name of him is the only name whereby we must be saved. Jacob in his
journey toward Padan Aram, as he In the name of Christ.
dreamed saw Ge^. 28. 12
a ladder reared from earth to heaven, which (by the Sea Doc. Willer upon Genesis
judgments of Divines) was a figure of Christ who by his humane nature touched
earth, and heaven by his divinity: upon this ladder there were Angels that
passed up and down, at the top of the ladder there stood Almighty God: whereby
we may be assured, that if we or our prayers pass by the ladder, by Christ
Jesus, we have God the Father at the top of the ladder ready to receive us,
and our prayers; whereas we have no such assurance, if we go by Saints, or
Angels, or any other bypath, save only the Kings high way. 1. Reg. 10. 18
The ascending to the throne of Solomon was by six staiers, or steps, and at
the end of every stayer was engraven a Lion. Ascend you unto the throne of a
greater then Solomon, by the six petitions of the same prayer that the Son
of God composed, and you shall find annexed to every petition a lion, even the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, who by his meditation will procure you both audience
and favor. Ioh. 2. 8.
When the wine failed at the marriage at Cana of Galilee, Christ took six
water pots full of water and turned them into wine: though those six petitions
delivered by our hearts and tongues (by reason of the mixture of our vanity)
be full of water, weak, wallowish, and not seasoned with that salt which
every man should have in himself, Mark 9. Uer. 50: Yet by his power and
mediation he can make them strong as wine, and us so strong, that by wrestling
with God, we shall be called no more Jacobs but Isreal's, that is preuayling
with God. Yet for all this the devil would lead (...) Iere. 2. 13.
from the fountain of living water unto pits which have no water. When demand
was made of the Oracle in Daphne near unto Antioch Theod. ec. hist. 3. 9.
why it ceased to give answers as formerly it had done; the devil made answer
that he had no power, because in that place the bones and relics of the
Martyr Babylas were buried, insinuating some extraordinary holiness and power
in the dead martyrs, and by consequent inuiting the simple to call upon them:
but you have otherwise learned Christ, you know that your high Priest who has
felt your infirmities, Hebrews, 2. says, Come unto me all ye that are heavy
laden, and I will ease you, Mat. 11. Ester 4. 11.
When King Ahashuerus waued his golden scepter toward any man, he might boldly
come unto him into the inner court, without using the means of any courtier:
What need we use the means of either Peter, or Paul, or the virgin Mary or
any Saint, seeing the K. of kings has called us unto him by his word, the
scepter of his kingdom? Ioh. 16. 23
What soever you ask the Father in my name (says Christ) he will give it you.
You must pray in the name of Christ, and not be presumptuous: for things
lawful, and not be impious.

For otherwise, you may ask and not have, because you ask amiss. If you ask
either for things unlawful, or for things For things lawful.
lawful, to be spent unlawfully upon your lusts, I am. 4. If you pray for
things unlawful Romans 8. 26
how can the Spirit help your infirmities? Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. lib. 4.
observes of the Pythagoreans, that they cried loud in their prayers, not
because they thought their Gods did not hear them, but because they would have
the world hear that they prayed for nothing, but for things justifiable. Let
not impiety dead a thing that is so lively of it self, as prayer is: happy
are they that have their quiuers full of these arrows: it is not every man's,
but I am. 5. 16
the prayer of a just man, that prevails much if it be fervent. Moses was
allowed to ascend up into the mount to confer with God: but (says God) Exodus
19. 13
If any beast shall touch the mount, that beast shall die: So, you may send your
sanctified thoughts up unto the throne of God; but as for the beasts, let not
them once touch the mount: away with all beastly cogitations, away with cruelty
that tiger, away with deceit that fox, with lust that goat, with drunkenness
that swine: in your prayers consult not flesh and blood, pray not for
satisfaction of your idle, vain, carnal, and sinful imaginations, but pray
for things lawful, and be not impious: zealously too, and be not lukewarm
Christians.

For, as a pot full of water in the heat of summer, is troubled Zealously.
and polluted with many flies, but if the same water were boiled upon the fire,
the flies neither durst nor would come near to pollute it: so, whiles our
souls in prayer are cold and liuelesse, we are perplexed with vain and idle
cogitations; whereas if our minds were inflamed with zeal, it would abandon
all those vanities, and so rectify our prayers, that we should not offer
Ecclesiastes 4. 17
the sacrifice of fools. This care had not the men of Israel in their prayers,
for either they called not, or not upon God. Kings and Judges were their fuel,
they devoured them both; the highest in place, were the deepest in sin: for
whereas God had taken away 1. Reg. 12. 13.
ten tribes from Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, and given them to Jeroboam of
1. Reg. 11 16
the kindred of Ephraim, even the house of Jeroboam (the fountain) was
corrupted, the root of the King, the blood royal, they that looked high in
the court, they that sat at the stern of the common wealth were corrupted;
against these especially the Zanch. in prolegom. sup. Hos.
Prophet Hosea speaks in this prophecy, so does Amos too; whereas Esaias, and
Micheas directed their prophecies against Judah not Israel, not one meddling with
an others charge, as though they were all ruled by the form of their
commission. Here I may justly tax our wandering planets, Ephraim.
wandering Leuits: who though S. Paul make profession against boasting of an
other man's line and labors; Yet they are never well, but when they have their
scickles in an other man's harvest, as though they would rob all the Ministers
about them of their 1. These. 2. 19.
crown of reioicing: like Iuie winding about the oak, that it may stand it
self, but yet sucking the juice out of the oak they flatter so, that they
wind themselves into favor with great ones, thereby standing themselves in
credit, and sucking no small advantage. I call God to record, I aim at no
particular man in the world neither am I so uncharitable as to repine at any
Minister of Gods word, whom necessity forces to take pains in many places
now in this hard hearted age; neither so discourteous as to disallow that usual
exchange of labor in this kind, among friendly Ministers of the word: but I
think those worthy of reproof, who willingly (for advantage sake) hold this
unsettled course, presuming that the Citizens of London are like them of
Athens, Act. 17. 21
itching and longing for novelties, and loathing Manna it self, especially if
it come from them to whom they pay tithes. Thus these oily mouthed Absolons
speak plausible things, to bring the people out of love with their true Father,
their true governor, their David, their true Shepherd: 2. Sam. 15 6
thus they steal away the hearts of the weaker sort in whose brains there are
many forgeries. Mean while those Ministers and Pastors of parishes, who, like
candles spend away themselves to give light to others, who have borne the
heat of the day, are disgraced, and the other sort suggest that besides (what
is among them) Ier. 8. 22.
there is no balm in Gilead, there is no Physician there. And the people come to
hear their own Parson or Vicar, Fox in Mar
as M. Bilney a godly Martyr said the people came to hear him, like Malchus,
having their right ears cut off: they bring their left only, sinisterly
interpreting whatsoever they hear. So the nurses of Schism do invade the
possessions of many painful laborers. There have been in times past some
about this City, pedlers of learning, not engrossing whole volumes by reading,
but gleaning and deflowring printed books and Sermons, picke-purses of other
men's wits, mere banquerupts if every man had his own: they had Genesis 25. 22.
Esaus hands though they had Jacobs voices. And whether there be any such now a
days or not, I can not tell: but if there be, I fear it is still the
sickness of this City, to admire them and disesteem your own Shepherds. They
say your houses are the 1. Cor. 1. 11.
houses of Cloe, your households the 2. Tim. 4. 19.
households of One siphorus: that house, that household would never be drawn
to forsake their own Paul for 2. Tim. 4. 3
an heap of teachers: I desire you of this honorable City even in the bowels
of Christ Jesus, that you will not be willing to entertain (you care not whom)
so it be not your own Minister, that you will not gad (you care not whither)
so it be from your own parish Church, but rather think that God in his
wisdom has placed your own Ministers over your own parishes; hear their
voices: if you will not hear them but rather choose unto your selves other
places and hunt after other men, you go about preposterously and saucily to
break that order which the God of wisdom has set. Your own Minister like
Exodus 28. 29
Aaron (having the names of the ten tribes upon his breast plate) should have
his parishoners near and dear unto him: and Gala. 4. 15
you should even pull out your eyes to do him good, as the Galathians would
have done for Saint Paul: your own Minister is the man whose prayers and
preachings are countermures for your defense against the enemy. Say then of
your own Pastors, 2. Reg. 2. 12
My Father, my Father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen of the same: 2.
Cor. 10. 4
for the weapons of their warfare are not carnal but mighty in God through
Christ to cast down holds: they are the perfumers of the world, and though
they be earthen vessels yet they carry that in them, that sweetens you. Such
love I say should you carry toward your own Ministers: So should Ephraim ever
have had an ear for their Prophet Hosea, for the Prophet leuelled his speeches
against Israel which was his butte, and in the midst of this butte his
fairest white was the house of Ephraim, Ephraim has mixed, etc.

There was a time when Genesis 48. 14
Jacob laid his right hand upon Ephraim.
the head of Ephraim, the younger son of Joseph, and his left hand upon
Manasses the elder; from whom he gave the superiority: which prognostication
began to be fulfilled, Judge. 8. when one cluster of the grapes of Ephraim was
thought better then the vintage of Abiezer: whereby Gedton intimates that the
men of Ephraim in pursuit of Oreb and Zeb had the wheels of their chariots
like the whirlewinde, and in surprising them being so pursued, their strength
was as the strength of stones. But how are the brawnes of the arms of that
Ephraim fallen? Ephraim is degenerate: which Ephraim? Ephraim that was sometimes
godly and in Gods favor, Ephraim that was now pompous and of the kindred of
the King; this Ephraim is become degenerate. I will draw blood out of these
two veins, and briefly handle these two points. Apoc. 2. 7.
He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

Jerusalem (as you know) was the chosen Cedar among all the trees of the
forest, it had the birthright from all the Godly.
Cities in the world: and so long as holiness kept residence in it, it was the
Cisterne into which the fountain of all grace powered his blessings by many
conduit pipes and means: Apoc. 2. 4.
But she left her first love: Matthew. 27. 25
She cried loud for Christ's blood to fall upon her and upon her children, and
so it fell upon her, and now, How is the gold become so dim? The Prophets
complain in diverse places, that the house of God was turned into the house of
vanity: and that the Esaias 22. 1
valley of vision was turned into the valley of the shadow of death. Therefore
trust no undermining Jesuit, though he cry loud, The church of Rome, as ever
the Jews did Ier. 7. 4.
Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord. I confess that which no man can
deny, that in Paul's Romans 1. 8.
time the faith of Rome was famous over all the world, but now I fear that
mother is not much more then a Church, she is so gawdily trapped with the
inventions of man. Though (like one clayming a monopoly from God) she ingrosse
holiness, and arrogate more unto her self, then her sister Churches, yet I
fear she is one of those stars Apoc. 12. 4.
which the Dragon with his tail has swept down from heaven, she deserved to
lose her praise, when she lost her piety: Lame^. 4. 1.
How is the gold become so dim? Such was the case of Ephraim, which first,
and which secondly I noted: Ephraim, that was a Ruler among the people, was
become out of measure sinful.

An inconvenience indeed, seeing that great men's actions Great among the people.
are made presidents among their inferiors, who suite themselves after the
fashion of their governors: that knew the devil well enough when he said unto
God, I will be 1. Reg. 22. 22.
a lying spirit in the mouth of Achabs Prophets: he knew the Prophets could
lead Achab, and Achab the people; if he could guide the leaders, then he knew
he should win the field. Jeroboam is never met withal in the book of God but
like a captive with a chain at his heels: and as one doing public penance
with a plate of impiety upon his forehead, he is called 2. Reg 3. 3
Jeroboam the son of Nebat that caused all Israel to sin. If a little shrub
or twigge fall to the ground, it falls itself only: but if a Cedar fall, it
falls not only itself, but with the fall it breaks down the little trees
that grow about it: So the sins of private men are only banes to themselves;
but if great men fall into impiety, they are accessory to the ruin of many
others, whereas 2. Reg. 23.
Josias serving God himself was a mean to put down the hill altars, destroy
the Chemarims, and utterly to abolish Idolatry: his goodness was like Psalm.
133. 2.
Aarons ointment flowing from the head to the beard, and so by degrees unto the
skirts of his garment. There was a dispute among the Philosophers (as Plutarch
reports) whether an army of Lions (a Heart being their captain) or an army of
Hearts (a Lion being their captain) were more powerful: Opinio Chabriae apud
Plut. in apotheg.
It was determined for the army of Hearts following the Lion, to show what
virtue is infused into the followers by the leader.

If then the inferior be the image of the superior, and (like an image in a
glass) look upward or downward to heaven or hell, as the body (I mean the
superior) does, then give me leave to advise you that sit at the stern
whether of little barks or greater ships, whether of houses, cities, or of
countries, that your evil conuersations be not thorns in your childrens eyes
and others whom you command: If they perceive your eyes to be sweld with lust,
your hearts to be as hard as the nether millstone, your tongues to be enuenomed
with slander, your whole life to be Job. 1.
a compassing of the earth by deceit (as Satan's was) they will deem straight
their warrant sealed for committing the like offenses; and then: 2. Sam. 1. 21.
O ye Mountains of Gilboa, upon you be neither deaw nor rain, because upon
you the shield of the mighty is fallen: O ye great ones of the world there is
a curse upon you; because, if not upon you, yet by your means, virtue, the
blessing which should cloth the children of God, and as a shield defend them
from the strokes of Gods vengeance (for they are safe that appear in their
Saviors righteousness) virtue (I say) is cast down, trodden under foot, and
made of none account among the lesser sort because of the example of the
greater: So Math. 18 7
evil does come, and woe be to them by whom it does come. How much better is
it for a man of worth to say with Nehemiah, Neh. 6. 11.
Should such a man as I flee? His meaning was, Not I, by any means; least
others should be discouraged by my flight: how much better is it to have the
saying of Ioshuah for a motto ever to be remembered, Josh. 24. 15
I and my house will serve the Lord: I, (and because I) therefore my house.

O you Superiors then, who with a respected grace sit (...) the stern of
example, how can you escape a double death, having their blood upon you as
well as your own for being accessarie to their guilt? Such was the case of
Ephraim; who being great in Israel caused Israel to sin, as may appear by
the first verse of this chapters for when God would have healed Israel, he was
led by the hand from the stream, to the spring; from Israel to Ephraim, whose
example was the bane of Israel, which Ephraim has mixed himself among the
people: so by that means he had not only sins bredde at home, but also
borrowed abroad. Ephraim has mixed himself among the people, Ephraim is as a
cake upon the hearth not turned. If you ask who mixed? Ephraim mixed himself:
if you ask where? among the people: if you ask what were the effects? he was
as a cake on the hearth not turned.

Ephraim, and so all mankind is poyzed down the Ephraim has mixed himself.
wrong way by his own plummets: and the by as being set upon the left side of
us all, we are of our selves naturally more prone unto evil then goodness.
Ier. 31. 29
Our fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge.
Eve, our great grandmother being beguiled by the Serpent, saw, and liked, and
eat the fruit of the forbidden tree: well may that in the Poet be fitted unto
her; -- Virg. Eclog. 8.
Vt vidi? vt perij? intrauit mors per fenestras, her eye was accessarie unto
the sin of her soul. Adam committed treason, and we that are Adams heirs
forfeited our estates, we have our wills fettered, and our understanding (the
candle of our souls) put out: there is a dash in our coat for ever. The world
was like a well tuned instrument, all the creatures in their kind gave praise
to God, there being no jar, till man who was the chief of the consort,
strayned a note beyond his reach: ever since, the sons of Adam have had their
meditations brackish and impure. Saint Paul becomes our Herald, and tells us in
many places 2. Cor. 3. 5.
that of our selves we cannot think a good thought, and the best of us, Luk
17. 10
when we have done all that we can, we are but unprofitable servants: and
like an impartial christian he begins at home with himself, and says: Romans
7. 24.
Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? If you
believe not him, yet melt at the lamentation of our mother the Church: whose
iron heart making her lumpish, and unfit to go to GOD without Gods spirit
(like an Adamant to dravve her) cries out in the first of the Canticles, and
says: Draw me, and I will run after thee.

And yet the Papists do so much flatter flesh and blood, that they make man's
soul as a bird in a cage, having wings to fly if the cage were open; and
like a lame man going upon chrutches, needing perhaps a little help, as though
they would make him cooperate with God: Whereas weak men (God knows) we want
both wings and legs, both will and power unto goodness: for, Phil. 2. 13.
from God comes (trust Paul rather then Bellarmine himself) and velle and
perficere.

Lactantius (who was the hammer of gentilisme) Liber instit. 4.
pleades against the heathens and says, that their gods were not the authors
of corn, and wine, and oil: he says he can prove these things were in the
world before either Ceres or Saturn were borne.

But if these things were invented by them, who but only God gave them wit to
invent such things? We are all of us of the metal of a stone, we can roll
down a hill by our selves, of our own nature: but up to heauenward we cannot
go without the help of Gods holy spirit. We are like a spring-locke, of our
selves we can shut and keep out the graces of God: we cannot open our selves
to receive them in, but by the help of thee (O Lord) who art the only key. But
blessed be God, who takes away our hearts of stone, and gives us hearts of
flesh: Aug. Ench. ad Laur.
who at the first by his preventing grace does work in us to be willing, and
after with his subsequent grace he accompanies us, that being willing, we
should not will in vain. Therefore, Aug. de bono pers. cap. 19.
In nullo gloriandum est, quia nihil est nostrum, we must boast our selves of
nothing, because nothing is our own: we are stars, we derive all that we
have from the Father of lights, Iam. 1. Idem eod. lib. cap. 20.
Give therefore Lord what thou command, and then command what thou will.
For, goodness is a flower that grows not in our gardens: It becomes us al to
look upon our trailing wings, and confess that we cannot fly, for no spices
can flow out of our gardens, no virtues out of our souls, unless Gods holy
Spirit enrich our souls, Cant. 4. 16
unless the North and South arise and blow upon our gardens. For of ourselves
we are naturally inclined to evil, as Ephraim was: so if you ask who mixed? he
mixed himself: if you ask where? he mix: himself among the people.

What, Ephraim? having all Israel as a train to follow after? they all making
by many degrees the mayor part of Among the people.
the sons of Abraham, they being ten tribes, and Judah but only two? being
joined with the people too, were not they a goodly company, even as the
morning spread upon the mountains? Yes their multitude was great, but they were
not therefore holy, because they were many: and therefore instead of wine,
Bellarmine brocheth that which is worse then water, when Quarta not a eccl.
secund. Bell.
for one of the marks of the Church he sets down multitude, as though there
were not a broad way that leads unto hell, and many passengers in that way.
Math. 7. 14.

What glory did multitude bring unto the Church, 1. Reg. 18. 22
when Elias mourned because there were so few that professed true religion, as
though he had been left alone as a sparrow upon the house top? In the days of
Traian the Emperor, the Church of God was like a dove in the holes of the rock:
and therefore the Christians in his time being excepted against for their
conuenticles, Plin. ep. ad Traian.
were apologized by Pliny the second, who wrote unto Traian, and told him that
he found no fault with the Christians, unless it were a fault to pray and
praise their God in their antelucane hymns. Hoc colligitur ex varijs locis
eccles. hist. Soct. and Soz.
There was a time when the Arrian heresies spread so fast, that there was
Athanasius against all the world, and all the world against Athanasius: Gods
chosen was a pearl in the rock, and a vain of gold hid in the earth hard to be
found. The wilderness is great where the goats do range, the fold of God but
small: Luke, 12. 32.
yet fear not little flock, it is your fathers will to give you a kingdom.
Ephraim has mixed himself among the people.

They were an irreligious and idolatrous people, which were as thorns in the
sides of Ephraim: and means to draw People.
them unto evil. Out of which words does arise this second observation, that
we must avoid evil company. For, with the froward we shall learn
frowardness. The wicked are like sticks one unto an other, kindling the heat
of concupiscence: mid-vviues they are, by their persuasions helping monstrous
births in the world, bringing to pass that Iam. 1. 15.
the sooner lust may conceive and bring forth sin, and sin when it is
finished may bring forth death. They reach out one unto an other the hand of
error, saying, not, Ps. 122. 1.
Come let us go up into the house of the Lord, but Amos 4. 4.
let us go up to Bethel, and transgress to Gilgal and multiply transgression.
A wicked companion is like unto Dan Genesis 49.
an adder in the path, which bites the horse, and makes the rider to fall
backward, he makes those who^ he works upon by his persuasions to become
retrograde, Tim. 4. 10.
with Demas to forsake Paul and embrace this present world, and with Apoc. 2.
the Church of Ephesus to leave their first love, and become Apostats in matters
of Christianity. It is a perilous conflict between the fire and the stubble,
even iron Lib. 2. Soliloq.
(says Isidorus) will melt at this fire, the most stayed man (seeing all men
have such flaxen souls and so apt to take fire) will thaw into vanity when he
meets with evil company. As 1. Reg. 12 28
Jeroboam reared up golden calves in Dan and Bethel, to keep the people from
going to serve God at Jerusalem: So, to draw those that are flexible from their
good and godly purposes, they erect vanities, and games unto Bacchus and Flora:
which idols, I mean drunkenness and wantonness, are better cliented upon
the Sabbath day, then the Ministers of Gods word. With a thousand lures, evil
companions provoke unto intemperate courses; and like Fimbria in Tullies
pleadings for Roscius Pro Ros. Amer.
who was angry with Scaeuola that he would not receive all his sword (point
and blade) into his bowels: so these are angry that all others will not run
with them into the same excess of riot. But it becomes you who have better
learned Christ, to be like Virg. ecl. vlt.
Arethusa which passes through the Sicilian Sea, and yet takes no saltness,
Phil. 2. 15.
to live (as Paul would have men to live) blameless in the midst of a
froward and crooked generation.

It is with the common corruptions of the world, as with a common plague; when
no man may safely converse with these, but the Physicions to cure them, nor any
with those but grave and wise men to draw them unto goodness by their good
counsel. Exo. 25. 20
Over the ark of the Lord in the tabernacle there were purtrayed cherubins,
and they had their faces and wings looking and pointing one toward an other,
but all of them toward the arc of testimony: So, every one must aim at an
other by their love, but all of them at the Lord; they must love in the Lord,
and ever maintain that true love knot of the communion of Saints. And here
for the use of this doctrine, I can not pass over a triple caveat, which is
meet to be given to three sorts of men: the first, simple men: the second,
men of wandering conceits: the third, self conceited.

Simple are they, who upon a consideration that all Simple.
the World is wicked, do sequester themselves from the World, affecting a
Monastical life, forgetting that God in the Nonage of the World, said; Genesis 2.
18
It was not good for man to be alone: avoiding (perhaps) some occasions of
doing hurt; but forgoing (without doubt) all means of doing good. And here
you have the pedigree of Eremites, whose lives were led under Math. 5. 15
a bushel, whereas both life and doctrine should have been on a candlestick;
they ever quarrelled with humane society; like candles turned downewarde,
choking the flame of themselves, with the oil of themselves: themselves by
their own peevishness damming up the light that the world might have been the
better for: and so retyring themselves from all occasions of intercourse (in
their dull judgments) become Antipodes, and tread opposite unto the world:
their lives are a continual rowing against the stream, and their own houses
may seem to deserve the names and the inscriptions of their sepulchers. Bucchij
liber aureus de conform. vitae Francisci and Christi et lib. conf. Franc. page
138
S. Francis was one that left the society of men, and conuersed with beasts,
and birds; and so much ioyed in solitariness and a private life, that the
Papists take him to be a man that tra^sgressed 1 Matt. 5. 18
no one jot of the law; and therefore they have compyled hymns and songs in
praise of him, as though he had had a maiden soul, free from sin: yet for all
these boastings, no question but he and al their dearlings were men, and had
their affections, they found many mutinies and rebellions in their little
Commonwealths.

A second sort of men there be, who think they cannot sufficiently Wandering
conceits.
mingle themselves with evil company at home, therefore they affect travailing
abroad, that having traffic with foreign countries, they may borrow the
sins of other nations. God I confess has enriched several countries, with
several commodities; that (no country being absolute of it self) every
country should crave help of an other: So the wisdom of God has decreed,
that the need of every country should occasion love among all countries. Hence
does arise the necessity of the Merchants trade, which triumphs as a Queen
in this honorable City, and makes it like unto Tyrus, Esaias, 23. having the
riches of the river to be a reuenew unto it, and her merchants as the Nobles of
the world: Yet in my opinion the trauelles of many young gentlemen are more
ordinary, then beneficial. I do not censure all, much less condemn them, for
I know the use thereof has been, and may be behoouefull to our common
mother: yet many I know ( Genesis 34. 2.
like Dina the daughter of Jacob) have lost their virginity by going abroad,
and have returned home impure; and our country which in former ages was plain
and downeright, they have made like Arras, full of strange forms and colors,
having in it twisted and wouen the fashions of all countries that are
inhabited, as though the four winds had conspired to blow their chafe, and
their feathers and their dust among us, and make a dunghill of our country.
They imbrue their minds in the impieties and suck up the infections of other
countries; and returning home with stomakes fully charged, they vomit their
poison in their mothers lap; they practice in England, what they have unhappily
learned abroad. 1. Reg. 11. 4.
Salomons outlandish women brought in outlandish religion, and conditions, and
so much estated themselves in the bosom of the king, that they drew him and his
people to idolatry. 1. Reg. 10. 22
The same Solomon sent his Ambassadors into strange countries for gold and
silver, and iuorie; So they went over and brought them, and withal they
brought apes and peacockes: I fear it is the case of many, whose friends send
them abroad to learn knowledge and experience, whereby they may better the
church and commonwealth, which perhaps they leave behind, and bring home
only the apes and peacockes; I mean proud and fantastical conditions. Else
what means this revolution of fashions, when men that should be mere English
are not themselves; but compounded men, Spanish, Dutch, Italian, and what not?
I would therefore (in the bowels of Christ) exhort all you young Gentlemen,
that intend this course of traveling, that you would strive to bring home, not
the apes and peacockes, but the gold, and silver, and iuory, viz. that
learning, and those manners that are precious: so shall you make a saving
voyage unto your own souls, and gain that good experience whereby your
country shall be enriched.

A third sort of people there be, who pretend such an Men of proud co^ceits.
abhorring of evil company, that they look asquint and disdainefully upon all
men, as being not holy enough to converse with themselves. They are so teasty
that they quarrel with the orders of the Church, reputing them as old hair
which superstition has shaken off. They are Brownists and Barowists,
peace-breakers of the Church: though our country now be not much molested
with them, b Judge. 5. 15
yet for the divisions of Ruben there have been great thoughts of heart. It is
with our souls while we live in these houses of clay, as with men while they
live in houses: neither can they enjoy the full benefit of the sun, but both
light and heat is abated; neither can our souls of the Sun of righteousness,
there is found such imperfection both in the warmth of love and in the light of
understanding. Though the Prophet reproved them that said one unto an other
Esaias 65. 5.
I am holyer then thou: Though Christ said that Math. 13 30
tares will grow among the wheat until the baruest: Though Saint Paul says
that 1. Cor. 15. 10
If we will depart quite from the wicked, we must depart out of the world: Yet
for all this the Brownists, and the Barrowists hold opinion, See their writings
M. Gifford and others against them
that we of the Church of England are not true members of the Church, nor our
Church the true Church of God, because stained (say they) with irrelligion and
impiety.

The varnish of their own hypocrisy deludes them so, that they make love unto
themselves, and grow amorous of their own virtues, which they draw far
beyond the staple, that of it they may weaue unto themselves a garment of
righteousness. What could the Pharisie have done more, who pleaded his own
merit, saying: Luke 18. 12
I fast twice awecke, I give alms to the poor, and give tithe of all I have.
If you look into their conuersations and observe their vaunts, with judicious
eyes and ears; O! what a rank shall you see of barren fig trees, and Ps. 37. 35
green bay-trees, to whom David compares the wicked? O what a noise shall you
hear of tynkling cymballs; to which S. Paul compares them which have a show
of religion, but no love. 1. Cor. 13. So little love to their equalles have
these men, that when the rod of God is shaken over our heads Gifford against
Barrow page 8^.
they make themselves the only men that are fit to stand in the gappe* they
blaze the honor of their own preaching, as though it were so full of life,
that they only knew the blood and marrow of the Scriptures: of their own
prayers, as though they were so effectual that Elias his spirit were only
redoubled upon them, and that every one of them is a second Elizeus. So little
obedience have they to their superiors, Giff^rd against Barrow. page 83
that the reverend fathers of the Church (who may well borrow that saying of
the Church in the Canticles; Cant. 1. 5.
The sons of my mother (were angry with me) are by these men scorned,
disobayed, resisted: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Luke
23.

Tull. de Senectute.
The sons of Sophocles being desirous to rule, impleaded the Father for
dotage, that they might have all matters committed to themselves; but Sophocles
presented, to the Judges, his Oedipus colonaeus, a tragedy which he had penned
in his old age, and bade them judge whether that was the work of a doting man
or not; which they all esteeming to come from a wit full of nimblenesse and
actiuity, condemned the sons, and justified the Father: So these fiery
spirits, longing to have the staff in their own hands, have by their words,
and in their writings traduced the Fathers of our Church: but if we look upon
their Oedipus colonaeus, and mark with what discretion they govern, and how
behouefull their government is for our times, we shall surely find them not to
be doting Fathers, but their accusers to be wicked sons.. And here, my
brethren, bemone with me the estate and calamity of our mother the Church,
which (Rebekah like) has diverse opinions striving in her womb: must not her
pangs needs be great? Plin. not. hist.
Amphisbena-like, two heads one against an other strive for the sovereignty: is
not the body then like to break? O! how well does it become the sons of oil
to nourish peace, a fruit of him which is anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows? When wind blows against wind, schism against schism, the
Church may say as Iocasta sometimes said, weeping over the malice of her two
sons, Eteocles, and Polynices: Sen. in Thebaid.
Tu times illum, and ille te, ego vtrumque sed pro vtroque thou fear him,
and he fears thee, and I fear you both, because I fear the destruction of
you both. O you then that are too prodigal of enmity one toward an other, 2.
Sam 1. 20
let not the streets of Gath, and Ascalonring your disgrace, nor the daughters
of the Philistines tune your shame to their tymbrells, be not the nails and
teeth of the Church to scratch and bite your brethren: howsoever your sails
swell with a favorable gale, yet Lipsius in his fifth book of Politics
advises you to take in at the harbor of peace: it becomes not members of the
same body to interfere and work one upon an other. 1. Cor. 3. 3.
When there are iarres among you, are not you carnal? Yes, for peace becomes
those spirits which relish and taste of him, whose birthday song was Luke 2.
Peace upon the earth.

Better Bar^. epist. 102. ad que^dam Abbatum.
, says a learned Father, vt pereat vnus quam vnitas: and therefore with
enlarged bowelles, I speak, not now unto Brownists, and Barowists, but unto
those who are nearer friends to our Church (men for their diligence and other
good parts worthy of much praise) and yet so impatient at the ceremonies of
our Church, that they be scarce willing (in the observing of them) to join
with us. I would pray them to remember that in the Canticles, where the Church
is compared unto Can. 6. 3
an army with banners displayed: Now if there was ever army without order let
them judge: if there ought not to be order in the Church, let Saint Paul judge,
who says; 1. Cor. 14. 40
Let every thing be done decently and in order. Seeing then there is one God
the Father of us all, one Church the mother of us all, one Christ the elder
brother of us all, one Baptism the seal of us all, one faith the hand of us
all, one salvation the mark whereat we all shoot, let us strive Ephesians. 4. 3.
to maintain the unity of the spirit, and in the band of peace. Let us not be
so conceited of our own holiness, as to distaste all men's company; nor yet so
lavish of our company as to mingle our selves among the wicked, but be
cautelous least we be like to Ephraim, who mixed himself among the people: and
the effect of this mixture was lamentable, he was as a cake on the hearth not
turned.

Raw on the one side, and roasted on the other, partly A cake not turned.
religious, and partly idolatrous, Apoc. 3.
lukewarm, fit to be spewed out of Gods mouth, a sin indeed to halt between
two opinions, to have 1. Reg. 18. 21
a knee for God, and a knee for Baal; and for Reg. 5. 18
Rimmon, in the house of Rimmon, to profess two religions, to woo the flames
of persecution, least they should endure the punishment of either. 1. Sam. 5. 4
If Dagon presume to stand by the ark of the Lord, it is well worthy to fall:
2. Cor. 6. 15
there is no communion between Christ and Beliall. Eusebius. ec. hist. lib. 3.
cap. 22.
Saint John could not endure to be with Cerinthus in the bath: Saint Ieromes
pen like a lance was charged against Uigilantius and many others. S. Austen in
his disputations spoke hot words, coals of juniper against the Arrians, the
Pelagians, the Donatists, and the Manachees. 2. Reg. 2. 23.
Before all these Josias whose name remains upon record in the calendar of the
just (whose soul is bound up in the bundle of life, and his life hid in Christ
with God) could not endure idolatry while he reigned: Ecclus. 49.
Therefore, his name is like a perfume, made by the art of the Apothecary.
Philip. Camerar. in operibus successiuis.
It is remembered of a certain Souldan which dyed at the siege of Zigetum, that
being persuaded by the Muphti (who holds the place of a Bishop or Patriarch
among the mahumetan turks) not to suffer so many religions as were in his
dominions; he answered, that a nosegay of many flowers smelled more sweetly
then one flower only: which I confess to be true, but the case with religions
is neither the same, nor the like; for in a nosegay they may be all flowers,
but among religions they must be all weeds, all heresies, except one only
flower which is the truth. Apocalip. cap. 2. 3.
The spirit of God blames the Church of Ephesus for embracing the doctrine of
the Nicholaitans: the Church of Smyrna for embracing the doctrine of Balaam:
the Church of Thyatira for embracing the doctrine of Iezabel: religion is the
jewel of the ring, Neh. 13. 24.
therefore the same mouth that speaks the language of Canaan, why should it
speak the language of Ashdod? the same chair of state which holds religion
stamped with the image of the most high, why should it hold the Apoc. 17
purple harlot, the whore of Babylon with all her paintings and complexions
upon her face, and the cup of fornication in her hand? There be two reasons to
the contrary, the one political, the other theological or divine.

The reason political is drawn from the mutinies and Political.
vprores that are made where there are two religions professed. There were in
the Church of Germany the opinions of Seruetus and Gentilis: what ruptures
those meteors bred in that sky, what breaches in that Church I will not tell
you; but I refer you unto Epist. ad Duditium and epist. ad orthodoxos omnes.
M. Bezaes epistles, where you shall see the judgment of M. Calvin, and many
others against the toleration of them. When Martin Luther under the countenance
and conduct of Frederike the Duke of Saxony held a candle in the dark before
Gods bleared children, and awaking antiquity for his succor opened a door
unto the truth, there was a book published by authority for the allowance of
interim Germanicum, page 640.
that is, till matters of religion were settled among them, men should enjoy
what religion they would in the interim or mean time. It was misliked by many
great divines, among the rest by Gasper Aquila a Minister of great account at
that time, by the Lubicenses, the Lunebergenses, page 658.
the Hamburgenses, the Magdeburgici, and for the most part by all the lower
Saxony. The relation of these things would require a long time: therefore I
refer you for your better knowledge unto diverse parts of Sleidans commentaries,
where you shall find the sturres were great, and the consequents had like to
have been bloody.

If God in his wisdom would set a mark of distinction, upon all such as did
not mourn for our Sion in her Widdowhood, nor pray for the peace of our
Jerusalem, what a show would the rank of our hollow hearted English make, who
would pull down our culuer house, our little Church? How often have thou heard
them, O God, (though they whispered unto themselves) say of the enemies of our
peace; Judge. 5. 28.
Why are the wheels of his chariot so long a coming? I thirst not after their
blood or trouble, their veins shall ever be springs of blood for me: but
seeing they will not be charmed not hear, then if the house be shaken about
their ears, it is but justice. If the liberty of them say unto the conscience,
I am restrained for thee: If the wealth say unto the conscience, I am impaired
for thee: If the strength of the body say unto the conscience, I am brought low
for thee; Justice I say upon them, of whom our enemies may say unto us, Iud.
14. 18
If we had not plowed with your heifers we had gained no advantage against you.

The reason Theological, or divine, is drawn first from the weakness of
man, secondly from the commandment Theological.
of God.

The weakness of man is such, that the devil who can Weakness of man.
turn himself into an Angel of light, plays upon that advantage: and
therefore it quickly came to pass that all the eastern Churches Co^stat ex
diuersis locis Soz eccl. hist.
almost were corrupted with Arrianisme, and the world wondered that it was so
suddenly turned Arrian. Heresy is like a raine-bowe, it has a thousand
colors glorious and seeming celestial: but Aduerso sole colores Virg.
it is ever against the Sun, Malach. 4.
the Sun of righteousness: therefore it is fit for no man to mingle himself
among the heretical, but rather to get out of Babylon, that there may be
recovered out of the jaws of the deuourer, a leg or a piece of an ear, Amos
the 3. and the 12. some one or other silly and miscarried soul.

Besides the weakness of man, there is the commandment The commandment of
God.
of God also enforcing; the tenor whereof is, that Leuit. 22. 9
no ground should be sown with two seeds, that no garment of linsie wolsie
should be worn, that no ground should be plowed with an ox and an ass
together: all which were shadows of two religions, whereof there ought not to
be a mixture. For, to join old ceremonies of superstition with Gods truth, is
to stitch Luke 5. 36.
a piece of an old garment unto a new vesture, which will make the rent or
breach the greater, the sin more odious unto God. It is obserueable that Noah
prayed for his sons, and said; Genesis 9. 27.
God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem, and let Canaan be their
servant: he knew how well it pleased the holy Trinity, to see the union of
the godly, and their loathing of the ungodly: it pleased God indeed, else would
the Prophet David never have hung up a table of statutes for his own house
(his little Commonwealth) Psalm. 101. whereby he chased away all the wicked,
whom (as the same David testifies elsewhere) God himself loved not: the
ungodly and him that delights in wickedness does his soul abhor. Psa. 11.
5. Happy are we then, in whose land Popery is not infranchised and made free
Denizen. So God would have it, Mat. 5. 29.
he would have the offending eye or hand cut off. Therefore Cant. 1.
tell us still, O Lord, where thou feedest, and where thou lie at noone, we
will only cleave unto thy truth, and not hunt after the opinions that are
heretical, the inventions of man's brain: Cant. 1.
for why should we be as she that turns aside unto the flocks of those
companions? I will conclude this point with the testimony of the Cappadocians
by Gregory Nazianzen in his Monodia: who seeing them live in safety and peace,
when al their neighbor countries about them were mudded with contention,
said, that sure they were preserved by the holy Trinity; because they did
without rent, with one accord so zealously maintain the Trinity against the
Arrians. I hasten to that which follows: among religions Luke 10. 42
vnum est necessarium, one thing is needful.

And so from the sin of Ephraim, I come to the punishment of Ephram, which
out of these words the interpreters say, was this: that as men being hungry and
coming with a ravenous desire unto a cake that is upon a hearth, devour and
eat it up, though it be not baked but raw on the one side; so shall the enemies
of Ephraim like those hungry deuourers, come with violence against them,
hastily make spoil, and prey upon them. The handling of which point of their
punishment, though I will not adiourn until another time, yet I will square it
and make it fit unto another place of this text; namely, the verse following,
upon which this doctrine may more sutably be grafted, for it is said: Strangers
have devoured his strength, and yet he knows not etc.

Which punishment (without doubt) was deep, if not the bottom of the cup of
trembling. Deep indeed, whether we respect the deuourers, they were strangers:
or the thing devoured, which was the strength of Ephraim.

Many times in the book of Moses, Joshua, the Kings, and Chronicles, it is
auerred unto the children of Israel, Strangers.
by God, who is only true; that if the people of Israel would serve the Lord,
they should enjoy the land: If not, then they should be dispossessed by
strangers, Deu. 28. 49
a people of a stern countenance, and an unknown language. Which admonitions
of Almighty God being knit together, like as many beams of the sun in a
burning glass, may serve like those beams to kindle a fire, to inflame the
hearts of men, to make themselves zealous for the Lord of hosts; that by their
obedience, the daughter of that zeal, they may prevent the invasion of strange
deuourers, of Iere. 51. 7.
Babel who is a golden cup in the hand of the Lord (as the Prophet Jeremy
says) to make the nations drunken with vengeance, and then they rage. As it
was the prophecy of God, who knew before; so was it the case of Israel, who
felt it, when it came upon them: For, Psalm 137. 1.
By the waters of Babylon they saete down and wept when they remembered thee, O
Sion; as for their harps they hanged them upon the willowes that were thereon,
while they that led them captive said; Come and sing us one of your songs of
Sion: but alas how could they sing the Lords song in a strange land? This was
their first captivity after the law: but they were surprised the second time
anon after the death of Christ, like men who were willing to bear neither the
hard yoke of the law, nor that of the Gospel which is easy, Matthew. 11.
though (in the judgment of S. James) I am. 2. 12
it be called a law of liberty. For the Aegle in the Roman ensign (that was
their arms) towred aloft with incredible majesty, and couched all the nations
of the world under it like lesser birds, and made them tributarie unto Caesar:
among other countries the land of Jury was dead in sins and trespasses, and
therefore (as one says) became a carcass or a smelling carrion, and therefore
fittest to be preyed upon by that Aeagles they endured the deuourings of a
stranger, but by whom? but when? but how? By whom? Josephus.
by Vespasian the Emperor, and Titus his s^n: when? about 40. years after the
prophecy of Christ, of the destruction of Jerusalem: how? that I may tell, who
gives me the pen of Esdras the Scribe? or the tongue of some fluent Orator?
There were diverse apparitions in the City, besides voices from the East, and
from the West, all as prognosticatious of their ruin; within the walls they
were divided into diverse companies, under diverse captains, they turned their
swords upon themselves (quis furor hic ciues?) as though their own hands had
been ordained to be their executioners, as well as their souls were
malefactors, and rebels against their God. Josephus.
Then came hunger, and pestilence, and the sword (like Gods good servants)
shouldering out one another, and striving which of them should first revenge
their masters quarrel: Famine made mothers eat their children: and those
wombes that gave them harbor, were now become the places of their burial: one
cut an others throat that he might catch the morsells before they fell into
his belly: extreme hunger made their practices lamentable and monstrous, both
to be pitied and abhorred. When famine had played his part, then came
pestilence and layed-along whole herds of them grouelling upon the ground:
which misery when they felt they gasped, and gased upon the temple, as the
story says. Which misery when Titus (the delight and honor of mankind)
beheld, he lift up both hands and eyes together to heaven, and called God to
witness, that it was not his cruelty but their impiety that did thus awake him
whose hand holds vengeance for to repay. When famine and pestilence had powered
out their vialles, then came the man upon the red horse, Apoc. 5. Blood, and
war, and the winged sword flew with triumph among them: there were slain (as
the story says) very many, there were taken prisoners many; the Romans in
scorn sold 30. Jews for one penny, because among them their Master was sold
for thirty pence. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 6.
Aelius Adrianus had a purpose (if it could have holden) to have reedified the
City, and to have called it Aelia, after his own name. Soz lib. 5. cap. 21.
Julian the Apostata, in his blasphemous imagination, thought to build up the
City again as glorious as it was before, because he would have disproued
Christ, who had prophesied of the utter dissipation thereof: but he that sits in
heaven laughed him to scorn, his workmen and his work were hindered by the
falling of lime, and sand, and a great gate, by the flashing of fire, and by
the quaking of the earth, and by other means, as if God had said of Jerusalem,
as sometimes he said of Jericho, Josh. 6. 26.
Cursed be the man before the Lord, that rises up and builds this City: he
shall lay the foundation thereof in his eldest son, and in his youngest son
shall he set up the gates of it. Thus Jerusalem, O thou, who like Genesis 49. 2.
Ruben wast the beginning of Gods manly strength, thou wast unstable as water,
and did forsakethy God: therefore O Ruben, O Jerusalem, thy dignity is gone.
Senec. in Troa.
Seneca describes the miseries of captivity, where (by the Chorus) he says,
that Priamus now is happy, for he sees not the burning of Troy, his victorious
hands are not bound behind him, he is not dragged at Agamemnons chariot, --
nunc Elyzij nemoris tutus erat in vmbris. And surely they whose eyes are closed
before they see the woes of their friends and country, may have that applied
unto them, which was said of Crassus (in Tullies Orator) upon the like
occasion; Lib. 3. de Orat.
Vt non tam erepta vita, quam mors donata videatur, life may not be so fitly
said to be taken away, as death given for a special comfort. Zach. 9 14
Give them: Lord what will thou give them? a barren womb, and dry breasts: a
favor indeed; better to be barren, then to bring forth children to the
murderer. But why should I spend my time in searching records for evidence in a
matter so plain as this? you know as well as I, that foreign invasion and
captivity opens the door to murder, and rapine, and oppression, and
mutinies, and liberty far from Christian, and confusion more then barbarous:
good governors are deposed, the incendiaries of the world are inthronized: in
stead of many years crowned with gladness, in stead of the thickness of
corn, which should have made the valleies laugh and sing; there is seen a
blurred countenance of the commonwealth: weeds the brood of negligence, the
ensigns of poverty do stain the face of the earth, the land howleth and is
abashed, Hos. 4. 2.
By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they break
out, and blood touches blood: yet in the end Psa. 34. 10
these lions lack and suffer hunger, when they that fear the Lord, want no
manner of thing that is good. Psalm. 144. 5
Blessed are the people therefore that have no leading into captivity, nor no
complaining in their streets, yea blessed are the people which have the Lord
for their God.

This doctrine may serve as a spur, and as a bridle: as a spur Spur.
to drine us forward unto praise and thanksgiving, and as a bridle to keep us
back from running inordinate courses: it may well stir us up unto praise (yea,
praise the Lord with understanding) for we have not as yet been scard with the
barkings of any uncouth woolfe; but under our own vines, and our own fig
trees, we have quietly reposed with our wives and children: our Land has
been a treasury and a storehouse for Gods blessings, whereas our neighbor
countries have been the cockpits for all christendom to fight their battles
in: we have been raised up unto our labor by the noise of the cock, who in his
chirping so merrily can greet the morning; whereas others have been rowsed up
with the sound of a trumpet unto battle: we have had the light of the
Gospel, and they the light of beacons: we have had peace the child of
heaven, and plenty the child of peace, while they have bin measured with the
line of Samaria, and have had stretched out upon them the plummets of the house
of Achab: we have lived on the lee side of the world, we know not what a
storm means: as upon Alexandria it is said the Sun shined once every day,
so we have not wanted our daily comforts; but like Gods minions we have had
daily cause of rejoicing both great and small; Our mountains have skipped like
rams, and our little hills like young sheep: Leuit. 23. 34.
if we did well, all our feastings should be feasts of tabernacles in
remembrance that our forefathers lived unquietly in respect of our settled
estate. Psa. 129. 1
Oftentimes may England with Israel now say, from my youth up have they fought
against me, Psalm. 83. 7
the plowers plowed upon my back and made long furrows, both Gebal and Ammon
and Amaleck with them that dwell at Tire: did they not even write and in grave
victory upon their own ships, assuring themselves of the conquest before
the encounter? but how they sped, the seas, the narrow seas can tell: ask of
the wind, ask of the whirlewinde, and they will tell you. Besides the
attempts of our foreign enemies, our country has been gnawne and wrung with
the gripings of homeborne traitors, looking still for the troubling of the
stream that they might fish. They said in their hearts as Esau said, Genesis 27.
41
The days of mourning for my father will shortly come, then will I kill my
brother Jacob; the days of mourning for Queen Elizabeth will come shortly,
then will we make havoc of our brethren, and either kill them or drive them
like Owls into the desert, and like Pellicans into the wilderness: whereas
(ignorant men) their simplicity would have betrayed them unto their enemies;
who knew how to love the treason but hate the traitor: and their malice was
like the Duke of Alnaies or the Guises sword, which after the victory would
know neither English, nor French, nor Spanish, nor Dutch, nor any friend, nor
any hired favorite, ^ What? noe return of thansgiuing for all these blessings?
Ingrata Valerius Maximus. Lib. 5. cap. ^. de Ingrat.
patria, ne ossa quidem? (said Scipio, Africanus) have I gotten so many
victories for you my countrymen, and not so much as my bones remain among you?
Have I gotten so many victories for you (may God say) and no remembrance of me
left among you? Luk 17. 17
Vbi nouem, where are the nine? But one among ten? but one among ten thousand
that returns to give praise? all like the Moon, which totum adimit quo
ingrata refulget, darkens that Sun that gave it light? Do we all take that
cup of Salvation with the left hand, which God has reached out unto us with
the right hand of his bounty? Have we not all cause to call upon the name of
the Lord? Let not Gods blessings fall upon us as pure water upon sinkes, which
return nothing in stead thereof, but anoysome smell again. Jacob could cast
his accounts; and remembering what before he wanted, and what now he had,
could say out of a thankful mind: Genesis 32. 10
With this staff, came I over Jordan. Job. 1. 9.
Does Job serve God for naught? It was the speech of the Devil: The Devil
himself can tell, that where God bestows his blessings, man ought to pay
tribute, praise and obedience. Aug. in med.
Unthankfulness is a parching wind, damming up the fountain of Gods
blessings. Realdus Columb.
There is given unto man (as the Anatomists do observe) one muscle in the eye,
more then in the eye of a beast, to teach that men are born to look upward (in
toke^ of tha^kfulnes) rather then beasts. Therefore Abak. 1. 16
let none sacrifice unto their nets, nor burn incense unto their yarne; but
let every one of us (like a bird leaping from branch to branch, and singing as
she leapeth) leap by our meditations from one blessing unto an other, from our
creation to our redemption, to our justification, to our sanctification, to our
glorification, from branch to branch; and ever as we leap sing out that hymn
of David: Psa. 103. 1
Praise the Lord, O my soul; and (as though that were too little) all that is
within me praise his holy name.

As this doctrine is a spur to stir us up to thankfulness, so I told you it
might serve as a bridle to curb those sins which Bridle.
are the occasions, that strangers may devour our strength. God has planted us
as Esaias. 5. 1.
a Vineyard upon a very fruitful hill, he has hedged us about with his
providence: what could he have done for his vineyard, that he has not done? In
stead of good grapes if we bring forth wild grapes; iudgethen Judah and
Jerusalem, judge your selves, can you have truce with any of his creatures?
will not God command the heaven to be as iron and the earth as brass unto
you? Will he not deny you the former and the latter rain? Will he not give
your fruits unto the caterpiller, your labors unto the grasshopper, and your
mulbery trees unto the frost? Yes, he will meet you Zecha. 5. 3.
as well on this side as on that: though ( Iere. 22. 24
Coniah-like) you be a signet upon the finger of God, yet if you wring the
finger he will pull you off; Joel. 1. 4.
that which is left of the palmer worm, the grasshopper shall eat, and the
residue of the grasshopper shall the cankerworm eat, and the residue of the
cankerworme shall the caterpiller eat. Though you escape the pit, you shall be
taken in the snare, Jeremy, 48. You shall fly from a Lion, and a Bear shall
meet you: or lean your band upon a wall, and a serpent shall bite you. Amos.
5. 2. Reg 9. 22
Is it peace lehu or not, quoth the messenger of Iezabel. What talkest thou of
peace (quoth he again) seeing the whoredoms and witch-crafts of Iezabel are
great in nuraber? So, how can we talk of peace, with God and our selves, while
our sins and impurities are great in number? For the which, God (being the Lord
of hosts) can vnmuzzle all his creatures, fire, water, hayle, ye, snow,
storm, and tempest to be the portion for the wicked to drink.

The world is old and now in her dotage: but good God, what a wonder is it?
though she be old she is ever in childbed, in travel every month of new
fashions, of new sins, of new vanities; of all new things, save only of the
new Man. That has brought in so many uncouth diseases, as punishments for
these new sins. That old man is in such request, that the world is ready to say
with the young man in the Gospel, whom Christ bade follow, that she will follow;
but first she must Luke 9. 59
go bury her Father: She has an old man at home that is not yet dead; an old
man, the old Adam, the man of sin, living, and not dead, not dead but living
in her own loins. Plu. de Solertia animalium.
Thales Milesius had an ass which being laden with salt, melted the salt in
the water, and so was disburdened; and afterward being laden with wool, and
plunging the same burden in the water, was more burdened: we are all fraught in
some measure with that Mar. 9. 50.
salt which every man should have in himself: that we melt away by bathing our
selves in the pleasures of the world; then we are laden with vanity, far
lighter then wool: which while we plunge in the same stream we are unawares so
burdened, that we cannot clime unto the hill, not to the hill of Sion, not up
to heaven, not up to those hills from whence comes all our help.

These vanities, these sins, these, these do lime the souls of men, and hinder
their flight to heaven: and with a false key they open the door to vengeance.
They wring the sword out of the hand of God. Presume not therefore to sin: for
that will make your sins, sins of a whorish forhead: but rather be led by the
punishment, to the sin, as by the stream unto the spring. Slander not the frost
and the hayle, and the wind, and the weather: they are Gods pursuiuants sent to
call you home, though you think them unseasonable and vnwelcom: rather kiss the
rod and submit your selves unto his power, and look into your own distempered
estates, suppress those rebels within you, your affections: retain S. Paul
for your counselor, who tells you that Gal. 6. 8
as you sow, so shall you reap: Hos. 8. 7
Sow not (says the Prophet) the wind, for fear you reap the whirlewind for
your harvest. So we not drunkenness, for fear you reap for your harvest, the
cancelling of the image of God which is upon you: bend not your knees to drink
healthes and carowses, which should be bent in your prayers and soliloques, for
the service of the living God: nor let that mouth which should praise your God,
be like Idols ever gaping to devour much of that which would relieve Gods
children. Phil. 3. 19
Stand in awe, and fear least those two cannot be severed, which Saint Paul
has linked together; the belly the God, and the end damnation.

When the devil wounds or kills by any sin (excepting drunkenness) he
pearceth with a single bullet, one sin only; but when by drunkenness, then
by chain shot, many sins linked together: it is never alone, it draws on
swearing, and quarrelling, and ribaldry, and words, what not? save only them
that are powdered with salt: and deeds, what not? save only the fruits of the
spirit. Leuit. 3. 1 Mala. 1. 8
By the law Leuiticall there was no beast allowed to be a sacrifice, that was
blind or lame, or unclean: when men are so drunken that they cannot see, and
therefore blind; that they cannot stand, and therefore lame; that they foam at
the mouth, and therefore unclean, neither God nor the world will judge them to be
living sacrifices unto their God. Beware of drunkenness, for surely there is,
mors in olla, 2. Reg. 4. 40
death in the pot, if it be abused. So we not blasphemy and swearing, least you
reap for your harvest many plagues; Ecclus. 23
yea, that plague that never departs out of the house, Zecha. 5. 2.
yea, that flying book which will break into your houses, whether you will or
not. The wheels of the clock within are never in order, when the bell makes
not true report of the time of the day: the tongue is the index of the mind.
Apply it to your selves; if the tongue sound not forth good words, the mind
within (without doubt) is distempred: that man is scarce to be thought a
temple of the Lord, but a nest for owls, and ostriches, out of whose mouth
there comes such a flight of unclean birds. Sow not covetousness: let not
the daughters of the horseleech, yawne within you; crying, give, give, with a
desire as large as hell: Let not your heaps of wealth be your graves, 1. Tim. 6.
9. 10.
for then you are in danger to fall into many snares, and be pierced through
with many sorrows: but rather Mat. 6. 20.
treasure up your hearts in heaven, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt:
you will find this gains greater then ten in the hundred, there is nothing but
loss to be had by being as Niniue was: and (I pray God you be not) Nah. 3. 1.
a bloody City and full of lies, and robbery, and one from whom the prey
departs not; she is famous for the lions den, and the pasture of the lions
whelpe: Bloody by oppression, full of lies and robbery in bargaining, famous
for lions, for deuourers, and for the lions den, (...) chests and coffers,
wherinto many men's goods do fall, and they are eaten up.

While I touch this vein and speak of this matter, I doubt not but some (and
they none of the meanest) could be content to say to me, at the servants of
Hezekiah say de unto Rabsaketh, 2. Reg. 18. 26.
Speak we pray thee to thy servants in the Aramites language, for we
understand it, and talk not with us in the Jews tongue in the audience of the
people that are on the wall.

I make no question, but you are loath the world should know much of your
dealings, and he that comes to ransacke among you, must needs be an unwelcome
guest. Sow not idleness least you reap brambles, and briers; it is a
lethargy, it dulls a man's faculties: but many about this City be Luke 12. 27
like the lillies which neither labor nor spin, yet (whether by robbing or
swaggering, or cony-catching, I cannot tell) they farewell, and they are clothed
like Solomon in all his royalty. Many of us (God knows) are like him in the
Gospelso possessed with a devil, that Math. 17. 15.
sometimes we fall into the fire, sometimes into the water, sometimes the devil
tears us and we foame at the mouth: we fall sometimes into the fire of
concupiscence, sometimes into the water and ouerflowing of drunkenness,
sometimes the devil tears us with rage and anger, and then we foame at the
mouth by slander and blasphemy: we have little sins (like little thieves) to
creep in at the windows unto our souls, and make way for greater, till
sinners be robbed of their best treasure: like little wedges they make way for
greater, til in the end they be cleft for fuel unto the fire of Esa. 30. 33
the valley of Tophet that was prepared of old. Be not infatuate with any
sin, with any sickness; the great Physician of your souls will discern
your diseases, when he feels your pulses: but above all other, beware of
hardness of heart, and final impenitencie; least as she in the Poet, who
Pectorapercussit, pectus quoque robora fiunt. Ovid metamorph.



So you m^^ desire to repent, but cannot have the grace, because your breasts,
your hearts are hardened, and Heb. 12. 17
like Esau, you cannot have repentance though you seek it with tears. Go not
from spirit to flesh, from flesh to iron, from iron to brass, from brass to
Adamant: least God proceed from love to anger, from anger to a rod, from a rod
to a scourge, from a scourge to a scorpion, and from a scorpion to eternal
fire. Weaue not (O weaue not) your own calamity on your own loomes: but
rather say unto lust, I have no purpose to nurse and dandle thee, and unto
deceit, I have no head to forge thee, unto drunkenness, I have no brain to
try thee, unto gluttony, have no stomach to banquet thee, unto cruelty, I
have no hand to execute thee, unto sin, I have no mind to committ thee. Fasc.
Tep. anno, 1426
There was a time when there was a conscience in the world: and is the World
better for age? nay, for conscience shrunk unto science; and under the full
sails of men's knowledge, they fall to make wrack of good conscience. And now
we live to hear every day the knell, and see the dying of good life and
conversation. If we take an inuentory of good works in this age, we shall
find it not much worth. What is the remedy for this? to turn unto GOD, when
all the world turns? no: if the enemy be behind an army (say the learned
in military discipline) they will be surprised before the whole army be whirled
about. How then? let every one turn one, and the whole army is turned. If you
will avoid the assaults of the Devil, tarry not until the whole army, the
whole world turn unto God, but every man turn one and say for his own part;
Luke 15. 18
I will go to my father, and say, Father, I have sinned against heaven and
against thee. Esaias. 29. 1
O Altar, Altar of the City of God, add year unto year, and kill lambs,
lest now when Ioh. 4. 35.
the regions are white for the harvest, and we even mellow for the judgment
of God, and Amos. 8. 2.
like a basket of summer fruit, prove like a bottle in the water, that never
sinkes until it be full, neither can we look for a downfall until we have
filled the measure of iniquity; but when those waters of Mara, those bitter
waters are brimfull, then Gods Angels will reap the world, with that
unperceived sieth, the pestilence that walks in the darkness: the rest
shall be gnawne upon by famine, and the remnant gleaned by the hand of war,
by the war of strangers: such was the sinne-sicke state of Ephraim, that
needed letting blood by such a boystrous hand: for strangers devoured not the
refuse and branne of his liuelihood, but his riches, and friends, and credit,
and power, and what not that was worldly? even his strength.

Where we may learn these two lessons: first, that we Strength.
may have these worldly things, because they are the gifts of God: secondly,
that we ought not to be had of them, or by them, because they are transitory
and subject to the devouring of strangers: my meaning is, we must have them to
use; not let them have us, not let them fetter us in their love: if God send
them, we must have them to use not to abuse.

In the 16. of Ezechiel, God gave the people, corn, and We may have them.
wine, and oil to use: but when they abused them, he did expostulate with them
for bestowing his corn, his wine and his oil upon their Idols. God has
bestowed many blessings upon us, he must needs be angry if we spend the
time he gives us, upon vanity: the strength that he gives us upon lust: the
power that he gives us, to the oppresssing of others: the wit that he gives
us, to the circumuenting of others: the riches that he gives us, to the eating
out one of another: his blessings, to those inordinate affections which like
Idols we honor and worship. Herodotus in Clio.
When the river Giudes had drowned one of Cyrus his white horses: he threatened
to cut so many Channels into which the river should be derived, that it should
lose both depth, and name, and glory. If those floods and great streams of Gods
blessings upon us, drown and overthrow not our white horses, but our souls
which should be white and spotless, God can derive that worldly pomp of ours,
into many channels, convey it into many hands, dispossess us both of the name
and glory that we had by those things; and therefore it was not without cause
that God gave the people of Israel a caveat, that they should not forget him,
when they cawe Deuteronomy. 8. 8
into a land of corn, a land of wine, and a land of oil olive. He knew that
these blessings were like fire and water, good servants, but bad masters. And
though for your good (beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) Amos 9. 13
the plowman touch the mower, and the treader of grapes him that sows seed,
yet you are but stewardes of that you have: and though it be not so cheap
service as you would wish, yet I would advise you to bestow some portion of
that you have to these two uses* to the releeuing of the poor, Gods children,
and to the garnishing of the Church, Gods house.

For the first, there be many, whose hearts are as hard as the nether millstone,
their hands are withered they cannot stretch The poor.
them out, they live unto the poor members of Christ, as though the rocks had
fathered them, and the wolves of the wilderness had given them suck: those
shall one day find that their white silver and yellow gold can draw black
lines, Gods blessings by them abused can pollute their souls. Let me land this
doctrine upon your own banks; and exhort you, not to give sparingly, that you
may reap liberally, for he that forgave the greatest debt that ever any in the
world owed, lays claim unto that of charity, and will not forgive it:
therefore he says by his Apostle, Romans 13. 8
Owe nothing to any man but this, that ye love one another. A shooter aymethat
a mark in the midst of a white: the white he seeeth, the mark he sees not: he
cannot hit the mark that he sees not, unless he hit the white which he
sees. We must all by our love aim at God and man; man the white which we
see, God the mark which we cannot see: we can never hit God the mark which we
see not, unless we (by our love) touch our brother whom we see. S. John, makes
good that which I say, 1. Ioh. 4, 20
If we love not our brother whom we have seen, how can we say truly, we love
God whom we have not seen? If many lines be drawn from the circle to the
ce^ter, the nearer they come one to another, the nearer they com unto the
center: judge this by the spokes of a wheel meeting in the middle: compare the
lines unto men and the ce^ter unto Christ, unto whom al heavy things tend (all
those that are heavy lade^ with their sins) the nearer they are joined one to
another in love, the nearer they com unto Christ. Those that are filled with
Gods blessings, should be like the full end of an hour glass, they should empty
and euacuate the^ selves into those that want, that those that have wanted, may
be raised up. You that are great in this world, you do not wind and turn
those things which are absolutely your own, you are but feoffees in trust with
them to the use of Gods Orphans. Greg. Naz. Monod. in Basil. Mag.
Gregory Nazianzen registring the life of Bazill the great speaks of a
Xenodochium or house of harbor which he built for poor strangers: he
preferres that goodly pile and monument of charity before the Sepulcher of
Mausolus and the Colossus of Rhodes and the rest of the wonders of the world.
If I should not commend you Londiners for much bounty and liberality toward
houses of learning and hospitals, I should do you wrong: but if you rob and
circumuent others, that you may be enabled to do good unto these, you wrong
your selves. As the former is justly to be termed a work of mercy, so the
later can by no means stand with good justice: in doing so Romans 3, 8
you do a great evil that good may come thereof. Let not your city, which is
worthily accounted the head of a kingdom, be made by your greedines the belly
of the kingdom for devouring the rest. I judge you not: but M^th. 7. 3 1. Cor.
11. 31
judge your selves that you be not judged of the Lord. O happy are you then, if
in your gardens this sweet flower, this charity be well blown; charity (I
mean) which is neither a fool to give to the idle, nor hard hearted to deny
the needy: and as at all times and to all of the household of faith, so it
becomes her well to have an open bosom unto the Church which is the house of
God.

Yet many are loath, in regard of the charge, to be open Church.
handed unto the Lords treasury, but had rather make themselves rich (as they
suppose) by stealing from God: so they become Church-mothes and chapmen of
souls, defrauding God, perhaps to give fuel unto their own vanities: so the
Church Gods Cant. 5. 2
dove, is now become a partridge pursued and preyed upon by tyranny and
oppression. That religion that in times past, wanted an eye, was a nurse, was a
mother unto the Church: and is our welsighted religion become a stepdame? If it
be not, what means the cry of the Church Ier 31. 15. and Math. 2. 18.
like that of Rahels in Ramah, weeping for her favorites because they are not?
Could those Church-leeches imagine they 1. Macch. 1
see Antiochus (after his reuelling in the Temple) killed in a strange Land by
an invisible hand: Dan. 5.
or Belshazzar pale and wanne, breathing his last after the abusing of the
vessels of the temple: or could they consider Celsus his disiwasiue.
that disswasiue used by Celsus of Verona unto the Senate of Venice, whereby
he makes it plain, that since they meddled with the Church goods they never
prevailed against their enemies, then would they cease to cry with Judas, Mat.
26. 6
What needs all this waste? grudging at all that is powered on Christ's
ministers: then would they not Deuteronomy. 25. 4.
muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treades out the corn: they would let them
live by the altar, who serve at the altar, they would not invade the
inheritance of Leui, they would not seek for those ministers who are content
to prostitute their worthes upon any terms, Judge. 17
for a morsel of bread and a few pieces of silver; but they would bring their
own offerings into the storehouse of the Lord, that God might not only rebuke
the deuourer, but open also the windows of heaven, and power upon them a
blessing without measure. Mal. 3. 10. If many in our age should use for their
daily prayer, the prayer of Nehemiah, Nehem. 13. 14.
Remember me, O my God, herein, and wipe not out my kindness that I have
showed on the house of my God, and on the offices thereof: I doubt they would
pull every day much wrath upon themselves, because the Church finds as little
favor at their hands, as at the hands of those mentioned in the first of
Aggai, H^ggi. 1. 4.
Who dwelt themselves in sieled houses, and let the house of the Lord lie
waste. Therefore (lest the Lord should blow upon that which you have) use the
things of the world, use them well, have them your selves: let not them have
you, let not them fetter you, they are but transitory.

Solomon weighed them all in a balance, and found them They must not have us.
but vanity: Therefore he said, Eccles. 1. 2
Vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity. We may say unto laughter, what
aylest thou? and unto folly, what do thou mean? Dan. 2. 32
The image of Nebuchad-nezzar was part of gold, part of silver; part of
brass, part of iron, and part of clay, resembling the several Monarchies of
the World: but there came a stone from the mountain, that crushed them all in
pieces. The square corner stone, Christ Jesus, is able to beat to powder all
the might of the world, and to fan the mountains. Esaias, 41. He is Lord
paramount of all, he coucheth under him the potentates of the earth like
lesser birds: therefore be not idle but seek, defer not the time but seek
first, be not base minded, but seek a kingdom, be not earthly minded, but
Math. 6. 33
seek the kingdom of God, and the things of the world shall be ministered
unto you, like a retinue they shall follow after. The flesh does inficere,
infect: the world does deficere, forsake: but Christ does reficere, refresh.
Luke 4. 5
The glory of the world was showed to Christ in the twinkeling of an eye: it
is a gliding pomp, of small continuance, for all it seems to have (like a
gloworme) yet it has neither true warmth nor light. Animula vagola b^ancula.
That knew Aelius Adrianus well, when having no hope in any thing but the
world (which he saw to fail him) he commanded his soul (the guest of his
body) for ever to bid farewell to all comfort. That knew they also that
admired the whore of Babylon, when they felt, that the apples which their
souls lusted after, were departed from them, and all things which were fat
and excellent were departed from them, they found them no more. Apocalypse 18.
14. Riches that are so high rated in the world, are but like thorns in a man's
hand: both when thorns come thither, while they stay, and when they are gotten
out there is still pain: So, riches are gotten with care, kept with fear, and
not lost without great anguish. Job. 8. 14.
The rich man's confidence shall be cut off, and his trust shall be as the
house of a Spider: Be he never so enamuled with worldly things (be they,
lilia terrae or ilia terrae, the pleasures of the earth, or the guts of the
earth) yet he finds for his inheritance, but Job. 7. 3
a month of vanity.

They that rest upon a round thing, they sit unsure, it is ever rolling; rely
not upon the round world: they that sit upon a square thing they sit firm;
repose upon Christ Jesus the square Cornerstone, he will nerer fail you. The
first is proved by the wicked, who say, Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.
6. The second by the godly, who say, Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us. Psalm 4. 7. The goodly things of the world are like Ships
which are graced with the titles of triumph, and victory, and honor, and such
like: yet are they subject to wrack. Bern. de inter. dom.
Which Bernard well considering says, that the soul in the body is like a
Queen in a Palace; She inioyes the pleasures of the earth by the 5. senses,
as by five windows, which windows as long as they are open, things of the
world bring much delight, and when they are shut up and decayed, the pleasure
decays with them. Prepare unto thy self (O thou soul) the joys of the holy
Ghost, which will remain with thee when the windows are shut, when the senses
are enfeebled, even in the hour of death and in the day of judgment. There
is no nobility like unto a new birth in Christ, no feast to the peace of
conscience, no crown to a crown of immortality, no life to a conversation
which is in heaven. And therefore, call home your affections that are set some
on pleasure, some on profit, some on preferment, gather up their dispearsed
limbs, and knit them all together that they may fasten on your God: So it
becomes your houses and your families, which are like houses of Cloe, and the
households of Onesiphorus; so shall your strength not be food for the
devouring of strangers, you shall be yoked by the hand of no Rehoboam, 1. Reg.
12. 10. 11.
who would whippe with scorpions insteede of rods, whose little finger would
be heavier then all his fathers loins. Though the land of Iewrie and the
Apoc. 1. 20.
Seven golden candlestickes, which were the seven Churches of Asia, be now
grown inglorious for sin, yet the enemy has not shined with our gall. God
has said of us (as of his vineyard) Luk 13. 8.
I will dig it, and dung it, and dress it, and try it yet another year.
Only he has often come to us and found us sleeping in our sins, as 1. Sam.
24. 5.
David came to Saul sleeping in a cave, cutting a piece off our garments, only
touching us by some small affliction, when he might have killed us, but
leaving peace within our wales and plenty within our palaces, and crowning
many years with gladness unto us. Which makes good the saying of an old
Writer concerning the raine-bowe; that Gods bow is without an arrowe, he
threatens long before he suffer his whole displeasure to arise: What then?
Romans 6. 1.
Shall we continue still in sin that grace may abound? God forbid: that
will inhance and improve Gods wrath, seeing Gods long suffering should lead us
to repentance, Romans 2. Rather let us, who thrice happy (as looking from the
shore) have no venture in the wrack that we see in others, turn unto God
that we may live; so did not Ephraim, therefore strangers have devoured his
strength and yet he knows it not, yea gray hairs were here and there upon
him, and yet he knows it not.

Gray hairs were upon him, and they were (as interpreters Gray hairs
say) signs of sorrow, or the forerunners of old age, or both: So the
doctrines then which hence are derived are these: first, that sorrow causing
hoarnesse: secondly, that hoarenesse the messenger of old age, should make men
know and consider their estates. And first for sorrow and affliction.

This doctrine is like Demetrius, Ioh 3. Epist. (...). 12.
it has a good report of Affliction
all men, and of the truth it self: O Lord thy word is truth. Ioh. 17. What
the word says, you may hear in the 5. of Hosea. 14. where God says by the
Prophet, I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and as a Lions whelpe to the house
of Judah: I, even I will spoil, and go away, and none shall rescue it. If you
look into the 107. Psalm, and the 4. of Amos, you shall find two fortresses
for this doctrine: I pray you read them and hide them in your hearts till you be
truly learned. The prodigal son had perished, if he had not perished: he
had perished in soul, if he had not perished in state, he was forced to go by
weeping cross to his father. Clodoueus, Vid an. do. 496. Ioh. Pappum de
co^uer. gent.
the king of France, could not be persuaded unto christianity by his wife
Crotildis a religious Burgundian, till by the Almaynes there was given him an
overthrow in battle: which calamity wrought so with him, that he vowed (if
God would restore unto him what he had lost) he would bequeath and dedicate
himself to his service, while he did live: so he prayed, so he prevailed, so
he performed. Apoc. 15. 2
This world is a Sea, and therefore turbulent; of glass, and therefore brittle;
mingled with fire, and therefore dangerous: we must go with a low sail (if
we do well) and humble our* selves; but not be too much afraid because of
the noise of the water pipes: for Gods Church is like Exodus 3. 2
the bush that burned and was not consumed, because the Lord was in the bush.
2. Cor. 12. verse. 8. 9.
Paul prayed thrice, that he might be freed from the buffetings of Satan: but
God thought it meet, that he should not want temptations to scour him and
make him bright; and therefore he promises not to free him from his
wrastlings, but to back him in his agonies: saying, My grace is sufficient for
thee. Affliction keeps the soul of a Christian in breath, it is the eyebright
to make him see both his own weakness (for David, before he was afflicted
went wrong) and the strength of God upon him. As is the fire unto the gold, a
purger: as is the pruning knife unto the tree, a pruner: as is the fan unto the
wheat, a purifier: as is the thunder unto the air, a cleanser: So unto the
soul is affliction, which God does use as mustard to anoint the teates of this
world withal, to wean us from it. Affliction is like Exodus 4. 3. 4.
Aarons rod; if it be used, it is the rod of God sent for our good: if it be
cast under foot and despised, it is a serpent, it stings us, it does us harm:
to be brief, affliction is a part of the dowry of the Church of God. Now
therefore when you are afflicted, look not only upon the arrowe that hits you,
but up unto the hand that drew the bow: we may learn this lesson of the Son
of God, and of the martyrs of God: the Son of God spread out his arms to
embrace affliction, he dyed willingly for our sins. Now as Antiochus the
younger 1. Machab. 6. 34.
powered out of the juice of mulberies upon the ground, that thereby he might
inrage his Elephants to battle: So, that we may be encouraged to wrestle with
afflictions, though it be unto blood, we must remember the pouring out of the
precious blood of him, who became for our sakes Ioh. 1. 29.
the slaughtered lamb of God. We may learn it of the Martyrs of God also: for
in the garden of God there have been as well Roses as Lillies; as well purpur
atimartyrio, as candidati innocentia. They were like rose leaves; not withered
upon the stalk, and falling away, but distilled with the heat of persecution,
till they sent out a water, a blood, a precious blood: Psalm. 116. 13
Right dear in Gods eyes is the death of all his Saints. These were the
primeroses of the Church, which died quickly after Christ their great
shepherd: many years after, there were many, whom when I remember, Socrat.
Eccl. hist. li. 3 cap. 11.
I remember also Ecebolius, who recoiled many times, and started from his God,
and in the end after his several apostasies, he laid him down in the Church
porch, and bade the passengers tread, upon him, deeming himself no better then
unsavory salt: his later end was better then his beginning. By Christ and by
these his Martyrs (who had the soul of their souls for their comfort) learn
to submit your selves to the correction of God, that you may legitimate his
wisdom in correcting of you; lest (as was in the Prophet Ieremies vision)
Iere. 1. 11. 13
after arod in this life, there come a seething pot, in the life to come. Then,
then unto the incorrigible there will be an accuser, the conscience: a
witness, the memory: a judge, the reason: all these within them, if there were
none without. De similitud. mund.
But there shall be (as Anselmus says) the heavens lovvring above, hell
gaping belovve, the Devil accusing on the one hand, sins witnessing on the
other, the conscience burning within, the world flaming about; these things to
fly, it will be impossible: these things to endure, it will be intolerable.
There will be a pain by loss, and a pain by punishment. It was a grief to
Adam to forgo Paradise, but a greater grief Genesis 3. 18.
to toil among brambles and briers: misery too much to forgo the presence of
God, Psa. 16. 12
at whose right hand there is fullness of joy for evermore; but a greater
grief to endure Ierem. 9. 1.
(O that my head were a fountain of water, and mine eyes floudes of tears,
that I might weep day and night for them that are in such a case) to endure, I
say, hell fire, Mar. 9. 44.
where the worm ever gnaweth, where the fire ever burns, and never
burns up, where death is ever living, (alas for pity!) that aeternus
ignis, that everlasting fire. Bid vvelcome to his correction in this life,
that you may avoid the second death. Yet graie hairs caused by affliction
could not make Ephraim know his estate: no, not gray hairs (which argued the
approach of old age and death) could make him know it: yet as I noted,
secondly the approach of age should make us know our selves.

psalm. 95. 8.
To day therefore if you will hear my voice, harden not your The messengers of
old age.
hearts: let not cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow be your note, Lib. 8 de
co^fes. cap 5.
which Saint Austen misliked in himself, when he was within the kenne of the
kingdom of grace; and therefore added, Why not now Lord? why not now? neither
flatter your selves as those did (whom Saint Peter reproues) saying, 2. Pet 3.
4.
Where is the promise of his coming? to day and yesterday are both alike: as
though they could plead prescription for Gods long suffering. True it is, you
may have mercy when you can repent: but you cannot repent when it is your
pleasure: therefore remember, though Christ saved one (the thief upon the
cross) at the last gasp, least men should despair, yet we read but of one only
lest they should presume. Iere. 48. 9. 11.
Moab was not powered from vessel to vessel, but was at rest, therefore Moab
was settled upon the lees: therefore, the Prophet shot a warning piece unto
them, because danger was at hand; saying, Give wings to Moab that he may fly
away. You little know what loss you may have by security, therefore lift up
your head from Dalilaes lap: O let the world charm you no longer: when the
gale is favorable go and good luck have you to heaven ward upon your great
adventure, stay not till the winds are contrary: old age is attended by many
impediments, lay not the heauiest burden upon the worst horse, charge not your
weakness with that high service, adiourne not your repentance, dedicate not
the flower of your age unto vanity, appointing only for God the dregs in the
bottom; rather awake thou that sleep, Ioh. 12.
the night will come when no man can work, work while you have the twelve
hours of the day. Be persuaded, let not your hearts be vnmalleable, persuade
your selves that qualis vita, finisita, as the tree falls so will it lie; as is
the life, so is the death, and as death leaves, so judgment will find. In
your memories let ever be engraven as upon a tablet, the picture of that rich
man in the Gospel; who when his barnes were full, said, Luke 12. 19
Soul take thine ease: but presently there came a summons unto him; Thou
fool, this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. Plu. and Val. Max.
When Caesar warred against Pompey, he had no care of managing his business
while he was in his own territory; for there he could command help: but
when he once passed Rubicon the utmost bounds of his dominion, he said,
The Die is thrown, there is no way but fight it out: So, while we are in
this life, we have power to labor for our selves; if our sins plead
against us, we may have the counterpleas of prayers and holy meditations. By
hearing of the word of God, and praying, we may have parle with God upon
conditions of peace; but when we once pass the utmost bounds of this life,
there is no purchase to be made by trentalls, or masses. Galat. 6. 7.
At men have sown, so must they reap: To dream of a serpent is an argument
of felicity: Philip. Camerar. in operibus succe^^uis.
Camerarius does instance in the mother of George Castroit, or Scanderbegge;
who, the night before her son was borne, dreamed of a Serpent, that laid
his head in the kingdom of Epyrus, and stretched out his body over the
dominion of the Turks; which argued he should be (as he became) the
vanquisher of them: Be this observation true or false in nature, it serves me
for your instruction, to land this doctrine upon your own banks. Our whole
life is but a sleep in sin: in the depth of our slumber, let us (like
dreaming men) have our imaginations running upon the old Serpent Satan, and
his sleights: so shall we be happy, standing we shall prevent a fall.

But as for Ephraim he was not so refined, not so zealous Yet they knew it not.
for the Lord of hosts: though strangers devoured his strength, though gray
hairs were here and there upon him, yet he knew it not, yet he knew it not:
his ignorance is redoubled. Out of which words I observe a just imputation
against diverse ignorant men: Some know not because they cannot, those be the
unlearned: Some know not because they must not, those be the weaker sort of
papists: Some know that which they need not know, those be curious
questionists: Some know not that which they need to know, and those be they
which know not the things that belong to their peace. i Luke 19. 42


First, the unlearned know not, because they cannot know; they roll along
with the stream of the world, all of 1. The unlearned.
them inacting, that learning in this age is not a thriuing course: whereas (O
blessed knowledge!) they that have thee, live two lives, whereas others live
but one. The mind is exempted: their little (all) falls not with the unlearned,
a prey into the land of forgetfulness. Thou art the soul of the world,
knitting together these present times with ages past by thee we that are living
call to counsel those that are dead and gone. Many huge dumb heaps, many
goodly piles and monuments, had been wronged by forgetfulness: but that by
thee (O learning) they survive: they are vented out unto us by antiquity,
which for reverence sake we must not count a liar. O knowledge, how much have
thou won from the waste of time? The want of this knowledge vnsinewes the
powers of a man, and vnmannes him quite. Learning has no need like a Curresan
to open her breasts whereby she may gain love; nor to beg an alms at the
gate of fame, to have her ge^try blazed: she is rich enough of her self, and
her glory is great at home, though fame were tongue tied, and could not speak.

Theodore tripartit. hist. lib. 6. cap. 17.
Julian that wicked Apostata, would have abolished schools of learning, arts
and sciences, because the Christians using the help of these things wounded
them with their own quils. Learning seasons tender years with graces, and
with virtues key tunes the strings of nature.

Therefore prize at no low rate the two Universities of this Land, Psalm. 45. 16
Unto whom instead of founders and fathers, God has given children, into
which two this and former ages have emptied themselves, they are the two
plentiful breasts of our mother England: they are deep died and ingrained with
knowledge from above: like Hercules pillars they may have engraven upon them
Non vltra, for there are no Universities in the world that go beyond them, no
not equal to them. And as Hercules pillars standing by the straites of
Gibraltar are the way Tabula Petri Plancij.
from Europe to the fortunate Islands: so these (if they be used) will serve
as a direction for England to a place more fortunate; where all happiness
dwells. -- Ovid. Meta. lib. 13
Deus est in vtraque parente. There Philosophers reign, and they that reign
may seem to learn Philosophy.

Secondly, the weaker sort of Papists know not, because Secondly. the weak
Papists.
they must not know. It was the case of our forefathers: the book was a book
sealed unto the^, and therefore they had cause to weep much. Reu. 5. 1. Cor. 14.
1
the trumpet gave an uncertain sound: how could they know when to go to battle?
the sword was sheathed up in an unknown tongue, how could they fight? Mat. 5. 15
the candel was under a bushel, how could they see? the land mark whereby they
knew their bounds, was removed: the law says of this sin, Deuteronomy 27. 17.
Cursed is he that does so, and let all the people say Amen, Their Cleargiemen
were as Hos. 5. 1
snares upon Mispah, and as nets spread upon Thabor, they did entangle the
people; who hearing their latin service which they could not understand might
go home again, and say with Nabuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 3.
We have dreamed a dream, and we cannot tell what it means. And yet the
weak ones will not stick to say, It was a good world in time of Popery,
things were cheap and plentiful; much like to them that dwelling in Pathros,
despised the prophecies of Jeremy, and say de It was well, and there was no
scarcity when they burned incense unto the Iere. 7. 18
Queen of heaven and baked cakes to make her glad. But those and these loved
darkness better then light. When the truth of God in despite of papistrie
would needs break forth as the noone day, and so Esa. 30. 26
the light of the Moon became as the light of the Sun, and the light of the
Sun seauenfould, Esa. 60. 18
Salvation became the walls of our Church of England, and praise her gates;
they went about to dim the stars when they could not darken the Sun, and
by a malicious inuasio they indeauoured to sophisticate the fathers of the
Church. Praefat. Iunij indicis expurg.
For Philip the second, King of Spain, gave commandment to Christopher
Plantine his printer at Antwerp to print a Catalogue or Index, which should
give direction how to geld and purge the Fathers of all such sentences as might
make against the Church of Rome: which Index should not be publicly sold, but
should serve for the use of the Spanish inquisition, that by their tyranny all
the old coppies might be called in and the new ones published unto their
minds: So with this one sword had Pharaoh meant that those Exodus 1. 15
Midwiues of Egypt should kill all the Children of Israel. But see how Psalm. 121
He that keeps Israel, does neither slumber nor sleep: It pleased God, that
reverend M. Iunius, having conference with a friend about this matter, had the
whole plot discovered unto him, got an authenticke copy of their Index, and by
the permission of John Casimere, county Palatine of Rhene, he got it placed in
his Library, where it remains (I think) until this day to the shame of them
who would have wronged Antiquity so much. If they had effected their purpose,
they had had the Fathers crying as loud for their opinions against Gods truth,
as ever Luke 23. 18
the Jews cried for Barabbas against the son of God. But to prevent this 2.
Chr. 6. 41
there did arise thou (O God) and the arc of thy strength.

Thirdly, curious questionists seek to know those things which they need not
know: they entangle themselves in Three curious questionists.
Genealogies and matters impertinent, and out of a desire they have of praise
for lanching into the deep, they pry into the secrets of the Thunderer, and
when they have seen what they can, they say more then they have warrant for,
wisely they tell foolish tales, and bring long lies very smoothly to an end. To
give you a taste of their vanity, some diue into the mystery of the
resurrection: such were the persecuting Gentiles in France (as Eusebius
witnesses) who in scorn of the resurrection, which the Christians do believe,
did burn many of the Martyrs, and afterward threw their ashes into the river
Rhodanus, with this foolish exprobation, Let us see now if their God be able
to revive them. They were not so well studied in the schoolmen, as to know that
which Peter Lumbard has, sentent. lib. 4. Did. 44, (urging this point of the
resurrection) that though an image be broken in a 1000. pieces, it may be made
up again so long as the image maker does live: So he that made all of
nothing, can much more of something make what he will. Nay (which was more
pity) they were such strangers in the book of God, that they knew not what
was delivered concerning the resurrection by Ezechiel, unto whom was showed
great heaps of scattered bones, which Ezech. 37. 6
the Lord yet put together and laid sinews upon them, and made flesh grow
thereon, and then covered both with skin, and afterward breathed life into
them. God Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. 2. Hom.
(says Saint Chrysostom) deals with the soul, as a man pulling down a
ruinous house does with himself: he retires himself into some other place
least he be annoyed with dust and rubbish, and returns into it again when it
is built more firm and glorious: so God gives the soul a repose in heaven, it
is not annoyed with the dust of the grave: but at the day of the resurrection,
when the house is built more glorious then it was before, 1. Cor. 5
when this mortal shall put on immortality, then shall the soul take
possession of the body again: but these things are to be scanned by faith,
they are out of the reach of humane reason: Napier in Apoc. pro. posit. 14.
part. 2. 8. Maxim.
some again take upon them to tell the time of the day of judgment; and
grounding upon the saying of Saint Peter (that a 1000. years with GOD is but
as one day, and one day as a 1000. years) have set down that after 6000.
years should come an eternal Sabbath or rest. Now because it is said, for
the electes sake, there shall be a shortning of those days, therefore they
affirm the time of Christ's second coming shall fall out between the years
1688, and 1700.

Some again are so impudent, that they venture (as far as human reason
will lead them) to prove incongruences in the book of GOD, and some belch
their impiety so openly that they would prove in justice in the designs of
GOD: as namely, See Sim. Pat. confut. of Machiuel.
Machiuel who is not ashamed to say, that Moses and the Israelites were as much
usurpers upon the Land of promise, as the Goths and Vandales were upon
Christendom. That desire of knowledge, that like a corn of salt distempered
the taste of our first parents, is become an habitual saltness in Adams
posterity: unto which malady Saint Paul applies a correctiue when he advises
men Rom 12. 3
to be wise unto sobriety.

Fourthly, they that know not the things that belong unto Fourthly, some know
not those things that belong to their peace.
their souls health, know not what they need to know: and such was Ephraim in
this place. Semblable unto Ephraim are many, who know too much and too little:
too much of other men's states, but too little of their own.

Therefore pry not into other men's actions and words, scour not your mouths
upon the^; as Lib. 3. de bap. contra Donat. c. 10
Petilian the heretic Too much.
doing, gave Saint Austen occasion to tell him, that his tongue was no fan
for the Lords floor, to discern the wheat from the chafe: look not over
other men's hedges, as they that have tender eyes do when they complain that
the Sun is waterish and dim when it is not so, but themselves are weak
sighted. Such men as are ever comme^ting upon other men's actions, make the
godly Psa. 120. 4
woe that they are constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have their
habitations in the tents of Kedar. Rather turn your eyes into your own
bosoms, as Christ bid them that judged the woman taken in adultery, John 8,
He that is without sin cast the first stone at her: so they went away from
the eldest unto the least.

Pry not you too much into other men's estates, nor too little Too little.
into your own: you have husbandry enough at home, you have psalm. 14
eyes, look that they be not sweld with lust: you have hands, look they be
not hands of iniquity: you have feet, look they be not swift to shed blood:
you have tongues, look the poison of aspes be not under them: you have
members, look they be not weapons of unrighteousness. A. Gellius
But as Polo the Tragoedian acting the part of Electra upon the stage, and
being mournefully to bring in the bones of her brother Orestes in a pot, he
brought the bones of his own son lately buried, that the sight of them might
wring forth true tears indeed, and therefore he might act it more famously:
So shall we more truly express joy in the holy Ghost, and repentance for our
sins, if we take a view of the estates not of other men but of our own
souls: that will breed true joy and true grief indeed, when we say not as the
disciples said (when Christ told them that one of them should betray him)
Mat. 26. 22
Master, is it I? Master is it I? but Master, it is I, Master it is I that have
sinned, that have committed treason against thee, the King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. Let your selves be the center of your own circling thoughts, and
bend your selves to know those things that may serve your turns at the day of
account. Scipio could weep when he saw Carthage a burning, because the like
misery might befall Rome his native country. But Belshazzar made not so good
use of his fathers troubles, and therefore Daniel says, Dan. 5. 22
And thou his son, O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy self, though thou
know of al these things. God shareth out his stripes unto the ignorant, Luke
7. 47
and many stripes unto the^ who have means to know and will not. And
therefore the Prophet Esaias delivers a burden against Esaias. 22. 1
the valley of vision, as well as against Egypt, where was ignorance and
Cimmerian darkness. Saint Barn. sup. cant. sermon. 36.
Saint Barnard speaks of some, who know only because they would know, and
that is curiosity: some know because they would be known, and that is
vanity: some know because they would edify, and that is charity: some know
because they would be edified, and that is true christianity. That learned
Father fannes away as chafe the two former kinds of knowledge, but as wheat
he preserues the two later, which tend to the edifying of the soul. The word
of God has flowed among you like Nilus or Gihon in the time of harvest. Romans
10. 22
God has stretched out his hand all the day long, his arm is revealed, the
preachers of the word have carefully planted in this place. Psalm. 78. verse.
47. 48
O give not their fruits unto the caterpiller, nor their labors unto the
grasshopper, not (as I may be bold to compare it) to the world, not to the
flesh, nor the mulberie trees unto the frost, not unto the cold numnesse of
zeal, of charity. Experience, that having many relators sees with the eyes
of all the world, tells us that frustra sapit qui sibi non sapit: and
therefore they that know and do not use their own knowledge to their own
good, they fall upon a wrong sent, and run counter after their salvation:
knowledge and performance should be twins of one burden. He that says, 1.
Ioh. 2. 4
I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a lier, and the truth is
not in him; he offers no sacrifice, but a lie unto the author of truth.

Learn that you may know, know that your selves may better yoursoules: so
did not Ephraim; though gray hairs were here and there upon him, yet he knew
it not, and the pride of Israel (his stubbornness, his impudency) testifies
to his face, and they do not return unto the Lord their God, nor seek him
for all this. They did not know their danger, they did not return unto their
harbor: they did not return unto the Lord their God.

When we have sinned, we must return unto the Lord our God, first by
repentance for our sins, He is a jealous God: Secondly, by reforming of our
sins, He is a holy God: Thirdly, by hoping in God, who does pardon our
sins, he is a merciful God.

By repentance for our sins: for in the first and second By repentance.
of Amos the language of the prophet is nothing but a volley of judgments
against Damascus, Tyrus, Edom, Ammon, Moab, and Judah; under whose sins God
was pressed, as a Amos. 2. 13
Cart is pressedwith sheaues, for they had threshed Gilead, with threshing
instruments of iron: for three transgressions and for four (says God) I will
not turn unto them. It concerned them then, and us also to turn unto him by
repentance, left for 3000. transgressions or for four, he come with the
besome of his wrath and sweep us all away. We are beleaguered and compast
about with iniquity of our own heels: let us not hypocritically dote upon
our selves, saying Ier. 6. 14
peace, peace, when there is no peace: let us rather by the heat of zeal
distill tears from our eyes, for Esaias. 57. 21
there is no peace (as my God says) unto the wicked. There was a woman in the
7. of Luke, who (as one in travail of a new soul) had the grace to repent her
of her sins; and therefore Cant. 4. 9
she wounded Christ with one of her eyes and with the cheine (the cheine of
graces) about her neck: she came into the Pharisees house boldly: and stood
behind him shamefastly: at his feet humbly: and mournefully, she washed his
feet with her tears: and as one one neglecting her best ornament in respect
of Christ, she wiped them with the hairs of her head: lovingly she kissed
his feet: and bountifully, she anointed them with ointment. Leuit. 12. 8
When a woman came to be purified in the time of the Law, she was to offer a
Lamb: which if she were not able to compass, then she was to offer a pair
of turtle doves: the authors of the heroglyphickes compare a Lamb to
innocence, and a pair of turtle doves to a pair of mournful eyes: if any
be so poor in good works that they cannot offer the one, let them be so
forward in repentance as to offer a pair of the other; and let them desire of
God as the wife of Othoniel did of Caleb and Joshua, that seeing they are
parched with sin and with the heat of concupiscence (as she complained of
an hot country) there may be given unto them Judge. 1. 15
springs above, and springs beneath, springs of tears in their eyes above, and
springs of blood (if it be possible) in their hearts beneath. It is Gods will,
that as Jacob was first married unto Genesis 29. 17
Leah, that was bleare eyed; and after an other prentishippe, unto Rahel that
was more beautiful: so should the sons of Jacob, first unto repentance bleare
eyed and full of tears, and after the enduring of that 2. Cor. 7. 10
godly sorrow (which will cause repentance unto salvation) they shall inioye
the joys of heaven, which are beautiful like Rahel: Apoc. 7. 17
For all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes. Grammarians derive terra a
terendo: So why should not man (who is earth and ashes, terra quiateritur)
because he is harrowed up with a feeling of his sins? When the wind is
enclosed in the hollows of the earth it strives for passage, and so makes an
earthquake: many times (O earth and ashes) thou tremblest and quakest at the
remembrance of thy sins: but fear not, that sorrow comes of God, it is
because there is within thee the holy Ghost, Ioh. 3. 8
(that wind which blows where it lists.) When thy soul (O man) is
troubled for thy sins, that garboyle within thee is like the troubling of the
water, John 5. Be thou sure, the Angel of the Lord has been there, that
sorrow of thine comes from God: hope in Christ, but sorrow for thy sins,
Exodus 12. 8
eat thy pascall Lamb with sower herbs. Plut. in vit. Syll.
As they that looked upon Syllaes ring, could not choose but take notice both
of Syllaes seal and the treason of Iugurtha, because that was graven upon upon
the seal: so consider and weigh both the Ephesians. 1. 14
seal wherewith you are sealed against the day of redemption, and the treason
of your forefathers also which gave occasion of the sealing of such a pardon
unto you. Therefore as the nightingale in the night time sings merrily with a
prickle at her breast: so in this valley of the shadows of death, sing praises
unto your God; but ever with a compunction, a feeling of your sins, and
sorrow for them.

Neither must you only mourn for your sins, but you must abandon them also,
for fear of the Diuelles reentrie, with Luke 11. 26
seven Devils worse then himself, and then your latter end will be worse then
your beginning.

But as I noted in the second place, you must turn unto the Lord by reforming
of your sins, and observing Gods By reforming of our selves.
commandments: which iniunction unto flesh and blood, is durus sermo. For,
though we could be content to die the death of the righteous, and say with
Balaam, Numb. 23. 10
Lord let my later end be like unto theirs; yet this living of the life of the
righteous is hard of digestion, as hard as the gayning of the land of promise
was to those spies which confessed that the Number. 13. 28. 34.
land was a good land, and full of fruits, but there were in it the sons of
Anach, and they were giants. The reward of a Christian many think to be a good
prize, but they are loath to wrestle with the difficulties of Christianity,
those be the sons of Anach and they be giants: it is better for flesh and
blood Wis. 2. 8.
to crown themselves with rose buddes before they be withered, then Psa. 127. 3
to sit up late, and rise early, and eat the bread of carfulness, though God
so give his beloved sleep. When they feel the pain that belongs unto the
service of God, they say with her (who longed for children but could not endure
the pain of childbearing) Gen 25. 22
Seeing it is thus why am I so Lamprid.
wa^ton. Florus could say: Ego nolo Caesar esse, equitare per Britannos,
cursitare per Germanos, pati pruinam, etc. I would not for any good be Caesar,
to endure so many frosts, and watchings amongst the Britans and Germans: but
Caesar thirsting after victory, retorted it thus upon him: Ego nolo Florus
esse, ambulare per tabernas, latitare per popinas, etc. I would not, for any
good, be Florus to spend my time in vanity. There is great difference betwixt a
carnal man, and those that desire (through Jesus Christ) to be more then
Conquerours: the carnal rather then they would lose their Math. 8. 34
swine, desire Christ to depart out of their coasts, whereas the other 2. Tim.
2. 12
that they may reign with Christ, are willing to suffer with Christ. Some of
the ancients speaks of a plea that shall be holden by the devil against the
wicked, before God, at the day of judgment: O glorious king, these that stand
before thee, are thine indeed by creation, but by their sins they have canceld
that image of thine that was upon them; they are thine by virtue of thy Sons
passion, but mine for want of natural compassion: in all matters of
difficulty, when the question was whither they would lean to thee or me, they
forsook thee and yielded to my temptations: therefore (o great King, o King of
glory, give me my due. There is danger you see in wearing the livery of Satan,
no less Esaias 59. 5.
then treading upon the eggs of a Cockatrice, which is dangerous; and weauing
the spiders web, which is fruitless. Let it not seem evil and burdensome to
you, to serve the Lord: for though there be no condemnation to them that be in
Christ Jesus; yet this privilege belongs unto them that live after the spirit,
not after the flesh, Romans 8. 1. 1. Sam. 6. 12
When the ark of the Lord was drawn by kine to Bethshemosh, though their
calves perhaps lowed unto them, and they (as the text says) unto their calves,
yet they could not go because they were tied unto the arc: So do you resolve
upon the keeping of the covenants of the Lord, and then though your affections
call you aside, yet you cannot, you will not go wrong because you are tied by
vow or by resolution, though not to the Arc of the covenant, yet to the
covenants of the Lord: but if you will needs follow your own Genesis 6. 5.
imaginations which are evil, and that continually; beware of joys no better
then sick men's dreams: those joys are quaedam nepenthica, and soporifera, for
a while charming and silencing the cries both of sin and punishment: but in
the end Dan. 4. 2
the visions of your heads will make you afraid. If you be wicked, pro. 28. 1
you will fly cowardly, yea sottishly when no man follows, because you have
loved iniquity and hated righteousness: therefore the devil (whom you have
served) will anoint you with oil of sadness above your fellows, then can
you never be merry though all the pleasures in the world should make you
melody. An evil conscience (when you have lost your selves, as Job lost Job.
1. 19.
all his goods and children) will haunt you and say unto you, you have lost
Gods favor and your own souls, and I alone am left alive to come and tell
you, to keep you waking at midnight when you should sleep. When there be
many fiery pictures in the air, a blast of wind breaks and dispearses them
all: when in your minds there be fearful and terrible cogitations, strange
frightings, and amazements; there is no way to dispearse them but by Gods holy
spirit, that wind which blows where it lists. When David understood that
the water of the well of Bethlem, that was brought unto him. 2. Sam. 23 17
was gained by the ieopardie of men's lives, he would not drink it, but powered
it upon the ground for a sacrifice unto the Lord: bethink your selves that
your souls are gained not by the ieopardie, but the loose of the life of
Christ: dedicate not your souls and bodies unto lust and vanity, but rather
say (O Lord) they were dear bought, I will offer them both as a sacrifice to
thee. We must mourn for sin, we must abandon sin; and because sin will ever
dwell in our suburbs and be a borderer it will hang on so fast, and will never
admit a Supersedeas from sinning, so long as we dwell in houses of claie,

We must (which I thirdly noted) appeal unto God By trusting in God.
(for he is the highest court of appeal) Ioh. 1. 29.
who is the Lamb of God and can only purge the sins of the world: Let this
Agnus Dei be your choicest ornament. Plut. in Apothegm.
For as the woman having a matter heard before Philip king of Macedon, who
being asleep did not well apprehend her cause, but gave wrong judgment;
therefore she said she would appeal from Philip to Philip, from Philip
sleeping to Philip waking: So must we appeal, from God to God; from God just
and angry for our sins, to God opening the bowels of compassion unto us.
Iud. 14. 4
Out of the strong came sweet, it was the riddle of Sampson: the meaning of
the riddle was, out of the dead Lion came the honey comb which relieved him: My
application at this time is, out of the strong Apoc. 5. 5.
Lion of the tribe of Judah, comes the sweet comfort of our saving health; for,
that Lion 1. Cor. 1. 30
is unto un wisdom, justification, sanctification and redemption. Genesis 27 19
As Jacob said unto his father, so we may say to thee O heavenly Father; eat of
our venison, of our flesh, the flesh of thy Son, that thy soul may bless us.
Tho man being just do live (as the Prophet says) once, and the Apostle does
canonize it once again; yet faith is the soul and breath of that life: Hag.
2. 4.
Iustus ex fide viuit. When it was resolved that Christ should do his Fathers
will for the good of mankind, he was ready to say; Lo here I come to do thy
will: he came indeed to shed his blood: he bled not inward, for that might have
endangered the body; but his blood was powered out for the good of others: the
spear of the soldier that thrust him through the side, may serve as a pen,
his blood was ink, wherewith was written our Quietus est. We may now with Paul
not only challenge death, saying, 1. Cor. 15. 55
death where is thy sting? but with the same Paul sing a Requiem unto our
souls, saying, that Romans 8. 38.
neither powers, nor principalities can make a separation between God and us.
Seeing then God has reared up a standard of hope unto all believers; let us
not be like reeds wavering and shaking in faith: for then we please the devil,
who by some of the ancients is compared to Job. 40. 10
Behemoth, that takes his pastime among the reeds; but rather, let us be like a
wall (strong) that God may build upon us Cant. 8. 9.
a silver palace, that he may make us houses for himself. Let us acquit our
selves like men: we have for our right hand, Ephesians. 6
the sword of the spirit, for our left hand, the shield of faith, for our
breast, the breast plate of righteousness, for our heads the helmet of
salvation, for our feet, the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel: furniture
enough for all parts, save only the back; to argue that if we fight against
the devil we may do well, but if we turn our backs and grow faithless, we
give him advantage against us. What need we turn back? seeing (like Rahel)
he dyed in travel of us his children, and though to him we were Genesis 35. 18
Benonies sons of sorrow, yet in regard of ourselves we are Beniamins, sons
of his right hand. He showed his power and strength to do us good, the deeper
we diue into the fountain of his mercy the sweeter we shall find the water,
we shall find Joel 2. 13.
he is gracious and merciful: if that be not enough let us dig deeper and we
shall find he is of great goodness, plentious in goodness, and one that is
sorry for any evil that happens unto us. Our Savior opens the breasts of
consolation unto us: now the more the breasts of a nurse are drawn by sucking,
the more ease it is unto her: by sucking therefore these breasts and calling
for mercy at his hands, shall we not please him? yes, as one desiring a vent
for his abundant mercy he cries, and says: Math. 11. 18
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. He our Head is
ascended into heaven, and now above the water; temptations may assail us, but
they cannot overcome us: so long as the head is above the water, we that are
his members can never be drowned: therefore let us with an intemerate faith make
way through 2. Cor. 6. 8
honor and dishonor, good report, and bad report, and dismayed with nothing,
take hold on Christ Jesus: he, he will trauerse the indictment, cancel the
debt, suspend the rigorous doom, acquit our souls, and this pardon will be
ripened with an influence from above, with the best aspect, the trine aspect,
the holy Trinity will say Amen unto it. Ephraim sinned: well had Ephraim been
if he had turned unto the Lord, by repentance mournfully, and by reformation
holily, and by cleaving unto Christ Jesus hopefully; but he did not, he sought
not the Lord (as the text says) of which point I spoke unto you out of the 7.
ver. and therefore now I pass it over: nay, Ephraim was so far from cleaving
unto God, that Ephraim was like a dove deceived without heart. Like a dove?
that was good, Mat. 10. 16
be ye innocent as doves* a dove deceived? that was naught, be you wise as
serpents also. A dove deceived.
But the devil took such order to infatuate that wisdom, that he gained
possession of the tower the strongest hold, the heart, unto which all the
affections owe suit and service. 1. Reg. 22. 31.
Fight against neither small nor great, but only against the king of Israel:
quell the the captains, and all the soldiers will be amated: the te^per of the
head spring is either the sweetning, or the poisoning of the streams: the heart
being surprised, the retinue of affections must needs do their homage and
follow after. But whither did the affections of the men of Ephraim follow their
hearts? to Egypt, to Ashur, where there were the sinnews of might and strength:
the earths terror, Ottoman has not greater at this day: but see how vnsurely
the foot of worldly pomp stands, they stood in slippery places, though they
did call to Egypt, though they did go to Ashur.

Simple doves, being well in their doue-house the Church of God, where they
wanted neither meat, nor nest, nor warmth, nor the protection of God, they
could not be content, but lured with the charms of Egypt and Ashur, flew
willingly into their nets, and there changing their gold for copper, forfeited
their estates in Gods providence: they wanted help, and though being under Gods
wing, they 2. Reg. 6. 16.
were more that were with them then they that were against them, yet did they
call to Egypt, and go to Ashur.

I call to mind two kinds of doves deceived without Spiritual.
heart; the one in matters spiritual, the other in matters temporal. In
matters spiritual, those that in the quest and pursuit of their salvation,
make not to Almighty God, the strong rock of their defense, but they make
wrack upon the sands, upon the unsure ground of masses, trentalls,
indulgences, pardons, the number (not the weight) of prayers, nay upon their
own good works, which are no better then sins, passing the sands in number:
and there might they drown, their Esaias 1. 18.
sins being as red as scarlet, if God in his mercy did not make the sinners
as white psa. 68. 14.
as the snow in Salmon.

The spider has many legs, and little or no blood. If you ask why the
church of Rome stands upon so many legs, and leans upon so many helps not
warranted by the scripture; it is because they have too little confidence in
the blood of Christ. Among other their reeds of Egypt they stand to the mercy
of the Pope, who pretends to have the key of the churches treasury, and can
sell or lend good works unto them that want, as though he were worthy to be of
Gods privy counsel.

I read of one Lampr. in Se. Verco.
Verconius, in the time of Alexander Seuerus; who pretending familiarity with
the Emperor, took men's money for preferring their suites, abused them, did
them no good at all: being conuented before the Emperor, he was judged to be
hanged up in a chimney and so perish with smoke, for that he sold smoke to the
people. The man of sin makes great boast of familiarity and power with God.
Though he take men's money for indulgences, yet how little good he does them,
the wise can judge, he sells but smoke: and if Gods mercy be not all the
greater, he may perish by the smoke or by the fire of the valley of Tophet
that was prepared of old. Vid. a little treatise. of the description of the
world.
In the country of the Abisanes where Prester John governs, there be
certain mountains called Montes lunae, out of which the river Nilus issues
with such violence, that it would ouerflowe the lower country (which now the
Turk possesses) if it were not received into certain deep pittes and dammes
in the country of Prester John; to whom for that cause the Turk yields a
yearly tribute: the deluge of sin is so great that it would ouerflow us body
and soul, but that Prester John, or Presbiter John, John the Priest, Christ
both King and Priest for ever, does swallowe up sin, and bury it in the
depth of his mercy. Shall we not then yield a tribute for his favor? yes,
and all too little. Dubrauius lib. 26.
As Zisca that valrous Bohemian did not only quell his enemy being alive,
but commanded that when he was dead there should be a drum made of his
skin thereby to terrify him: So, Christ Jesus for our sakes did not only
when he was alive Genesis 3. 15.
break the head of the Serpent, by his preaching and miracles, but by his
death and after his death also he wrought the Devils woe and our good, he
Romans 4. 25.
dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification. So now, non gens
sed men's (as Reusner Leor. in symb. imperator.
Julius Aemilianus said in his Emblem or Poesy) not only Jews but Gentiles
also (if they fear God) find favor at his hands: While we walk through
Psalm. 84. 6.
the valley of Mulberie trees, or of misery (as diverse translations render it)
we may use these meditations, as pooles of water to refresh us, and learn to
fly to God, not to Ashur, not to Egypt. As I have noted unto you a kind of
doves deceived without heart, in matters spiritual concerning their souls;
so I note another kind that are as much deceived in matters temporal,
shrinking from God and leaning upon the broken reeds of Egypt.

Dan. 7. 9
O thou ancient of days, thy mercy is as ancient, and from the beginning: O
thou whose name is wonderful, thy Temporal.
love is wonderful: why should men then, from the breasts of consolation, fly
and call to Egypt or go to Ashur? Lean upon the worlds lap as long as you
will, she will prove but Judge. 16. 18.
a Dalila, to rob you of your strength, she will prove like that Cant. 8. 8
little sister, Cant. 8. that has no breasts: but Christ is your true Vine.
John 15. 1. A vine grows near the house, so he is near to all them that call
upon him: a vine is an ornament to the house, so Christ is to us: therefore we
must cast all our crowns down at his feet. The Vine keeps the house from
a storm: So, CHRIST keeps us from storm and tempest, which is the portion
of the wicked to drink.

But which is tremblable and monstrous, there be some, who, when God smites
them, they fly unto a witch or an Inchauntresse, and call for succor; as
though Job had been deceived when he said, Job 5. 18.
O God thou vvoundest and healest again, thou woundest and killest again: or
when he said Job. 1. 11.
The same God that takes away, the same God does give. When Ahazia was hurt,
he sent to 2. Reg. 1. 2. 3. 4
Beel-zebub the God of Eckron, but God sent Eliah the Thisbite in haste to meet
the messenger on the way, and bade him say, What, is there never a God in
Israel, but thou must seek for help of Beel-zebub the God of Eckron? Because
thou have done this thing, thou shall never rise out of thy bed. Gods favor
never was upon Saul after he left him, and 1. Sam. 28. 7
went to the Witch of Endor: therefore, it is said, that 1. Chr. 10. 13.
Saul dyed in his sin, because he forsook the Lord, and asked counsel of a
familiar spirit. Let this doctrine serve as eye-salue unto all you (if there be
any in this place) who for the love of your goods and your bodies health, seek
unto, not the hurting witch (for flesh and blood abhorres her) but the good
witch (as you call them commonly) who is more sought unto, therefore the more
dangerous; who assure yourselues is, the more Saint, the more Devil.

Therefore deal you with God by prayer, be in league with God: this blessed
league of love, was not concluded betwixt God, and the men of Ephraim, because
they left their first love and started aside like a broken bow: but God was
angry, his jealousy burned like fire, he found their goodness Hos. 6. 4.
to be as a cloud and as the morning dew, quickly come, and quickly gone,
their zeal short breathed in going up the hill to heaven. He found their
motion not to be natural, not from the heart, because it was tardior in fine
quam in principio, more flow in their latter end then in their beginning.

His family admittes no dwarfes or vnthriuing souls, which grow not in grace,
which do not 1. Cor. 9. 24.
run that they may obtain, but rather with Demas, 2. Tim. 4. 10.
go back and embrace this present world; therefore he Dan 5. 27.
weighed them in a balance, and found them too light, and divided their
kingdom. Here stand amazed with me and tremble at the angry words of our
just God. But when they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, and draw them
down as the fowls of heaven: I will chastise them as their congregation has
heard. verse 12.

As if God had said, O ye men of Ephraim, though you be without an eye, and
see not your danger: without a foot, and return not unto me: without a heart
like a dove deceived, and go to Ashur: yet I will see you when you go, for
Zepho. 1. 12.
I search Jerusalem with a candle: I will spread a net by my wisdom, and draw
you down by my power, and chastise you in my justice, and make good my truth
by performing that which you have heard in your congregation. He will see them
when they go: where I note Gods all seeing But when they go.
providence watching over the godly and over the wicked: over the godly, to
protect them: and over the wicked, to restrain them.

Over the godly, for their protection: and therefore in Godly.
the 9. of the Proverbs, Wisdom (that is Christ the wisdom of his father) is
said, to buildher an house, (that is the Church) upon seven pillars (that is
upon a sure foundation) and in the foundation of the Church (as of the Temple
of Jerusalem, Zach. 4.) there is laid Zecha. 4. 10
the stone with seven eyes, Gods all seeing providence; which is is so mounted
upon the wings of birds, that Mat. 10. 29.
two silly Sparrows sold for one farthing, cannot fall to the ground without
his permission: much less, man who is of more worth then many sparrowes: least
of all Gods elect, for whose good his Angels are appointed to be a guard and to
all that are heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. 14. The difference between the God
of Israel and the Gods of the Gentiles is this: the God of Israel holds his
people in his hands, Apoc. 2. 1. But the Gentiles held their Gods in their own
hands, Genesis 35. 4. The wheels in the first of Ezechiel, (things whose motions
are giddy and uncertain) resembled the round world and the things therein,
which things (like the rings of those wheels) are full of eyes, full of Gods
providence (for now Jerusalem, being without walls has Gods Ze l. a. 2. 5
providence to be awall of fire about her, and himself, is the glory in the
midst of her) for the good of his people, he Hos. 2. 21
makes the heavens to hear the earth, the earth to hear the corn, the wine,
and the oil, and them to hear the cries of Israel: when Israel cries he
must be heard; For he that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep.

Least then we plow the Sands and labor in vain, we must wrestle with all
difficulties and businesses, and overcome them as the people of God did the
Madianites with Judge. 7. 20
the sword of the Lord, and the sword of Godion: neither being wanting unto our
selves, nor yet depending upon our own endeavors without the blessing of the
Lord, who will say to the Esaias. 43. 6
North Give, and to the South keep not back. It was a worthy resolution of
Jacob, that he would not go into a strange Country upon a great business,
Genesis 28. 20
unless GOD would be with him in his journey. Let it be your resolution, not
to undertake any business for soul nor body, but with a request unto God
(before you undertake your work) that he will further your enterprise. When
you come into the Church to hear for your souls health, or when you are about
to labor in your vocations, remember this; GOD is the supervisour of his own
will to see that it be performed, by the godly and by the wicked: he helps
the godly that they may do it. If the ungodly do it not, He tears them in
pieces, while there is none to help: for (according to the position of the
schools) in him there is bona potentia and potens bonitas.

Over the wicked a power, and that is good: for the sakes Wicked.
of the godly a goodness and that is powerful. Let no man say that when he is
about to sin, Tush Psalm. 11. 14
God does not see it, what is there knowledge in the most high? Those men are
like to stage players, personate men, they seem what they are not, their deeds
give their words their lie: like idle housewiues (which sweep the dust
behind the door) they have filthiness enough though it be not to be seen.

There is in this world a great swollen body of ostentation, both words and
deeds: it is the great physician of our souls, who can only skill of the
Anatomy of this body; and therefore though the Jews cried, Iere. 7. 40
The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, yet he tried what gold they
were, not only by the ring and sound, but by the touchstone also: and when he
found what they were, he said, Mat. 7. 21
Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven, but he that does the will of the Father that is in heaven: When a
man had a sore, that was not covered, by the judgment of the law Leuiticall,
it was but a sore, but Leui. 13. 30
when it was covered over with a yellow lock it was a Leprosy: every sin
may pass for a sin, but when sin is covered over with a fair yellowish
lock, with a fair show or smooth excuse (as namely when pride is glorified with
the name of cleanelinesse, covetousness with the name of good husbandry,
deceire of wisdom, drunkenness of good fellowshippe) then it is more then a
sin; a man may suspect himself for a Leprosy, then he must proclaim
himself before God (as the Leper was to do in the streets) Leu. 13. 45
I am unclean, I am unclean. Now in this seeming age (when complement goes as
far as one of the liberal sciences, and to be a fashionable man is as high
rated as to be learned or honest) Josh. 6.
Seven days, and seven Priests, and seven rams horns are all too little
to cast down this sin, which is as mighty as Jericho. Christ was never so
loud against any sin as against this sin of hypocrisy, crying oftentimes,
Mat 23. 13
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites. Therefore if there be any of
you, who give Christianity occasion -- Virg. lib. 2 Geor.
mirari suas frondes, et non sua poma -- Who seem to make accounte of Esaias. 1.
13
New Moons and Sabbaothes, and of the Church of GOD, and of religion, and
have your hands full of blood, grinding Verse. 15.
the faces of the poor by hard bargains, having your mouthesfull of lies,
and yet wiping your mouths, as though you were no such men; take heed the
visard will be pulled from your faces, and Godwil smite you, you whited walls.
Act. 23. 3. God will see you, you cannot deceive him, he saw the purpose of
Ephraim: and when he saw it, he said, I will spread I will spread my not and draw
them down.
my net upon them, there is his wisdom; and draw them down as the fowls of
heaven, there is his power: he spread his nets and drew down Nabuchadnezzar
that Lucifer, that sun of the morning, while upon his Turret, he was making
an Idol of himself; and many others: among the rest, Corn. Tacit. and alii.
Nero, who piled cruelty upon cruelty; witness many villainies chained
together at one time: When first he set Rome on fire: Secondly, he played upon
his Lute and song verses of Homer, concerning the burning of Troy, comparing
the two Cities together: Thirdly, he charged the Christians with the burning
of the City. Fourthly, he clothed them with the skins of beasts, that being
taken for beasts they might be devoured by dogs. Seemaster Knowles his
Turkish History in the life of Amurath the 2.
Though diverse of the Turks kill their brethren to prevent treason, and thereby
to make themselves great in the world, yet God can put hooks at his pleasure in
their nostrils, and turn them back whither soever he will. He can spread
his net and pull down the greatest oppressors of the earth, and make their
Prou. 20. 17.
bread of oppression to be gravel in their teeth, and make Job. 31. 38.
the furrows of their Land to complain against them: which Land being gotten
by the hurt of Christ's members betrayed and sold, (as Judas betrayed Christ)
will prove no better then Mat. 27. 8.
Aceldamaes, fields of blood. Exodus 6. 5.
He that saw the wrong offered by the taskemasters of Egypt, and heard the
cries of Israel, will ever hear the groans of his distressed people crying, --
quem das finem Rex magne laborum? Apoc. 6. 10
How long Lord, how long Lord holy and true? They that wound Gods children,
touch the apple of his eye: Act 9. 4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Saul through the sides of the Church,
wounded Christ. Benhadad was deceived when he said, the God of Israel was 2.
Reg. 20. 23.
the God of the mountains, and not of the valleys, as though the Lord cared
for the high and mighty and not for the lowly and dejected: there will be a
time when God will no longer suffer the wicked Esaias 65. 15
to spoil upon his holy mountain: Psalm. 12.
but for the comfortless troubles sake of the needy, and because of the deep
sighing of the poor, I will up (says the Lord) and when he arises, who is
able to resist? Herod was a King, and (as the greatest are) he was but Lord
over a little corner of Gods footstool; yet he grew impetuous, and when he
sat upon his royal seat, he remembered not him that sits upon the circle
of the heavens: when he stretched out his hand, he remembered not him that
with the span of his hand reaches from the East unto the West: when he spoke,
he remembered not him whose voice is like the sound of Thunder: when he was
clothed with royal apparel, he remembered not him who is clothed with
righteousness, as with a garment: therefore he found that Omne sub regno
grauiori regnum est, Act. 12. 23.
He was eaten up with worms. It is GOD that can visit Esaias. 27. 1.
Leuiathan, that pearcing Serpent, yea even Leuiathan that crooked Serpent, and
can slay the Dragon that is in these^ and as for those who are any way
displeasing unto him, he can take them though they hide themselves Amos 3. 12.
in Samaria, as in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus as in a couch: for God
in this place says of Ephraim, I will draw the^ down as the fowls of heaven.

This may seem harsh to flesh and blood: which out of weakness may even
seem to plead against God, and say that God is the cause of their ruin and
perishing in their sins, seeing he shows his power in punishing of them, for
those sins which himself by infusing grace might have prevented. Dust and
ashes dispute not thou with thy maker, Hos. 14. 2.
Perditio tua ex te Israel, Every reprobate is choked with his own venom. God
can touch pitch, and not be defiled: as for example, Job. 1. 15.
The Sabaeans and the Chaldaeans spoiled and robbed Job, the Devil caused
them, God suffered them, nay in some some sort he was an agent; for Act. 17. 28
by him men live, move, and have their being: author I say of the action, but
not of the obliquitie of the action: when impiety was once aflote, God by his
wisdom ordained a channel for it that it might turn to his glory, and the
greatest good of Job. When a skillful musician plays cunningly upon a Lute
that is out of tune, the jar (if there be any) comes from the lute, not from
the hand: when men's lives are out of tune ought they to blame that wise and
powerful finger of God without which they cannot work? No, no: O sinner all
that iarring comes of thy self. It is not God (O drunkard) but thy self that
drinks thee drunk: Not God (O thou murderer) but thy self that stains thy
self with blood: Not God (O thou blasphemer) but thy self that filles thy
mouth with Ecclus. 23 12.
words that are clothed with death: build not thy sins upon the back of God:
thou mockest thy self, when thou think to shift thy burden from thy self
unto his shoulders. Ezech. 18 4
The same soul that sins, the same must die, unless Gods mercy be all the
greater. As the Devil brings darkness out of light, so the manner of God is
to bring light out of darkness: thereupon Saint Origin speaks of a great
pedigree of blessings derived from that unnatural sin of the selling of
Joseph into Egypt, which blessing after many years returned plentifully again
unto his fathers house. Aug. in Fau^^um Manich.
Saint Austen in few words determines this question: the Devil tempts, man
consents, God forsakes. Let God be true, and all men liers: Let God be justly
esteemed pure, and all the world be tainted with impiety. God in his wisdom
shows his justice often and many a time upon us, as at this time upon Ephraim,
that by his correctio^s he may call us home unto him: Hos. 11. 4
He draws us gently with the cords of a man, even with the bands of love,
least we should be drawn from him by Egypt or by Ashur, by little sins or
by great, Esaias. 5. 18
by the cords of vanitic or by the careropes of iniquity.

And therefore in the words following, he calls them Chastise.
chastisements: which chastisements (when men are incorrigible, deaf adders
and stop their ears against the wise charmer) are the best means to cast
salt upon affections, and gives eyes unto reason: he says, I will chastise
them. The chasticements of GOD lay heavy (that my discourse may bear date
then, and not before the coming of our Savior in the flesh) upon the son of
GOD himself: the rods wherewith God did suffer him to be chasticed were his
enemies and his friends: his enemies were like Psa. 22. 16
as many dogs that came upon him: and as the Sun entering into the
constellation called the Dog, argues a hot season: so the conflict must
needs be hot when the Sun of righteousness fell among so many dogs: his
friends, the flock, were so amazed (the shepherd being smitten) that he was
like a tree having all the leaves beaten of: not only the withered leaves,
those which followed him for his bread and for his miracles fell away, but the
green leaves also, they which loved him best, his own Mark. 14 71
Peter both denied and forsware him. Luke 23. 31
If these things fell unto the green tree, what shall be done unto the dry
tree? The Church could not escape sorrow, but has hen Esaias. 1. 8
as a lodge in a garden of cucumers, and as a besieged City. When the devil
tries, he tries with a sieve, Luke 22. 31
Satan has d^sired to winome thee as wheat: When God tries, heetrieth with a
sanne; Luke 3. 17
With a fan will he purge his floor: a sieve keeps the bad, and sends away
the good: a fan keeps the good, and sends away the bad: therefore the trials
of the devil do rob us of our virtue, and the trials of God by affliction do
dispatch away al our vices. Be not afraid (says Petr. de remedio vtriusque
fortun^
Petrarch) though the house, the body be shaken so the soul, the guest of the
body fare well. Affliction is the whetstone of zeal, which made God sometimes
let his Church taste of it, and (...) 13
lie among the pots, though her wings be of silver, and her feathers of gold.
God does come with love or with a rod inter changeably as it pleases him: He
has piped unto us by many earthly blessings; have our hearts danced for joy,
and in our songs have we pray sed him? He has mourned unto us by the shaking
of diverse rods, and calamities over our heads, and has our mourning for sin
been like the mourning of the mother for the loss of her first borne? If we
will be reconciled by neither means, he will do unto us as he did unto
Ephraim: Mat. 11. 17.
For when he piped to Ephraim by his love and by his word, they would not
tread right measures by their obedience, therefore he told them they must
adresse themselves to weeping, for now he meant to mourn unto them and to
chastise them as their congregation had heard.

Such is the confluence of opinions for the exposi^ion of these words, so
diverse and so iustling the crowde of interpreters, As their congregation has
heard.
that I cannot without wronging you overmuch, marshall them into their several
ranks: therefore Zanchius and ^hi.
I will at this time build upon that which is subscribed unto by the best, and
excepted against by none; which I take to be the quick of these words; and
that is this, that they had often heard in their co^gregations, by thelaw and
the prophets, that the chasticements and the rods of God would tread upon the
heels of their sins, if they continued in them. Happy were the men of
Ephraim, if they had known their own happiness: yet being as they were they
were happy, for being forewarned they were forearmed. So was Nineveh: for the
noise of destruction Ion. 3. 4.
after forty days made the Ninevites turn unto the Lord, and so prevent the
danger. Arise quoth Elias to A^^^b and 1. Reg. 18. 44.
prepare thy chariot, for I hear a sound of rain; unless thou pass quickly
thou can not pass: there the sound of rain, prevented the danger that
might have come by rain: So though the justice of God require the cutting
down of sinners, yet God in his mercy first Mat. 3. 10.
puts the axe to the root of the tree, to see if that repentance and
amendment of life, may prevent that cutting. Seeing then you have so many
warnings in the congregations, to forearme you against danger, make use of them
and be bettered by them, least they prove a cloud of witnesses against you.

I will chastise them as their congregation has heard. Out of which words, I
observe first that the preacher who is the tongue of the congregation, ought to
tell the people of their danger to come: Secondly, the people who are the ear
of the congregation, ought to yield their obedience unto the voice of the
shepherd; a well composed body that has such a tongue and such an ear. The
preacher should tell the congregation of the danger to come: but some cannot,
some dare not, some will not, some though they do it do it to no purpose.

Some cannot, for they run before they be sent, not having Some cannot.
eaten Apos. 10. 10. Ezech. 3. 1.
the little book that Saint John and Ezechiel were commanded to eat: they
give counsel before they receive it of the Lord, they preach without
meditation, they only turn the cock and let the water run; whereas
fishers of men should be as the Apostles were (when they were fishers) who
were not always casting in their nets, but some times mending their nets: so if
these men be always feeding others by their preaching and never feeding
themselves by reading and meditation, they will prove but dry nurses in a
while, and unfit to give the sincere milk of the word to others: what then,
Ier. 8. 22.
is there no balm in Gilead? is there no physician there? Yes, but some dare
not. Some dare not, forgetting (that when occasion serves) they must be Mar.
3. 17
sons of thunder, as well as of consolation. Woe unto them that gild over
ragged walls and rotten posts, Ezech. 13. 10.
who dawbe with vntemperedmorter, and sow pillowes under the elbowes of
sinners: saying peace, peace, when there is no peace: Ps. 137. 6
Let such a tongue cleave to the roof of the mouth, let such a dawbing right
hand forget his cunning. In the Gospel we read of Mat. 13. 33
a woman, that seasoned three peckes of meal till all were leauened. I compare
the three peckes of meal to three sorts of men, our superiors, our equals,
our inferiors: some preachers can be content to put leaven (sharpnesseinough)
into their equals and inferiors, but when they should come to season their
superiors, they dare not, they Hatter; in stead of leaven, they bring honey:
they are in some sort like Surgeons, though they have not Lions hearts, courage
to lance, and pearce, and cure the sins, yet they have Ladies hands, which
(they say) are enured to complexions and paintings, they have complexion for
every vice; both will and skill to justify the balances of deceit and
wickedness (be it never so great) in a friend or in a man of power. They be
like ciphers which are nothing of themselves, but serve to raise the figure to
a higher number: so these are men of no worth, only they serve by their
flattery to puff men up with an opinion that they be more then indeed they
are. Hotto. in his treatise called the ambassador.
Hottoman a learned Lawyer, says that an Ambassador should not be like a stage
player to change his person, he must stand constantly upon the will and
pleasure of his King. If an Ambassador must be so, then Gods Ambassador must
be so, and more then so, delivering neither more nor less, then the counsel
of God. John Baptist (that day star before the Sun) the forerunner of
Christ did not stick to tell Herod that Mat. 14. 4
it was not lawful for him to have his brother Philips wife; though Amos. 7.
verse. 12. 13
Amaziah said unto Amos, Go thou Seer into the Land of Judah, and prophecy
there, but prophecy not in Bethel, it is the Kings chapel, it is Ieroboams
court: Such agents for the Devil (that breed singing in the ears of great
men, and make their heads giddie) vould persuade that those great men of the
world (who have their authority given them as a talent whereby they may punish
others) should become sanctuaries for sin, and that no man should dare to
meddle with any vice that they are given unto. Deuteronomy. 19. 5
When the hatchet of any man hewing timber did by chance fly out of his hand,
hit, hurt, or kill a man, there was allowed him a City of refuge: If any
preacher hewing timber for the building of the Lord, touch or wound any of his
auditors, shall there not be allowed unto him a City of refuge? Yes, the
necessity that lies upon him to discharge his own conscience, and deliver the
Lords counsel, will be sufficient to plead his pardon.

Some again will not though they can and dare; they are Some will not.
like Genesis 49. 14
Issachar, who was a strong ass cowching down under two burdens, (two or
three livings) saying, Rest is good. Such a one was Alexander the sixth, who was
more fit to keep the castle of Pageant of Popes.
Saint Angelo against Charles the eight, King of France, then to tend the flock
of God against the invasions of Satan: he I say having sons whom he
especially advanced unto honor, viz. the prince of Sicily, Caesar Borgia, first
a Cardinal, then Duke of Valentia, Aut Caesar aut nihil.
first Caesar, then nothing, according to his own speech, and the duke of
Spain, who being murdered and cast into Tyber, and dragged for by his careful
father, made his father then, and perhaps only then worthy to be accounted a
fisher of men. Christ (if you mark them well) with many working words, does
enforce ministers to be careful guardians of their congregations: though Peter
himselftels him thrice that he loves him, yet he will not take his love to be
sincere unless Peter will Ioh. 21. 17
feed his sheep, feed his lambs: by all the terms of love that may be, he
pleades and becomes an advocate for his people, lest the sheep of his fould
should wander in the wilderness without a guide. Ministers are called
shepherds, watchmen, laborers; their names are not still borne, but have their
signification and teach them their duty: yet some will not, though their office
be to be orators for the people and Ambassadors from God.

Some again, though they do it, do it to no purpose: as Some do it to no
purpose.
when they give good oracles out of Moses his chair and yet have not
consecrated hands to perform what they speak; which makes the people think of
some great mystery of Atheism, that was never yet imparted to them. It should
be with the minister as in the vision that Ezechiel saw, Ezech. 1. 8
a hand under a wing: they should not only have knowledge to mount upwards, but
a hand also to perform that which they know is meet. Therefore in the old
Testament, there was not only Aaron that had upon his breast plate, Exodus 28.
30.
Vrim and Thummim, perfection of life as well as light of understanding: but in
the new Testament also there was John Baptist, who was Ioh. 5. 35
a shining and burning candle, not only shining with knowledge but burning
also, such was his zeal. It was an argument of the calling of Moses, when his
rod Number. 17. 8
brought forth both blossoms and ripe almondes: No man will deny that Minister
to be lawfully called, who has both the goodly blossoms of learning, and the
ripe fruits of a lively faith: those that have the one are like Saul 1. Sam. 8.
7
who overcame his thousand: but those that have them both are like David who
overcame his ten thousand, and being made keepers of the vines they may
rejoice that they keep their own vines also. Cant. 1. 5.

Some cannot, some dare not, some will not, some though they do it, do it to no
purpose. These words I doubt not are drunk up into the ears of many, with as
longing a desire as Job. 40. 18
Behemoth would swallow up Jordan into his mouth: but what? Is there sin only
in the house of Leui, and not among the rest of the Tribes? no, not only: I
may not silence the sins nor the duty of the people: the people also should
hear the threatenings that are delivered in the congregation. But some will not
come, some will not mark when they come, some will not be pleased when they
mark, some be they pleased or displeased, will not obey.

Some will not come, but (like beetles who care more for the dung of the earth
then for a rose) they esteem more of Not come.
that which is Phil. 3. 8
loss and dung, Romans 15. 12
then of Christ, the flower of the root of Iessee: they cannot abide the
savor of him, tho his word be 2. Cor. 2. 16
the auour of life unto life: though his word turned Lions into Lambs, making
the soldiers say, Luke 3. 14
Master what shall we do? the subtlety of the serpent into the simplicity
of a dove, making the Publicans say, Master what shall we do? many heads into
one tongue, making the people say, Master what shall we do? All this, when it
was put into the mouth of John the Baptist, Luke 3. Judge. 5. 23
Curseye Meroz, (says the Angel of the Lord) indefinenter maledicite (as
Iunius and Tremelius render it) curse it with an everlasting curse; because the
men of that City would not come out to help the rest of the Tribes in the day
of battle. When we come all to the Church of God upon the Sabbath day we come
(like an army) to join together to war against the devil by our prayers and
holy meditations: if there be any that be either idle, or drunken, or wanton,
or worldly, or (for any cause) unwilling to come to join with and help their
brethren in this high service, shall I curse them? I pray God they be not
cursed with an everlasting curse. While we blaze the glory of the word, there
comes unto the ignorant a Jesuit or a Seminary or perhaps a pupil of theirs,
and beguiles them with a show and pretense of antiquity, as the Gibeonites
beguiled Joshua, by telling him a tale Josh. 9. verse. 4. 5.
of oulde shoes, and oulde bottles, and old moldy bread: they tell them the
old good world was then at the best, when they lived under the Latin law, and
knew no Scripture, but believed as the Church believed, and so by this means
many simple men have been drawn to make a league with them (as Joshua did)
Josh. 9. 14
without asking counsel of God. I do with reverence ascribe all convenient
authority unto the Church, whose beauty within is far more then I can
comprehend. -- Martial.
Par domus est coelo, sedminor est Domino. The Church, the house of God is
glorious, and even the gate of heaven, but the Church (especially those
hoodwinkt Churches in those sickely times whereof I spoke before) is far
inferior to Christ the Lord of the Church, and his holy word which is his will,
whereby he governs this house of his. And therefore despising the words of
God 2 Cor. 1. 20
(which are Yea and Amen) we must not only eye the Church, which may err while
she is militant here on the earth. Those that travail Southward have the
Northern pole for their direction, till they come beyond the hot and burning
zone or part of the world: which when they have once passed they lose the sight
of the Northern; and the Southern pole arises to be their guide: so while we
pass to heaven ward through Apoc. 15
this glassie sea mingled with fire, which is the world, we are directed (as
by a star) by the word of God: but when we are once past the hot fits and
pangs of death, then we lose that direction, we need it no more, an other
light is our comfort, even Apoc. 21
the light of the Lamb for ever and ever. Josh. 5. 12
No falling of Manna unto the children of Israel, when once they had gotten a
croppe in the Land of promise, so long it fell, and no longer; noe more the
word, noe more the bread of this life shall nourish us, we need it not when we
have the blessings of that place which flows with better things then either
milk or honey.

Some will not mark when they come, yet both strong Some do not mark when
they come.
and weak Christians should mark, for the word of God is a Greg. in mor.
River where the Elephant may plunge and the Lamb may wade. In the Church
Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in acta.
when the Priest prays and blesses, I see one talking and another laughing:
when thou sit and kneelest there, do thou not know that thou art in the
company of Angels? and yet do thou laugh or scorn. If these things be not
worthy of a thunderbolt, I know not what is. August. contra Donatistas.
To pollute a common well, where the whole City fetches water, is a thing that
cannot be endured: how much more to abuse the Church where Gods people come for
the waters of comfort? Tertull. Apologet. cap. 19.
Coit coetus, the people gather together, and like a band of men they set upon
God with their prayers. Grata est haec vis: God is pleased to have such
violence offered unto him. When you come then unto the Church, mark well the
use of the Laver in the sanctuary, Exodus the 30. and the 18 verse: and wash
your selves before and when you offer your sacrifice. Leuit. 11
No beast was clean, but that which chewed the cud: If you will be clean, and
pleasing unto God, hear not only, but mark and chewe the cud by serious
meditations. God cared not so much for David's sacrifices as for his obedient
attention unto his word: the former he needed not, for His are the bullockes
upon ten thousand Plains: but the later he required, and gave David power to
perform it: whereupon David says, Psalm. 40. 8
Sacrifice and burnt offerings thou would not have, but mine ear have thou
opened: he made account he should hear, and attention would be more pleasing
unto God then any sacrifice. Exodus 21. 6
If a man for love of his master were willing to be his servant continually,
he must by the Judges of the city have his ear bored: If you vow your selves
continual servants unto the Lord, you must desire the Judge of quick and dead
to bore and open your ears that you may hear and know his will. When you com up
the^ with the Tribes into the house of the lord, bring your buckets with you
unto the well, your ears and hearts that they may be filled, Mat. 26. 40
Grudge not to watch with God one hour, let no temptation of flesh, the world,
or the devil steal away your hearts. Like children dote not upon babies while
you should learn your lesson, be not miscarried by worldly shows and vanities.
Say unto every evil suggestion, Mat. 16. 23
Turn thee behind me, Satan: know that Exodus 3. 5
the ground where you sit and kneel and stand, is holy ground. Let God in his
own house be the Emperor of the field: and by his word he will hammer you so,
that if he find you Lactantius lib. 3. divine. institut.
like Lions, he will make you lambs, if he find you weak, he will make you
resolute, never to be outfaced by the flames of persecution: 2. Cor. 2. 16
who is sufficient for those things? for the message of God? yet Ephesians. 4. 8
God has given gifts unto men, whereby they deliver the word of God (as
Vincentius Vinc. Ler. contra. hae res. cap. 17
Lerinensis says) noue, but not nouum; after a new manner, but no other word
then that which was from the beginning: and they stand upon the watch towers in
your Churches to descry the danger and give you warning, hear the^, and by
their preaching together with the power of gods holy spirit (a beam of the Sun
of righteousness) you will quickly perceive your souls not to be virgins, you
will see your own sins and corruptions that you may amend, as the beam of the
sun shining in a house discouers many motes which before were unperceived:
woldst thou not be caught by the hooks of Satan? then let not thy mind leap out
of the poole, out of the well of the water of life, at every fly, at every
wordly vanity: would thou have thy affections deep died in religion, so that
thy mind clothed with the^ may be taken to wear the liuerie of God? then let
the^ stay long in the liquor; let thy body stay in the Church, and thy mind
besetled upon the word that is read and preached: so by the hammer of Gods word
without, and the fire of the holy Ghost working within, thou will be beaten
and fashioned into a signet, near and deer unto God: but if ( Ier. 22. 24
Coniah like) thou being a signet on Gods finger do rebel against him, he
will pull thee off.

But some will not be pleased when they mark; but like Not pleased.
Apes and Monkies which break every glass they look into, because every glass
does show them their own deformity: so they quarrel with all preachers and
preaching because the truth delivered cannot choose but show them their own
ouglines. They have their galls in their ears: whatsoever they hear turns
into the gall of bitterness, they love to have their ears sheaths for flattery,
they relish nothing but placentia, if there be any sin that rules in them (as
who has not one or other that is praedominant) then they acknowledge no king,
but Caesar, no ruler but that evil affection, the word of God shall not
ouerrule them by their good wills. How much better were it for men when they are
touched by sermons, to give God thanks for it, because God has sent a special
messenger that day to take them (above others) as brands out of the fire, and
like stinging spirits to bring them unto God. For such words Psa. 149. 8
bind kings in chains, and nobles in linkes of iron: they carry not away the
ear unto God for a present, but a heart Pro. 23. 26
which he himself requires of all his sons: O God (may they say, who are
touched for their sin) I thank thee, Luke 19. 9
this day is salvation come into my house.

Some again (be they pleased or displeased) will not obey. Not obey.
Though the word of God like the Josh. 10. 12
Sun standing still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aielon, has been
a long time at the noone point and height, that by the benefit of it we might
be revenged of our greatest enemy: yet I fear, the Devil may still walk Mat.
12. 4
in dry places, as he delights to do, among those (I mean) that are not
moystened with this well of living water, or if they have heard the word, yet
Math. 13
it takes little or no root because it has fallen in stony or thorny places.
When Naaman murmured at Elisha saying, that 2 Reg. 5. verse. 12. 13
Abanah and Pharphar rivers of Damascus were better then either Jordan or any
river in Israel: the servant of Naaman said unto him, If the man of God should
bid thee do a great matter, would thou not do it? much more when he bids
thee wash thy self seven times in Jordan and be clean. So should we do any
thing that God commands in his word (even because he commands) much more when
he bids us obey and be saved. The assurance that we have for our salvation is
in the word of God, we know in whom to trust: but God keeps a counterpane
thereof, he is not ignorant, but knows whom we must obey: as he will on his,
so must we on our parts perform conditions. Chrysostom. in 2. Math.
If having gone astray and being in danger of Herod (of the Devil worse then
Herod) we will not with the wise men of the East return home another way, then
God may say (as David said in the pang and burden of his soul) 2. Sam. 18.
33.
O my son Absalon, O Absalon my son, my son; you would needs be rebels:
but, as he was hanged in his own hair, so your lot is to perish by your own
rebellion. Hear the word then, as though the very message brought you wings
to fly to God: let not sin (that shot without noise) wound you unawares and
possess you so strongly, that you be loath to leave it till it leave you; so
that you say of it, as Abraham said of the son of the bondwoman, Genesis 17. 18.
O that Ishmael might live in thy sight. And surely such is the nature of man,
that every one has a sin (which I may call a peculiar) beloved with an
extraordinary love, for which he desires a dispensatio^, though he can be
content to forgo all other sins but that. As Lot said of Zoar, Genesis 19. 20
O Lord spare it, it is but a little City: so every man says of his be loved
sin, O lord spare that, it is but a small sin, I am naturally inclined unto it,
and therefore to be borne withal, from other sins I am content to be
weaned. Thus every man would be so sawey as to pass a faculty with God, if he
were not both wise and just. The devil is like Nimrod a great hunter, O Lord
keep us out of his chase: yet men like the pleasures of sin: and though they be
in danger to be molested with many spirits and terrors, who come within the
compass of sins enchanted circle, yet are they never willing out of the
Devils by-pathes to follow their mother the Church, by the steps of the flock.
Cant. 1. 7. not from virtue to virtue, from grace to grace; which is the
progress of Christians, to whom Christ says Cant. 2. 10
Arise my love, my fair one and come away. Moisture in the feet strikes up
into the head, the sin of the meanest member dishonours our head Christ. Let
the^ the girdle of verity be straight girt about your loins; I mean, observe
strictly that which God commands: he says Prepare your selves for heaven: say
you, Psalm. 57. 8.
O God my heart is ready, my heart is ready: he says, Seek ye my face, answer
you again, and say, Thy face O Lord will I seek: lay your noses open unto the
sweet savor of life unto life: your eyes unto the Day Star that is sprung
from on high: your ears unto the charms of the wise charmer: and seeing God
by his word knocks at your doors, Psalm. 24. 7.
Lift up your selves you gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that
the King of glory may enter in. Let not the Ministers of Gods word, row any
longer against wind and tide: but seeing they are appointed to raise up seed
to their elder brother Christ Jesus, by preaching Lib. 1. pastoral. curae cap.
5.
(as Gregory does moralize that leuitical decree) be flexible at their
persuasions. Our eng. Chr. M. Fox and others.
Then shall that of Pope Gregory be more fitly applied to you, then when it
was spoken; Angli quasi Angeli, not for the beauty of the body, but for that
beauty which is the beauty of your mother the Church, who is alglorious within.
Pro. 30. 26.
Conyes are a people not mighty, yet they make their houses in the Rock:
howsoever many of you in this world be but mean, yet be wise, and build upon
the Rock of your defense: do it in deed by your obedience unto the word, if
you will stand against all temptations: if you do but in show only, it is but
a sandy building and will fall. M. Krolles his hist. of the Turks.
Uladislaus no less then a king of Polone and Hungary, and therefore a
Christian King, was punished with a great overthrow at Verna for breaking his
promise and oath made to Amurath the 6. who was no better then a cruel and an
irreligious Turk: how shall men who are base, far worse then Kings, and yet
Christians by profession, escape Gods fearful judgments for breaking their
promise and vow made in their baptism, not unto a Turk, but unto God, not
irreligious but the author of all religion? Therefore remember your vow and
yield your obedience? If ever it was a time to hearken to Gods word in Gods
congregation; it is now, when Exodus 8. 28
the wicked swarm like the flies in Egypt. Apoc. 8. ^1
The star called wormwood is fallen into this glasly sea, and has poisoned
the world. Antigonum quaero (quoth one) I seek Antigonus: So may we: Where is
the innocence of former ages? Now the wicked, Genesis 41. 4.
like the lean kine (which Pharaoh saw in his dream) eat up the fat ones
(the good men) yet are they never a whit the fatter themselves, but as ill
favored as they were before. In this age one may see Zecha. 3. 1.
Iehoshuaes, the best men, standing before the Angel of the Lord, in the best
place and presence, and Satan on their right hands hindering their best actions:
The Lord reprove thee Satan, even the Lord, that has chosen Jerusalem, reprove
thee.

Especially now seeing the ends of the world are drawing near unto us. It is
(in respect of us) long, since Christ said, Apo. 22. 20
Surely I come quickly. And now by the forerunners of the end, we may guess
the beginning of sorrows unto the wicked: but as for you that have better
learned Christ; Lu. 21. 28
Lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near. One forerunner, is
carnal security; men shall (as they did in the days of Noah) put far from
them the evil day: even now men pamper the flesh, their bellies have no ears.
Zech. 1. 11.
The man among the myrrh trees said most truly then (so might he now) that all
the world is at rest: Such is the security and sleep in sin, that with the
world it is midnight: but beware; Mat. 25. 6.
at midnight will the Bridegroom come, he will once more Hag. 2. 7
shake not only the earth, but the heavens also. Look you be not taken
unawares in your bloody feathers, unbrace not your selves as though the armor
of a Christian were no wearing for you: ye are yet in the militant church: the
devil so long as the world indures will never dislodge his camp, but be up in
arms against you. Yet blessed be your God who leads you against him, with the
Zech. 11. 7.
two staves, beauty and bands, a beautiful and comely government, and with the
bands of love: do not all the other forerunners follow after with Zech. 5. 9.
windin their wings, Matthew. 24.
wars abroad, rumors of wars at home, a general conflagration among
private men, by strife and envy: the pestilence knocking at our doors: So Luk
21.
little faith among men, that the wiser sort and more nimble headed are pioners
and underminers of others: which made David in his time say, having the choice
of three plagues (and we have now much more cause) 2. Sa^. 24. 14
Lord let me not fall into the hands of men.

Antichrist, 2. These. 2. 4
the man of sin, sitting as God in the temple of God, whose mystery of
iniquity beginning to work in Paul's time, has now filled the world brimme full
of poison: many false Christ's (if you look into our Chronicles) have lift up
their heads many years ago: how many Jews be converted to Christ we cannot
tell, but we are to hope that God^ privy seal has marked many among them who
live in Italy, France, Germany, and other places of Christendom. We have
seen signs by fire, many and fearful: Signs by water, when God did let it
loose to the spoil of whole countries, the next year he bound it up with
frosts, and gave it bars and doors, saying An. 1572.
Hither to shall thou come, and thou shall come no further, here shall thou
stay thy x Job. 38. 11.
proud waves.

There have bin signs in the stars set by him who guides Job. 38. 32
Arcturus with his sons: as there was a blazing star seen in Cassiopaea,
for the judging of whose place and altitude our Mathematicians wrote two
books, the one called Ala mathematica, the other called Scala mathematica; but
they could neither fly so high nor clime so high, but they found that digitus
Dei, the finger of God was above them. These signs and tokens (beloved) are
not limetwigges to catch you, but rather marks to direct you: let all your
kowledge of these and other things end at home: your best Geometry is to
measure the length, and the breadth, and the depth of Gods mercy: your best
Arithmeticke is to learn to Psalm. 39 5.
number your days: your best Grammar to learn to know the property of that
name which is a name above all names, whereat Thil. 2. 10.
all the things in heaven and earth do bow themselves. These signs are past
and gone: when Ma. 24. 29
the sun will be darkened, and the moon turned into blood, we cannot tell: but
for the publication of the Gospel over the world, it may be proved by many
instances. One most pregnant, most fresh, is that of Virginia which now (by God
grace) through our English shall hear news of Christ, the gospel of Christ
shall be published, no doubt Romans 10. 18
the sound of the Preachers will go out into that corner of the world, and
make it as a Esa. 58. 11
well watered garden. There were a people of the like quality (with the
natural inhabitants of Virginia) poor and naked things, (I call them so, the
more to indeare your affections) when they were conquered, there was that
cruelty used unto them, that scandal was given unto the name of Christ, the
name of Christianity grew odious unto them, by reason of that cruelty they
would let it have no room in their thoughts. It would require a just volume of
it self, to tell you what Benzo and Bartholomeus a Casa write of this argument:
but I hope our English are of that metal, that having in their hands the key
of the kingdom of God, they will not keep those weak ones out, but rather
make way for the Gospel (as I hope they may) by their gentle and humane
dealing. You see many of the forerunners of the end, have already run their
race: Mat. 24. 32
as the summer follows the blowing of the fig tree, so the end follows
these things; it is the application of Christ himself. O that I had the tongue
of the learned, that I might cloth and enrich with due lights of speech this
point, which was ever acknowledged by as many Philosophers as looking upon the
Sun of righteousness through the cloud of Nature, held the immortality of the
soul, and not now denied by any but by Psa. 14. 1.
that fool that says in his heart there is no God. He is a fool, scorn him:
he says in his heart, he is a dissembler, trust him not: he says there is no
God, therefore he is a blasphemer, abhor him: and roue not upon these things
in the tempest of your judgments; but let zeal the careful nurse of
Christianity, whose warmth does much help the blowing of virtue, maintain in
you these meditations. Prudent hymn.
So did it in Prudentius, who framed a song unto the crowing of the cock,
whose noise resembled the last trumpe, which should awake men sleeping in their
graves, and give warning of the great day. Ierom super Mat.
So did it in S. Jerome, who (whatsoever he did) thought he heard in his ears
the sound of the last trumpe, saying, Arise you dead, and come unto judgment.
The Pilot who gouernes the ship, sits at the stern which is at the hinder
end of the ship: if a man will govern his life well, his meditations must be
settled upon the later end of his life: Who Ecclus. 7. 36
so remembers his end can never do amiss. And (God knows) it is a needful
thing to be remembered: for miile modis morimur, vno been, there be a thousand
ways to die, and but one way to die well. When Christ came first, he came to
vanquish the Devil, that 1. Sam. 17. 8.
Goliath that braued the host of the living God: when he comes the second time,
he will come to be revenged of those churlish Nabals, who have unkindly
rendered unto him, hatred for his good will: examine your selves of what rank
you be: and as Christ advises the man of war in the Gospel Luke 14. 31.
to sit down and take counsel whether he be able with ten thousand to meet
him that comes against him with twenty thousand; if he be not, then while
he is a great way off (if he be wise) he will send Ambassadors and desire
conditions of peace: So think and know, that you are not able to answer God
one for a thousand: therefore while he is yet afar off, before the ends of the
world come upon you, send your Ambassadors to entreat a peace: cast out the
dumb spirit and pray unto him: the deaf spirit and hear his word: the lame
spirit and walk unto him in your lives and conuersations: the fearful spirit
and believe in him: that you may sing victoriously as Debora did, Iud. 5. 21.
O my soul thou have marched valiantly.

Let your thoughts be sublimed by the the spirit of God. Arise unto your
selves, arise in your selves, arise from your selves, and arise above your
selves: unto your selves by knowing of your sins, in your selves by
acknowledging of your sins, from your selves by forsaking your sins, and
above your selves by having Phil. 3. 20.
your lives a conversation in heaven. God would have you (his sons) to be Ps.
144. 12
as goodly plants; and you (his daughters) to be as the polished corners of the
Temple. Therefore he does in his congreations often and many a time persuade by
his word: therefore, per haec lumina, for the light of the Gospels sake:
suggest by his spirit: therefore per haec lumina and auras, for the sake of the
spirit of God, Acts 2. 2
that wind that is rushing and mighty: Gods justice does enforce, therefore
Virg. Aeneid libro sexto.
per genitorem oro, for God the Fathers sake: the mercy of Christ does allure:
therefore per spem surgentis Iuli, for the sake of God the Son in whom you hope,
I desire you that you will meditate upon your day of account. And while I sound
out unto you these things, it becomes me like a Cock to clap mine own wings
upon mine own breast, and rowse up my self out of my slumber, before I give you
and others warning of the approach of the great day; that you with me, and I
with you, may all upon Angels wings be carried up to heaven, and like Larks
sing merrily while we are mounting. Then and there (that at length I may take my
work out of the loomes and conclude) shall we have joy of ourselves, joy of our
friends, joy of the King of heaven, and joy of the joys of heaven. Joy of
our selves; for, though 1. Cor. 15. 40
one differ from an other in glory, yet we shall be like pots full of water, one
being greater then another: he that has least (being brimme full) shall have as
much glory as he can have or desire. Joy one of another, for if the rich man in
hell Lu. 16. 24
knew which was Abraham, and which was Lazarus in heaven: and if at Christ's
transfiguration (being but a shadow of immortality) Math. 9. 4
Peter, James and John, knew Moses and Elias, though they had never seen them
before much more shall we (I take it in the fulness of glory) know one another,
who have been acquainted upon earth. Joy of the king of Heaven, who Reu 12. 1. 2
shall be our light for ever, at whose right hand there is fullness of joy for
evermore. Joy of the joys of heaven, where we shall not hunger, there is the
tree of life: nor perish with thirst, there is the water of life: nor be
perplexed with melancholy, there is a quire of Angels and Archangels ever
singing and making melody: which melody that we may be partakers of, I desire
of God, and let all the people say Amen: and let Christ Jesus 2. Cor. 1. 20
whose words are Yea, and Amen, Apoc. 1. 5.
that faithful witness in heaven set to his seal, and say Amen unto it. Even
so Lord Jesus, Amen, Amen.

LAVS DEO SOLI.
FINIS.

