THE FIRST PART of the Mirror of Princely deeds and Knighthood:

WHEREIN IS SHEVVED THE WORTHINESS OF the Knight of the Sun, and his brother
Rosicleer, sons to the great Emperor Trebatio, with the strange love of the
beautiful Princess Briana, and the valiant acts of other noble Princes and
Knights.

Now newly translated out of Spanish into our vulgar English tongue, by M.T.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East.

To the right Honorable, the Lord Thomas Haward.
NOT being greatly forward of mine own inclination (right Honorable) but
forced by the importunity of my friends to make some trial of my self in
this exercise of translation. I have adventured upon a piece of work, not
indeed the most profitablest, as entreating of arms, nor yet altogether
fruitless, if example may serve, as being historical, but the while, either
to be borne withal for the delight, or not to be refused for the strangeness:
farther I mean not to make boast of my travail, for the matter was offered,
not made choice of, as there appeared likewise little liberty in my first
yielding. The earnestness of my friends persuaded me that it was convenient to
lay forth my talent for increase, or to set my candle on a candlestick, and
the consideration of my sufficiency drove me to think it better for my ease,
either quite to bury my talent, thereby to avoid the breaking of thriftlesse
debtes, or rather to put my candle clean out, then that it should bewraie
every unswept corner in my house, but the opinion of my friends judgment
prevailed above mine own reason. So upon hope to please them, I first
undertook this labor, and I have gone through withal, the rather to acquaint
my self with mine old reading: whereto since the dispatch thereof, I have
made, my friends privy, and upon good liking, with request thereto I have
passed my grant unto them for the publication, referring for my self the
order for the dedication, so as I should think best, either for the defense of
my work or for some particular merit toward me. And herein I took no long
leisure to find out a sufficient personage. For the manifold benefits
received from your honorable parents, my good Lord and Lady, quickly eased me
of that doubt, and presented your honor unto my view: whom by good right I
ought to love and honor in especial, as being of them begotten, at whose
hands I have reaped especial benefit. The which benefit if I should not so
gladly profess openly, as I willingly received being offered, I might well be
challenged of unkindness, but were I as able to make good my part, as I am not
ignorant what may be required at my hands, I would hope not to be found
ungrateful. In the mean time this my travail I commend unto your Lordship,
beseeching the same so to accept thereof, as a simple testimony of that good
will which I bare to your parents while they lived, then being their servant,
and now do owe unto their offspring after their decease for their demerits.
Under your honors protection I shall less fear the assault of the envious,
and of your honors good acceptance, I have some hope in the mildness of your
Lordshippes nature, not doubting but that as your Lordship has given no small
signification in this your noble youth of wisdom and courage to so many as
know you, it being the only support of your ancestors line: so the same
likewise will maintain your ancestors glory, and the hope of your own
virtues with affability and gentleness, which was the proper commendation of
your parents. The almighty increase this hope with the other virtues before
named, to the good hope of your Countries peace, your Princess safety, and
your own honor, with the joy of your kindred and friends, whom not a few your
parents good deserving has assured unto you, and of whose earnest prayers you
shall not fail, to further your well doing. Amongst them, though last in
worthiness, yet with the foremost in well wishing and desire of well deserving,
your honor shall find me.

Your honors humbly most assured, Margaret Tyler.

M.T. To the Reader.
THou have beer gentle Reader, the history of Trebatio, an Emperor in
Greece: The commendation of the story.
whether a true history of him in deed, or a fained fable, I wot not, neither
did I greatly seek after it in the translation, but by me it is done into
English for thy profit and delight. The chief matter therein contained, is of
exployts of wars, and the parties therein named, are especially renowned for
their magnanimity and courage. The authors purpose appears to be this, to
animate thereby, and to set on fire the lusty courages of young Gentlemen, to
the advancement of their line, by ensuing such like steps. The first tongue
wherein it was penned was the Spanish, in which nation by common report, the
inheritance of all worldly commendation has to this day rested. The whole
discourse in respect of the end not unnecessary: for the variety and
continual shifte of fresh matter, very delightful: in the speeches short and
sweet, wise in sentence, and wary in the provision of contrary accidents.
For I take the grace thereof to be rather in the reporters device, then in the
truth of this report, as I would that I could so well impart with thee that
delight, which my self finds in reading the Spanish: but seldom is the tale
carried clean from another mouth. Such delivery as I have made I hope thou will friendly accept, the rather for that it is a woman's work, though in a
storye profane, and a matter more manlike then becomes my sex. But as for
ye manliness of the matter, That a woman may write of war.
thou know that it is not necessary for every trumpetter or drumslare in
the war to be a good fighter. That a woman may write of war.
They take wages only to incite others, though themselves have privy maymes.
and are thereby recurelesse. So gentle Reader if my travel in Englishing this
Author, may bring thee to a liking of the virtues herein commended, and by
example thereof in thy Princes and Countries quarrel to hazard thy person, and
purchase good name, as for hope of well deserving my self that way, I neither
bend my self thereto, nor yet fear the speech of people if I be found
backward, I trust every man holds not the plough, which would the ground were
tilled, and it is no sin to talk of Robinhood, though you never shot in his
bow: Or be it that the attempt were bold to intermeddle in arms, so as the
ancient Amazons did, and in this story Claridiana does, and in other stories
not a few, yet to report of arms is not so odious, but that it may be borne
withal, not only in you men which your selves are fighters, but in us women,
to whom the benefit in equal part apperteineth of your victories, either for
that the matter is so commendable that it carries no discredit from the
homelynesse of the speaker, or for that it is so generally known, that it
fitt^th every man to speak thereof, or for yt it iumpeth with this common
fear on all parts of war and invasion. The invention, disposition, trimming,
and what else in this story, is wholly another man's, my part none therein but
the translation, as it were only in giving enterteinment to a stranger,
before this time unacquainted with our country guise. Marie the worst perhaps
is this, that among so many strangers as daily come over, some more ancient,
That a woman of your years may write in this argument.
and some but new set forth, some penning matters of great weight and sadness
in divinity, or other studies, ye profession whereof more nearly beseems my
years, other some discoursing of matters more easy and ordinary in common
talk, wherein a Gentlewoman may honestly employ her travail. I have
notwithstanding made countenance only to this gentleman, whom neither his
personage might sufficiently commend it self unto my sex, nor his behavior
(being light and soldier like) might in good order acquaint it self with my
years. So yt the question now arises of my choice, not of my labor,
wherefore I preferred this story before matter of more importance. For answer
whereto gentle reader, the truth is, that as the first motion to this kind of
labor came not from my self, so was this piece of work put upon me by
others, and they which first counseled me to fall to work, took upon them
also to be my taskemasters and overseers, least I should be idle, and yet
because the refusal was in my power, I must stand to answer for my easy
yielding, and may not be unprovided of excuse, wherein if I should allege for
my self, that matters of less worthiness by as aged years have been taken
in hand, and that daily new devises are published, in songs, sonets,
enterludes, and other discourses, and yet are borne out without reproach, only
to please the humor of some men: I think I should make no good plea therein,
for besides that I should find thereby so many known enemies, as known men
have been authors of such idle conceits, yet would my other adversaries be
never the rather quieted. For they would say, yt as well the one as the other
were all naught, and though peradventure I might pass unknown amongst a
multitude, and not be the only gaze or odd party in my ill doing, yet
because there is less merit of pardon if the fault be excused as common, I
will not make that my defense which cannot help me, and does hinder other men.
But my defense is by example of the best, amongst which, many have dedicated
their labors, some stories, some of war, some Physic, some Law, some as
concerning government, some divine matters, unto diverse Ladies and
Gentlewoman. And if men may and do bestow such of their travails upon
Gentlewomen, then may we women read such of their works as they dedicate unto
us, and if we may read them, why not farther wade in them to the search of a
truth. And then much more why not deal by translation in such arguments,
especially this kind of exercise, being a matter of more heed then of deep
invention or exquisite learning, and they must needs leave this as confessed,
that in their dedications, they mind not only to borrowe names of worthy
personages, but the testimonies also for their further credit, which neither
the one may demand without ambition, nor the other grant with out
ouerlightnesse: if women be excluded from the view of such works, as appear
in their name, or if glory only be sought in our common inscriptions, it
mattereth not whether the parties be men or women, whether alive or dead. But
to return whatsomeuer the truth is, whether that women may not at all
discourse in learning, for men lay in their claim to be sole possessioners of
knowledge, or whether they may in some manner, that is by limitation (...) or
appointment in some kind of learning, my persuasion has been thus, that it is
all one for a woman to pen a story, as for a man to address his story to a
woman. But amongst all my ill willers, some I hope are not so straight that
they would enforce me necessarily either not to write or to write of divinity.
That you may not write of d^uinitie.
Whereas neither durst I trust mine own judgment sufficiently, if matter of
controversy were handled, nor yet could I find any book in ye tongue, which
would not breed offense to some, but I perceive some may be rather angry to
see their Spanish delight turned to an English pastime: That you meant to make
a common benefit of your pains.
they could well allow the story in Spanish, but they may not afford it so
cheap, or they would have it proper to themselves. What natures such men be
of, I list not greatly dispute, but my meaning has been to make other partners
of my liking, as I doubt not gentle Reader, but if it shall please thee after
serious matters to sport thy self with this Spaniard, that thou shall find in
him the just reward of malice and cowardice, The use and profit of this
Spanish translation
with the good speed of honesty and courage, being able to furnish thee with
sufficient store of foreign example to both purposes. And as in such matters
which have been rather devised to beguile time, then to breed matter of sad
learning, be has ever borne away ye price, which could season such delights
with some profitable reading: so shall thou have this stranger an honest man
when need serves, and at other times either a good companion to drive out a
weary night, or a merry lest at thy board. And thus much concerning this
present story, that it is neither unseemly for a woman to deal in, neither
greatly requiring a less stayed age then mine is. But of these two points
gentle Reader I thought to give thee warning, The conclusion,
least perhaps understanding of my name and years, thou might be carried
into a wrong suspect of my boldness and rashness, from which I would gladly
free my self by this plain excuse, and if I may deserve thy good favor by
like labor, when the choice is mine own, I will have a special regard of thy
liking. So I wish thee well.

Thine to use M.T.

The first part of the Mirror of Knighthood.
CAP. 1.
AFter that the great Emperor Constantine, had peopled the City of
Constantinople, with the race of the noble Citizens of Rome, and had reedified
the ancient buildings, founded by Pansanias King of the Parthes. Among all the
Emperors which succeeded in that Empire of Greece, none seemed to have raised
his own name, or to have made it so famous, as the great and mighty Emperor
Trebatio. Whose worthy deeds, with the valiant acts of the Knights of his
time, I will report here, according as Artemidoro the Grecian has left the^
written in ye great volumes of his Cronicle.

The story says thus: That if at any time Fortune, being always uncertain
and variable, showed her self more friendly to the Greeks, than to all men
besides, and if ever the Grecians were feared in all the world, it was in the
time of Trebatio the son of Alicante, which man by right line descended from
the noble and ancient blood of Molosso, the second son of strong Pyrrhus, and
in the third descent from the great Achilles, which was slain in the wars at
Troy. This Trebatio in the xxv. year of his age, reigned in Epyrus, where the
said Pirrhus and his ancestors had been Kings. He was strong and valiant in
arms, and endowed with so many graces, that his fame in that time was spread
over all the world, and that there was neither King nor Emperor, but he was
glad to hold him for his friend. Now it happened in his time by the death of
the Emperor Theodoro, the state of ye Empire to be void, for that Theodoro had
no son, and the Empire was to be given by election: so that ye Electors not
finding any whom with se good reason they might choose for Emperor as the great
Trebatio, as well for his great valor, as for his descent from so noble a
race. They with the willing and joint assent of all the Emperialls, named him
unto the Empire, and brought him with great honor to Constantinople.

Where, (if before for his great fame they had praised and honored him) now
much more they held him dear, having in some part seen and known him.
Because he was of conditions very noble, pleasant, loving to all, liberal,
courteous. sufferable, pitiful, and above all very desirous to entertein in his
Court, valiant and worthy Knights, whom he honored above all the Princes of the
earth. So that his court flourished with Princes and Knights, as well subjects,
as strangers, which much magnified his great estate, and himself held
continual excerse in arms with them, as being like inclined to nothing. His
virtue by ye report of such as knew him, was so rare, that it was generally
thought none of his predecessors to have had advantage over him, but rather he
was of greater force then any one of them all. For many men were witnesses of
his mighty strokes. He was called the great Trebatio, because he was 8. foot
in height, and very strong timbred, so that without proof of his manhood, they
might thereby make conjecture of his force. In his life, customs and
conditions he was always so affable and courteous, that never might be noted in
him one little fault. Wherefore his Historians say, that he was the crown of
the Greeks, and the clear mirror of all the princes and knights of the
world. Whence also this his Chronicle boroweth this title, especially having
therein to remember the marvelous deeds of the Knight of the Sun, with
Rosicleer, both sons unto Trabatio. Since whose time, all the adventures of the
ancient and famous knights were clean forgotten, and since whose time, neither
Ulysses, of whom Homer speaks, neither any other songs or sonets, ballads or
enterludes, were heard in Greece, only with these two Knights, they were
familiarly acquainted. Of these they made great volumes, and with a thousand
devises in verse they sang of their love. They made no building nor painture,
without some story of them, and their memory therein declared. In such sort,
that you might pass by no part of all Greece, where was not recited, sung or
painted the histories and noble deeds of these Knights, as if no other thing
but arms or love were fitting for them. And because that in ye time to come so
noble things should not be put in oblivion, some of the Grecians compiled this
noble History, to the encouraging of all Nations that shall either hear or
read this History.

The King of Hungary pretending a title to the Empire, sets himself
against the Emperor Trebatio.

Cap. 2.
IT appears by an ancient Greek Cronicle, that the Emperor Helio the third
predecessor in the Empire of Trebatio had two sons, the eldest of the which
two, the father being deceased, was chosen Emperor, the other was married with
a Princess, inheretrix of the kingdom of Hungary, whereby he became Lord and
ruler of that kingdom. The first son which was elected for Emperor departed
without issue. For which cause the Grecians chose another, which was the
predecessor of Theodoro. This seeing the second son of Aelio, which then
reigned in Hungary, and judging that with most reason the Empire was his, as
grieved with the election, he assembled his power against ye Grecians, thinking
to be Lord over them by force. In the end, as he was not so mighty as they,
so he was vanquished and slain before he might attain his purpose. Yet from
that time forth, all the kings which succeeded in Hungary, pretended always
that the right of the Empire rested in them by way of inheritance, and there
never failed wars and dissentions between the Hungarians and the Greeks upon
this occasion. In like manner, when the great Trebatio was chosen for Emperor,
then reigning in Hungary the King Tiberio, a very strong man and of great
courage, besides of more might then all his ancestors. For he had in his
subjection beside the Kingdom of Hungary, many other Provinces, as Holland,
Zeland, Flaunders, Zweueland, Bauare, Austrich, Almaine, Alba, Denmark,
Marcomandia, Persia, and other Regions, with the which he deemed himself one
of the mightiest Kings in the world. This Tiberio knowing the election of the
Emperor Trebatio, and being more attached with the desire of the Empire then
any of his predecessors were, (as it was to be gotten by war) so he
assembled by summons ye greatest of estate throughout his land, and declaring
unto them his will, he commanded to gather all the people they might, for to
invade Greece. Besides this, to the end his power might yet be greater, he
determined to marry his Daughter unto such a one, as would and could maintain
his quarrel. This Maiden was called Briana, the most beautiful Princess that
was to be found in all those parts, being by the only report of her
excellency, sued unto by many worthy Princes, especially by Prince Edward,
son of Olyuerio, King of great Britain. This young Knight strong and
valiant, and greatly enamoured on the Princess Briana, through the great fame
of her beauty, had before dispatched his Ambassadors toward the King her
father, to request her for wife. To the which her Father because he had
already undertook the battle against the Emperor Trebatio, easily
condescended, upon condition that the Prince should come into Hungary with
20000. chosen men of war, for to aids him in the pursuit of his claim
against the Emperor.

This when Prince Edward understood, he had so great desire to have the
Princess Briana, that by and by he granted his request, and so as speedely as
he might, he gathered the people that the King Tiberio required of him, and
with the consent of his Father, he departed from great Britain toward
Hungary, giving intelligence before unto the King Tiberio of his coming. The
King knowing the succors which came unto him, appointed a day when all his
Host should meet together, and finding himself of so great power, in the
mean while until the prince came, he resolved to make a road into Greece,
sacking all the little towns he might, before that the Emperor Trebatio
should perceive it. Afterward if the Emperor Trebatio should come to succor
his subjects, then to join battle with him, at such time as the Prince should
approach, which thing he put in practice diligently. For with that power which
he had, he entered into Greece, forraging the country, taking little towns of
no great force, burning and wasting so much as he might, to the intent, that
the people of other fenced Cities stricken with fear, might abandon themselves
to flight, and enfeeble their forces. Howbeit King Tiberio, had not passed in
Greece xxx. miles, when the Emperor Trebatio having knowledge of it, came
against him with an host of knights so valiant, that at ye first alarm, the
Hungarian reculed, and by the chase of his enemies, was forced to retire home
into the city of Belgrado, which is in Hungary. There he fortified himself,
and manned the town, unwilling as yet to go into the field, until the Prince
of great Britain should arrive, by whose coming their powers being joined, he
thought he might give the battle unto the Emperor Trebatio. Albeit he carried
about him a mayme incurable in his body, not by any stroke lent him by his
enemy, but by the only conceit of the Emperors virtue. For he had seen the
Emperor demean himself more worthily, then any of those that came with him,
and namely in a kinsman of his, a very strong Knight, whom the Emperor at one
blow as it were divided in two pieces. This, as it might be, made him keep
his chamber, because he himself confessed the valor of the Emperor to be above
ye report of men, notwithstanding he had heard sufficiently of the Emperors
prowess. But because these things are not mentioned, but to give beginning to
this history, we run them briefly over, not rehearsing the great deeds of
arms that the Emperor and his people did in besieging the City, because we
have other matters more noble in hand, in comparison whereof, these things were
needless. The story hereof, begins in the chapter following.

The Emperor Trebatio by the hearesay of her beauty, was surprised with the
love of the Princess Briana.

ca. 3.
Certain days the Emperor Trebatio lay at the siege of Belgrado, hoping that
the King Tiberio would come out to give them battle, for that he had great
desire to be aduenged of the great harms which he had received in Greece,
but the King would in no wise leave the town, still abiding the coming of
Prince Edward and his army out of England. The Emperor meruailing much at it,
commanded a prisoner to be brought before him, whom he had taken in the former
battle, of him he demanded ye cause why the King Tiberio held himself so
close with so many good knights mewed up in the city, and why he came not out
to give the battle, with promise of life and liberty if he told troth,
otherwise the certainty of most cruel death. The prisoner thus placed before
the Emperor, what with fear of death, and hope of liberty, durst not declare
other then the truth, and therefore thus made answer unto him.

Prisoners oration.
Know you mighty Emperor, that when the King of Hungary my master, first
took upon him the entry into Greece, he would not have done it (although he
has so mighty an host as is seen) but in hope that before he should be
espied and met withal, there should come to his help Prince Edward son to
the king of great Britain, with 20000. knights. This number was promised upon
condition that the Prince should have the Kings daughter, the Princess Briana
to wife, which Princess I believe is the fairest maid in all the world, and by
such fame the prince is become enamored of her, so as we hear, that he is
already departed from great Britain with the number appointed, and shall take
landing very soon in this country, the King Tiberio abides his coming, and
is determined to give the onset, as soon as their forces shall be united.

This said the prisoner: but the Emperor minding to know more of the matter,
demanded of him, where the Princess Briana remained, and of what age she
might be. The prisoner answered him. My Lord, she is with the Queen Augusta
her mother in the Monestarie of the River, which is near Buda, a pleasant and
delectable house, wherein none are lodged but Nuns, and the Queens
Gentlewomen. The Princess is of the age of 14. years, and be assured that so
many as shall see her, will judge her rather a gods then a woman, so much her
beauty does excel all the gentlewomen of the world. Now so soon as ye Prince
shall land, he will straight ways take his iourny toward the Monestarie of ye
river, because it is so appointed by the King her father, The King himself
will not be there, because he will not be absent in such a busy time from the
City. When the prisoner had thus said, the Emperor Trebatio commanded him to
be set free, without speaking other thing to his people, but with a sorrowful
and troubled countenance, he withdrew himself into a secret chamber of his
Imperial tent. Where tossing in his conceit diverse and sundry fancies, he
endured a wilful imprisonment with out any bail or maynprise. Thus that
force, which neither by till, turney, nor barriers, neither by spear nor
sword, neither by malice of the enemy, nor pride of the mighty, might at
any time be subdued, was now vanquished by the only hearsay of a
Gentlewomans commendation. Nay, ye valiant heart, which he held forcible enough
against all the world, failed in his own defense against a delicate damzell
whom he had never seen. What force is it that may repulse this evil, since
that with such flattering closes it overthrows so many noble hearts and
strong bodies. But to return, the Emperor Trebatio so much burned in love
with the Princes Briana, that already he has forgotten the damage received in
his Country, his travail out of his Country with a huge army, the consuming
of his treasure for to wreake his anger on the King Tiberio, only he devised
upon this, how to give remedy unto to his amorous passion. For as the fire was
great which enflamed him, so was the remedy by all semblaunce far from him.
Because that on the one part he was hindered by the enmity between him and her
father, so that he durst not require her for wife, and on the other side, she
was already promised to the Prince of great Britain, who had put himself on
his journey for the attaining of her person, so that likewise the King could
not take her from him, to give unto his enemy. These things bred such grief,
unto the Emperor, as that he hoped for nothing but to die. And so turning and
ouerturning in his thought a thousand sort of remedies, without finding any
which might satisfy him, he conuaied himself into his most secret Tent, and
there remained three dates, not suffering any of his people to have access
unto him, or speech with him, except some squiers seruitors, from whom
likewise he would willinglye have exempted himself, but that he would not die
so desperately. Those of the Camp, which saw the sudden change and alteration
in the Emperor, as they knew not the cause of it, so were they much abashed and
careful to know what it might be. Some imagined that the delay of the war,
and the coming of Prince Edward were the occasions of his trouble, and so
hoping that he should well overcome that grief shortly, they left him to his
rest until he had resolved upon the pursuit of this which follows in the next
chapter.

Prince Edward enters into Belgrado. The Emperor bethinketh himself of his
remedy.

Cap. 4.
Four days after that the Emperor Trebatio was thus wounded with the love of
the Princess Briana, Prince Edward with xx. M. entered into the city of
Belgrado, where he was welcomed by the King, who had great desire to see him,
for be thought not only to depart with the City, but also to add thereunto a
great part of ye Empire of Greece.

So soon as this news were spread in the enemies camp, the Emperor was cast
into greater melancholy; as by the shortness of time not being able to find an
issue for his late devise, only this he thought, yt for to assure this
uncertain hope (if there might be any) he had none other way then to cut off
prince Edwards enterprise, and so by shortning his life, better and more easy
to compass the obteining of the Princes. Upon this resolution he made to call
into his tent. 12. knights, ye most valiant and worthiest of all his host,
among whom one was Alceo, father of Rodomarte, prince of Sardinia, of whom
there is made great account in this history: the second was Alpineo L. of the
Island Lemnos: the third was called Alfonte L. of ye Island Sicile: the 4. was
called Alcino king of Thrace: the fifth Liberio L. of Nicroponte: the sixth
Boristhines whose son was Rodopheo Prince of Rhodes: the. 7. was Dardante,
Prince of Dalmatia: the. 8. Melides L. of Ithaca, where Ulysses reigned king:
the. 9. Argante. L. of Pathmos: ye. 10. Arimont L. of ye Islands Cyclades: ye.
11. Artedoro prince of Candia: the. 12. and last Nicoleonte L. warden of ye
streights where Corinth stood. All knights of great account, young and very
strong for to undertake any enterprise, all subjects unto the Emperor, and all
well-beloved of him, because he was privy. unto their great virtues. Now when ye
Emperor saw al those knights in presence, with some shame fastness which ye
weight of ye matter caused, he reveled to them wholly his grief, giving them to
understand withal, yt unless he had some help, his life were spilt. Among al
ye best which he had found, he reckned specially upon one, which was yt
secretly they should avoid the camp and follow him. The knights having great
desire to serve him, and esteeming themselves happy that he would communicate
with them part of his mind, they freely offered unto him their persons, for ye
accomplishing of yt which he should command them, and they all agreed to depart
with him in such order as he had devised. Then the Emperor made to call before
him ye king of Boheme, which was his uncle, a very wise and expert man in
arms, to whom he declared, yt he had urgent occasion to be absent a while from
his army, ye circumstances whereof says he, you shall further know at our
return, in ye mean time I commend unto you ye charge of my war, and for your
greater credit with the people, I deliver unto your hands the Imperial
Scepter. The king meruailing at this yt the Emperor did, without more demanding
of him whether or wherabout he would go, accepted ye charge and promised
therein to employ his travail. Well, ye night approaching with ye hour agreed
upon. the Emperor with. 12. knights, armed at all points with rich and costly
armor, and with Hungarian bases, secretly left ye camp, without being heard
or known of their enemies, wherein they travailed all night until the day
appeared, then they alighted to rest their horses, and fed upon such victuals
as they had brought with them, after taking again their horses, they posted on
their journey till they were in the mid way between Buda and Belgrado, which
way prince Edward of force must have passed when he would go to the monastery
of the river. There in a thick wood somewhat aside out of the way, they put
themselves having provision and furniture of all things necessary, where they
remained very close, until that Fortune friendly to the Emperor and enemy
to the prince, gave the prince into the Emperors hands, which shall be showed
in the chap. following.

Prince Edward riding toward the monastery of the river, was by the Emperor
Trebatio encountered and slain.

cap. 5.
WHen prince Edward bad once set footing in Belgrado, he had great desire to
see the princes, so yt the third day after his coming, he would needs depart
toward ye monastery of ye river. The king Tiberio understanding his desire
(albeit he himself might not acco^panie him, yet) he set him on his way
thither ward (only to have his aid and assistance in the battle) with. 4.
aged knights in his company, being best known by the queen and the princes.
These should be in the princes retinue, and other 12. knights mo which be had
brought out of his country, and by these the king sent letters to ye Q. and the
princes Briana, ye contents whereof were, yt the prince might speedely be
bethrothed unto her, but more company would he not send, thereby to have the
match kept secret till ye war which he held with the Emperor were finished. For
this matter was hushed no man almost being privy unto it, yet ye prisoner which
bewraied it unto the Emperor, had understanding of it by means of the kings
service. In this time the Queen and her daughter having intelligence of ye
princes coming, attended his coming in ye monastery with preparation for his
enterteinment. Prince Edward departing from the king one night the most
covertly yt he might, went out of the city with his own. 12 knights, and. 4.
of the kings: with these he took his way a whole night and a day with all the
have he might, to end the great desire he had to see the beautiful princes.
This way albeit short, yet it seemed long unto him, as being ignorant of the
sower sauce and woeful wedding which was in providing. O marriage, yt slender
and weak foundation of worldly things, how is it not only regarded by men,
but highly reverenced? How seldom was it ever steadfast, and how many
thousands has it beguiled, I mean not the base and common people, but even
kings and Emperors.

O how many impediments be therein left to hinder us, from enioyeng it: O what
a common thing is it to die, and how many ever saw happy end in it? How
joyful and pleasant was to Paris the desired match of Helena, and how
sorrowful and lamentable was the end, not only to him, but to his parents
and brethren and the greatest part of all Asia? For not only in Greece, but
in all the out Islands thereaboutes was bewept his bitter Bridal. With how
great care and diligence do men hasten on the causes of their care, occasions
of their heaviness, means of their pains, and matter for their grief, and
do not content themselves with the continual affliction wherein Fortune
schooleth them? But by new means they invent new mathers of danger which
crosses them at every step, they frame new causes, and as it wore, forge unto
themselves sharp spurs to prick forward this woeful life, where they think
to find pleasure and rest, there they find for their loss, travail, and
trouble for the death which they would fly from. To escape either nipping
colds, or scalding heat, this only one remedy they have, to climb up into the
mountains, where yet ye wind has most force, and ye sun does soonest parch:
above all this, has not ye insatiable covetousness of man broken through ye
sturdy waves of ye sea, and cut out new passages in the mountains? But why do
we complain on fortune, do we not bend her arms to fight with us, do we not
maintain her weapons which peradventure lights on our own necks. As for
example, if Paris had not made a way through the deep waves of ye sea Aegean
(which the Gods had placed as a peaceable bound between Europe and Asia) and if
he had not sought. Greece, since Asia was large enough to have found a fair
wife in, and (so it may be) much more honest then Helene was, then the Achians
had not transported themselves into Asia, to destroy Troie. And turning again
to our matter, Prince Edward might have sought him a wife in his own country or
more near home, of whose beauty his own eyes might have been witnesses, and
not have sought her in a strange land by the only brute of a cunning tale,
especially upon so hard and sore conditions as to bring his own person and
people to the war. Whosoever comes to seek pleasure and delight for his
youth, let him take that he finds, and think it not strange, because that
unkind. Fortune has used the like unto at her. The Prince now being on his
way, two of the kings knights were dispatched before by some secret by ways
very well known unto them to advertise ye queen and princess of the
approaching of the Prince. These two held on their way, not ascried by the
ambush, but so soon as the prince with his knights had entered in the thicket,
they were presently discovered by the Emperor, who was already armed with his
rich armor, and mounted upon a strong and light horse. The Emperor taking a
great spear in his hand very sharp, and well steeled for the purpose, went
alone aside out of the wood with a soft pace, to encounter with the Prince
and his knights, and being come right before them, said unto them. Know you
knights that this passage is forbidden, except you leave your sheelds and your
names in them. For that a Lady whom I honor and serve has commanded me to do
it, whose love I could not otherwise obtain. The Prince Edward was by nature
very stout, and by inclination given to somewhat less modesty in his talk
then behooved such a Prince, howbeit for this and other faults he was a very
valiant and strong knight, such a one as neither in great Britain, neither in
the kingdom of Hungary, was thought to have his peer. But as he understood
ye demand of the knight, very wroth he answered him. By God knight, if the
king Tiberio were as certain of the victory against the Emperor Trebatio, as
I hope to chastise thy folly, then the Prince of England should not need to
come from so far a country to give him help. Take thou quickly that part of
the field as shall seem good unto thee, and with one only choice thou shall
see how dear and bitter thy love has been unto thee.

As the Prince had said this, and had pronounced with his own mouth, that
cruel dome, not well foreseeing his own fall, he took a great spear from
one of his knights and broched his horse with the spurs to meets the
Emperor. (This he did, not for that his knights would not have put
themselves in the adventure before him, every man claiming to be first, but
for that no reason sufficed him. For his stoutnesse and his unmeasurable pride,
made him to forget the force of his enemy, and yet his enimye stood before
him so great and so big made, that he seemed to be a Giant). But this
Princes adverse fortune and unhappy destinies would him to be the foremost, so
that the mighty Trebatio knew it, as well by the rithes of his armor as by
the talk which had passed between him and his knights, and being very glad
to see him the first which he met, he said unto himself, O that my Spear were
now greater and stronger, and the bead forged by Vulcan, that it might not
stay in the armor of this Knight, for that according as I see him great and
strong, so I fear he will escape my hands, and then my travail shall be
all in vain. Thus as he said, they by and by did put both their Spears in
their restes, and giving either horse his bridle, they ran together with such
fury, that they made the earth to tremble, and yet the lightness of their
horses was such, that it seemed the grass yielded not under their feet. The
Prince hit the Emperor in the midst of the sheelde, and pearcing farther
left the head remaining in the fine and well steeled armor, whereby the staff
broken in many sheeuers made a great whisteling in the air. But the Emperors
stroke was much more fell, for he leuelled it with such force that it entered
not only into the sheeld and strong armor of the Prince, but passed through
unto his amorous heart all bedewed with blood a whole arms length.

Then the Prince fell dead, executing the sentence which he had given in these
words, that that love should be very dear and bitter. When his people saw
him stretched upon the ground, there might no sorrow be compared unto
theirs, and as raging mad they ran all together upon the Emperor, thinking
to put in practice their deadly anger upon his carcass. Some with Spears and
other with Swoordes struck him on all parts with great rage and have, so that
if his armor had not been very good, in short space they had hewed it in
pieces. But that most valiant Greek no less strong then any of his
auncetors, bearing his fine and sharp sword, turned himself among them in
such manner, that he sheathed it in their bodies. The first whom he met he
cleaued unto the eyes, the seconds arm he cut off by the elbow, and being sore
wounded he ouerthrewe the third at another blow, neither stayed he here,
but in his rage, he dealt blows and wounded many, which for fear accounting
him rather a Devil of hell, then a knight, put themselves to flight. Albeit
they might have recovered some courage in that they were many and chosen
knights, always against one knight only. But the reason was for that at this
time the Emperors knights showed themselves out of the wood. So that indeed
by the great manhood of their Lord they found none left on live save two
knights of the kings which were known by their Hungarian bases. Those the
Emperor commanded to be kept carefully, for the thing before touched.

This being done, the knights and other footmen which the Emperor had brought
with him to guide his carriage took all the dead bodies upon their horses,
without leaving any thing which was theirs, and altogether they carried them
into the thick of the wood, from whence they before came out, there. in the
thickest thereof they made a great pit, into the which they threw the Prince
and the knights, save the English bases, and the kings letters which were
needful for his purpose, they covered them with earth in such sort, that there
was never memory of them. At the time that the Prince was entered, the
Emperor being of conditions pitiful, felt so great dolor in his heart, that
the tears issued abundantly from his eyes, ruing the loss of so great a Prnce
slain out of his own Country in the beauty of his age, which also yielding
a great sigh, which seemed to have come from the bottom of his heart, he said
with a troubled and low voice in this wise.

O unhappy and unfortunate Prince, God knows how sorrowful and grievous thy
death is to me, and how feign I would have given remedy in some other
manner, to that I most desired, and although thou wast mine enemy and come in
favor of the king Tiberio to take from me my land and high estate, yet would I
not have been so cruel an enemy unto thee, but the entire love of ye
princess Briana drove me more thereto, then mine own enmitye. Now I wish that
by some other means I might have been relieved, and not to have bought my life
by thy loss. But as love is tyrannous, so marvel not though he want pity
toward thee, which could not otherwise purchase it to himself: Pardon me
therefore, O mighty and worthy Prince, and judge if thou were alive what thou
would do, if by my death thou might find remedy of thy love. The
Emperors knights which heard these words, and saw the tears trickling down
his manly cheeks, perceived well how much the death of the Prince disquieted
him. And they said amongst themselves, that by good right the Emperor
deserved the praise of the most noble and worthy Prince of the world. But
having made an end, the Emperor caused to be brought before him the two
knights belonging unto Tiberio. These two were very fearful of the death,
seeing the things which were already done, and especially when they knew him to
be the Emperor Trebatio, whom they held as their mortal enemy. Now when they
came before him, the Emperor said to them. If you will do yt which I command
you, and keep secret that which I tell you, I will not only pardon you the
death which I have given to your fellows, but also I will bring you with me
into mine Empire, where you shall be very well contented. The knights better
satisfied then they were, because he promised them life, before not hoping but
ye death, with good will they yielded themselves to do all that he would,
with all, swearing into his Imperial hands their faith and obeisance. Then
said the Emperor, yt which I would have you do is this, I have great desire to
have the Princess Briana for wife, and this may not be done, except I go in
the name of Prince Edward, to ensure my self to her in ye monastery of the
river, for the which it is necessary yt you two being known of ye queen and
the Princess, should go in my company, and say that I am Prince Edward. Now
sirs, discover not my secret to any person, until yt you be licensed thereunto
by me, and in so doing, you shall do naught either against your Lord or
Kingdom, since in this bargain the Princess loses not, and the King with
all his subjects win perpetually, for that by this means, the great wars and
contentions begun, shall take end.

After that the Emperor had said these and other things, whereby the Knights
understood his will, it grieved them not a whit of this talk, but they were
rather joyous, weieng the benefit which the King, the kingdom, ye Princess
Briana, and all his should reap thereby, and especially the Princess, by
obtaining to husband, the most noble and worthy Prince of all christendom, as
well for his person, as for his estate, and so with good will they submitted
themselves to do him pleasure, and what else he commanded them. With this, the
Emperor and his Knights took the letters which were directed to the Queen and
the Princess, and with more hope to atchieue their enquest, they put on the
English bases, which made them seem English men, then taking their way toward
the Monestarie of the river. In the way, the Kings knights fold the Emperor,
how two of their fellows were gone before to give notice unto the Princess, of
Prince Edwards coming, and that therefore it were good to go well advised,
for they should meet them by the way. The Emperor allowed their advice, and
charged his people until they approached near them, not to disclose themselves,
least they retiring, their secrets might be laid open. Now fortune iumped so
even with the Emperor, as that all things succeeded on his side, until the
accomplishment of his desire, which shall be recited in the chapter following.

The Emperor Trebatio was received at the Monestarie, by the Archbishop of
Belgrado, and there betrothed by the name of Prince Edward.

Cap. 6.
THe Emperor with his Knights departed from the wood, where the unfortunate
Prince was slain, and took their way toward the city of Buda, until they
came within vi. miles of the Monestarie, where they saw a far the two other
Knights, which had returned to bring the Prince on his way. When their
fellows had espied them, they told it to the Emperor, upon this, the Emperor
commanded his Knights to keep together, least they should be known, and so
they kept on till they met. The other two seeing the English bases, thought him
to be the Prince of England with his knights. But the Emperors knights, as
soon as these were within their reach, laid hold on their bridels, and with
courteous words stayed them until the other two knights of the Kings had talked
with them.

These two declared unto the other that which had happened between Prince
Edward and the Emperor Trebatio, and in the end, made plain the meaning of
the Emperor, both praieng them to keep it secret, and threatening them with
death, if they did otherwise. No doubt, they wondered at that which chanced,
but what the Emperor would, that they promised him, and were nothing
repentaunt of their exchange.

The Emperor being assertained of their faith, went with them toward the
Monestary of the river, whereunto being come, they found not in the Monestarie,
but the Q. the Princess, and other Gentlewomen being seruitors, to attend upon
them, and the Archbishop of Belgrado, which there tarried for to ensure them.
This Archbishop received the Emperor at the gate, and thinking him assuredlye
to be the prince of England, conducted him with his knights, where the Queen
and the Princes were in the company of beautiful and discreet Ladies,
abiding his coming. When they had saluted each other, and that the Emperor had
taken a full view of the Princess, he was greatly abashed to see her beauty,
for he could not be persuaded yt so great comeliness had been in Helene,
although dearelye bought by his ancestors, he judged it more heavenly or
angelical, then humane or earthly, besides, she was of a goodly stature,
excelling the other Gentlewomen, in height a sp^n. The Princess when she saw
the Emperor before her, she judged him to be goodliest knight that might be in
the world, which his beautiful face and pleasant countenance showed especially.
When thus by the eyes each of them were indifferently satisfied, the Emperor
would have kissed the hand of the Queen Augusta, but she with great good will
embraced him. By and by turning himself again toward the Princess, he took
her by the hand, and said in effect thus much.

The fame of your great beauty, excellent Princess, has in such sort passed
through the world, that the only report thereof, has forced the Prince of
England to leave his natural Kingdom and soil, to come and serve you in this
Country, and to behold with his own eyes, that which his ears would
scarcely believe. God has made me so fortunate that I have obtained the good
will of the king your father, and of the Queen your mother for to have you to
wife. Only now I want the consent of your part, which the King by his letters
prays you to give me, and I for the desire that I have to be yours, beseech
you not deny it me, for with it I may account my self the happiest knight of
all the world. And with these words, kissing the Kings letters, he delivered
it into her hands, which the Princess receiving, with a grave and sober
countenance, and after taking it to the Archbishop for to read, the mean
time made answer softly on this wise.

I would to God most worthy Prince, that I were such a one as with reason might
deserve some part of ye pains which you have taken only to see me, or that I
might in some little respect recompense the great pleasure you have done to me,
and to all this kingdom, in coming to succor us with your great force and
power, but since desert does want so much in me, I will accomplish that which
the duty of obedience unto the King my father forces me unto, for yt I must
subject my will unto his commandment, yet I so consider of this your offer and
request, as that from this time I will dare to compare with you in like
happiness.

While these words were in speaking, the Archbishop began to read the Kings
letters, wherein only was contained his consent, with the desire of dispatch,
that presently upon the Princes coming they should be married.

The Archbishop, with both their consents, taking their hands, married them
with all the ceremonies and words which the Church ordeineth. After this, the
Emperor embraced the fair Princess, and with unspeakable gladness kissed her
on the white and red cheeks, and from thence, brought her into a gorgeous
chamber, where they drove forth the rest of the day, with very amorous and
delectable talk, which so much the more set his love on fire, as he proceeded
farther in his pleasant daliaunce. Albeit ere night, the most puisant Emperor
was not altogether quieted in his thought, for fear least some one which knew
the Prince might have bewrayed them, at length, being certain that none in
the Monestarie, had seen either the one or the other, but only the Kings
four knights, and his own men, which kept the matter close enough. When the
hour of supper approached, he supped with some pleasure, and so held on a great
part of the night till it was time to take his rest. Then the Emperor was
led to one side of the Monestarie, wherein there was a rich and stately
lodging, where he lengthened the night with many fancies, not having as yet
reached into the very deapth of his enterprise, albeit stilled a little, with
that which already had happened. The beautiful Princess after leave taken of
the Emperor, accompanied the Queen her Mother.

Because, until that the war was ended between the King her Father and the
Emperor, she was desirous to keep her self unknown, and so the king her
father, and the Queen her mother had commanded, least if ought should happen
amiss to the Prince in those battles the Princes should have remained both a
maiden and a widdowe: this devise little auailed, as shall be manifested in the
sequel.

The Emperor Trebatio drives in his conceit, the order how to consummate the
marriage, which in the end he brings to pass accordingly.

Cap. 7.
THE Emperor Trebatio remained three days in the Monestarie of the river, not
having opportunity to talk with the Princess alone, because she was not
willing to give consent to his desire, until the war with the Emperor should
be finished This inconvenience trobled his thought, and increased his
melancholy, as nothing more for that the term which the King had set for his
return was already expired, and being afraid least the King would send for
him, whereby his fault should be discovered, without giving remedy to that
which had been the original of his grief, in such wise he was tormented that
he could neither sleep nor eat. And in his imagination he did naught else but
gaze on the Princess, expecting time when he might alaie the heat of his
amorous passion.

But whether it were Fortune, or the will of God, it fell so out, that there was
begotten between them, the fruit of their desire. For one morning walking in
his chamber, he espied out of a window the Princess alone in her night gown,
going toward a fresh and pleasant garden butting upon his lodging, (the
gardein before he had not seen.) Into this gardein entered none but the
Princess and her Gentlewomen. As he saw so good and prosperous a time, the
most joyful man that ever was, he went toward the pleaseunt gardeine, and
finding no entry, but by the chamber of the Princess, the door whereof was
shut, he took two of those spears which his knights had brought, and rearing
them up against the wall with the blunt end vpwardes, (as he was very nimble)
he lifted himself upon them lightly, and easily slidde down betwixt them
into the gardeine, without being seen of any, especially not of the
Princess, who was unwitting of such a leap.

The Princess was nigh a Fountane well set about with Roles and Iessamines,
kembing and dressing of her yeolow hair. Now when she saw her self thus
sodeinly taken by the Emperor, with a fearful starte, she rose from whence
she was, and gently smiling as somewhat overtaken with shamefastness, she
beshrowed him in this sort. Assuredly my Lord, needs must the hurt be great
which you have sustained by your leap, and great is the injury which the
gardeine has received by your enterie, because that in it none have come, but
either my self, or my Gentlewomen: for whose solace it was first plotted out.
For this cause God has showed me such favor, answered the Emperor, because I
have lodged my heart in your excellent beauty, and well may the body
lawfullye enter, where the heart is harbored. Let not therefore my entry,
good madame, seem strange unto you, since that neither hour nor moment I may
depart from you. And if this my rudenes has procured you any pain, by the
freedom which you have given me, my heart shall make excuse unto your beauty,
under whose safe conduct without demand of leave, my body has entered. The
good Emperor having thus said, embraced and kissed her, and not leaving any
leisure of reply, made her to sit down by him near unto the well. This place
was so hedged and compassed about with odoriferous Roses, and sweet smelling
Iessamine, that they might not be perceived by any. And the gentle mourmure
that the running water made upon the pebble stones, agreeing with the delicate
lays which diverse birds made upon the green boughs, increased so much the
longing desire of the Emperor, that casting how to win the favor of his
Lady, already his tongue failed to speak, and his hearing to receive that
which she spoke. She then all trembled, as knowing his purpose, and through
fear greatly desired to have shunned that place, but the Emperor caught her
between his arms, and with such have to end his suit, left her unfurnished
of her answer.

At that time as the burning beams of the Sun began with his golden rays to
look through the thick Iessamines, all the fortunate aspects intermedling
their forces, at that time, by the grace of the Almighty, were begotten these
two noble children the Knight of the Sun, and Rosicleer, the beams of whose
knightly deeds so shined through the world, as that the worthy prowes of their
predecessors were thereby eclipsed.

This was the Plaudite of his passion, and the beautiful Princess now became
a wife somewhat against her will, but when she saw no remedy to that which was
past, she comforted her self in that he was her lawful husband, and therefore
she pardoned him his boldness in trobling her. These two lovers shortened the
time with good agreement, until the Emperor at his departure, took his leave
of her to mount up the way he came, and to return into his lodging. The
Princess remained alone in the gardeine, until her Gentlewomen came for her
to dinner,

After this, yet the Emperor soiourned there three days, at the end whereof,
fearing the kings jealousy over his tarieng, and the event of his sending for,
he took his leave of the Queen and the Princess, not without the courtesy of
many tears on each part, and especially of the Princess whom he left very
doleful, albeit sadder would she have been, if she had foreseen the long time
of his absence. C. iiij.

The Emperor Trebatio pursuing those which had stolen his Lady, left all his
knights, and took another way.

ca. 8.
THe Empereur Trebatio thus having departed from the monestarie of the river,
became very sorrowful in his heart, with the leaving of the Princess Briana,
for that the fire which inflamed him after he had known her, was greter, then
the affection which he bare to her before by the hearing of her beauty, and
that which caused his most grief, was, that he knew not how, either to return
speedely unto her, or to salve that sore which he had already chafed.

He thought in himself, that if he made peace with ye King Tiberio letting him
understand of the matter, ye king would not accept of it, either for the great
enmity which was betwixt them, or for the bond wherein he was bound to the
Prince of great Britain. And therefore it would be a thing neither reasonable,
nor agreeble with his honor, in lieu of the Princes pains which he had taken,
to come from his country accompanied with so great a number of knights to
serve him, and in regard of the death which he there received in his service,
now to become a friend to his foe, and to give his daughter before espoused to
the Prince, unto the deadliest foe which the Prince had, debating these and
other things in his mind about the time that they had got over their heads
the thick wood wherein they had been before, now to the end not to tire
their horses, they lyghted down, unbridled their horses, and turned them to
grass. They themselves feeding on such victuals as they had brought with them,
although the meat whereon the Emperors stomach tired, was most of all sobs
and sighs, as receiving no pleasure in the absence of the princes. Now the
night assailed them, and having not in them to make resistaunce, they yielded
their forces, every one taking his rest where it liked them best. But ye
Emperor somewhat a part from the rest, casting himself upon the green grass,
and staieng his back against a tree, he there remained more then two hours
broad awake, staring at the cleerenesse of the air, and the brightness of the
stars, when his thoughts renewed, and the amorous passion, if before not clean
buried, now revived a fresh by the solitariness of his conceit: at length his
cares, the weariness of his way, and the sweet noise of the pleasant leaves,
through the hissing of ye wind, brought him to a gentle slumber, wherein he had
scarcely been half an hour, but that his fancy presented to him again his
Lady Briana. He dreamed that she was taken by force of two giants, the most
fierce and strong that ever he had seen in all his life, and that she seeing
him, cried for help: Through the grief whereof he awaked very much afrighted,
and indeed this dream proved no game unto him, for by and by he heard a
great noise near unto him, and listening where it might be, he beheld a fair
chariot drawn with four horses, and in the top of it two great burning
torches set in silver candlesticks, by the light whereof he saw a Lady in the
chariot clothed with rich and princely roabes, and resembling so much the
Princess Briana, that he verily believed it was she. The gentlewoman leaning
on her elbow, and casting down her countenance, passed on still sighing, as
one enduring some great force and torment. The Emperor prieng about to see who
were the guides of the chariot, perceived yt she was carried away by two
strong and huge Giants, with great battle axes in their hands, being on foot
at the fore end of the chariot. These two had so fell and cruel looks, that
they would have daunted the courage of any man which should have behold them.
But the Emperor assured in his thought that this was the Princess, with great
anger start up, and not remembering to call any of his knights, with his sword
he paced toward the Gyaunts, where without either good even or good morrow,
he lent the first whom he approached unto such a stroke, that the Gyaunt would
have morgaged his part in the Lady to have made sufficient payment of that
blow, for lifting up his battle axe to receive the blow, the sword cut it
into the midst of the helm, and from thence gliding down upon his armor,
hewed it into many pieces. Then the other giant hastening to smite the Emperor,
laid at his head with maine force: but the Emperor warded it on his sheelde,
in which the Giants battle axe stacke so fast, that he might no more draw it
out, until the Emperor struck him on the right arm, that he made him forgo
his hold. The two Gyauntes thus being left weaponlesse, with much lightness,
more then was likely for their bigness, leapt into the Chariot, whereby the
Emperor had no time to bestow another blow on them. Then a dwarf being in
the one end of the chariot, lasht forth the horses, so that they ran with
such swiftness, as if they had fline. With this noise the knights awaked, and
with their swoordes in their hands came to learn what it should be, in the
end much abashed to see their Lord in such a heat, as they demanded of him
what befell, he was so troubled in his heart, the Princess thus being lead
away, that he made them no answer, but taking his horse, he commanded them
to follow him. The Emperor spurred his horse with such fury that he made him
to run as fast, as the Swallowe flies in the air. It could not be that the
palfraies which drew the chariot were horses, because his horse was one of the
best and most precious in the world, and this Lord having desire to overtake
the Princess, made him gallop more then an indifferent pace, but the other
were sprightes of the air, and infernal furies I think, forced by Art
Magic both to fly and run. Yet the Emperor followed the chase, without
loosing the sight of them, although it was all in vain. The knights which
remained in the wood, being loath to be far behind their Lord, went to
catch their horses, but were it that naturally they feared the Giants, or that
the wicked spirits had bewitched them, they all brake out of the place, and
strayed here and there, so that the knights spent more then two hours, ere
they might take them. By this the Emperor was so far from his knights with
the have he made, that they knew not what way to take, and indeed it was not
possible for them to get within the sight of him, albeit they had held on the
beaten way, which they thought that the Emperor had taken. They rode one way,
and the Emperor belyke posted another way, for they never met, but the
Emperor pursued so long, until in the end he came to the brinke of the river
Danubia, there where it divides it self into five arms, at the shore
whereof there was a goodly and tall ship, as the Emperor might well see,
being a bow shot behind the giants. In this they put the chariot and withal
hoised their sails, and through the middle arm sailed with good speed. Thus
outraged the Emperor so, that with spurring he caused his horse to fall down
dead under him. Being thus left on foot, notwithstanding he dispayred not,
but held on to that place from whence the Chariot was taken, where he
carefully looked about him to see if peradventure on the one side or on the
other, he might trace out a way to follow: so loath he was to loose the
sight of it. But as all this was devised by enchauntment, so likewise it
happened him to see a little Ship sailing in the river with great
swiftness: in the which there sat an old man with a white beard, by his
countenance seeming to be a very honest man. To him the Emperor called with
a loud voice, desiring him to take toward the shore. The old man which had
the same thing in charge, incontinentlye steered toward him, and asked what
he would have. That which I would have, quoth the Emperor, is to be conuaied
in thy ship, to that other ship which rides before us. For they have in it
stolen from me the thing which I love best in all the world. This pains if
thou will take for me, I will so well content thee, as thou shall think thy
travail well employed. Assuredly said the old man, I am content to do it,
because your courtesy induces me to a greater hope of your merit. Sailing
this, he guided his ship so near the shore, that the Emperor leaped up into
it, and being on the hatches, tourning himself to the old man to give him
thanks, the old man vanished away: and the Emperor never saw him after. The
ship kept the same course that it began with, and the Emperor was much
astonished at it, the rather for that he wist no man else aboard to rule the
ship, not knowing what else to say or think of this great wonder, he then
beseeched God so direct his voyage that he might yet obtain his lady: for he
verily deemed her to be Briana which was in the chariot. In this order being
still within sight of the former ship, and not straieng from the way which he
had kept, the Emperor sailed three days and three nights in the river
without any lack of sufficient food. By reason of this travail and thought,
the meat which he eat was no more then would suffice nature. In the fourth
day by morning, the ship with the chariot was driven into the great and large
Sea called Pontus Euxinus, through the which he yet sailed within the view of
the other, until the forward ship arrived in a fair and delectable Island,
where the Chariot took landing. Half an hour after the Emperors ship
rushed on the shore, with such force that the ship rent in pieces, and with
the violence of the rush threw the Emperor upon the bank flatlings on his
back, where after he had stretched himself, he began again to travail on
foot that way which he gessed the Chariot had gone. In this way strange
things befell him, as shall appear in the Chapter following.

The adventures of the Emperor in following the inchaunted Chariot.

Cap. 9.
THE Emperor being as you heard cast on land, he beheld well how the Island
was as it were walled about with a fair and fresh water, the fairest that ever
he had seen, then looking further into the land, he marked also how it was
furnished with so many trees, and of so diverse sorts that it was very
strange in respect of their unmeasurable height and greatness, underneath
these the ground was beautified with sweet roses and other fragrant flowers,
amongst the beds whereof there ran by chanells, a very clear and
christalline water, able to delight the most weried senses and travailed mind
that might be. Besides these, to make up a full mess of disport, there was a
sweet and pleasa^^t song of Birds, which seemed to rejoice in the bright and
clear morning, besides a thousand other pastimes which I let pass, too long
to make a tale off. But yet of all these the noble Emperor took no care, for
the thought of his Lady detained from him, but only he beat all both known
and unknown ways, to find out that wherein the Chariot had gone. At length
he winded one, but an unused way, which by all likelihoode was the same which
he would have, in that the grass seemed new pressed down. This tract the
noble Emperor followed on foot, without that either the heaviness of his
armor, or the length of the way, made him to rest any whit. From the morning
a-full half day the Emperor had continued his journey, not meeting any
person, at whom he might ask news, of that which he most desired. But
afterward leaving the thick and pleasant wood, he came into a fair green
or meadow full of roses, and other sweet herbs and flowers of all colors,
without any other shade in all the meadow then those trees, which served for an
hedge unto it. The length of this medowe seemed three bow shot unto the
midst, where was situated a good Castle, and in good proportion. It was
four square, having at each corner a tower, and on every side one in the
midst of the side, all of them so high as if they should haus edged with the
clouds. This great castle was enclosed and shut in with a high and thick wall,
the siones whereof and the towers, did shine like Crystal, or the well
polished steel against the Sun beams. Round about the wall there was a
deep moat, the water being so broad, as a man might scarce cast a stoue from
the one side to the other. Over the water there was a bridge, very large and
well towred so strong according to the depth of ye water, that it might have
withstood a thousand men Three towers it had in all, one in the entrance,
another in the middle, and the third at the furthest end each of them very
high and great, and wrought with the same stone, that the great castle was
builded with. The two uttermost towers of the bridge, as well the entry as that
toward the castle, were gated and barred with doors and locks of fine filed
ste^ele, being so sheene yt it served for a looking glass unto the
passengers. The locks were so shut, that unless they were opened on the
inside, it was impossible to undo them. The good Emperor scanned upon all
this, the like whereof he had not seen in all his life, and concluding fully,
that no such building might be made by man's hand, yet he meruailed that of an
Island so fair and delectable, there was no more noise bruted, especially
standing as it seemed to him in a sea so saileable. He believed yt the
Princess was within, because there appeared to him no other building in all
the Island, and therefore taking wide steps, he passed on toward the gate of
steel, where finding it closed, he took a great hammer hanging thereby and
bounsed at the gate with such force upon the sounding Steel, that the fury of
the rap was heard through all the Towers, and a great part of the Island. For
all this stone showed themselves to make him answer, although he had stoods
more then a whole hour calling and knocking, at length with some trouble he
departed from thence to coast the water, if perchance he might light upon
any other way into the Castle. When he had gone a turn about, at one part of
the wall he happened upon at Gentlewoman, which was in a little boat newly
taking land at a posterne door of iron, when the Gentlewoman had taken
footing on the land, she opened the gates making show as if she would have
entered leaving the vessel in the water. The Emperor strained his voice to
call unto her yt she should stay, but the seining as though she heard him not,
made to ye wicket, whereas she was to fasten the door: the Emperor cried yet
louder, then she turned toward him, and as though she had but then espied him,
she said unto him. What would you have fir knight? The Emperor prayed her to
come nearer, for that he would only demand a certain thing of her with this
she took her boat again and with a little ower rowed toward the land, where
the Emperor was, when she came somewhat near the bank there staieng, she
said unto him. What is it yt you would have sir knight, in that you have
called me so loud. That which I would fair Gentlewoman answered the Emperor,
is, that you would ferrie me over in your boat unto the Castle, for yt I have
to do with one of ye giants which are within. If you have to deal with them
said the gentlewoman, they be no people on whom you may win honor. That is
true said the Emperor, I have no desire to trouble them, if they will do that
which I require them. Since it is so said the gentlewoman, I will do your
commandment, because you look like a knight worthy of this service. I give
you great thanks for your courtesy answered ye Emporour, and with this he
entered the boat, and shouing with the rudder toward the castle, he got
thither. The Gentlewoman went in leading ye Emperor with her, and closing ye
door after her, conducting him through a little court into another privy door,
which was not the common entry. She opened a wicket with ako^ which she had at
her girdle, and brought him farther into a garden, the most delight some yt art
might devise. The Emperor now took himself to be in a terrestrial
Paradise, and gasing a while thereon, without remembering the occasion of his
thither coming, he was so estranged from himself. Out of this garden by
another door, they came into a large court of the castle, built with bright
Alabaster, the excellency whereof in ye imagery and workmanship cannot be
declared. For in comparison of this enchanted castle, either the sumptuous
building of Mansolus tomb, or the famous Pyramides of Egypt, or yt maze of
Daedalus making, found in Crete, may well be forgotten. And as the Emperor
mused on all this, the gentlewoman knowing him to be distraught, caught him by
the hand, and brought him to a pair of stayers, the steps whereof were all of
Jasper, by them he mounted with her into a chamber four square, of the
largeness of a stones cast. In this yet she opened another door, with three
steps of silver plate, out of the goldsmiths shop, through which she brought
ye Emperor into a more stately chamber, four square as ye other was, and very
rich, whereof the seeling and roof were engraven gold and embossed with many
precious stones, sending forth such a light as it was marvelous. The Emperor
took no keep of the riches of the place, but of the beauty of a number of
fair gentlewomen whom he saw sitting richly apparelled in every part of the
chamber, among these one seemed to be the principal, stalled in a seat higher
then the other, and passing them all so well in beauty as rich apparel. She,
as lady and mistres above them all, held in her hand a Lute, whereon she
played and sung together with such an harmony, that it was no less dangerous
unto the poor Emperor, then the alluring song of the Mermaides should have
been unto Ulysses company. She sang sweetly, and she with all reached her
warbling notes so high and so shrill, that it much pleased the Emperor. Her
fair and golden hair hung down her back, and covered both her shoulders.
And you must pardon the Emperor if by this he was wholly possessed with her
love, and forgot his late wife the Princess Briana. The enterteinment was
great, and yet this change proceeded not through she beauty of the
enchauntresse, for his own wife was much fairer, but rather by the secret
virtue of the place, which was thereto devised, according as shall be recited
hereafter. By this time the Emperor had clean lost the remembrance of his
wife, his Empire, Country, and what else pertained to him, only rejoicing in
the love of Lindaraza, (for so this Lady was called) this he esteemed for his
principal hap and good fortune. When the Emperor had stood stone still a
while, this Lady rose from her seat, and laieng down her Lute which she
held in her hand, with her Gentlewomen waiting on her, and with a good grace
she made toward the Emperor to take him by the hand, saying unto him: You
are welcome most noble and worthy Emperor Trebatio, for whose coming I have
long time wished. The Emperor glad of such a welcome, and making not strange
of his courtesy, albeit he could not find whereby she should know his
name, he answered her. Madame, my arrival cannot be but good, since by it, I
may behold the prick and price of all the beauty in the world, conspiring as
it were in your excellency, and since you receive me with such favor, I
beseech you tell me who you are, least by not knowing you, I might foreslowe
that duty which I owe unto your person. This account (replied the Lady) shall
be made in better time. Now know you, that I am all yours, and there shall not
be done by me or my Gentlewomen other thing, but to do you pleasure in my
Pallaice. The Emperor was intrapped with her pleasant speech, and knew not
whether he were in heaven or in the earth, and willing to kiss her hand, for
the grace she showed him, she thought no scorn of a kiss on her cheek when
it was proffered. Then she led him by the hand, unto the place where her own
throne was, there the Emperor felt in himself a great contentment, by the
touching of her white and delicate hands, imagining with him self, that he was
transferred into a second heaven. Some of the Ladies helped to unarm him, and
other were not idle, either plaieng on their harpes, or singing and making such
music, as well eased the minds of the enamoured: some brought rich robes to
attire the Emperor withal, other, conserues and comfets very comfortable,
with delycate wine in great plates and cups of gold to refresh him, as he had
need, by reason of the travail he had taken on foot, although other meat
liked him better, which was the sight of the fair Lindaraza and her company,
and she no less enamored with him, beheld him goodly, and with her knife in
one hand, and a napkin in the other, she her self carved unto him of those
pleasant conserues. I do not think that the Emperor refrained upon
strangeness, but she to quicken his stomach with many a pleasant devise and
other amorous persuasions made him eat a good, and very swoote were those
morsells unto him. When this collation was ended, with some solempnitie, the
fair Lindaraza led him aside into a great bay window, opening upon the fresh
and gladsome gardein through which the Emperor, with the Gentlewomen had
before passed. There they both beguyled the time with pleasant speech and melody
which the Ladies made in a fresh arbor upon the top of two trees, the Laurel
and the Cipres, the Tenor being maintained among them, only by Nightingales. I
deny not, but the savor also of the sweet smelling flowers, refreshing their
spirits, did increase their appetites, and gave hope of better joy to come.
When it was time to suppe, the tables being spread, they were served of
exquisite dainties. Supper being done, the two estates fell to their wonted
discourses. It was now night, and yet there needed neither torch nor candle,
the brightness of the stones enchased in the walls, made the chambers as light
as the day, when it was time to sleep, the fair Princess Lindaraza brought
the Emperor to her own lodging, richly adorned with silk and gold, wherein
was a rich and statelye bed, and there unclothed by her Gentlewomen both of them
went to bed, and remaining thus, both of them rejoiced of their loves to their
contentations. As ye Emperor had thus lived wantonly many days, deprived of
his understanding, saving only in honoring her which was before him. In the
end, the beautiful Lindaraza was great with child, and bare him a daughter
of rare beauty called Lindaraza by her mothers name, from whom issued a great
and noble race, which because in his place it shall be largelye declared, I
shall ouerpasse now, briefly touching such occurrents as I read of in the mean
time.

The Emperors knights find not their Lord, and the Hungarians miss the
Prince of England.

Cap. 10.
WHen the Emperor Trebatio was in his quest of the inchaunted chariot, the
story tells that his knights might not come near him, some because they
could not take their horses, and some because his horse ran so fast, for he
overcame in half a days journey, the travail of eight days (as I think)
for that he was carried both by his own desire, and the devils driving,
otherwise it had been impossible to have endured so great pains. For this
cause I say, although the Knights rode so fast as they might, yet they could
not come within ye sight of him, nor find which way he was gone, yet with
sorrow and grief, especially through the fear which they conceived by his
meddeling with the Giants, they parted companies, every man taking a several
way to seek the Emperor, and they agreed at the months end to meet at one
place. The month came, when as yet none of them heard any news of him,
although they sought him in diverse parts. They all meruailed, but not knowing
what to say, in the end, they determined at some other time to meet, and to
enter into this quest again. For this time they altogether took toward the
camp, which they left before the city of Belgrado, where they abode not long,
but remembering themselves of their promise, they met at the place appointed,
and divided themselves accordingly. The four Hungarian knights, fearing to be
descryed by those which went to seek Prince Edward, the couertlyest which they
might, they went toward the camp of the Emperor and there remained some time,
after they followed into Greece, where they tarried till the return of the
Emperor, according as shall be mentioned hereafter. Now by this time, with no
less care and diligence, Prince Edward was sought by many Knights in all the
kingdom, for that the King had given him no longer time to remain in the
Monestary of the river then three days. There was already told xx. days when
he came not. First then he sent many of his knights to know the cause of his
tarrieng, these returned unto the king with an answer that they neither found
him in the Minster, nor could bear tidings of him by the way. Then the King
dispatched other messengers to enquire after him and his knights in all the
land, but they brought the like answer, yet again he sent more then 1000.
well prepared for war, with authority of search through all his kingdom,
that they might bring news of life or death, but all was one. Last of all,
fearing least peradventure he had been taken prisoner by his enemies, he wrote
unto the Emperors camp to know the truth, to the end he might ransom him
if so it were, but not hearing any news, he then bewailed the loss of the
prince, and became very sorrowful, like as contrary wise the Emperials bemoned
their Emperor. These things happened so in the neck one of another, that
Tiberios judgment failed to decide the truth, and he pitied him with no less
grief then if he had been his own son, partly for his daughters sake, who
must needs be partner of her husbands misaduenture, and partly for the Princes
parents, who could not without some sorrow conceive of his missing, albeit all
this happened more by the misgiuing of his own mind, then by any certainty
he found. You have heard particularly the care of the king Tiberio, now you
must consider of the diligence of the king of Boheme by the semblable. Another
month had end, and the knights botaries sped them homewards to the camp of the
Emperor, without any news of their Lord, which no doubt much molested the
whole host, but in especial it afflicted ye king of Boheme, to see them come
without him. As they made declaration of the whole months travail, it little
pleased the king, only for the love he bare to the Emperor, and the want of
his presence in a time so dangerous, he wept as sore for him, as if he had
seen his little child give up the ghost.

The loss of the Emperor thus published through the army, there was no one
which sorrowed not inwardlye, for he had the love of all his subjects. Albeit,
this was bootlesse, yet his love beguiled him, for the king yet charged more
then 2000. knights with the search of the Emperor in all places, as well by sea
as by land, but it naught auailed, for the Island of Lindaraza held him so
sure, that he could not be found, and if he had been found, yet he was so well
guarded, that the whole host had not ben able to have delivered him from ye
enchanted castle. While these things were in doing, the king of Boheme
himself set ye remainder on work to assault the City, with full purpose not
to leave the siege, till either he knew where the Emperor was, or had lien a
half year longer, at the end whereof he would raise the siege, and so depart
into Greece again. In this time, the Hungarians issued out of their City
against the Grecians, and there was between them many cruel and bloody
skirmishes* the Greeks did nobly, as you may read in their several histories.
At this time, because they are not of the substance of my matter, I will not
name them, only I will recount unto you ye particular truth of yt which
follows.

The Princess Briana, takes great sorrow at the loss of Prince Edward.

Cap. 11.
GReat was the diligence, which the King of Hungary commanded his Knights to
make, in seeking the Prince Edward, and as great was his grief, in not finding
him, by the consideration of the towardness of the noble Knight, and the dole
of his Parents, being their dear and only son. But greater must needs be
and inexpressible, the mortal dalour which the Princess Briana conceived,
when she once heard of the miss of Prince Edward. And as I read, at the three
months end, when nothing was reported, for very anguish of heart, (besides
her often sowndings) after, when the recovered out of that trance, she seemed
to them nearer the death, then the Prince her husband was, as they thought: for
believing that he was dead, she would neither eat, drink, nor sleep, but
became weak and feeble, and wasted her days with sorrow. She laid a part all
her Princely roabes and precious Jewels, and tired her self in course
mourning weeds of a widdowe. She kept her self in a secret chamber, only
with the comfort of her Gentlewomen, and coming not forth one step,
demeaned rather the life of an Anchresse, or religious woman, then of a
Princess. The Queen mother then abiding at Buda, came oftentimes to visit
her, and in her company other great Ladies, but they could not remove the
dullness of her melancholy.

Ere the Princess had long led this solitary life, she felt her self quick
with child, whence she took some joy, but yet fearing the disclosing of it
unto her friends, whom she would not have pertakers of it for all Hungary,
before the solempnization of the marriage was openly performed, and being
notwithstanding desirous in time to seek remedy thereunto, she concionated
her secret only with one of her Gentlewomen, named Clandestria, whom she best
loved, and with whom she was best acquainted, for the good counsel she often
gave her. She, which was wise and discreet, kissed her Ladies hands, for the
honor she did unto her, in revealing such a secrette, only a little
withstanding her intent of concealment at the first, and persuading that it
was no reason why she should not bewray her childbearing unto the king her
father, and the Queen her mother, for that seeing it pleased God to give you a
child by a lawful husband, it were not amiss if it were known abroad, be
it son or daughter. And says she moreover, if God give you a man child,
Prince Edward thus perishing, as we know no other, this your child is lawful
inheritour of great Britain in the right of his Father, the King now living,
having no issue male.

Wherefore me thinks you should do him wrong, seeing he has lost his father,
to deprive him also his lawful succession.

The Princess answered, Persuade me not to this good Clandestria, for though
the child which shall be born of me, should be Lord of the whole world, I would
not tell this secret to any body, but to thee. And if it shall please God
that the Prince Edward shall see us once again, it shall suffice, let him
discover it when he sees time. If it fall out otherwise, my son may well bear
the loss of great Britain, and it be but to accompany me in the loss of so
worthy an husband. Clandestria would have entered farther in this persuasion with
the Princess, but seeing it would not be, she gladly made offer of her
service. Then said the Princes, What do thou think is best to be done in
this thing. The best which I can advise you, said the Gentlewoman, is yt you
madame govern ye child so yt it perish not in your womb, and when the time of
your travail shall be at hand, that you feign unto your Gentlewomen a
solemn Fast and prayer forty days, without to be seen or visited of your
Gentlewomen or any person saving me, whom you will have to wait on you only
for your necessary repast. The glass which you shall set on it, shall be
this: That you will pray to GOD for Prince Edward your husband, the show will
be credible enough by means of your life hitherto. This would I have you do
madame, for this cause take your lodging in one part of the house joining to
the wood, being very good and solitary for this purpose. If you be
delivered in this time, I will conueigh it to a sister of mine lately married,
and dwelling in the City of Buda. She bare a son about a month past, and
will nourse your child carefully. This counsel lyked well the Princess,
because it was consonant to her desire. The Princess now expecting the time of
her lieng down, told her gentlewomen yt she had undertaken a devotion of fast
and prayer, and before she entered into this obseruaunce, she said she would a
little take her rest, eating and sleeping somewhat more then she was wont,
which in deed she did, to preserve that which was in her belly, albeit it was
well colored by her continual sadness. In this time the Queen her mother
was brought to bed of a beautiful boy, which much gladded all the kingdom,
his name was Liriamandro, a noble Prince, much aduauncing the honor of ye
Hungarians, as shall be showed you in his history. But this childing of the
Queen, was very commodious for the Princess, for that when the Queen was
brought to bed, she could not visit her daughter at the monestarie, as she was
accustomed.

The Princess Briana was delivered of two sons, Clandestria christeneth
them, and causes them to be nurssed.

Cap. 12.
THe Princess as you have heard, lived somewhat contented after that she felt
her self to be with child, but yet not so, but that her color much abated,
and impaired her beauty, and so driving on her days until the approach of her
travail, she now fained to begin her voluntary fast of forty days, which
she before had signified unto them, and withdrawing her self into a chamber
provided for her, she forbad the entry to all, except only Clandestria for
her table, this they thought the Princess had done upon mere devotion.

The same night after she was now professed a holy vowesse, Clandestria took
the ^eyes of the back Gates, belonging to her lodging, and opening a door
into the wood, she passed by the fields to Buda, standing but a mile off,
and entering into her sisters house, secretly declared the cause of her
coming, desiring her to be as secret, because the Princess would in no wise
have it manifested, she willingly promised silence, and withal departed with
her toward the Monestarie, ere it was long, they came before the Princes,
whom they found sitting alone, not altogether void of bread, as being,
unacquainted with those pangs, and heartely wishing for their coming, as
without knowledge to be her own midwise. When she felt the fittes of her
travail, she was somewhat comforted with their coming, and Clandestria with
her sister, enforced their diligence to do her service, giving themselves to
prayer until it pleased God to manifest his works in this noble Princes.

She bare two sons so strange and rare for beauty, that the Gentlewomen not
a little wondered, and yet they were more moved to see the tokens which either
of them brought severally from their mothers womb. For they marked well how
that the first borne, had upon his left side a little face figured, shining as
bright as if it had been a little Sun, and how that the other had in the
midst between his breasts a white Rose, fashioned of so perfect making, that
it seemed to be gathered from some arbor of Roses.

Before they swadled them, they laid the little boys between the Princesses
arms, comforting her with that that God had given her, two so exellent
children. The mother full of pain with the travail which she had sustained,
as well as she could, laieng them to her breasts, kissed and embraced them with
such love and pity, that the tears trickled down from her fair eyes, and
with a low and soft voice she said thus.

O my sons, I beseech the Lord who has made you so exceedingly fair, to
bless you also with good hap, that you may ease your mother of that sorrow
wherein she remains as now plunged, and that you prove such, as by your
valors, you may recover that which your mother to cover her fault has made
you loose. These and other words spoke the Princess, weeping bitter tears,
until the nurse took the children from her bed, to swaddle them in cloth
bands, and to give them her breast. Now least peradventure they should be heard
to cry, Clandestria said to the Princess, that it were good her sister
should return to her own house, where she would bring up the young Princes,
as carefully as if she were daily in her presence. The Princess very loath to
part with her children, badde her do notwithstanding what she would with them,
so that she baptized them ere they went, for fear they should perish in the
way. Let it be so madame said Clandestria, for you have said very well. The
nurse then took water, and pouring it on their heads, she christened them in ye
name of God, with other formal words of Baptism, as she could best do.
Clandestria with a very good grace, gave names to the little boys, the first
she named Caualiero del Febo, for the figure that she saw in his left side
near upon the heart: the younger she called Rosicleer, for the Rose between
his breasts. Of this the Princess took some joy, saying she had given them
names as they deserved. The Nurse took leave of the Princess, and with her
husband which came on the way, and which had not stayed far off, she got
readily into Buda before broad light, where she fostered these noble babes as
carefully as her own. Clandestria after she had shut fast the doors went up
again to the Princess, whom she found discomforted for her children. The
Gentlewoman pained her self to comfort her, and soberly spoke unto her in this
sort.

O madame, how unthankful are you to God for the great grace he has bestowed
on you, in giving you two sons of so excellent beauty, and that with so
little peril of your person. I believe and hold for certain, that God has
not left you such sons, never to know their Father, nor made you such a
Princess, never more to see your husband. The works of God are wonderful,
and that which we think is set for our grief and disease, he tourneth to our
commodity, what know you madame, if God willing to preserve your husband, has
by some adventure brought him where he shall escape the great dangers and
perils of death in which he was hourly like to incur, in the battle that
the king your Father has against Trebatio. Good madame quiet your self God
will bring him unto you at such time, when you shall be least mindful of him.
And if you can so ill brook the absence of your sons, they are not hence but
a mile, the her may you send me, when it pleases you to know of their
welfare.

Thus Clandestria discoursed with her Lady the Princess Briana still beating
upon this one point that she should rest her self upon Gods providence, and in
the and she so assuaged her grief, that she after well endured the fortye
days penance. In the end, being better at ease, and feeling her self more
pleasauntly disposed withal as fresh as if she had never abode any childbed
took her lodging among her Gentlewomen, who seeing her so well and somewhat
more merry then before, were glad of that alteration, for they loved her so
heartely, that they willingly would have given their lives, to have redeemed
her from that coffeehouse wherein she lived.

The king of Boheme raised the siege, and the king of Hungary returned the
Princes knights into England.

Cap. 13.
MAny and hot bickerings there were between the Emperors people and the king
of Hungary, while the siege lasted against the city of Belgrado: but because
the history has more to entreat of other especial adventures, it reme^breth
not every particular which happened in ye skirmish. It says in effect, yt as
those of the city were many, so they were well provided of all furniture, yt
the Greeks might not enter into the city, albeit many of them had done
meruailons deeds in arms. After one year was come and gone, ye king of Boheme
with all ye principal of his host; thought it best to raise the siege then
lieng before the city, and with bag and baggage to march homeward to
Constantinople, to the end to give out a new order for the finding of the
Emperor. So within two days they had all charge to pack and prepare
themselves for their return: the soldiers not yet forgetting the loss of
their Lord, which they showed by their cheer. The king of Boheme the
Emperors uncle well perceiving it, and knowing how the good Emperor was
wont to encourage and comfort them, he took some pain in it at that time, and
being well setteled in Constantinople, for the better pacifieng of all tumults,
the army as yet not dispearsed, he took upon him the government of the Empire
in his Nephews name, at the humble suite of all the Emperialles, after he
provided the best that he might for a new search of the Emperor, swearing many
good knights unto this enterprise. Which likewise the king of Hungary did
send certain news into England, and to have some sufficient guide to
conduct the army homewardes at the end of two years, all which time ^ee
detained the Soldiers, upon hope to find their Captain, no news being
heard of him. The King embarked them homewardes to great Britain, with gifts
and presents unto the king of England, and sufficient rewards plentifully
bestowed upon the mainie, over and above the due payment of their wages. This
the liberality of the king, profited him not a little in other matters of
great importance, as you shall understand in this history* The knights thus
shipped ready to depart, were near in number. 20000. In few days they
coasted France, and entering in the narrow Seas, with a good wind they landed
in great Britain, where soon their hanging countenances, gave testimony to
the heavy news they brought. Which thing so sore appaled the whole Realm,
that of a long time after their coming, there was not used any exercise in
arms: and the queen dyed also, adding to this mishape a new corsie. This
Queen left behind her a daughter of young years named Oliuia, so renowned for
her beauty, that she well wanne to be loved and served of the most loyal
knight of all the world. She was brought up, as being inheritrix to the state,
with great care by the king her Father.

Clandestria deuiseth with the Princess Briana how her sons might be brought
up in her company.

Cap, 14.
THE Princess Briana lived no doubt better contented after her delivery of
the two fair Boys, which she thought had been Prince Edwardes, and yet as I
say, very religiously, as it had been in a Cloister, for the reason so often
alleged. Now yet somewhat there was which impaired this contentation, which
was the absence of her children. This she thought to repair again by
bringing them up in her own lodging, and having broken it unto her Gentlewoman
Clandestria, whom she desired to find the means for it. Clandestria after
conference had with her mistress, one day said unto her, that she had well
foreseen the mean. The Princess then urged her to utter it, which
Clandestria delivered in this speech. Madame, that which I have thought in this
matter, is like. That one day when I shall come from the City of Buda, you
shall demand of me what news is there. I will answer you among other
things, that a sister of mine has two sons, borne both in one day, so
excellently fair, that all the lookers on do not a little commend so goodly
creatures. They are borne moreover with notable tokens, which they bring from
their mothers womb. You madame hearing this, may say that you have great
desire to see those strange children, and may will me to procure the
bringing of them unto this monastery with their mother, and here in your
company they may he brought up, for that in such children you may take some
solace, whereby to forget part of that which sore annoieth you. In this manner
neither your Gentlewomen nor any other person shall understand our secret.
Clandestrias counsel seemed so good unto the Princess, that embrasing her
many times, she said unto her. My faithful and loyal Clandestria, when shall
the day come wherein I shall be restored unto the first joy and estate which
I was wont to hold, and in which I may reward the good service thou have done
to me? Go thy way and put in effect that which thou have devised for mine
ease. Madame said Clandestria, if my service may in any wise ass wage your
grife which I so sore pity, I think it sufficiently rewarded, considering
the duty wherein I stand bound unto your highness, and assuredly no less
is the pleasure which I receive by the acceptance of my service, then that
which you have by the fruition of it. But since my counsel likes you so well,
I will make no tarrieng: go you madame to your Gentlewomen, and I will
presently to the city. Go in Gods name said the Princess, and so she took
her to her gentlewomen, Clandestria being in her way toward the City. When
Clandestria had performed unto her sister that which the Princess had
commanded, not long after she came to the monestarie, at such time as the
Princess was in the company of her* Gentlewomen. Clandestria entered into the
Chamber, making her obeysaunce. The Princess espyeng her, said unto her
merrely.

Welcome my Clandestria, how is it with the Queen my mother, and the young
Prince Liriamandro my brother. They are all very well madame said
Clandestria, and the Queen your mother commends her self unto you by me.
Well said the Princess but what news have they in the City, say they any
thing of Prince Edward. Of the Prince surely I heard nothing, answered
Clandestria, but I have news if it so please you to hear them, me thinks the
straungest that you have heard. Tell us then said the Princess, if it be such
as you speak off, we shall have pleasure to hear them.

Know you then madame said Clandestria, that a Sister of mine, which is
married and dwells in the City of Buda, has two sons of the age of two
years, both borne at one hour, in the top and pitch of all beauty, so that
their matches are not to be had. They have besides marks on their bodies such
as those which have seen them, cannot tell what to think of them. The first
borne of them has on his left side the form of a face vorie beautiful, and
so bright that I dare liken it to the Sun, which ouershaddoweth the earth,
and for this cause the little boy is called Eldonzel del Febo. The other little
boy has between his breasts a Rose growing in the flesh, so fresh of hiewe,
and so perfectlye colored, that they which see him say, he bears the badge
of his mothers bed, as if he had been borne in an arbor: for this token
they name him Rosicleer, I tell you madame so excellent is their beauty that
the best Painter in Hungary, need no other example to draw out the Picture
of beauty. The Princess making a show of great marvel, and as it were
mistrusting the report because of the strangeness, answered: Truly
Clandestria you have brought us matter of some marvel, but I fear me the
neerenesse of kin between you makes you to speak of affection more then
knowledge, I would that by sight of them you would prove unto us that which you
have spoken, with this the Princess Gentlewomen, hungrye after noueltyes,
importuned Clandestria to deal herein, so that they all might enjoy the sight
of those two so rare children. Clandestria tourning toward her Lady said, by my
faith, if my Lady the Princess be so contented, I will go to my sister, and
cause her to come hither with her little ones. The Gentlewomen then besought
the Princess that she would command them to be brought thither.

The Princess telling them that she did it more at their request, then of her
own good will, said to Clandestria, you were best do this, which your
fellows require you, my lyking you have, for I my self would gladlye be a
witness of so great a marvel. Clandestria took her leave of them, hasting
toward the City where her sister dwelt, and declared her message for the
bringing of the Princes. Her sisters husband was a very good Gentleman borne,
though very poor, he and his wife made them ready to come before the
Princess, with the little Princes, which by this time were of some growth,
being two years old, having both goodly looks, standing as it were upon a
just temperature of gravity and pleasaunce. When they were come to the
Pallaice, Clandestria first entered into the lodging of the Princess, being as
yet in the company of her Gentlewomen, there she lead in by the hand the fair
and gracious Rosicleer. So soon as he was seen of the Gentlewomen, they
believed him to be no less then an Angel of heaven, and that wherein
Clandestria had before instructed them, she had nothing deceived them. The
Princess not having seen her children since her first blessing of them, and
now seeing the height of Rosicleer, with his beauty above her hope, she made
such joy as might have well been discerned by her countenance, but her
gentlewomen more attentive of the beauty wherewith God had endued the young
Rosicleer, were not ware of it. Clandestria made the little boy bow his knees
to the Princess, and whether it were nature, or the beauty of his Mother, or
both, so soon as he beheld his mother, he left the other Gentlewomen. The
mother taking the little boy in her arms, kissed him many times, shedding upon
his fair cheeks great abundance of tears, for the memorne which the son
gave her of his father, and for the great joy she had in having him so near
unto her. Not long after there entered Clandestrias sister with her husband,
leading by the hand, ye fairest among the most fair, Donzel del Febo. At the
sight of him, ye Gentlewomen repented them of their former judgment, as
concerning Rosicleer, that there might not be his like in all the world, in the
end, the question arising of comparison, to part the strife they agreed, that
as the one moved every one to love him tenderly by his gracious behavior, so
the other by his modest iestures, made them to fear him with reverence. The
difference only put in this, that the one had more Majesty, the other more
mirth and delight in his countenance. The Princess having Rosicleer in her
arms, when she saw her other son before her upon his knees to kiss her
hand, with gladness she raised him from the ground, and with Rosicleer in one
arm, took him on the other, kissing him upon his cheeks, and in deed rather
obaieng the love she bare unto her sons, then regarding the fear she was
wont to have for being discovered, albeit, to say the troth, the Princess was
of the better hand, for all the good will she showed, her Gentlewomen imagined
to proceed of their beauty. And yet to take all suspect away, she could very
wisely moderate her passions. Clandestrias sister the supposed mother of those
children, and her husband, by name Armaran, kissed the Princesses hands, where
she in token of good liking intertayned them as her servant, from
thence-foorth to remain with her, as their sister Clandestria did. On this wise
the Princes were nourished in their mothers presence, without that any knew the
right parentage whereof they came, and they so enticed the Gentlewomen to the
lyking of them, that there passed not one hour, without playing and dallyaunce
with them. This joy on the Princess part was unspeakable, I dare not say,
able to countermaund her foreconceiued grief, but the worst was, it was not
durable. For fortune ever mutable, changed her copy, and became so contrary,
that the date of her ease being out, there succeeded disease and mishap, so
that her death should not have been half so yerksome, as her life was
dolorous. This shall you hear of, in the next chapter.

Donzel del Eebo was lost by misaduenture.

Cap. 15.
NOw the creator of all things minded to manifest the worthy deeds of the
valiant Donzel del Febo, which as yet lay hidden in the arms of the delicate
Gentlewoman his foster mother, and therefore in such sort, he ordered the
celestial influences and powers of the planets, that scarcely had the young
Gentleman fully reached unto three years of his age, when he was carried from
the princely Graces of his unknown mother (leaving her pensive and sad) into a
large and maine sea, whence, being tossed with waves, and almost weather
beaten, at length he escaped.

Such an argument God left us of his prowess to come, since in so tender age
he enabled him to subdue the most raging element that is. And you which read
this history, may be brought by good reason to give credit to this my report,
since you your selves are witnesses of the evident presence of the Almighty in
so certain a danger. And as the learned well know, Achilles has his Pallas
in Homere, and Aeneas his Venus in Virgil, Goddesses assistant unto men in
their dangerous conflictes, Homere and Virgil meaning no other thing, then the
care of God toward his, why may not we believe, that if it pleased God that
this infant had the secret direction of Gods mighty hand in all his
enterprises. But mine Author willing to entreat somewhat of him, sets it
down thus. That in the end of a year, these two beautiful boys b^ing
brought up in the Monestarie of the River, with great pleasure of the Princess
and her Gentlewomen, one day in the month of May, the comfort of the Sun there
enforcing them to come abroad and seek their solace under green boughs. The
Princess and her Gentlewomen leaving their lodging went into a large and fair
orchard, exceedingly well cast, in one part of the Monestarie, there they took
up their seats at a wells mouth, ouer-shaddowed with trees, that the heat of
the Sun could not annoye them, and sporting with the little Rosicleer, who
was somewhat more given to play then his brother Donzel del Febo, they so much
delyghted in Rosicleer, that they took no heed. of Donzel del Febo, sitting
not far off. The little one being very young, yet greatly discontent to see
the small account they made of him, in a fume rose from the place where he was
set, and by soft paces got from them, without being espied by the
Gentlewomen, saving of his mother so called, which loved him no less then her
own self. She rising from the place where she was set, followed him, and
look him by the hand, laughing a good to see the choler wherein he was, and
walking among the trees so long with him, that she came to a large and deep
water, running thorough a part of the great orcharde, where hard by were great
store of trees, and whether the Princess, because the place was very pleasant,
often resorted with her Gentlewomen to rejoice her self.

When they were there, the little boy seeing the water, was desirous to play
with it. The nourse, though otherwise willing to have contented him, yet
fearing the danger of the water, went farther to find some sure place whereby
to come unto the water, and taking a little boat at the bank, which the
gardeiner used, in coming into the Orcharde, put her self in it, and the
child with her. The boy leaning his breaste upon the brimme of the Boat,
troubled the water with his hands, and took up some to wash his face, a while
after the water being calm and plain, he looked in it again, and seeing his
shaddowe there, he began to play with it, and stroke it with his hands, now
because it would not give place, but did that which he did, waxing angry, he
prayed his mother to give him a rod which lay upon the land to beat the babe
withal. It was a good pastime for her, to see the displeasure which he had
conceived against his own shadow, and leaving him thus, she lept upon the
land, to reach him the stick that he required. Being thus on land, either
with the force she put to the side of the boat, in aduauncing her self out of
ye boat, or else because it was the will of God, that the little boy should
then be pressed to try the hazard of his constellation. So it was, that the
boat being untied, it shoued from the shore, the nourse not perceiving it
before she turned again: then was it more then two yeards from the land, and
not having whereby to take hold, it bare so swiftlye down the stream in a
little time, and so far off, that she lost the sight of it. When she saw the
danger wherein the little child was, not having power to succor it, she
rent her garments, and tore her hair, and fell to the ground making such moan,
that the Princess and her Gentlewomen sitting about the Well, heard it, and
much abashed, rose from the place to know what the noise meant. When they saw
the pitiful dealings of the nourse upon the ground, quickening their pace
they gate near her, and demanding the cause of her great lamentation, they
found her so sorrowful that she could not speak to them, but rather the
more she was comforted by them, the more she outraged in crieng, as yt they
judged her to be distraught. So long lasted these her cries, that the Princess
disquieted, went toward her, leaving Rosicleer with one of her Gentlewomen. As
the Princess came toward her, the nourse knew her, and not having the
boldness to show how it fell out, in respect of the grief the Princess would
take for the loss of her son, before the Princess came at her, she ran
and lept into the water, with full intent to drown her self, yt which she had
done, had not her clothes borne her up, and the gardeiner hearing the great out
cries she made, waded in the water for her, and brought her to land all wet and
bloody with the blows she gave her self in the face. This caused such pity
and compassion in the Princess and all her Gentlewomen, that all astonished,
they abode only to see the nourses demeanor. In the end, at the instance of
the Princess, she declared how Donzel del Febo was got from her, for the which
they imparted with her grief, and especially the Princess benumbed of all her
senses sunk to the ground with no more color and breath, then if she had been
quite dead. The gardeiner entering into another boat there, which she had to
fish withal, pushed up the stream amain with his oar to overtake the boat
in which Donzel del Febo was carried, but all his travail was lost, for either
by divine permission, or by Art Magic, made by a learned man, as shall be
told you hereafter, the boat rode faster then the violence of the stream
might drive it, and in short time it entered into the great sea, where it
followed the mighty waves more then an 100, miles in a short space, so that
neither the gardeiner nor who else followed them might in any wise attain unto
him or bring news of him. When the Princess was reuined, and remembered the
chance of Donzel del Febo, she powered out so many salt tears, from her fair
eyes, that like as out of fountains or springs, water gusheth out abundantly,
so from her face, streamed down floudes of water, issuing with sobbes and
sighs as would have broke her heart in a manner, such as commonly the fall of
the water makes from the steep mountains. But for that she would not be
heard of her Gentlewomen, she turned her self and went toward her lodging,
where remaining alone with Clandestria, she gave a fresh onset to her former
complaynts, on this sort.

O mighty and sovereign Lord, wherefore does thy highness suffer the
Princess Briana to live this long, seeing she does roll on this life with such
sorrow and care? O Lord, wherefore gave thou me a husband in this world so
valiant, seeing that so soon as I had lost the name of a maiden, thou made
me an unfortunate widow. Wherefore gave thou me sons, with so strange
tokens at their birth, if with so sudden misfortune I shall loose the one of
them, why did I reach to so great estate, in which I must live with sorrow? And
why gave thou me beauty, not to enjoy it? Alas poor woman that I am, I see
that each thing enforces my pain, for Fortune the mistress of mishap,
despitefully throwing down those on whom she frowns, has turned her back
on me, which desire to live without the compass of her wheel. Ah silly woman,
ye longer I rub out this life, the more my grief increseth. When I seek to
mollify my grief, then my care redoubleth, and one sorrow surceasing, there
succeeds another, as one billow follows on the others neck, in the maine
sea. O thou Lord, which have created me, take me out of this deceiptfull
world, if by death only the intolerable misfortunes may take end which
daily awaite me. These, and other words spoke the Princess Briana, much
agreeuing therewith her Gentlewoman Clandestria, who a little altering the
course of her answer from the platform of the others complaint, drove with
the Princess unto these conclusions. First, that there was hope enough to
recover her losses, the reasons which lead her there unto were these. Albeit,
says she, Gods works be unsearchable, yet thus bold may we be with them, not
meddling with the causes to compare the evils together, and then surely the
whole course of worldly things sufficiently teach us, that GOD creates not
such excellent personages but for excellent purposes, and not as in dumhe
shows upon a stage, where the players only present themselves and pass
away. Again, says she, you are altogether uncertain of their death, and why
not in so doubtful a case, should hope be as ready as care, or perhaps you
think as soon happens the worse as the better, yet the ancient proverb is,
that he which naught hops for, ought to despair naught, for hope and
misgiuing, are in the same subject. Therefore says she, you may well hope. The
second was, that she should comfort her self in the beautiful Rosicleer, who
was then in her keeping, for says she, he alone suffices to counteruaile all
the harms which have chanced you. For I dare warrant, if God preserve him,
that you may name your self mother of the best knight in the world. With
these and many other goodly counsels Clandestria daily labored the Princess
to give over her grief: but for all this, if God with his mighty hand had not
held her up, it had gone wrong with her. For he provided her of comfort by a
man very wise and well learned in Art Magic, of whom shall be made mention in
this history. By him God permitted that the prison of the Emperor with other
appurtenaunces should be discovered, foreseeing by the sigens, planets, and
other natural operations, that which seems impossible unto us. Thus the
truth is, that this wise man knowing the great sorrow and care, wherein the
Princess lived, and well perceiving that unless she had more succor at his
hands, then she had erst by other, because of yt which befell hereafter, it
should be impossible to maintain her life, determined in himself to comfort
her and, so one day as she sat alone very sorrowful, weeping with great
abundance of tears, near unto the well where her two sons were begotten, he
appeared to her in the shape of a Nymph in the clear and christalline water,
with the hair loose, and shedding upon the greatest part of the body, and with
a face so beautiful, that the princess abashed to see her, and in some fear,
for that she had not seen the like before, would have fled from thence. But the
Nymph called unto her, saying.

If thou knew noble princess who I am, and how well I know thy great
thoughts and passions, thou would not fly from me, but rather stay and talk
with me. Now because the time affoords me no leisure to tarry with thee, and
to discourse at large all the loyalty I bear unto thee, and the desire I have
to serve thee, in a word I pray thee take good courage unto thee, to overcome
the great adversities, which may come, and ere it be long are like to come unto
thee, so yt thou shall be left altogether comfortless. I give thee yet to
understand, that Prince Edward is not now living, and that in the time,
wherein thy despair shall be highest, thou shall obtain thy husband again,
as safe and sound as he departed from thee, and he shall acknowledge thy
children, and shall joy in their virtues, that the joy which thou shall have
hereafter, shall surmount the pain wherein thou remainest at this present.
Assure thy self therefore that as all shall come to pass which I have
foretold thee, so were it good to keep it in memory, thereby to strengthen
thy courage, the better to resist the malice of thy adversary Fortune, whose
wheel, as it is round, and in continual motion, so persuade thy self when it
is at the lowest, must needs turn again vpwardes, and restore thee thy
damages. Farewell, and hope no more to speak with me, till all be accomplished
which I have said. In this sort preparing the Princess to the conflict with
her adversity, the fair Nymph vanished away, diuing down into the depth of
the well, and the Princess devising upon this saying, was as it were besides
her self, not fully knowing whether she had heard those words or dreamed them.
For as she understood of the one part, that Prince Edward was dead, and of
the other, that she should once again see her husband, she was so confused in
her thought, that she knew not what to judge, and said to her self, that
peradventure she had mistaken the Nymph.

In the end, resting upon the hope which she had made promise off, she was
somewhat comforted, not doubting the accomplishment. Yet she remained in the
Monestarie, not willing to go out of her lodging, and clothed always in
black mourning apparel, and delighting in nothing so much as in little
Rosicleer. Rosicleer as he increased in years, so he exceeded also in beauty,
goodlynesse of body, and excellent qualities, that a man might well
prognosticate thereby of his valiauncie. But because the history shall more
specially talk of him, I leave him for this time to his nurse, there to be
instructed, till he shall be called forth to greater matters. Now it is time
to go to the succor of Donzel del Febo his brother, who is all this time upon
the river.

The pedigree of the valiant Prince Florion, and other matters as touching him.

Cap. 16.
BY the most ancient and true records of the Assirians, it appears, that in
that time when Theodoro predecessor of the great Emperor Trebatio, ruled in
the Empire of Greece: there governed among the Persians the mighty Orixerges,
king of Persia and Souldan of Babylon, for his great power among the Pagans
much renowned and feared. This man after he had lived in great prosperity,
dyed, leaving behind him three sons, the eldest king of Persia, the second
Souldan of Babylon, the third Lord of the Crimson Island which is in the red
Sea, whence also it takes the name, because all the land is dyed with the
color. This third brother from his youth was very studious, and given above
all to Astrology, and other unknown sciences. In these he became so
exquisite, that scarce in his time might any he compared unto him. The
greatest part of his life time, he dwelt in that Island, choosing that place
as most convenient for his study. The eldest of the three brethren, being
king of Persia, dyed about 40. years after this distribution of their
inheritance, having for heir a son of his. 40. years old called Florion, a
valiant and strong knight, big made, and of a goodly statute. This Florion
being a young man but of a great courage, putting in his room a vizeroy for
his kingdom, wandered as a knight arrant through the world to seek
adventures, where he did great and noble deeds of arms. At the end of three
years, after this his absence from his Country, he stroke over toward the
Court of the Souldan of Babylon his uncle. Where he remained sometime very
well welcomed, and beloved of the Souldan, for he was a good Knight. The
Souldan had a little son and a marvelous fair daughter, whose name was
called Belisea, of her Florion became enamoured, and requiring her to wife of
her father, she was granted him, and the marriage celebrated between them
with great solempnitie of feasts and triumphs. While he was thus within doors
sporting, there was worse news abroad: For a mighty Pagan called Africano,
the brauest and boldest knight that ever was in all the coasts of Affricke, had
transported over into Asia, and by his great force in few days subdued the
whole Country of Media, and two other kingdoms adjacent, belonging to two
great Pagan Princes. These thus vanquished, after became tributaries, as
subjects and vassalls. The fame whereof was bruted far and near, that there
were few kings in those parts which requested not his amity, for all
accounted him the lustiest warrior in the world: and sooth it is, that in all
Asia was never borne so proud and fierce a Pagan.

But he was gainesayde by him, unto whose courtefie not only our lives and
livings, but we our selves stand thrall and subject, otherwise he had in few
days made himself Lord of the greatest part of all Asia. This Pagan was a
huge and mighty man, large lymmed, of the bigness of a Giant, and so strong
and weighty with all that the strongest horse which was, he could make to bow
between his legs, any piece of armor how fine so ever it were, he would
bend and wreath in his hands, as easily as if it had been framed of Wax.
This man well knowing his own forces and estate, and not contented with that
he had gotten, in few days determined to invade the kingdom of Persia, to
bring that also to his subjection. Into it he entered, and in a little time he
conquered many Cities, plaining Towns and Castles, all this while the Prince
Florion being in Babylon. The Peers of his kingdom sent messengers unto him,
declaring ye whole state of the Country, how unable it was to make
resistaunce, without the leauieng of a new army, and some foreign succors.

Then the Prince assembled the royallest army that he might in the land of the
Souldan, and shipped into Persia, there to give battle unto Africano, and to
punish by arms his enemies intrusion. But he reckoned without his host. For he
had not rode ten miles in his own kingdom, when the mighty Africano came
and pitched near with his whole army, and in the first field discomfited
Florion, the most part of his people being slain. The Prince Florion hasted
into Babylon, for ever dispayring to be reuested in his segniories, and
Africanos power was so great, that he well knew all the Souldans power to be of
little force to withstand him. The Souldan received him glad of his escape,
but yet sorry again for his people, and disheriting of his nephewe of so
noble a Kingdom.

As they were thus sorrowful, within a few days after came into the Court
the third brother Lyrgandeo, which as the story says, inhabited the Crimson
Island, at his coming they were much quieted, he bad them be at rest and not
take care for the kingdom of Persia, for that there was among the Christians a
child borne in the happyest and most fortunate hour that ever Knight had
been borne in, the which by good adventure shoulbe be brought to those
parts, and by his noble valor and virtue, should deliver the Souldan and the
Princess his Daughter from death, or from perpetual imprisonment, and
dispossessing the wicked intruder, should place the Prince Florion in his
lawful enheritaunce, to his own great glory and the utter confusion of his
enemies. This done that Florion should enjoy his kingdom in peace and
tranquillity all his life, until then he requested them to have patience, since
it is not yet says he, when these things shall happen.

Lyrgandeo was held for a very wise man, and they all believed his saying,
for that at other times he had denined of many things which came to pass
accordinglye: but yet they knew not who that knight might be, so strong as to
resist the force of Africano, for he was reputed the brauest and most valiant
knight of the world, and they were very desirous every day to hear of his
arrival in their land. Now not a month after this the wise Lyrgandeo,
counseled with the Prince Florion in secret, willing him immediately at that
hour to take. 20. knights of the best he had in the Court, and himself, and
to embarke themselves in a war ship, as it were to scowre the coasts.
Where sailing in the Sea Mediterraneum, Fortune should bring unto their power
two little boys the most beautiful and excellent that ever he had seen,
with these, says he, you shall return to Babylon, for these are the nurses
of your good hap. The Prince glad to please his uncle, chose out his
knights, and took leave of the Souldan, departing from Babylon, and passing
through Asia the less, he came to a haven in Phrigia, where he put himself
and his mates in a ship well puruaied of victualles, and lately rigged and
trimmed for some such voyage. In this with a prosperous wind he sailed till
at the end of twelve days mounting on the tilbacke of the ship to look if
perhaps he might behold the thing, of which the wise man had told him. It was
so that he kenned a far off a little bark in which the Gentleman of the
Sun was driving toward them, and the waves rocking it on every side. It
might be that this boat defended the burden naturally, as only following the
course of the waves: But I rather believe that God which had created him with
so wonderful marks, took this care and keep of him, until that Florion
espieng the bark coming right toward him, and the Gentleman in it so
beautiful and bright as an Angel of heaven, no tongue can express the joy
that now he promised himself touching the perfourmaunce of that hope which
Lyrgandeo gave him to repossesse his kingdom. His conceit also as concerning
the beauty of Donzel del Febo was, that some one of the celestial Gods had
begotten him on some fair Lady here on the earth, and therefore as to a
personage, which did participate with the deity, he bowed himself, honoring
and embracing Donzel del Febo, and upon his knees thanked his Gods for yt grace
they did him, in delivering into his hands one with whom they themselves might
joy. The beautiful young gentleman which saw him so before him embased,
feared him not a whit, although the armor glistered, but with a joyful and
pleasant countenance colled him and clasped his arms about his neck, as if
he had known him a long time. I do not think that the desire of safety made
him so to fawn upon Florion, for they with whom he was erst acquainted wore
no armor. But the Prince Florion took him up in his arms, and kissed his
white and roseall cheeks as tenderly as if he had been his own child, making
him to eat of the most delicate meats which he had then on board. The little
boy which was very hungry fed very well, and from that time forth loved the
Prince Florion more then any other: as it is natural in man to prefer those of
whom they receive benefits. When the Gentleman of the Sun was well satisfied,
the Prince Florion entered again into his own ship and hoised sail toward
Phrygia with a good wind.

Prince Florion in his way homewardes finds by adventure the young Gentleman
Claueryndo, son to the king Oristeo of France, and brings him with the
Gentleman of the Sun to Babylon.

Cap. 17.
THE second day after the Prince Donzel del Febo, had been thus taken into
Florions Ship, they turned about toward Phrygia whence they first
departed, and escried at three of the clock in the morning right against their
ship another the tallest and beautifullest ship that ever they had seen,
which the faster it sailed, the nearer it approached to their vessel. For the
Pilot directed their course straight upon Florions ship, and in short space
they joined togethrr. This ship grappeling with the other, by and by a
Chiefetaine getting upon the hatches commanded all in the other ship to
yield as prisoners. Then the strong Florion not knowing who they were, took a
heavy and well steeled battle are, and getting upon the shipboord, made him
ans were on this wise. What art thou knight so arrogant, which without knowing
who we be, would make us thy prisoners. What may you be said the knight
that you can acquit your selves from the terrible Mambriniano which comes in
this Ship, now except you do this that I command you, all the world is not
sufficient to make you a way to escape his hands. Until this day there was
never borne a man which has made like effusion of humane blood in this Sea.
Then feign would I see this brave knight auns wered the Prince Florion, and
scarcely had he spoke these words, when the devilish rouer armed with a very
great and heavy armor, and a battle are of fine steel in his hands, joined
to the Prince speedely, and without God speed you, laid at him such a blow
upon the head piece, as might have cloven his head in pieces. But the Prince
was deliver and quick, and seeing the battle are descending, the air beaten
before it, he stepped aside, and the blow fell upon the planks of the ship,
which made a great piece thereof to fall into the water, quite shutting him from
hope of a second blow. Then the bold Florion closing with him, gave him a
buffet with his swoorde upon his great and fine helmet, that he made him bow
his knees, and with the great weight of his body scarcely might this rouer
arise, but he turned himself with great pain to strike the Prince. There
began a brave and terrible battle, either of their knights much amassed in
beholding them. Now welfare thy heart thou valiant Florion, for thou much
disappointedst Mambriniano of his enterprise, and made him confess that in
twenty years robbing on the Sea of as many so he might find, he had never
met knight which had put him in so great danger, nor fought with one of so
great force. Thus they fought half an hour and no man might judge who should
have the better. The great rouer struck with all his force at his enemy, (but
the final hour of his own life now^ edging near him) so it was that the
courageous Prince anoided it, and as he was already entered into the good
success of his voyage, having in his power the Gentleman of the Sun, so
fired all with wrath, his color (as a man might say) bewraieng his cholar,
he gave the rouer with both his hands such a blow upon the head that he
felled him to the ground, and before the rouer might get on his knees, he gave
him another between his helmet and his neck piece, and laid him flat upon
the planks of the ship. There the wretched Mambriniano with his gluttenous
desire spit out his stinking and corrupted spirit, and the noble Florion rested
not here, but with a brave and stout courage entered in the ship and laid
about him on both sides. The knights of the rouer to revenge their Lords death
wounded him on all parts, but by and by there boorded them twenty knights of
the Prince, all chosen men of war, and helped their Lord in such wise, that
in short time the greatest part of their enimyes were slain, and the rest
seeing their fall, yielded themselves to his mercy. The battle thus ended,
the Prince would see what was in the ship, for he believed that there was
within great riches, according as the dealings of the rouer had been. There was
much treasure found, but searching every place of it, they found in a cabin a
knight of an indifferent age clothed with rich garments, and by his grave
countenance seeming to be of good account, and near unto him a young
Gentleman of four or five years old, very beautiful and seemly arrayed in
cloth of gold, and about his neck a collar of gold set with rich and
precious stones. The young Gentleman was so gracious in behavior, yt if
Florion had not before seen the Gentleman of the Sun, he had believed him
to be the fairest and proprest Gentleman that ever he had seen, and desiring
to know who they were, he saluted them curteouslys, willing the knight to tell
him who they were. He which had already known Florions great virtue in the
battle that he had with the rouer, rose with the young Gentleman from the
place where he was set, and using an humble duty to him, answered. Sir
knight, I am a prisoner to the rouer Mambriniano, which took me and this young
Gentleman at a place near a haven of the Sea, and since God by Fortune has
been so favorable unto you that in a righteous battle you have slain him,
we remain now for yours to do with us that which shall seem best unto you,
and we have good hope that with a knight of so great valor, there cannot
happen unto us so much evil as with him which took us prisoners. The Prince
accepted well that which he said unto him, and prayed him to go on in
declaring who he was, for that by lack of knowledge he might forslacke to
do to them the honor that they merited. Albet now the knight wished that he
might dissemble it for the danger that might ensue, yet in the end, putting
his affiaunce in the Prince, he said unto him. Since it likes you sir knight
to know who we be, only to please you I will tell it you, though I would
gladly have suppressed our names, till Fortune somewhat more friendly unto us
should have bewrayed it. But know you that this young Gentleman is called
Claueryndo, and is the son of the king Oristeo, King of France, only
inheritour and successor of that great kingdom, and I have to name Armineo,
being brother to the king Oristeo, and uncle to this young Gentleman. The
whole order of this misfortune, was in this sort. One day for to sport our
selves, in the company of many other knights, we rode to a fair forest near
unto the Sea, and the Knights which came with us, the most of them delighting
in hunting, severed themselves for their disport, in such manner, that the
young Gentleman and I, with only ten knights, were lest in a fresh and fair
arbor about a well, near adjoining unto the Sea. In this time, while our
knights followed their game, this great Rouer Mambriniano, whether espieng us,
or by chance taking land for fresh water, we know not, but with more then
twenty knights he beset us, and although we defended our selves some time, in
the end, this Gentleman and I were taken prisoners, and our ten knights slain
and sore wounded, before the other knights which hunted in the forest might
understand of it. He carried us to his ships, where it is more then a month
that we have been in this manner as you have seen us, close pent up in this
cage. For my self Sir, as I never hope for liberty, so I respect not my
imprisonment, but for this fair young Gentleman my heart is sore wounded. I
had rather suffer ten deaths, then any such misfortune should happen to him.
Because that when such news shall be reported to his father, he will bear it
more impatientlye than his own, and that which worst is, to me only will he
attribute this fault, since, having committed his only son to my governance,
I have given so ill account of him. Unto these words, the knight lent many a
tear sliding down his face, which well showed the grief he bore in heart. The
prince Florion in great compassion comforted him, promising liberty of return
into his country when but by and by remembering the words, which the wise man
his uncle had said, he called it back again, and in steed of his first
promise, he turned his tale to the narration of his own mishaps, being on
this wise. I thancke you heartely for your courtesy, in recounting to me the
whole discourse of your imprisonment, and of this young Gentleman's captivity,
and I call the high Gods to witness, what pain your misfortune has caused in
me, and how ready my power shall be to remedy it when I may. For I mean
to^giue you liberty of return, and with my men to conduct you homewards into
France, thus much occosioned in me, by the deserts of your estate. But fortune
has been so contrary to me, that except your return be delayed, I my self
shall want my necessary help, ye whole state of the matter lyeng thus, if it so
please you to hear, I am by name Florion, king of Persia, my father deceasing,
which was king thereof, and so by just title, as to his only son and heir,
the crown of the kingdom descended to me. This charge I sustained in mine
own person a good while, but being young and lusty, and in good age to follow
arms, I was desirous to wander in the world. So leaving a governor in my
kingdom, I travailed through diverse countries, until the end of three
years, at which I took over into Babylon, where I was matched with the
daughter of the Souldan being mine uncle. Thither came Ambassadors from my
subjects, certifieng me, that the king of Media, the stoutest Pagan in all the
heathen country, with maine force had intruded upon my kingdom. I, for to
remedy it, gathered a great host in the Souldans land, and transporting into
Persia, at the first battle that I* had with the king of Media, the greater
part of my people being slain, my self was overthrown, and with great
grief, by secret by-ways recovered Babylon, where I could willingly have dyed
for pain and anguish^. But one, min^ uncle, a very wise and learned man in
Art Magic, recomforted me, saying: that the time should come, in which I
should be restored to my kingdom with great honor, and that for this it
behooued me to awaite on the sea, til I met with two little boys of excellent
beauty, with whom I should return to Babylon, for that they should be the
principal cause of my redress: and so giving credit to his word, I thus put my
self in array for this adventure, where thanks be to the Gods, all has
succeeded as ye wise man fore-spoke it, for within this three days I lighted
upon one being alone in a little boat, having in him according to my fancy,
the very pride of all beauty: and the other must needs be this young
Gentleman Clauerindo, the fairest beside him, that ever I knew, so as I have
good hope heerby to reenter into my kingdom. For this cause I have in charge
to bring these two to Babylon, and now sir knight I beseech you to take it in
good part, for he shall be as well entertained in the court of the Souldan, as
in the court of the king his father, and when my good fortune will that my seat
shall be established, he and you shall return into France with my ships and my
people, and my self also, if it be so convenient. When the prince had there
stayed, Armineo was well contented with his talk, taking him for a knight of
great prowess, and although the long stay that ye prince Clauerindo should make
in this country grieved him, yet with hope to return in the end, seeing it was
not in his power to do otherwise, he subjected his will to the princes
command, and with courteous words rendered him thanks for ye story of his
adventures, and for the offer he had made them, the pith of his answer being
in few words this. Be it as you have said sir, for I deny not but the
Gentleman Clauerindo shall gain very much by his bringing up in yours and your
uncles so noble a court. With these profers too and fro, Florion took
Clauerindo in his arms, and entered in his own ship, Armineo following him.
When Armineo had beheld within Florions ship, the young Donzel del Febo, you
must not marvel though he blessed himself, for there was none which had had
but a blush of him, within his tender years, but took him rather to be a
celestial Seraphin, shen an humane creature, and believed that this might not
be done without some great mystery, as if the young Gentleman showing in his
infancy the comeliness of stature, and other excellent qualities wherewith he
was endued, besides the strange finding him alone in the rage of the tempest,
did well foreshew his nobility in time to come. But when they saw him naked,
and the portraiture of the Sun, with the brightness that it gave to the
beholders, it was so strange, that they called to mind Phaetons fall out of
heaven, comparing this young Gentleman with Phaeton, as if he had been Phoebus
son, like as Phaeton was, although somewhat diverse again in this, for that
Phaeton taking his fathers chariot, for his presumption was drenched in the
Sea, this young Gentleman was preserved in the Sea, as betokening some greater
secrecy in Nature. Armineo was best apayed to have the company of so
excellent a Gentle man for the Prince Claueryndo. Now by the way, this may you
learn, that although they could not tell Donzels name, yet by the tokens he
had upon him, they named him the Gentleman of the Sun, somewhat in other
terms in the Persian tongue, but in signification all one, with the name that
his mothers Gentlewoman gave him in Hungary, being worth the marking that both
Persians and Hungarians should so iumpe in naming him. But to make have
homewards, they took the way to Phrigia, and with a good wind ere fiteene
days they landed there, and coming a shore, they sent harbengers before hand,
as well to advertise the Souldan and Lyrgandeo of the Princes coming, as to
puruaye by the way, of lodging for the estates. The two young Gentlemen being
not a little welcome unto Florions two uncles, as you may read in the next
chapter.

Prince Florion with the two young Gentlemen entered into Babylon, and were
there honorably received by the Souldan.

Cap. 18.
THe Prince Florion needed not to have given intellygence to the Souldan of his
coming, for the wise Lyrgandeo opened all which had chanced, as well as if he
had been a party in the doing of it. So when the prince was in less then an
half days journey from the City, the Souldan and his wise brother Lyrgandeo,
issued out with a great train to receive him, and coming near, the wise
Lyrgandeo espieng Florion with ye Gentleman of the Sun on his horse before
him, in great joy rode a pace, and taking him in his arms, spoke these words.
O ye sovereign Gods, immortal thanks be given unto you for the high favor
you have showed unto us, in bringing into our power this rare Gentleman, with
whom you have imparted of your most secret graces. O that mine arms could
once merit such an heavenly burden. O how well may Babylon rejoice, since he
is thither brought, whose glory shall no less glister through the earth, then
the bright Sun shines in the world. Who deserves to have his biding among the
Demigods for his valor and mightiness. O how he shall race out the memory of
Ninus and Xerxes, and all the pride of the Assyrian Monarchs. From henceforth
Assiria, for being only the cradell of this Gentleman's nourserie, shall be
famous throughout the whole world: from hence-foorth men shall have so much to
do, to put in writing the worthiness of this Gentleman, that all the
monuments of our ancestors shall quite dye; and this man only shall be our
table-talke. The wise man thus as it were ravished, and uttering his conceiptes
in great gladness by inter-breathings, the beauty of the child sometimes
amazing him, and his divinity astonishing the hearers, he kissed the young
Gentleman and held him in his hands till the Souldan drew near, as the
Souldan approached, he delivered Donzel del Febo unto him, and turned himself
toward Clauerindo embracing him goodly, but in more modesty of speech or
less delight he said unto him: You are welcome noble and* sovereign Prince, I
knowing how well known your name should be in the world, had great desire to
see you, albeit, it shall be some grief unto your parents not to enjoy your
presence, the time shall come when you shall give them greater comfort and
pleasure. In the mean time, you shall not loose any thing in being brought up
in the company of this Gentleman, whom you shall love so exceedingly, that his
love shall often extinguish the remembrance of your parents. Armineo which was
not far off, gave him great thanks in the behalf of the Prince. Then they
two rode together devising of many things, and many courteous words of good
enterteinment passing between them, until the Souldan fell in talk with the
young Clauerindo and Armineo, to whom he showed a friendly countenance in
token of great good love. These things thus done, they all held on their way
to the City, and passing through toward the Pallaice, there they were
received by Balisea Princess and wife to Florion, making semblaunce of great
liking to Donzel del Febo, whose excellent beauty and comelinsse she well
noted, and already concluded in her thought for a companion to her son, now
of three years old, very large and beautiful called Brandizel. Which in deed
after proved a knight so good, as few better, being strong made, somewhat
higher than his father, and of more puissance. These three Gentlemen by the
Princess Baliseas devise were brought up altogether in like suits, and like
exercises, and so from their youth, their friendship increased with their
years, that in the end, as they themselves were at their full growth, so
their friendship waxed so firm, that neither the diversity of their
professions, nor the distaunce of their countries, might in any wise infringe
it.

These young Gentlemen thus brought up in Babylon, Armineo which in all things
was very wise and well learned, taught Clauerindo the liberal arts, and
instructed him in the true and perfect law of God, in such manner, that although
his education was among the Pagans, yet ye prince was always a good Christian.
The wise Lyrgandeo like wise careful of the Gentleman of the Sun, and of
Brandizel read unto them diligently what was convenient, save that as he was a
Pagan, so he acquainted them only with Pagansie in their religion: which error
notwithstanding afterward they both renounced. This was the training up of the
young Princes in the court of the Souldan, as heedfully looked unto, as if it
had been in their parents Courts. But as their years multiplied, so they
exceeded, all others inferior in judgment, wit, discretion, goodlines of
stature, actiuitie, and all that which was requisite to such princes, but
especially and above all his equals, Donzel del Febo surpassed. For attaining
to the age of ten years, he seemed to be more then fifteen, both for wit and
strength, courage and policy, and by the bigness of his body (being withal
well featured) men gathered undoubtedly of his might.

They made their argument thus. If he be so strongly set in his youth at ten
years, what will he be at twenty. And truly although, his father the
Emperor Trebatio was big of body, as the history has already specified,
being eight foot in height, yet Donzel del Febo ouereached him somewhat, and
with all this maintained the prerogative of his proportion. So that I think
our painters as well Grecians as Assyrians, had never the perfect knowledge to
draw and finish the true proportion of man, before they had the view of this
knight. His picture was sent into sundry parts, as the noblest Painture that
ere was wrought. Besides this, there appeared in his face a majesty so grave
and Prince like, that it stroke a fear of him into mighty Princes. For all
this, he was yet of behavior affable, and somewhat familiar, that he which
knew him well, albeit his mortal enemy could not but highlye commend of it.
What shall I say? As the Adamant stone draws to it, the hard and sharp iron
by his hidden virtue, so likewise this knight procured the love as well of foes
as of friends, and of as many as knew him, and were conuersaunt with him.
And so this young Gentlemen Claueryndo and Brandizel, and other young
Gentlemen, which were his play-fellowes were so glad of him, that they could at
no time be without him. Now, because we have more perticularly to descend into
this story hereafter, and to describe the manifold graces of this knight, for
these matters we will let them pass at this time, and remember you of his age
of twelve years, at which time, there happened that which shall appear in the
chapter following.

The delivery of the Souldan, by the Gentleman of the Sun.

Cap. 19.
MAny times the Souldan and the Prince Florion, with some other Knights for
their recreations, rode on hunting into a thick wood standing in a fair
forest seated somewhat naere the Sea, and plentiful of all kind of game,
especially of wild Boares and such like beasts. Now, when the young
Gentlemen could sit their horses, and were able to endure some travail, they
took them with them, and furnishing them with boar spears in their hands,
they appointed them to the chase. Some game there was killed before them,
wherein they took great pleasure: but especially the Gentleman of the Sun,
which by himself wearied a wild Bear and two Bores so fierce, as might have
frayed a right good Knight. His practice was a^wayes to hunt alone, to have no
man's help to the encounter with any wild beast. And it was so, that one day
the Souldan would go to the same forest to delight himself there for certain
days, taking with him the Princess Balisea his daughter, and the train of
many Ladies and Gentlewomen, and the most principal Lords of his Court,
because the place was gallaunt and delectable, and replenished with variety of
game, being as I said, hard upon the cliffes of the Sea. For this cause there
were reared up many pauilions there, and there was puruayed of other provision
necessary for the householde. He made his own tent to be pitched in a
flourishing meddow next to a goodly fountain. There rested he one day solacing
himself among his knights, for the first day they went not out to seek
their game. The next day early in the morning, the Prince Florion, the young
Gentlemen, and the most part of all the knights took their way through the
forest, climbing up a steep hill, and parted themselves into diverse
companyes, some to raise the game, and others to be at the receipt. The Souldan
and the Princess with her Ladies, and only 15. knights remaining in their
tents as unmindful of any danger if any should happen. The Sun being almost
at the highest, and his beams more direct, the Souldan with the Princess his
daughter and her Gentlewomen left their tent and came to the fountain, the
water being clear, and the place well shadowed with trees, there in the quiet
shade to abide the coming of ye Prince Florion and the young Gentlemen to
dinner. In the mean time the Gentlemen sewers prepared the cupboord and the
cooks made ready for dinner. The tables being spread upon the green grass,
and every man attentive to his function, the officers to their charge, the
knights to their game, and the Souldan with the Princess and Ladies to refresh
themselves in the cool air: there came in place a mighty and woeful giant,
with more then twenty knights after him. The Ladies screeched out, but there
was no remedy. For the Giant with his knights took the Souldan, the
Princess, and most of the Gentlewomen, and conuaied them into a chariot drawn
by strong horses which they brought with them for the same purpose, with the
outcryes of the Ladies the knights which were in the tent iss^^d, and seeing
their Lord with the Princess with her Ladies so carried away perforce (albeit
this they did more for shame then through hardiness, yet) they made toward
the Gyaunt. with their swoords; and began to compass him about, but they so
ill yerformed their duty, yt in short time themselves were either wounded,
slain, taken, or put to flight, and their Lord for lack of rescewes was bound
and fettered. The Gyaunt having his pray, withal the have he might took
toward the Sea, where he had a good ship in readynesse. The lamentable noise
which the Ladies made was such, that it beat through the air into the skies,
and yet could not penitrate so far as to Prince Florion or his knights,
either that they were so eager in ye pursuit of their wild Boares, that they
marked it not, or that the cry of the hunters was so loud that it drowned the
other. But the young Gentleman of the Sun, loosing his company, and well
mounted upon a light horse with a Boar spear in his hand, being also
clothed in a hunters weed of green cloth of gold, and a hat to keep down his
yelow hairs, rode roming about the wood to seek some beast, upon whom he
might try the steel of his bore spear, and taking this way and that way,
without staieng in any place, he met with a knight sore wounded by the Giant,
which rode pitteously to call the Prince Florion and his knights for succor to
the Souldan and the Princes. As Donzel del Febo saw him thus araied, he asked
what he ailed. Alas Gentleman of ye Sun, said ye knight, ye Souldan, our
Lord, and the Princess, are taken prisoners by an ugly and monstrous giant,
and by yt have he makes, I guess he is alredie near unto the Sea: The
Gentleman of the Sun much lamented such news, and with a noble and heroical
courage, which by nature now enforced it self forward, he prayed the knight
to guide him on the way toward ye Giant. The knight thinking it an unfit
match and beside his purpose to turn back with him; for he thought him too
young for such an enterprise, would not stay, but rode on faster. The
Gentleman moved with this that the knight set so little by him, yet said
nothing, but not tarrieng for more company broched his horse with his spurs,
that he made him spinne the same way in which he had seen the knight before.
The have he made is incredible, for before the Gyaunt had recovered the Sea, he
ouertooke him in a plain amongst his knights, and the Chariot in the midst.
The Gyaunt was hindmost on foot, with a great battle axe of steel in his
hand, so that it might have dismayed one to see his fierce and cruel
demeanor. When the Gentleman of the Sun had got a sight of him, with greater
force then before he spurred his horse, making way through the green meddowe
as fast as if he had been driven by the rage of tempest and thunder, and crieng
aloud. Stay, stay. The giant and his knights hearing the noise that he made
and the sound of the horse feet galopping in such have, turned their heads
aside to see what it meant, and amongst the rest the Souldan likewise looked
behind him, and espyeng him to be the Gentleman of the Sun with only a Bore
spear in his hand, he much pitied his case, for he thought surely Donzel
should never escape death or durance. The loathsome Giant wondering at the
young Gentleman coming toward him, with great fury lift up both his hands
to his head, and there stayeng on foot as he was, made a fierce and stern
countenance of disdain, till the young Gentleman aproched. But the noble and
valiant Donzel del Febo, borne for the atchiuement of greater adventures, with
a furious mood as it had been thunder drew near, and with his boar spear in
his hand, being very strong, sharp, and well steeled, with all his force he
shoued it into the breast of the giant, that although he had a breast plate of
fine steel a finger thick, yet the Spear entered, and issued out at the
shoulder all begored with blood. Thus the Gyaunt fell down dead on the
ground, to the great abashment of all those which saw him, judging that
Donzel del Febo had been then let down from heaven to do this feate, for in
their fancies, not the thunderbolt which by the renting of the Clouds drives
the winds before it, might ever give a more sodeine or more forcible blow
then that which Donzel del Febo gave the Giant, especially the knights of the
Giants retinue, not witting who he was, imagined that their own Gods had sent
him down from the heavens for the more notable chastisement of their Lords
cruelty. Now some of the knights hearing a rushing a far off in the wood,
and thinking it to be the Souldans people, their master thus slain, without
having care of Chariot or prisoners, took them to their heels with more have
by half then good speed. For one letting the Bridle flippe, and for fear not
able to guide his horse, by the stumbling of his horse had so sore a bruise,
that his horse rising, he lay still on the ground tormented with the fall. And
those which got to the Sea, themselves being past danger, nothing sorrowed at
the death of the Gyaunt, for they hated him, and served more by compulsion,
then with good will. This trouble in the Gyauntes men made the Gentleman of the
Sun make no account of them.

Wherefore alighting from his horse, he went toward the Chariot where the
Souldan was, with the Princess and Ladies, and unbound them. The Ladies when
they saw him, were no less glad of the proof of arms in Donzel del Febo,
then of their own delivery. But the Souldan embrasing him and kissing him
with great love, said unto him.

O my son, now I know assuredly that the mighty Gods highly favor you, and
that only by miracle you have been brought to Babylon, as to give succors to
me and to my children. Now do I firmly believe my brother Lyrgandeo, who long
before prophesied of the great meruayles of your valor, since that being so
young and tender and in the maidenhead of your strength, it being never before
tasted upon an enemy, you have begun so well as I have known no knight in his
perfection matchable. And truly this is the accomplishment of your first
adventure as my brother foreseeing it told me, that you should rescew me and
my daughters from death or imprisonment, and I hope as well in the immortal.
Gods that the second shall be likewise finished, that is, the kingdom of
Persia se long withheld by a false usurper, may by you be redeliuered to the
Prince Florion. My Lord answered Donzel del Febo, I have not as yet done the
thing in your service neither in my life may hope to compassie which may
counterpaise with my good will in this behalf, and truly the duty which I owe
to your good grace my Lord, to the Prince Florion, and to my Lady the Princess
your daughter, daily so augmenteth, as more then yt duty I cannot owe unto my
father, to the discharge whereof, notwithstanding I stand bounden to your
goodness, not only of courtesy, but in conscience, and so humbled himself
before the Souldan: but the Souldan again embraced him, and they two helped
the Ladies out of the chariot. The Ladies were desirous to know who the giant
was, and what should be the cause why he so assailed them. Therefore the Souldan
and the Gentleman of the Sun made toward the knight of the Giants which was
fallen to the ground, and as they took of his helmet to give him air, they
fetched him out of his sound, and setting him on his feet, they demanded of
him who the Gyaunt was, and why he came to take them prisoners. The knight
seeing it behooved him to say the troth, made answer shortly thus. You shall
understand my Lords that this Giant was called Brandafileo, Lord of the
towred Island, which is in the great Ocean, at the mouth of the red Sea. This
Island is so strong and inuinsible, that being within, he need not fear all
the world if they had bent their force against him, and being proud upon the
safety of this Island, he did much wrong to the nations round about him,
spoiling and robbing all Arabians, Aethiopians, Egyptians, and the Garamantes
of Inde, and finally so many as he might come by in the great West seas, and so
the Island of Traprobane, and by long continaunce in this trade of rouing, he
is become so rich of captives and treasure, that no Island is comperable with
his. Now the cause wherefore he came into this your land was, for that in the
time that the mighty Orixerges your father reigned in Persia, the father of
the Giant called Briontes then being Lord of the towred Island; by occasion
of Briontes evil life, your Father and he fell at variaunce, wherefore the
king your Father sent out his whole navy to subdue this Island, but being not
able to conquer it, he gave them notwithstanding in charge to lie in the out
creekes awaiting when he came forth from the Island, and so to set upon them.
One time the Giant making a road out for a like cheuisance a far off from his
own Island, the king your Father dogged him with his ships, and as he
returned met him in the half turn, and (for all the havoc he and his made
of your fathers soldiers) in the end killed him. This Brandafileo his son
then being a child of tender age, yet so soon as he was of years to be made
knight, he greatly longed after the revenge of his fathers death, and because
he could not work his mischief on the king Orixerges, being then dead, at
the least it would ease his stomach, if he might wreake himself on you his
son, and for this cause many times he has sent spies into your land, to be
advised by them when he might have opportunity of vengeance, and learning of
your coming to this forest for your disport, he has now lain more then a
month in secret expectation of so good luck as to take your person. This time
he had found to his contentation, had not this Gentleman ben, who now has
made sufficient pay to Brandafileo for his months hire. This is all my Lord
which I can tell you as to your demand, and it is truth which I have told
you, as I certainly believe, that if ever he had clean carried you from hence,
you should not have escaped from death or bondage, for so he had determined.
The Souldan mused at yt which the knight had told him, and waieng ye great
danger wherein he was like to have fallen, he ceased not to give thanks to his
Gods, and to the gentleman of the Sun for his safety. At this time Prince
Florio^ came with more then. 30. knights running their horses, so fast as they
might, because already they had heard the news, and coming where ye Giant
lay dead, viewing well the wide and mortal wound, they highly commended of it,
and ceuld not judge by whom he had received it, but very joyful to see the
Souldan and his Princess out of danger, leaping from their horses they came
toward them. Then Florion excusing his long absence by the ignorance of the
fact, desired to know who he was which had so gently bailed them from the
Gyaunt. The Souldan answered on this sort. Ah Florion, Florion, now we know
your uncle Lyrgandeos diuinations, as touching this Gentleman of the Sun, to
be sooth and steadfast, for we have well approved his valor, and know that he
alone being the only man which came to succor us, brought to ground the
giant Brandafileo by one only blow with his bore spear, riuetting as you see
his coat armor, and ridding us from so dangerous a foe, making his enteraunce
to knighthoode the straungest that ever was heard. Florion giving back, either
as wondering or not crediting his uncles speech, was still urged by the
Souldan, who told on forward as Brandafileos knight had confessed. Florion yet
as it were half in a mammering which part to take between the Gentleman's
youth and his courage, disputed rather the impossibility by means of the
hugeness of the Giant, his strong armor, and the number of his knights, in
the end he overcame himself, by remembrance of Lyrgandeos report, and thanked
the Gentleman on this wise. O my right noble and beloved son, I grant, that
that not my force, but the mighty winds and swelling waves by the ordinance
of my Gods, have given me power over you, for that by your sovereign bountye
the wrong which is done to me by the tyrant shall be revenged, and I shall
recover mine own kingdom. O how happy was the day and the hour fortunate
in which I found you, since my Gods have reserved you for so great benefiter
toward me, and the release of mine uncle, with these and many other words
Florion wept for great pleasure to think of Donzels magnanimity. And in this
time the other young Gentlemen his companions came riding from hunting, and
saw the fierce Gyaunt lie dead by the way, they enquired after the manner of
his death, and hearing it to be as you have heard, the one took great pleasure
in it, and the other with an honest emulation of the fact, wishing it to
himself, according to the diversity of the good will they bare unto the
Gentleman of the Sun. Then they came altogether to their tents, where they
made but a hunters breakfast, for ere dinner was half done, the Souldan
commanded the horse to return to Babylon, and so they all on horseback, the
Princess and her Gentlewomen on their palfraies, and the lusty knights on
their sturdie Rounceualls took the way toward the city, laieng the mighty
Giant upon a horse, his head and feet trailing on the ground.

When they were within the gates of the City, all that which had happened
being published, all the Citizens and other of the court were in contrary
arguments about the hugeness of the Giant and the courage of the Gentleman of
the Sun, thinking it an impossible matter to be brought about by one of so
few years. But from that time forth, (although before likewise they loved
him) yet now they made much more of him, and the Souldan with the Princess and
all the Courtiers held him in great account always. Notwithstanding the report
of men, and the high extolling of his acts to his own face, the Gentleman of
the Sun kept the same tenor of life, not bearing himself any thing upon
his good fortune, but rather as the winds increased, which promised him
safety and honor, and as his fame was more blazed, so he stroke his sails
and became more lowlyer. This his humility made him much more to be loved, as
the sprinkelyng of water, augmenteth the flame in a Smithes forge. Claueryndo,
at this time egged on by Donzels good hap, and being of riper years, sued
to be made Knight. But the wise Lyrgandeo foreseeing somewhat, and to have
him keep company with Donzel del Febo and Brandizel, with-stoode his purpose
for that time. Claueryndo was but about fourteen or fifteen years of age,
but he was so comelye and nimble in all feats of arms, that there was not a
knight in all the court which out-passed him. In this manner were these two
Gentlemen brought up in the Souldans Court, with great magnifice^ce, as if they
had been in their fathers courts, and above all, they were so thoroughly
instructed in lerning, that there were none able to come in controversy with
them, all this, equal to both, notwithstanding the difference of beleefes,
which shall be a like ere it be long. Claueryndo which was guyded by Armineo
his uncle, was a Christian: and the Gentleman of the Sun believed in the
law of the Gentiles, as the wise Lyrgandeo had taught him, Lyrgandeo
himself, being bred and brought up in the same error by his father, for all
his great cunning, was not able to find out, the vanity of his false Gods.

O the providence of God, how much be we bound to thee, and how ill do we
acknowledge thy great goodness, in suffering us to be become Christians, when
thousands wise men and mighty Monarchs dye in the law of the Gentiles, not
all their power auailable to save their souls, and their learning not worth a
rush for the displaieng of the falsehood of that law, wherein their fathers
have nouseled them. And shall we Christians think that our knowledge can pull
us out of hell, if not the wisest of ye earth, I mean the learned Gentiles,
could once reprove their own law, and know the only and true God. As for
example, this Lyrgandeo was so wise and well learned, that not Artimedoro, nor
Rogel, nor Turk, nor Sarasin, nor Jew, nor Christian came ever near him, and
yet because he had learned that law from his cradle, and wanted the gift of
God, for the true understanding of his will, he wallowed still in his error,
as the Sow does in the mire, till God having a regard of the Gentleman of the
Sun, and minding to make him a true Christian, did by his means convert the
wise Lyrgandeo to the knowledge of his will, and pour out his grace abundantly
upon the whole kingdom of Persia, according as more largely shall be recited.
But to return, the two young Gentlemen, albeit contrary in professions, yet in
friendship and good will were conformable, as shall be declared in this story.

An adventure in the Court of the Souldan, which befell to the young Gentleman
of the Sun.

Cap. 20.
THe Souldan and the Prince Florion, with all the knights of his court, greatly
prayed their Gods, that the Gentleman of the Sun might come to his full age
to be made knight, for that only they stayed their voyage into the kingdom of
Persia for his cause, as willing to have him with them, for the great prowess
which rested in him, and (...) ^hought their stay not ouer-long, seeing it was
(...) ^^^^^ely that which the wise Lyrgandeo prophesied of him, that he should
be a valiant knight, and that without him their entrance into Persia were to
small effect. For this cause, they employed their care in the aduauncing
for^^^^ of the Gentleman of the Sun. This gentleman (...) being of the age of
sixteen years, was so high and well (...) ^^oued, that he wanted little in
stature of any man. One (...), ^^ince Florion with many other knights being
a^^^^ at the river to fly at a foul, the young Gentleman staieng in the
Pallaice. The Souldan with many of his knights and Gentlewomen took their
pastime in one part of his great Pallaice, where entered in at the gates six
ancient knights with white beards hanging down to the girdle-steedes, and all
armed save the head-peeces, compassing on each side a Gentlewoman fair and
young, clothed all in mourning apparel, and having a crown of gold upon her
head. This Lady was led, by a knight great of body, well and strongly
proportioned, and armed at all points, with a rich and strong armor. This
knight lifting up the visor of his helmet, showed himself to the Souldan,
where they perceived his face to be very foul and fearful, of color more
tawnie and Sunburned, then cole-blacke, his eyes flaming in his head, his
nostrells wide and large, broad lipped, and his sharp fangs issuing out of his
mouth, like Boares tuskes, and reaching to his chin, so that there was no man
living, but might have been afraid of his fierce semblance. But besides this,
he was so high, that there was not any in that place, whom this knight exceeded
not two spanfulls at the least, and in making of his body, he was so large
and well quartered, more then the compass of two knights. Having thus entered
and set himself to view, those which were present, had enough to occupy their
eyes, either on the ugliness of the Giant, or the beauty of the Gentlewoman.
But the Gentlewoman kneeled before the Souldan, to have kissed his hands. But
the Souldan taking her by the hand, raised her up, doing her the honor he
thought it convenient, in that she appeared to be a Lady of great birth. She
with tears distilling down from her beautiful eyes, and watering her crimson
cheeks, spoke unto the Souldan, on this wise.

The heavenly and immortal Gods maintain and increase thy high estate, most
puissaunt and mighty Souldan of Babylon. Know for certainty, that uncertain
fortune never constant to any, has in such manner showed her self cruel and
adverse to me, that she only not sufficed with the death which my father and
mother, and many of their subjects have received for my sake, she cease not
daily to afflict me, and to bring me to so low an ebb, that being defeated of
mine own inheritance, I am yet feign to wander through the Courts of mighty
Princes to find some good and pitiful knight, which bewayling my mishap, will
ease me of the great travail I daily take to save my honor. For if you will
suffer me to lay open my case, the whole story is thus. I am right enheretrix
of the Island of Cypres, where my predecessors reigned long time with much joy,
until that their good hap was hindered by my beauty. For having brought me
into this world, with that beauty wherein you see me, which I would to our
that beauty wherein you see me, which I would to our Gods had either perished
when I first was swaddeled, or else had never been known, that none might have
taken delight in it. So soon as my beauty was sounded abroad, this Knight
here present, King of the Zardians, Lord of the Island of Zardia, called
Raiartes, hearing of it, came to see me, and so soon as he came, he was taken
with my love, and demanding me for wife, was denied it of my father. Wherefore
very angry returning to his Island of Zardia, with a great army of knights, he
came against my father, and at the first field killed him, and murdered all
his people, and in short time became Lord of Cypres. My mother seeing my Father
dead, and her land wasted, dyed for grief. I remained alone without company,
till such time as Raiartes came to the Pallaice where I was. I knew to whose
power I was become servant, and fearing that he would have forced me,
determined by ending my life, to make my self free from his subjection,
esteeming it far better to dye with my Parents, then alive to bewail their
deaths. And having no better leisure nor means to achieue my purpose, I
leaped up to a window, the highest in all the Pallaice, thence to have thrown
my self down, if Raiartes seeing me in his plight had not prayed me not to
do it, promising if I forbear that, that to do the thing that I cmmaunded
him. I resolving upon death, told him, that unless he granted me one gift, I
would be mine own executioner: he, to save my life, promised it, whereby I
left off from putting that in practice, which I had contrived in my thought.
By this means, Raiartes had me in his power, and having the whole Island at his
commandment, he carried me contrary to my will into his own country, with
these aged Knights my near kinsmen, there he requested me of love, and prayed
me to accept of him for husband. What should I do, he was importunate in his
demanund, and I remained in his danger, so that to put by the execution of his
desire, I had none other remedy but to answer him, that so soon as he had
performed the promise which he made me, I would satisfy his whole intent.
This hearing, he was well content, and so I told him that he should carry me
for the space of a twelve month into all places, whether I would, and if in the
mean time. I found a knight to defend my right by fighting against him, he
should grant the Battle, with condition, that if my knight vanquished him, I
should be fre from his demand, and my land at quiet, otherwise, if he had the
upper hand, I from thence-foorthe, to be at his commandment, and he do what
ever lyked him. This knight, most noble Souldan, counfailing with his strength,
and thinking all men's virtues infertor to his, took upon him the Quest, glad
by such means to manifest his power, and so he carried me from the Island
Zardia more then half a year past, in which time yet I have not found a Knight
to undertake my quarrel, and yet I have been in the courts of mighty Kings
and other great Lords. Now seeing the term set between us, is more then
half expired, for my last refuge hither am I come to thy court to prove, if
here my good fortune should be such, that I should find in it that which I
have so long sued for in other Courts.

Here she ended with sighs and sobs out of measure, thereby uttering the
sorrow she had in her heart, and the grief for to love such a knight, which
moved great compassion in both Souldan and others of his company. But there
was no knight which would answer for the Princess Radamira, that was her
name, and yet there were many in the Souldans presence. Then in great pride,
and with a fierce look, this terrible Raiartes spoke unto her. What knight is
there in the world so foole-hardie and presumptious, Radamira, which for thy
cause durst enter into lystes with me, yea, be it that both right and justice
were right and clear on his side? And art not thou quite deuoyd of reason to
live undone that which I beseech thee? Besides, valewing thy beauty with my
bravery, and thy pride with my puissaunce, I shall seem to set too low a
price on my self, if I enjoy thee, and if there be any knight here, which
will say the contrary, I will soon make him recant his folly. Raiartes
having said thus, knit his brows, and made such a grim countenance, that all
they feared him, which beheld him, and there was not a knight so hardy, as to
answer any thing in the Princess Radamiras behalf, as if it had been mere
sin, in a Gentlewoman strangers right, to hazard their person upon a devil
rather then upon a humane creature. Every man was still, to the no little
grief of the Souldan in that his court ^rceiued such disgrace, but the
Gentleman of the Sun sitting by, and moved with compassion toward the
Gentlewoman, arose on his feet, and made answer to Raiartes saying: Sir
knight it is a great blasphemy to knighthood, to say, that in the whole world,
there is not a knight which dare fight with thee. Thy lie is loud, and thou
do against all reason enforce this Princess to marry thee. Be thou sure
that if I were a knight, I would suffer a thousand deaths, rather then such
reproach should be offered to a Gentlewoman. For thy brown beauty is not fit
to be her play-fellowe, and saying thus, he set himself down again.

Raiartes mad angry for these words, fourning toward him, and rolling his
eyes with great rage, answered. If thou were as strong as thou art foolish,
thou weak youngling, I would make thy life and thy words end at one time. But
they say commonly, that women and those which are not able to wear armor, are
privileged for their speech, and may talk without controlement, and so
Raiartes left him. But the courageous Gentleman not being able to hear that
contumely; in his anger rose from where he sat, and coming to the Souldan
kneeled before him, beseeching his grace to grant this one suit, the first
which in his life time he had made. The Souldan little thinking what he would
ask, and loving him so well, that what thing he demanded, it should have been
granted willingly, said yea, and bad him say on what it was that he desired.

The Gentleman of the Sun said, my Lord, that which I require is, that you make
me knight, because it is high time that I receive it: I do not think my self
so young as to put up wrong at any man's hand. Those which were present were
much troubled at the request of the Gentleman of the Sun, foreseeing the
end, which was to answer the bold Raiartes, and the Souldan was greatly sorry
to have been so rash in making promise before he had known his suite,
wherefore he sat still without speaking, yea, or no, diuising only how to
satisfy the young Gentleman, and to quite himself of his promise. The
gentleman of the Sun doubting least the Souldan would linger and delay the
time, very angerly said unto him. If I cannot obtain this at your hands my
Lord, I swear by the high Gods, that during my life I shall not be merry,
and I will go serve some other Lord which more liberally will consider of my
requests. The great Souldan loath to disquiet the young Gentleman of the Sun
whom he saw attent upon this matter, albeit his promise grieved him much,
answered him thus, saying. Assuredly Donzel del Febo, if you had demanded any
other thing of me more profitable for your self, doubt you not but you had
been in possession of your desire by this time, yea, had it been the greatest
part of my kingdom. But because I see you are of tender years, and that the
time is not yet for you to supporte the burden of armor, I would wish you to
refrain, and let fall your suit for this time, or if you will not otherwise be
persuaded, hold you, I yield unto you, watch this night in your armor, and to
morrow at day-breake, I will give you the order.

The Gentleman of the Sun took him at that word, and very joyfully kissed
the Souldans hand, for his gracious favor. Then from thence by soft paces
coming to Raiartes, he said unto him. Now that I have license to parle with
thee as a Knight, I will answer thee Raiartes to the words which thou have
said unto me, and so I tell thee, that if the Princess Radamira, will put her
quarrel into my hands, I will defend her right, and take the battle upon
me, and be it that the Princess Radamira dare not commit her right unto me,
yet I say, that to be aduenged on thy reproachful speeches, which thou have
blowed forth, I will fight with thee, and make thee to know, that thou art
more unjust and foolish, then valiant and courteous, as knights ought to be.
The Gentleman of the Sun here ended, and the grimme sier Raiartes began a
laughter with these words. In deed, if all folly were force, ma^^e knights
were courageous and strong, for most of them are too too ventrous, and if thy
self were of so great ability as thou art of forwardness, the princess
Radamira should en^e her quarrel by to morrow night, but thou deceiuest thy
self, and albeit I am half ashamed to take the battle against a knight
never before acquainted with ar^^^r, yet because thou shall not want due
correction for thy follye, I accept the battle which thou offerest, as well
for the one cause, as for the other. As this talk was at the hottest between
them, the Princess Radamira beheld the Gentleman of the Sun very
earnestly, noting as well his years as his person, and albeit he was then
beardlesse. Yet she thus conceived of him, that he was of noble courage, and
very strong, and besides this, there appeared in his face somewhat which she
judged more then manlike. And as she was wise, so her heart gave her that this
young Gentleman had some divine blood in him, which she thought to have
descended from some of her false Gods. So neither lightly nor wantonly moving,
but with great discreation and wisdom, standing in the same place, and musing
what she ought to do, in the end, no other knight answering the challenge for
her, not altogether out of hope, she agreed to put her quarrel into his
hands by deliverate counsel, concluding, if he were murdered, her self to
follow after, and so she spoke to the Gyaunt on this wise. Raiartes, since
this Gentleman with so good will proffereth himself to maintain my right
against thee, I am very well content to put my quarrel into his hands, and
from this time forth I will not seek other knight. The beautiful Princess
Radamira doing thus, the fierce Raiartes was sore moved to see that she made
so little account of him, and so much trusted the boldness of the young
Gentleman, and foaming at the mouth like a wild Boar, he was not able to
speak one word for the fury and choler which boiled in him. The Gentleman of
the Sun thanked her goodly for the acceptance of his pains in her name. In
this manner the matter was put off till the next day, but the Gentleman of the
Sun was not so glad, to have occasion offered to be made knight, as the
Souldan and his friends were sorrowful, to have him fall into this danger,
which they imagined to be to too sure, because of the strength of Raiartes, and
the youth of the Gentleman of the Sun. They thought it a desperate case for
him to wage this battle, with the sauegard of his honor. Then the young
Gentleman Clauerindo being of more years then Donzel del Febo was, repented
that he had not answered for the Princess, both because he thought it a
blemish to his honor to have excused himself from such a matter, and his age
was more then Donzel del Febos was, and so might better acquit himself
against the force of Raiartes, and especially fearing the peril of his friend,
he would needs have taken the battle out of his hands, but perceiving the
unwillingness of the Gentleman of the Sun he would speak no more of it. At
Sun set Florion came from hunting, and hearing of the battle which was
appointed, he was very sad for Donzel del Febos sake, because of Raiartes
force, and Donzels weakness, and so he took upon him to persuade Donzel del
Febo to give over the battle, and put it upon some other in his right, if it
so pleased him. But Florion and Clauerindo were both beguiled in Donzel del
Febo, albeit either of them were such knights, as of the one has been
rehearsed, and of the other shall be showed hereafter. Raiartes was strong, and
his like scarcely among the Pagans, and it might be, it would ill have proved
with them two, as a man would have sworn it, only by the tenor of Raiartes
countenance, no man beholding him but with the same good will which they bear
unto the Devil. And if Florion and Clauerindo desired this battle, it is to
be thought it sprang of their love toward Donzel del Febo, rather then of
any comfort their courage gave them to win honor in the battle. But the
day was spent, and things necessary for the battle were in providing. At
night Lyrgandeo the wise coming from the red Island, took landing at
Babylon, and meeting with the Gentleman of the Sun, he told him that many
days had passed since he knew of the conflict between Raiartes and him, and
therefore had brought certain armor for him, and so he commanded his
Squiers to untie their two packets, out of the one packet Lyrgandeo took a
white armor wrought with beams of gold descending from his helmet, wherein
was graven a face so fair and sheene, that it shedded out beams as the Sun,
and scarcely for the brightness might a man behold it, and out of the same he
took out a swoorde all garnished with gold, and embossed with precious
stones, the pomell, scabbard, and chape being so rich and curious, that none
there was which praised not the workmanshippe. Out of the other packet he
drew out another white armor pounced with Flower de Luces of gold, and
another swoorde, both which he gave to Clauerindo, bestowing the other upon
Donzel del Febo.

With these good armours the two Gentleman were well apayde, especially the
Gentleman of the Sun, which more esteemed of this gift, then of all the
segniories of the earth. And so he continued the charge for the morrow
battle, very confident on his own part, but to the no little dismay of his
friends, chiefly of the Princess Balisea, which would not his destruction for
all her fathers lands. The Princess Radamira in the mean time not fully
settled in her thought, drove out the night, neither merry nor dumpishly, but
very heavily as abhorring nothing so much as the company of Raiartes. Her
flesh would tremble often and quake for fear, mistrusting Donzel del Febos
good fortune for the perfecting of his charge, his years being clean
contrary to all good hope.

Donzel del Febo is dubbed knight, and overcomes Raiartes.

Cap. 21.
THe next day in the morning the Gentleman of the Sun, with his rich harness
buckled about him, was brought before the Souldan, and all the knights and
Gentlemen in ye court. When he was thus bravely armed, he showed greater and
stronger then he did unarmed, and none of them which saw him would have judged
him of so young years. And when he came before the Souldan thus accompanied
with all the principal knights and Gentlemen of the court, the Gentleman of
the Sun kneeled vowne, and bumbly craned to be made knight. The Souldan with
tears flowing from his eyes embraced him, greatly rejoicing to see him so
comely in armor, then taking the rich sword which the young Gentleman held
naked in his hand, he gave him three blows on the creast of his helmet, and
so sheathing it again, girded it about Donzel del Feboes loins, and with
these words blessing him. (The high Gods defend thee with their mighty
hand) he had him arise knight, and then made him swear to the obseruaunce of
all the orders of knighthoode, which done, the young Gentleman kissed the
Souldans hand, and all the hall rang of the noise. Our Gods defend the Souldan.

This was in the morning, but before dinner was clean done, and the tables
taken up, the hour was near wherein they ought to perform the battle, and
Raiartes richly armed, and mounted upon his horse trauersed up and down before
the Pallaice, where the Ladies which were bestowed in the windows to behold
the fight were afraid, for in their seeming by the hugeness of his body and
his fierce countenance he was the brauest knight in the world, and his
harness covered in him the defermities of nature. The Princess Radamira in
her mourning weed accompanieng the Princess Balisea, was in a great bay
window, and seeing Raiartes so great, strong, and well borsed, she changed
her color without hope to remove Raiartes love, and there fullye appointed
with her self, rather to murder her self, then to be in his powor, for his
filthy and ugly shape was such, that what Gentlewoman in the world could
have affoorded him for love?

When the Souldan and other knights took their seats as Judges of the field,
the knight of the Sun departing from the Pallaice, was conducted by d^vers
knights to his tent, and there sitting upon a lusty courfer, he praunced a
while before the Souldan, his borse was all covered with rich harness, in
which were enchased sundry precious stones, all both horse and harness of the
Souldans gift, himself being clad with his bright armor his vmberere pulled
down, and a mighty spear in his hand, so big as they all meruayled of his
good making. When Cheualiero del Febo stayed, Raiartes drew near, and with a
loud voice said unto him. Thou presumptuous knight, what woldst thou now give
me not to be here alone with me? Do thou not think it no wisdom to
adventure thy body, where there is no hope of safety? Assuredly Raiartes,
auns wered the knight of the Sun, hitherto I have not seen the thing
wherefore I should repent me of my enterprise, and hitherto I have had more
experience of thy vain and foolish words, then of thy great and valiant
prowess. Raiartes, was fell angry at this (the foame staring through his
visour) would have run upon the knight, but being awarded by the Judges to
the lists, while the Trumpets sounded, he groned out thus much to himself in
the cursing of his Fortune. O how does Fortune envy my felicity in
prolonging the time thus, that I cannot so soon as I would dispatch this
wretched knight, saying this and somewhat else, the Trumpets stayed, and with
great rage he ran toward the Knight of the Sun, but the Knight bearing
his sheelde before him, with his Spear in his hand, met Raiartes with all his
force, with the violence of this course, the ground shook under their horses,
and this first journey brast their great Spears into small sheeuers. Raiartes
with the strong encountrie of the knight of the Sun, doubled and fell over
the arson of the saddle, his horse carryeng him out of the prease to blush
without company, for never in his life time he had received the like blow.
But when he recovered his seat, and saw the Knight of the Sun not stirred
in his saddle, and now with his sword in his hand coming toward him, he drew
out his sword which was broad and he auie, in great choler to receive him,
thinking for a surety with the edge of his swoorde, to supply that which had
failed in the point of his Spear. Both of them mad angry, Raiartes to amend
that which he had mard in breaking his Spear, and the Knight of the Sun to
revenge the proud words which Raiartes had spoken, their first blows were
such, that their pauices were hewed a sunder, and fell to the ground, the other
part they after threw from them, and griping their swoords in both their
hands, they hit each other such blows upon the Helmet, that flakes of fire
issued after them. By this time neither of these Knights were well pleased
with the other, and they let drive so each at other, that in short space they
made plain their singular manhoods, and they which saw it judged it to be the
brauest battle which they had ever seen between two knights. The valiant
knights with malicious eyes, sorrwing eath at others welfare, because their
armor was so good that no sword could enter, were much more wood, layeng
about them without order, and caring not where they hit, so they might see ye
blood spin as fast as the sparkles increased.

It was not half an hour since the battle began, and Raiartes well feeling
the courage of ye knight of the Sun, in that he had gotten none aduauntge over
him in all the time. Now with what courage fought he think you, being besides
himself for the desire of the Lady, at that time he doubted whether this were
the Gentleman of the Sun, whom before he had continued, and if it were not he,
yet he meruailed in himself who this valiunt knight might be, in the mean
while the Souldan and Florion with all the beholders of the battle were
astonished at the great prowess and valor which the knight of the Sun
showed against Raiartes. They thought truly that he would prove the best knight
of the world, since in so tender years he was of great virtue. The Princess
Radamira which looked on this battle before, half against her will for
fear, now viewing how well the knight had behaved himself against her enemy,
with greater joy and hope she gased on him, and often prayed her Gods to grant
him the victory. But as I told you, Raiartes seeing his adversary so
valiauntly bear himself against him, and not being able to govern his ill
will, he lift himself up in his stirops and lent the Knight of the Sun a
blow with all his force, that although he could not cut his fine helmet, yet
he made him bow his head to his horse neck, being blinded with the
continual sparks of fire which came out of his head piece. The worthy knight
of the Sun coming again to himself and sitting surer in his saddle,
returned the like blow to Raiartes, so that Raiartes lost his memory, and
received another blow on his bulk against the saddle bow, which made the
blood gush out of his mouth and nosethrills, and the knight of the Sun
followed him to have unhorsed him. But Raiartes recovered, and ere the Knight
of the Sun could hit him, he gave him on the left shoulder a mighty
blow, that with the weight thereof he had fallen to the ground, but for the
embracing of his horse neck. Again Donzel del Febo repaied him with a plus
vltra, the surplusage more then an ordinary interest, and they wounded each
other, mangling themselves pitifully, and the clashing of their armor was so
great, that it rang like bells in all the city.

This was the second hour of the fight, and the match was equal, not being
known who had the better hand. Raiartes not greatly pawsing, but in his anger
reuiling his Gods, said unto himself. O immortal Gods, how little is
Raiartes beholding unto you if a man is able to resist his might? Why? If the
report of my valiant deeds and noble prowess made known to the heavens
causes you to malign my state, come you down and fight with me, for I had
rather be vanquished by your Deities, then to be yielded to man's strength. But
what can I think, either then that this Knight is one of you, for the love
of Radamira, to take her right in hand, or at the least some fiende of Hell in
likeness of a Knight, minded to quell me. But seeing this is the issue, that
if I loose this day, I must loose Radamira also, let him win her and wear
her: for be he what he may be, he shall get no honor at my hands, and so
saying, he stroke his adversary so sore on the breast, that he bruised his
carcass, and put him in great danger. Cheualiero del Febo not a little
abashed at the great force of Raiartes, this being the first battle that ever
he had fought, thought in himself that if all the knights in the world were
like him, he should get but small praise, and therefore to embolden his
courage, he rated himself on this wise. Am I he of whom the wife Lyrgandeo
has foretold so much? Am I he without whom the Babylonians dare not set foot
into Persia? Am I he for whom they have thus long time waited? Certainly if
this be all which I shall be able to do, shall not all happen contrary to that
which the wise man has said? Shall not the Babylonians be mocked of their
hope? Has not one only knight much endamaged me? what shall the whole
multitude of the Persians do, and the puissance of the Giants which shall come
to assist them? Had it not been better for my credit not to have been borne,
with so great fame as the Astrologers have forshewed, then in so short a time
so much to be troubled. O Souldan of Babylon, and you others which are Judges
in the field, are you not ashamed of me, that in my first battle, and the
first fruits of my knighthoode, I am at the point to become recreaunt. But
recreaunt I will never be, and so as it were blowing the coals of his anger,
when he was on a light fire, he set Raiartes in such a heat, with his thick
and mighty strokes, that the unlacing of his helm, and the vnmailing of his
armor could scarce give him breath enough. Raiartes then thought that his
enimyes strength increased, yet not altogether fowndered, he answered him as
well as he could, that the battle seemed to be more fierce at that time then
at the beginning. The hour clock has smitten thrice, since they entered the
lystes, all much meruailyng how they were able to endure so long. The Souldan
said to Florion and to the wise man which sat by, certainly, if I had not
seen it with my eyes, I should hardly have believed, that a knight of so young
years, as this knight of the Sun is, might have had the force so to
endaunger a worthy knight, for you know how the hours are passed, since they
began the combat, and how yet he abides many blows, and still seems as
fresh as he was when he first came forth. The wise man answered, yea, my
Lord, but if you knew with whom he does fight, you might with more reason
marvel at it. For Raiartes is one of the strongest and worthiest knights that
is among the Pagans, and his pride is so great, that he alone would not refuse
to join with an C. knights, and would well think to have the masterie of them
all, before he would be taken. Thus the bench was not idle, and the Princess
Radamira very busely attended upon her knight, and watched every turn, more
then half joyfully, speaking thus unto the Princess Balisea standing by. I
believe for a certainty Princes Balisea, that our high Gods now at length
cloyed with my mishaps, have provided this knight for me, for in respect of his
beauty and great bounty, he seems rather heavenly then terrestrial. Yea,
so I think, then answered the Princess Balisea, and that not only for your
succor, but to aid me and my cause, the Gods have sent him hither, for by him
I look to be queen of Persia. Do you so madame said Radamira, now I pray our
Gods that he well escape this battle, to fulfill your hearts desire, and
truly if he become victour, not only I shall be avenged on him for my fathers
death, but I will make account that I am now risen from death to life, for
sooner had I purposed to kill my self, then to lie in Raiartes arms.

But all this while the good knights plied the combat, fighting courageously
till they were fore wearied, every one misconstruing the event. For Raiartes
seeing that the longer the battle lasted, the farther he was from the
victory, with all the force he might, he stroke ye knight of the Sun such a
blow on the helmet, that his senses were bereft him, and had he not taken hold
of the saddle bow, he had kissed the ground. So the fray was renewed, but the
knight of the Sun gave Raiartes another blow as strong, which bewitched his
understanding, for his horse carried him about the field, tossing him on the
pomell of his saddle, as if he had been dead. The knight of the Sun thinking
it no glory to smite a man half dead, pursued him not, but Raiartes reviving,
his face all bloody, with both his hands hit the knight of the Sun upon the
head piece, that if the helm had not been the surer, it had riuen him to the
belly, but the stroke amassed him, and the goare blood ran out of his month and
nostrells, and his horse feeling part of the great blow, carried his master
from thence, the good knight lieng upon the crouper of his horse, in an
ecstasy, as if he had been quite dead. Raiartes hasted to have given him
another blow, those which saw it, were very sad, but none were ever so woefully
begone, as was the Princess Radamira, who with great grief tourning her self
from that sight, and fell on weeping bitterly. But Raiartes had not followed
him four paces with his horse, when the good knight start up, and feeling his
face wet with blood, in great fury spurred his horse, and met Raiartes with
such a blow, that the fine helmet could not deny him passage, but that he
cloue Raiartes head in sunder. Here the shoot of the people, and the
Princess Baliseas calling her, awaked the Princess Radamira, as it had been
out of a sound fleep, and little looking for so good news: and the good
Knight, ( Raiartes being dead) put up his sword into the sheath, and demanded
of the Judges if there were ought else to do to make the Princess free. The
Princess heard this gladly, and the Judges answered him no, for that had
sufficed, which he had done. Then with the noise of instruments, and much
honor, the Judges led the knight of the Sun from that place to the Pallaice,
where, with great joy and pleasure of the Souldan and Florion, he was well
received, they showing as much good will to him, as if they had never enough in
making of him. The Gentleman Claueryndo and Brandizel, glad of their friends
conquest, holp to unarm him. Then the Princess Balisea came, and the
Princess Radamira, doing her duty to the knight of the Sun, and as not able
else to requite the courtesy he had showen her, she offered to him both her
lands and her person, ye better to serve him. Thus they took their rest many
days, and the good knight was much honored of them all. And there was a great
feast made, and diverse Iustes and Turnayes there proclaimed, for the dubbing of
Clauerindo and other Gentlemen Knights. At this feast, the Prince Claueryndo
behaved him best, so that all men judged him to be a valiant knight. And after
this, the Princess Radamira minding to return, desired a safe conduct of the
Souldan, who sent with her an hundred knights, and other men of war, which saw
her safely landed in her country, and in full possession of the crown. For
after they knew that Raiartes was dead, willingly they gave her place, and the
Princess remained Lady of it, although not very free o^ her thought from the
knight of the Sun, whom she loved so well, that in long time she forgate him
not, and it fell out so that in the end she pleasured him, wherefore he gave
unto her a mighty Prince for husband, as shall be declared hereafter.

Africano king of Media and Persia, inferred war upon the Souldan of Babylon.

Cap. 22.
THe history has told you before, yt the strong and mighty Africano
transporting from Africa into Asia, by his force and valiante made himself
Lord and king of Media, and after entered into the kingdom of Persia,
conquered it, and overthrew Florion, coming to succor his own people, after
which time the Prince Florion recoiling back to Babylon, there remained very
sorrowful, and without hope to recover his kingdom. Now the story retourneth
to the same Africano, and says, that when he had appeased the people, and
brought these two kingdoms in quiet subjection (as this is an imbecilitie of
man's nature, ever coveting to amplify and enlarge our possessions,) so this
stout and proud Pagan not content with that which he had already got by
disorder and rapine, he adventured yet farther to win Babylon, with all the
kingdoms of the Assirians, bordering in those parts, reckoning himself
already in possession of them, for the power of the Souldan was insufficient
to repulse his forces, hoping moreover to add to his dominions, all those
countries lieng in ye coast of the middle earth-Sea. For this cause he
assembled his power as well Medians, as other his subjects. Having this great
army in a readiness, yet trusting more in his own person then in all his
people, he took the way toward Babylon, minding not to stay till he came
near to Babylon. This was some days after the combat which the Knight had
with Raiartes. And as it fell out, it was at the same time as the Souldan and
the Prince Florion were devising of the order which they should take for to
recover the kingdom of Persia, that the news came how the puissaunt Africano
was on his way with a huge army toward Babylon, for which cause they were cast
into double doubts, seeing that the enemy whom they purposed to find abroad,
came to seek them at their own doors. Well with great care and diligence
they began to prepare all things necessary for the welcomming of such a gest,
by gathering his people out of all parts of the kingdom, raising the walies
higher, and fortifieng the Towers once builded by Semiramis, all which would
little have helped the great Babylon against the power of Africano, if the
puissaunt arm of the you^^ Greek had not defended it. But thus the Assyrians
were almost at their wits-end, not knowing how to repel him, for the brute of
his fan^^ was greatly noysed. The Souldan of Babylon well experimented in
warfare, commanded all which could bear armor to come to Babylon, that his
forces being united, he might be of greater power against his en^mies.
Africano stayed not till he came to the very walls of Babylon, where he gladly
beheld the City, because of the same it had to be so great and so well
peopled, he highly commended of the sumptuous edifices, and high walls en^^^ng
it* which inflamed his desire to be Lord of it. Presently (...) made to pitch
his tents in a large field, enuironing ye ^als as far as he might, for it was
impossible to compass them round about, with two of Xerxes armies. He had in
his camp 20000, knights, and 30000. hors-men, and two strong Giants beside,
the one of them called Herbyon, and the other Dardario, through whose force he
thought to have overcome the Assyrians. So soon as he had trenched round about
his camp, and provided for the sauegarde of his army, before he would
enterprise any father, he sent a messenger with a letter to the Souldan,
containing this that follows.

Africanos letter.
I the great and mighty Africano king of Media and Persia, send greeting unto
thee Souldan of Babylon, son of Orixerges. Know, that the report of thy City
of Babylon, has procured me to cut the seas, and to arrive in this country,
rather with desire to have it as mine own, then for any pleasure to offend thy
person, or molest thy people, for thy father and mine during their lives were
great friends, which friendship I would willingly should endure between us, if
thou will as willingly satisfy my desire, albeit I am content in recompense
thereof, to give thee ye kingdom of Persia or Media, choose thee whether. Now
thou know my whole meaning, fail not to accomplish my desire, for unless I
have it with thy good will, I will force thee thereunto maugre thy ill will.
Farewell.

The messenger coming to the gates of the city, was let in, and being brought
into the pallaice, he delivered the letter to the Souldan, in the presence, of
Prince Florion, and the other knights of the Court. The letter was read, and
they all said, that in great pride the Pagan had so written, but because Prince
Florion, and the most part of those which were there, knew the strength and
power of Africano, in the battles fore-passed, they would not make answer,
nor speak a word, until they had heard the Souldans mind. Being in this
order all hushed, the knight of ye Sun rose up, and demanded license of the
Souldan, to give answer to the messenger. The Souldan granted it him.

Then the Knight of the Sun aduauncing his voice, that it might be heard,
spoke to the messenger thus. Return to thy Lord, for it is now too late to
answer his letters, but in the morning my Lord shall call his counsel, and
shall send thy Lord an answer by one of his knights, to whom he must give
credit in this behalf. Thus the messenger dispatched from the Souldan went to
his Lord, who little delighted in the fore-flowing of the Souldans answer,
for he less wayed the Souldans power. Therefore he determined in few days to
destroy the great city, burning and wasting all, for all that, that he wished
rather to have been owner of it by exchange or covenant, then by rasing and
battering the walls, which were so goodly. The messenger avoiding the pallaice,
the knight of ye Sun directed his spech to the Souldan in this wise. Since your
excellency well understands the arrogancy and high disdain of Africano, and
has given me in commission to devise the answer, I humbly beseech your grace
to be content therewith, if to morrow in the morning, I alone take upon me this
message, to satisfy him as shall seem best unto me, and according as his
pride deserves. When the knight had so said, the su^^ which he made, grieved
the Souldan very much, although the great exployts which he had already done,
and which were diuined to be done by him, somewhat abated his grief, yet
greatly preferring the valor of Africano above that which he had heard of all
the Princes Pagans, for there might none be compared to him, he put of ye knight
of the Sun for that time with this answer, that he would not have him to
hazard himself in such danger, until he had grown to more ripe years. But
if ye Souldan was in any perplexity for love to the knight, much more was
prince Florion troubled, which had had experience of Africanos puissaunce, and
had seen Africano in his own person, demean himself so justly in the
battale between them, that he thought him to be vnparagonized for mandhood,
and therefore he was more then unwilling that the knight should alone deal in
this matter, albeit he had well and worthily acquitted himself against
Brandafileo, and the strong Raiartes, for it was not a thing conuentent in his
judgment that he being as yet of tender years, should prove his body upon
Africano. But were it that the Souldan and the Prince Florion were loath of this,
as at the first it appeared, yet they thought it best to dissemble their
conceits, least the knight should take displesure at their little account of
him; and therefore in the end, after some consultation had with the wise
Lyrgandeo, with a mild countenance, the Souldan agreed to the knights
request, saying, That he would put into his hands, both his honor and the
cause, to the end that he should ans were Africano as best should like him. The
knight of the Sun would have kissed ye Souldans hand, but ye Souldan embraced
him, and there it was solemnly enacted yt the next morrow, that the knight of
the Sun should be the only messenger. Clauerindo and the prince. Florion lay
at him earnestly to bear them in his company, but be shifted them off with
this, that it behooved him to be alone, for the answer which he should give to
Africano.

The Knight of the Sun makes answer to Africano, as, to his letter.

Cap. 23.
AT the day peep before the gray morning, the valiant and worthy knight of ye
Sun got him up, in ye mean time while he ought to execute his charge, he
armed himself with that armor which the wise Lyrgandeo had bestowed on him,
and so stayed a great while until it was past broad day, every minute in this
time seeming an hour, and every hour xi. for his magnanimous stomach,
always coueted to put himself in praise, where to exercise his valor, and so
when it was now time, casting a fair horn about his n^cke tipped with gold,
and having a horse under him, the ^^st that the Souldan had, (as the night
before he had taken his leave of the Souldan, and the other knights of the
Court) so he privily put himself on his journey, without being seen of any of
the Court, and making those gates of the City to be opened, which were shut to
Africanos Camp, he rode through, and by soft paces coming with in a bow
shot of Africanos own Tent, he winded his horn^, so loud, that it was easily
heard in both the enemies C^^pe, and the City of Babylon. Immediately the
Souldan, the Prince Florion Claueryndo, and other knights cried alarm, and
issued forth of the gates in battle array to see what the good Knight of the
Sun would do, and by and by the walls and high towers were full fraught,
with as well nobles as communaltie. The king Africano in his Ten^ bu^^ed about
other matters, hearing the shrilnes of the sou^de, was somewhat disquiet, not
thinking any knight to have had the hardiness to summon him to the battle,
and desirous to know who he was, he called before him one of the two Giants
which came with him na^^^^ Herbyon, a strong man, and king of the Camarians, a
(...) regi^^ adjoining to Media, to him he said, Take thy ^^^^e and armor and
ride to^ and that knight which has ^^^ded his horn, and f^ile not for any
entreatie to bring (...) before us, ^eere in our presence to declare his
message. ^^^e grant having his charge, delayed no time, but hastelye ^^^ing
himself with fine steel, he took a strong spear in (...) hand, and ^ode
toward ye Knight of ye sun, who in ye midst way abode his coming, very glad
when he saw so great a Gyaunt: come against him, as desirous to purchase
honor upon his likeness. But the Gyaunt said unto him. What art thou knight
so bold and venterous, that have in such wise disturbed our Camp, with the
noise of thy horn. The Knight of the Sun replied. I am a Knight of the
Souldans which come to the king Africano to make him answer to the letter by
him sent unto the Souldan. Now return you back and tell him, I am here to
do my message, and if he will hear it, bid him come armed and well horsed,
for otherwise I will not make him answer. The giant very scornfully took up
a great laughter, and giving the Knight a little sowce on the helmet with his
gauntlet, he said unto him. Now I tell thee, that thou art the maddest Knight
in the world, to challenge him to battle, at the only hearing of whose
name, the greatest part of all Asia does tremble, and if thou were not a
simple, fool thou would not in such sort discover thine impotencie. If thou
have any message to the King Africano from the Souldan, come with me and thou
shall be brought to his presence, for he is not such a one as to come into the
field against one sely Knight. The king Afrinano himself must hear my
message, said the Knight of the Sun, and he must hear it armed, for
otherwise I will not open it. The strong Herbyon was angry at the knights
words, and thinking him to be but as other knights were, or amongst the
meanest, he offered to have set the knight beside the saddle, and so to have
drawn him perforce to the king, showing herein no less pride and disdain
then the greedy Fawlcon does in the pursuit of the simple Pigeon, to carry it
to the air among the young ones. But his lot was far otherwise, for the
knight perceiving his intent, turned the point of his spear, and struck him so
strongly on the chest, that though his armor were good, it entered a little,
and left him windlesse for a time. Herbyon thought himself now not well at
ease, and therefore returning to himself, he never studied at the courtesy of
the knight in sparing him in this trance, but taking one part of the field,
and broching his horse with the spurs, his Spear being in the rest, with
deadly rage he ran against the knight of the Sun, who was nothing slow in
the receipt. Their shockes were such in their meeting, that the heavy spear
of the strong Herbyon brake into shiuers in the fine helmet of the knight of
the Sun, not diseasing him. But the knight of the Sun hit the Giant with such
dexterity that he overthrew him, and the great weight of his body made the
Giant wear his neck on the to side like a sidler, which was no little pain
unto him. Yet he gate upon his feet, rising with much a do. Then the knight
of the Sun finding him vprisen, bad him defend himself. The Gyaunt answered
that he could not, therefore do, with me what you will. The Knight of the
Sun said no, but return to the king Africano thy Lord, and tell him that
a Knight of the Souldans does awaite him here, to make answer unto his
letter, and if so be he be minded to hear it, will him in his armor to
come forth, for in no other order will I utter it. The Giant answered he
would do it, and not being able to sit on horsbacke, he was compelled to go
on foot through the camp, driving in his thought the remembrance of the
Knights prowess, so that he was persuaded that not twenty knights Assyrians
could have done him so much harm as this one knight had done. The Souldan with
the Princes Florion and Clauerindo were no less amazed in their contemplation
to behold the event of the first welcome, and they gave great thanks to their
Gods for sending them so good a Knight. Herbyon came before the king Africano
his Lord, and without failing in any part, declared to him that which had
chanced with the knight, and the message which was sent by him. Moreover,
telling the king that he thought that knight to be the strongest knight in
the world, for that with these two blows which he had given him, he had
thrown him to the ground, and might have killed him.

The king Africano not a little sorry to see the strong Herbyon so ill
entreated and abashed at the force of one only Knight, would thereupon have
put on his armor to have been avenged on the knight and to hear his message.
But the other Gyaunt then in presence called Dardario, and much about Herbyons
pitch, being of no less value then the first, in his choler menacing the
knight, swore a great oath that he would bring the knight bound hand and foot
unto the king, wherefore taking a great horse he passed through the camp, and
approaching near the Knight of the Sun, he would not salute the Knight, but
as his anger was thoroughly kindled, with a great spear as big almost as a
Pine tree, he prepared himself for the carrier. And the worthy Greek
knowing the Giants errand, did the like, and spurring his horse he came unto
the close. The great spear of the Giant was thought to have pierced the
harness of the knight, by reason of the few shiuers that it made, but it did
not so, and contrariwise the knights spear couched with great dexterity,
entered through the body of the great Dardario, a great part of the staff
appearing at the shoulders.

By this means the monstrous Giant fell dead from his horse with such a groan,
as the tall Cedars of Libanus make, being rent up by the root. The
Babylonians rejoiced exceedingly at this: but Africano was all enflamed with
choler to fee his Gyaunt slain with one only blow, and knowing that to
himself alone this base was bid, in great rage rose from the feate where he
sat, without speaking a word, and entering into his tent, armed himself with
sure armor, and chose him a very strong Spear, not tarrieng for squire or
page to help him.

In this anger he was so terrible that none of his people durst come near
him, and so with a most fierce and cruel countenance he armed himself. So
soon as the Pagan had buckled on his armor, immediately there was brought him a
horse, such a one as could have carried ten armed knights, as I think, of
the same breadth whereof the horse of Troy was. The trappings of the horse as
well gold, as the stirops and all his armor set with precious stones, that
he might well seem a great Lord which was master of such armorie, but this
was the straungest sight, that Africano sat upon so mighty a horse, made him
notwithstanding to bow and double under him. But to go forward, Africano
taking the greatest Spear which might be had, rode with a soft pace toward
the knight of the Sun. The Knight of the Sun saw him come from amongst his
people, and thought presently that he was the king Africano, as well for his
rich armor, and his horse so curiously barbed, as the talenesse of his
personage which he very well noted, not to be far dissonant from the
common report: so he beseeched his Gods from his heart to be favorable unto
him against so strong a Giant. Africano well viewed the knight of the Sun,
his stature and making, and upon these premises inferred thus much, yt well
might he be a man of much force, which so well showed it in his exterior
countenance, and much more in his deeds and valor. But coming nearer unto the
knight as his custom was little to regard the whole world, so with a proud
and disdainful voice he spoke unto the knight. Thou miserable and wretched
knight, thou say thou art a messenger and bring a message unto me, thou
have slain the Giant Dardario and almost the strong Herbion, which two had
been sufficient to have beat down the walls of Babylon, I swear unto thee by
my Gods, that if all the world were given me for thy ransom, thou should
not escape the death. The knight of the Sun embasing his voice, mildly
answered. If I have had to do with thy Gyaunts Africano, they were occasioners
of it themselves, for I came not hither to other purpose, but to make thee
answer in the behalf of the Souldan, and if I came only to seek thee thou*
ought to have been first which should have presented himself to me, and to
have heard what I would have said, and to have heard me as a messenger, and not
to attempt my death as a known enemy. Now that thou art come Africano, I tell
thee why I am come, hear it if thou will. The Gods which have preserved me
from thy Gyauntes, have reserved me to fight with thee. But listen on, etc.
Here the rage of ye Pagan stopped the course of his talk, and the mighty
Africano smiting his hand on his thigh, for anger lift up his other hand also
to have buffeted the knight, but a better mind ouertooke him, that be thought
it reason to hear the Souldans aunswrre before he should condemn the
messenger, and so* stayeng, he bad him tell on quickly, for I will well punish
thy offense what so ever answer the Souldan sends me.

The knight of the Sun wishing the battle with all his heart, said. Then
know thou Africano that thy letter being received and read in the presence of
my Lord the Souldan; after consultation had, my Lord sends thee this answer
by me. Albeit before this time thou art notoriously defamed for a tyrant, in
that thou have falsely and fraudulently enchroched up many kingdoms, yet he
never thought thou would have enterprised the usurpation of ye most sacred
Assyrian Empire, an Empire consecrated to the Gods, and claimed by them as
their right, and in their right, governed by my Lords ancestors as
Liefetenaunts to the Gods, and their Fee-farmers, and therefore though
peradventure the open wrongs done unto men, the Gods do often pardon and wink
at, yet seldom leave they unrevenged the iniuryes offered to themselves, and
as it is to be thought, so manifest a contempt of their divine power, shall not
escape them. Besides for the City of Babylon, he lets thee to understand,
that thy self art not ignorant that it is his, and that he has right to it as
heir to the king Orixerges his father on that part of his liueloode, and that
thou have no title nor coulourable show to demand it. Wherefore if it be so
that thou will take it against all reason from him, he tells thee that he
can no less do then defend it from thee and the whole world, for having right
and justice on his side, he little fears the invasion of man, delivering his
message in this form of words, the knight of the Sun said. This is the
Souldans answer, and pausing a while, he began again thus. And I Africano
craved of my Lord to be the messenger, for I would thou should know how
dangerously thou offendest the divine Gods in entering upon the kingdom of
Persia, and disinheriting the Prince Florion, the legittimate and only Lord of
that kingdom. Now therefore thou should well do to furrender thy claim
into his hands, and content thee with the revenues already received, and the
unjust deteining of his right so long time. If thou will do this, not for my
sake, but for the high Gods, against whom thou have hainously trespassed,
thereby thou shall parifie the Gods, and leese the name of a tyrant, so odious
and so detested amongst men. If thou will still persevere in this thy
tyrannical obstinacy, I utterly defy thee to the death, and certify thee
that either I will slay a tyrant, or upon a tyrant I will be slain. Whilst ye
knight of the Sun amplified at large upon this point. Africano albeit very
angry, yet marked him from top to toe, waieng with what confidencie he had
discharged his charge, sometimes quietly admonishing to amend, and otherwise
threatening and defieng with a fierce semblance. But as he cared neither for God
nor man, so he swallowed up the knights words, reputing ye knight for a fool,
for he thought his name only able to afray any knight, thus he replied. Were
thy hands foolish knight as good to fight, as thy tongue is fine in preaching,
I would not marvel though thou had the hardynesse to defame Africano. But I
will curtall thy copy with this currish answer. Prepare thee to the battle,
and take this premise at my hand, that if I be overcome, I will leave to
Florion not only the kingdom of Persia, but also all that which I my self
have of possessions in Asia, and so saying Africano made against the Knight,
but the Knight of the* Sun wisely to order his affairs, answered him
saying. Stay a little Africano and hear that which I say; Thou know that
already this day I have twice fought with two of thy giants, and am
forewearied, if now I fight with thee, and thou subdue me, what honor shall
thou get thereby? Will not men say that thou tookest me at the advantage, when
I was hurt before or wearyed as I am? Appoint that our combat be to morrow, and
that assurance: he had of this condition on either parts, and say thou the
s^^^e before the principal of thy army, that if perhaps I should slaie thee
in this battle, the Souldan should not need to have a new skirmish with thy
people. The devise of the knight was fore against Africanos mind, for he would
willingly have purged some part of the choler^ which he brought with him
boiling in his stomach, but seeing this auoidance could not be at this time
made with the warrantie of his honor, he granted to the conditions, and thus
answered him. Let it be so as thou say, foolish knight, I will do thee a
pleasure in delaieng the time of revenge of my knights and thy foolish words,
but since I may not refrain my anger having thee before me, return hastily to
the city and I will to my tent, and with this he turned the raines of his
horse, and came to his pauilion where he fed upon melancholy all the day, not
speaking to any one* The knight of the Sun deferred the battle till the next
day, not for that he was weary, but to advertise the Souldan of that which
was agreed upon, now the rather to assure himself, returned to the City,
where he was received with great idye and pleasure of all his friends, and
being within the Pallaice, he told the Souldan to what issue he had brought the
matter, he was very joyful by reason of the wise Lyrgandeos prophesies, which
he hoped then to be accomplished, and partly doubtful of the success, because
Prince Florion knew Africanos strength was such as few were able to resist it,
he would have had him not to deal in this adventure alone, and requested him
to join* unto him some other companions, namely Prince Florio^n and
Clauerindo, which themselves labored grea^tly, but he gave them thanks and
excused himself with this, that it was so derreed, but says he, there may be
a time wherein you may imptoy your forces. For he knew the people of Africano to
be to hardy, yt if perchance their Lord should be slain or be in danger,
they would either succor their Lord, or work his revenge upon the conqueror:
therefore he willed them to be in a readiness. So these two knights gladly
accepted that charge, and all that day chose out of the people, those which
should ye next day keep the field with them to be at hand for succors to ye
knight, if any treason should be compassed against him. The knight of the Sun
took his rest merely till the day wherein he prospered, as you shall now
hear.

A cruel battle between the knight of the Sun and Africano, with the
discomfiture of Africanos host.

Cap. 24.
GO soon as the day appeared, the noble Greek arose from his bed, and he
being now ready to arm himself, the Souldan, the Prince Clauerindo,
Florion, and other knights his friends came into his chamber, which all
helped to arm him. When he was all armed, the wise Lyrgandeo came in also with
a helmet in his hands, the richest and most precious that ever was seen, and
the strongest also and the best wrought that ever came on knights head, for
that the wise man had made it by observation of signs and Planets in such
aspectes that no Sword how good so ever, might enter into it, and he had been
more then twenty years in making it, to have the true conjunction of the
celestial badyes which are apt for the operation of it, besides all which,
he had fetched from far countries the stuff whereof it was made, for it was
no common metal. This helmet was for workmanship so exceeding, as for it
only, Lyrgandeo wan his spurs, and was commended above all the learned and
wisest Magicians, for none other having not attained to the like perfection in
Astronomy or Art Magic could have ever made it. Now as I said le^^^^ing
into the chamber, where the Knight of the Sun, the Souldan, and the rest
were, and showing his helmet, be drous them all into a wonder, at the beauty
and riches of the helmet, for although they knew not the hidden virtue of it,
yet for the bravery of the stones, they judged it valuable to a kings delight.
He bare in it a field Azour of the likeness of the Element in most quiet and
peaceable manner, not troubled with wind or clouds, in the chief, there was
a Sun gilded, spreading his beams all over the helmet, as it were the
mantling, somewhat besides good armorie I think, but well fitting for so
gorgeous a peer of armor. The Sun shined so bright, that it almost dazeled
the eyes of the beholders. This helmet christening him now by the name of the
Knight of the Sun, as the Sun in his left side named him the Gentleman of
the sun when he was first found in the Sea by Florion. The wise man came
unto the knight, and took from him the helmet, which he had already laced on,
and put on this other, saying.

My Lord, you go to fight with one so strong and valiant a Knight, that
neither may I report it for the strangeness, neither can you give credit
vnlosse you have trial. Now, though the helmet you have is very good, yet
being hacked and bruised* with the terrible blewes of the strong Raiartes, it is
not such a one as may resist the weighty strokes of Africano: but this which
now I give you, make much of it, for I knowing, that this battle ought to be
foughten by you, in the right of my Nephewe the Prince Florion, have this
twenty years and more busied my self about it, and fully finished it, not
past a year since. The Knight of the Sun triumphed now to be made the
master of so rare an helmet, and in so needful a time, saying to Lyrgandeo in
thankful wise, that he accepted better of that helmet then of the whole
world, if it were given him. You do not amiss in so doing, answered the
wise man, for I tell you the time will come when you shall make exchange of it
unto a Knight stranger, far borne out of these countries, and I do not
marvel though you shall then make merchandise of the head-peece which now you
so highly regard, for at that time you shall sell the most precious thing that
ever you had, for a worse thing, which shall bring you to ye ieopardie of death
a thousand times, and neither shall wit nor might, cunning nor courage, help
you to avoid this chance. The knight of the Sun stood looking upon the wise
man, as not witting to what end those words tended, and studieng a long time,
he thus gain-sayed it.

Of things to come, I have naught to say, but to refer such things to the
providence of our Gods, but of things which are already come, thus much I say,
that I know nothing in the world for which I would loose this helmet, given me
in so good opportunity. But the morning, being far spent, they left off
for that time, and departed all from the Pallaice toward the Souldans army,
and setting their people in order, they passed out of the gates, with all
things prepared for to keep the field. The Knight of the Sun accompanied
with the Souldan, and the other two Princes, Florion and Claueryndo, Armineo,
and the wise Lyrgandeo, rode to the place appointed, for the execution of the
conditions concluded upon. The great Africano was in place before, expecting
his adversary, whom when the Knight espied, he rode against with only two
Knights, of the most principal in the Souldans host.

The Knight of the Sun saluted Africano courteouslye, but Africano being of
a stubborn and discourteous nature, gave him the resalutation in this manner.

Thou ought to have come earlyer into the field, to the end our Battle
might have been sooner dispatched, but tell me now quickly the Articles of
agreement to be made. and spend no more time, least we take another day of
respite. Nay, there is no more to do, answered the Knight of the Sun, but
that of thy part two of thy Knights be Judges, and for my part, these two
Knights, Claueryndo Prince of France, and his uncle here present, shall sit
with them, before them take an oath for the performance of that, whereof thou
made me promise being alone with thee. I am well contented with this, said
Africano, and now I swear the same, that if I be either slain, or yeelden,
the kingdom of Persia, shall be redeliuered to Florion, and this I command my
Knights to see avouched. So soon as he had said this, he gave back, and the
Knight of the Sun did the like, the Judges assiguing a place for the combat.

Now are the two couragiousest Knights, in all the world left the one against
the other, with so fierce and manly countenaunces, that it might have dismayed
the spectators. When the sound of the Trumpet had summoned them to the
Battle, the two strong Knights girding their Horses with their spurs, rode
the one against the other, with such vyolence, as if the Clowdell had rent
asunder, by the out-brasting of the Thimder-ho^te! Their great spears broken
upon their armor, flewe in small shiuers, and they rode me by the other as
quietly, as if no shocke had been made. Africano the Pagan not acquainted, with
such encountries, and always wont to unhorse all knights* whom he me^, seeing
the Knight prepapared for the second journey, meruailed much wh^ this strong
warrior might be, whom before this time he had not proved; nor yet ever heard
off. But lightlye casting these things in his mind, as at a sudden he drew
out his sword^ and turned toward his euemie, which was then ready for him.

They struck each other such heavy blows, that warding them on their shields,
although they were of pure steel, yet they cleaued them in the midst, and
their swords lighted on their helmets driving out great sparkles of fire before
them. The great Africano gave the Knight of the Sun upon his helmet such
buffets and with such force, that every man would have judged it had riuen the
head-peece. There the cunning of the wise Lyrgandeo well appeared, for it was
not possible for iron, steel, or Adamant stone, but to have yielded to that
stroke. But what think you that the Knight of the Sun did, when he thought
that he had lost his hearing by it, and said to himself, that not without good
cause Africano was greatly feared among the Pagans. Nay, to the no less
marvel of both hoasts, the Knight of the Sun let drive at Africano with
such force, as it was to the no small admiration of all men, that he hewed him
not in pieces. But you must learn, that when Africano passed by Sea from
Afric into Asia, it was his chance to sail by Lemnos, where Vulcans Forge
was. There he heard of Vulcans cave where his storehouse was, and entering
into it, he achieved strange things, not here to be recounted, and gained
Vulcans armor, wrought with his own hands, the best in all the land. This
when Africano tried oftentimes to be very good, whereof he was well pleased,
from that time forrth, he never fought with other hut with that. Now, albeit
this head-peece was well framed from being cut, yet the knight of the Suns
blows were so heavy, that oftentimes Africano wist not where he was, and
recovering would say unto himself. What is this? I believe the strength of the
whole world conspireth with this Knight against me, and if it be not so, that
he is of the offsprings of our Gods, yet am I sure that he is no man. But
among all the great blows which the Knight of the Sun lent to Africano there
was one at the fore-ende of the battle, upon the top of Africanos helmet,
the sword not entering, but sliding down upon his shoulders, with such force
that it made him lean all his body upon the horse-necke, whereof if he had not
taken hold, he had fallen to the ground. Then the Pagan sure enough yet in his
saddle, and his force redoubling as his anger increased, smote at the
inchaunted helmet, that he made the knight confess in his thought, that his
helmette was his good borrow. The blow sounded throughout all the field, as if
it had been a bell, and the Knight of ye Sun with the weight of the blow,
neither bolt upright, nor full declining, but staieng upon ye arson, drouped as
half dead. But the blood gushing out of his nose, fetched him again quickly,
ere that Africano could come within him. Now, seeing it time to defenve
himself from his adversary, he stood upright in his stirrops, and with both
his hands struck at Africano, so that if the worke-man had not been more to
blame, the blow had made peace between them, but for all the work-mans craft,
the weight of ye blow bruised the helmet, which was the cause of Africanos
speedier death.

Africano benumbed of his senses, the blood straining thorough the joints of
the helmet, and he sitting in his saddle as half dead. The horse sore daunnted
with the blow, stood still till Africano revived, and in the gathering of his
strength, out-brayed thus much in his thought. O infernal furies, are you not
all hired against me? Or is it credible, that either Jupiter, or Saturn, or
Mars, or all ye Gods, may have the like force as this young man. But Africanos
heart failed him not, albeit his words out-raged, for he followed the Knight of
the Sun, who attended him speedely.

Then the Prince Florion said to the Souldan his uncle, We make great account
of the travails of the ancient Assyrians our forefathers, and of the
Grecians, with whom our countri-men joined, at the expedition of Troy: but I
cannot think, that ever two so strong warriors have been, as Africano and
Raiartes.

You may boldlye iussifie that, answered Lyrgandeo, for there was never
until this day a battle between two knights so valyant and sharp as this
is, nor yet ever two so hardy drew swords against each other, although things
before done, carry a greater burden of authority then that which we our
selves can testify. But the jealousy which Claueryndo had over the Knight of
the Sun was not a little to be judge of so valiant behavior, not that he
had an ill eye toward his friends good Fortune, but either wishing to
himself the like trial, or desiring to adventure with his friend, although
that many days ended, er^ he had his fill to his contentment. Africanos people
looked ever for the victory, greatly fore-thinking them, that any one knight
should make resistaunce to their Lord, as having experience in themselves,
which all shook for fear to see him angered. Now it was more then two hours
since the battle began, and then Fortune alwayed fickle and unstable which
had of a long time gone even with African o, now played her part in her kind,
and as already weary of his company, turned her tale, and stroke in another
way, desirous to show the great swiftness of her euer-turning wheel, and
minding the sudden ouer-throwe of those which too much trust in her. For
Africano desperately determining to break up the fight one way or the other:
once again hit the Knight of the Sun upon his Magical helmet, that he took
quite his memory from the Knight, the sword and the raynes falling from him.
Yet the sword hanging by a long string at the pomell was not out of his reach,
but the horse having the liberty of the raines, and feeling his part of the
blow flange up and down the field with his master, the strong Pagan following
to have unhorsed him. But how* dear was this blow to Africano for it cost him
no less then his life, for the valyant Knight of the Sun never stained in
fight, became wood mad for his hurt, and in great rage took his sword in
both his hands, and repayed the borrowed blow so surely upon Africanos head,
that not Vulcans well tempered steel could forbid the passage, but that it
quartered the helmet, and made the brains sprinkle on the ground. Now sound
ye Trumpettes, for in this wise is the great Africano brought to ground, ending
his life in such sort, as is fatal to tyrants, whose death commonly is cruel
and bloody. This the Souldan and those of his part seeing; made such joy as
cannot be told, but on the contrary side, Africanos people made great
lamentation, and reckoning little upon that which their Lord in his life time
had commanded, because they were greater in number than their adversaries,
they joined together on heaps sine discretione, and without a guide made an
assault upon the Knight and his adherents. But they not taken at unawares,
received them accordingly. These were the^ Souldan, the Prince Florion, the
Prince Claueryndo, and Armineo, with the Knight of the Sun, in whose company
they were the bolder, and coming to the foreward in the foremost rank, they
find of the stoutest and principallest knights that Africano had. These four
encountered them and unhorsed as many as they came against, and breaking
through to the thickest thronge, they wrought wonders, especially the Prince of
France desirous to get honor in the first head of his knighthood, shooued
into the midst, beheading some, and mayming other some, making as it were a
lane before him to pass thorough, so that the wise Lyrgandeo said openly that
now his outward fight did well witness the self same thing which his Art
had showed him in casting the Constellation of this Knight, for he was a
valiant Knight, and the slaughter he made, was nigh hand comparable with that
of that of the Knight of the Sun.

Upon the left wing Prince Florion tried his manhood, having near unto him
the Souldan. Where (be it that other-wise to a strong Giant as Africano was,
he was inferior,) yet among the other people, he was as proud as a ravenous
woolfe among a flock of sheep. The Souldan and the good knight Armineo did
their part, but what would all this avail, unless the knight of the Sun
had beaten the way before them with his sharp sword, slaieng so many, as it
was easy for the followers to keep the trodden path. And now at this time, ye
Souldans army appointed for the guard of the Knight of the Sun, came to the
battle, and finding Fortune so courteous at their coming they refused not
her gentleness, but following her command, made it a bloody conflict for the
adversary. But yet a man may rightly say, that the Knight of the Sun
delivered that day the Babylonians from death or bondage, for if he had not
overcome Africano. not the high walls of the Queen Semiramis, could have kept
Africano out from enjoying the City. But their Lord being slain and they
left without an head, their courage was so quailed, that ere two hours
passed, the greater part of them was slain like-wise, and of those which
remained on live, the most part fled by one and one, the Assyrians pursuing
them, till the Souldan commanded the retreat to be blown, fearing to be
ouer-taken by the night. By this means, some escaped to their Country, most
of them being inhabitants of Media, where also was the abode of Africanos son
called Brandimardo, not being able for years to be made knight, and therefore
going not out with his father to the war. These so soon as they came home
crowned Brandimardo, and incensed him to the revenge of his fathers death, for
although he was of years young and tender, yet was he very strong and of a
lusty body; being like unto his father, as well in stature as in qualyties,
and in deed, being continually laid at by his Fathers subjects, passing
into Greece, he behaved himself manfullye, as shall be showed you. Well, the
Souldan and those which were with him as you have heard, recourned in joy and
pleasure, and highlye magnifieng the noble Knight of the Sun, so as this
discourse as an argument of great good will canuased between these knights
and Princes brought them ere they were well aware before the Pallaice gate,
where the Princess Balisea welcomed them with torch light, the first whom she
embraced was the Knight of the Sun, to whom she said on this wise. Sir
knight we (...) great cause to give thanks to our Gods for your hither ariuall.
First you delivered my Lord the Souldan and me from death, and now you have set
all us free from sorrowful captivity. But madame answered the knight of the
Sun, to my Lord the Prince Florion, and to these other knights, you ought to
attribute this, for they are those which have destroyed Africanos host. Then
the Princess turned unto Clauerindo and thanked him likewise for his pains
in the defense of her fathers City, and so to the rest in that order which
best liked her. After this they supped in the great hall, continuing there
their sports till bed time, as likewise the citizens well showed their good
liking of the victory by bonfires and other reuelling sport. The next day they
ordained that which follows.

The knight of the Sun, the two Princes, Florion and Clauerindo, with a great
host enter into Persia, and there put Florion in possession of the Crown.

Cap. 25.
THE next day after dinner, the Souldan himself entered into the counsel
chamber, and other affairs being laid a part, the wise Lyrgandeo made this
Oration. It is apparently known unto us all, how bountifully our high Gods
have dealt with us as well touching my Lord the Souldan as the Prince Florion,
and the whole nation of the Assyrians, in bringing to this Court, the knight of
the Sun and the Prince Clauerindo: who by their notable virtues not only
have kept this city from sacking, but also as we make account have left the
realm of Persia naked for resistaunce, not one spear remaining to be tossed
against us. For the attayning of either of these things we are not ignorant,
how weak and unable we were, that were it not for these two young Gentlemen,
not only our home bred power, but also thrice as many of foreign succors
could not have hindered Africano from his purpose. Wherefore I think it
convenient, that since the Gods have granted us this victory, and that we have
the wind at our backs, that we follow our good Fortune while we have her,
least by ouerslipping the opportunity, we to late repent our too much
daintiness. My meaning is, that with such speed as may be, the Prince Florion
and these Lords depart the realm into Persia, there to make claim of his
right by arms, whilst every man is occupied in complaining on his own
harms. For although as yet there dare no man stand against us, yet for a
certeintie there is a king of Media, Africanos son, which ere it be long will
be our heavy neighbor, he is not yet made Knight, but his destiny
foresheweth us, that if he once come to boorde in Persia, we shall be no
less disquieted with his company, then we were with Africano his Father. The
wise Lyrgandeo made an end of his Oration, knitting up his matter with this
clause (that it were not out of the way to advise themselves) notwithstanding
for good resons this was his judgment.

They which would never contrary him in any point, took no further respite,
but consenting to the effect of Lyrgandeos Oration concerning the conquest of
Persia, took this order. The Prince Florion, the Knight of the Sun,
Clauerindo, and Armineo his uncle, with fifteen thousand Knights, and fifty
thousand footmen, within ten days should prepare themselves for this
adventure, the Princess Balisea abiding with the Souldan her Father, till the
kingdom were well setteled from tumult, and the Prince in peaceable fruition
of the crown. This they dealt in effectually, for within the compass of the
days limited, they left Babylon, the Souldan, and the Princess, only
comforted with the hope which Lyrgandeo made promise of.

The fifteen thousand Knights with the foot men by long iourneyes entering
into Persia, and coming near unto one of the chiefest Cities of the Kingdom,
there in the plain unloaded their carriage to erect their tents there. But
the Citizens having understanding of Africanos death by the fugitives in the
last discomfiture of Africanos host, and thinking it not safety for
themselves to rebel against their liege and natural Lord Florion, especially
he having the aid of the whole flower of Babylon set their gates wide open for
his army, and sent of their worthiest knights to Florions tent to inuit him
to his own City, and to crave pardon for their former re^^ulting, in that
time when they were left destitute of man's succor, not being able of
themselves to withstand the force of Africano. And also excusing themselves
that they had never a guide to conduct them into the field, against so strong
an enemy, having in his power the greatest part of all Asia.

The Prince lightly excusing their fault, easily condescended unto their
requests, and being glad of so good enterteinement of the first, the next
day rode into the City, with the joyful acclamations of the whole multitude.
There he resumed the Crown and Scepter, and being in quiet seyzure, the
subjects of the Realm by the fame of his thither arrival, came from all
parts to do him homage, so that in half a years space all the principal
Cities of the kingdom submitted themselves, and there was left no more
memory of the usurpers name

The King Florion seyzed of his land in such a friendly manner, now took
counsel how to have the Queen his wife conuayed thither, and for that it was
requisite that the king himself should tarry behind, for the appeasing of
all tumults if any should arise in so raw a possession, he gave the charge
of fetching the Queen with all reasonable pomp, unto the knight of the Sun
and the Prince Clauerindo, they to take with them. 200. knights for their
safety. They took it gladly, and frayted their ships with necessary
provision and other furniture for war, determining to travail by sea the
sooner to come unto their iourneies end. When every thing was in a readiness,
the knights took their leave of the king Florion and the wise Lyrgandeo. But
the wise man not refraining from tears, and lovingly embracing the Knight of
the Sun, burst out into these speeches in such sort, as the Sibilles in
ancient time were wont to read men's destinies. Noble and worthy Knight, you
are determined to see Babylon, but you are uncertain whether ever to see it,
or to return to Persia, and as little know I what shall befall. For truth it
is that all the heavenly spheeres warrant more unto you then to to any knight,
what that is, it is kept from me, I cannot find the entry thereunto,
wherefore I am in doubt of your hither return. But if the fates, or otherwise
the course of the stars which impose a necessity to man, carry you beyond
the compass of your will into a far Country, where there shall be greater
need of your presence, grudge not at it, but give thanks to our Gods, for all
shall redound to your honor and the magnifieng of your lignage. This I tell
for a surety, that you shall never do the thing in your life whereof you
shall take like pleasure as in your two first adventures undertaken for two
Knights strangers, whom notwithstanding you shall not know till time and
place discloseth them unto you. Of you sign ago I will report nothing, for it
is ordained by the Gods, that by the mouth of one of these two Knights of whom
I have spoken, your whole parentage should de layds open, before which time
you shall be at mortal de^^ance. For the shutting up of this speech, the
remainder only is, that I make offer of my service unto you, whereof I hope if
shall be needless to make a profession in words, seeing I am thereunto
bounden by your manifold friendships toward my kindred. In a word Lyrgandeo
shall never fail you in the thing, wherein either his wealth or wisdom may
stand you in steed; and the day shall come wherein you being in the country
where you were borne, and amongst your own parents, shall account them all for
enimyes, and yet no man shall take your part but only Lyrgandeo which for that
time shall save your life, and I hope that this service shall not be the last
in account, or the least in value which I will do unto you. The wise man
ended, and they all which were present wondered to hear him so divine of
things to come. But the knight of the Sun not understanding the tenor of
this prophecy, wisely referred all things to Gods providence, thanking the
wise man for his great care over him.

Now when on all parts all courtesies were performed, and yt the king Florion
had commended them to his Gods, they embarked themselves, and spreading their
sails followed the way toward Babylon, as the chapter following shall declare.

The Knight of the Sun and the Prince Clauerindo being in their way toward
Babylon, were divided by a sodeine adventure.

Cap. 26.
AS already the noble and knightlye deeds of the Knight of the Sun did bud
out and were likely to flourish more hereafter, so now not only the
celestial influences, but the confluences of the tempestuous winds also, and
the sea it self became so careful for his advancement that there failed
nothing of that which might work his preferment, for so it is, that when any
thing is forced by the stars as to succeed prosperously unto a man, albeit
mountains of adversity impugn and assail him, yet can they never expugne
his good Fortune, but in the end he recouereth his quiet rest, maugre the
malice of misaduenture. And so the issue declared in the Knight of the Sun.
For the ninth day after that the knight of the Sun, Claueryndo, and those
which were with them had sailed in the Persicke sea, the night attached them,
ouercast with dark clouds without any stars appearing, whereby the
mariners construed the roughness of the weather on the morrow, and therefore
guided toward land to cast anchour in some good harberowe till the storms
ceased. Ere the dawning of the day they discovered a docke not far from the
continent, in their seeming very commodious, but indeed very dangerous, as
it proved. Entering the docke, they scarce had leisure to throw out their
anchors, but two other ships joined with them to seek some safe road out of
the tempest. These which last gat to the port were very desirous to know what
the other might be, and therefore an armed knight, so huge and great as if he
had been a Giant, mounting on the ship board, called aloude unto them to answer
him. Some of the other ship hearing him in this wise crieng, leapt upon the
hatches, saying. What is it sir Knight that you would have? Marie I would know
answered the knight, what you are, and whether you will. One of the company
being stout and of ill behavior, and supposing this knight to be some Giant
of that Country minding to set upon them, made him answer thus. Return to
thy dwelling, and be not careful to know them which know not thee, otherwise
assure thy self here are Knights which will chase thee hence, in such sort
as it shall well grieve thee. The strange knight stomacking this rudeness,
said again. Assuredly Knight thou art some vilayne borne or of base birth,
since in such order thou rewardest me, demanding only upon courtesy, but
seeing I cannot learn it of thee with thy good will, I will compel thee
thereunto with thine ill will, and saying no more, he drove at the knight so
strongly that he claue both sheeld, helmet, and head, unto the eyes. O what a
mischief does ill speech breed unto man, and how inexcusable was it in this
knight, when he redeemed this frank speech with his own life, and sold to
make a payment the life of many others. Another knight seeing his fellow
slain, stepped into his room and smote at the stranger, where by the
clattering of their harness, the dinne was so great, that it raised the people
on both parts by clusters. And there was a great fray betwixt them, the knight
of the Sun nor Claueryndo witting of it, till the great knight had overthrown
and put to death five or six of those knights which came nearest to hand.

The Knight of the Sun seeing his knights so destroyed, especially by this
great Knight, leaving the other, bent his force against him, and struck him a
blow overthwart the head piece, making him to abate his courage. The great
Knight answered the loan, and the battle was verys hot between them, for
though the night was dark, yet they knew where to hit, as well by the flames
which sprang out of their helmets, as the clashing of their armor: Claueryndo
put himself amongst the thickest, and at his first God-morrow slew ten
knights, and then not finding with whom to fight, he leapt into his enemies
Ship with his uncle Armineo, where he felled more then. 30. Knights, and
the skirmish began a fresh, either part willing to help theirs, and the four
ships grapled together, so that the fight would have been dangerous if it had
lasted longer, but half an hour and a little more ouerpassed, the tempest
which before threatened to appear now outraged, and the port not very sure,
the four Ships were divided by the storm, every one withdrawing himself
to seek succor. Now in the Ship wherein the knight of the Sun and the
great Knight fought, there were no more Knights but they two, for all
followed Clauerindo into the other ships. The two knights left alone were so
earnest that they took little keep either of the tempest or of their danger.
The success of the battle was doubtful, sometimes enclining to the one
part, sometimes to the other, neither part quailing, but gathering their
strengthes to them by the emulation of each other. For the knight of the Sun
verily believed that except his enemy had been some such as Africano was, he
could never have bid those mortal strokes: and the other Knight thought as
well that no man's force could be matchable with the knights, and either of
them both had better cause to thank Lyrgandeos kindness, especially this
strange knight at this time, for had not his armor kept out the edge of the
other knights armant sword he could not have prolonged the battle till day
light, yet at that time he was so ouermatched, that if a sodeine adventure had
not broke up their fight, he had ended his life in that place.

But when it was broad day, by this the battle surceased, that the strange
Knight knew the devise of the Sun, upon the Knight of the Suns helmet,
which when he espied, letting his Sword fall, and lifting up his beuere, he
cast himself at the Knights feet with this speech. Oh my Lord the Knight of
the Sun, pardon I pray, your friend, who by mere ignorance has made upon
your person, and who acknowledges in you such sovereign virtue as may not be
in other, but in those to whom our Gods have imparted of their goodness. For
if the day had lingered, or that the morning had not been somewhat clear, I
should have received a full payment for my rashness: and saying this, he
would have embraced Del Febos knees. Now the Knight of the Sun so soon as
the others visour was pulled up, knew well that he was the Prince Brandizel,
whom his father not willing to make Knight before his years were more, had
left with the Souldan in Babylon. For he was scarcely eighteen years of age,
yet being in armor, he was as big as you have heard off, and taking courage
upon his stature, in his Fathers absence, he lay at the Souldan his
Grandfather to be dubbed Knight, thinking it long till he were with his
father, and his great friends the Knight of the Sun and the Prince
Claueryndo. So after that he had obtained his suit of his Grandfather, he
demanded license of departure of the Souldan and the Princess Balisea his
mother to pass into Persia, which was granted him, and two ships charged
with two hundred Knights to conuaye him thither, where after the fourth days
sailing, that chanced to him, which the Historye has recounted.

But to return, as soon as the Knight of the Sun knew his dear friend the
Prince Brandizel very glad to have found him so valiant and hardy, he
embraced him heartely, and so they communed of their own affairs, and the
desire that each had to see others. But as they began their several stories,
by enter-chaunge of speech, first one, and then another, the Mariners cried,
that the ship rent in pieces. So some leapte into the water, and other threw
out plankes to save themselves by, and the Knight of the Sun finding the
Cock-boate near unto him, let it down into the water by a cable, and calling
the Prince Brandizel, he lept into it first himself. Thus much is ordinary
in the course of worldly things, but that which is to come, is beyond the
credit of a story, as it were an extraordinary miracle. For when the Knight
of the Sun lept into the boat, the cable rent in pieces, and with the force
of the iumpe, and the rage of the winds together, the boat lanched into the
deapth, that the Prince Brandizel, could not follow him, but got into a
little boat, which the Governor of the ship had before taken. But by and by
after these Princes had thus escaped, the ship wherein they had been, tore in
pieces with the storm. Some being drowned, and other some in no little
danger, as the waves began to swell, so ever prognosticating of their own
deaths.

The Knight of the Sun sailing alone in the vessel, and in such fear of
destruction, was not so stout hearted, as to contemn the senseless element,
but confessing the imbecilitie of man's power subjected under these weak things
as fire and water, besides casualties infinite more, he commended himself unto
his Gods by earnest prayer, not yet only for himself, but also for his friend
Brandizel, not being able to divine of his deliverance. Sitting thus in the
boat all pensive, till the winds were somewhat alayed, and the Sea waxed more
calm, afterward he looked about him, and saw that he was out of danger,
with other two things which made him more to marvel. The one was the great
foyzon and plenty of all victuals, sufficient to a man for many days, the
other was the swiftenesse of the boat in the sea, having neither sail nor
care to rule it, and musing of this in his thought, he couiectured presently,
that it should be done by Lyrgandeo, and therefore as very glad of such a man's
friendship in so needful a time, he gave him thanks as heartely as if he had
seen him there, in this order he was upon the Sea many days, without knowing
whether the wind would drive him, ^^ll that from out of the Persians Seas he
came into the Occean, and so coasting the whole Country of Asia lieng upon
that Sea, he was carried into Affricke, which stretches upon the wide West
Seas. In which Country the Historye leaves him, till an other wind serves,
now it proceeds with the story of his friends Brandizel and Claueryndo,
who were on the Seas tossed in like manner. Claueryndo, as the storye told
you, boorded his enemies with fifty Knights in his company, and made great
havoc of them, so that he had not left any of them alive, if the storm had
not risen so greatly. For the winds were so outrageous between them, and
when they could stand no longer on ship-hoorde to try it out, they left not
off to ask, who each other was, the one party said, we are Babylonians, and
the other, we are Persians. All this happened in good time, for when they
knew each other, they fell not again to quarrelling, but they agreed to
empty their ships, thereby to avoid the danger. So Claueryndo having now
leasu^e to look about him, the battle being ended, and not sinding the
Knight of the Sun nor the Prince Brandizel, with-all, remembering how he had
left them twain in fighting, was greatly afraid least that the Knight of the
Sun should endaunger the Prince, before the one should know the other.
Therefore he beseeched God like a good Christian to deliver them both, and to
make them know each other, thereby to make greater account the one of the
other, and it is to be thought, that this his prayer was heard, for the second
day following, the storm flaked; and the ship wherein they sailed, arrived to
a Port, not far from a place where they were nowly rigged. There they had not
stayed an hour, but that they saw the boat in which the Prince Brandizel
was. The mariners in Brandizels boat, not being perfect in the haven, would
not venture to take landing there, but coasting a long they passed by the
ships, to find some more safe place to land in. The Prince was ascried by his
men in his ships, and therefore they made signs unto the Governor to stere
toward them, so the Governor understanding the fokens, guyded thither. The
Prince Claueryndo and his uncle Armineo, standing on the hatches ready to
welcome the Prince Brandizel, between whom there-was showed tokens of great
good will, and each made much of other as two faithful friends.

But questioning about the Knight of the Sun, the Princes Brandizel declared
the manner of their parting, and the danger wherein he had left him. This
caused great sorrow in them, for they loved him as dearly as any father his
children, or any wife her husband. And to assuage their grief, Armineo
remembered unto them the words, which the wise Lyrgandeo had spoken to the
Knight of the Sun at his departure. Where-by they were persuaded, that his
departure by such a chance, was but for the achieuement of things more worthy
of him alone, and for whom only they were reserved. Now, having stayed in this
Haven two days to repair their ships, when they were in a readiness, they
sailed toward Babylon, where they were goodly received of the Souldan and of
the Queen, both very joyful of the news, as touching Persia, and the King
Florions peaceable possession, and again, as sorrowful for the loss of the
Knight of the Sun, and the peril of death wherein Brandizel saw him last.
But in short time after, there were letters received from Lyrgandeo, containing
the certainty of his safety, the manner of his escape, and the affairs
wherein he was employed. Which last point bred a great desire in Claueryndo and
Brandizel to stray through the world, and to exercise the feats of arms, And
a while after they had rested themselves in Babylon, they brought the Queen to
Persia by land, for they would no more adventure the Seas, especially having
the Queen as part of their burden, and the history brings them on their
way as far as Persia, whence, it retourneth toward Hungary, to matters of
like importance, wherein the younger son of Trebatio had to deal, whose
prowess is no less worthy my pains, then his brothers valor is worthy of
your rememebraunce, for he surpassed all other Knights in loyalty and might,
being equal to Donzel del Febo in all points, as heere-after you shall here.

The Princess Briana discovered to Rosicleer secretly, that he was her son.

Cap. 27.
THE story left the Princess Briana straungely afflicted and tormented with
the double loss, both of Prince Edward her husband, and Donzel del Febo her
son, which grief no doubt had quickly killed her, had not a Nymph given her
comfort at the well in the orchard, as it has been showed. But yet it somewhat
eased her melancholy, that she had the fair and courteous Rosicleer, in whose
only company, she was wont to beguile her mishaps, and by his means, to
forget her miseries. For he was so gracious, as that he was beloved not only
of his mother, but of the other Gentlewomen also, which might not one minute
spare his company, as if he had been child to every one. This Rosicleer,
when he attained to the age of twelve years, removed out of the Monestarie to
a house hard by, where his nourse Leonardo kept, whom he thought to be his
father. Here he was diligently instructed in all good literature, and in the
exercise of arms, both to be able to be a good counsailour in peace, and as
good a warrior in battle, over and besides the knowledge of the tongues,
wherein Leonardo was very curious, as having travailed for his knowledge,
through the most parts of Europe and Asia, being thereunto both wise and well
learned. Rosicleer was of such pregnaunt wit, and so ripe of capacity, that he
little needed the help of a teacher, and to that which his nourse read, he
added by his own industry somewhat, that he became so profound in these
studies, as if he had been studied in them, all his life time at Athens. But
remaining thus, under the governance of his supposed Father, till he was
fourteen years of age, he then was so high and big made, that few in that
country were so tall, and being at this age, he was able for strength to do
that, which three Knights together, were unable to do. The Princess knowing
of his strength forbad him her fathers Court, and would not suffer him to
forgo the Monestary, for she feared, least the King hearing of his
towardness, should enquire after him, and so retain him in his service. For
this cause Rosicleer thus kept in at this age, and thus strong, became very
sad, for his so straight enclosure, as if he had professed already a vow in
some cloister, and his mind ever ran upon his desire to be made Knight, to
the end he might experiment the adventures of the world, and learn by proof,
that which he had often heard by ^chearfull. Hereunto having no hope nor
help by his restraint, it abated his cheer, and increased his sadness.
Leonardo his nourse marking in what plight he was, often demanded the occasion
of his heaviness, but could by no means wring it out of him, and so one day
talking with the Princess, he told her, that unless she found a remedy for
her son, his thought would anoy him. The Princess very pensive at that which
Leonardo had told, commanded Rosicleer to be brought before her presence.
Rosicleer coming into the presence of the Princess, kneeled down, and humbly
asked what was her Graces pleasure. The Princess bidding him stand up, spoke
thus: Rosicleer, thy father Leonardo tells me, thou art never merry, now
therefore open to me, the cause of this thy heaviness, and if thou want
ought which thy father can-^ot supply, utter it freely, and I will provide thee
of the remedy to have thee contented. Rosicleer hearing the words of the
Princess, kneeled down again, and said Madame, I kiss your hand, for the
sovereign grace you show me, in having such compassion on my grief, and I am
well assured, that if it were for any thing whereof I have need, your
Ladyship would furnish me of i^, as hitherto you have done, but if I be sad
or solitar^ for any thing which grieueth me, it is not for need of any
necessary provision, for I thank your goodnes^e, I have had it hethertoo
abundauntly considered by your Highness, without my speaking. But it is, for
that in respect of my age, the life which I now lead, is more like a
Gentlewoman then a young man, which made me dei^te to be dubbed Knight, and to
wander abroad for to seek adventures. Now, for that I know your Ladyships
pleasure to be the contrary, as neither willing to depart without your
license, nor daring to utter my desire unto you, I cannot do less but be
sorrowful, for I want the remedy of satisfieng. When Rosicleer had thus said,
the Princess feeling already in him, the heroycall stomach of his father
Prince Edward (as she thought) and calling to mind, the continual casualties
of knights arrant, burst into fears in great abundaunce, which occasioned
great ruth in the young Rosicleer, but that he durst not demand the reason.
After a while, the Princess to with-drawe her son from his thought, or by
some means to remi^ his grief and to comfort him, stretching her arms over
his neck, said unto him. O my son Rosicleer, already thy valiant heart does
manifest that, which so long time for mine honesty sake I have concealed, this
it is, that thou art the son of my Lord and lawful husband, the Prince
Edward, begotten in wedlock, but my Parents unwitting thereunto. Thy fathers
likeness in other qualities thou do well resemble, albeit his favor is
clean out of my remembrance. Thou can not be content with the life which
thou now leadest void of all danger, but couetest to be made Knight, and to
ieoparde thy person, in the search of adventures as thy father did. This if
thou do so that I may not behold thee every day, from that time make
account of me as dead, for my great misfortunes, together, with the double
loss both of thy Father and thy Brother, in that order as thou have known,
has by thy only presence been borne out and supported, and now, deprived of
this supporte, must I not yield my back to the burden of continual woe and
misliking?

Behold then my child, the extreme grief, where-in thou find me, and for
that as yet thou art young of years, do away this affection for a time, and
heere-after when thou shalt be of more strength, and better able to undertake
the enterprise of arms, I will so travail, with the King my Lord, that he
shall dubbe thee Knight, and thou shall have Horse and Harness at my charges,
conformable to thy estate. In the mean while, rest thee here, for it may so
be, that I shall in that time bear some news of the prince Edward, or of
Donzel del Febo, which if it so fall out, then shall thy absence be less
grievous unto me. When Rosicleer heard the secret, which the Princess his
mother bewrayed unto him, he was well apayed as touching his thought of being
made knight, before, the baseness of his foster-father, hanging in his light,
and now he reckned the rather to undertake the highest exployts, whereto his
heart drove him, and kneeling down before her, he kissed her hand, for the
secrecy which she concionated with him touching his true original. His mother
by the outward joy he made, supposing his former thought to be put out of
conceit, was very glad, but the Princes was deceived in him. For Rosicleer
hearing himself to be named the son of so mighty Princes, if before he
wished to be made knight, either of a wanton delight, or for some greater
occasion, now he thristed greedely after knighthood, as thinking himself bound
in conscience to advance his lignage in the right of his parents, and his care
increased how to steal from thence. This care he covered the best ways that
he might, and stayed with his mother, comforting her in all that he could,
until that the Princess went to her lodging, and he returned with Leonardo,
who only heard that which the Princess had declared. But from that time
forth, as I say, he canuased in his thought too and fro, the secret means of
his escape, which he thought, (though perhaps at first it might wring some
tears from so tender a Princess,) yet in process of time would as well dry
them up, his valor making amends for his sudden departure.

Rosicleer departed from the Monestarie of the River, without the knowledge of
the Princess, his mother.

Cap. 28.
LIght days after Rosicleer knew himself to be the son of the Princess
his Lady, he abode with Leonardo, casting how he might convey himself from
thence, without the knowledge of any man. In the end one night all the
householde being on sleep, his lodging standing in one corner, severed from
the Gentlewomens chamber, he took a sword which his nurse had given him, and
out of a window looking into the gardeine, he daulted down, and coming to ye
porters lodge, he requested an horse of him, whereon sometimes before he had
ridden, saying unto him yt his Lady the princess had sent him on a secret
message. The Porter believed him, and sadled an horse, commending Rosicleer to
God, who from thence rode so fast, that by the morrow he was beyond hiew and
cry. Before noone ye princess sent for him, but he could not be found, then
ye Princess gessing what it might be, was so sorrowful yt it little failed of
her death, which assuredly she had not avoided but that there came to her
remembrance then that which the Nymph had fortolde her in the fountain of her
loves as concerning her losses, and so with some little lingering hope for the
return of Fortune, banishing all delyghtes, she shut her self up close in the
Monastery, more like an obseruant vowesse then a stately Princess, whence
also she never departed, until that God had permitted her to recover her
husband, as shall be told you.

But to return unto Rosicleer, being neither sick nor well at ease, between
the concert of his mothers grief, and the hope of being made knight by some
adventure. He gave himself unto the quest of seeking Prince Edward and Donzel
del Febo his brother, and therefore his intent was to pass into great Britain
to see the king Oliuerio his grandfather as he had heard, and by some good
hap to be made Knight. In this journey he made to great have, that in short
space he e^^^^ed into Almaine, and there travailing by the ignorance or the
way, one da^e he lost himself amongst the mountains which were thick of tall
wood, and other lower husk, seeming to he no way unto him, and he strayed
so long not finding his way that the Sun was set ere he knew how to get out,
wherefore having no other remedy, he climbed up to the top thereof to take a
view of the place on each side, and he saw beneath him a deep and large
valley as it were a mile from thence, environed with steep and high hills, in
which there were some castles and other buildings very fair and goodly. Now
that it was night, and that this was his only refuge, he made his horse
easily descend the hill, at the foot whereof he es^yed a savage Bear,
running from the Town with a child in his mouth of two years old. The
child cried so pitifully that Rosicleer took great compassion of it, and
seeing it even at the point to be devoured, he ran his horse with great
fury toward the Bear. The Bear nothing afrighted, at the noise of the
horse, stood still with his pray in his mouth, and he so glared with his
eyes, setting his foremost paws for his defense, that although Rosicleer
spurred him, his horse yet would not approach nearer. Then Rosicleer alyghted,
and fastening his horse to a tree, with his sword drawn went toward the
Bear, and the Bear seeing him to make toward him, let the young child fall
upon the ground, and began to buskle himself to the fight with such a loud
groan, as he might have feared a right good Knight, but Rosicleer as it were
dedicated to greater purposes then to be murdered by a Bear, was nothing
appalled at this, but when the Bear snapped at him to have griped him between
his arms, he gave the Bear a blow cross the raines of the back, that the
Bear almost hewn in sunder fell dead to the ground. Rosicleer by and by
wiping his sword in the grass put it vp^n his sheath, and to the child he
went which lay crieng on the ground, being also in his seeming both beautiful
and pleasant, and therefore likelye to have been taken from some of those
castles in the valley. By ye time Rosicleer had ridden a mile in the valley, he
saw therein situate many castles and edifices so near together, as yt the
valley seemed to be well people, and taking his way to the nearest, he saw
two young men and an old man, with battle axes in their hands, and in their
armonr ride in great have as somewhat disquieted, as they came near to
Rosicleer, and saw the child whom they sought for, they were very glad, and
well eyeng his good proportion and beauty said. God reward you fair
Gentleman, for you have rid us of a great part of trouble which we should
have suffered in seeking the child, and we pray you on your faith how you
come by him. Rosicleer saluting them courteously told them, that the child was
carried by an ugly Bear, and that he was feign to set the child free by
slaieng the Bear. The men more amazed at this, gave him great thanks, and
certified him that the most ancient in that company was the child's Father, and
that the other two were his brethren, and that they walking on the battlements
of the Castle, the child stood at the porch, from whence the Bear had
carried him, and neighbors espyeng it had told which way the Bear ran,
upon this we prepared our selves, although we are sure that if you had not
succored him before, we should have come to late for rescewe. Rosicleer then
delivered the child to the Father, whom the Father kissed with so great love
as if he had seen him newly raised from the dead.

Then the ancient man making his preface with a great sigh said. Beautiful
Gentleman, if you knew how plentifully God has bestowed his blessings upon us
on the one part, and how justly he has scourged us for our offenses on the
other part, you would not so highly commend of the fruitfulness of the soil,
as greatly bewail the misery of the inhabitaunts enduring such torments, as
were never greater in the land of Pharao. What great visitation is this said
Rosicleer, you make me muse on it. This plague replied the old man, is so
insupportable, that diverse times the indwellers have forsaken his Country, and
abandoned themselves to wind and weather, to avoid the inconvenience of this
place, but for that all my living lies here, and in other places I have
nothing whereby to mainetaine my degree, I drive out my days here in sorrow.
The valley of it self is fat, delectable, and wholesome, and so large that it
contains more then. 2000 Castells, and other houses, all divided as you see.
But I pray God our fullness of bread be not our just undoing, as it was to
the Sodomites. For we had a Prince and Lord over us in times past good and
gracious, but as God has provided for our misliuing, in our time very cruel
and vicious, he has to name Argion, who according as his power by reason of
his exceeding wealth which the country yields is not to be contraried, so I
believe of life he is the most peruerst and wickdest under heaven. For among
other his devilish and detestable customs which he ordinarily observes, and
besides the impouerishing of his poor tenaunts, racking them shamefully to
enhaunce his treasorie, and besides the daily raunsoming of his neighbors
lives and goods at his pleasure for every little displeasure conceived against
us. This is one the most ungodly of all, that every week he inioyneth us to
find him a gentle woman for his carnal liking. This use he has frequented this
four years, so ouer-awing us and murdering such as make denial, that now
there are none to make resistanuce, and his fact now gorwen unto an habit by
our patience perforce, and his force in spighte of our patience, is nothing
strange unto us, that now all of us obey his heast in being bawdes unto our
children, so that it would riue a man's heart a sunder to hear the fair
damsells curse the light into the which their parents brought them, only to
fulfill the shameless lust of so tragical a tirant. And to my share it is
fallen, that having one only daughter, the fairest in all this valley, since
she has been fifteen years of age, I have every day expected her sending
for. If I ought could remedy it. I would either murder my daughter or banish
her my country to release her of so great an infamy: but Argion is so wicked
and devilish, yt this will not suffice him, but rather if he be defrauded of
his bargain, we shall all die for her sake. Here the ancient man was so
overtaken with grief yt he might not utter a word more, his name was Balides.
Rosicleer angered at the heart to hear of the malice of the wretch Argion,
would have given away the possibility of his liuelood to have been made knight,
only to have set the land free from so intolerable slavery, and therefore he
appointed with himself when he were made knight in England, to return hither,
and to wage battle with Argion. And so till devising of such things, he came
to the castle of Balides, where he alighted and was friendly enterteined by
the ancient man's wife, and the young gentlewoman their daughter named Lyuerba,
both greatly praising Rosicleers good favor and feature of body, but much
more his courage when they understood that he had delivered the child by
killing the Bear. Rosicleer seeing the Gentlewoman fair and proper, and yet
very sad, for that Argion had sent her word yt he shortly looked for her, was
greatly moved, and the rather for that he knew not how to acquit her.
Balides at his first coming in, commanded the supper to be made ready, in the
mean while taking Rosicleer a side to a window opening into the valley, and
questioning with him of his birth, and of ye adventure which brought him
thither. Rosicleer answered, I am borne in Hungary, and I am to travail about
my affairs into great Britain, and being on my way this morning I lost my
self in ye wood, which was the occasion of my hither coming. In good time
came you this way said Balides, for by you I have recovered my son, and
talking of such like matters, they passed the time till supper was ready.

Rosicleer in Lyuerbas name slaieth Argion, and remooueth the Jews.

Cap. 29.
THe supper being ready, Rosicleer, with Balides, his wife and children sat
at the table, but there was little discourse at the board, save that the
beautiful Lyuerba felt so great grief in the remembrance of Argions message,
yt in lieu of meat, she fed on tears, and her parents helped to bear a part
with their sighs, which made it a very melancholic supper unto Rosicleer. And
in the neck of this, ere the cloth was taken up they heard great rapping at
the gate, and looking who they were, they saw more then.20. knights and other
serving men, with torches in their hands at the gates. Those of the house
demanded what they would, one of them answered. Tell Balides that Argion our
Lord has commanded us to bring Lyuerba by and by, for he tarrieth for her to
have her company this night. O how unwelcome was this arrant unto the parents,
and how pitiful unto the Gentlewoman, which sounded at the hearing of Argions
name, and all the householde wept bitterly. Rosicleer for company moved to
great pity, with the best courage yt he might, to give remedy unto this
outrage, devised a present shift, and bid some of the servants to tell those
which were without, that they should stay a while until the Gentlewoman were
in a readiness, and after that, yt she should be sent unto them. Then he made
the costlyest apparel which Lyuerba had to be brought unto him, and clothed
himself withal, making for his head a perwicke of Lyuerbas hair, and binding
it with a little chain of gold, so yt being thus readily araied, he was so
beautiful as no gentlewoman thereabouts might parage him for grace or favor.
His host and hostess were amazed in beholding him so well bear out ye credit
of a gentlewomas, in his disguised habit, neither yet knowing what he meant
thereby, nor yet minding to learn it of him unless he first declared it. But
so soon as he was thoroughly arrayed in this wise, he softly rounded his host in
the ear, saying. My friend, your mishap and the thraldom of this land has
had such force over me, yt having hope in God which brought me hither, I will
take upon me to be Lyuerba, and will go with these knights to the castle of
Argion. When I am alone in his chamber, I will behave my self, God willing,
that I will free you from this man's tyranny. Or though I be slain in the
execution of this enterprice, yet it were a small damage in respect of so great
a cure. But I would have you Balides, your sons, and your other acquaintance
and friends to arm your selves likewise, and lie covertly a little from the
castle, where if you see that I make you any tokens by the light at a window,
make account that Argion is slain, and be not afraid to come near the gates
which I will set open for you, and so with little ado we will make our selves
Lords of his castle. When this is done, we will publish it abroad to the
inhabitaunts of the valley, which being certain of Argions, death will rise to
our succor. Balides looked wistly upon Rosicleer, and wondered at his courage,
for he being so young, it was in his fancy for the boldest match which he had
heard off, yet though it was impossible as he thought to come to their purpose,
for that he saw how willingly Rosicleer had made this offer, he consented to
call his friends, esteeming it far better to die in such a quarrel, then to
see and suffer so great a mischief. The Gentlewoman Lyuerba being made privy
thereunto by her father kneeled down before Rosicleer, and shedding abundance
of tears said unto him. The God which created both heaven and earth grant you
fair gentleman so good hap, that both this land may be acquit from this
tyranny, and I delivered from this villainy. The knights which were without
hasted to have the Gentlewoman with them, and so Rosicleer putting sword under
his kirtle closely and surely, that it could neither be perceiuied, nor fall
from him, he took his leave of Balides, his wife, and his daughter. Balides
wishing him well and commending him to God, accompanied him to the gates where
the knights were attendaunt, and there poured out so many tears to the
outward sight as if it had been his daughter. The people without having a
glimps of Rosicleer by the light of the Torches, took him to be fairest
Gentlewoman which they had ever seen, and very glad to bring so good
tidings unto their master, they set him upon a palfraie provided for the
purpose, only they were agreeued at the time which was so short that they
could not sufficiently gaze on her. Their whole talk by the way ran upon
this, yt it were for Argion more convenient to detain her for wife, then
every week to seek a new, and laughing at their own devises they came to
Argions Castle, being very great, and of building the most sumptuous in the
valley, as it had been a kings pallaice. In this they entered, and helping the
fained Lyuerba from her horse, they lead her up a pair of stairs into a
chamber where Argion awaited her coming. Rosicleer keeping a demure and sober
countenance, drove Argion into a great amaze at his beauty, yt greedely
beholding him he arose from the place where he was set, and embraced him in
these terms. You are welcome hither my Lyuerba, for you make me right glad
to have your company, and for yt your beautye is more then the rest, I will
do you more honor then to others. The fained Lyuerba countenaunced out his
counterfeit with grave behavior, only fixing his eyes upon the ground,
without aunswering a word, save yt he thought upon his purpose, which he
knew would be somewhat dangerous, in that Argion was strong, foul, and
fierce of look more then ever he had seen any. Argion took him by the
hand, and placed him next himself, demanding first how her parents did, and
from thence he fell to more amorous delights, still staring on Rosicleers
beauty, which thoroughly kindled his lust, and he desired her to unclothe her
self, and to come unto him, into the rich bed. This supposed Lyuerba framing
a shamefast and bashful look, with a loud voice, gently answered him, that
unless he commanded his servant to avoid the chamber and the doors to be
fastened, she would not be seen naked in that company. Argion taking it to be
an argument of great honesty, did of his clothes first, and lept into his
bed, commanding his people to go out, and shut the doors after them. They
lighting a great candle set on a candlestick of silver went out, and there
remained only this Lyuerba with Argion, leasurely vncloathing hir-selfe, to
delay time, and that the servants should mistrust naught, by hearing a bustling
in the chamber, first she put off her upper gown, then to her peticoate, and
so she staid a while, Argion calling on her to dispatch quickly, as if the
greatest part of his delight had been to come, Rosicleer thinking it now time
to discover himself, and that the hour was already come, wherein God
almighty would the wicked Argion to be chastised, cast off his long garment,
and turned himself into his dublet and hose, and having his sword drawn, he
came to Argions bed side, saying: Come out of thy place where thou art thou
foul letcher, and come to rejoice thee of Lyuerbas love, for very bitter shall
this nights rest be unto thee. Argion which beheld him, rose up lightly, and
taking a sword which hung at his beds head, went toward Rosicleer to have
catched him in his arms, but Rosicleer with his naked sword watched him so,
that he smote the neck from the shoulders, the head beating against the wall,
and the body falling headless to the ground. This done, Rosicleer quietly
sat down in the same place, and thus remained till the greater part of the
night was spent.

Balides now in this time had not forgotten his charge, and having talked with
more then twentye of his friends as concerning their intent, he easily
persuaded them to this enterprise, so having them in his company, with his
sons, he lodged near to Argions Castle, only looking for a sign, which
Rosicleer should make them out at a window, which when Rosicleer, had for a
time neglected, they suspected the vnlikelihoode of the fact, and had
retourned-closely to their homes, if that Rosicleer had not then taking the
light in his hand, opened the doors of the hall, and showed the torch out of a
window. Then they knew what had happened, and went joyfully toward the Castle.
Rosicleer coming down, opened the gates, so that they all entered, and
lighting many Torches which they brought with them, they cast themselves into
several companies to search every corner, and ranging without fear
throughout the Castle, when they knew that Argion was slain, and killing so
many as they found, that in deed, though there were more then an hundred
Knights and other servant within the Castle, yet all were slain before they
could puruay of armor, or think of remedy, in such sort that in the Castle
there was not one left to take Argions part. At Argion may the stout Lords and
untamed tyrants, take example of their ends, and make it a benefit of his
fall, for although God sometime forbear the wicked giving them space of
amendment and repentance, yet when they can in no wise be reclaimed, his
justice must of necessity correct them in the manner that both their bodies
repay in this life their trespasses, with cruel death and perpetual
dishonor, and their souls in the other world receive double disgrace and
horror of conscience for their misdeedes. How many great Lords and tyrants
have we read of, to have been in the world, and how few or none have we heard
of unpunished, which can be no other thing, but that the divine providence has
so ordained it, some to be chastised for the misgouernment of themselves, and
other some to amend by the terror of others destruction. Well, the tyrant
Argion thus being slain with all his people, Balides and those which came with
him for his great prowess in killing Argion, sued unto Rosicleer, to
acknowledge them for his subjects, as they all would willingly obey him for
their Lord. But he severally making semblance of great love to every party,
made them to rise, aduising them on this sort. That for their deliverance they
ought to attribute it unto God with hearty thanks for it, which by his
goodness had provided, that the evil lust of wicked Argion should last no
longer. But for that they called him their Lord, he said he would be their
friend, and nevertheless, since they requested him thereunto, that he would
not refuse their profer, not for himself, but indeed to give order to that
which should succeed, for the quiet government of the segniorie. This done,
Balides sent for his wife and his daughter Liuerba, with his household. They
coming before Rosicleer, gave him thanks for this great good turn in
procuring their safety, he received them with great pleasure, and they made
merry all that night.

The next day they devised for the publication of Argions death, which Balides
to be made known to the most principal in the Valley. They all, very
desirous of such news came to the Castle, where knowing the manner of Argions
end, much praising the strength and boldness of Rosicleer, with all seeing
him so well favored and of so young years, they ceased not to give him thanks
for the good which he had done, so that Rosicleer somewhat blushing at it,
forbad them to speak more of it, but to attend their own affairs, for the
Valley being so replenished with dwellers all of them were not sound, but for
fear or favor were Argions claw-backes. These they had to do with all, and
in the end subdued them.

After, wanting a Governor, they besought Rosicleer to abide with them, and to
take oaths or their alleagiaunce toward him, for since that by him, they have
been restored to their ancient Liberties, they thought him to be an able
mainteiner of their Franschises.

But Rosicleer made them answer, that at the suite of Lyuerba Argion was
slain, and that he moved with pity upon her, had enterprised if for her
sake, if therefore, he had deserved ought, he wished them in respect thereof,
to make Lyuerba mistress of it, and for the establishment of her possession,
to match her with the most chiefest inheritour of land and fee amongst them.
This, if they did for his sake, he should account it not only a satisfaction
on their parts for the pleasure he had done them, but also a bond for a
further good turn, if it so lie in his power. They debating upon this matter,
were all contented with it, and promised all their abilities to do his
command. So among them, there was a Knight called Brandidonio, the chiefest
of all the Valley, a proper and honest Gentleman, Lord of three great Castles,
and beloved of all the Country for his bounty and courtesy, him they chose
to marry with Liuerba their Lady. Rosicleer very well pleased with this
Gentleman's noble disposition, concluded upon the marriage, so that in four
days the Lord Brandidonio and the fair Liuerba were created Lord and Lady of
the valley, and in token of obedience, took the oath and assurance of their
subjects, where they lived long time in quietness, their subjects as well at
ease to have such Governors.

Rosicleer departed from the valley of the mountains, meets with two Princes
christened, and by adventure is carried from them again.
ROsicleer remained four days in the valley of the mountains, for so it was
called, to solempnize the marriage between Brandidonio and Lyuerba, whereat
the tenaunts of the valley being present, and seeing his personage so tall and
goodly, and joined with so good grace and gentle behavior judged him a person
rather celestial then mortal, and believed that God had sent him for their
deliverance, from the miserable subjection wherein Arglon had holden them, so
they reverenced and honored him, as if they had seen in him some undoubted
image of immortality. But Rosicleer, this marriage being finished, having no
more to do, made to assemble the greatest of the Country, unto whom he said,
that he had vowed a voyage which might not be left off, and therefore now at
his departure, he prayed them to accept well of his so short tarrieng, and in
his absence to do the honor diligently to Brandidonio and Lyuerba, which was
due unto their liege Lord and loving Lady. They ouer-charged with grief, for
the lack of him whom they loved as their nigh kins-man, laid to stay by
gifts and other offens, but when it booted not, they swore faith and obeysaunce
toward their Lord, and for a remembrance of their love, they forced upon
Rosicleer an horse which was Argions, a very tall and strong Horse, which he
refused not, as being verge commodious to travail with, and then after this,
took his laue of Lyuerba, her Father and Mother, and Brandidonio her Husband.

Being ready to mount on horse-hacke, a younger brother of Lyuerbas, called
Telyo, throwing himself on his knees before Rosicleer, besought him to grant
him his suit, which Rosicleer willingly promised, bidding him say on. Telyo
then said, Sir, fith you are to, trou^^le alone, and have none to serve you by
the way, may it please you to show me the favor, as to retain me for your
Squire, Rosicleer well pleased with the good affection, which Telyo bare
toward him, embraced Tielio with much love, and thus made answer. Telyo,
thou art before hand with me, for I have given thee thy request, so that I
may not excuse my self of my former promise, although I would advise thee
rather to tarry at home in the delyghts of thine own nation, then to put thy
self in danger in a for^eine and unknown count r^y.

Telyo gladder of this, then of a good purchase, prepared all things ready for
their journey, and took his leave of his Father, Mother, and kins-folke, who
were nothing miscontent of his choice, for that the company was such, as
every one could have wished his room. Rosicleer and Telyo took on their
way, neither speaking to other, for the thought of their so loving parting
from their frieudes, which as yet stacke fresh and green in their
rememberaunce.

And sooth it is, that within a while after Rosicleers departure, to the end
the strangeness of their delivery, might be renewed by their posterity, and
no age should leave to speak thereof, they founded an House of Roligion, with a
fair Temple, wherein, at the one side of the high Alter, they erected a pillar
of Marble, very fair and curious, bearing the true counterfaite of Rosicleer,
with the History of Argion, the freeing of Lyuerba, and all that consequently
follows in that story, so that long time after, this monument of restoring
the inhabitaunts, was found by our age, in the pursuit of adventures in that
country. Brandidonio and Lyuerba here ruled long time in peace and
tranquillity, and from them descended all the Lords, which since have had the
governance of that Valley.

But from thence to follow Rosicleer on his way, the History says, that
with his Squire Telyo, he travailed so long through Almaine, that he came to an
Haven of the Sea, in a manner direct against great Britain, in Picardie, where
there were two great and fair ships tarieng for the wind, to coast over
into England. Rosicleer hearing of this in his Inn, went out of his hostrie to
the havens mouth, there to speak with the master of the ship, for to become
a passenger, and coming thither, he saw many Knights and servant, by
lykelihoode of some worship, pass too and fro, which made him think it was no
Merchaunts vessel, but yet he entered the ship, and there espieng two Knights
young men, richlye apparailed, and placed in two several feats, to whom, the
either Knights in the ship, made their obeysaunce, courned his face to have
gone out again. But the young Knights seeing Rosicleer, and greatly delyghted
in his beauty and comeliness of personage, called to him, Rosicleer courning
toward them mande is we reverence, as unto so great estates. The Knights
receiving him with as great courtesy, demanding of him gently what
countrieman he was, and what he sought there Rosicleer lookeing upon them,
very sadly and soberly answered. I am come my Lords from the Valley of the
mountains, and I am desirous to see great Britain, for my affairs which lie
in that Country, whether as I have learned by others, your ships are
prepared, I am therefore to beseech you, to do me the pleasure, as to grant
me passage in your company. They well contented with-all, for that he was a
young Gentleman excelling in beauty all those which they had seen, told him
they were willing thereunto, and that if he needed ought unto this iournes,
they would minister unto his wants. Rosicleer gave them many thanks, for this
their courtesy: but they demanded farther how he was called, and of what
lineage he came. To the first, Rosicleer answered, that his name was Rosicleer,
and minding to cut off the rest, he desired them to spare him for the other at
that time, and to content themselves with this, that he now came from the
valley of the mountains, wherefore they believed, that he was naturallye borne
there.

By this means, Rosicleer was enter tained with these Lords, and grew
farther in acquaintance with them* that he knew the one to be Bargandel the
Bohemian cousin germane to the Emperor Trebatio, and eldest son to the King
of Bohemia, the other to be the Prince. Liriamandro brother to the Princess
Briana, both of them of his night kin.

The Fortune which linked and conjoined these Princes in this amity, was this.
The King of the great Britain, called Oliuerio, considering that the loss of
the Prince Edward his son, noysed through his Empire for fifteen years
space had so appalled the courages of his Knights, that neither feasts were
made, nor turneyes proclaimed, nor any disportes used with Gentlewomen in his
Country, where-by to fire the hearts of young men to the deeds of arms* But
that either all of them overcome with grief, and mourning still for his
son, forsook to wear armor, or else, such as their own good natures
pricked forwards to try adventures, departed out of his Realm, in other
Regions to become famous, so that the Kingdom of England was very naked of
able Knights to defend it, whereas before it was best known in all the world
for knighthoode and chivalry. The King I say, wisely casting of these things,
did not now so much lament the lack of his son, as fearing the inconvenience
which might ensue by the want of good Soldiers, if any enemy should arise,
provided against this mischief, on this sort.

First, taking the advice of his counsel therein, he caused to be proclaimed
through every Shiere and Markette Town, that such Knights his subjects, as
either were already departed, or now were in mind to depart the realm, and
to serve in other Princes courts, should return to their homes by a day
prefixed in the schedule, upon pain of his high displeasure. This
Proclamation diuulged abroad by the sound of a Trumpet, as many as hoard of
it, either by their friends Letters, or by the rumor spread in other
Countries, resoutned speedely, so that the King in a solemn triumph, taking
the muster of his special knights found himself sufficiently furnished.

Now, the second care was, how to detain them at home, and for this he devised
with his counsel to make a high feast in the City of London, with iustes and
turneys, for all knights aduenturous both Englishmen and forreiners, and to
ordeine such prises as might inuit noble Princes thither. This thus agreed
upon, the king Oliuerio a year before that these feasts should begin,
directed his letters to all Princes christened, and other wise as far as
Turkey, certifieng them that he had appointed iustes to be holden at his city
of London, and prises for the best dooers, and that thither it should be free
for all knights to come and try their forces. The price was a massy crown of
gold all set with pearls and precious stones, valued by all men's deeming at
the price of a great City. The news hereof by the kings letters spread over
all Countries, entised these two Princes likewise, being but of young years
to crave to be made knights by their parents, and to travail to wards England.
So having obtained their purposes, either of them prepared for his journey, and
met together at one time in this haven, neither of them knowing other, nor of
their intents. Wherafter they had knowledge ^a^h of other, and had concionated
about their enterprise, they determined to go together as friends, and had
stayed three days for the wind ere Rosicleers coming, whom good fortune
drove unto the same coast, there to make an assurance of perfect friendship
between these three, like as she had erst done between Donzel del Febo,
Brandizel, and Claueryndo. This knot between these three being the more
insonable, as both it has more hope of succor by the greater number, and
represents in my fancy the figure of a triangle in Geometry, with this Posie.
Every way the same. This amity by degrees increased as their acquaintance
augmented, for Rosicleers conversation was so good, that they were very glad
to have his company, but they lost him, ere they had thoroughly found him, and
as no pleasure in this world may dure, so at the time when these two Princes
most ioyed in Rosicleers company, their pleasure was ouerturned, and their
delight converted to mourning.

For the next day the wind blowing* very calm, ye mariners hoised up the
Sails, and plied their tackelinges so merrily, that with great liking of them
all they rode easily, yet not so as they could attain to the Haven, in good
speed, but that one evening when the moon shone bright, and the waves of the
Sea were still and quiet, the two knights with Rosicleer between them, leaned
over the sides of the ship, rejoicing all three at the brightness of the
stars in the firmament, and at the delicate rumbling, which the wind made in
the bottom of the water. This was so pleasant unto them, as that in this
contemplation they spent the third part of the night, about which time they
heard the cry of a Gentlewoman as it might be in some distress. Then they
looked about them, and espied a little Crayer coming toward them, in which
there was a wild man, for making a Gyaunt, fierce of countenance, and all
hairie of body, of manners savage and cruel, having in the one hand a knotted
clubbe with pikes at the end of iron, so heavy as a less man could not lift
it: and in the other hand haling a fair Gentlewoman by the hair, her face all
bloody with the blows he gave her, and punches with his feet. The Gyaunt
still cried. Turn thy Boat thou falfe and traitorous enchauntresse, or I
will make thy life to answer it me, in that thou have kept me so long from
it. The Gentlewoman never answered him, but continually prayed unto God for
succors. This they both heard and saw easily by Moon light, for the Boat
approached to their Ship, and the two other Gentlemen were much abashed to see
so wild a Gyaunt so near unto them, for they had never seen his like before.
But the noble courage of Rosicleer could not be so countermaunded by the
Gyauntes hugeness, as to suffer such vilany toward any Gentlewoman, and
therefore setting his foot upon the side of the ship, and taking his sword in
his hand, he leaped into the Gentlewomans boat.

Nature as it were willing to manifest her own works and to discover the
secret graces, which she before had covered in his comely personage. For so
as if he had long time experimented the danger of conflictes, boldly he
took upon him this adventure. At his first coming into the boat he struck
not the Gyaunt, but with great moderation and more discreation then was
needful (but that he was very circumspect, and in all things lowly) he
said unto the Gyaunt. Leave of Gyaunt to entreat this Gentlewoman in this
sort, and way well, that it is geeat shame to a man for to lay his hands
upon a woman. The great Geaunt little respecting this courtesy, left the
Gentlewoman to have taken up Rosicleer, and to have thrown him into the water,
but Rosicleer perceiving him, put his naked sword poinant before him.

The Gyaunt rashly ran upon the sword that it entered a little, and
therefore mad angry at his wound, he gave back, lifting up his great Bat
with both his hands to drive at Rosicleer. But Rosicleer as destyned to
greater exploytes, watching the blow, start aside, and closing with the Giant
thrust his sword into his guts. Rosicleer pulled out the sword hastily to have
given him another blow, but the Giant fell upon the plankes gasping for
breath: then Rosicleer stepped unto him, and with maine force tumbled him over
shiphoorde, where he lay drenched in the Sea.

All this the two Princes beheld, and wondered at the great courage of
Rosicleer, but not a little diseased in that they could not help him. For
when he leaped into the Gentlewomans Boat, they cried alowde to their Knights
to let down their Ship boat into the water, but it could not be, before
that the valiant youth had drenched the Giant in the sea, and that the
Gentlewomans boat rode with such swiftness as in short time they lost the
sight of it, with so much grief unto both these Princes, as they might scarce
speak the one to the other.

For when they compared together the shortness of time in which they inioyed
him, and in that short time the great prowess which he had showed before
them, they could not easilye ascerteine themselves, whether they had dreamed
of such things, or seen them waking. But if so be they were not beguiled
either by a dream, or some fantastical illusion, I dare warrant they thought
that in regard of that which God has wrought by him, he could not be but of a
noble estate. Well, when there was no hope of following, they haled up their
boat again to keep their course toward Britain, having hope to meet him
there, otherwise appointing with themselves, if they there failed to go in
quest of him.

I may forget to tell you of his Squire Telyo, but you may easilye think of
his pains by the love he bare his Lord, and I will leave him to your several
considerations of your selves in like cases, being far from your Country,
and farther from your friends whom you have preferred before your Country, the
rather to accompany these noble Gentlemen unto the coast of England, which in
their way still kept on their former dittie, ever talking of Rosicleer, either
commending his good grace, or bewayling his departure, or blaming their own
misfortunes, or extolling his strength, and ever the foot of his song was,
what should the swiftness of the boat mean, and our sodeine acquaintance?
Unto the depth whereof because they could not reach, thereby to quiet
themselves, their sorrow redoubled by misiudging the worst. In the end, the
Wind was so good that it set them on land in the great Britain, not far
from London, where the King was restaunt. Where as soon as they came on
shore, before they presented themselves to the King, they dispatched out one
of their ships with some of their knights and Telyo Rosicleers Squire to
coast the same way which Rosicleer was gone, to the end if Fortune were so
favorable to bring some tidings of him. Afterward themselves with the
majesty that does belong to so great princes, took toward the great city,
viewing on every side the great assembly of people, all the fields and high
ways besides towns and hamlets taken up for knights, as well strangers as
natural, and an infinite number of Ladies and Gentlewomen, coming only to
see the turnayes. The two Princes sent two of their knights before hand to
give understanding unto the king of their coming. The king glad to have the
presence of so noble Princes at his high feast, with a great train of knights
met them without the City, and coming toward them, embraced them with great
love. The story leaves to recount the words of courtesy which passed between
them, and says that they entered into the Pallaice with the king, and were
lodged in one quarter thereof, himself keeping his new guests company that
night, and talking with Liriamandro as concerning his daughter in law. At whom
he learned the whole state of Hungary, with the appendices as touching that
matter, which in some respect made him very sorrowful to hear of the
continual affliction wherewith Briana tormented her self in the monestarie of
the river. And he was as greatly abashed to hear that in Greece they knew as
little of the Emperor Trebatio, as in England he heard of the Prince Edward.

Then Liriamandro espyeng the king somewhat inquisitue, proceeded farther with
his talk, in declaring the adventure which had joined him and Bargandel, and
how that they two met at the Haven with a Gentleman called Rosicleer, and so
consequently of the battle with the Giant, the king hearing of so many
virtues in Rosicleer, as Liriamandro did his uttermost to set them forth,
greatly wished to have seen him. Here the story leaves the King and these
Princes to the providing of things necessary for the tilt, and goes on with
Rosicleer, whom these Princes left upon the maine sea.

Certain accidents which befell Rosicleer after his departure from the two
Princes.

Cap. 31.
ROsicleer made an end of the battle with the Giant, and the Gentlewoman so
well revenged by his means, kneeled down before him to have kissed his hand,
and to give him hearty thanks for his great friendship showed in working her
delivery from the terrible Gyaunt. Rosicleer took her up, and demanded of
her what she was, and by what adventure she was brought into the Gyaunts hand.
The Gentlewoman answered. Know my Lord, that I am named Calinda, Daughter to
the wise man Artimedoro, of whom peradventure you have heard speaking before
this time, inhabiting in an Islande not far from hence in the midst of the
sea, which may never against his will be seen of any body. This wise man my
Father having sent me on a message in this boat to a friend of his, Lord of an
Island not far hence, my Fortune was such, that when I returned by this
Gyantes Island, there entering on land for fresh water, I was espied by this
Giant who made to me to have taken me, but I fled toward my boat, which I
could not recover so soon, but that he entered with me. But as he shoued to
land, my boat drove backward into the stream, and had lost the sight of his
Island. The cruel Gyaunt seeing this, and thinking that I had done it by my
knowledge, would have killed me, and entreated me in such sort as you saw.
Now as for the lightness of the boat sir, I believe says the Gentlewoman,
that it is guided by my Fathers Art, and that we are on the way toward his
Island. Whereat Gentleman I beseech you take no thought, although you have lost
your company, for I doubt not but that by my fathers cunning you shall be
joined, and then my Father shall serve you loyally, for the mercy you have
showed me.

Rosicleer much wondered both at the Gentlewomans speech, and at the Giants
cruelty without good occasion, and especially at the incredible swiftness of
the boat, sailing in the sea faster then a bird flies in the air, which made
him judge Artimedoro to be a very wise man, in that he had so great
authority over the Sea. And therefore he rejoiced himself upon hope to see
the wise man, at whom he might demand some news as touching Prince Edward
his Father, and Donzel del Febo his brother. And for that he questioned with
the Gentlwoman many things as concerning her Father, of whom he learned many
things.

Now as they talked of these things, the boat stood still as it had been
sanded. Rosicleer much abashed thereat looked on every side what it should be
that stayed it, and gaged the water with a poale, but he perceived nothing,
wherefore he thought ye peradventure under the boat in the place there lay some
Adamant stone, of the virtue whereof he had read before times that it draws
iron unto it, and stays the Ships which sail over it. And as he was much
perplexed in his thought, not knowing how to remedy it, he saw before him a
little Island, the freshest and most delectable that in his life he had seen,
and the Boat already fastened to the bank. Then the Gentlewoman bad him not
to fear, but to come out on land, for the Island which he saw before him was
her fathers Island.

This was strange unto Rosicleer, to see the lyquide Sea so soon converted to
selide earth, but he made not strange to come on land at her bidding. Where by
and by the wise man met them, a man by seeming very aged, his bearde all white
and reaching to his wast, with a little white rod in his hand, as some token
either of his honor or profession. The wise man for the great pleasure he had
to see Rosicleer, said unto him on this wise. Right noble and most worthy
Rosicleer, you are welcome unto this my Country, for by your coming I have
been more at my hearts ease, then during my life I have been, and many years
past have I longed for your presence. For although I knew for a certeintie that
hither you should come, yet the time when I knew not, which has hitherto been
concealed from mortal men; and only made known to God himself. I knew
likewise so soon as my daughter Calinda was borne, that she should be set
free from cruel captivity and perpetual dishonor by you only, but the
manner how, was not revealed withal, only that it should be when the
providence of God directed by his will, committed the execution thereof to
Fortune. Thus may we men for all our cunning neither alter the course of
things appointed by destiny, nor yet find other remedy then is permitted by
the foreknowledge of God. As this my Daughter could never have been saved but
only in that same manner as you gave her succor. The reason was, because my
knowledge could not wade so deep as to foresee every thing concluded by
destynies, the self same thing being subject under the line of destiny that
I should not perceive it. So my daughter went on land unto the Gyaunts Island,
which I neither foresawe to prevent, nor could have prevented if I had
foreseen. Yet that which was in my power, I so ruled the boat that it came to
your ship, thereby to have relief at your hands for my care: This have I
told you at large the inhabilitie of our cunning against the influence of the
stars, whereby you may perceive how much I am beholding unto you the rather
to make bold upon my service, if in any respect either my art or my armor
may do you pleasure.

Rosicleer attentively listening unto the wise man's discourse, in the end
gave him great thanks for his so lyberall offer, promising likewise the
service of his body, for other thing had he naught, to do his command in any
matter reasonable. With this the wise man took him by the hand, and lead him
toward a great and beautiful pallaice seated upon the shore. Rosicleer with a
curious eye gazed on each part of the Pallaice, so situate in an unknown
Island, and was never content, for in deed, the subtlety of the workmanship
surpassed far the craft of masonrie in our days. But here he abode two
days with Artemidoro, served of delicate vyandes, and strange devises, able
to quicken a dead man's stomach, being here better pleased with his
entertainment, then he was ever otherwise.

One day sitting at the board with Rosicleer, the wise man espieng him
occupied in his thought, about his journey to England, sported with him in this
sort. Rosicleer, I see well, this Country breeds not such things, as may
content your appetite, and I hold you excused, for your desire coueteth after
Mars and martial feats, wherefore as my learning shows me, your lust
carries your stomach into England, there to be knighted. Truly fair sir, you
have good reason thereunto, for the time is at hand, where-in your knighthood
must be manifested. But for to do you honor, I my self will attend you
thither, in respect, both of your friendship past toward my daughter Calinda,
and other greater matters to come, which I hope shall be accomplished. I know
not in deed the time when it shall be, neither the manner how, but this I
know, that by your means I shall once escape the death. Now as well for your
own sake, being for the very moment of your birth, illumined with more then
mortal graces, as I have already engrossed the dolorous life of the Princess
Briana, so will I be also the Register of your acts, to inroll your memory in
the Records of Fame, that it shall be maintaineable, against all
Counter-pleas, and forged Evidences. This will I do for-you, besides the
perpetuity of my service in other matters. And for your Brother Donzel del
Febo, he has already found a Chronicler (meaning this by Lyrgandeo) such as
his worthiness meriteth.

Rosicleer tickeled at his talk, touching his brother Donzel del Febo, bowed
himself thankfully, and requested him to go on, saying. Right honorable.
Sir, seeing you have entered into this discourse, I pray you continue it, for I
knew naught as pertaining to this my brother, save that he was lost in the Sea
being very young, and I have hethertoo thought that he had been dead: and since
nothing is hid from your knowledge, I pray you likewise satisfy me in the
same manner, as concerning the Prince Edward my Father, that I may seek him,
if there he hope of finding, on this earth.

Most noble Prince, answered the wise man, you draw me unto a long tale, and
in some point nothing pertinent to you. But know for a truth, that the
Gentleman of the Sun your brother is alive, already Knighted, and for his
first prises, he has achieved such marvelous deeds of arms, as that it
staudeth you in hand to besturre your ^e^fe if you mind to be matchable,
being the only man as yet vnparagonized through the world. He is now in a
Country, where without knowledge of his Estate, he is notwithstanding, much
praised for his personage, the Region far distant from this our Clymate, that
if you put your self on the way to seek him, your pain should be infinite,
and as I can learn, needelesse, for ere that you pass out of this Country,
he will come to seek you here. Now, as to your demand touching the Prince
Edward, whom you call your Father; I do you to wit, that he was dead before
that you were begotten, and that the royal Princess your mother, now
destitute of an husband, shall in time recover her lawful husband, and you
shall know your Father, for the greatest and myghtiest Prince christened.
Furthermore, because it is forbidden me to discover of the great secrets of
God, until it be his pleasure that all men shall know it, I may not answer
you, but the event shall witness with my Prohecie. Now, will I make ready for
your passage into Britain, for there must be showed the first flower of your
manhood.

Rosicleer was greatly confused in his understanding, at the words which the
wise man spoke, being yet plain and easy, and he able to make English of
every word, but the cause was, for that he was unable to find out the true
sense, which this divinity carried, being repugnaunt to his former belief.
So hacking and gesting about it to make lykelihoodes of impossibilities, and
examining every point by it self, yet could he never be setteled, nor make
good construction of it. For his Mother told him, that Prince Edward was his
Father, the wise man delivered the contrary. And if his Mother knew his
Father, then how could his father be dead ere he was begotten, and how
could his Mother recover her lawefull. Husband, being dead, and how could
his Father become such a Monarch after his decease, and so forth.

Now if he gave credit to the wise man, yet no man better knows the childs
Father then the mother. So that for reverence of the wise man, and to reconcile
his mothers words with the wise man's reed, he framed to himself for that
time a new article of belief, that one thing might be, and not be. Yet time
found out a better solution of this Sophisme. For this time seeing it was no
reason to importunate the wise man upon this matter, it contented him to know
for a truth that Donzel del Febo his brother was yet alive, and he gave him
hearty thanks for the courtesy he had showed him herein. But for his
voyage into England he left that to his direction, since he perceived his
meaning therein. The wise man said it should be so provided for as best
beseemed his honor.

The third day after when all things were in a readiness, Artemidoro brought
out of his armorie a rich armor and gave it to Rosicleer. The armor was
framed so cunningly, as for workmanship, cost, and secret virtue, it excelled
all that I have seen. It was closely wrought, curiouslye engraven, enchased
with precious stones, and above all, this efficacy, that it resisted ye edge
of all metal, this effect proceeding either from ye stones, or ye examination
of ye ascendents in the forging thereof. The color of the armor was all
white, well fitting for a new Knight. Artemidoro gave at the same time to
Rosicleer, a bay Courser, strong and wight of lymme, which he had bought for
that purpose in the Country of Spain, where the best breed of such horses
were. And after all things set in order thus for their journey, taking men with
them for their necessary uses, they shipped themselves in a fair Bark,
sailing with great swiftness, as the wise Artemidoro had by his skill directed
it, in which journey, the history leaves them, till their sudden approach
unto the Listes, within great Britain.

The great Feasts began in Oliuerios Court.

Cap. 32.
IN the fresh and pleasant month of May, when the green boughs, and sweet
smelling flowers renew joy and gladness in the hearts of young folk, the
great City of London and wide fields there-about, seemed not less covered
with armed Knights, then if ye mighty hoasts of Darius and Alexander had
thither assembled, for the great Feasts and Iustes were so diligently publyshed
in every Region and Country, and the prises which the King had set, were of
such valor, that there came thither from diverse far and strange lands, so
many Knights and Ladies, as that the number of them was infinite. Now that that
especially drew young princes and men of great name thither, was this. The king
Oliuerio had a daughter named Oliuia, the only inheretrix of his Kingdom, of
the age of fourteen years, a beautiful and delycate damzell, as not her like
might be found in all that quarters. For the fame of her singular beauty,
thither came many noble Princes and worthy Knights, to win her liking, each
of them wearing so rich and quaint devises, that their bravery in short time
exiled the long mourning, which had continued in great Britain. The myrthe
which they made, much delighted the King Oliuerio, and it ioyed him much to see
his Court and Country so well stored of Knights and Princes, to whom he gave
honorable entertainment and countenance of good will, as well of his own
subjects as strangers, and all were well content with it, highly commending of
his Court, for magnificense and courtefie. The King at this time was a
widdower, and therefore he sought much the honor of the Princess his daughter.
But to come to our matter, amongst the Knights strangers, the two Princes
Bargandel and Lyriamandro, bare the greatest stroke: next, Don Siluerio Prince
of Lusitania, a young Knight and valiant in arms, already enamored upon ye
fair princes Oliuia, for whom he had been a long time suter in ye Kings
Pallaice, presuming upon his birth and liuelihood, that she should be granted
unto him, and as it fell out, the Princess understood some part of his
desire, but she was of an hautie heart and high mind, making no more account
of Don Siluerio, in respect of that demand, then of another ordinary Knight,
or the refuse of other. For amongst all which were already come, she thought
none merited to be a peer and match for her beauty, being (as my Author
says, such in her own conceipte, as if no Prince were worthy of it.) But
the truth is, that the blind Boy shooting at randon, had ouer-reached his
mark, as appeared in the second shot, at the coming in of Rosicleer* In
the third place there came into this Triumph, the Prince of Irelande called
Argiles, and Don Orgiles Prince of Scotland, and Allamades king of Cornewaile,
all three vassalls and subjects to the King Oliuerio. The fourth room was
assigned to Don Brynco. Prince of Numidia in Affricke, bringing from his
Country many valiant Knights richly armed, and with them Albalaxes King of
Mauritania, a Pagen young and lusty. There came thither also two Gyaunts of an
admirable height and fierceness, being such a terror to the poor Communaltie
inhabiting the villages near to London, that the poor man's fear made them
the more insolent to commit diverse ryots and other trespasses, before the
Feasts began. This was the several countenaunces of the Knights of most
account, but to make short, there came besides, many other knights, both
Christians and Pagans, under the Kings writ of safe conduct, which himself
gave out; that never England more flourished of Knights, nor never Nation was
like to England. But now the first day of the Iustes, before they should ride
to the Tilte, ye King Oliuerio invited all the Kings and Princes to dinner in
his Pallaics, where they were feasted royally, and with great melody. After
the Tables taken up, the Knights went to arm themselves, and the King
conducted by the ancient Lords and Barons of his Court, took up his seat in
a window over the Tilt-yard, and upon a scaffolde before him, reared for that
purpose, he commanded the prises to be put, which were diverse: for unto the
Crown before spoken of, he added a cholar of like valor, and many other
jewels, able for the honor of attaining them, and the worthiness thereof, to
animate a dastard Knight to such an enterprise. After this, the Princess
Oliuia coming forth of the great Pallaice with an hundred Ladies and
Gentlewomen, mounted upon a stately scaffolde very richlye hanged. Among these
Ladies, there was the Princess Siluerina daughter to the King of Scotland, and
Rodosylua Princess of Lusitania, sister to Don Siluerio, and many other
Ladies, Daughters to the great Lords of Britayne.

But in the midst of these, the fair Princess Oliuia showed not less
Majesty then the fresh and fragrant rose does among the briers and stinking
nettles, which notwithstanding have their commendation for their green and
lively verdure. But the scaffolde being filde with Ladies and Gentlewomen,
there came the Knights in place, most of them young and shining in thou bright
armor. The first that pricked himself forward to just, was Allamades king of
Cornewaile, a very good and tried knight, against whom there came to
encounter, and other abled knight, an Almaine set upon a strong Courser. In
their shocke, their spears flew in shiuers, and the king Allamades somewhat
staggering in his saddle, vnhoried the Almaine. After him there came ten other
knights strangers more bold then skillful in feats of arms, all which, the
valiant Allrmades* ouerthrewe, with great pleasure to the King and all his
Court. Their the King called for his Knights, with this, Allamades to give
them place, voyded the lystes, and there entered. Argiles Prince of Ireland,
which with eight several courses brake eight spears, and overthrew eight
knights.

After him, Don Orgiles prince of Scotland came, whom when Argiles espied, not
minding to disturb him, he rode unto the lystes end. Orgiles without being
moved in his saddle cast down twelve knights, and then followed his follow*
Argiles. By and by Don Siluerio came in with a gylte armor gorgeous to
behold, and his Horse barbed with cloth of gold, cut upon silver Imagerie,
being a lustye and valiant Knight, and as the thoughts of the Princess
Oliuia emboldened his courage: so besides, the hautinesse of his stomach
contempned all other Knights, in respect of himself. In his journey, he
dism^unied twentye Knights, within less then half an hour, so that many
thought, he would win the honor of that day. But straight way there
preased forward the two Princes, Bargandel and Lyriamandro, having in their
company more then two hundred knights, with their Haraldes crieng before them,
Bohemia, Bohemia. Hungaria, Hungaria. The two Princes rode upon fair and
strong Coursers, richly armed as became their Estates, their lustiness being
inflamed by their loves, for since their coming to the English Court, they
were esprised with love, Bargandel of the Princess Syluerina, and Lyriamandro
of the Princess Rodasylua, and having obtained the good favors of their
Ladies, they pained themselves to be as bold as the brauest. So finding the
Tilte empty by Siluerios departing, they praunced forward till other Knights
came against them. And either of them in their turns before they lefie the
lystes, ouer-threwe at the least thirty Knights a piece, so blazing their
prowess by the force they showed, that the King and other beholders changed
their opinion, as touching Don Siluerio. Upon this, the two Princes glad of
that days travail, and vaunting themselves before their Mistresses, made
room for others to do their endeauours. After these, the valiant and hardy
Knights of the English Court, came in against the strangers of other
Countreies, where the English men so behaved themselves, as that days honor
was theirs.

Now, as the King was in talk with his Lords, about the glory which his men
had gotten, and every man was attentive to that which was before him,
sodainlye there was heard a great cry amongst the people, on the back side of
the lystes, no man knowing what it meant. By and by there came forth a tall
Giaunt with a train of more then twenty Knights upon a stone horse, which
groned in a manner under his weight. The Giant commanding his Knights to stand
a side, went alone to the window where the King was, there raising up his
Beueare, and forcing out a terrible look, without other reverence, he spoke on
this wise. King Oliuerio, I am Brandagedeon, Lord of the Islands Baleance, and
am hither come because, of the prices which thou have appointed for the best
dooers, I am well known in all the Heathen Country, for by the power which my
Gods have imparted with me, there is no mortal man that may gainestand my
puissaunce, and for that this day thou shall have some trial of this truth,
behold before the night be shut in, there shall no Knight of all these which
are here keep his saddle, unless he keep himself from me. And so in
great pride, as you may presume by the course of his speech, he uttered this,
and pulled down his visour. Then with a great Spear in his hand, he took
the one end of the pale. This his coming was nothing pleasant to the king,
for since his ariuall in that kingdom, he had done many outrages to the poor
subjects of the land. And the king feared least the knights of his Court,
should not be able to maintain their honor against him. Now this monstrous
Giant had not stayed there long, but that a valiant knight a Britain called
Brandaristes made a sign unto him.

These two ran together, and in their shocke Brandaristes with his horse fell
to the ground: but the Giant nothing diseased, held on his way toward another
Knight, by name Brandidarte, a Britain too, a brave Knight and as bold as
Gawayne, but the Gyaunt welcomed him like as the other, and thus in short time
the Gyaunt proouing himself upon more then an hundred knights, of the
hardiest, both strangers and English men, he made them all to descend from
their horses, that the king Oliuerio was much disquieted heereat, and would
have bought out the giants presence if he might, for more then London is worth,
even for the pity which he had upon his knights, not possibly able to
withstand this Giant. The king Allamades beholding the kings countenance
sad, and gessing the cause, would needs adventure the honor which he
before gained, upon the vanquish of such a Gyaunt, and taking a fresh horse
with a choice Spear from the ratier he rode to Brandagedeon, whom the Gyaunt
met so forcibly that Allamades lay on the ground, and Brandagedeon dressing
himself in his saddle passed on. By and by Orgiles Prince of Ireland set upon
the Gyaunt, which somewhat estonished him: but nevertheless Orgiles hap for
himself was in no other manner then his fellows. Then came in Don Argiles to
take Orgiles part, and fiercely encountered the Gyaunt, but to the same
purpose. Now was Don Syluerio ashamed before the Princess Oliuia to have
tarried behind so many good knights, and therefore forcing his courage to
please his Lady, upon a light courser he ran against Brandagedeon, and his
fortune was so good, that he made Brandagedeon to loose one of his stirops and
the raines of his bridle, but Brandagedeon quitted this with more then a
tolerable usury, for he carried him beyond the crouper almost a spears
length, which disgrace before his Lady Oliuia made him wood angry, and
willingly would he have challenged the combat, if both leisure and place had
been convenient. Not long after the Prince Bargandel gathering his forces at
the beholding of the Princess Syluerina, went to encounter the Gyaunt, either
of them being well heated, but diversely, as arising of diverse causes, but
their strengthes increased by their hearts, made their shockes so terrible, as
neither part had great advantage. The Giant fell upon the crouper of his
horse, and rode the length of a carrier ere he might arise again. Bargandel
fell to the ground, with his horse under him. This made him hang his head, and
stirred up his friend Liriamandro for his succors, which caused Brandagedeon
to embrace the saddle how, himself being clean lift out of the Saddle by
Brandagedeon the Gyaunt, and Liriamandro lay on the ground to complain him of
his mishappe before his mistres Rodasylua. After these there was none left so
hardy, as to dare encounter Brandagedeon, which caused the king and other
Princes to look rufully, and the Giant to bear himself as insolently, for
when there was none left, he lift up his voice in these terms. Come
forth, come forth, ye knights of the great Britain, and either know what
the force of Brandagedeon is, or if you dare not appear, send me the prises
presently, for to none of the world they do so rightly apperteine as to me,
and this saying, he gallopped up and down in the place, expecting either some
Knight or the prises. The King seeing none come to answer his challenge was
very angrye, and would have given his best town to have had a Knight which
could have quayled the Gyauntes courage, and for very grief he turned
himself from the window, till the sodeine shout of the people, caused him to
look out again.

Then he espied the people flocking together toward one corner of the list,
and in the midst of them an aged man with a long white beard riding softely
on a Mule, and bearing the countenance of a very wise man. After him he saw
a Knight well harnessed in white armor, richly beset with precious stones, so
that no man in the place had the like, his Helmet had a fine plume, and his
horse the like, the pomell of his Saddle of Golde-smithes caruing, and the
seat all imbroudered with gold and silver. Every thing belonging to the
knight so brave and lusty, that none now but gazed on the stranger. After
him a good distaunce there rode a Gentlewoman an easy pace upon a palfraye,
driving before her a sumptuous horse.

The Gentlewoman coming near unto the Pallaice alyghted, and unlacing her
male, spread a fair Tent in the plain, made all of cloth of gold, with such
strange devises, as neither king nor Keisar in the world but might have
vouchsafed it for himself. But that which was most commendable, was the most
excellent and brave conceits with needle work, which could never have been
wrought but by an exquisite Semster, as indeed the wise Artemidoro was the
workman. Now to make short work, when the pauilion was pight, Artemidoro
leading Rosicleer with him unto the king, spoke on this wise.

God increase thy royal estate king of the great Britain, and advance the
credit of thy whole Court. Wit you most puissaunt Prince, that from mine Island
I am hither come with this young Gentleman, that he may be knighted by your
own hands. And albeit that so great a courtesy neither he nor I have merited
of your majesty, yet understand worthy king, that for his lignage he is such
a one, as not without reason he may crave to be dubbed knight of so mighty a
Prince as you are. And I dare warraunt moreover that it shall not be ill
bestowed on him, as your self shall testify in short time, although you shall
not thoroughly enter into the consideration of his valor, till that his death
be published by report of his drowning, and that much blood shall be spilte
to the greater praise of his prowess, to the contentation of your person, and
to the profit of your royal estate, and be it my tale seem incredible, yet
I beseech you to remember it well, for I will avouch the event as I have told
you. Retain him therefore sir King in your Court, and believe that the time
shall come wherein you would loose the best part of your kingdom to have him
near you. But to the end, this Story now auerred by me, may carry more
authority with your worthy person. Know that this reporter is Artemidoro, of
whose knowledge you have heard before. For with my skill I have done service to
such great Lords as you are. Artemidoro here making a reasonable pause, began
again on this wise.

Sir king, with your majesty's leave, we have here pitched a tent in the name
of the Gentleman, as a challenge against all comers, after you have made him
Knight, the first, which shall unhorse him, shall inioye his tent, the value
whereof shall content him for his journey, and here staieng he said. Sir King
I have done. King Oliuerio all this while not lending his ears idly, as to a
fable in a winters night, but wayeng every point, looked upon Rosicleer, and
well thought that his personage might agree with Artimedoros commendation, but
yet as half in a doubt as touching himself, he made the wise man this
answer. Assuredly Artemidoro with this demand or any other which you shall
require, I am very glad that you take occasion of coming to my Court, for by
the brute of your fame I have long time wished to see you: but to send for you
indeed I was never minded, because as I hear, against your will no man may
speak with you. And to make you answer, I am in purpose to satisfy you, as
well for your own sake, as for this Gentleman's, whose behavior seems to be
such, as without your report, he comes sufficiently commended unto me, I
promise you here to make him knight with mine own hands, and I beseech God he
prove no worse then you foreshew me, Rosicleer and the wise man both bowed
humbly on their horse backs.

The king badde Rosicleer to alyght, which dismounting from his horse, ascended
by a pair of Stayres to a little scaffolde before the Kings window, where
kneeling down in the sight of the whole multitude, he received the order of
knighthood at the kings hands. The king demanded where the young Knight should
receive the swoorde, and the wise man answered, that he should stay for that
till he could conquer it. Then after his duty done to the king, Rosicleer
returned to horse back, and with a lively grace so demeaned himself upon
his horse, as that it well pleased the beholders. Now for that which follows,
you must intend that the wise man uttered his speeches to the king in the
audience of the whole multitude, many knights and other compassing him about
to hear his arraunt, so that few or none but were partakers of it. Amongst
them was Brandagedeon, bearing himself within the lists, as proudly as the
Cock of the game does in the Cock pit, when the crauen is chased. Then
hearing that the tent was put for a reward to him which could unhorse the
young knight, when he saw time he cried aloud to Rosicleer, saying.

In good sooth new knight, thou bewraiest thy folly and lack of experience,
when thou saw me stand in this place with my spear in my hand to make that
challenge, which shall not be in thy power to maintain so surely, but that I
will be the master of thy pauillion, and yet Gods blessing on thy heart for
bringing so fair a Jewel, being indeed fitter for me then for thee.
Rosicleer whose courage never tainted, answered as shortly. It shall be thine
Giant if thou winnest it, and there shall no man forbid thee the possession
of it if thou overthrow me. And without more words he took a great Spear
from the ratter, and tourning his horse head, he rode softly to the place where
the iustes were kept. In his way thither, Rosicleer lifting up his eyes to the
Scaffold of the Gentlewomen, he saws the beautiful Oliuia standing directlye
against his face, exceeding no less the other Gentlewomen in brightness, then
the Moon excels the stars in a frostie night. O poor Rosicleer, what a
look was that which locked thee from thy rest, for with her beauty thou wast
wounded at the heart, that albeit in time the skin ouergrew it and the flesh
healed, yet the skarre remained: and never knight in the world loved more
loyally then thou did. For though the sight was short and the blow quick,
yet the wound was deep and the smart curelesse. O full many a bold
enterprise did thou achieue, ere thou gainedst a reasonable guerdon for thy
great good will. And thou fair Princess being within the hearing of the wise
man's speech, did not spare to lend thine ears to another man's tale, and
shine eyes to another man's bravery, that thy succors being far from
thee, thy heart had not the power to repulse thy adversary, love being the
only occasion of thy unrest. But Lord what alteration both of you felt by the
enterchaunge of your looks, which served likewise for messengers to tell your
tales betwixt you.

And yet I cannot deem but that this love so enraged his courage against
Brandagedeon, as otherwise I may think he had not done so well. But coming
into the place, he addressed himself toward Brandagedeon, both of them now
being in a readiness. The King at this time very sorrowful to see the new
Knight in his first bat^aile to endaunger himself upon a Gyaunt, and would
have talked with Artemidoro about this matter, but the wise man gave no
answer, and to the end not to discover more then was behouefull, he conveyed
himself out of the kings sight. So the king held still his opinion of the
young knights weakness, till the issue disproued his thought.

For in the carryer when the two knights met in the midst of the Tilt-yarde,
the Giants Spear burst upon Rosicleers head peace, no more moving him with
the blow, then if he had stroke against a wall. But Rosicleer hurling at the
breast of Brandagedeon ouerthrewe him and his horse to the ground, the horse
in the fall, brusing the Gyauntes shoulder, that his Knights were feign to
carry him out of the preale, whereat all the standers by with great admiration
beheld Rosicleer, every man being a Prophet as his heart gave him, that
Rosicleer would prove the best knight in the world, seeing that at his first
encounter in tilt, having never had to do with any knight, before be had
overthrown so mighty a Giant.

The King now thought that Rosicleer had well amended the great corsie which
he had taken at his Knights disgrace, and the other Knights were glad to
have that huge monster rid away, bolder and willinger valyauntly to adventure
themselves against Rosicleer then against a Gyaunt, and their courage was the
more, for the richness of the tent which had inuegled their conetous minds to
venture the purchase. But as the knights entered to just with him, he
overthrew them all, being more then an 100. knights, without that any man
was able to sit the second journey. Then the kings knights entered, by name
Brandaristes, Brandidarte, Allamedes, the Princes Argiles and Orgiles, Don
Brunio Prince of Numidia, and other, all which he threw down so lightly, as
that they might not turn one course more that day. Some held more tacke with
him as you shall hear hereafter, but by the way the king turning to his
Lords, spoke on this wise.

Truly my Lords, if I had not my self seen the valourous deeds of this
Knight, I should hardly have credited another, so incredible the truth is that
one should work such masteries. I would the iusts were ended that I might see
this knight unarmed, to know him, and honor him as is reason. True it is
answered his nobles, and for his valor there is not so puissaunt a Prince in
the world, but that he shall have cause to be glad of his service. This was a
breathing time for Rosicleer, but yet I am persuaded that it was no plaieng
time, although no enemy appeared, for he had a greater conflict within his
bones, then he professed outwardly, and therefore his heart neither fully
assured, nor yet in danger, gased upon the beauty of Oliuia. Whereby the fire
entering closely by the veins, wasted and consumed his flesh, sooner then he
felt the flame or could think of remedy: but better considering that he was
within the compass of loves segniorie, and that his matter was to be tried at
the great assise in loves dominion, he took better aduisement, to alter it to
an action upon the case of covenant against his mistress, the matter arising
upon exchange of looks as you have heard. And for this cause he enterteyned
Sergaunt hope to be his Lawyer, and feeyd diverse others to assist him, but
master Despair an old stager had won the day of him, had not the whole
Bench, and especially the chief Justice Desert, stayed upon a demurre, which
relieved much Rosicleers courage, and made him look more freshly, upon hope to
find out better evidence for recovery of his suit.

But as Rosicleer thus plied his cause at the Bar, so gentle Cupide attended
upon his Mistress, faithfully serving him, and beating into her head the
remembrance of his acts, and the beauty of his personage, that the windows
of her desire being set wide open, she viewed her fill, wishing yet to see his
face, thereby to comfort her self, if his visage were aunswerable to his
virtue. Now Don Siluerio with an envious eye, minding to interrupte this
medlea, provoked Rosicleer to the lystes, which Rosicleer refused not.
Rosicleer shaked somewhat in his saddle, but yet without danger of falling,
and Don Siluerio with his Courser tumbled to the ground, so evil entreated,
as that he was feign to forsake the lystes. The Princes Oliuia remembering his
former importunity, was nothing agreeued, thinking thereby his suit to have
slaked, the rather to delight in her new champion.

By this time, the greater part of the afternoon was spent, and very few
remained in that place, which durst ride a course with Rosicleer, albeit the
number of Knights were more than three thousand. But last of all Bargandel and
Lyriamandro willing to prove themselves upon the new Knight with great
courage, which the sight of their Mistresses caused in them, rid both against
Rosicleer, and in their way as they two straue who should be first,
Bargandel giving the spurs to his horse ran against Rosicleer, Bargandel in
his race hit so strongly, that his spear flew in pieces, but Rosicleer knowing
Bargandel by a devise that he had, and mindful of his former courtesy, when
he came near him, raised up the end of his spear, and rode by without
touching of Bargandel.

Bargandel not feeling his adversary thought that he had missed his rest, and
therefore taking another spear for the re-encounter, he rode again toward
Rosicleer, but Rosicleer did as he did before, whereby he clearly perceived
the knights intent to be for to spare him, and waxing mad angry he avoided the
place. Presently stepped in the Prince Lyriamandro, to whom likewise Rosicleer
so behaved himself as unto Bargandel, albeit himself was well stirred with
these shockes. Lyriamandro as mad as Bargandel, to find a friend without
occasion, and not knowing his meaning, rode after Bargandel, where both of them
departed to disguise themselves thinking to beguyle the Knight, if peradventure
he had had some knowledge of them. Not long after, the Trumpets blowed the
retreat, and the Iustes should have ended, when these two Knights entered
with yeolowe plumes and guylded armor, their horse trappings all of yeolowe,
and parting company, the one of them ran against Rosicleer, whom he met so
strongly, that their spears flew in pieces, neither of them being unhorsed,
whereat all the people were dismayed, for no Knight that day but was
overthrown of as many as Rosicleer had encountered. But these two Knights
rode again the second time, and as with more cholar, so with fiercer stomachs
they met, that Rosicleer turned with his horse more then four paces
backwards, having much a do to bring him forward, and the strange Knight lost
his stirrops and fell to the ground with his horse over him. His companion
took his room and ran twice against Rosicleer, neither of them loosing
their seats, but at the third encountrie he fell to the ground as his fellow
did, Rosicleer a little diseased in his saddle, recovered lightly. The yeolowe
Knights thus overthrown mounted on their horses to reurne the way which he had
come, sore displeasaunt at the little harm they had done unto Rosicleer, but
they beshrewed themselves for the further attempting of his acquaintance, and
musing who it should be, they remembered themselves of the young Gentleman
Rosicleer and of his great prowess, whereto themselves were privy, thinking
that perhaps it might be he, but yet because of his young years, they
removed this thought again, and could not well judge who he was.

Then the King commanded every knight to leave off, at which the noise of the
instruments were heard so loud, that the whole place rang of the sound
thereof. Oliuia now minded to descend with the other Ladies, wherefore the
Knights and other Princes flocked together to give their attendaunce, among
whom, Rosicleer as forward as the best in good will, presented himself unto
his Mistress, which pleased her not a little. Entering into the great Court of
the Pallaice, they there alyghted, where the King welcomed them, making
several tokens of courtesy to every one, and coming to Rosicleer he desired
him to be at his appointment for that night, for that he had great desire to
see him unarmed. All the rest gladly obeyed, but Rosicleer with his beuere
shut, requested his Majesty of pardon, for that it behooued him to disarme
himself in his Tent, till the wise man had permitted the contrary, and so
saying, he took his leave of the King, entering into his Tent, where he found
the wise Artemidoro, which with two Pages abided his coming.

When Rosicleer was within, they drew the curtains so close, that Rosicleer
was not seen of any, and then helped to unarm him. After the tables were
covered and the board was furnished of al delicacies which Artemidoro had
thought on, the wise man himself being both Cook and Cater. Rosicleer sitting
down, gave him hearty thanks for his good provision, but in deed his
stomach was full with the Princess Oliuia, which had so possessed his
entrayles, that the dainty dishes did not a whit delight his appetite. During
this time, the Princes and the Knights which supped with the King, highly
ertolled Rosicleers worthiness, each of them being desirous to know him, for
they all judged him to be of high parentage. Thus was this night bestowed till
the day came, wherein they were to expect fresh matter of discourse and
table-talke.

An adventure which chanced in King Oliuerios Court.

Cap. 33.
THe next day after divine service finished, the king invited to break-feast
all the Knights, and that done took his place in that order as you have heard
before, looking that some strange Knight should just with the new knight. Now
when the place was peopled with both gentle and ungentle, and that the
Princess Oliuia was placed on her scaffolde, in came Rosicleer, mounted upon
his courser, and vaunted himself as ioyously before his mistres as if he had
not feared the skirmish with ten Giants, but that which lyked the Princess
beft, was a conceit devised in the pencill of his spear, being a burning
torch, the ware dropping from it, signifieng thereby the misery of lovers,
with this posie underneath in Roman letters.

Extinguo and Extinguor. After Rosicleer was thus entered many strong and
valiant Knights, such as had not iusted the day before, desired to try
themselves upon the new Knight, especially Albalaxes King of Mauritania, who
upon hope to be Lord of the rich Tent, took a great spear, and with all his
force ran against Rosicleer, but Rosicleer was not taken so tardie in the
receipt, but that he met the valiant Pagan with such strength, as horse and man
tumbled to the ground. Rosicler rode on somewhat troubled with this
encountrie, and ere he was well set in his sadble, there ran against him
another Pagan Lord of Busia, but Rosicleer sinely unhorsed him, and in the same
course ouetthrew four others, that there was not a knight lefie to dare him.
At this time he tarried sometime awayting for new comers in, but there was
none. Only at a corner of the lystes, he saw a huge Gyaunt in white armor
upon a great Courser, with a hoarce and disdainful voice, commanding the
people to make him room, and not far from this Giant, a gentlewoman upon a
palfray in strange attire much different from ours, her face was all bedewed
with tears as if the Giant had used violence toward her. The Giant approaching
to the place where the King stood, made no reverence: but the Gentlewoman
kneeled down, saying. Know most excellent Prince that the renown of this
Court, has brought me from far Countries hither, chiefly for one cause, which
the wickedness of this Gyaunt has now made two, the original of them both
you shall hear now under one. In the farther part of the East near unto the
great Cataya, there governs a Princess named Iulia, as yet but young of
pears, but not young for handsomnesse, heeing now as it were in the pride of
all her beauty. Her Father was a right cunning Magitian, instructing her so
perfectlye in his skill, as now therein there are few comparable. For since
his death, she her self diuined by her knowledge that she should be prisoner
to two Giauntes, and should be enlarged by one Knight, which should fight with
them both. For the case should stand thus, that if her Knight were vanquished
she should as perpetually captiuate be at their command, otherwise to be at
liberty if they were yelden. Her self foreseeing this, and not finding who
he might be, has provided by her knowledge not to be beguyled: for by her
Art she made this sword, which no Knighte may ever vnsheath, but only he
which must fight with the two Giants for her lyhertie, and besides, the sword
is such as without it, it were an hard adventure, but with it the Knight may
boldelye venture on his foes. The sword she made and kept, close till time
these two Giannts by night assailing her, got the Lordship of her person, after
which time by a trusty servant, she caused this sword to be conuayed unto me
with this command, to travail for her sake in all Princes Courts, and to
seek out the Knight, which could and should maintain her quarrel. Three years
are passed since I under took this enterprise, and within this three months
landing in an Island toward the West, after a long journey to no purpose, it
was my fortune to meet this Giant Candramarte, there making him pertaker of my
suit, he requested to prove the adventure, which I granted: but when he
could not draw it out, being covetous of the sword, he denied it me again,
saying. For so much as you go to the King of Englands Court, there to seek
some Knight, which will do his devour in your mistress behalf. No man shall
attempt the adventure of the sword, but he shall first try his forces upon
me, and if by him, I be vanquished or slain, let him take the sword, other wise
I will with hold it from all men: with this he promised to bear me company,
and I of two-euills determined to choose the less. Albeit at this instaunt I
am in greater extremity, by reason of this Gyaunts wrong done to me, and my
mistress thraldom. This is the necessity which drove me hither, and I am
humbly to beseech your Majesty, discreetly to weight my cause, and to give
remedy by your subjects as you best may.

Candramarte all this time standing by, in the end, auerred her tale to be
true, and farther intimated to the Knights and Princes, that seeing he could
not draw out the sword, there should no man be master of it, but by the
mastrie of him: but says he, I will defend it against any Knight which shall
demand it. All the Knights beheld the sword with the rich hangers, as the
fairest which they had seen, but the King somewhat angry at the Gyauntes
rudeness toward the Gentlewoman, said to him in this manner.

Candramarte thou have done ill to take this sword from the Gentlewoman, for
as it seems Iulia made it not for thee, and thy pride is over great to
suppose, that none in the world will demand it of thee. The Gyaunt angerlye
looking upon the King as though his eyes would have flien out of his visage,
said to the King. Demand it then thy self sir King, or set any of thy
knights to ask it, and I will then make answer unto thee how rashly thou
have taken upon thee to correct me. These speeches were delivered with so high
a voice by ye Giant, that all ye knights which were in the compass heard it,
but no man spoke a word, so that the Kings choler increased both against the
Giant and his own subjects. And I must bear with them, for the Giant was great
and tall, and as hardy as a Lion, and no man living very near matchable for
so good Fortune: but yet there way within the lystes both a hardier and more
fortunate Knight, even the good Rosicleer, which ouer-hearing his indiscreet
talk unto the King, coming near unto the Giaunt, took him up in this sort.

Candramarte, content thy self, and learn to know unto whom thou speak,
for I tell thee that King Oliuerio has such Knights in his Court as can make
thee amend thy rusticitie, though thou were more untaught then thou art, and
for that thou shall not mistrust me, behold I am the last and the least of
them, yet as one which desires to serve him with the most. In his name, and in
behalf of the Gentlewoman, I charge thee surrender the sword unto the
Gentlewoman, or if thou will not that, do thou take that part of the field,
which shall best like thee, for in this quarrel I will either kill or be
killed. With a terrible countenance Candramarte stared upon Rosicleer, as who
should say, dare thou speak so boldly, and perceiving him to be but a young
Knight, which he noted by his white armor, in great scorn he answered thus. I
see well foolish Knight thou have not been long acquainted with the burden of
armor, for if thou were in thy kind, and had well wayed the success of
Combatons, thou would shake every joint of thee to behold me. But thy
ignorance makes thee leap beyond thy lash, and thrusts thee forward to
thine own decay. But seeing thou have made choice thy self of thy
deaths-man, let us go to the battle, for I would not but that thou should
repent thee of thy foolishness. So Candramarte broched his horse with the
spurs, and Rosicleer did the like, which appeased the Kings displeasure, that
he knew not how to recompense his for wardnesse in doing him pleasure, albeit
it may be if he loved Rosicleer, that he somewhat mistrusted the event because
the Gyaunt was big and Rosicleer unexercised in arms, and that which was
chiefest without a sword, but for remedy thereto, he caused a sword of his
own to be fetched, wherewith he charged a Knight to deliver it to Rosicleer
with this commandment. That seeing in his name he has so well fitted
Candramarte for his auns were, and for that cause was to take the battle
upon him, now he prayed him to wear this sword likewise for his sake,
which he would warrant to be good. The Knight did his message accordingly,
but Rosicleer making his excuse gentlye, returned the sword with this auns
were, I humbly thank the Kings Majesty for so high a present, the not
receiving whereoff comes not of any refusal but by a promise which I have
made, as his Majesty can testify, never to wear sword, but if I win it,
and therefore I crave pardon at his majesty's hands for this discourtesie,
otherwise I were greatly to blame, if I thought not my self honored by being
girte in a Kings weapon. The messenger delivered Rosicleers auns were in the
same words as Rosicleer had given it out, so the King somewhat lamenting
the Knights wilfulness, as he thought, weaponlesse to wage battle with so
abled a warrior, mused upon this and for the rest commended him to God. All
the standers by were sorry to see the new knight so courageous as to fight with
a Gyaunt without a weapon, and especially the beautiful Princess Oliuia could
not but be an angered at the new knights ieoperdous adventure, as if she had had
no small title or claim to his person.

A dangerous battle between Candramarte and Rosicleer.

Cap. 34.
As they prepared themselves to the carrier, the people gathered together to
see this dangerous fight between the new knight and the Giant Candramarte,
and they as glad to see the issue, upon their light coursers with their Spears
in their restes so violently hurled against the other, that the ground yielded
under their feet, the force of their strong arms joined with the fury of
their horse, in such wise that the Gyaunt made small shieuers of his great
Spear, and constrained Rosicleer to take his pillowe on his horse back, but
the new Knight gave the Gyaunt so mighty a blow that he made his stiroppes
fall from him, and quickly closing with the Gyaunt he drew him by force from
the Saddle, and threw him to the ground, so that he somewhat bruised the
Giants shoulder bone, and presently would have turned again upon
Candramarte to have made a dispatch of all, but that the Gyaunt being of great
courage, and enforcing himself to endure the remnaunt, got on his legs, and
addressing his sheeld before him, with his Fawlchon in his hand awayted
Rosicleer, for so soon as Candramarte was down, Rosicleer then alyghted and
sent his horse to his Tent, Rosicleer now being on foot made toward
Candramarte. Candramarte first assailed Rosicleer with these words. What
knight think thou to fight with me without a Sword? What if thou had a
better then this which I wear of the Queen Iulias making, were all the Gods
able thereby to warrant thee out of my hands? No, and thou shall deerelye repaye
me the pain which thou have put me to in this fall. Rosicleer coming nearer
answered. Candramarte spare not to do thy uttermost, but cease thy reuilings,
for God which gave me might to overthrow thee, will also give me power and
strength without other weapon to subdue thee, and although I bring no sword
with me, yet I hope in the living God that thine shall profit me, and serve my
turn. Then the Giant was in such a rage that the fury of his choler with the
blustering of his breath issued through the sights of his equimas, in like sort
as the smoke issues out of a furnace. And his second assault was with his
Fawlchon with both his hands fetched compasse-wise against Rosicleer, which
seeing the blow coming with such force forward, lift up his sheeld therein to
receive the stroke, but the blow was so mighty, that it hewed the sheeld
asunder, and descending upon the head piece, made Rosicleer abate his looks
and bow his knees for sauegard to his fall. The Giant doubled upon him, but
Rosicleer never yet daunted, and recovering his courage almost against the
hare, stepped aside, that the Giants blow was all in vain, and being somewhat
out of charity with the first, he determined no more to receive any such
counterbuffes, so that an half hour after the combat had lasted the Giant
might never hit him one blow for all that he could do, For Rosicleer was so
deliver and quick that he lightly avoided them. Candramarte seeing that
Rosicleer would not abide by it, chased him up and down, and Rosicleer lead
the Giant a course likewise: but so that the king and all the lookers on judged
that if the battle should endure long, that the new knight might never escape
the death. Rosicleer assaied many times to couple with the Gyaunt, and to pull
the Fawlchon out of his hands, but Candramarte was so wily and so well advised
of the words which Rosicleer spoke in the beginning of their battle, that he
either kept himself aloof off, or in his pursuit bare the point of his
Fawichon before him: but by this means the battle continued to the no little
coffeehouse of Rosicleer. For although his armor was such that no weapon
might wound him on his body, yet was he sore bruised with travail, and his
bones were in a manner softened with the weariness he had felt for the length
of the battle. As the one gave lightly, so the other pursued eagerly, but as
I say, never fastening a right down blow, but as he might overthwart and
end-long, slipping his blows, and in his pride boasting out these and such like
speeches.

O knight how costly shall the challenge of Queen Iulias Sword be unto thee,
if for it thou must exchange thy life? Had thou not been better never to
have been at this mart. But now know what valor Candramarte is often, for not
all the world are of that credit with me as to bail thee out of my hands.
For the fitting of his action whereunto he would shake his heavy Fawlchon so
gallauntly, and roar so terribly, that every man took Candramarte, rather
for a Tyrant in a Tragedy, then a Iester in a Commedie. And Rosicleers
friends with their pitiful looks bemoned the poor Rosicleer, as if he had
already tasted of most cruel and bitter death in his green youth.

Amongst them the fair and beautiful Princess Oliuia, although as yet
altogether unacquainted with Rosicleer, was a spectatour, neither careless nor
curious, but as one without hope, she only wished well to Rosicleer, whose
bruses were as deep set in her sides, as they were imprinted in Rosicleers
flesh, and every wagging of the most huge and monstrous Candramartes weapon,
stooke a salt tear from her fair eyes, so was she estraunged from her self
and altogether become another man's: the new knight eyeng his mistress became
so desperate that he fully resolved either to close with Candramarte and wring
his weapon from him, or to die upon him. And watching the opportunity, when
the Fawlchon was over the Giants head, bending his body stepped within the Giant,
that the Gyaunt had no other resistance but to fell him to the ground with his
elbowes. This was no great misfortune to Rosicleer, for albeit he was feign
to bow his knees by the thrust of the Giants elbowes, yet couching his body
closely, his chance was so good as to fasten upon the hilts of Queen Iulias
Sword, which he drew out, the scabberd remaining at the Gyaunts side.
Rosicleer now being ceased of the sword stepped from Candramarte, and called
upon him on this wise.

Candramarte now thou shall see who shall have the worst bargain of queen
Iulias sword, since on even hands we shall try this combat, and with this
remembering the Giants former pride, he laid at the giant so thick and so sure
that in short space the blood ran from the Gyaunt in more then ten places,
for the sword was exceeding sharp, and Rosicleer as fell and venomous. Now
may you think that the maiden seeing the Swoorde bared by the Knight, was the
gladdest woman in the earth, and that the king with other Princes and knights
thanked God heartely, for providing Rosicleer of a weapon, the sooner to put
end to the battle. But the Gyaunt assaulted so sore by Rosicleer and wounded
so daungerously, began wholly is mistrust the Prophecy of the Sword, and to
despair of the victory, and as in such cases wan hope is aduenturous: so his
armor being rent, the habergion vnmayled, and all the riuetring out of order,
for that cause the Giant would needs put the trial of the challenge upon one
blow. When this blow was reached as far as the Gyaunt might, to have
descended with more violence upon Rosicleers head piece, Rosicleer being more
quick then he, met the blow cross ways that he cut off both the Gyauntes
arms hard by the elbowes. The Giant thus maimed, yelling out a loathsome
cry, reviled and railed on Rosicleer as a man distraught, and that which most
increased his pain, was not the torment of his disfigured arms: but either
the shame of the victory, or the envy at Rosicleer, but Rosicleer making
little account of him, took the Scabbard from his side and so left him.
Candramarte still followed blaspheming and cursing both God and man, and when
he could neither be his own executioner, nor procure another to take the
pains, swear, that for sparing his death, he would devise all the mischief
he might against Rosicleer, and that he would practice his death also, if
possibly he could invent the means. But truly if I had been in Rosicleers
case, I should not have been so strange: seeing, that both it should have
been the Giants last request, and so little encomberaunce to wards me. But
the king, Princes, and knights were so toyous of the victory against the
Gyaunt, as they bare countenance of more joy outwardly, then they had erst
received, every one openly desiring to see him unarmed: but chiefly Bargandel
and Liriamandro, being in some jealousy of ye knight whom they had found a
friend, ere they looked for, supposing that peradventure he was Rosicleer, of
whom the sodeine adventure in the Sea had berefte them. And Queen Iulias
Gentlewoman seeing the combat tried, and the aduenturer of the Sword
achieved, concluding thereby that this was he for whom she had made so long a
journey, saluted him curteouslye with his ambassade. Now that it is evident
noble Knight, that you are the person, for whose help this swoorde was framed
by my mistress, I am to certify that my Lady greeteth you by me, and gives
you warning that for her sake you must maintain the fight with two brave
giants, jointly combattant against you only. For this she has sent you this
sword, the commendation whereof, albeit not unknown lies in the continual
proof, which she requesteth you never to forsake, for it will much further you
in your enterprises. Whereto I beseech you give credit and deal effectually as
she has hope in you. But now give me ye sword that I may bear it to the king
and the other Princes, that they may justify the truth of my former avouch. So
Rosicleer delivered the swoorde into her hands with the sheath, which the
Gentlewoman brought before the King and the knights then present, which all
attempted the pulling out, but could not do it, as if the scabbard had been
a piece of the same metal whereof the Sword was, and not severed by edge or
tool, which made them all confess, that to the new knight it was proposed,
and to him apperteined the fight with the two Giants for the franchising of
queen Iulia.

The king redeliuered the swoorde into the Gentlewomans hands, and bad her
yield it again to Rosicleer, which she did, and taking her leave of him
received this for answer. That he recommended himself unto her good grace,
heartely thanking her for so great care over him, as to provide a sword,
whereof he had need, as her self can witness, and for the rest he promised
not to fail her as he was true knight to God and the worlds. The Gentlewoman
with this recommaunde gallopped away as fast as her palfraie might carry her,
the whilst Candramartes knights removed their Lord out of that place into
his Tent, whence afterward with great grief for his sore maime they conuaied
him into his Island, wherein having settled himself, as mindful of his oath, he
never left from imagining of crafty means, and coining new policies to
bring Rosicleer to the death.

When Candramarte was carried into his Tent, Rosicleer mounting upon his horse,
took a great Spear in his hand, and stood at the lists end, thinking that
some knight would come against him, but they were all so schooled with the
sight of this last victory, that never a Knight showed himself. Wherefore the
King commanded to sound the Trumpet to proceed unto the disposing of the
rewards for their travail. An Heralde demanding alowde who had done best,
they all referred the prices to Rosicleer. The King would not contend with
them, but (says be) I will that my daughter have the bestowing of them where
she best likes as touching this tourney.

She with much shamefastness which her colored cheeks bewrayed, accepted
the charge, and taking the crown with the choler in her hand, she caused the
new Knight to he called before her, who burning in love toward her, no
less then she was seruent in lyking toward him, dismounted at the first
call, and between the two Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro mounted up the
Scaffolde where the beautiful Princess was, before whom he appeared with
greater fear arising of his conceit concerning his indignity, then erst
attached him in the fight with Candramarte without a weapon.

The two Princes coming before Oliuia, made their humble obeysaunce, and
Rosicleer kneeled down. The Princess with a good grace bending to every one
of them spoke to Rosicleer. You know new knight what charge the king my Father
has laid upon me, although far more honorable then I am able to sustain,
yet by me assumed, neither to resist his will nor yet against my desire, for
it is commendable of it self to be a commender of virtue, and never too much
may I commend it. The charge is, that with mine own hands I should
distribute these prises according as mine own fancy leads me to deem of
every man's travail and valiauncie. The deliuerye of these Iewelles, were
nothing hard nor doubtful, but the disposing more then hard, because it
pertayneth to judgment in deeds arms, whereunto my sex is not sufficiently
abled. Nevertheless sir knight as your pains have been greatest, thereto
witnesses this whole multitude: so your prowess in my judgment, so much
assures on your part, that without doing wrong to any of these Princes and
knights, I may with good reason confer them upon you. For this, if I know
to do right unto whom I ought, it is meet that you do away your Helmet,
and since your deeds discover who you are, it is no reason that you cover your
self any longer. When the Princess had thus said, Rosicleer not having
power to excuse himself, unlaced his Helmet, which being put off, his face
seemed so beautiful by the heat and travail of the armor, which raised a
fresh read in his cheeks, that it stroke them all in amaze, and none of those
which saw him, considering his fairness with his age, but rather judged him
an Angel of heaven, then a mortal knight.

When the Princess Oliuia saw him so fair, as already love had made a wrack
in the most secret part of her heart by the view of his Knighthoode, so now
the same breach being made wider by the second assault in his beautiful
looks, love entered with banner displayed, and finding no resistance, took
possession wholly of her heart, and swore all that he found to be his true
prisoners. Thus lost she her liberty, and yet with the best courage that a
woman might, she framed out a countenance of great freedom in this manner.

You needed not by your favor sir knight, to have been ashamed shamed of your
face, and yet such as it is, it is far inferior to your manhood, but this is
beyond the compass of my commission, now come you near and receive at my
hands the glory of your worthiness, which your good fortune yields you.
Rosicleer approaching very near, kneeled down, and the Princess put the
choler about his neck, and the crown upon his head. When the Princess had so
done with a little stay between, Rosicleer took the crown from his own
head, and as he was on his knees, said unto the Princess Most excellent
Princess, for the sovereign grace you have showed me, I will remain yours
hence forth to serve you loyallye, as a poor recompense for so rich a
benefit. And as I deo receive this chollar as the price of Knighthood in your
opinion, so I beseech you to take of me this crown as a testimony of your
surpassing beauty in my eye. With this he set the rich crown upon the golden
hairs of the Princess Oliuia, she being glad of this gift, although somewhat
blushing at the words he spoke. The two Princes Bargandel and Li^iamandro
standing by, and knowing him to be Rosicleer whom they had lost in the maine
sea, when the ceremonies were finished, went to him, embracing him as goodly,
as if he had been their own brother, yet courteously challenging him for his
unkindness, in not making himself known unto them.

The King Oliuerio abashed at so great bounty, in a Knight of so young years,
began to think more advisedly of that which the wise Artemidoro had said,
from that time he esteemed more highly of the new Knight, as you shall hear
after this.

But now the noise was so great which the vyals made and other instruments,
that one might not hear an other speak, at which time, the fair Princess
Oliuia with the rich crown upon her head, and in her company the Knight
Rosicleer with the two Princes, descended from the scaffold, and in great
pomp, went to the Kings Pallaice, ye Princess leaving them there to take her
own lodging, and they all entering the chamber of presence, where the King
stayed for them, and after a general welcome, by name taking Rosicleer aside,
he said unto him. Sir Knight, hither you are very welcome, for I have had
great desire to know you, and I would to God by your stay I might as well be
acquainted with you, for by you the honor of my Court has been well
vpholden. Mighty King answered Rosicleer, I am rather to be borne withal, if
I desire to be your servant, since for the same cause, and for to see your
court I am come hither. The king kissed the knight upon ye cheek as tenderly
as if he had been his own son, saying. Rosicleer, I account more of these
words, then of the worth of my best City, and advise thee well of these
speeches, for I am to demand them of thee, if thou will not other-wise
perform thy promise. So Rosicleer was retained for the Kings Knight, and all
the old courtiers, both Princes and Knights of great name, ran to embrace
Rosicleer, with great pleasure unto them to have his company, except only Don
Siluerio Prince of Lusitania, whom a ielous thought vexed as toward Rosicleer,
for that he had unhorsed him in the presence of his Lady. But after this order
Rosicleer remained in the English Court, where he rested himself, till this
sudden adventure called him forth, as shall be told you.

A Gentlewoman came to the Court from the Princess Briana, which made him
follow Brandagedeon.

Cap. 35.
THe story recounteth, that Rosicleer abode many days in King Oliuerios
Court, well liked and loved of both King and nobles. In which time, Rosicleer
gave the King the rich Tent, which the wise Artemidoro had wrought for him,
wherein the King took great delight. For although he had many other, both
curious for making and costly for matter, yet had he not seen in his life any
either so rich or of so cunning work-manship, so that the Kings good will
toward Rosicleer increased by Rosicleers presence, and in that also for his
company many other great Princes and strange Knights remained with the King
so long time after that these iusts were ended, which beginning of friendsh^p
betw xt Rosicleer and some of these Knights grew in the end to such
perfection by his gracious and familiar behavior, that neither favor of
friends, nor dread of danger might with their wills sunder them from this
amity. And if Rosicleer had such power over Knights strangers, what had he
over the Princess Oliuia being surprised with his love, and having engraven
his Image so deeply in her imagination, that he never departed from her
thought, but evermore there renewed in her rememberaunce his Knightly deeds
and great valor, whereby she made an evident demonstration of his lineage as if
naught else had been enemy to her purpose. But this fair Princess now so
languished with the torment of this amorous thought and pleasant liking of her
love Rosicleer, that now the conversation of her Gentlewomen was yerksome, and
to be solitary did most content her, forbearing withal, both her rest in
fleepe, and her sustenaunce in feeding. In which melancholye she was so far
gone, without feeling of her own disease, as that nothing might ease her
highness but Rosicleers presence, which bred her greater bale in his absence,
by the grief galling her most to think that seeing he was a stranger in that
land, he would ere long return to his own country. One day casting her self
upon her bed and tossing such like things in her fancy, she sent out many a
sorrowful sigh as the forerunners of this which follows. O love, love, how well
it eased me before times to hear lovers mourn, to read their strange fits,
to see figured before me the variable succes of their attempts, with ye
fearful frights of thy subjects and captives. O how well at ease was I, when
being far from the fire and out of danger, I might laugh and look on, and
warm me by their flame. But now not so free nor clean deuoyd of thought, I
rue the little pity I took upon their pain, and am therefore scorched not
without desert. O love, love, by whom not the feeblest only, but the
sturdiest also and stoutest, are unable to quench this fire, if it please, thee
to kindle it. Alas do not the wise men seem fools, and the hardy cowards,
if it be thy pleasure: and dare any man confess the truth in this passion,
and are not all like sick men beguyled, call sower sweet, pain pleasure,
bale bliss, grief gladness, and the loosing of their late liberty, the
enlarging of their new franchise, to content their fancies. And thou
unfortunate Oliuia, art thou Princess of great Britain, the daughter of King
Oliuerio, the woman sued unto by so plyant peticioners, both Princes and
Knights of great courage, whom thou have all refused. No assuredly, but thou
art some base and mean Gentlewoman, if the sight of one only Knight not
known unto thee, has so dimmed thy understanding, that reason is become no
more defensible. Where is thy late pride Oliuia, where is thy ancient
pleasure, where are thy hautie looks, where lies the charter of thy liberty,
where is the estimation of thy beauty, where is the excellency of thy estate.
O the miserable and euer-chaungeable state of man, like unto the herbs or
flowers, which the mornings deaw refreshes, the noones heat oppresses, and
the night shade encloseth in as the grave does our bodies: being a lively
moral of our mortality. Alas Rosicleer, my father thinks he has made a
great purchase by thy being here, but I would to God I might be as sure heir
to this purchase, as I am otherwise certain to repent thy coming hither. And
yet what some ever the event be, my love commaundes in me the contrary. For is
it not better for me to see Rosicleer, and to acknowledge the goodness of God
toward man, in in-ablyng of him to the atchieuement of such wonders, whereby,
and by the enjoying of his sight* I receive such pleasure, then never to have
seen him, though I loose the hope of augmenting my state. And truly befall
what may, in spite of Fortunes rancor, I will stay my self upon this choice,
and will not exchange it.

Very wise was the Princess Oliuia, and as the times affoorded, very well
learned, but yet these speeches proceeded rather of her passion, then of
advised reason or good reading. And the like combat to this of contrary
thoughts Rosicleer endured, enterteyning in his heart the counterfa^te of the
Princess in secreat contemplation, wherein he was diligently occupied,
imagining thereof the brauerye of her beauty, and the great desert in her to
be best beloved. But as again to the Princess in all this subjection to love
and his laws, her honesty is chiefly to be noted, which for all yt both the
remedy was above her capacity, and the pain likely to overcome her patience:
yet bare out the bruntes thereof in such modesty rather by sufferaunce then
striving withal, that neither could Rosicleer ever assure himself of her
liking, nor any of her servant wring it out by the manner of her disease.
Rosicleer was so close, which in him was the occasion of farther trouble, for
coveting to be alone the better to rejoice himself, and to enter more
narrowly into the search of his own ability with the likelyhoode of his suit,
he stumbled as in a blind way upon two blocks, so placed as that if he
avoided the one, he must needs hit his shinne against the other: For this was
one. If he reauealed not his grief or not made her privy to his estate, there
was naught to prefer him before another knight. Again, the other was, if he
laid open his race, his supplication would lack succor. Now how could he
with candle light not hazard a fall upon the one or the other. For he was
persuaded that Prince Edward, brother to the Princess Oliuia was his father,
wherefore the near kindred was to be concealed if he looked for help, and yet
the concealment was the only debarring of his hope. In this conflict he did
nothing but afflict himself, neither daring to discover his malady, nor
minded to dissemble it altogether, by so much the more in worse case then the
Princess was, as the infirmity of her sex did lessen her pain by yielding
at the first, and the magnanimity of his courage to have the masterie, did in
the end make the deeper impression in his flesh, like as in nature the hardest
fight is between the hardiest, and sooner shall the cannon shot deface the
high towers, then break through a rampire of wool or flax, and so the issue
proved in him. But being one day with the king and the other noble Princes
in the great pallaice to beguile his solemn conceits which overcame his
nights rest, he saw entering a Gentlewoman well apparailed, which when she
came near beewing humbly to the king, said as follows. God preserve your
majesty, most noble King of the great Britain. The Princess Briana my
mistress and wife unto the Prince Edward your son, with the remembrance of
her duty, craves to be certified by your good grace what you have heard of
her Lord and husband, for she never saw him since his first arrival into
Hungary. My Lady also by me greeteth the Princess Oliula your daughter, unto
whom she commanded me to deliver a cofer of jewels, but coming to land on the
English coast, I was set upon by a great Giant, named Brandagedeon as I hear,
who taking the cofer from me badde me come to this Court, here to tell a new
knight which once unhorsed him, that he would make answer to none but him as
concerning the coffer, and that for him he would stay at the shore, there to
make satisfaction according as he was charged, I beseech your good highness
therefore to send that new Knight in your daughters quarrel against this
Giant. Rosicleer having known this Gentlewoman amongst those which attended
upon the Princess Briana his mother in the monestarie of the river, and that
she had to name Arinda, was glad to have the opportunity offered to serve the
Princesses Oliuia and Briana, and therefore rising from where he sat, he came
before the king, to whom he said. Sir seeing it is Rosicleer whom this
Gentlewoman seeks, and that Brandagedeon has sent for me, I beseech your
majesty to give me lisence to go in these affairs, for it is out of reason
to withslacke such worthy service to two so noble Princes.

The king loath of any occasion at all to be ministered whereby he should forsake
the court, least his return would not be over hasty, for he knew well that he
was nothing addict to idleness, yet seeing his importunity both to answer
the challenge, and to employe his travail, in the name of these two Princes,
would not gainsaie his purpose, but wished him not to go alone, for that the
Giant was well manned with above. 30. knights, for this cause Bargandel and
Liriamandro, and other Princes and knights offered to go in his company, but
they could not prevail, for he excused himself with this, that it should
redound to his disworship, if he should take more company then the Giant
looked for. And by and by he craved pardon to depart to his chamber there to
arm himself. The Gentlewoman Arinda well knowing him, but for that time
suppressing it, while Rosicleer buckled on his armor, went to deliver her
message unto the Princess Oliuia, unto whom she told yt the cofer with
jewels was intercepted by a false harratour, a Giant named Brandagedeon, and
that the new knight had taken upon him to fetch them again, which when the
Princess heard, although she was glad to understand ought from the Princess
Briana, yet was she sorrowful when she heard that Rosicleer would leave the
City and would go alone thither where the Gyaunt abid him, for her mind gave
her that she should not see Rosicleer in have, but turning from this she
demanded of the Gentlewoman many things in particular touching her Lady, so
that the Gentlewoman stayed with her, till Rosicleer being armed called upon
her. Then the Princess says; if there be no other remedy you may go with
him, albeit tell the knight from me, yt I had rather the jewels were lost,
then he should put himself in so great a ieopardie. Arinda said thee would
do her command, and went down to Rosicleer being already on horseback
with his Esquire Telyo, she likewise took her palfray, and they three rode
through the City of London, much gased after by the king and all the knights
and Ladies which stood in the windows and battlements of the pallaice, and
with great sorrow pitied him to see him go alone, persuading themselves that
if Brandagedeon were slain or in danger, that his men would rescew him.

A cruel battle between Rosicleer and Brandagedeon with his knights.

Cap. 36.
ROsicleer being thus accompanied with Arinda, and Telyo his Squire, willed
the Gentlewoman to guide him on the way to the place where Brandagedon was.
Arinda knowing him well enough, said. Noble Rosicleer I dare not so do. The
Giant is fierce and strong and has with him many knights, which if he have
need shall help him, and then shall I see you in peril of your life. Better
were it Rosicleer that you should leave this enterprise and take the way
toward Hungary, there to comfort the sorrowful Princess Briana, which
since your departure from the monestarie has never ben merry. Rosicleer
perceiving well that the Gentlewoman knew him, casting his arms about her
neck, said unto her. Why how now Arinda, how is it that you know me, and I have
not known my self since my coming into this land? But tell me gentle sister
how the Princess Briana does, my good Lady, for whose sorrow I am much
agreeued, albeit to remedy it there were no reason in forsaking this
enterprise, which I have taken in hand to do her service therein. Besides
that, I am determined not to return into Hungary, before I can hear some
news of the Prince Edward, whether he be dead or alive. No says the
Gentlewoman, but let this matter alone, for it were less loss that the two
Princesses should want the Cofer of Jewels, then that you should hazard
your life in winning of it, and more acceptable service shall you do my Lady
in going to visit her, then in seeking out the Gyaunt to fight with him. The
Gentlewoman with all took hold of the Bridle raynes to have lead Rosicleers
horse out of the way, whereat Rosicleer laughing a good, answered her thus.
Arinda, I should get a good report in the Court of king Oliuerio, if for fear
of a battle with this Gyaunt, I should turn aside from this journey, which
for the same cause I have undertaken. If I were certain of more then a
thousand deaths, I would not follow thy advise herein Arinda, and so spurring
his horse he kept on his way. The Gentlewoman would not importune him farther,
but lead him toward the Gyaunt, where not far of they met another
Gentlewoman on foot weeping very pitteously. At her Rosicleer demanded the
cause of her grief, which she uttered straight ways in these words.

O sir knight, Fortune, Fortune has frowned on me, so that better welcome
should be the death then the day light. Rosicleer yet requested her to speak
more plainly, and to tell wherein Fortune had wrought her such despite. I will
gladly says she, and for truth sir knight I am a Gentlewoman belonging to the
Queeene of Lusitania, which sent me with a Brother of mine a very valiant
Knight hither, to bring certain Jewels for the Princess Oliuia, daughter to
the King Oliuerio, and for the Princess Rodasylua her own Daughter. Now our
mishappe was such, that entering the shore, we hit upon a great and devilish
Giant, who examining us whether we went and what we carried in our fardle,
because my brother made no answer flew him, and putting me from me palfraie,
took from me my horse and my fardle, over and besides with this command, to
go unto the king Oliuerio and to the knights of his court, there to record my
complaint against him. Thus have I my Lord satisfied your request, now God be
with you, for I will on to crave some remedy.

With this the Gentlewoman parted from them, but Rosicleer calling to her
said. Gentlewoman, so it is that my arrant is for the same purpose to fight
with the Giant, for the like trespass by him committed against this
Gentlewoman here with me. If you will return with us, we shall be very glad
thereof, and by Gods help I shall well qwell that Giants insoleucie. What
said the Gentlewoman, do you purpose alone to fight with the Gyaunt. I
indeed answered Rosicleer, and have hope to revenge this Gentlewoman and your
brother. God mate well give you power so to do, it it please him said the
Gentlewoman, but in respect of the Gyauntes strength it will not sink into my
breast that 100. such knights as you are can chastise him. Well said Rosicleer,
if you will go with me, you may at leisure when you see the event deliverate
what to do. If ye will not fare you well, for less shall be your hope of
remedy in keeping your way as you now do. Rosicleer held on, and the
Gentlewoman viewing his goodly personage, thereby persuading her self that it
were but little loss to turn back with him, determined to prove his good
Fortune. And as she was not fully assured in her thought, she spoke on this
wise.

Be not displeased with me, but for the love of God fair knight have some
greater regard of your own safety, not to cast your-selfe away for the
recovery of my damage, it is no great matter for me to take some pains in
going with you: but it will be some grief to return again laden with a fresh
complaint of a new murder. And therefore for God sake let the Giant alone.
Rosicleer said, I may not, but seeing you have promised your company, get up
behind my Squire, and cast your care upon God, which will prevail for your
ease, as best shall like him. So they four trauayled toward the place where
the Giants abiding was, and coming near unto the shore, they saw him hard
by the water, where he sat upon a great horse, and more then thirty knights
in a Crayer not far off, as if they purposed to board a tall ship. which was
on floate in the Sea half a mile. Brandagedeon by and by knew Rosicleer to be
the new knight, by the rich armor he bare, the self same being worn by him
in the iusts, wherein he was hurled to ground, for which cause preventing
Rosicleers salutation, with a loud and hollow voice he cried unto him Now sir
knight may I magnify my Gods for that I have thee in such a place where I may
be avenged of thee at my pleasure for the despite thou have done me, and all
the world shall not ransom thee from my hands. God of heaven shall be my
borrow answered Rosicleer, which also shall correct thy wickedness and tread
under foot thy intolerable pride and arragancie. But to tell thee my message,
I challenge thee for to make satisfaction unto these gentlewomen of the wrong
thou have done them, or to prepare thy self to maintain thy miichiefe.
Brandagedeon spoke no word, but signified his meaning by his demeanor, for be
turned his horse head in great rage and took a beauy spear with him, the
other understanding his sign, did as much. This first journey brake their
staves, and made them try the rest of the battle on foot. The Giant being
clean unhorsed, and Rosicleers horse giving back, so that he rusht against
the ground, but ye success was diverse and unequal in the riders themselves.
For Rosicleer keeping his saddle selt no harm in his body, and the Giant
thrown violently to the earth, was well shaken with the fall.

But the combat is not yet ended, for Brandagedeon being strong and mighty
held Rosicleer very hard, as indeed it could not be otherwise, for betwixt
them alone ye fight continued two hours, all the mean time neither part
giving over; nor making any semblaunce of discomfiture. In the end the knight
having treble advantage over the Gyaunt, first the Queen Iulias sword which
hit sore: secondly in Artemidoros harnes which held out the force of the Giants
weapon: and thirdly the nimblenesse of his body ready both to assail
stronglys and to decline as lightly from the others blow, by which means
having made a wide hole in the Giants armor he wounded the Giant at his
pleasure.

The execution of this challenge to so little displeasure on Rosicleers part,
made Arinda think it long till she should blase it at home in the monasterys
of the River, but her pleasure was soon ouercast, for there was ministered
unto her a cup of cold water in steed of better lyking to alay her thirst.
All this happening beyond her expectation, by that Giants knights, which seeing
their master at such an exigent, although in no evident appearaunce of his
end, in great fury came to land, and at once all of them with their swoords
fell upon Rosicleer. This was no even match, thirty Knights and a Giant to set
upon one silly knight, before almost tired with two hours battle against the
Giant. But what thing may resist Gods ordinance? The Giants knights laid on
with such courages, that it revived the Gyaunt, for they were all chosen
Knights, but I doubt not but that Rosicleer besturred himself, for so many as
he met, he either maimed, wounded, flewe, or threw to ground. And being
ouer-awed by number and fresh onsettes, he was feign for defense to his back,
to withdraw himself into the Sea, there to stand in the water and receive
their blows before him.

Now Telyo his Squire and Arinda the Hungarian seeing him forced to this
extremity were very woe begone, but the Gentlewoman Lusitanian as desperate of
all succors by his means, gallopped from thence upon her palfraie which
stood by the shore, no less complaining the danger wherein she left this
good Knight, then recurelesse lamenting the unjust death of her brother. As she
had rid some part of her way toward Oliuerios court, there were two knights
in her judgment very lusty and armed at all points which made all the have
they might to get neer^ her.

The Gentlewoman coming within the hearing of them, and minding to prevent
other questions, cried unto them a far off. For the passion of God my good
Lords, if all nobleness and virtue be not clean buried in you, make have to
succor a Knight the best in the world, which is now enuiroued with his enemies
being about thirty knights besides a Giant. The two knights with these news
posted a maine, and by the same way which the Gentlewoman came, in short time
got a sight of Rosicleer, which at that time stood in the water against. 11.
or. 12. of them, for so many were left on live of thirty persons, those also
which then lived being well nurtured by Rosicleers discipline, that they would
prease upon him without good warrantise.

Now vy that time that the two knights came, Rosicleer had killed more then
twenty, leaving a passage so well trod as they might easily trace out his
foot steps. At their first breaking in among the Giants knights, they burst
their staves upon two of them, overthrowing them, and then drawing their
swoordes struck so lustely that the assaylants were glad to leave Rosicleer,
and to defend themselves against the two knights. Rosicleer having so good
help at hand, although he was stirred with the continual heat of the foot
battle, would needs be a party player in the last act of this Tragedy,
and therefore chose out Brandagedeon to deal withal, and with his sharp
sword gave him so fierce a stoccado, that the bowels trayled after the
weapon, and the Giant fell down. Now being thus put in possession of his
desire, he came to the two knights, uttering these or such like speeches.

I beseech you noble knights to let me know at whose hands I have received so
good maintenance, that I may the better give you thanks according to the
state of your degree, and your demerites toward me. One of the knights auns
wered. You are not to thank us, for your own hand had wrought your escape
before our coming, but nevertheless at your request we are content to
discover our selves, and straight way they unlaced their helmets, whereby
Rosicleer knew them, the one to be Bargendel, and the other Liriamandro, his
d^re friends. Rosicleer after his presupposed thanks so happily stumbling on
his friends help, fell to other matters, and first asked of them for what
cause they came thither, they made answer yt the only fear they had least
the Giants knights should at once enclose him, moved them to abandon the court
for his rescewes. And as this talk was interrupted by the coming of the two
Gentlewomen and Telyo Rosicleers squire, to demand leave of search in the
Gyaunts beat for the coffer and fardle which had been taken from them, so
after the Gentlewoman with leave obtained, departed for to search: these three
knights began a deep consultation of their own affairs, and what they
ought to do. Bargandel spoke first in this wise. We have this month and more
leitered very idly in king Oliuerios Court, without exercise of arms or
armor, therefore it were not mis-beseeming us knights, if we should for a time
forbear our return, to practice deeds of arms, that our good name and
honor may enlarge our credit in this kingdom, and be a means of the sure
settling of our memories in this land, and the rather thereto am I lead, for
that I will not fear any disworship or vanquish in your company. I am
content says the new knight with this or any other thing which you shall
devise. But what shall we do with these Gentlewomen. Marie says Liriamandro,
they shall return to the court with the dead body of the Gyaunt, there to
present his carcass before the Princess Oliuia as a token from thee Roficleer,
and in part of payment for the great dishonor which the Gyaunt has prosfered
her in withholding her jewels. They may likewise when they be there, make all
our excuses unto ye king for our so sodeine departure.

By this time the Gentlewomen returned with their own carriage, and what with
the length of the battle, and other accidents, the day was so far shut
in, that being very dark they were constrained altogether to turn into a
keepers house near at hand, where they were welcome at such warning. For he
knew the three knights at the great feasts, wherefore he enterteined them
as honorably as he might. That night not having wherewith otherwise to busy
themselves, and the opportunity of the bearers, putting them in mind of their
mistresses, they gave themselves to enditing every man of several letters
unto his love and Lady. Bargandel and Liriamandro delivered theirs unto the
Gentlewoman of Lusitania, but the other not willing to make manifest his choice
for that time, took Arinda a letter closely to carry unto the Princess
Briana his good Lady, and afterward amongst other talk he required to see
the coffer of jewels which the Princess Briana sent to Oliuia, as if it had
been only to have seen the riches thereof, Arinda gave him the coffer, which
he opened, and tossing up and down as if to see all the jewels, he secretly
conuaied his letter to Oliuia, under all the papers, and redeliuered the coffer
without being suspect.

Well to make an end, the talk had an end, and when the rest went to their
rest, Rosicleer fell into his ordinary humor, driving in his thought the
whole order of the delivery, and her receipt, with her manner of turning over
the papers to view every jewel, this being but the first assay of the humor,
but when his fancy brought him to the finding of the Letter, Lord what a fight
he sustained, for the better understanding whereof, you must imagine a young
scholar but lately entered into school points, over seeing of his theme,
before he bring it to the reuiewe of his Shoolemaister, and believe me in
far greater double hung Rosicleer of his Ladies liking, then the boy does of
his masters. For in his reading of the blotted Coppie, as distinctly as if he
were to guess Oliuias conjecture upon every syllable, good God into what a
hard censure was the poor payer subject, as if every sentence had been then
arayned before him. For almost at every lines end, he would say. Either this
was too much, either this was too little, or this is maimed, or this is too
rude and unlearned. or this was not well and finely penned, or that was not
plain enough, or this is faulty, or this should be amended, and to draw all
into a sum, in every piece he would blame either the little wit in
invention, or the lack of eloquence in the delivery of the matter, but
chiefly his own over boldness in presuming upon so high a Princess with so
rude a discourse, and yet I dare say it did him good to beguile the Princess
with this Letter in the color of a Jewel, which she must receive and read
through, ere she should learn the contents thereof, or know the penman. And
beginning to reckon a fresh after this comfort, he stayed himself upon these
two points, first, that since he was diseased, his remedy must begin by making
his grief known: second, that his conscience told him there was nothing in
the letter, the truth whereof he durst not avouch as concerning either his
own person, or the Princesses, and this was his nights rest as I suppose.

Rosicleer and the two Princes seek adventures in the land of Britain, and
the two Gentlewomen carry the Giants body to Oliuerios court.

Cap. 37.
NOT much out of the same manner was the other Knights sleep, dreaming of
their delights and other such toys, but the next day they arose and armed
themselves, taking leave of their host and the Gentlewomen. But Rosicleer
tarryed behind to conduct the women a little on their way, and to have more
secret conference with Arinda about the Princess Briana, (the remorse of his
conscience stinging him for stealing away so privily from the Princess,) in
the course of this talk he would sometimes name the Princess his Lady,
sometimes his foundresse, by which name he requested Arinda to make offer of
his humble service with the best excuse the might, for his long absence, in
that he had already entered the quest of seeking the Prince Edward or Donzel
del Febo his brother, and in such speeches he brought them on their way,
afterward, taking his leave with a friendly embrace, he posted after his
company whom he ouertooke in short time.

Sire days these three knights rode together without happening upon any thing
worthy the recital. The seventh day in their way they saw a far off a
Knight very tall and big made upon a fair steed by seeming a Knight of
great account. There followed him two Squiers, the one bearing his lance, the
other his helmet, for the heat of the day had made him veil his head-peece to
put on a light hat of Taffeta, and coming near, they saw that he was of a
good countenance, somewhat of color duskie and black, but in making both
manlike and of good proportion, his joints well knit, and somewhat large
withal, which foreshewed great likelihood of strength and courage. This knight
stranger first saluting these three Knights riding by, spoke unto them thus.

Tell me my Lords I pray you, whether you be of King Oliuerios Court or no?
Bargandel answered him. Truly we are if we list, and so long as our lyking
lasts: but wherefore demand you this? I will tell you said the Knight. Sooth
it is, that I am a Tartarian, borne in that part of Tartarie which bordereth
upon Europe, and trauayling to seek adventures, I was cast by tempest of the
Sea, upon the Country of Zealand, where I heard, that many Knights should
assemble in this Realm, at a great Feast and Iustes proclaimed by the King,
with a safe conduct warraunted out under his own signet, for all Knights
Christians and Pagans or of all Nations else besides whatsoever, thither to
come and prove their valor. I am as I say, a wandering Knight, and have no
other erraunt but to see such good Knights, and to try my self amongst
them. Upon the report hereof, as soon as my ship was rigged, and trimmed,
and that the wind served for my purpose, I entered in my ship to arrive in
this land. Now, whether that the way long and dangerous by the ignorance
of my Pylot shut me from my hope, or that the reporters mistook the day, or
rather knew it not. Since my coming to land, I have in many places been
assertained that the Feasts are long agone ended, and that the most part of
the Knights have taken shipping, and departed into their Countries,
notwithstanding, leaving behind them such a good memory in the mouths of
every man, as much it grieueth me to have lost my labor. For this cause last
remembered, I am in purpose for one months space to ride through this land,
and to deal with all Knights comers, to prove whether their credit be not
above their deserts: whereunto I have set this condition, that if any of
them dismount me or make me yield, that then I must faithfully accomplish all
that which the vanquisher shall will me. But if I unhorse any of them, or
take any of them prisoners, then the vanquished, shall commend me to the
King Oliuerio, and make offer of his or their lives and goods, at his
courtesy as a simple token of my great good will toward him. Since this
determination three days have I iourneyed in this land, and I have
encountered ten knights whom I have sent accordinglye to King Oliuerio. And my
Lords, whether are you retaining to the English Court or no, for if you be, I
may not break my vow, although by your semblaunce and riding, you show to
me as the best Knights, which I have seen in my life.

This said the Knight stranger, and the other three Knights were easelye
brought to the allowing of the conditions. Wherefore Bargandel which had
undertaken to answer, said. Sir Knight, we thank you for the large
recounte you have made unto us of your hither coming, and as to your ouer-late
arrival, and the conditions set to the Tilte, albeit I may not mislyke them
being so equal, yet for my part, I answer, and for these Knights, that we
would not gladlye deal with you upon so light occasion, for rather will we
honor strange Knights then in any wise be an incombraunce unto them, but
since it is your earnest suit, and that therein we shall do you service, we
will not refuse you, and by the leave of these my Lords and fellows, my self
will be the foremost. But by God sir Knight, there is the Lady Syluerina in the
English Court, and if I fail not of my purpose, I will make you kiss her
white hands, ere you be many days elder. But Bargandel failed in deed of
his purpose, for though he was a very valiant Knight, yet was he but young,
and the Tartarian was both mighty and well exercised.

After the Tartarian had buckeled on his helm, and Bargandel had obtained
leave of his fellows to be the first in this adventure, either of them
clapped their spurs to the Horse sides, and their encountrye was such, that
Bargandel brake his spear in small shiuers in the shield of his enemy,
causing the Tartarian to loose the raynes, and to wreathe somewhat in his
saddle. But the Tartarian ouerthrewe Bargandel horse and man to the ground,
and with the turn to recover the raynes, dressed himself in his saddle,
passing forth gallantly, while Bargandel lay on the ground very angry and
desirous to have had the Combat with the sword.

Rosicleer and Lyriamandro much wondered at their shockes, Lyriamandro then
took the next turn, and Rosicleer because the stranger wanted a spear,
sent his own staff unto him, which peradventure if he could have foreseen
the euente, he would not have done, for by it Liriamandro was hurled to
ground, and the Tartarian almost unhorsed, his stirroppes being broke, and
himself cast upon the arson of his saddle. The Tartarian Knight was much
abashed at the great force of these two Knights, for he had not thought to have
met two so strong Knights in all this land, and when there remained none but
one Knight, and he likewise without a staff to just with-all, he came to
this one, and bid the base to the sword play in these terms.

Sir Knight, since both of us want spears to just with all, it shall be well
to make up this lack with our swords, that you may revenge the shame of your
companions, or else go with them for company, and all three present your
selves prisoners to ye King your Lord. Whose Court notwithstanding I shall
highlye commend of, for the great virtue, whereof my self has had proof
sufficientlye in your fellows. Assuredlye sir Knight (said this odd man,
which was Rosicleer) were it not for the duty which I owe to my companions,
and for that you should ill acquit their courtesies if you should leave me
scot-free to scorn at their mishappes, I would that this Combatte with
swords should be excused, for that I am not accustomed to fight for so small
a cause, but since that both my companions challenge this at my hands, and that
it is a point of cowardlynesse to leave the combatte, and also that you will
not have us to break companies, I condiscende to your device with this
Prouiso, that if by good Fortune I overcome you, my companions shall be freed
from your charge, and you shall go in their rooms to kiss the King of
Englands hand, as I am sure it will do you good to have acquaintance with
his grace. I am well pleased heere-with answered the Tartarian, and so saying,
he drew out a fine sword, Rosicleer likewise drawing his.

Thus began the brave Combatte in which they continued a long time, no
advantage being espied on either part by the beholders, what was within
them, themselves best knew. But Rosicleer rather delighted then afraid at his
enemies courage, devised by himself how to win that valiant Knight for
friend, and to leave the Combatte, for upon so flender a quarrel, he
thought the hazard would be too great. Marry for all that he did his best,
for when he felt the strong buffettes, he could not but yield the like. The
Tartarian Knight burning in rage, rather to have the masterie over so valiant
Knights, rather then for any ill will he bare to Rosicleer, compassed how by
maine force to subdue his adversary, and in this thought be struck so
furiouslye, that with his charge and the others answer, the noise was so
confused and great withal, that it was heard upon the top of hills, as
the shot of Artillery. When the Tartarian Knight was so well heated as you
have heard, he drove a blow with both his hands, full at Rosicleers head,
which lighting upon the fine and inchaunted helmet, notwithstanding deprived
Rosicleer of his eye sight, and infeebled his hearing at that time. But
Rosicleer could not so soon forget it, and therefore while it was fresh in
his remembrance, he restored the like blow, which in the descending, missed
the Tartarians creast otherwise it had put him in danger, but styding upon
his shoulder, it was so heave, that it made the Tartarian stoop to his horse
back. The next dangerous blow which the Tartarian gave, made Rosicleer
boowe unto his saddle both the sword and the raynes falling from him.
Bargandel and Lyriamandro standing by, fell therewith into a strange
admiration of the Tartarian, in that he not only kept Rosicleer play, but
put him to his trumpes, and by this time, I think their desire to fight with
him, was well abated, seeing they knew now how well he could handle his
weapon. And Rosicleer having got greater courage through the grief of his
wound, kept no more his seat, but rising in his stirroppes and recovering
his sword, which was fastened with a little chain unto his saddle bow, he hit
the strong Tartarian so great a blow, that the blood gushed out both at his
ears and nostrells, and he lay for dead upon the crouper, the horse carieng
him about ye field til he revived. After not without some abashment, as one
come out of another world: the Tartarian when he felt the bold issuing in
such measure, lift up his hand, and calling for help on his Gods, saying.

Assist me O my Gods against this fell knight, for if I tarry more of these
blows, my life shall soon be ended. And when he had so said, as purposed to
make an end of the fraye, he took his sword with both his hands, and with
all his force following the blow, he smote Rosicleer upon the helmet, to no
great harm on his body, but the weight thereof astonished him, as much as if
a Tower had fallen upon him, whereat Rosicleer waxed mad angry, and not
remembering that which before he had premeditated, as to end the battle in
quietness, he repayed the trespass, with treble damage to the Tartarian. For
albeit the Tartarian might well be reckoned among the most famous Knights of
elder time, being covered with a helmet so well tempered as any Prince might
have, yet living in that age, and encountering such Knights, his room was but
next the best. And when he saw that terrible blow over his head, he could
have wished a whole Mountain between him and it.

But there needed no such impossible means to avoid this misfortune: for it
was provided by the divine Majesty of God that this noble Knight should dye a
Christian, and that great friendship should grow between these three
Knights, and therefore God so directed Rosicleers hand, that it fell not
right, but glauncing down upon the shoulder, it notwithstanding turned the
Tartarian from his Horse, with so great pain on his right shoulder, that he
might not rise himself up again, with this fall his buckles brake, and the
naylings rent, and being then half unarmed, he threw his sword from him,
putting his knee to the ground, to give thanks to his immagined Gods for
their delyuerye from so furious a blow, and then tourning toward Rosicleer,
he said.

Noble and valiant Knight, the strongest and mightiest which I have ever
known, or would have believed ever to have been in this Court or others,
pardon me my rashness, for I have been misaduised when my will first put me
forth to contend with you, only your greatness of body and comeliness,
might have sufficed to teach me, that you were more valiant and stronger than
I am, and since I am now vanquished, and rather by great miracle escaped with
life, from your hands, than by mine own cunning, say on what you command,
for I am preast to accomplysh all that, which (...) as agreed upon before our
Combatte, and my duetye shall not be slacked in any point, but I would
rather fulfill more then all that, for to gain the society of your worthy
person, and your companions, for I never metie with more nobler Knights, for
valor and bounteousnesse: and so saying, he yielded himself.

By this speech, the fury and chollar of Rosicleer was well slackte, and being
glad to see the Knight so humbled before him, he answered. Good Knight I
accept in good part that which you have said, and it greeueth me much to have
had the battle with you, for unto a Knight stranger and valourous, I had
rather be a means for procuring honor and ease, then their trouble and
incombraunce. And as to the Articles of the covenant which you remember me
of: believe me I would not have exacted them at your hands, and it shall be
yet in your choice, whether you will fulfill them or no, and yet I fear not,
but that you shall well like of your service to the King Oliuerio, himself
being a good knight, and a great honourer of strangers. Likewise, we three
shall take it as a sign of your good liking toward us, if you make us privy
to your name, that hereafter we may know you, and do unto you that honor,
which so good a knight meriteth.

Sir knight, answered the Tartarian, I have great desire to go and kiss the
hand of King Oliuerio, as well to know him, as to satisfy that which I owe
unto you, and will not fail to depart and take my way toward the King. But to
your last demand, I am as I told you before, a Tartarian, and my name is
Zoylo, Prince and heir of that kingdom, which I would with good will forbear
for some time, if you and these Knights would vouchsafe your acquaintance and
company, for I have more desire to travail in these parts then in that
Country from whence I came, because there is no continual affoorde of Knights
and fresh accidents as I find in this kingdom, and I should more highlye
esteem of the friendship and society of such noble and worthy knights then of
any riches in the world. And now for that I have declared who I am, I shall
think my self farther in your debte if you make your selves farther known
unto me.

Rosicleer and his companions, gladlye heard of his birth and lignage, but
much gladder of the friendship whereto he requested them, so they gave him many
thanks, and told him who they were. Diverse speeches of great courtesy
passing between them, whereby their amity was so sure confirmed, that it
remained unto the death, every one laboring to be found most friendlye. And
this done, they appointed, that Prince Zoylo should go to the Court, only to
have a sight of the King, and that Rosicleer with his companions should abide
him thereabout, then they four to travail together whether Fortune would
carry them. This being concluded, the Prince of Tartarie took his way toward
the court of king Oliuerio, thinking long to find the time for his return.
They took the way toward a forest, where the history leaves them, to
entreat of the Gentlewomen in the mean time, which brought the body of the
great Brandagedeon unto the court of king Oliuerio.

The Gentlewomen brought the body of Brandagedeon to the Court, and the
Princesses received the Letters of their knights.

Cap. 38.
GReat was the grief which the Princess Oliuia felt by the absence of
Rosicleer, that neither her high estate, nor the courtly disports sufficed to
make her forget her care, or help her to cover her lyking, but in her lodging,
she would be without ^^mpanie in the day, and in the night without sleep,
ever wishing to see him again whom she loved more then her self, for her
mind prophesied to her that she should not see him very quickly, and as it is
natural for the patient to communicate his grief with the Physician, judging
this some ease where the principal remedy wants. So the fair Princess as
unacquainted and to begin in such passions, not being able at the first to
counsel her self otherwise, thought it best to discover her grief to one of
her gentlewomen named Fidelia, the faithfullest and most secret of her
householde, the which many times had importuned her to know the cause of her
sorrow, and one night as she was alone with her, the Princess said to her.

Thou know my Fidelia how among all the Ladies and Gentlewomen which I have,
I have chosen thee only for the faithful treasorer of my secrets, and I have
not done nor thought the thing which I have not imparted with thee, which has
come to pass only by the loiall and good service, wherein I have always
found thee plyant and diligent, with the like confidence unto that which I
always have reposed in thee, I will unfold unto thee a secret, which none in
the world my self except, and thy self shall learn at my hand, in the
concealing whereof, unto this day I have a thousand times endured little less
then death. And the matter is such, that it is unfitting for any one to be a
dealer therein but my self and thy self, whom I account as my self. At a
word my Fidelia, that tyrant love, which spares neither high nor low, has
taken possession of me by the great prowess and beauty of the new Knight, and
I am sure, that but my death, nothing can set me free: although I have
studied all possible means of my liberty, and thereto have set the defense of
my honesty and great estate to withstand this conceit, yet for all that I
can do, as long as this Knights race is unknown, I cannot ease my self,
my former remedies serving me only against the temptation of the flesh, and
not to drive out the rembraunce of his personage, whence my desire springs.
And truly I cannot persuade my self other, then that this knights offspring
is right noble, he being of so courtlyke behavior and knightly, prowess, the
truth hereof being somewhat more incredible, then the lieng fables of our
ancient Poets. Now if he be a Prince borne, the only hope to have him for
husband, my father and be being therewith pleased, may yield one some comfort,
in the mean time while opportanitie serves for the final accomplishment.
Wherefore mine own Fidelia seeing yt I have fully laid open the bottom of my
heart, that which remains on thy part is, to frauile with his Squire or some
other to wit of what parentage Rosicleer is.

Fidelia had listened very attentively to that which her Lady had said, and as
she, was very wise, so perceiving by the drift of the speech, that neither her
mistresses malady could be removed by counsel, nor that she would accept of
it if it were bestowed, besides that, that her desire was lawful to match with
Rosicleer, if there were no disparage in his stock. She could not gainesaie
her mistress in ftat-tearmes, but made auns were, that since her grace had
laid that charge upon her, she was confent to receive, as also ready to
offer her sermce in any other thing for this matter which she now moved, she
said, that since her graces purpose was so good, she should not need to
remember her farther in it, for that so soon as Rosicleer should return, she
would be in hand with his Squire to boult out the truth of every thing, and
yet (says she) I cannot believe by reason of his magnanimity, but that be
is descended from some noble progeny, which if it so be, I like very well
that your grace is so affectioned toward him, otherwise I dare not advise
you, but yet I will tell you my fancy, it were better for you to abide some
pain, then to make your head of your underling. The beautiful Princess was
well apayde at this counsel, so iumping with her former determination, and it
greatly assuaged the malice of her passion, in that she had bewrayed it to
her trusty servant. The next day the Gentle women entered into the pallaice,
driving a horse before them loved with the Giants body. At their entrance the
hurly burly in the court was so great, every man running to see the wonder,
that the king with all those which were with him and the Princess Oliuia with
her Gentlewomen ran to their windows to see what the matter was, and when
they saw the Gyaunt they knew him, and as newly abashed at Rosicleers
virtues, they began to commend of him as of the best knight in the world. The
Gentlewomen presently were brought before the king, which received them
courteously, and they in order declared unto him and the rest that which had
chanced to Rosicleer since his departure from the city.

The king lyked very well of all, save that when they told him that the
knights could not reteurne presentlye, as minding to pursue adventures. For
the King feared least by being so much inclined to knightly deeds, their good
success should carry them farther off then should be for his pleasure. But
the Gentlewoman departed from the king to do their message unto the Princess
Oliuia, whom they found in her chamber with the other two Princesses in her
company. Coming before her they delivered their message with commendation
from Rosicleer, and the two Princes, which had sent her that Giant so dead, as
a satisfaction in some part for the detayning her Jewels. The Princess
pleasauntly laughing at that present, caused the Gentlewoman to go on in that
Story, and to make report of all occurrentes in their journey, which they did
so faithfully, that the Princess in the telling was not able to color her
affection toward Rosicleer. This tale ended, Arinda gave into her hands the
packet, which the Princess opened, and tourning over the Jewels found a
Letter, which she put in her bosom, taking it to be Brianas, and in like
sort the Gentlewoman of Lusitania made delivery of Bargandel and Liriamandros
letters unto their Ladies, with the cofer unto Rodasilua. The two Princesses
Syluerina and Rodasilua being great friends, went both together in a closet to
read without interruption their lovers Letters so eloquent and so fraught with
amorous speeches, which much rejoiced the young Ladies to be beloved of so
good knights, and not to break off their several commendations of their
knights and Lords, we will speak of ye Princess Oliuia, who being left alone
for the company of the ye two Princesses dispatched her other gentlewomen into
diverse parts of the chamber, to have a more secret suruaye of Brianas letters.

When she had read on through that which was delivered with the packet, she
took that other out of her bosom, which she had found in ransacking the
packet, and opening it she saw in Capital Letters ROSICLEER subscribed,
whereby she knew it to be his, and somewhat troubled she folded it up quickly
again, minding to learn by what means that Letter was hid among the jewels.
And therefore calling Arinda she asked if that any one had unlocked the
coffer, after that her Lady had delivered it unto her. Arinda supposing yt the
Princess had wanted some thing, answered. No truly Madame, for I have always
kept ye keys, and no body ever had them at my hands but Rosicleer, which
requested to see ye jewels when we were in the keepers lodge, and in my
presence he shut it, restoring me the keys, and not taking out ought whereof I
can accuse him. The Princess smelling out Rosicleers shift, and somewhat
smiling withal, to hear whereunto Arinda had construed her meaning, replied
merrily thus. I asked it not gentle friend, for that I thought there wanted any
thing in the cofer, for it was wholly lost when it was in Brandagedeons power,
but I asked it for that I meruailed it fell out so well, when Brandagedeon was
the keeper. Arinda waxing bold heereat. Nay marie says she, with your favor
noble Princess, Brandagedeon misgiuing in his mind how little time he should
enjoy it, took little care for the opening.

So this question who opened it was concluded in a laughter, and little talk
continued after. The Princess thinking it long til she might alone read
Rosicleers letter, and therefore somewhat earlier then she was wont, she
withdrew her self into her bed chamber, with only Fidelia in her company to
see her in bed. When the door was fastened, she drew out Rosicleers letter, and
not having power her self to read it, she gave it unto Fidelia, The tenor of
the loving letter was this, which hereafter follows.

Unto the most excellent Princess, the Princess Oliuia.
THat which is appointed by God mighty Princess, may not by man's power be
altered nor perverted, as in my self I prove it, for since that mine eyes
first told me of your beauty, and my judgment gave consent thereto, and that
my will has procured liking thereof in my affection, I have felt an alteration
in me so incurable, that striving with it both by art and nature, I have not
hitherto found my remedy: which thing good madame I trust cannot seem more
unlikely to you, the^ it has been to me in the feeling terrible. The clap of
thunder is the greater when it meets with the thicket able to make more
resistance, longer lasts the kinled fire in the builded Oak, then in the
parched straw, and more vehement is the fight between two enemies, then when
the one yields. What force love has as I could well wish your Ladyship to
consider in me, or to feel in your self, so at least I beseech you to way by
others, and to believe report, how that with light assaults be beats down
the stoutest courages, and with gentle cords binds the biggest arms, that
his force, neither the wisest nor the mightiest were able to resist, that from
his subjection not Julius Caesar the great Monarche of the world could free
himself: that he quelled the pride of the mighty Carthagenian in the
delights of Capua: and fettered Mars and Jupiter, two Gods of the Gentiles in
chains of iron: that he transformeth men into sundry shapes, and as it were
by sodeine inchauntment framed the arme-strong Hercules to the distaffe and
spindle: Aristotle to be bridled and saddled: that he climbeth the highest
Towers, and stretches to the lowest valley: that he divides the hard
rocks, and blows through the easy passages: to conclude, nothing so strong
and invincible, but that love can overthrow, and does what him lists. So
that if I confessed my self yeelden unto so mighty a conqueror, I should
yet be blameless for my cowardice. Yet what have I not attempted? If either
counsel of friends, or mine own wit, either Phisickes cure, or might of
companie-might have warraunted my quietness. So God, good madame speed my
writing as I meant not to trouble you with my Letters. But the weak complain,
and the dieased seek remedy, as what grief is so great or wound so wide,
but it has some redress or other provided in nature. To you therefore good
madame, thus boldly have I discovered my unrest, that by your means whence
only I may hope for it, I may receive comfort. And so attending your highness
answer either of life or death, I humblye kiss your Princely hand.

Thine resolved to love or not to live, poor Rosicleer.


Rosicleer penned this letter either not well in his wits, or else greatly
perplexed in his thought, so hard it is to find an issue, but I believe rather
yt it came from heart to hand, and was so set down without farther advise. Yet
in ye mean time that Fidelia read the letter, the fair Princess broad awake
to hear those amorous words, and feeling them in her heart with the like love
wherein Rosicleer wrote them. When it was ended, heaping out abundance of sighs
upon the argument of the letter, she said unto Fidelia. Ah Fidelia, what force
may a tender Gentlewoman as I am have to resist the tyranny of love, when so
many famous and so mighty Princes could never conquer him? How may I overcome
him which has had the mastrie of so many, tell me Fidelia and counsel me
what I have to do in this matter, for I mistrust my own wisdom, and very
field is the passionates judgment very sure and requisite. Fidelia nothing
wondering at that effect which love had wrought in the Princess her Lady, for
she rather wished her self worthy of so glorious pain, answered her thus:
Madame to counsel you aright, were to will you to defy love, and to abandon
Rosicleers company, and yet the words of this letter leaves in me a doubt
thereof, if the matter be as true as the words imports. Next were to desire
you to have an eye unto your high estate, which yet me thinks is not
necessary, for I know you to be so wise, as that you will hazard death
rather then commit a thing so prejudicial to your honor. Now there remains
only to learn out Rosicleers lignage, yt if he be such a one as may marry
you without disworshippe, you may then begin the redress of both your wrongs,
otherwise if he fail in that point, the first counsel will be most
convenient to eschew his presence, which shall in time do away this affection,
as in time all things are forgotten.

Here the Princess interrupting Fidelias speech, replied in this manner. Ah
Fidelia, you think me not such a one but that although the love which I bear
to Rosicleer be such that it procures me to will his presence, if he fail in
gentry, I will rather chastise his boldness with perpetual exile out of this
land, then give him comfort to the empayre of my credit, and sooner will I die
an hundredth times, then bestow a countenance upon such a one. But this I
judge of Rosicleer by the pure and loyal love which he means toward me,
that it is lykely he may merit me for wife, otherwise it is to be thought
that in a knight so virtuous there cannot lie hidden such impudency as to move
a Lady unto her dishonor. In such like talk after the Letter read, the
Princess and Fidelia passed most part of the night till Fidelia took her
leave, the Princess notwithstanding still canuasing over the Letter of
Rosicleer, and every sweet word which he had written, and she prayed to God
with all her heart, that he might prove such a one, as was not unfitting for a
Queens marriage.

Arinda the Gentlewoman belonging unto the Princess Briana, told the bringing
up of Rosicleer unto the Princess Oliuia.

Cap. 39.
ARinda remained a long time in the Court tarrieng for such things as the
Princes Oliuia made ready to send unto the Princess Briana, upon which
occasion, as it happened one day, the Princess Oliuia, Arinda, and Fidelia to
be together, then Arinda not so well advised as she ought to have been, in the
secret affairs of her mistress, unbridled her tongue, and declared to the
Princess Oliuia all the life and doings of her mistress the Princess
Briana, as far as she had any knowledge, and it may be, that she added
sometime more then truth. Amongst other things in this tale, she told of the
little boys which had been brought up with the Princess Briana, reciting
the marvelous tokens which they brought from their birth, and how that the
sorrow of her Lady was somewhat comforted by them, till fortune brought one of
them into a bark near a great and deep river, running into the maine sea, as
you have heard before, and that the other of fourteen years (the Princess
unwitting of it) stale away. After, entering farther, she told that the same
Rosicleer which killed Brandagedeon, was the same which departed without leave
when he was fourteen years old, whom she knew at the first sight, and had
entreated to return into Hungary.

When the Princess heard this, driving to the conclusion, she demanded where
the Princess had those little boys. Madame (said Arinda) in this shall you
see the works of GOD how meruaylous they be, which from so base a stock can
raise so worthy Impes, and you shall understand that they be sons to a
Knight named Leonardo, not of the most noble, but of the meanest Knighte of the
City, and for that their Father has to wife a woman, sister to a Gentlewoman
of my Ladies, named Clandestria, for her long service in great favor with her
Grace: for her sake, the Princess made the parents of these children, to
nourse them up in the Monestarie at her charges, until they were all lost, as
I made mention. When the Princess had heard Arinda in this sort blazing the
offspring of Rosicleer, what sorrow may be compared unto hirs, for in that
instaunt she could well have yielded to death: and why? For yt the only hope
of all her remedy was in the conceit of Rosicleers high estate, thereby
meriting to be her mate, which when she saw to be clean contrary, she was in
such a case, as if her soul had been taking his leave of her body. When
Fidelia saw her color so soon changed, as understanding from whence this
effect proceeded, she rose up, and desired Arinda with the other Gentlewomen to
void the chamber, for that her Lady was newly entered into her fit, which
oftentimes has taken her, and she has no remedy so present, as to be alone.
Arinda and the other Gentlewomen not mistrusting her speech conuayed themselves
into another chamber. Now Fidelia being left alone with her mistress, shut
the door, but Oliuia sanke down in a sound, whom Fidelia fetched again.
Afterward, being well recovered, and seeing her self without other witness,
she sent out a deep sigh, with the company of many tears, as seldom is a
stormy wind without a shower of rain: rufullye withal making her moan unto
Fidelia on this wise,

Ah my Fidelia did thou not hear what the Gentlewoman of Hungary has said
as touching Rosicleer? If thou did hear it, why do thou not take part
with me in my insupportable grief? Were it any marvel at all if my life
should take end with her report? For since the hope which hethertoo has
maintained my rest, is now ended, I would to God my life would end withal, and
rather would I dye not to hear such news whereby my hope decays, then to be
privy to such a truth, and live without my comfort. Oh my Fidelia, come,
come, and help me now either to set forward my mishap with some desperate
shifte, or to lend me thy faithful counsel and advise the better to ass
wage my grief, and to forget the same misfortune which now assaileth me. Alas,
I see yt it is not for my quietness to banish Rosicleer, and if by the
excellency of my estate I am forced to chastise his ouerboldnes, in so doing,
I shall both bar him from the sight and light of his eyes, and make the
stripe redound upon mine own head, for who shall receive greater smart by his
absence then I shall, What a wicked world is this, wherein men of force must
neglect other men's virtues, and magnify their own Nobility without desert:
were it not more reason to raise this man to the top of honor, that in him his
posterity may glory, then for lack of ancestors famous for like
qualities, to suppress his virtue, and keep under the magnanimity of his
courage? When began my Fathers and Grandfathers to be Nobles, but when with
the wings of virtue they soared above the vulgar sort, and if by their means
only I am advanced to be a Princess, what thank is there to me of my
highness? And thou Rosicleer, if by those rare and sovereign virtues which
flow and flourish in thee, thou do mount in credit, not only above the
baser sort, from whom thou wast taken, but also above Princes and Lords,
whereunto thou art to make thy assent. Art not thou worthy of greater renown
then we and others, which climbing by virtue in like sort, never yet came to
the possibility of like worthiness?

Is not this a forgerie of the world, and a plain iuglyng with Nobility, when
we must make more account of one, which perhaps by disorder of life defaceth
the honor of his race, then of one which reaches up the ignobilitie of his
stock, wherein consists nobility in the opinion of men, or in virtue in
deed? and do men inherit virtue, as the child enters upon the fathers
land, being lawful heir? No, here we receive naught, but what our selves
sow, and he that reapeth not, may be a loute for all his Lordshippe, as in
time appears, which judges freely and without affection. And for me, if the
eyes of my understanding were not dimmed, I should soon confess less merit
in me to deserve Rosicleer, then wants in him to be worthy of me. I am a
Princess by my Father, and my glory rests in the reckoning up of a bead-role
of Princes, some of them dead a thousand year agone, which nothing pertains
to this present age. But he may be a Prince by his own virtue, and his
Nobility arises not by keeping a Tally of names, but by making just proof of
manhood in his defense of justice every day, in such sort likewise, that not
any of mine Auncestoures virtues, whereby they became noble, dare approach to be
tried with his in an even Ballaunce. And is there not many Gentlewomen in the
world of as high a calling as I am? And is there any Prince or Knight of so
high renown for virtue and knighthoode as Rosicleer is? Have not the best
Knights of both Christendom and Pagansie, joined with him either at Tilte or
Tourney, and does he not obscure them all, as when the Sun appears, no
Stars dare come in presence? And I silly woman having not so much as the
refuse in me of my predecessors virtue, am notwithstanding by the injury of
the times, bond to so great folly, as that I must not think him worthy to
equal me, which is much my better. But since of force I must yield to the
time, and rather dye then acknowledge the contrary, since my Fortune is such
that I must live by the immagination of other men, and since my estate may not
be yoaked with his baseness, have at it, I will for ever shut him from my
presence for the sauegarde of mine honor. But withal, seeing without his
presence, I cannot find ease for this torment, I will make him amends by giving
over my life, unto the enduring of everlasting sorrow. And if it be best so to
do, tell me my Fidelia thy mind, for I perhaps am beguyled by my passion,
neither in deed have I either judgment or seelyng of ought, but of grief and
sorrow. Fidelia heard the words of the Princess, and taking part with the
Princess, made up this woeful lamenting with her sorrowful speech, in this
sort. Alas Madame, how much better had it been, that never the Knightly deeds
of Rosicleer had been manifested in Britain, for then without the sight of
him, you had never received this wound, which now festering in you for lack
of looking too will be very hard to be cured. But the wisest say, that in
such matters as are hard and difficult, a man must especially employe his
travail, and that the succesie is not so vnlykelye, but that labor may reach
unto it, as for this grief which now distempereth you, is not so great, but
that you may be soon whole, your self being thereunto willing: For in
this, neither Nature works, neither Fortune, nor the Stars, nor the
celestial Signs, nor any supernatural Influence, as you suppose, but only
the fancy and lyking of man: the self same effect with that which in the
sick is to desire to be whole and in the thirsty to drink. And whosoever
with the consent of his own will, attempteth the breaking of these snares,
which his fancy lays to intrappe him in, may escape scot-free, and help
others in like necessity. Otherwise, if this love were natural to all men, as
all men then should love by Nature, so should they not forbear it, either
for shame or friends displeasure, and if it proceeded from Forture, or by
grace inspired, whereof the cause is not known, but the event is evident, then
were our liberty herein irrecuparable, and in that the principal suit was
without us, it might excuse the infirmity of the patient, whereas as both
experience proves, that love has been removed by reason, and we daily chide
their impotencie, which are not able to resist the darts of Cupide. It is
therefore requisite madame, that your self put too your hand and frame your
will to the obaying of that which may bring remedy, not only for the love
which you presently feel, but for that which you fear will hereafter happen,
by your ill brooking of his absence.

And truly I am persuaded, that seeing you have with your self resolved to
exclude him from your company, that the best is to put it in practice
faithfully and effectually, least by forbearing of this correction, he take
more courage to disturb your rest, and yet am I not against that which you
have confirmed with good reason, that we ought to reverence virtue rather than
riches, and in my judgment that Gentlewoman which shall match with Rosicleer,
may think her self happy, for his rare and marvelous deeds of arms make
him to glister more gloriously then all other Princes and Knights whosoever.
And in times past, when all things went not so overthwart as they now do, he
was the best of lignage, whose prowess was best known, and he best esteemed
which wanne his estimation by his manhood. And to this purpose, behold the
buylder of Rome, by name Romulus, taken from his foster-father a shepherd, and
in a manner edified for that erection: although there were many buylders in ye
world both before and after, but the difference of the buyldings, lies in the
excellency of the workmanship. Again, was there ever one in such credit for
honesty and wisdom as Socrates, the son of a base midwife. Euripides one
of the rarest men that ever were in tragical Poems, was borne of mean
parentage. Demosthenes the flower of Greek eloquence, was a Cutlers son:
Horatius the Poet, borne of a bond woman, which had been taken prisoner, and
yet all these preferred for their virtuous qualities, before Kings and Princes.
Cicero could not dissemble his progeny, and yet was he lifted unto the
Consulship in Rome, and never proved other Consul so commodious for the
commonwealth. Serramus and Cnimatus wise men, and thoroughly exercised in their
enemies land were Consulls in Rome, and delivered their Country from spoil
and pillage. And if for a matter pertaining to a Kingdom, we had rather take
example of Kings, let us see if mean estate has been any let for men to
aspire unto mighty Kingdoms, and by name let us take a more particular
surnaye, of the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth King of Rome.

First Tullus Hostilius had his cradle in a shepheardes cottage, and his
bringing up in the wide field. Then the two Tarquins were sons to a Merchant,
and exiled their Country. Seruius Tullius was son to a bondwoman, as his
name imports: all which notwithstanding, in their times were Kings of Rome,
and if from thence we take our way to other Nations round about, what a
flock of shepherds, surgeons, laboring men, founders, and such like servile
occupations shall we meese, which ^^pyred to the highest place of government in
their Countries. Alexander a crowned King was a Gardeiners son: Pertinax
Emperor of Rome, borne of a slave which lived by thrashing of grain and
fellyng of wood: Seuerus the seventh Emperor of Rome was bredde and brought
up amongst Surgions, and these of the meanest sort. Agathocles King of Sicile,
son to a potter: Maximianus and Maximus chief men of the Empire, the one of
base birth, the other doubtful, whether a Smith or a Carpenter, and yet
neither barrel better Herring. Vespasianus which was called the good Emperor,
rose from lord degree, and by his virtue blotted out the infamy of his
progeny. And to have more notable testimonies, who was father unto the great
Caesar Augustus the ruler of the world? Virgil in a jest made him a Bakers
son, but his own mind misgaue him otherwise. As for a truth far worse be
they, which rife to glory from the mislyking of their parents, like as
Hercules, Perseus, and Iugurtha the King of Numidia, all begotten in adulterye:
and likewise mighty Alexander King of Macedon, as concerning whom his Father
Philip on his death bed denied him to be his son by the report of his
mother Olympia, for which cause after his Fathers death, he would needs be
called the son of Jupiter Ammon. Constantine the Emperor was borne of a
young maid before lawful espousalles: and Iepthah in the Scriptures, was
son to a harlot. Or if you will Madame, that for like examples, we run over
the histories whereunto my wit can not carry me in so sudden speech, yet I
remember, that few years since there dyed in Spain a stout king of ye Goths,
called Bamba, which as I have heard, was a laboring man, and at that time
when he was to be crowned King, was feign to stick his spade in the ground, to
receive the scepter, being neither less feared than his predecessoures, and
not reserved by me to the last place, as one of least credit among others.
Remember your self of the great king Arthur your progenitor, of whom (with
your graces leave) I do not think that men of mallyce, doubted whose son
he was. And we may boldly speak of these and other things so long agone
passed, without suspect of mislyked affection. But why marvel we at these
things? Does not the wise man say, that if our life were long, we should see
many Kings become bondmen, and of many bondmen crowned Kings, the reason
being the same as I have rebearsed, that in elder age the only Heraulde to
pronounce a man either noble or unnoble, was his own good deeds, which
advanced his good name and renown above the inferior deeds of Kings of
Princes.

But to paint out the pride of our times let us cast down our eyes to the first
root, from whence we all took our beginning, shall we not find it all one for
all men? Marry in the body of this tree there are many branches, some higher,
and some only water boughs, from whom the top boughs keep off the
comfort both of Sun and showers, yet no man I trow will be so envious as to
hinder the growth of the inferior, if they be more faithful then the
superior, as not always the tallest men do the best service, and the best
borne for wealth or might prove not the best always for manners and worship.
Witness heereto the sons of Scipio and Marcus Aurelius, of which two
descended two perverse impes, far more infamous then their parents were famous.
And there are infinite mo likewise to improve the succession of virtue, in ye
succession of inheritance. And yet for all this long discourse, I cannot
choose but reserve my former purpose toward you, for I am afraid that the
most part will not be of my judgment. In a word therefore to make an end in
that wherewith be first began, you must consider both by what means and for
what causes the times are altered, and thereupon take advise according to the
time. And since that for our sins God has given us over to a wrong judgment
in matters of high estate, rather to prefer wealth then virtue, and since you
are now fallen unto that time, wherein this error generally has ouergrowen
the truth, and is strengthened by consent of men, I would counsel you to
yield unto the time, that is to take it as you find it, and to make the best
of your chance: for it were great folly for you, and no less danger to
resist a multitude, and you know your friends will never be brought to
esteem so highly of virtue in a base personage, although a precious stone
can never be but precious, whether set in Lead or Copper. You must forsake
him then, and that is the only remedy, for according as I have read and have
heard the first remedy against a fit of love, is to exempt our selves from
the company of the beloved, and to shun and eschew the things which may
bring it again to our remembrance, the next is to drive in our thoughts the
things which be contrary thereunto: as to think with how many breaches of
sleep, and with what continual care we desire a thing either stithie, or
unlawfully coueted, or at the least wise transitory, though never so honest,
with all to set before our eyes what harms, what robberies, what murders,
what madness it has caused in the world, whereof there be too many histories:
but yet from all this you may well signise your self, if you will separate
from you your former conceit. And if none of these will suffice, there is
another remedy behind, which is to bestow your lyking upon such a one as may
be matchable to your estate. For as one nail drives out another, so men say
that the new love dispossesseth the old, which remedy as I have read was put
in practice by Assyrius the king of Persia. And this is my opinion, which it
may be your grace would not mislike, were it not somewhat troublous, but it
you have an eye to your benefit, thereby I doubt not but that you will well
overcome the trouble, and I pray you speedely take some way or other, but the
best I say still is the former for to alaye the heat. The next is, to take
away the wood, and so to forget love, is to remove from beloved, for otherwise
that which you quench in a month will be kindled in an hour.

Now the means to atchieue your purpose, is by writing your self to Rosicleer
to this effect, that he abandon your presence for ever, my self will be the
carryer: although I have some compassion on his pain. The princess knowing
the wholesome counsel, which her Fidelia as a faithful friend had given her,
answered lovingly, but yet with some conscience for her owns smart in these
words.

Those which are whole, can easily give good counsel to the sick, and every
remedy seems to them east and possible, as in like sort thou Fidelia not yet
attainted with love, tellest me of many remedies which not only seem
convenient unto thee, but also so easy, that thou say it lies i^^ my hands
to make my self free from the passion which tormenteth me, I tell thee truly
that I know both that I am not worthy of Rosicleer: and that besides it
behooves me to banish him from my presence. This I know my Fidelia, but alas
shall this be easy to me? Perhaps I may make him avoid the Court and
Country by the means thou have prescribed: but what then? I have a greater
adversity within my self, which makes this match not so even as thou weenest.
I know that when Rosicleer shall have departed the land, that my life will
well near depart my body, and I shall not easily forget mine own choice, but
yet as thou willest me I will adventure to put him from his hope, though I
bear part of the smart, and I had rather my body should pay for it, then
the honor of the Princess Oliua should be blemished, nor never shall the
force of love be able to disparage her. In this heat she called for pen, ink,
and paper, which being brought, she wrote to Rosicleer as you shall hear
hereafter.

I cannot think that for all her great stomach to mainetaine her honor
against Rosicleers basernesse, that she could draw those cruel lines with
dry eyes, but when she had made and end and closed up the Letter, as if she
had got some memorable conquest, says she. Now dare I compare with the Roman
matrones, which for the preservation of their honesty sacrificed themselves
unto their Gods, for what have I done else, but in a manner sacrificed my self
to God, when for my honor sake I have bound and lynked my self to such a
continual martyrdom and perpetual imprisonment, as the absence of Rosicleer
will breed in me, and never more will live as a Princess, but rather like a
vowesse. But hold Fidelia take it, at which word she sent out such a sigh,
and wept so bitterly as if her heart had rent asunder. Fidelia promised to do
the message, and after she had comforted her Lady departed speedely. I think
fearing lest the Princess should reclaim her opinion.

Fidelia being on her way to carry the Letter to Rosicleer, was taken by
six knights, and from them delivered by Rosicleer.

Cap. 40.
FIdelia having already taken leave of the Princess to execute the cruel
sentence pronounced upon poor Rosicleer, was upon better advise called back
by her Lady and made stay till the morrow. The next day coming before her
Lady to give her warning of her departure, scarce might she obtain leave to
go or tarry. And when she urged the necessity of her going, still the
Princess would stay her with some sweet speeches. Sweet Fidelia tarry yet,
yet a little longer sweet Fidelia, tarrye till my life leave this careful
body, it will not be long, my sorrow prognosticates of my end, if thou
tarrye till I have ended this my weary life go in Gods name then to
Rosicleer, it will be to some purpose to let him understand that though my
body be dead, yet I meant mine honor should remain sure for him. Fidelia
payned her self to comfort her Lady, and thinking it not best to enter any
long talk, as if she had gone of some other erraunt, stale away princlye
from her mistress in the company of other Gentlewomen, the less to be
suspected, and mounting upon her palfraye, she road through the City of
London all disguised, to seek Rosicleer.

Ere long she came to the keepers house where the three Princes had lodged, at
whom she learned that they were not far from thence, so with great
diligence she hasted after them, and as their knightly prowess left behind
them the memory of their being there, so wheresoever she came, she still
heard of them, and within eight days after that she had left the keepers
lodge, she came within less then one days journey of the place where their
abode was. That day passing alone through the thickest of a Forest, there came
out against her six knights, which took her horse by the bridle, saying that
she should go with them: which when she denied and began to plead for her
delivery with words of courtesy, one of them drew out his sword and said he
would stay her, unless she prepared her self to their company, but whether
she would or no, they made her palfray go by force with them toward the
Forest. Then Fidelia seeing that they meant herein some dishonor to her
personage, leapt from her palfray, and one of the knights perceiving it,
alighted to fetch her up again, but she getting from him, ran thence as fast
as she might, and by her good Fortune it came to pass that when the Knight
had overtaken her, and held her in his arms to put her upon her horse, that
Rosicleer and the two Princes Bargandel and Lyriamandro then passed through the
Forest to seek the self same Knights, and to be avenged upon all the
evils, in which they had wronged that Country. These three bearing the
screeches and outcryes which Fidelia made, got near the sound, to know the
matter: in the end, they saw that the knights would carry a Gentlewoman
^l^aie against her will. At which (albeit Fidelia was so w^ll muffeled that
none of them knew her) they were all displeased, and Rosicleer more angry
then the rest, said.

Sir knights what is the cause that you force this Gentle woman to go with you
against your will. One of them in great scorn said. If you will needs be of
counsel with us, I will prick you the cause upon my spears point. But
Fidelia cried. Ah my Lord deliver me from these false thieves which will lead
me away prisoner I know not wherefore. Rosicleer hearing them both, without
more to do, gave one of them such a blow upon the breast with his lance, that
it pierced him through, and he fell dead to the ground, the two valiant Princes
ran against two, and within short time flew them, the three which remained set
upon Rosicleer, but he cleft one with his sword and made the other two to
gallop away. The two Princes loath to let any of them escape, followed them in
such sort, that they four were now entered into the thickest of the wood,
Rosicleer being alone with the Gentlewoman Fidelia now at liberty and only
the company of Rosicleer, stood in a doubt whether after so great courtesy,
she might in her mistress name declare so discourteous a message, but
remembering her self to be at another command, unto whom she had promised
her faith in this matter: the time also so fit for the accomplishment of her
Ladies charge, she discovered her selte to Rosicleer, who presently knew her,
and much abashed to see her in that plyght, alighted from his horse to embrace
her, and as it has been recounted, his speech was on this manner.

What misfortune fair Gentlewoman has brought you from that heavenly court,
wherein you were once acquainted, to seek harborowe among such uncivil hosts
as these knights are. Fidelias answer was short in these terms. O noble
Rosicleer, the anguish which Fidelia feels is indeed great, but yet it only
arises through the remembrance of that message which she has in charge unto
Rosicleer, and with that she wept bitterly. Then somewhat amazed he said unto
her. Tell on fair Gentlewoman, and if your sorrow be for my sake let me bear
part with you, and thanked be God, I am not altogether a stranger to mishaps:
yet wist he not whereabout her message was, but he being very earnest to have
the message told him, she drew out the letter out of a little bore, and put it
into his hand with so much pain that she could not speak a word withal
Rosicleer having the letter and desirous to know what was in it, opened it
presently, wherein he soon espied the set determination of the Princess as
touching his exile, but before he had well weied of the contents, espieng only
Oliuias name in the inscription, as we say that men's minds misgiues them
against a mischief: so his heart throbbed, all his body tremble, and he had
much ado to force himself to endure the uttermost. The Letter said as
follows.

The high and mighty Princess, the Princess Oliuia, Princess of great
Britain: unto the most arrogant Rosicleer sends perpetual disgrace for thy
lewd attempt.
Being no less injured by thy presumption then minding the punishment of thy
folly, I have written unto thee. And know thou that thy letter has come not to
me in day light, nor delivered in thy name least I might justly have refused
it, but in the night time, and that closely and by strealth conuayed in my
cofer that I might first be beguiled, ere I might forethinke me of the deceit.
The receiving whereof albeit so at unawares, has somewhat blemished my honor,
and the shame thereof if I thought possible to be rubde out, I would not spare
for Tems water being so near my fathers pallaice. But to make amends for my
fault, and least thou take some pride in thine impudency, I am driven now to
an other inconueniencie, that is to answer thee, whom otherwise I would not
have vouchsafed in this respect, the courtesy of a good look. In thy letter,
the first point of thy pride I find, to be in bending thy lyking toward
me. The second and greater, in daring to manifest it unto me. The third and
especial, in forcing me by coppie of words, and an old tale of loves power
to give some relief to thy heaviness. Which thy intolerable pride, as it
seemed rare and strange unto me, so it made me more narrowly to fist, and
examining my self thoroughly and in every point, if either the lyghtnesse of
my looks or my unchaste demeanor, or the lack of foresight in my speech, or
the familiarity of acquaintance might give occasion to so base a Knight as to
attempt a Princess. Wherein if I could have called to mind any little
oversight, whereby thou might have courage of impeaching my honor, I would
first have punished it in my self, as I am now purposed to amend it in thee.
Only I remember I bestowed upon thee largely: and what then? Thou therefore
as Lucifer having more graces then thy fellow Angels, wilt pull GOD out of
his throne. Note that the stay of true virtue is humilitye, and there is no
glory so clear but pride may darken it. Because I humbled my self so much as
to think of thy mean virtues, would thou venture this? Did my beutie cause
thee to love me, and could not my estate withold thy pen, but thou must
challenge me for it? I was above thy reach, and why did thou not fear thy
ouerstrayning, if thou meantest to compass me? God never punishes the desire
of things allowed by nature, but thou shall find occasion of smart by thy
disordered affection. What if love be so great as thou painest thy self to
prove unto me? Did not other Princes see me, from whom yet the honest regard
of my greatness sheeleded me, which thought never entered into so abject an
heart as thine is. Yet Caesar forsooth and Hannibal and Mars and Jupiter, were
overcome with like passions. What ever good lyking I might have had to them, I
tell thee I list not to hear poor Rosicleers tale. Thou will have me so to
use clemency toward thee, as I shall thereby to be cruel to my self,
otherwise thou did my loss. Then must I have regard, and for ever cease
thou to trouble me in like manner. Or if because thou love me, I must deal
with thee accordingly, I am content, but to thy greater grief. For mark, the
greater love, deserves the greater chastisement: and greater is the fault done
upon presumption, then by ignorance or infirmitye, as much less sufferable
is the disgrace wrought by a friend then by a foe, and the lovers unkindness
is less excusable then the strangers. Thou professest thy self my friend and
lover, and I protest and proclaim my self now to be wronged at thy hand.
Judge thy self how I can bear it. For this injury which thus spiteth me. I
charge thee avoid this Court, forsake the land, and if thou meanest good to me,
get thee thither from whence never news of thy name may be brought to
England. This way shall thou prove thy love, and else not, and so she leaves
thee till doomes day.

Thy mortal enemy Oliuia.


When Rosicleer had read the words of the letter, the contents thereof so
galled him at the quick, that for very grief his senses forsook him, and he
fell upon the ground, there remaining an whole hour without moving foot or
hand, and Fidelia departed: so soon as Fidelia was gone, Telyo Rosicleers
esquire came that way to seek his Lord, for he had departed from him before to
fetch fresh water at a Fountain hard by. Now when Telyo approached and saw
Rosicleer stretched in that manner upon the ground as if he had been dead, he
made the greatest dole that ever poor creature made, and alyghting from his
horse, he plucked off Rosicleers helmet, casting water in his face, if perhaps
he might revive. In the end Rosicleer yielding forth a groan, as if his
heart strings had burst withal, came wholly to himself, and stretching his
ioynis upon the green grass, began to speak in this manner.

O fell Fortune, and ever spightfull, why have thou not made an end of my
life, with the end of my joy, and why live I, since that thereby my life is
berefte me. Leave me alone I pray thee and my grief shall not grieve me
without thy compauye, above all, welcome death, the vndooer of my care, welcome
my death, in what manner I care not, suffer not a Knight so unfortunate to
appear amongst men, nor to receive common sepulture. Cato not to behold the
conquerours face, slew himself with his sword: and Sophonisba poisoned her
self to be free from bondage. Now what reason was there in them by death, to
fly common and ordinarye mishaps: if I maintain my life to the abiding of
far greater torments, then are in death. And whence comes this mischaunce
unto me? from Love. O Love, Love, far more outrageous, then Fire and Water,
and far more dangerous to deal withal, then Chance or Fortune. Thou art
strange in all thy purposes, stranger in the execution of them, and in the
end thereof, straungest of all. How commonly do thy practices exceed the
working of Fortune, for she never gives pain but in pleasure, never grief
but in gladness, and she never overthrows but at the top and pitch, so
that there is yet some comfort to have been high, but I which in true love
toward Oliuia, had never countenance of comfort nor pleasure of any height,
am now so disgraced and have fallen so low as no adversity of Fortune can
match it. Artemidoro told me, my k^^ited should not let our marriage. But
now farewell my friends, by name Oliuerio King of the great Britayne, my
loving Lord, Bargandel and Lytlamandro Princes inheritours, and my loving
companions: and farewell Zoylo Prince of Tartarie, as my last acquaintance,
Fortune did but show us to each other, when we hoped of great acquaintance,
and farewell all my comforts, for I will hence to some dark and clowdie
Country, that not so much as the light of the Sun, may bring tidings of my
smart.

This saying, Rosicleer rose up, and mounting on his Horse, rode toward the
Forest which leads unto the Sea, with full determination to leave the
Country, presently, his esquire Telyo, which both saw and heard his
complaint, with great grief followed him, not yet daring to speak a word,
for fear of disquieting him. Rosicleer in this journey made great have, and
before night got to a huge and hollow rock, about ten miles from the place
where he received the letter. Thereon he cast himself turning his horse loose
upon the cliffes. Now being alone, as his manner was, he renewed his complaints,
with many a siker sigh.

In the morning when the Sun cast his beams upon the large Sea, Rosicleer
rose from the ground to look if he might see any ship, wherein he might put
himself. When he espied none, he commanded Telyo to ride unto the next haven
about two miles off, there to provide a ship, himself promised in the mean
while-vnder that covert to abide his coming. Telyo presently did as his Lord
commanded him, and made as much speed as he might, not to leave his Master
comfortless: but ere Telyo had got to the town, it chanced that Rosicleer
having great desire to be solitary, mounted upon his horse, and rode a
contrary way. In which way he saw a little ship making toward the land, and
out of this ship, from underneath the hatches, there appeared a Gentlewoman
very high and big of body, but of a good complexion, and straungely attired
as was her Country guyse. This Gentlewoman as soon as the anchors were cast,
caused the cocke-boate to be let down, wherein she entered, and coming to
land, she took her Palfraye to gallop up the sands, but espieng a knight
alone, whom by all semblaunce she took to be Rosicleer, she framed a
sorrowful countenance, and in great ruth saluted him, to whom he rendered the
like salutations, demanding what her grief was. The Gentlewoman still
counterfaiting a show of great sorrow, as not able to speak any thing, till
being importuned by him with much adoo she as it were forced out these
speeches.

Alas sir, tell me if you can, some news of a new Knight which has won the
prises at the great Feasts in London. Wherefore seek you him fayde Rosicleer,
I seek him aun swered the Gentlewoman, for that I hear so much of his glory,
as that I am pers waded, that he only is like to give remedy to my travail,
Rosicleer to make have away for fear least his esquire should find them,
opened himself unto the Gentlewoman, saying that he was the new Knight. The
Gentlewoman seeming to be very glad for to have found him, kneeled down:
but he lyfted her up, and desired byr to faye on presentlye what her sorrow
was, for he would willinglye undertake her demand: the Gentlewoman said on
this wise.

Sir knight, not far hence there is an Island where my father dwelled, a
plentiful land and ancient inheritance to our line. This land my father
governed a great time in peace and ease, till that Fortune loath to preserve
things in one estate, changed her coppie, and that which grieueth me most,
found means by me, to work the coffeehouse of my friends. For being young
and marriagebale, and my Fathers only child, it happened that I had many
suitors, but to be short, my Father thinking it safest for the continuance of
his line, and the peaceable government of his people which had rather have
been subject to their natural Countryman, then an Alien, matched me with a
lusty Knight, both best beloved for his worthiness and of greatest
possessions in all that Country. Now amongst my other suitors, there was one of
great liuelood, worthy for his wealth to have been preferred before all the
rest, if himself had been as worthy, but this Lord was refused by me, and
taking it as some part of disgrace, he kineeled his cholar and wrath, against
my Parents and me, and at a time convenient, which was not many nights past,
and when we least immagined it, he burst in upon my parents, where he found but
weak resistaunce, but I my self in the mean while, stealing by the shore
side, recovered this little boat, wherein I was scarcelye entered, when I saw
a far off my Parents and my husband led away prisoners. I think they
cannot iustlye guess whether I am gone. But after that I was in the boat, I
met with many which came from the instes at London. They seeing my heavy
cheer, demanded the cause, and when they understood it, they directed me to
enquire after a new Knight in the land, for he alone say they, is able to
undo this injury. You hear sir, both the cause of my care, and the occasion
of coming into this Country to you sir, now sir knight, if my ruth may work
any compassion, or that you think I have cause to complain, do your best to
amend my harm, you shall do double justice in restoring the wronged, and in
punishing the wicked dooer. Rosicleer feeling a yerning in his mind, against
so unlawful a practice, if her tale were true, badde her take her boat
again, for be would hazard his person in her quarrel. The Gentlewoman
desiring presently no other thing, gave him many thanks, so they entered the
boat, and the water being calm, they passed without any danger. But still
Rosicleer haunted with his ancient thoughts, now seeing himself far
distaunt from the Princess, and without hope to return, began a fresh to
consider of his exile, which thought so overcame him, that he wished his soul
to depart from his body.

But the History leaves him on the Sea, to recount in the mean time of his
Esquire, who finding a ship in the Haven, returned to his Paster, but not
meeting him, he was sore abashed, and in great sorrow coasted over the
Country to find him out.

After long travail by land to no purpose, he put himself to the Sea in a
ship prepared toward Almaine, where after continual weariness, and not
hearing any news of his Master, he turned toward his own Country in the
Walley of the Mountains, where he was well welcomed by his brethren. There
let us leave him, till time carry him from his Fathers home, to meet with his
Master. Now tells the History, of Zoylo Prince of Tartary, which had
trauayled toward the Court of King Oliuerio, as has been recited. When he
came to the Court, he found in the Pallaice hall, the Princess Oliuia, with
the King her Father, and diverse noble Princes, devising and sporting of diverse
matters, and especially of Rosicleers worthiness, which not a little tickled
the princess Oliuia, for all that cruel sentence which she had given of him.

The Tartarian Zoylo entering the Hall in goodly manner, to the great amaze of
the Knights and Nobles which beheld him, after he had made his humble
obeysaunce to the King, he spoke as follows. It may be, noble and worthy
King, that the greatness of my estate, forbids me to be so humble, but the
great virtue which I have found in the Knights of your Majesty's Court, has
enforced me above my wont, to do you that honor, which I would deny else, to
any King or Emperor in the world: now I beseech your Majesty to accept of
my service, and to receive me into the number of your Knights, for I have
great desire to belong unto your Court, if it so like you.

The King very well lyking of the Majesty which the Knight bare, albeit he
knew him not whence he was, of courtesy embraced him gladlye, and raising him
from ground, answered thus: Sir Knight, you are very welcome, for as your
personage and good behavior is above the credit of a mean man: so have I
great opinion of your high estate: and as to your request to be entertained of
my Court, I receive you willynglye, and promise you there-in my royal favor,
for I would live no longer then to make of your lykes, and I pray you sir
Knight tell me who you are, least peradventure I should fault, in not
honoring you according to your calling.

Zoylo answered, Nost puissaunt King, the report of your courtesy assured me
your good favor before I demanded it, and now sir understand you, that I am
called Zoylo, son to the King of Tartaria, in that part which bordereth upon
Christendom, and that I have spent many winters both an sea and land, till
that Fortune cast me on the English shore, then coming out of Dutchlande.
After here in your Country, minding as my usage was to try my self upon
Knights errants, it chanced that I met with three of your Knights in a
Forest, their names were as I learned of them, Rosicleer, Bargandel, and
Lyriamandro, with these I iusted, and after that I had cast down the two last
at the Tilte, I fought with Rosicleer at the swords point, but in the end I
was vanquished.

Rosicleer, when I was yeelden, having some lyking of me, desired me to come
and be acquainted with your Majesty, and to kiss your royal hand in his
name. All which I have done, as well for to offer my service to so mighty a
Prince, as for to accomplish the charge of so valiant a Knight, neither think
I it any disgrace to be vanquished by him. For besides that his bounty and
courtefie meriteth to be beloved rather then envied, his valor and Knighthoode
promises the conquest over the whole world. He has received me for a
perpetual friend, and his acquaintance do I more set by, then the whole
Kingdom of Tartary, my lawful inheritance. Therefore because I hope the
longer to enjoy this new friendship in your feruice, I have been bold to
crave the name of your Court, which, shall be as well welcome unto me as the
title which you have unto your kingdom. The king was glad to hear some news
of Rosicleer at that time, and much praised his own good Fortune to have
lyghted upon him, for that by him his Court had daily increased in worship,
and so tourning toward the Tartarian, he said on this manner. Pardon me
mighty Prince, in that I have not done you that honor, which appertains to
a Kings son, but the little acquaintance I have had with you, and the
ignorance of your estate, shall excuse me, henceforwardes, if I amend not,
let me be without excuse. And with these same words, the King led Zoylo to
the Princess, willing her to welcome the Knight stranger. Zoylo coming
before the beautiful Princess Oliuia, kneeled down before her to kiss her
hand, which she refused, but gently kissing him, she had him welcome. Farther
talk had she not, for the often naming of Rosicleer, brought to her
remembrance, the wrong which she had done to him, and her heart was so great,
that she had no power to speak a word, but craving pardon, she departed to
her chamber: this seemed strange to her father, but because her color was so
pale, it was thought to be by reason of sickness.

When she was within her chamber doors, she let her tears flow at liberty,
which before she restrained for fear of being espied. And thinking in what
manner her fathers Court was honored by Rosicleer, and in what estimation he
was holden among those Princes and knights, how glad they were of his
friendship, and how loath her father was to loose him, she burst out into
abundance of tears, and with the repentance of her former fact, she began
in this sort to repent her rashness. Thou hasty and over credulous Oliuia,
what thing did the poor Rosicleer crane of thee, but the acceptance of his
service, and that thou would become his Lady? why did thou not receive
him offered, especially when so many puissaunt Princes and worthy Knights
require to have, and are refused? why would thou not be Lady over him, whom
the best in the world, would be servaunt unto? Where was my judgment, and the
eyes of my understanding that I forethought me not of these things, now do I
too much repent that which I hastily willed, as touching the banishment of
Rosicleer. Here she stayed her speech, and in great disease of mind, shut her
self in her closet. Here now wanted the faithful counsel of her servant
Fidelia, for had she been at hand she might have slaked her mistresses sorrow,
which in the end grew so far, as besides the loss of speech and her often
sounding, she fell into a hot burning ague, which left her not of a great
while, till more comfort came by means of another Letter which she read of
her loves to his mother Briana. Till that time we will help the two knights
Bargandel and Liriamandro out of the wood, and bring them from the search of
Rosicleer, to the court of king Oliuerio.

The Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro retourning from the Forest, miss
Rosicleer.

Cap. 41.
THe great desire which lead Bargandel and Liriamandro to pursue the knights of
the forest made the^ to follow on so long, till they joined at a great and
well towred castle, standing at the one end of the said forest. There before
these two knights could enter to save themselves, the two Princes had overtaken
them, and getting between the castle and them, they put them to so great
scath, that the knights unable to resist, cried amain to those which were
within the Castle for s^^^cour, yet or they could come they were ouerthrown,
fore wounded, and as the Princes alighted down to make dispatch of them, ten
men issued out of the Castle well armed, and coming near laid at the Princes
in great rage, for they weened their Lords to have been slain: but this
skirmish lasted not long between them, for the two Princes were valiant, and
putting themselves in prease amongst the thickest, in short time made
riddaunce of the greater part, and those which remained besought the Princes of
pardon, which being eastyle granted, the two Princes returned to the two
knights which had been felled but late before. These two knights seeing in
what case they were, and pittyeng the destruction of their people, yielded
themselves to the will of the conqueror, promising that if they might inioye
their life and liberty they would amend their folly, and make satisfaction to
all Gentlewomen, whereof the Princes were glad, and taking their oaths for the
perfourmaunce, departed in have toward Rosicleer, as they thought, but he was
not where they left him, wherefore they sought him out in all parts. This day
till night they never descended from their horses, at night they took their
bed under a tree until the coming of the next day, and they were very
pensive, for that they knew not the cause why he absented himself, yet with
some hope that the next day they should hear some news of him, they drove out
that night, and on the morrow mounted up their horses again to find him out,
but it was to no boot, for eight whole days they travailed thorough the
Country and heard no news of him, in the end thinking they should meet with
him at the Court, they rode thither in the company of many knights, whether
let them go, whilst we in the mean time bear the Gentlewoman company which
had carried Oliuias Letter unto Rosicleer.

This Gentlewoman Fidelia as I tolke you, perceiving as well by the witness
which his eyes gave of his outward grief, as also by the sound wherein she
left him, as an argument of his inward sorrow that he needed comfort, and yet
not daring to show him hope contrary to her Majesty's commandment, struck
her palfraie, and without more stay gallopped on her way toward London,
whether in short time she came: but when she had entered the pallaice, she
would not presently make her coming known unto the Princess, least her
sodeine return should work some alteration, whereby the other Gentlewomen
might misdeeme of her errant. But when she had learned of the Gentlewomen that
her Lady was sick, she well wist whence her disease sprang, and therefore
wisely coming before her mistress, she yet spared to name Rosicleer, till she
understood how well she would take his heaviness.

The Princess now uncertain in judgment whether to commend of Fidelias
faithfulness in executing her devise, if the Letter were delivered, or to like
of her good Fortune if some occasion had hindered the delivery, being now
alone, stayed yet to hear either yea or naie, as touching the dispatch of her
message. But Fidelia as well for her own compassion over Rosicleer, as for
sorrow to see her mistress in that plight by her own conceit, uttered never
a word, but burst out into weeping, whereby the princess more troubled then at
the first, with a feeble voice spoke unto her.

Tell me Fidelia what thou bast done in thy message, and doubt not but thy
travail shall well please me, for although the love I bear him fears to
hear thine answer, yet shall mine honor counteruaile the dread, in which
quarrel I will as I told thee erst venture my life rather then yield my
body to any opprobrie. This saying, she lent her ear unto Fidelias
answer, and fastened her eyes upon Fidelias looks, as if no word should have
escaped unmarked or unadvised of her. Fidelias answer was short in these
terms.

For a truth madame I had sought Rosicleer no little time ere I could find
him, and as it fell out I found him when my self was not without danger, as
it were to participate of that cruelty toward him wherein I was partly a
dealer: but that which makes ^^ms especially to repent my pains herein was,
that my delivery was wrought by him: For at the same time I met him, six
knights outlawes set upon me in a Forest, and had lead me captive away,
there to be spoiled of my honor: but that by my outcryes, Rosicleer with two
other knights came thither, none of them having any knowldege of me who I
was. There in my presence he killed three of them, the other flyeng away were
followed by the two knights in Rosicleers company, by which means being
alone with him, I there delivered your Letters. But I believe that he had
rather have received his deaths wound, then that letter. Ere he opened it, his
color changed, and all his body shook for fear, but after he had read
the superscription, his eyes were filled with tears, and never man was so woe
begone as he: yet he read it out, and as I remember, with the last words he
gave a great groan, and sanke to the earth. Whether he ever recovered or no I
wot not, for I durst not stay with him, therein to fulfill your graces charge,
which was, not to receive answer from him. This understanding the Princess,
and that Fidelia had obeyed every jot of her will so well, although she would
that her servant had failed in some small point of diligence in this matter,
yet thinking to learn more at her hands, she demanded what thing he did
when she parted from him, and what words she spoke, moreover what she thought
the event would be. To all which questions Fidelia answered at once, that
she left him for dead upon the ground, and to divine was not in her skill.
With this the Princess waxed angry, and blamed her very sore in not abiding
the time of his recovery, whereunto Fidelia excused her self by her
commandment, but yet because the Princess would have it so, needs must
Fidelia be thought in a great fault or crime, for not doing so.

Now may you guess that Fidelias trustiness was like a cup of cold wate to
her burning ague, the more to enrage it, or like drink to a Dropsy man,
whereby his malady the rather increases. For in like manner as Rosicleers
heaviness came by reading the letter, so hers grew by Fidelias report of his
heaviness. And albeit that we hear seldom time of man or woman dead for
love, yet is it natural for overmuch grief to abridge man's days as now it
was not love which so much afflicted the Princess, but the injury which she
had offered Rosicleer, and the grief which she conceived by the despair of
ever seeing him, and his grief had almost wrought her utter bane.

Rosicleers departure is published in the Court of King Oliuerio, Oliuia after
knowledge whose son he was, reuerseth judgment passed by a countermaunde in
another Letter, whereof Fidelia likewise is the bearer.

Cap. 41.
THe Princes Bargandel and Liriamandro in the quest of Rosicleer rode far and
near and could not understand any thing as touching him, till that having
travailed over a great part of that Country they met with people strangers,
which certified that themselves had seen a Knight in that sure of armor,
imbarking himself with a Gentlewoman, and after that a Squire sore weeping,
entering into a ship to follow them, for the which news Bargandel and
Liriamandro were very sorrowful, and for now they were sure that he had
forsaken the kingdom, whereupon they agreed to return unto the Court, and one
day as the King Oliuerio, with the Prince Zoylo and other worthy Princes and
knights were gone out of the City to solace themselves in the fields, these
two Princes came toward the place where the king abode, which had beheld them
before very heedfully, for they seemed unto him to be two comely and noble
knights, and therefore he desired to have a more perfect view. But valiant
Zoylo knew them by their devices upon their armor, and said to the king and
to the other then in presence, that he greatly meruailed why Rosicleer came not
with them, for says he, when I parted from them they were all three together,
when the king knew them to be the two Princes, he caused his train to stay
till the two Princes came against him, those he embraced with great love and
thanks for their return, demanding withal for Rosicleer. They which I dare
not say knew the right cause, but coniectured some likely cause by the
strangeness it wrought in him, with great grief made a narration of each
particular as far as they knew, both what befell him within the Realm, and
in what manner he avoided the Realm, as they had heard of others only in the
company of a Gentlewoman, and they added moreover perhaps of their own
heads, perhaps as I said before, upon some farther knowledge that it could
not otherwise be, but that he had some great wrong offered unto him by some
person within the Realm. The King excusing himself to the Princes for his
own dealing toward Rosicleer, became very sad and heavy for him, as also
those which were near with him, not being able to guess of his return: and
indeed if they had been certain of his long absence, it would much more have
been grievous unto them, so rare was the love they all bare to him. But with
some little hope of Rosicleers speedy return, the King with those Princes
his friends tarried some days in the Pallaice, till that because he was from
them so long, the three Princes Bargandel, Liriamandro, and the Lartarian Zoylo
together, took upon them to seek him, in which time they adventured many
strange exploits as shall be specified hereafter in this History. But in the
end as the greatest part of these nobles and Princes stayed in England for
the love of Rosicleer, so his presence wanting in that court diminished so
fast, that in short time there was not behind remaining in the Court any
Knight of great account, but the Prince Don Syluerio, unto whom the loss and
absence of Rosicleer bread no small contentation, as it wrought in the king
Oliuerio, to the contrary no lesser displeasure and disquiet, as if the loss
of Prince Edward had again renewed. For there was no one in his kingdom which
could and would advance his private credit and the honor of his Country by
worthy prowess and by valiant deeds of arms.

But when all the kingdom began to bewail the loss of Rosicleer, what did
that fair Oliuia which had abandoned him the Country, and loved him more then
any one in the world, might she forget him one instant? No, but when she
wayed well that for the accomplishing of her charge he had forsaken the land,
her good will increased toward him, and in steed of the daily view of his
personage, in his absence she gazed at will upon the counterfayte and
portraiture which she had imprinted in her fancy. This did she the oftener
because she found not in her solitary contemplation any other thing to
present it self. For amorous thoughts are ever enemies to company, and
being alone, as commonly she was by reason of sickness, what was there to
remove this solitary thought and conuersaunt companion from her.

This companion she still enterteined, which by use and continuance of time
grew to a setteled sentence, and her love waxed greater then it was before, and
then increased the flame which burnt more earnestly then ever before it had
been. But as it chanced, tossing of these things in her remembrance, withal
she remembered that Arinda had told her how that Rosicleer had written unto
the Princess Briana, and as the amorous are accustomed to build themselves
Castles of Hope, albeit sometime without foundation or sure ground whereon
they may surely stand: so her love waxed ielous over him, and she began to
cast with her self why Rosicleer should write to the Princess Briana being to
her no kiffe nor kin to her, and so mean borne, out of which in the end she
picked out this hope, that out of doubt his birth was as good as his bringing
up. In this matter therefore she labored Fidelia, secretly to steal that
Letter from the Gentlewoman Arinda her bedfellowe, and talking about this
matter one certain time with Fidelia, among other things, she said. Oh my
Fidelia, as I had the power to banish Rosicleer the land, so would I that I
could banish him from my memory, how profitable had thy counsel been then
unto me, but what shall I do for that remedy is no more auayleable, since
his absence wounds me more then his presence, I grant thee the fight of the
beloved to some increases love, still offering it self to be seen, and yet
to other some again the thing daily seen brings little delight but rather
lothsomenesse as contrariwise sometimes love is moved by discontinuance, and
sometimes men's desire increases the flame, albeit the beloved appear not in
presence. But this thou take to be impossible, for thou art not touched with
the like passions, and none knows the bitterness thereof but the experienced,
as appears by thee which have ministered a medicine not of force against my
disease. But make me amends and once again venture for my sake, I remember
that Arinda has a Letter of Rosicleers to the Princess Briana, to what
purpose I know not, but I would gladly see it, this steal from her and bring
it me that I may read it, I cannot say what good news my mind foretells me
by it, but sure I long to read it, as if there were some great secret
contained therein, and quiet shall I not be till I have had it. Heereto Fidelia
replied briefly that this matter should be left unto her to watch her
epportunitie, and indeed when Fidelia and Arinda slept together one night,
Fidelia espieng Arinda fast on sleep rose as softlye as she might, and taking
one of the keys which Arinda had tied to her girdle, therewith she opened the
call ket and pulled out Rosicleers Letter, which she brought to her mistress
lodging, whom she found waiting for some glad news. The Princess her self
would not open the Letter but gave it to Fidelia, which unsealed it and read as
follows.

To his good Mother the high and mighty Princess Briana.
IF my departure from your presence procures your just displeasure, believe
me madame, and my good mother, your son Rosicleer cannot be well pleased
therewith, foreseeing the great solytarinesse wherein you remained, and yet
because this my journey has so prospered with me, I am the better contented,
and I beseech your grace to quiet your self upon Gods ordinance, from whom I
am persuaded this motion in me proceeded. Besides the Story of mine own good
Fortime, which Arinda may safelye report, I have heard news as touching your
self, the redeliuerie of my Father, and the safety of my Brother. For since
my departure I have got acquaintance with Artemidoro a great wise of man of
Greece, perhaps he is not unknown unto you, of whom I have learned that
your husband my Father shall ere long return unto you. That the Gentleman of
the Sun my brother is alive and already Knighted, and for prowess so
greatly approved, as not the Knights of elder time are thought matchable,
that he and I shall know our Father to be the most valiant and worthyest
Prince on the earth, that we shall have a pleasant end of our sorrowful
beginninges, which God grant. As touching mine own estate I have been
brought by this Artemidoro to the Court of king Oliuerio, where by his own
hands I have been dubbed Knight, and have received such honor as if I had
been his known Nephew, and had it not been that your grace had commanded
the contrary, not suffering our progeny to be known, I should for this
favor have bewrayed the truth, at least to have given him some comfort, for
the supposed loss of Prince Edward, but I will obey your command. And these
news I thought to make you privy unto, as not being ignorant of your
heaviness, which I pray God lessen to your comfort. Farther as touching these
matters, Arinda may tell you of the specialties. The Almighty send you
speedely your desired husband. I take my leave, kissing your royal hands.

Your obedient son. Rosicleer.


When Fidelia had ended the letter, and the Princess had well understood the
secrets thereof, what tongue may express the great joy that entered into her
sorrowful mind, as if she had but now recovered her lost hope, and had
she not now counterpaized her ancient sorrow with this late sprung joy, her
life had been in danger, for in no other thing excessive joy may do so much
harm as in the hearts of true lovers. Amongst whom I can compare these two
Princes, Rosicleer and the beautiful Oliuia as the chiefest. This Princess
now rid of some part of her fear, and as it were brought into a new
world, thought to make amends by punishing her self for her cruel letter,
thus says she. Oh, how well am I worthy of the pains which I now sustain in
the repentance of my former fact, not only for that which against Rosicleer I
have committed, but also for the little credit I have had of his valourous
personage. Where were mine eyes and judgment, when I did not prove his
nobility by his virtue, how great was my pride, in that I would in such
sort despise so worthy a Knight, and bannish him, not only my presence, but
this Kingdom also?

O inconstant and frail woman-kinde, for just cause lightly regarded among
wise men, since we are light in belief, light in judgment, and ouer-hastye in
showing the effect of our conceit. What occasion had Rosicleer given me, that
I should make exchange for the great good will which I bare unto him, with so
cruel a sentence, as to dispatch him from my presence? What had he in his
letter, any dishonest word, any unlawful demand, or did he move me to the
thing prejudicial to my great Estate. This he desired, that I should know he
loved me: why should I be ashamed that my inferiors love me, and that he
should like of me, was the thing I desired. Tell me Fidelia, what is thy
counsel for to amend this fault, me thinks we are in worse case then
before. Rosicleer is already departed the Country, and if I send to call him
back, he will not regard me, or will it not be thought lyghtnesse, after
that I had in such earnestness refused him, as it were yesterday, this day
sodainelye to alter my purpose? Besides that, when he retourneth into this
Court, his glory may increase to my dis worship, and again, if to bear
out my former fact, I let the matter pass as it has done, what shall then
become of me? I know not how to live, he being bannished from my presence,
whom I love better than my self. But Fidelia, as thy part was in the first
counsel to bannish Rosicleer, so now put too thy help that Rosicleer may
return again, without the blemmish of mine honor. Very joyful was Fidelia
to hear the Letter, and being well content that her Mistress had^^ kept her
former conclusion in this matter, as touching the marriadge of Rosicleer, if
his Parentage were not so far inferior, soberly answered.

Madame leave off your complayntes, and be more glad then ever you were, since
God has been so favorable unto you as to make Rosicleer of so high estate
that he may merit you. For in good sooth I stood in doubt whether of your
pains were the greater, and I knew no means how to slake them. But fith now
this secret is disclosed, the remedy is in our hands, and not so difficult
as you make it. For be it that you shall send unto Rosicleer, to demand
pardon of him for the offense which you have committed against him, shall you
think you do your self any wrong therein in respect of your princely
estate. No, for assuredly he loves you loyally, and because he is of nigh
parentage with you, you may therein beguile suspicious eyes, and after his
return you may boult it out of him, whether he love you, yea, or no, if he
do, without peradventure you may acquit him, and love of all things would
be rewarded. I dare warraunt that your love shall detayne him with us, and to
this purpose madame your hand and my head which jointly committed the former
fact, shall now together make the recantation, and cry Pecaui. The effect
may be only to will him to resourne to your presence, and my self will be
the messenger, and I promise never to refourne into this Country till such
time as I find him, and have delivered your Letter to his hands. Withal
says she, this ought prsently to be put in practice, for by the grief
Rosicleer took at the sight of your Letter, I guess that he is either
departed this life or avoided the Country. The Princess was very well
content with her have, as the thing which she most desired, and so embraced she
Fidelia gladly, and spoke unto her.

Fidelia now I know the good will which thou have to serve me, and I
confess that I have not made thee privy to my heaviness without great hope
of comfort at thy hands, therefore I beseech GOD once to reward thee as I
wish, but bring me pen, Ink, and paper, for I will straight way follow thy
counsel herein. Fidelia brought unto her pen, ink, and paper, wherewith
the Princess, wrought her reclayme, with as many sugered words, as the
other letter had sharp and sower.

This letter, the sequel will show unto you, when we come to the meeting of
Fidelia and Rosicleer: but before that time, the letter written after this
manner, was delivered unto Fidelia, and it was agreed upon between
themselves, that upon the next day she should go to seek him. This night
they took their rest, the one, for the better enduring of her long travail,
which she should sustain, the other, to make satisfaction for her broken
sleeps. Ere broad morning Fidelia was up, and having conuayed Rosicleers
letter where she found it, she went unto the Princess, to take her leave of
her. When as they were departing: Oh my good Fidelia, said the Princess, do
as much as thou may to return again speedely, for if thou stayest long, I
shall live but a small while, there is nothing that may so soon shorten and
cut off my days as to hope without success, and to dread the worst. I tell
thee that till thy coming again, my nights will be turned to watchinges,
and I shall reckon the clock hourelye awayting thy presence. O God, Fidelia,
when the day comes I will look for the night, then when as the night is
ouer-passed, I will make account of the day to come, and I will never leave
casting of perilles till that I shall hear thee bring some tidings of that
good Knight.

Fidelia was very sorry to think of the cares, which her Lady, was like to
receive, and principally for that she should teaue her alone wanting with
whom to communicate her pain. Wherewith, being somewhat troubled, and also
foreseeing the long time of her absence, so she departed weeping in this
manner.

Madame, it is needelesse for you to charge me farther in the affairs, the
pains wherein I leave you, are sufficient to hasten my journey, I would to
God my Fortune were aunswerable to the desire which I have to serve you in this
matter. But be of good courage, and hope for the coming of your Knight, or else
look not for me. With these they broke off, and Fidelia went to her fellows,
unto whom she told, that she would soiourne with her parents in the Country
for a season: after, going to the Sea side, she entered into a ship prepared
toward Almayne, wherein the History leaves her saylyng, to recount of other
things which chanced in the mean time.

Rosicleer was betrayed into the Island of Candramarte that Gyaunt, whose
hands had been cut off before, by Rosicleer.

Cap. 43.
YOu have heard, how Rosicleer departed from the great Britain, in the
company of the strange Gentlewoman never hoping to return again into that
land, only for the accomplishing of the exile, whereunto he was bound by his
Ladies appointment. Now the History says, that the Gentlewoman with whom he
was in the boat, was sent by Candramarte, whose hands Rosicleer had cut off
before the King Oliuerio for Queen Iulias rich sword, and that she was sent
under color of a distressed Gentlewoman to bring him to her Fathers Island,
there to be aduenged of the hurt and shame which her Father had received. This
device was thought fittest, both, for that Rosicleer as a noble Knight, pittyed
such oppressed Gentlewomen, and that for other cause then to show himself,
Rosicleer could not be brought out of England. In this Island Candramarte had
two young Gyauntes to his sons, whom for that purpose he had knighted,
being in making no less than himself. Besides these, Candramarte had
fortye chosen Knights, all which he armed to assault Rosicleer, least be
should escape them. By this guyle the Lady Gyauntesse, Daughter unto
Candramarte, carried him to her Fathers Island, wherein, without any farther
advice, he adventured himself, for very grief of hearts which he
conceived, to see himself abandoned his Ladies presence. But now sire days
have they been on the Sea, at the end whereof, the wind was so favorable,
that they came within kenning of the Island, to his judgment very strong, and
to the show very pleasurable.

This being discovered by the Governor, the Gentlewoman said, that that was
the place, wherein her Parents and Husband were taken, crieng and tearing of
her hair, as if the sight of the place had redoubled her sorrow. This made
Rosicleer to be more earnest in her quarrel, and to think if long till he
were landed, which his desire being accomplyshed, the Gentlewoman led him up
upon the shore, where Rosicleer viewed at ease the whole sight of the Island.
In the first enterye upon the land, there were two strong Castles as two
Bulwarks, situated upon a stype recke as it were a bow shot distaunce over
against the other.

Before the Castelles, there was a great broad plain shaddowed with great
Dakes, and when they had come near unto these great Castelles, the Gentlewoman
poynting to the one Castle, said to Rosicleer on this manner. If that Sir
Knight you will aduenge my quarrel you must go to that Castle, which is on
the right hand, for that is the traitor Knights Castle, which has taken my
Parents and Husband as prisoners, and until your coming, I will stay here
in this little boat we women are weak hearted and fearful, and above all, I
would not come into his power, for then would he for a surety murder my
parents and my husband, whom now perhaps he entertaineth more gentlye,
upon hope to win me. If you will, be it so answered Rosicleer, for your
long gowns are not fit to fight withal, and your sex shall well answer the
challenge of your cowardice, with this speech Rosicleer departed, and taking
his horse, mounted thereon to come to that Castle on the right hand, the
Gentlewoman took her ship again, and drove from land amain. By and by
Rosicleer heard the winding of an horn at the one Castle, and presently he
heard an annswere at the other Castle, whereby suspecting that this token was
given of his coming, he turned his head to see the Gentlewoman whom he had
left on the shore. The Gentlewoman houering about the bank, now sure of his
escape, and straining her voice, cried. Come forth, come forth, sons of
Candramarte, for here is the new Knight, which cut off our Fathers arms. Now
wist Rosicleer by this horn, and the Gentlewomans outcries, that he had been
betrayed, but as one careless of life, as quietly as he could, he prepared
himself, which he certainly looked for, his prayer was this. Lord Jesus have
mercy upon me, whom thou so dearly have bought with thy bloodshed, pardon
my sins, and receive me unto thy Kingdom, as for my carcass, be it as thou
have appointed me, for death cannot betide me in a better time.

After this, he stayed, not as dismayed, but passing farther to see in what
manner this treason was compassed, he saw the gates of the one Castle set wide
open, and thence issuing a huge Giant upon a mighty Courser, with more then
twentye Knights well armed at his tail. At their first coming, they made a
great showt, as if they had got some great victory, and the Giaunt amongst
the rest said unto him. Thou miserable and wretched knight well shall thou abie
the shame which thou did to my father Candramarte, when thou did cut
off his arms at London. Rosicleer as desperate made answer: I doubt not but
for all your threats you will give me leave to dye, but ere that happen, it
may be you shall be disappointed of your purpose, and with that he drew out
Queen Iulias Sword, with the which he encountered the tall Giant which came
against him with a great Spear. The Spear hit Rosicleer on the breast, and
indeed were it not for the finenesse of the armor, it had pierced him, but
the metal being such as it was, the Greek made no more for the blow then if
it had been hit with some delicate young knight, and before that the Gyaunt
could recover his horse rain to fetch the second course, Rosicleer gave him
such a blow with his Sword that he cleft him to the bowels, the great giant
fell dead to the ground, the blood issuing in great abundance. Here the great
brag was quailed, when he which came to aduenge another man's quarrel could
not warrant his own safety.

But truth it is, that those which vnmeasurably do seek revenge, do
oftentimes heap on themselves the greater mischief. And what did this
tyrannous Candramarte else, which placing himself at his window to behold
the battle, and to make more solace at Rosicleers harm, as if the only
report had not been sufficient, now in steed of his former wrong he found a
greater by the death of his sons, but yet this is the beginning only of his
misery, for the valiant Knight not fearing death at all, in great choler
rushed among the other Knights which likewise assailed him courageously, and
had within a while with their battle axes hewn his horse in pieces.

When he was on foot he laid about him manfullye that in short space the
scantling of ground in which they fought was covered with breast-plates and
Targets, and as their number lessened, and that he had more room, so his
courage increased and he did them more scath: but well fare his inchaunted
armor, which had served to more purpose in defending then his swoorde in
offending, or else his courage had tired before the end of so dangerous a
fraie. Now there are few alive, and those either striving for life upon the
grass, or in weak case upon foot, readyer to fly then to fight: but
presently there came fresh succors from the other Castle. For the other son
of Candramarte with more then thirty knights in great have came against this
good knight, not being idly occupied among the other Knights. The Gyaunt
for other good morrow gave the good knight so strong a blow with his battle
Axe upon the head piece, that had it not been rather in the head piece to
withstand the blow, then in himself to resist the Gyaunt, Rosicleer had layne
brainelesse on the ground, but all this greened him not, saving that the
weight of the blow made him kiss the earth, whence yet he start up lightly,
and minding to requite courtesy for courtesy, as he was purposed at the
Giant, there stepped in a knight between them, whom Rosicleer divided to the
breast bone, whereat the Gyaunt and those which beheld him were much abashed,
notwithstanding this, they being many and he wearied, he might not defend
himself long from them, especially from the Giant, which only watched
opportunity of aduauntages, yet lengthened he the fight by his noble courage a
long time, until for very faintness he was feign to give back and get his
shoulders against a wall, from which afterward he was driven by maine force,
and being pursued, he withdrewe himself to the Sea, ever as he warded one
blow bestowing another. After he had got the Sea at his back he waxed bolder,
and above all watched Candramartes son which had hurt him, most especially him
he hit so sure, that the blood gushed out in three or four places.

In the mean while Candramarte viewing the battle to no great liking
blasphemed heaven and earth, and leaving the window ran to the Sea side,
where the battle was continued, and with a loud voice he called on his
knights, reuiling them as cowardes and dastardes if one Knight might resist
them so long, and above all to his son he spoke thus. Thou vile and dastarde
sheep, how like thou art to thy miserable mother, I swear by heaven and earth
if thou escapest out of this battle alive, my cause and thy brothers death
unrevenged, that I will starve thee in the same place where I starued thy
mother.

The Gyaunt and his knights thus railed on, for shame and fear gave a fresh
assault upon the good Knight, so that as he dispatched some, there stepped in
new in their rooms: and ever the battle was as it were new to begin to
poor Rosicleer, which drove him to seek farther succor in the water, and to
stand up to the navel, thinking his death to be very night, he prayed to
GOD with all his heart for his souls health, as one that altogether detested
his life, and determined no longer to defend himself then the water would
give him leave. Then takes he his swoorde with both his hands and lays on
so thick, that there are slain more then ten knights ere he leaves, as the
Sea gave witness which made the bank seem as all bedewed with blood. Now
behold and see how GOD never forsakes his, and especially those which abide
his pleasure: as he did unto this Knight, and now standing equally betwixt life
and death, though neither fearing the one nor hoping the other, and sure of
neither, yet has he remedy besides his hope and is comforted of his own
brother, unknown to both.

So may Fortune sometimes vex and anoye us: yet at the length she retourneth
back and relenteth again. But for this matter which we entreat off, we are
to remember our selves of that valiant Grecian son to the Emperor Trebatio
left in the little Boat sailing through the Occean Seas, with the which he
had passed the bounds of Africa, and coasting by the Mediterraneum Seas, was
driven along the Spanish shore, and from thence at length sailed by the Island
of Candramarte at such time as Rosicleer now enforced himself to abide the
uttermost of the skirmish, with resolute mind presently to receive the death or
to be conqueror. But this boat guided by a wise man as you heard before,
took landing almost against Donzel del Feboes will, about a bird bolt^ shot
from Rosicleer, where he espied a cruel fight, but that which most amazed him
was, that one knight (though strong timbered and valiant) yet had set himself
against so many, and with their bodies had made so great a slaughter. So with
a great admiration, rather amorous then jealous, he said unto himself. Who
would believe that in our days there might be found a Knight furnished with
such excellency of manhood. Assuredly his fame is as worthy to be spoken
off, as that Greeks which had killed the famous Troyan Hector. Thanks be to
the Gods which have brought me hither, for although I should loose my life, I
will not leave him vnsuccoured.

Thus saying he waded in the water to come near him, and seeing the Gyaunt to
oppress him so much and without a sheelde, for he had lost it in battle
with the first Gyaunt he took his sword with both his hands, and let drive
with all his force at the Gyauntes head that he cleaued it unto the brain, and
afterward rushed among the rest, killing many of them. When Rosicleer saw
with one blow the Giant stricken down and such unhoped for succors, the
great wonder that he received may not be told. And as if the enterprise had
been achieved or his life saved, with a fresh courage he went out of the
water, and valyauntly thrust himself among his enemies, where he well gave
them to understand that he was desirous the battle should end. Here two
brethren albeit unknown each to others, gave brotherlye help in time of
need. And there was never a one left, which either cried not pardon, or
fled his way, the supplyauntes were pardoned. But let us think of
Candramarte which now saw his other and only son slain at one blow, in
what plight do you judge him to he, but the worst is good enough, whereas if
she had held in his hungry desire of revenge with a long delaie, or had
dissimuled his choler he might have lived quietlye with his sons by him,
able sufficiently to defend foreign invasion, and maintain his. But now
childlesse, knightlesse, and armelesse, besides at the mercy of his enemy, he
was far out of charity with all the world, that cursing heaven and earth,
and what was in them, he run headlong into the sea, there drowning himself
among the waves, and bequeathing his soul to the devil, who long ere that
expected to be his executor.

Tell me I pray you gentle readers, how often you have seen the
unmeasurable desire of revenge have a luckie end, or not rather to procure a
father harm, when as that which might be pardoned or dissimuled with honor,
afterward is bewailed with sorrow and grief. It is written that he that
seeks revenge, vengeance will light on him. For why the same God says. To me
vengeance belongs, and I will reward it. O ye malicious and wicked men which
with infinite travail beat your heads to ordeine mischief for the least
displeasure. Take this lesson for your amendment, and make Candramarte your
example.

But let us continue our history of the two brethren, the Knight of the Sun
and Rosicleer, which now the battle being ended and the mis dooers
pardoned, had little leisure to learn of each other who he was. Rosicleer
pulled off his visour and spoke to the Knight of the Sun, saying. Knight the
most valiant that ever I met withal, I know not how to reward you for the
great friendship you have showed to me, but tell me your name I oraie you,
and I shall account my self the happiest man this day living, and while I
live will I remember your valor. The knight of the Sun noting the great
slaughter of knights with the mangling of armor in that place where the first
battle had been fought, besides the monstrous blow wherewith the first
Gyaunt had been stain, and after viewing his personage, his bearde but now
burgening, he pulled off his helmet, and after the manifesting of his
beautiful looks, such as passed all the knights of his time, he answered
gently. Right valiant Knight, I am to thank my Gods for that they have
brought me hither in so good a time as to know so valyant a knight, and to see
with mine eyes the knighthoode which I would scarce have credited with mine
eyes: but whereas you demand of me whom I am, know you that I am called the
Knight of the Sun, for the devise which I bear in my armor, and for my
birth I can show you no-farther, neither know I more of my estate: but the
adventure which brought me hither has been by occasion of a storm which
drove me on this shore, and this is the first land whereon I set foot since
this tempest took my ship, and courtesy commanded me to lend mine aid
when I saw you ouermatched with number. And thus much for answer to your
demand: but now again that I have told you that which you required, so I
pray you tell me your name, and for what cause this cruel battle has been
fought between these Gyaunts and you. While the Knight of the Sun spoke
thus, Rosicleer beheld him very sadly, and hearing him say that he was the
Knight of the Sun, and that he knew no more of his estate, he thought that
peradventure this same might be his brother of whom Artemidoro had told him
such meruailes, but leaving this suspicion till he might question of it more at
large, he satisfied the knight of the Sun as to his question in short speech
after this manner.

Your friendship was great, and so I make reckoning of it, otherwise I should
not have happened on so good a time to tell you my name, in which because you
would learn of me, you shall understand that my name is Rosicleer, and that I
was of good report in the Court of king Oliuerio, the king of great Britain,
although my mishappe causing it, I doubt me so much that my name is once
mentioned amongst them, but that matter I will leave off as not pertinent,
this which you require about our fight sprung upon this occasion, and so he
showed the whole order both of the receiving of his Auant Cheualier at the
kings hands: the first days iusting: the seconds days combat with
Candramarte: the honor of the iusts: the envy of Candramarte: and point by
point the whole story as you heard before.

Which tale Rosicleer had searcely finished, when the Gentlewoman which all
this while remained in the ship cried out, whereat they turning their heads,
saw in what manner she outraged, saying. O spightfull Fortune do what thou
can, for the succor which I have wanted on land, I hope to find in the
bottom of the Seas, and the God Neptune which has power over the swelling
waves, shall keep me from farther vengeance, wherewith she leaped into the
Sea, but being clad in large garments, she could not drown presently. The
knight of the Sun and Rosicleer seeing her in that estate, pittyed her
greatly, but she was too far off for them to wade near, so the knight of the
Sun took his boat hastily to help the Gentlwoman, where otherwise then he
looked for, the boat was carried by violence another way, and albeit he
strove to bring it toward her, yet prevailed he nothing, for it sailed in the
Sea as swiftlye as sometimes the clouds rack in the air being driven by the
winds, presently Rosicleer with great grief lost the sight of the boat,
werefore fetching a deep sigh, as for that his former hope was clean dashed
to have found his brother, he said as follows.

Fortune the thing which I most detest, therein thou show thy self most
favorable unto me. This is my life which now twice thou have restored me
without my wish, but that which my heart most desired, and with which my life
should find most ease, therein thou show thy self an adversary to me, so
that whatsoever good happens unto me, thou make me think that it happens
for the worst, for the longer I live, the more are my pains increased. Now by
that time that he had lamented a while for this sodeine loss of the strange
knight, he saw the gentlewoman cast upon the sands not yet dead, whom he
caused those Knights which were escaped in the battle to carrye unto the
Castle, and there to find some remedy for her. Thus the knights did, with
whom he went to one of the Castles, where for this time we will leave him, to
follow the knight of the Sun on his journey by Sea.

The Knight of the Sun was carried to the Island of Lindaraza, where he
achieved many strange and fearful adventures.

Cap. 44.
WIth great swiftness and incredible have the Boat whereas the Knight sailed
was carried, passing in short time the deep Atlantike and West Occean, near
the uttermost Cape of the Ponent, till from thence it drove upon the Pillours
of Hercules, where his mighty arm and steeled forke made place for the Occean
to enter, and water the earth. This Sea is called Mediterraneum Sea, and into
this Sea the Knight of the Sun shooued his Boat, where he found well peopled
Towns and greater delight then appeared in the wind and West Occean, and he
began to receive some joy of his hither arrival as if not without cause he
were carried in such have, and that some great thing was thereby hoped for: but
as sorry for his sudden acquaintance with Rosicleer, he beseeched his Gods
with all his heart, that they might once meet again, and at more leisure
recount each to other of their adventures.

Well on all griefs, whether for his friends Brandyzel and Claueryndo, or
this unacquainted Rosicleer, or the unskillfulness of his way were
extinguished, by that his learned Governor guyded their Bark whether it was
convenient. So still hoping for the Port and Haven, wherein his little boat
should ride, he sailed as I said in the middle earth Sea, where, on the left
hand, he saw Spain, Portugal, and those Countries, where he could gladly
have bestowed himself, but that he was not to command the steeres-man: but in
good time came he thither, as shall be recited in the History hereafter.
Although by shore on the right hand he left Affricke, Carthage, and Tures,
and forward as he sailed, he discovered the Islands Baleares and Sardinia,
with the warlyke Italy, and the fertile Sicily, where the flames of Aetna hill
a while stayed him. There might he see the ruinous Relyques of old Syracusia,
and many perilious Mermaydes haunting those shoares, much feared by all the
Mariners. Then saw he the fresh water of the river Nylus, which enters the
Sea by seven mouths. From thence on the other hand might he see Greece:
wherewith he would more willynglye have fed his eyes, if he had then known
the right which he had theretoo. But from thence he lawnched into the broad
Euxino, where the wide Sea conuayed all things out of sight, that naught
appeared, but clouds above, and waves beneath. Long thus he sailed, meruayling
when his Navigations should take end.

After this, as it were a fair calm following a stormy tempest there appeared
above the water a fair Island unto the which his boot drove, whereat he was
merry and pleasant, thinking that there abode him some adventure, wherein he
might try his manly prowess, and full feign he was to leave the Sea: here I
say at this Island, his Bark stayed, whereby he knew that his journey was
thetherward.

Then the Knight leaped to land, upon the enterie whereof, there was a bank
cast of hard stone, and somewhat farther, he saw a fresh and pleasant soil,
full of the-sweetest herbs that ever he had seen. There was a fence or
closure made of tall high Trees, some of them with so loftye tops, that it
wearyed him for to look vpwardes. Beneath this, there was a Meddowe platte
whereon grew many flowers and herbs of all sorts, and it was compassed
with a still water, gently rolling upon the Pummise stones, the water was as
clear as any Crystal.

Among the thick trees, he might have seen the swift Heart, and the fair
Unicorn, with the little Beueret, and the small Conney banking the green
boughs, beside the light Squirrell clymbing the tall Oak, with the seete
chirping lays which the Birds made, recording so pleasauntly among ye tender
sprayes, that it would have made a man utterly forelorne to receive comfort,
and he that was surprised with love or loves daries might have found a more
present remedy, then the Hearts of Creete do, when they are wounded by the
Hunter. This pleasure to have enjoyed, you would have thought your self to
have been transported into another world or into a celestial Paradise.

When the Knight of the Sun had both beheld and heard all those things,
he immagined presentlye that the Island was well stored with people, thither
resorting for the desyght there to be found, but yet he meruayled why their
paths were no more trodden, and gazing on every part which way to take best,
he took the way which was most beaten, therein he walked heaufly laden with
his armor: but his desire to know the end of this adventure, and the sweet
melody of the birds continuallye accompanieng him, made him think his
journey shorten.

About a mile or more out of this meadow, he entered into a plain pasture so
beset with flowers as the meddowes were. In the middle of this pasture, as it
were a bow shot from him he saw the farrest Castle which ever eye had seen,
as well for the height and largnesse, as for cost and workmanship.

The matter was all of Jasper, which when the Sun began to cast his beams
thereon, shyned so bright, that it dazeled the eyes of the beholder. The form
was quadrangle after an even proportion, as broad as long. In every of the
corners, there were ten fair Turrets, which reached by man's seeming to the
clouds. The outward wall of the Castle was hard Marble hewed but of the
Island Paros. Round about the Castle there was a deep ditche, with a device,
that albeit there was no Spring in it to nourish it, yet was it mayntayned with
a fresh flow, partlye by the fall of waters from the mountains, partlye by
the Rivers we named amongst the meddowes, which at every spring cleared the
channel. Upon this water there stood a Bridge with three strong Turrets, one
in the beginning, the other in the midst, the other in the end toward the
Castle. Through them a man cannot enter but by plain force, for the keepers
open not but constrained, and they need to be right valiant, for the Porters
are fell.

The Knight of the Sun gazed upon this verge attentiuelye, so amazed at the
strangeness of the work, that he could not think it to have been builded
by man's hand. And having as then no other skill of God, but the Gentiles law,
he thought that peradventure this might be the house of his Gods, when they
descended from heaven to soiourne amongst us. So very desirous to know the
end thereof, he came unto the bridge, where he stayed a while ere he proceeded
farther, for he indged that according to the great strength of the arches,
the depth of the water, and the height of the wall, that no man might enter
without leave asked. And as be there wanted not matter of marvel for the
wonder of the castle, so meruailed he that nere so rare and magnificent
buyldings, so meruailed he that nere so rare and magnificent buyldings, he met
no person of whom he might demand to whom the fair Castle did belong. Amid
these thoughts it seemed best in his fancy to call to them within, if
perhaps any would auns were him, and therefore coming to the gates of the
first Turret which was then nearest to him, he found a Porch opened, and right
before a fair stately Court, enclosed with walls of Jasper, and in the midst
before him a payer of staiers of a ten or twelve degrees which led up to a
fair Pillar, whereunto was fastened with a chain of gold, a fair horn and
a rich brawdricke to it. The horn was tipped all with gold, and in the end
were set many precious stones. The riches thereof, might have contented a
right covetous eye. Underneath the horn, upon the same pillar, there were
engraven letters, which the Knight of the Sun perceiving and hoping there to
learn some more news he mounted up the stayres, and read as hereafter
follows.

This Castle belongs to the beautiful Lindaraza, the gates may not be opened
to any save to him which windeth the horn. But let him take heed withal, for
when they are open there shall not fail him cruel and fierce porters to give
him the death, if it be possible.
When he had read the letters, and gathered by them that there were Porters to
auns were him, he feared not a whit for all the threats of the Writing, but
with an heroycall heart he untied his horn, and winded it so shrill, that all
the Castle eccowed with the noise. At the sound hereof, the inner gates of
steel flewe open, as if they had been shaken with a tempest, and presently
there appeared a fierce Gyaunt, bearing in the one hand a bar of iron, and
in the other a chain, wherein he led tied a Dragon, the most hydeous that
ever man looked on.

This beast was from the breast downewarde, as high as auye man on horseback,
and the tail thereof was ten paces in length, wherewith he sweeped the
ground. Now the strong Gyaunt coming out of the gates, let loose the Dragon,
and took the bar of iron in his hands, paceing toward the Knight, which
was now in descending from the Pillar. Ere the Knight could easily come to
the ground, the Gyaunt met him with a counterbuffe on the shield, that he
missed two or three steps in coming down. The monstrous Dragon beneath, was
ready to receive him. But the Nephewe of Alicante lightly esteeming all this,
and rather took courage in this, that there was some thing worthy his pains
behind, when the Castle was kept by such vglye Porters, and drawing out his
sword, he stroke at the Serpent a blow on the top of the head, but it did
him no more harm, then if it had lyghted upon a Smithes anfielde, but it a
little benumbed his senses, and beguyled him of his fore-hoped grype. This
little harm which he had done to the Serpent, did much amaze him, and the
better to save himself from the Serpent, he got under the Pillar, and then
he bestowed another blow upon the Serpents head with all his force.

The Serpent so sore stricken, wared wood, and brayed out so loud, that all
the Court rang of the noise, and feign would it have got between the
Knight of the Sun, and the place under the Pillar where he stood to have
raught him in his paws, but the good knight defended himself lightly from
him, and laid at the Dragon still with the sword. The Gyaunt abode still at the
staters foot, to wait for the Knights tumbling on the stayers: at length he
came down headlong, where the strong Giant let drive at him so great a blow
with his Bar, that the bar burst, and the good Knight thought his head had
been bruised: with this, as well as he might, he rose up, and driving at the
Gyaunt, he cut his legs clean from his body. The Giant falling to ground, the
Serpent raising his tail, grasped at the Knight of the Sun, but I cannot
tell how the Knight escaped it, and withal be took up the greatest piece of
the barte of iron which the Giant had, and hasting toward the Serpent, he gave
him such a blow therewith upon the head that he fell down, and before he could
rise, the Knight gave him such another, that his scull as hard as flint burst
into two pieces, yet for all this, the great Serpent was not throughlye dead,
but bounded up into the air, and swept the ground with his tail, seeming more
fierce then at the beginning. The Knight of the Sun purposed to strike no
more, but quickly gate up higher on the staiers to be out of danger, in the
end, the Dragon stirred no more, whereby he judged that he was dead, and
meruailyng what besides there might be found in the Castle, he hung the fair
horn about his neck, and with the bar in his hands, he entered the first
Lower, and from thence through the first arch of the Bridge, till he came to
the second Tower, which was in the midst of the Bridge, the gates whereof were
of steel, and shut as fast as the gates of the first arche were. Cheualiero
del Febo winded his horn, and presently the gates were opened, and there came
issuing out a Giant no less strong then the first, having in the one hand a
club, and in the other a chain, wherein he led a Lion, the mightiest of
lymme and biggest of boane, that ever man saw. The body as big as a Bull,
and every of his claws was a handefull long, his eyes shyned like lamps.

This Lion the Gyaunt untied straight, and set upon the Knight, which with no
little courage, as he had a greater Nuest in hand awayted him, and at the
first blow he struck him so fell upon the head, that the brains starte
out, and the monsterous Lion fell stark dead, without more sturring. When he
had this done, he encountered the Gyaunt, and the Gyaunt let drive at him: But
the Knight not minded at that time to assaye or put his trust to the fine
metal of his enchaunted Helmet, starte aside, that the clubbe fell upon the
Bridge: but before the Gyaunt could rear his clubbe, the son of Trebatio
hit him so stronglye beneath the knees, that his shinne boanes were burst
withal, and the Gyannt with great clamours fell down, the Knight of the Sun
leaving him sure enough for making resistaunce, took up his heauie-slubbe to
go farther, and to see what was within.

Thus passed he through the second Tower, till he came to the third and fast
Tower of the Bridge, whereof finding the gates shut as the other, he winded his
horn, and with the sheilnesse thereof, the gates burst open, making as great a
noise, as if the bridge had re^it in two, presently stepped forth a huge
Giant, nine foot in height, all his body covered with a tough hyde, so hard
and strong, that no sword could enter. At his waste he had a sword, and in
his hand a chain of iron, whereto were fastened two Tigers of wonderful
greatness, by the fierceness of their looks, able for to have affrayed any
man.

For all this hardy Grecian was nothing appalled, for he lift up the heavy
clubbe so strong, as if the great Hercules should have come to fight with him,
only with the show, it might have made him to tremble.

Those fierce beasts, so soon as the Gyaunt had unloosed them, opening their
horrible mouths, ran with such swiftness upon him, that if seemed their
feet touched not the ground. At such time as they came both upon him, he
gave one of them such a blow upon the shoulder, that he burst all his boanes
in pieces, wherewith the Tiger fell to the ground. Then came the other, and
caught hold of him in the shoulder, so griping him, that he could not stir
his arm neither one way nor other, and grasping almost all the head-peece
within his sharp teeth, he thought to have crushed it in pieces, but the
helmet defended the head, and the Magic armor kept off the tearing of his
nails. Now the good Knight seeing neither purpose of his clubbe, nor use of
his sword, while he was thus entertained by the Tiger, throwing away his
clubbe, he strugled and wrastled so long with the Tiger, that in the end, he
cast the beast upon the hard flynte stones, with such a fall, that the brains
flewe out of the head. The wild Gyaunt, when he saw the Tiger thus slain,
with an hellish fury he went toward the Knight of the Sun, and taking his
long sword, he gave him such a blow upon the top of the helmet, that there
sparkled out great flakes of fire, and the Knight fell upon his hands and
knees. But as soon as he could, the Knight recovering his sword, requitted
him so couragiouslye, the Giant being unarmed, that had not the strong hyde
stood him in steed of complete armor, the sword had entered the flesh,
whereof at that time it missed. Heereat the wild Giant taking up again the
heavy sword, stroke the Knight of the Sun upon the top of the head-peece,
but he avoided the blow lyghtlye. In such sort, that the heavy sword fell
upon the grounds, and brake in pieces the hiltes only remaining in his
hands. Now before the Giant could raise up his sword, the knight of the Sun
ran him through. When the Knight of the Sun had accomplyshed thus much of
his purpose, he thought there had been no more to be done save now to know the
secrets which abode behinds, and wherefore this straight warding was ordained.
Therefore he went through all the bridge until he came to a path way which
lead between the outward wall and the great castle. When he had walked this
path, about a bow shot off he saw a little door, all engraven with sundry
kind of portraiture, the strangeness whereof with the variety of the Story
therein portrayed, might have held a good caruer a long time: the Imagerie was
so drawn that it would have troubled the wit of Praxites to have matched it.
The gates were not great, but the chief part was of steel as surely closed as
the first.

The Knight of the Sun thinking that percase they would open at the first
push, rushed against them with all his force, but his labor was lost, and he
prevailed no more then if he would have broken down the walls with his
feet. Therefore he winded his horn, whereat the gates burst open, but no man
appeared without, save that when he was about to enter he saw two Gyauntes the
one on the one side and the other armed from top to toe, with head pieces of
fine steel, and their armor a finger thick in deepnesse, they held in their
hands two battle axes raised up aloft ready to discharge their blows upon
the commer in. The fierceness of their semblaunce was so strange that it is
hard to believe that any man had the courage to enter against his will, but
if it had been the dog Cerberus he could not have defended him the passage.

This valiant knight seeing them in such sort prepared for the fight, albeit
he wanted not courage to assaye that fearful entry, yet he stayed in doubt
how he might enter without danger, and ward the two first blows. For to
receive both their blows at once was not possible without great hazard, and
otherwise enter he could not, but after long pausing he came nearer, and as if
he would have passed through he showed himself, whereat the Giants as if he
had entered indeed let drive their blows, the whilst the knight stepped in
between them, and taking the next to hand he hit the one Gyaunt overthwart
the pawnch, but his swoorde entered not. The Gyantes which at their first
blows had broken their heavy clubbes drew out their broad arming Swoordes,
and laid at the knight of the Sun. The one he received on the sword, the
other he avoided lightly by stepping aside. And willing to see the end of the
adventure he stroke one of them full upon the v^sour, wherewith he had thought
to have hewed his face, but he was deceived, for it did the Gyaunt no more
harm then if he had been smitten with an hasill wand.

The Giants now laid on load, but he disappoynted them by the deliuernesse of
his body. And now consider what thought this good Knight was in to feel
himself assailed by two fierce enemies, and not able to hurt again. Neither
was it possible to master one of them by wrestling, for both the weaker of them
two was too strong for him, and perhaps while he should deal with the one,
the other might displease him. So that neither of these ways were convenient,
without some present help the danger certain, yet in the end he began to
rebuke himself, ever saying: Stick to it thou coward, and albeit as yet it
seems impossible for to escape this perilous skirmish, yet stir not thy
foot, either shall thou soon overcome or soon loose the victory, but never
shall thou loose thy infamy, if thou die flyeng, many times such hard
adventures have been occasion of greater glory, and if any body but my self
atchieue it, I shall not like my self as long as I live.

So gazing about to seek aduauntages he marked the wicket standing open
somewhat beneath the Porche, where through he might well pass by little
bowing himself, but neither of the Gyauntes, might except they fell on all
four, for they were higher then he by the breast downewarde, when he saw this
door he bethought himself how to be out from the danger of blows which fell
into his brain at a time of need. Thus it was as the giauntes were desirous
to hit him, he ever stooped under, and watching one of them, as he was lifting
up his arms, before the blow could descend, he ran and closed with him,
and taking him by the girdle carried him by strong hand, and with all his force
ran against the wicket, that the Giant not being able to pass through burst
both head and shoulders against the wall, the giant there dyed in his armor.

This done the strong Knight passed farther, and letting the body fall, with
as much speed as he might he ran to meet with the other Gyaunt, which then
approached with his swoorde in both his hands to have smitten him. But these
Gyaunts little acquainted with feats of arms, and the knight of the Sun by
the dexterity of his body defended himself lightly from them and obtained
victory.

For when the Gyaunt had let his swoorde fall out of his hands, he embraced
the Gyaunt with both his hands, and tourning himself twice about, at the
third time he let him fall, that through the weight of his body his gall
burst in his body, and he dyed presently. This meruaylous combat being ended,
the good Knight was now weary, and therefore took his ease upon a seat of
stone which was in the Porch, there to occupy himself, he beheld the strong
buldinges of the Castle. After roaming about to find some other way to depart
thence, he found at one end another gate all of iron, and the gates shut as
all the first, whereby he saw that he had yet farther trial to abide.

And therefore he rested himself where he sat, after which done he arose, and
passing through the first wall to the second he found the Gates shut, and
therefore he winded his horn, presently the steel gates opened, and there
came out thereof a flame of fire accompanied with great smoke, as if it had
been some place of hell, until the smoke vanished away he could see nothing.
After he saw before the gate a beast in form like a Crocodile, but some what
more hidious, as it were a misshapen monster, purposed by nature to show the
lothsomenesse of deformity. Out of his mouth he sent great flakes of fire, in
the fangs there sat a tuske without the mouth about half a yard very sharp
and cutting.

The good knight abashed now to see so many fierce keepers in that Castle, as
if it had been nothing but a lodge of warders, (as he supposed) to keep in
durance the sons of Titan which once rebelled against Jupiter. The which tale
he had often heard in the Gentiles law, and yet the travail of conquering
grieved him not alyke to the long looking for of the end, but not minding to
debate the matter at this time, he took his sword in his hand, assailing the
entry, but the vglye beast cast out such a flash of fire that the Knight of
the Sun little lyked of it. And not being able to endure it, he gave back
till the heat should slake.

This may a man say, that it troubled the Knight more then all that had
passed, one cause was for the extremity of heat, another for that he saw no
way to come near the beast, for before he might approach it, the beast would
be all on a light fire, but remembering himself of the club which he had left
in the first entry, and thinking that it should be the best weapon he might
have, be ran to fetch it, and retourning speedely he found the monster as
you heard before spitting out his fire. The Knight of the Sun with his long
reach in his hand gave the beast upon the forehead such a blow that the head
rent in two, and the terrible beast fell to ground, beating his feet against
the ground so hard, that it seemed the Castle shook with all, and the smoke
which it sent forth, as at the quenching of a great fire, so blinded the Knight
of the Sun till it was stark dead that he might not enter: from thence
after he came to a fair Court, the sumptuous building whereof amazed him
much, that in comparison the golden statues which Nero the Emperor of Rome
erected, might not more delyght him: no, nor yet the wonders of the world, the
stately Pyramides of Egypt, wherein only their kings are buried, and wherein
they wasted the most part of their substance might like delight them. In
beholding the strangeness of these buildinges, I cannot tell precisely his
thought for every circumstaunce, but if his thought were as my thought, or if
the report be true which first came from him, surely there was matter enough
to gaze upon, but what think you he noted especially? Nothing but a marble
stone, but as it fell out to some good purpose.

In the Marble stone were engraven the valiant acts of all knights alive or
dead, in such order of time as they lived. First the auncienter, then the
later, till he came to the nearest, very few or none omitted. A rare piece
of work, and must needs have been done by other cunning then story or
caruing, for the one the pains were insinite, for the other no man's reading
stretches so far as to know every Story. But herein he took great
pleasure, and from the last to the first he ran them over, he stayed at his
own picture, whereunto joined next above was Trebatio, and the next beneath
was Rosicleer. These three pictures were fresher in his fancy then the others,
as if they had been new made. Remembering by the picture of Rosicleer the
countenance of that Knight whom be had found in the Island of Candramarte,
he yielding forth a great sigh, and blessing the picture from the bottom of
his heart, he spoke these words unto like purpose.

Thou art a right good Knight, and worthily placed among the most famons
Knights of the world, for I believe not that among so many as are here
painted there is one so valiant as thou art. For albeit commonly we make much
of our elders virtues, it is but as commonly many things show fairer a far
of, whereas when they come to trial, they are but as ordinary.

After this he mused in himself who that Trebatio might be, for he never
heard of such a man: but by the draught of the picture, he took him to be a
comelye personage, of a mild and sad countenance, and it did him good to
behold him: so looking farther he saw the whole Story of the Emperor
Trebatio drawn underneath, from his first landing in Hungary till the hour
of his enchauntment in that Castle. How he was in the company of Lindaraza
without knowledge of himself, or witting to his friends. Now did he at length
learn the purpose of the strong wards, which was to hold in the Emperor
Trebatio there bewitched for the company of Lyndaraza, whom before he could
reshore to the knowledge of himself, he must bring from that peer of the
Castle which was inchaunted to that only effect. This when he understood, it
pittyed him much that so good an Emperor should there be in hold by false
means, to the great sorrow of his subjects, and principally of his wife the
Princess Briana, whom ve saw likewise all cladde in black like a widdowe,
and to work some means of his delivery, he looked about him which way was
best to take, and liking best one of the gallories the which was nearest to the
paued court, that he followed, mounting up a pair of stairs all made of
Jasper, in the midst whereof he mercomming down a big knight, armed with
rich and glistering armor, his face bare and of a fresh color, which
approaching to him drew out his sword, and without saying ought, laid at the
knight of the Sun as fiercely as he could.

The Knight of the Sun would rather have talked with him to have learned
some news, but it could not be, so it behooued him to draw his swoorde and
to defend himself. There began a hot skirmish, that the claftering of their
armor and the flashing of their Swoordes rang throughout the Pallaice. This
fury notwithstanding lasted not long, for the Knight of the Sun in a
cholarike rage hit his adversary so sure upon the top of his helmet, that
the big Knight fell down and lay for dead.

The Knight of the Sun stayed not to make dispatch of him, but rather having
compassion on him (for he seemed a noble-knight) he unlaced the knights
helmet to give him air, but not being able then to recover him, he passed
farther, and coming to the gallorie, he then went up another pair of stayres
so wide and broad, that if two were going up near the two ends, scarcelye the
one might know the other. Now in this his way albeit many things were which
might have stayed either an idle gaser or a curious eye, and many things
besides to have invited a wearied man to take his rest, yet the desire of
finding the Emperor carried his feet, and ouercomming the pains of the way
he came to a portall curiouslye wrought, to the entry whereof there lead three
steps of beaten silver. By them be entered into a great chamber where first
the Emperor Trebatio had a sight of the fair and beautiful Lyndaraza, and
was bereaved of his wits.

In this chamber he was greatly abashed at the cost and workmanshippe of rich
Tapestrie and other oruamentes, and ever though the stuff were of the
costiliest, yet the workmanshippe bettered the matter. Hence must he as I told
you conuaye the Emperor if he mean to make himself known. Now for your
farther instruction, know that among other things which the wise Lyrgandeo
gave unto the Knight of the Sun, at his departure from Babylon, he gave him
a lyt^le stone set in a King of excellent fine gold, the same being of so
strange dertue that no inchauntment might prevail against it, by this he was
bold to enter the chamber, and being within was free from the charm. Out of
this chamber he came to the Orchard whereunto this chamber looked, so fresh and
delectable, that if ever pleasure might ravish the senses of man, a man might
affirm it of that place. In the arbor near the entry he saw a number of
fair Gentlewomen clothed with silk, their breasts bare and white as Snow,
some played on instruments, and other sang sweetly to them.

Such kind of Mermaides would have beguyled a well stayed Ulysses, or such
Musitions as well for their cunning song as their company, would have brought
a watchful Argus to a sleepie head. A good way off heee saw the Emperor
Trebatio and the fair Lindaraza alone, set in several chaires, all unmindful
of other things but of their love and wish to other. The Emperor Trebatio
leaned his head upon the white and delicate breasts of Lindaraza, with such
show of pleasure therein, that the young Greek feeling thereby in himself
that which all men have, could have been content with the others room, and
for very love he made an inuectiue against nature which had ordained that
kind to have such sourreingtie over valiant knights, with many words to the
same matter, but this was yet the wantonness of his imagination, his neck had
not felt the yoke, hereafter perhaps he will speak more earnestly when you
shall believe him.

Nows, when the Gentlewomen espied him as all abashed they laid aside their
Music, with the sodeyne stay whereof Trebatio and Lindaraza lyfted up their
heads, and seeing a Knight so strongly made to come toward them, they were
overtaken with fear, especially Lindaraza, which gessing at the troth of the
matter that her long love should now take end, for very sorrow fell to
ground, Trebatio comforted her in as much as yet no vyolence was offered, but
she replied with tears, saying. Alas my Lord, I shall dye unless you do
justice on this Knight, which has here entered without my leave, and which
has interrupted our joys by the destroieng of my keepers. Heerewith the
Emperor very angry, spoke to the knight, saying. Sir knight, why have you come
within this place without the license of this Lady, it being hirs and kept by
strong keepers for her use. The Knight of the Sun gently answered. Noble
Emperor I confess I demanded no leave, and till now I met with none which
would ask wherefore I came, but my arrant is for your self, which here live
unknown, and have forgotten your wife and Empire. The Emperor angerly
replied: neither thou nor the whole world may bring me hence, and for thy good
zeal to put me from my joy, stay a while and I will acquit thee thy fee. So
hastily he flang to a chamber where he armed himself, the while that Lindaraza
whom it touched as in especial, reviled the Knight of the Sun for his
thither coming. O says she, thou saucie and unmannerly Knight, how have thou
had the face to enter my Castle in despite of my Porters, either depart hence
quicklye or tarry to abide the Emperors puissaunce.

And if my mind deceive me not, I shall soon be satisfied for this disgrace.
The Knight of the Sun knowing how grievous it would be unto her, that the
Emperor should leave her, laid contrariwise with fair words to persuade her
to give consent to his departure, saying Worthy Lady, may you not content your
self with so many years, in which you have detained this noble and famous
Emperor both from wife and kindred, from land and subject, but will you also
for your pleasure, neither lasting nor honest, undo a whole Country, and take
a man from his wife, which has mourned for him twenty years. I beseech you
madame content your self with that which is past, and let him not wade farther
in this error, which if it may please you to remove, to your great honor at
my entretie. Heereat Lindaraza all fiery could not abide the end of his suit,
but with great outcries to incense the poor Emperor, she put him off The
Emperor being armed, in great cholar ran upon the Knight of the Sun, and
without saying any thing, laid at him with all his force. The Knight of the
Sun knowing, that what the Emperor did, was but as done in a dream, would
not strike him to do him harm, but only to save himself, and to find the
means whereby to bring Trebatio from that inchauntment. Thereupon by little
and little he gave back, that the Emperor following him, he might in the end
bring him from the inchaunted chamber. This came to pass accodingly, for as he
made show of lack of resistance, so the Emperor thinking to follow the
advantage, pursued him to the great chamber, where the enchantment first took
effect. In short, by this fore-saide means, there also this Emperor was
brought to the point of avoiding the chamber, whereat Lindaraza fearing least
he might be led, cried with a loud voice. Stay, stay, my Lord, for this Knight
is full of falsehood, and if you go out of this chamber, both you and I shall
die. Heereat the Emperor, who was not desirous of any thing but to please
her, returned back. The Knight of the Sun would not follow him, but still
kept at the pitch of the entry, and the Emperor would not come to him for
fear of Lindaraza.

Well, this devise not succeeding the Knight of the Sun, thought now to try if
he might carry him by main force. This he knew would be a dangerous matter
for the courage which he knew in the Emperor, but all was well employed, if
he might set him at liberty. So toward the Emperor he goes, whom not
prepared to fight, he suddenly catches in his arms, and with a lusty courage
raises him from ground to have carried him away, but before the Knight might
get to the door, the Emperor catching hold likewise, held the knight so
short, that for a while they tumbled in therhall, neither part gaining any
great scantlyng of ground, but the ods was the Knights, and in the end he
quickly lifting up the Emperor would he or not, he brought him without the
chamber. The Emperor strugled to recover the door, but in their struggling,
they both tumbled down the staiers. Now has the Knight of the Sun played the
man, for ere they came fully to the ground, the doors of the inchaunted
chamber clapped together, wherewith, and with the noise thereof, a great part of
the edifices sanke withal. The Emperor returned to his former wits, presently
saw that he thought he had not stayed there past a day, and that which passed
between him and Lindaraza, had been but a short and pleasant dream. After
calling to mind his wife the fair Princess Briana, and the great host which
he had left before Belgrado, he became so sorrowful, that the tears
trickeled down his cheeks in great measure. But of this manner and condition
are we mortal men, that for our pleasures we sometimes forget our ^pouses,
the one half of our selves: sometimes neglect our children, the more half to
our selves (as in whom the hope of posterity rests) and lastly, sometimes
we ouertourne our Country which ought to be deerer to us then our selves,
neither mindful to what use we are created, namely to the benefit of others,
neither careful what loss ensues, as in especial our own discommoditie,
but that which is more then careless, is the little thought of change, and
the loathing to depart from it.

That when we are at our ways end, we seem but as it were now to begin a
fresh. It is like a sweet fleepe, but let us shake off this drousie humor,
and let us open our sleepie eyes. Let us use our selves so that sometimes we
have recourse to matters of more importance, and to think of heaven, to
despise the vain temporal things of this world, to separate our selves from
the man of flesh, and willingly to heave him least he leaves us against our
willer.

Little shall remain thereof after scores of years, and that which remains,
shall be shame and grief, for the life passed, be^^des desperate repentance,
which is a double torment. (...) much after this same manner was this valiant
Emperor for his long delights with Lindaraza, now twentye year was but a
Summers day, and yet there left him not shame of his fact to fret his
conscience, albeit he advised himself the best remedy which I have read of,
which is amendment of life, the safest haven for a wether-beaten pe^^cent.
First therefore knowing that this Knight was he which had as it were awaked
him from this dream, he pul^ed of his helmet and embraced him, giving hearty
thanks for his deliverance. Withal professing, that he thought himself
unable to requit that great courtesy, yea, even with the bestowing of his
Empire, so assuredly be meant not to forget it, if peradventure God would show
him the occasion of doing him service. For (says he) you have not saved my
life, here might I have lived without danger of sword, but you have saved my
soul, etc. Extolling the greatness of the benefit, and in the end, he prayed
him of curtefie to tell him his name and Country, with the cause of his
coming to that Island. The knight of the Sun answered him geatly: Valiant
Emperor, the thing which I have done in your service, is not like to that which
I wish for, as your valor forces my will, so my will sueth a deserte on your
part, more unto you, then to all the Knights of the world. But wit you, I am
called the Knight of the Sun, my country I know not, but my bringing up has
been in Babylon, where I was told that I was found upon the sea, being a very
child, my coming to this castle was by chance, my boat being driven by
tempest upon the shore, where seeing it so fresh and fair I had desire to know
the owners, and fortune being favorable, I passed through all killing ye
keepers till I came within this court, where I saw engraven your whole
history from ye time that you were married with the Princess Briana, till
time (...) There knew I the manner of your bewitching, and albeit your self
were unknown to me, yet I thought I would set you free if that I might, from
whence this has proceeded which you have seen. When he had ended, the
Emperor embraced him many times with great pleasure, as well wondering at his
great prowess, for he could not be ignorant of Lindarazas power, as also at
his boldness for a matter not touching him in any respect, by all
appearaunce. For he neither knew country nor parents. But as the remembrance
of his wife and Empire caused in the Emperor much grief, so he besought the
Knight of the Sun that they might depart from thence to go into Greece,
where he might better thank him then he had erst done. The Knight of the Sun
with a good affection to bear him company, condescended easily, rather yet
upon desire to know the Country, wherein he had heard to be right valiant
Knights, then of any hope of reward. So when they came near the outward
Court, they found that Knight (whom the Knight of the Sun had left in a
trance) now returned to himself and upon his feet safe and sound. The
Knight when he saw the Emperor and the Knight of the Sun coming down, giving
great sighs and weeping bitterly, began to say. Oh what a dismal day is this
for me, now my sister Lindaraza is dead and I have lost a sweet companion, I
would rather that I had been killed by this stranger, which has destroyed all
our good, then that I should live and sustain such anguish. Little have the
monstrous keepers prevailed, whom we put in our Castle to defend her life, and
to defend the death which so suddenly has taken her away. The Emperor hearing
him, and knowing him, ran to embrace him, saying.

My dear friend Flamides, how chances this heaviness in your countenance? Why
do you fetch such deep sighs, and spill so many tears with so great
sobbes. If it be for my departure, and for the liberty which I have received
by this Knight, you know how long time I have here remained out of my
remembrance, and forgetful of my Empire and kingdom, and shall I not go to
comfort her, which long time by my absence has been comfortles. My Lord said
Flamides, I can not deny but your reason is good, and that the iniurye has
been great in detayning you so long from thence, but as your excellency
knows, there is no love more natural then between brother and sister. O the
death of my sister Lindaraza pearceth me to the heart, and I had rather then
my life, have accompanied her in death, then thus to bewail her lack after
death. For so soon as you came out of the inchaunted room, my sister dyed
presently, so was it appointed by the destenies, that no longer then she should
enjoy your presence, she should live. Blessed man, said the Emperor, and is
Lindaraza dead? yea assuredly quoth he. Now on my honor (said the Emperor)
her death grieueth me, and during my life shall I be sad, as often as I shall
call her to remembrance, and although my case is such, as in more need of
comfort, then likely to comfort others, yet me thinks, I may tell you, that
you ought not to bewail her death so much, for belike a long time have you
known that her life should not last after my departure. Now, wherefore do
you lament her so sore, as if it were but now thought on, and not before
foreseen. Again, your overmuch carfulness in fortifieng your Castle, was
but needelesse, for it is given to man to have the mastrie over beasts which
either by Art or Nature become tractable. And be it your Castle had been
inexpugnable for all men in the world, yet what fence had you to shut out
death. A man in no place can warrant himself such safety, as yt at every step
he draws himself nearer unto death. Whether we be free or bond, on foot or
horseback, sleeping or waking, whole or sick, we daily draw near unto our
end: or if you will speak more truly, to our perfection, for then man
begins to live indeed, when he goes out of this miserable world.

Lindaraza is dead, and weeping may not recall her: if you bear unto her any
love, you may show it now after her death, in receiving to her place her
daughter Lindaraza, for her provide that she may depart from hence, and I will
carry her to my kingdom, where she shall be in that estate as is due to the
daughter of such parents: when the Emperor had thus said, Flamides forced
himself so much as he might for to speak, and thus answered him. Your reason
satisfies my understanding, and I confess it true that we ought not to weep
when death assaileth us, neither ought we to make strange of it, for in the
end we must leave this world, and then is there nothing more certain, but my
conceit builded upon outward sense being contrary to reason troubles again
that part where affections are, and makes it rebellious, and howsoever men be
provided for death by continual thought that they must dye: ordinarily
notwithstanding we think our selves immortal till death attacheth us. And
what old man only for age is so feeble that he hops not for a day to live:
But as to Lindaraza my sister, I believe that although you had stayed here many
days, the secret of this adventure had never been disclosed unto you,
neither do you know the cause why you were brought and put here. But I will
tell you plainly. My sister Lyndaraza and I had both one Father named Palisteo
being the second son to the king of Phrigia, my Father not being borne to
the kingdom fell rather to seek his own delight without envy, then to
trouble himself with the care of governing. Above all he studied the Art
Magic, where by his pains at length came to the most absolute perfection of
all in Asia, he was matched with a Lady of high parentage, by whom he had two
children, my sister Lindaraza and me, we were of young years when our mother
died in labor of the third child, so there remained none else but our Father
alive, and loving to be solitary came and dwelled in this Island, bringing
with him my sister and those waiting women which you have seen, by his great
skill he builded this Castle, here he lived until my sister and I were of
some discretion to guide our selves. Here he drew many histories of things
passed in the world, and among other, the pictures of many valiant Knights
which were then on live, with the rest you were so lively drawn that it
happening my sister to enter one day where the Imagerye was, by the sight of
your picture she was surprised with your love. Our father Palisteo knowing her
disease, devised you should be brought by following your own wife carried from
you. For this cause, was this inchauntment made in that quarter of the Castle
wherein you abode, without making your self privy to your own estate that if
your Knights came to seek you, they might not persuade you hence, neither
could ever persuasion have served, only force which this man has used. When
the wise man our father had done all this, he declared unto us the secrets of
these things, and farther told us by his Art that the tim^ should come when you
should be delivered from the inchauntment although he knew not when nor in what
manner. He told us, that at such time as you should be at large, my sister
Lindaraza should die, either for the grief that she should conceive, or for
that the fates had so appointed. Moreover, that you should have a daughter by
her, which might not hence depart till there should come a Knight, which
should win the entries once again, and after marry her. Of this Knight he
said that there should spring the race, whence issues the two noble families
much spoken off throughout the world, the one house to be called Mongrana, the
other Claramonte. Me he charged not to leave the Castle till my niece Lindaraza
should be acquitted. After this, our father Palisteo being sore sick, died:
since his death hitherto every thing has fallen out accordinglye. And thus
you have heard the whole process of my tale, and the cause why your daughter
Lindaraza cannot go from hence at this time.

The Emperor and the knight of the Sun had very attentively lystened to all
that which Flamides had spoken: and albeit the Emperor was desirous to carry
his daughter Lyndaraza with him, he could not yet refuse to leave her when he
could not otherwise choose, and he besought Flamides that at such time as
they came both out, that they should take the way to Greece, there to rejoice
with him. After they had thus argued a little, Flamides brought them through ye
part of the Castle which was not inchaunted, showing them many things, as
well, of halls, of cloisters, as of pictures and painterie, whereat the
Emperor and the Knight of the Sun were greatly amassed. And for that that
day the knight of the Sun had not eaten, Flamides made them sit in a fair
parlour, where they had plenty of delicate viandes: when they had eaten, the
Emperor being desirous to depart, desired Flamides to conueye him through the
gates. So (by the ^^aie) this piece of the story as I have heard, was
afterward penned and portrayed in the Court hall of the Emperors Pallaice at
Constantinople. But they went through all the gates of the Castle and of the
bridge, till they came where the pillours stood. There Flamides took his
leave of the Emperor and of the Knight of the Sun.

When Flamides had departed from them, and they had passed through the bridges,
presently the gates of the Towers clapped together with great noise, being as
surely shut as ever they were. The Emperor and the Knight of the Sun were
amassed at the strange things which had happened in that Castle, and took the
way toward the Sea by the same path in which they had come, rejoicing at the
sweet harmony which the Birds made in those pleasant trees, so that
although they went a foot, yet it seemed no pain unto them. And the love that
they bare to each other was so great, that it could not have had been more if
they had known each other, especially the Emperor, whom so often as he saw
his face thought upon the Princess Briana, whom he much resembled. In this
manner the father and the son travailed, running over in their discourse
strange things of the inchaunted Castle, till that they approached the maine
sea, whereas yet the little boat stood in which the knight of the Sun had
come thither. Now for that along the shore there were no more boats, the
Emperor was somewhat sorrowful, seeming to him that he was ill furnished to
go whether he purposed, and telling it to the knight of the Sun. The knight
of the Sun answered. My Lord I pray you be not agreeued with this, for the
boat is guided by a wise man a friend of mine, one as I believe so careful to
carry me hence, as he has friendly sent me to work your deliverance. Besides,
this boat will hold us both, and if it be so you will vouchsafe my ship, you
shall never sail more safe, neither better provided for victuals. The
Emperor was greatly amazed at it yt all things were so plentiful with the
knight of the Sun. But both very merry they entered into ye boat, which
being driven from shore so soon as it took the shore sailed amain, neither
missed they ought which was then thought necessary. Quickly they hasted over
the sea Euxinus, where we will leave them until another time, to write of other
things which chanced before this time.

The three Princes which went in the quest of Rosicleer, were transported into
the Empire of Trabisond, where chanced to them a fair adventure.

Cap. 45.
AS the valiant deeds of Rosicleer while he was there caused great joy in the
court of king Oliuerio: so no less was the grief there for his sodeine
departure amongst his friends, yet all these sorrows joined in one, might not
be equal to that which the fair Oliuia felt, for she seeing she had been
the cause thereof, took thereat such inward grief, that she became both
weak and pale, and her father with the whole court greatly lamented for her.
In this general sorrow for the loss of Rosicleer, you must think that the
Princesses Rodasilua and Siluerina were not free, for the loss of Rosicleer
procured the absence of their loves. So as the history recounteth, that they
two together with the valiant Prince Zoylo took upon them the search of him,
and therefore let us leave the court of king Oliuero to tell you of them.

Thus it is, that after they were all embarked in the Haven which was nearest
to London, they sailed forwards a months sailing, not desiring to bend either
this way or that way. At the end of the month rather upon chance then their
purpose, they were driven upon the coast of Trabisond, where yet glad they were
when the Country was descried to see it and to abide there. Coming to land
armed with their rich armor and their Esquires accompanieng them, they took
their horse, and riding through a beaten path, at the side of a pleasant wood
they heard a noise, whereat being moved they turned back to see what it be
might be.

Out of the thickest of the wood they saw a wild Boar driving so fast as
possibly it might, and in the pursuit thereof, a young Gentlewoman upon a
mighty courser and a Boar Spear in her right hand, her hunters weed was
all of green Velvet, her tresses hanging down in color like the gold of
Arabie, in her left hand a wande of gold, and two rich Pearls hanging at her
ears. She came spurring her horse in such wise and with such courage to
overtake the Boar, that she much delighted them, and at such time as the
Boar crossed the way between them and her, she struck the Boar on the
flank, that her Spear appeared at the other side of the Boar.

The game was got, and the Lady not taking heed of the other knights,
perhaps shaddowed by the trees, returned with soft paces to her company,
but the knights ouertooke her, and as I may say, abashed at that which they
had seen, at her graces and beauty, they only gased one upon the other,
not once making offer to salute her, whereat the Lady more bold then the men,
as it were to awake them out of their dreams, took and winded a fair horn
which hung at her neck so loud and shrill, that all the forest and valleys
rang thereof, and when she had thus done she came to the three Princes, in her
seeming the proprest knights that ever she set eye on, whom she friendly
welcomed on this wise. God save you gentle knights and send you the comfort
of your loves, for by your sad and demure looks, it seems you are either
strangers or others thrall.

The Knights tourning toward her made their courteous obeysaunce, and for
them the valiant Tartarian spoke in this manner. Madame we have stood
astonished neither for strangeness, nor for ill success in love, which some
of us have not yet tried, but only for the thought of your beauty, being a
Lady huntresse as if you were Diana, which in like attire was wont to hunt the
Forrestes: but as you say we are strangers indeed, and because we would
carrye somewhat worth the telling, we crave your name, and the fashions of the
Country.

The Lady delighted in the good behavior of the three knights, and tickeled
with the words of the Tartarian, in great majesty answered him. Assuredly
sir knight I know no cause you have to marvel at me, but rather I at you.
For if I seem to you like to Diana the Goddess of the Gentiles, you likewise
seem to me the three sons of Priamus, Hector, Paris, and Troylus, not far
inferior in renown to the Gods themselves, whereas you desire me to make you
know who I am, I will do it gladly, but yet conditionally, that afterward
you tell me your name and Country. This shall be one for one, and by just
exchange we shall hereafter find peace.

Wit you now that I am called Claridiana the daughter to Theodoro Lord of this
Empire, and to the Empress Diana Queen of the Amazons, which two having been
mortal enemies, as by long wars appears, continued hotlye in every part,
they were after great frindes, meeting in a pitched field, either being then
young and unmarried. I am their only child which since my young years have
been brought up in hunting, and I am promised to be made knight, for my mother
being but young achieved such enterprises that in her time there was no
knight more famous, and I am desirous to be somewhat like unto her, especially
in that point. And now sir knights tell me who you are, for I would well
accompany such lusty knights.

The Tartarian who had first taken in hand to speak answered. Noble Princess
we were sure enough that there wanted not in you the divinity we spoke off:
but yet we failed in the name, for so many graces which accompany you could
not be in a Lady of less estate, as my Religion being* Pagansine would
rather have induced me to take you for the Daughter of Jupiter, then of the
Emperor Theodoro. And now since your excellency has showed us such
undeserved favor as to tell us who you are, it is reason that we obey in
telling who we are, and where we were borne. This Knight pointing to
Bargandel, says he, is the Prince Bargandel the Kings son of Bohemia,
thi^, by Liriamandro, says he, is the Prince of Hungary called Liriamandro,
and I am called Zoylo son to the king of Tartarie, we have joined for
adventure, beginning in the great Britain to find a new Knight a friend of
outs taken from us, we wot not how. Him we are determined to look in the
world and we have already sailed a month since we left England, so this
morning we landed here very glad to have found your highness. God be
praised said the Princess, for the names of so high Princess ought not to
be concealed, especially here where the Emperor my Father would be glad of
such knights for the honor which his court should receive thereby, and I for
my part would think it a great courtesy in you, if you would stay here till
I were knighted, for by such noble Princes might I be honored. In the mean
while, the courtesy which our Court can affoorde, shall be accomplished to
the full, and after that you may tourns you to your purposed journey. The
Princess had thus said, and straight ways there came from the forest
thirty Gentlewomen on rich palfrayes, and in long weeds of green Taffata,
among them also a troop of more then thirty Knights, all surely armed, with
their Spears in their hands, coming to seek the Princess, which being
better horsed then they, had killed the Boar long before their approach: The
princess when she saw them, said to the three Princes. My good Lords, if
you thought it not amiss I would see what my Knights would do in my
defense. Bargandel answered. Noble Lady the thing cannot displease us which
contenteth you, we will endaunger out, persons to serve you* The Princess then
called her knights, and said unto them.

In good time my friends are you come. These three Knights whom you see
here would have carried me away against my will. But I prayed them not to
offer such wrong to a Gentlewoman, and if they would therewith satisfy
themselves, I offered them that of my knights so many as they should hurl
down or unhorse, they should have so many of my Gentlewomen for reward, and
themselves or any of them were ouerthrow^n* that then the party fauiting
should forfe^ h^rse and harness. H^ere^ o^ they have agreed, now do the best
you canue to defend the Gentlewomen which are in your company. Here the
Prince Zoylo which knew the Princess meaning, said unto her. Nay madame let
us first know whether the Gentlewomen will yield to our covenant or no, and
let their knights speak for them. Marie answered the knights, we are content.
Yea, but so are not we said the gentlewomen, shall we say they, venture
imprisonment upon our knights and they loose nothing, they may befraie us if
they will, but we fear rather that it will not be in their power. Yea marie
answered the knights, you are now wise: but if you be so fearful, we pray you
alter the iusts to the trial of the sword, and you shall (...) presently
these knights both ashamed and unhorsed.

Nay but yet quoth the Gentlewomen we had need of better warrants then your
words, but if you will deal with our knights as we would have you, you must
wager your horse and armor to be given them with us if you fail, and heereto
we request these knights strangers, otherwise to discharge the Princess of
her promise. The three Princes fained to mislike the Gentlewomans device, and
the knights of the Country were angry to see how little hope their
Gentlewomen had in them. So coming unto the three Princes, they said unto
them.

Sir knights you may behold theere that our Gentlewomen are not content with
the first ma^ch, therefore we will unbind it and loose as much as you should,
therefore take to your selves so much of the field as you shall think good,
and let us to the just, for we will deceive the women of the little hope they
have in our virtue. Three of the knights at this alarm prepared themselves to
just, and the three Princes did as much glad to show there their manhood.

The three first knights were horn down horse and man to the great
discomfort of the Ladies, whereof one mocked her knight for his courage, crieng.
Marie it seems sir Knight that I might have been safe between your arms,
when you know not how to sit sure within your saddle. Which words caused as
great laughter in the princess, as shame and confusion to the Knights which
were on ground.

Then came three other which doing as much as the other were in like manner
welcomed. So that to make short tale from three to three the Princes unhorsed
whole thirty, and no man offered a second course: but yet the shame of their
falls so egged them on, that they demanded the combat with the Swoordes.
Heereat the knights which knew well enough the Princess purpose, made a great
stay, as it were to consult with their power, being strangers and but three,
in the end say they. You know that the prise which was ordained at these
iustes were your horse and armor the which you have lost, if you will
therefore needs urge us to the combat with the s^woordes, lay away your horse
and armor which are ours and come your ways. Otherwise you must beg the use
of them at these Gentlewomen, to whom we surrender our whole title.

Marie said one of the Gentlewowen. My Lords we accept of your courtesy, and
here we else stay the combat, for we will not give them leave the second
time to hose both themselves and us: The Knights were so ashamed as well for
the Princes words as for the Gentlewomans rebuke, that altogether with their
swoordes drawn they would have rushed upon the strangers, if the Princess
coming between had not stayed them, speaking to the strangers. That this was
sufficient, and it greatly liked her that they had thus showed their valor.

Whereto Prince Zoylo answered. Madame we have besides to demand our
prises, which we will not otherwise remit but to your self, whereat smiling,
they all unbuckled their helmettes, Bargandel and Lyriamandro being then of the
age of xx. years, seeming so beautiful that as well the Gentlewomen as the
knights were amazed at them. After them the Tartorian showed himself, who
although he was a Morian borne, and somewhat of color tawnie, yet had he a
manly countenance, and therewithal pleasant, that he pleased them as well as
his companions. With this there are no mo foes to be feared as it appears
said the Princess, if you challengers unarm your selves, but if it be no
grief to you, let us go together to the City of Trabisond, not being far
off, for at your instance, I may the sooner receive ye order. The Princes
thanking the Lady for that favor, prepared themselves to obey her command, so
rid they on with the Princess toward Trabisond, where they stayed about xv.
days much increasing their honor at the feasts proclaimed for the knighting
of the inheritresse, they being made known to none but to the Princess.
Here likewise the great prowess which the Princess Claridiana showed, were
such, that every man was amazed at them, albeit the three princes never iusted
against her, but hereafter you shall hear sufficiently of her and them. Now
to the two Princes Brandizel and Claueryndo, whom we left in the kingdom of
Persia, very sad for the loss of their dear friend the worthy knight of the
Sun.

The two Princes, Brandizel and Clauerindo stale secretly out of the kingdom
of Persia, to seek the Knight of the Sun.

Cap. 46.
NOw you are to remember your selves of the two volyant Princes Brandizel and
Clauerindo, which remained in the kingdom of Persia, very pensive for the
loss of their friend, touching whom the history says, yt after these two
Princes were in Persia some days, having great desire to find out the Knight
of the Sun, and seek strange adventures: one day as they were with Armineo,
uncle to Clauerindo, they determined between themselves for to depart closely
from them, and to go by sea whether soever fortune would transport them,
whereto although Clauerindo and Armineo would have made the king Florion
privy, yet the Prince Brandizel would in no case consent, believing that if
his parents knew of it, they would not give him leave to go from them, so to
pleasure him, they kept that counsel as privy as they could. And when all
things were in readiness, one night secretly they conuaied themselves out of
the city, and so straight to the sea side, where they entered into a ship
provided for that purpose, and hoising up sails, they were carried they
neither knew nor cared whether, for the courages of these two Princes, resolved
to the search of worthy adventures would not let them be quiet, so yt any thing
might better content their ease at home. But as soon as they were gone, the
wise Lirgandeo knew of it, and waieng the great commodity which might ensue
thereof to themselves and others, he would not hinder it, not yet make as if
he knew it: yet had he great care to guide their ship wherein they sailed, and
they reached thither in fifteen days which to other is an ordinary months
sailing, yt the mariners were abashed to see the swiftness of the ship
being more then usual, which when they had discovered to their Lords, the
Princes knew presently by whose means it so happened, wherefore yet they were
the better apayed, for now they were sure thither to be carried, which fitted
best for their purpose. Well, shortly after these Princes departure, and before
it was either so noised or suspected, Lyrgandeo declard the truth to the king
Floron and the queen Balisea, willing them withal not to afflict them, for
that they thereby should gain much honor, and should return safely, with
the knight of the Sun in their company. With this the king and queen were
indifferently appeased. Now all matters quieted in Persia for the Princess
absence, we may the freelier bear the knights company which are yet sailing
on the Sea, so that the. 15. day after they were departed from Persia, they
landed in a haven of Polonia, where their ship stood still, and taking land
to learn some news and know the country, ere they had long travailed they
saw before them a little town, to their judgment pleasant, and round about
great flocks of men and women scattered, and making great cries as if some
great mischaunce had happened to them. Armineo demanded of them the cause of
their sorrow, whereunto an ancient man amongst them answered, yt a fierce
Giant with more then fifty knights had come in this morning upon the^ to
steal away the Princess Clarinea, daughter to the king of Polonia, their
liege Lord, that he had killed the greater number and spoiled the residue. And
as he thought was ere this time on his way with the Princess in his carriage,
from whom if it so be, not all the world may recover her: why so said
Armineo, and where is the king, or where are his knights that they do not
defend their Lady. The old man answered, they are in a town four mile off,
not mindful of any such matter, and it has not been past eight days since
the Princess came to this town, and now this which you have heard has
happened to her: when the three knights heard this of the old man's relation,
without staieng longer they gallopped with their horses so fast as they might,
and coming near to the town, they saw issuing out of the gates a great
troop of knights, the one part driving the other before it. For so it was
that the Gyaunt having the Princess in his power was carrieng her away, and
the townsmen fought with him, but their power little prevailed, the Giant was
strong, his knights many, and so they murdered all that came, in such sort
that all the Town dwellers flod: then came the other knights, which slew
many of them. Twenty of the Giants knights at once fell upon them laieng at
them with all their forces, the mean while that the Gyaunt held in his arms
the Princess Clarinea, and thinking that his knights would make riddaunce of
these three, he took no more keep but rode away softly with the Princess.
The Princess cried out so loud, that it was great pity to hear her, and
those which heard her of her own knights, came pitifully crieng to the knights
strangers, that for the honor of God they should go help her. When this was
spoken Brandizel besought his companions to stay there in the battle, and to
give him leave to follow the Giant, which when they granted him, he putting the
spurs to his horse followed the trace, the whiles the knights of France
thoroughly galled their enemies. For the one of them matchable I dare avouch
with the ancient Franconio the Troyans son of whom he descended: for he
putting himself in prease among them, to some he claue their heads, to other
some their sheeldes, murdering many and felling many, that at length there was
none so hardy, which durst stand him a blow, but every of them did his best
to save one. His uncle Armineo in ye broyle, helped not a little, for he was a
valiant knight, and much esteemed of in France. But let us leave them, and
speak of the Prince Brandizel, who pursued the Giant. He rode so fast, that ere
the Giant came within a flight shot of the sea, he ouertooke in a large plain,
and crieng alowde, bad him redeliuer the Princess false traitor as he was.
The Giant looked back to see what it was, and seeing but one, though riding in
have, he cared not for him, save that not to be found unprovided, he loosed the
Princess from betweens his arms, and set her on ground: the Prince coming to
him spoke never a word, but drawing his sword, hit him so great a blow upon
the helmet, yt he made him boow his head to his breast, wherewith the Giant
increased in cholar, and gave him the like: this began the skirmish between
them, wherein the noise was so great, that the Princess Clarinea before in a
sound returned to her self, and seeing the battle with so little hope as
that one only knight should adventure her deliverance, fell into a sound
again, wherein she had died for sorrow, had not God (...) When they had thus
fought an hour, it was a wonder to see their bruised armor with their backed
shields, but ever the steel coat defended the biting of their swords,
especially Brandizels, which made by Art Pagicke had this virtue, that no
metal might pearce it. The Gyaunt was hurt in many places, whereat as at the
force of his adnersarie he was greatly estonished and blasphemed his Gods in
desperate manner, which had made him stay that good Knights coming. The
Princess Clarinea seeing the Giants blood thus cover the ground, was very
glad, and byr color became fresh, which increased her beauty: whereto also
(Fortune willing to be favorable) it was so that the prince Brandizel
beholding her, was enamored of her beauty, and entirely loved her. For his
heart now set on fire angmented his conrage, and he buffeted the Giant so, that
in short time he unarmed him in many places. In the end the Prince desirous to
give end to the battle, raised in his stirroppes, stroke a full blow at the
Giant upon the shoulder, that his sword entered a handful, and the Giant fell
dead. The Prince seeing him fall, presently leaped from his horse, and pulling
off his helmet, went to the Princess to recomfort bir, saying: Madame, I
beseech you accept in good part this little service at his hands, which
destreth to do you much more. The Princess very joyful to see her enemy on
ground, and more glad to see her friend so goodly a man, courteously answered.
Noble knight you have done so much for me, that with all that which my father
has, I shall not be able to requite it you, but if you will that this good
which you have done me do like me indeed, show me so much favor as to carry
me to the king my father, for bether will come the residue of the Giants
knights, and then my liberty is to begin again: the Prince gently taking bath
her hands in his, kissed them and said unto her. Madame if it please you we may
return to the town from whence we came, for I beleene yt these knights of
whom you spoke, are but few alive to put us in danger, I left my companions
fighting with them, who I am sure hane done their parts, and yet they shall do
us no wrong though they be many, But in far greater ieopardie am I of my life
by you, if you vouchsafe me not your service, wherewith the Princess was
nothing offended, for she liked very well his comely personage, but she
answered nothing. The Prince seeing the Princess without a paltray, took her
up behind him, and with easse paces rid toward the town. In which way, the
prince with many amorous words feasted the princess, and manifested to her his
love, and after disclosing himself also, he beseeched her to keep it secret,
which she did, resolving not withstanding if her father were so content, not to
match otherwise. Well, near the town they came, where they saw a great
troop of Knights hasting so fast as they might, and indeed they were the King
and his Knights, more then 500. in number, who by the report excited to succor
their Princess came to the town, and finding almost all the Giants knights
taken or slain by the prince Clauerindo and Armineo, with such aid as the
town affoorded, they altogether follow on, in the pursuit of the Giant which
had led her away. Now there were of the company, which a far off ascried
the princess behind Brandizel, and learning that it was the Knight which rode
to follow the Giant, they told it to the King, whereat he was very glad, and
making much of the three strangers, especially of Brandizel, he spoke on this
wise. Sir knight, how shall I be able to requite this friendship which you and
your companions have showed to me. Assuredly I know not, though I should give
you my kingdom, for were it not for you, I should have lost this day my
daughter Clarinea, and with her my joy and pleasure, which being lost, what
joy should I have found in rulyng? But tell me I pray you, how dealt you with
that Giant, for he was strong and great. Sir says Brandizel, offering to kiss
his hands, which the King gentlye refused.

Sir says he, mighty Prince, my companions and I, think our Fortune to be
very good, in that we are thither arrived where we may do service to so
courteous a Prince, and it is reward sufficient, your acceptance. As touching
the Giant, his ill purpose was his own decay, for be is already dead, not
far from hence. The King wondered to hear tell that the Giant was dead, for
by the report of his bigness, he thought it impossible that one only Knight
should coape with him, and then much more making of the Princes, he embraced
them oftentimes, and desired them to tell him their names, which at length they
did. And the King understanding of their birthes, carried them with himself
toward the town, where, in the way he told them who that Giant was, and
what the cause was why he had come thither in such sort, saying: My Lords this
Giant was called Lamberdo, Lord of the Island of Perda not far hence, he has
since the time he was first knighted, never employed his time to other
advantage but to robbing and spoiling, and for this, he has an Island exceeding
strong, but very little, and scarce well peopled. In this he may defend him
from any enemy, and bestowing his spies in every corner to watch for some
such cheuisaunce, he knew that my daughter Clarinea was in this town with a
few knights, so hither he made a voyage and had stolen her away, but that God
be blessed, such valyant Knights as you, came in such a time for her succor.
While the King told this tale, they were within the town walls, and as they
entered through the streets, the whole town gathered together to see the
Prince which had stain Lambardo. And then through the town they came to the
Kings pallaice, where they abode a great while.

Rosicleer departs from the Island of Candramarte, and meets with certain
adventures on the sea.

Cap. 47.
THe history left the valiant Rocleer very sad in the Island of Candramarte, as
well for his Ladies letter, as for that the knight of the Sun departed from him
so sodeinly that he could not know him. For remembering himself of the words
which the wise Artemidoro had told him as concerning his brother, his mind
gave him yt it might he he, wherefore as without hope ever to see him, and not
having to comfort his afflicted spirits, he burst out into fears, saying. O
Fortune how have thou been froward to meee above all men. First before I was
borne I lost my father, and when I was borne my Mother was in sorrow and care
for me, and scarcely began I to know the world when I was bannished from her
whom I loved better then my self. And now by chance have I hene brought to
the company of a noble knight, with whom I might have been more friendlye
acquainted, but the waves rose vo against me, and have carried him away from
me as if I were unworthy of any good. When he had wept his fill, he went to
one of the Castles, there to set such things in ordes as were disquieted by
the death of their Lord, and so comfort ye woeful Gyantesse, whom he afterward
matched with one of the best knights of all those whom the Giant had left,
giving them liuerie and season in that land, and making others to swear
obedience. Short time after he would needs depart, with full purpose to keep
in the Sea, and not to depart till that he should have sailed so far, that no
words might be heard of him in those quarters. Therefore he took his armor,
wherein was drawn the God of lous, in such sort as our ancestors were wont
to paint him, with his eyes out, his bow and arrows in his hand: The picture
being so lively drawn, that Rosicleer kuewe it was done by the wise
Artemidoro, and therevppon he sooke his name of that device, from which time
he never called himself other then the Knight of Cupide, under which name he
achieved many enterprises, and Rosicleers name came never more to the ears of
Oliuia.

Having put on his armor he took his leave of Candriana, for so was called
the Daughter of Candramarte, and for remembrance only the ship wherein he
first sailed when he lest great Britain, with two mariners to conduct it,
whom he charged not to call by other name then the Knight of Cupide, and to
guide the ship Eastwarde. When he had so sailed fisteene days without
chancing to him any thing worthy of recital. It was so, that one morning by
Sun rising, he saw a little boat pass by him, out of which he heard many
cries, as if it had been the labor of some woman, and thinking that there
might be need of some help, he was desiraus to know what was in the ship,
and thereupon he commanded to join with them.

Presently there ftept upon the hatches a sad ancient man with a white
beard all armed save the head, which demanded what he would. Rosicleer
said, I would know who is in your Ship, for me thinks I have heard some
woman complain, and if it be so, I will venture my person to do her good.
The ancient Knight beheld Rosicleer, and taking him to be some knight of
great bountis, especially in that he had offered himself so freely. When he
had thoroughly beheld, he opened the matter on this sort. Assuredly good
Knight, I thank you for your great good will, and as it is not mis beseeming
your outward beauty to have some inward virtue like thereto.

But know you that in this ship there abides a Gentlewoman making toward
the great Britain, there to complain her to the King Oliuerio and his
knights, of the outrage which is done unto her. Now because our stay is
dangerous, I may not tell you farther of this matter, our enemies follow us,
and so rest you with GOD. When the old man had said this, Rosicleer having
desire to know more, stayed him, and besought him to discourse more at large,
for himself was a Knight of that Court, and could tell him what remedy was to
be hoped for there. The old man was loath to stay longer, yet hearing him say
that he was of the same Court, he told him in few words, that this
Gentlewoman was the Princess Arguirosa, one of the fairest Ladies in the
world, and a Princess of Thessalie, only heir to that kingdom. That her
mother being dead, the King Arguidoro her father fell in love with a
Gentlewoman of Thessalie, not so honest nor of so high estate, as wanton and of
base birth: and loving her affectionately, after married her, to the
dispossessing of his own child. Then in the time of her Fathers life, there
was in the court a knight called Rolando, besides his great living, one of the
strongest knights in all those parts, but proud, and little respecting the
whole world. That this Knight during the life of the King was lyked of Ipesca,
and so soon as the King Arguidoro dyed of a sodeyne disease, was promoted to
the Kings bed by matching with the Queen, and being of great revenues,
that he now inioyed the kingdom by force, and excluding the right heir, none
of the kingdom daring to gaine-saie him, for the most able are his night
kinsmen, the other learn patience perforce. But that which worst of all was,
that to undo her rightful claim, he minds to marry her with a kinsman of
his, and to give only some little Town to dwell in, reserving the title of
the Kingdom after his own days to a son the which he has begotten on his
Queen Ipesca.

I am kinsman says he to the Princess, being her mothers brother, and
therefore I have adventured to rescewe my niece, but not knowing any remedy at
home, because my power is not equal with Rolandos, I have brought her out from
thence, and I determine to go to the great Britain, where as I have heard
there are many valiant knights, especially a new Knight, of whom I have heard
especially since the great feasts there holden. If this Knight help me not, I
know not who may with-stand Rolando. Three nights and days have we been upon
the Sea: only I, the Lady, two Gentlewomen, and our Mariners, and I believe
that there come after us Rolandos knights. Now have I told you the whole of
your desire, and I beseech you tell us what news you know of that good knight.

Rosicleer now having heard the whole state of the Princess Arguirosas
matter, was much treubled, and desirous to help her, he answered the
ancient man, that for his stay he thanked him, and as touching your demand
(says he) of the new knight. Truth it is that in Britain none can tell you
news of him, wherefore your labor should be lost if you sought him there. But
the Princesses affliction so much moves me, that albeit I was purposed other
where, yet would I gladly fight with Rolando in the Princess behalf.

The ancient knight was very sad to hear that the new Knight was not in
Britain, but well eyeng this knight which had so told him, and made profer of
help, he stood in doubt whether to take or refuse, by and by he discovered
two ships under sail, and by their tops to be of Thessalie, whereat
striking himself on the breast he cried out. O most unhappy that we are,
here comes Rolandos Knights which will take us, and being brought again
to Thessalie, we shall there receive most cruel death, and he wept, cursing the
hour of his departure, the Princess Arguirosa hearing the complaints which
her uncle made, his great sorrow which he sustained, the extreme danger
they were in, and the cause why he did it, took it as heavy, and woefully
bewailed their misery

When Rosicleer saw them in this plight, he much pittyed them, especially
Arguirosa, which the Princess Oliuia not remembered might have well contented
him. Therefore he willed them to get under the hatches again, and to let him
shifte for their safety, the old man thinking that Rosicleer would defend
them by saying that they were his people, did so, not ceasing yet to fear the
worst and to pray earnestly for their escape. Rosicleer leapt into the
Princess ship, and sat upon the brimme thereof to see what would happen,
till that the other ship came near, and that he which was the Captain
commanded to grapple, and espyeng Rosicleer, with a proud voice badde him
say both who himself was, and what people he had in his ship, and not fail
in any point. Whereto Rosicleer by and by answered. I am a stranger in these
parts, and farther it is not reason that you know who they are yt are with
me, for we keep our way without molesting thee or thine. The Captain angrye
for his short speech said unto him.

I will strike thy head into the water, unless thou answer me directly to my
question, and so saying he halde and pulled Rosicleer to have forced him.
Rosicleer thus rudely entreated rose up, and with his gauntlet gave the
Captain such a blow upon the helmet, that his brains flew abone his head, and
presently he fell into the water, where the weight of his armor kept him
down. Straight ways more then twenty knights well armed and well angered for
the death of their captain, altogether with their swords in their hands smote
at him. Rosicleer drawing out queen Iulias blade, stroke again with such
courage, that at three blows three knights were slain, and those which
presently knew his great prowess drew back, making no great have to come
near him. Rosicleer knowing his enemies fear, leaped into their ship, and
there laid so about him that in short space he killed half of them. The
Princess Arguirosa and the ancient knight now began to show themselves
above board, and they greatly wondered at his manhood.

So shortly after Rosicleer was ralone in his enimyes ship without
resistaunce, either all being slain, or all slain or wounded, or slain,
wounded, or by flight escaped: for Rosicleers own ship was lost in the
garboyle. Now returned he to Arguirosas ship wherein she with the old man
received him, Rosicleers salutation to the Princess after this exploit was in
this wise.

Madame what has been done your self has seen, but for a recompense thereof
I shall think my self thoroughly satissied if you will venture that into my
hands, which you dare hazard into the hands of the new Knight. For I promise
you I will as willingly ieopard my person as he shall. Now when Rosicleer had
so said, the Princess and the old man stayed a good while without speaking
word, for the consideration of their own danger with recovery if this man
failed, made thein the more wary, and so between the examination of Rolandos
valor and Roscleers hardiness. In the end Arguirosa her self rather upon
love toward him, then of assured confidence, would put her matter to no other
trial then Rosicleers, so she commended her quarrel to him on this sort.

The courtesy valiant knights which you have offered me, though unworthy,
has been so great that I want the holdnesse to accept more, yet because you
carst defended me from death by the vanquishing of Rolandos knights, and now
again you will needs take upon you a further matter, rather not to refuse
you, then willing to trouble you again, I will return with you to my
Country, and commit wholly to your hands the whole ordering both of my self
and my cause: her uncle gave his consent thereto, and Rosicleer thanked them
much. So they sailed to Thessalia, where by the way Rosicleer casting in his
thought how to redress the Princess wrong, to the least displeasure of her
and her uncle which were loath to be known, determined as a stranger to enter
the land and to demands justice as it were against a person not known. To
which device after he had made them privy, and promised that they should not
be disclosed till it so served for their avail, they were better comforted,
and sailed with so good wind that they took landing in a haven near the
place where the king was, taking land, he made the Princess to put on a
muster, and the old knight to cover his head, besides bidding both to
counterfaite for the time some strange behavior, either in holding down
their heads, or in bisguising their attire. To either of them he gave his
horse, and himself mounted upon a courser the best of all Candramartes stable.
In the cool of the evening they fooke their way to the nearest City, where
then were many knights and Ladies coming out of the city to disport them in
the shadow.

Rosicleer being of a comely personage and so lustelye mounted forth to be
seen, and was well lyked off and praised amongst them all. And they followed
on their journey toward the gates of the City, the king at that time came
accompanied with his nobility to solace himself in the field as at other
times before he was accustomed. The king rode upon a mighty horse, with
trappings and harness most of beaten gold, his horse being so brave, and
himself so fierce and stern to look too, that it would have daunted a right
good knight to have but spoke to him. So soon as the Princess and her uncle
saw him, they counterfaited the best that they could, and for fear their
blond sonke down into their bellies. The valiant Greek knowing yt this was
Rolando whom he sought for, as nothing afraid of his terrible looks, but
rather glad to have met with him so conuenienly, and in the company of so many
knights, willed the Princess and the knight to follow him. So came they all
three before the king, Rosicleer speaking to him and saying.

Mighty king, in justice stay thy horse to hear a poor Ladies complaint, and
to right the greatest wrong yt ever was offered to a Gentlewoman. Why she
complains to she is, for that thou art the king and should above all men
repuise the wrong doer, (so further discovering of the kings duty.) Now the
while Rosicleer spoke thus, Rolando beheld him very well, lyking both his
courage and personage, and albeit of his own nature he neither feared God nor
kept justice in things which perteyned to himself, yet hearing in Rosicleers
discourse, himself to be made on now and then as of a right Judge, and that
he would not consent that other then justice should be executed in his
kingdom, he was tickeled therewith, and bad Rosicleer tell on, for he would
hear his matter willingly. Rosicleer strayning his voite, that what he said
might be heard and noysed busoade, spoke as follows.

Know you mighty king that the father of this Gentlewoman was Lord of great
possessions, which marryeng with an honorable woman begat on her this Lady.
Few years after his wife deceasing, this Lord married also another woman, by
whom he had no child, after that the Lord himself dyed also, the stepdame
remaining alive, and shortly marryeng with another man whom in her husbands
days she had a liking too. This man sir king, matching with the mother in
law, has dispossed the true heir of her lawefull inheritance, insemuch too,
as being so disseysed, she has in no wise been considered off as such a
man's Daughter. Now, seking her redress abroad, it was my chance to meet
with her, to whom after she had declared her case, I made offer for to fight
for her with any which impugned her right. These are therefore to require thee
O King, so to tender her suite in the honor of justice, either that she may
lawfully inioye her own, or that you authorize the lystes, that the conqueror
may enter by a lawefull mean.

So Rosicleer ended, expecting the kings answer, who neither warily nor
advisedly waieng and understanding the drifie and purpose of this parable,
answered. Sir Knight, thy demand is just, and the Knight which has done
this wrong, cannot choose but take the one of the two, therefore tell me who
thou art, and I will send for him to answer thy challenge. Be it as the king
has spoken it said Rosicleer. And know for truth that the Knight which has
done this injury is thy self: the Gentlewoman which received it is the
Princess Arguirosa which here stands by me, the lawefull inheritour as thy
self knows of this kingdom: thou without just title have intruded upon it:
therefore do that which thy mouth has witnessed to be just. When Rosicleer
had said, Rolando much amassed at his great presumption, and not being able to
bridle his choler, answered despirefully.

Thou foolish and unhappy Knight, how has so great madness entered into
thee as to appear before me with such a demand, that were it not for the
sentence which I have given, I would ere this have abated thy pride: but I will
not keep long from thee the rod of due correction, I am content to take the
battle, and with the conditions which thou have named, hard enough I warrant
thee for thy self, and that woman, whom I will so cage up that she shall no
more seek such knights as thou art. When the King had thus said he went on
his way, and all those that heard the demand of Rosicleer were much abashed
at his boldness, for though he was big, yet seemed he nothing so strong as
to resist Rolando, presently it was published throughout the whole City, and
the battle was appointed to be on the morraw, where you should have seen most
part of the Town pray to God for the right of their natural Queen, many
scaffolds were erected to see the lists.

The ancient Knight uncle to the Princess was called Alberto, and he had a
Nephewe a strong and lustye Knight, dwelling a mile from the City in a
Castle of his own, whence he seldom departed for fear of the king. Thither
did the uncle of the Princess for that night carry them, where they were
received gladly, and took their rest.

The battle which Rolando had with Rosicleer.

Cap. 48.
ROlando made no account that night of the battle which he was to fight the
next day, for he thought no harm could happen him, though there had been ten
more such Knights as his adversary was. The day being come he arose and armed
himself, where enquiring whether the Knight his adversary were in field or
no, it was told him yea, wherefore he made the more have, and coming to the
lystes with a troop of armed Knights for his more honor, he defied the
Knight of Cupide, for so was Rosicleer then called, of the device which he
bare: the Kings words were to this effect. Tell me now foolish Knight, do
thou not repent thy yesterdayes challenge, would thou not give much not to
be here now: whereto Rosicleer. No assuredly I repent me not, for if thou
vanquish me I look for naught but death, which I set so light by, as in so
right a quarrel, I would venture my life twentye times, but thou ought
rather to repent thy self, and to have remorce of thy ill dealing. Rolando
heard him say so, and began to laugh aloude. Art thou (says he) become a
Philosopher? who wanting strength of arms to purchase honor, when they lie
striking themselves on their couches, can talk gallantly, which they account
for as great a glory. Thou trusts more I perceive in thy tongue Philosophy,
than in chinalrie or manhood, and yet to be spoken off after thy just
punishment, thou will dye forsooth in defense of Justice. But if death in such
a quarrel be so acceptable, prepare thy self for it, for thou shall stay no
longer, then the proof of my spear.

So saying, Rolando turned the raines of his horse to take the carrier. The
mean while that the Judges were placed on their bench, and that the Queen
with her Ladies had taken the windows to behold the battle, the princess
Arguirosa sat upon her palfray all heavy, and only accompanied with Alberto,
for none else durst make any countenance of well meaning toward her, for
fear of the king. But to our matter, these two knights putting their spurs
to their horses, with their spears in their restes, ran together, and with
their force the earth shook, and their spears burst in sunder. The King in
the midst of the carrier being borne upon his crupper, and Rosicleer not moved
at all, save that his horse peantrells burst with the rushing, and both knights
lyghted down, where began a fierce battle on foot, either laieng at other
so thick, that their shields were burst in pieces, and themselves so wearied,
that either followed the other staggering and not tertaine of his gate. The
beholders of the battle were much amazed at Rosicleer, and at the danger
wherein he put the King, but if any meruailed, much more did Rolando, which
both felt it, and could judge what terrible shakes he had borne both on
horse and foot, and he thought in himself, never to have met with the like
knight, one or other, man or Giant. Ever Rosicleers nimblenesse helped him
much, for he could step easily aside and escape the blow: but Rolando found a
want of his horse, for he was so heavy, that he could not avoid one blow. At
length stark tired, his bones aching for very pain of travail, he would have
taken breath, but fearing to make his adversary privy thereto, he forced
himself quickly to kill or be killed, and heaping his blows upon Rosicleer,
he so galde him, that the lookers on mistrusted Rosicleers party. But would
he or not ( Rosicleer enduring the uttermost) Rolando was feign to give over,
whereat Rosicleer, though not having so much need, yet not to take so foul on,
did the like.

They two leaning their breasts upon the pomels of their swords, beheld each
other a long while, where Rolando thinking it not best so to end the matter,
but take it up some other way, spoke to Rosicleer, saying. I had not thought
Knight, that so much courage had been in thee, and yet ere the end it will
little further thee against me: but for that I am given to love and like of
such knights as thou art, I will use clemency toward thee, which I never
determined to do toward one, which has so much offended me. This it is, I
will that thou leave off the battle which thou have in hand for the
Princess Arguirosa, and from thencefoorth that thou abide in my Court, where I
will do thee that honor which thy person meriteth, and I will bestow a living
upon thee, wherewith thou shall live contentedly, Rosicleer here well
perceiving what he went about, said unto him: I would willingly Rolando, that
as thou have in show offered me great honor, for the which I thank thee, so
that thou wuuldest in deed perform another thing, which should be less
impair to my present honor then the leaving of the battle: the battle as
thou say would I gladly end, not only for mine own danger which I am like
to be in, but for thy sake, whom I rather wish to amend his fault by living,
and restoring the Lady to her own, then by dying in a wrong cause to hazard
the utter perdition of thy soul: and for truth take this, that I will choose
to dye, than to suffer her cause to be lost by my collusion. Take therefore some
other means to leave this battle, for this will not succeed, or let us
fight it out, for I hope in God, that he will defend the innocent. When
Rosicleer had said this, Rolando thinking that his own gentle speech had made
his enemy more bold, became mad outright, and forgetting his weariness,
took his sword with both his hands, and therewith he struck Rosicleer so hard
on ye headpeece, that he made him boowe both hands and knees unto the ground,
the blow being so heavy, as if a Tower had fallen upon him. Rosicleer rising
up acquitted it him, that he made him stagger five or six paces backward. And
between them the combat was renewed. Now this especially refreshed the poor
Princess Arguirosa, that her Knight troubled his enemy more now then at the
beginning. And not long after it was apparent that Rosicleer had the better,
for Rolando began to be weary, and could not move out of his place. Rosicleer
knowing the advantage, and willing to end the battle the sooner both for
the contentment of the Princess, and the safety of Rolandos life, whom he
judged to be a valiant knight, offered again the conditions before mentioned:
but it was not Rolandos good hap, and true it is, that those which live so
wickedly, dye commonly as desperately, least they should repent their faults,
and find mercy: But Rolando more then mad at the curteste which was offered
him, would hear naught, but struck at Rosicleer with all his force, Rosicleer
stepped aside, and the sword fell upon the ground sticking up to the hyltes. The
whiles that Rolando haled at his sword, Rosicleer discharged his blow with
great strength, and cut the neck in sunder from the body. Wherewithal the
whole multitude showted, but in diverse tunes, some for sorrow of the Tyraunts
death, but most crying: Live thou Arguirosa, our Queen and Lady. Then albeit
some of the Kings friends would have aduenged his death, they durst not
signify it, the people being so bent after the new Queen. The Knight of
Cupide when the battle was ended, thanked God, and demannded of the Judges,
whether ought else were to be performed, for the restoring of the Princess
Arguirosa to her kingdom. To which, all said no, and the Trumpetts sounded.
Yet sat the Princess upon her Palfraye till there came to her of the most
principal Knights, and others Citizens, which now all fear set aside, durst
discover their good affection.

The Princess therewith and the knight of Cupide, with her uncle Alberto,
rode in great honor to the Pallaice, where, that present day, ye princess was
crowned Queen, the chief Lords kissing her hand, in the name of the Gentlemen
and Commons. After this, there was no talk but of the marriage of the Queen,
every man as he wished, naming the Knight of Cupide, which her self more
desired then they all, but knowing that the Knight of Cupide had else where
bestowed his liking (which she gathered by likelihoode of speeches which she
had heard in the ship, by the deep sighs which he hourly fetched, and
especially by his device, which did not argue in a new beginner) she ruled her
passion the best she might, and for this time moved him not therein.
Afterward, she sent for Rolandos wife, her mother in law to keep her
company, but the report was, that for anguish of mind she had slain her
self. Well, yet she commanded them both to be interred as belonged to the
Kings and Queens of that land. Rosicleer remained in that Kingdom six days,
at the great entreaty of the Queen to help all things to good order. After
feelyng the wound which sat more deeply imprinted in his heart, then the Image
thereof in his armor, he departed thence. And so let us leave him, to recount
of the Emperor Trebatio, and the Knight of the Sun, who were left sailing
upon the Sea.

The Emperor Trebatio and the Knight of the Sun, are in their way to the
Kingdom of Hungary.

Cap. 49.
THe Emperor Trebatio and the Knight of the Sun, departing from the Island
of Lindaraza, were left sailing in the Sea Euxino. Now, the ship wherein he
was, having so good and skillful a Governor as we have told you, was carried
so swiftlye, that within two days they entered the mouth of Danubia, and
being upon the river three days and three nights, the fourth day in the
morning, they were set on land ere that they wist. The Emperor looking about
him, knew the country very well, since he had followed the Chariot to the
self same place. And being glad to have arrived to Hungary so safe and so
shortly, he embraced the Knight of the Sun for joy, telling him that this was
Hungary, where the Princess Briana lived. So he devised with him in what
manner he might best make himself known to the princess, and conuaye her
into Greece. The Knight of the Sun being so friendly asked his advice,
answered as faithfully. My Lord, it is requisite for us, first of all to
know where the King Tiberio is, and in what order the Princess now abides,
which being done, you may ye better compass that which you purpose. You say
right well, answered the Emperor, let us keep along the shore, that if
perhaps we meet with any one, we may enquire what news there are. So on
foot they walked thorough a Forest, leading upon the River, wherein they
travailed half a day without meeting any one: after, (...) weried, they sat
them down to rest themselves, where they fed on such vyandes as they had
brought with them from the boat. An half hour after, when they had (...)
indifferently, they saw near at hand a Gentlewoman upon a palfraye, making
as much haste as she (...) her a Knight on foot with a naked sword, (...) the
stayed not, when he ouertooke her to (...) through. The Gentlewoman seeing the
Emperor (...) the Knight of the Sun, leapt from her palfray, (...) good
Knights, for this traiterous Knight ^anish me. The Emperor rose up, and
comfor^^^^ the Gentlewoman, stayed a while till the Knight (...) ^^^des on her,
then he said, Sir Knight el^^^^^ (...) this gentlewoman alone, or tell us why
thou will carry her against her will. The Knight which was both (...) p^euish,
answered him, I will carry her away maugre your teeth, and I have no charge
to make you other answer, but as to the cause, wit you well, it is formy
self and for no other, whereof you shall be no let I warrant you. But you
carry her not away, said the Emperor, for sooner shall you dye then touch
her honor. The Knight thus ouer-awed in words, thought to make amends in
deeds, and suddenly he hit the Emperor under the ribs. The Emperor to
yield it him again, struck at his head, which he received in his shield, and
not daring to abide another, he fled through the Forest as fast as he might,
neither the Emperor nor the Knight of the Sun would follow him, but
demanded of the Gentlewoman why that Knight pursued her.

Alas my Lords said she, my fellow and I came riding through the Forest,
where we were met with four Knights which would have carried us away by
force, my self fled this way, my campanion another, and but if you do
help her, these wicked Knights will do her villainy. The Emperor ^auing
alone begun the battle, desired the Knight of the Sun to abide there. The
while he took the Gentlewomans palfray to succor the other Lady. The Knight
of the Sun would rather have taken that travail upon him, then to expect
the report, but not to importunate the Emperor, he promised to stay his
coming, or to follow him. The Emperor took up the gentlewoman behind him
to conduct him on the way, and being brought by her to the midst of the
forest, about a flight shot, they heard the scriching of some Gentlewoman, and
following the sound, they find four knights laieng hands upon a Gentlewoman,
whereat she cried out. The Emperor presently as he saw it dismounted from his
horse, and cried to the knights saying, Knights let this gentlewoman alone, for
it is great villainy to force a woman. One of them hearing the Emperor, cried
again. Who made you a Justice, or do you look for an Atturneyes fee, and
they all three laid at the Emperor, but it had been better for them not to
have been so hasty, for ere long they received just reward for their
insolency. For the Emperor cleaued one of them to the scull, and another from
the shoulders downward, the other as he made have to escape, was taken shorter
by the legs. For the Emperor albeit very inclinable to any reasonable pity,
yet was he in this point very rigorous, not to spare the dishonourers of
virginity, his saying was: That it quenched the natural love between father
and mother, sister and brother, between kiffe and kin: that the bastard
borne seldom came to good purpose: that it was partlye the sin of Sodomy,
etc. And for his own fault, it was in deed mere ignorance or rather
constraint, and thereby the more pardonable, or perhaps the detesting of it
himself, made him more severely exact the keeping of chastity in others. But
forward with our matter: The Emperor beholding this Gentlewoman whom he had
succored, knew her presentlye to be Clandestria, a Gentlewoman belonging to
the Princess Briana, wherewith he was the gladdeit man in the world, as
hoping to hear some good nowes at her hands. Yet to cover himself, he made
the Gentlewomen sit down, himself sitting by them, and to tell him whether
they went, and wherefore they were in those parts. The Gentlewomen glad and
feign that they might without danger tell of what Country they were, and what
their arraunt was thetherwarde, answered.

Sir Knight, we are belonging to the Princess Briana, Daughter to the King of
this land: the cause of our coming, is, that long time agone our Lady lost
her Husband the prince Edward prince of Britain, I has never since heard of
him. For his sake she has remained a widow in the Monestarie of the river,
demeaning a very sorry life, as pent up in a religious Cloister. Her belief
was always that he was dead, till within these fifteen days, she dreamed
that she saw him alive, and that he came by Sea to this land, very merry,
of the same age which he was off when he first left her, which dream she
has dreamed three nights together, the last night of the three there appeared
to her an ancient man much rebuking her for her distrust, whereat the
Princess, though hardlye persuaded, yet being so admonished, the better has
credited that nights vision, and has sent us to a religious house, dedicated
to our Lady the blessed virginne, with rich offerings, and many good devotions
for his safe return. Whence after we were retourning by this Forest, these
Knights beset us, and had ravished us, but that we cried so loud that you
heard us, and you have thanks be to God well eased us of them, and for your
so great courtesy, if it so please you to ride with us, I doubt not but our
mistress will well consider you. The Emperor much rejoicing at the great
constancy of his wife Briana, and desiring to discover himself, asked the
Gentlewomen if any of them had seen the Prince Edward or no. Whereto
Clandestria answered. Yea sir Knight very well, and I would that God would
once show him me, I should know him by his lovely face, excelling all other
knights which I have ever seen. I will see that presently said the Emperor,
and so saying he put off his helmet: and how now says he, whom take you me
for. O say they both, your self are Prince Edward, and kneeling down before
him would have kissed his hands, and they earnestly entreated him to go with
them to the monastery of the river. The Emperor consented gladly. For I have
says he as great desire to see her, but here not far hence there is a knight
which stays for me, him must we seek and carry in our company, for he is
the man next unto God, to whom I am most beholding, for by him have I been
delivered from prison and from inchauntment. The whole story I will tell you
by the way.

So the Emperor made the Gentlewomen to mount upon their palfrayes, and
himself took one of the horses perteining to the dead Knight for himself,
and another for the knight of the Sun, and by the way he discoursed as he
promised of his own estate with Lindaraza, till that they met with the Knight
of the Sun, with whom the Emperor, communicated of his good adventure to
light upon Brianas maids, and what news he had heard of them. Whereat the
Knight of the Sun became as joyous, and they made a merry journey toward
Belgrado, which held them four days travail from that place.

The Emperor and the Knight of the Sun riding toward the monestarie of the
river, are by an adventure separated.

Cap. 50.
THE Emperor by the way declared to the Gentlewomen and to the knight of the:
Sun who he was, not Prince Edward as they thought, but in his name Brianas
bridegroom, and so forth of that matter, which you may conceive by that you
heard before. Whereat the Gentlewomen were not a little amazed, but nothing
sorry. And with the knight of the Sun the Emperor entered into farther
counsel in what order he might make the king Tiberio privy to his fact, and
carry ye Princess Briana into Greece. Whereto the knight of the Sun
counseled thus. My Lord, you know the faith of a Prince, a bond very
straight for kings and great Lords, as touching the preservation of their
honor in promise, for which many times many have preferred the trust laid
upon them before the safety of their near kindred. This I say for that
peradventure Tiberio will be right glad to have matched his daughter with you,
yet for the Prince Edwards sake, coming under his safe conduct, he may not
take it in good part, or if he did, had not king Oliuerio just cause to be
angry being so abused, as under his word to have lost his son, and subjects
withal, my counsel is therefore, for the better dispatch of your business,
and avoiding of being shent, if you venture rashly upon an enemy not
reconciled, that you go secretly to the monastery, and carry away the
Princess from thence, scarce letting her self know whether she shall go,
save that behind you you may leave a letter which shall signify the whole
effect of that which is passed. By this means if the king of England bewail
the death of his son, the king Tiberio may complain of the loss of his
daughter, and in time when these fores are skinned; there may friendship be
made on either part. The Emperor liked well this counsel, and giving him
many thanks told him that he would put it in effect. So two days they kept
company, in the mean time happening nothing worth the telling.

The third day coming to a cross ware well trod, they saw a pauilion
pitched, and not far off twelve Gentlewomen clothed in black, and having
very sad countenaunces, at the tent door they saw three knights which
were their keepers. When the Emperor and the Knight of the Sun approached,
the Gentlewomen cried out, whereat the knight of the Sun stayde, and spoke
unto them.

Gentlewomen, as well by your countenaunces as by your outeries, we perceive
you are distressed. Show us now the cause thereof, and if the thing be such as
that we may remedy it, we will do our best to do it. One of the chiefest of
them answered. Sir your courteous words makes us the bolder to utter our
grief. Therefore know you that I have a sister called Elisandra, Duchess of
Pannoma, and married to a Knight the most wicked man that was ever borne, for
he has staundered her with such a misreport, as the like has not been heard
off. So it is that my sister and he have been married eight years and have
had no children, wherefore he fearing that after his decease the Dukedom
should return to her kin, as by right it should, being her only
inheritance, and minding to establish the state in his own name, has
subborned a desperate person to challenge her of adultery. By which means she
being executed as false to her husband, all her lands and goods are forfayted
to the husband, as it were to make him amends of his wives wrong. Now this
slander is apparaunt to all men, but because the Duke offers that the combat
shall be granted to him which shall gaine-saie the slander, the matter is
made the lykelyer, and is borne out, though not by strong hand, yet by
policy, and yet no man dare oppose himself to the challenger. For there is a
knight in the land called Aridon, Lord of the black wood, by report the
strongest Knight which ever was in these parts, albeit very like unto the
Duke in his ill living, him has the Duke made his friend and accuser of the
Princess. For a plot of ground adjacent to his segniories, his accusation
lies thus, that with himself she committed adultery, whereas though he was
a long soiourner in his Court, yet he neither persuaded her to it, or would
ever move her in it, for he knew his answer. But the matter was thus
canuased, the while the Duke* kept at the Court of the King Tiberio, thither
word is brought of the false packing of the Duchess and Aridon. The Duke
presently complayneth to the king, and both parties are sent for in all have.
Aridon being first asked confesses it, and is acquitted by his confession. As
(by the way) our law in this case acquiteth the man once confessing it,
though otherwise never so great an offender, and only stretches to the
woman, in respect of her faith given at marriage. Now what could the
Princess do standing before the King, and accuses not of bear say, but by
himself, with whom she is fayde to have lain? yet denies she it. Well, the
Duke charging her with it, and she purging her self, she was feign to
require respite for providing a sufficient Knight to maintain her innocence.
Yet was she commanded to prison under sure keeping, and there is a day set
for the trial, Arydon being the accuser, against whom I do not think that
any man in her defense, though the cause be righteous dare show himself,
for we have tarried here these. 20. days, and have not found any. Now
because here are cross ways, in which it is likely that many knights should
pass, we determine to abide the rest of the prefixed time. And this is the
cause sir knight why we mourn, and so she ended weeping bitterly.

The Emperor and the Knight of the Sun pittyed them much, meruailing so
ungodly dealing could have any place to rust in Hungary, but God is wise
say they, yea, and sees his time. So the Knight of the Sun talking a part
with the Emperor, said to him. My Lord you see good cause binding me to
pity the Duchess in her extreme need, if you be pleased therewith, I
will go answer for her in the Court of king Tiberio. In the mean time it
will be best for you to go to the monastery of the river, the most secretly
that you may, and I will not fail to certify you from the Court if I hear
ought which might avail you being known. This being done, I will with Gods
help come to Greece, where I look to find you very merry. The Emperor was
loath, but seeing the urgent necessity he was content, and answered, that he
would not be against his pleasure, although it would grieve him to be so long
without his company, but at Constantinople shall we meet.

Therevppon the Knight of the Sun turned to the Gentlewomen, saying.
Gentlewomen, your mourning has so much grieved this Knight and me, that
although his affairs lie other where and that he cannot be present, yet for
his sake will I go with you to the Court, there to answer for the Duchess
if she be so content. The gentle women willingly accepted of the knight, and
not staying longer but to thank him, they pulled down their tent and to horse
back they go. By the way he had much talk with Elisea, for so was the
Duchess sister named, he comforting her, and she requesting him to make
speed, for we lack not many days of our appointed time, when if we fail we
shall loose a good cause for lack of pity in knights aduenterous. But let us
leave this, and turn we to ye Emperor in the company of Brianas Gentlewomen.

The Emperor Trebatio came to the monestarie of the river, and there was made
known to his wife the Princess.

Cap. 51.
THE Emperor having good hope to meet with the Princess, whom he loved no
less then before he had, when he hazarded his person for her sake upon
Prince Edward, made great bast, and he trauayled with the Gentlewomen three
days and three nights. Now we have told you often that the Princess
lodging was in one quarter of the monestarie separate from the other, whereto
she had a posterne gate toward the wood, by which Clandestria had carried
Donzel del Febo and Rosicleer to nursing, and by this gats no man either
entered or went out, but by Clandestrias leave, thee was groom porter and kept
the keie her self. And for to recover this matter which ye Emperor would in
no wise have known, it was very fit that Clandestria was there in company. For
when they approached the monestarie says Clandestria, my Lord if you will not be
known to ye Gentlewomen here belonging to our Lady, best it were that I
should first enter and see what they do, and that I should cause the Princess
to take her most secret chamber, where as I shall find her, so will I declare
of your coming, otherwise it may he that your so sedeine approach might work
some alteration in her body to the danger of her health, she being so sore
weakened by continual mourning, but this night shall pass and the morrow you
shall come unto her. The Emperor liked well of Clandestrias speech, and so he
stayed in a place which she provided for him, the whilst that the Gentlewomen
went to the Princess. Some will think that the Emperor should be much
changed, this being the 20. year of his absence, but it was not so, for when
he first entered the Castle of Lyndaraza he was but. 35. years in age, and no
more was he when he came from the enchantment, neither his age increasing nor
his beauty decreasing. When the Emperor left the Princess Briana, she was
but 14. years old, and counting the time that she had lived afterward, she
was just one year under him, wherein her beauty best appeared, and the great
sorrow which she before had taken, did not so abate her color, but that the
joy of his return fetched it again more fresh and lively then it was before.

But the story says that the Gentlewomen found their mistress alone, praieng
devoutly upon her knees, and more merry then she was before, whether by
inspiration or by immagination, conceiving hope in the dream I told you off:
but her Gentlewomen were very glad to be witnesses of her mirth. The Princess
lovingly welcomed the Gentlewomen, especially Clandestria which was her sure
friend, demannding of them how they had spead in their journey.

Clandestria answered: Madame, we were once in danger to loose both our
honors and our lives, after that we had done as you commanded us. Ah blessed
virginne said the Princess, and is it possible that ever you should be in
so great danger for my cause. Yea it is most certain madame answered
Clandestria, but as after a foul evening comes a sayre morning, so after this
trouble we had some quietness by the means of our flight, for we met with a
good knight, which not only saved us from great shame by killing these wicked
knights which would have spoiled us, but after told us such news as you have
cause to be the gladdest woman in the world. He said that not many days
before, he departed from your husband, which was in good health, and of the
same age as he was when you first knew him, for since he was with you he has
been inchaunted, and being now set at liberty coming to you.

O my good Lord, and is it possible said the Princess that thou art so
favorable unto me as to send me my husband alive: or is this some dream
the farther to increase my dolor. Tell me Clandestria in good faith, is it
true which thou say, for I can hardly believe thee. Yea assuredly said
Clandestria, for the Knight which reported it is so credible that he will not
tell other then troth. Ah Clandestria said the Princess, thou have been
always diligent, discreet, and lyberall in those things which has touched
my service hitherto, but in this now concerning my life, especially thou have
been neglygent, or have wanted discreation. For why did thou not bring him
before me, yt my self might have heard it of his own mouth, would it not then
have been pleasant unto me to have seen that knight which so lately saw my
loving husband, and to have known of him in what manner he met with him, and
for what cause he comes not so soon as the other.

Madame be not agreeued with this said Clandestria, for the knight which
told it me is not so far hence, but that within a quarter of an hour you
may see him if you have desire thereto. Desire said the Princess, I desire
nothing so much in the world, therefore go and fetch him before me, that I
may know whether that be true which my heart thinks so incredible, I will
go my ways said Clandestria, and so she went out of the Princess lodging,
and straight to the Emperor, to whom she told all that talk which she had
had with her Lady, whereat the Emperor was so glad, that up the stayers
full feign he goes, and by such privy ways, as none but Clandestria knew,
he is brought before Briana, Clandestria first entering, then the Emperor
clothed in rich armor, and his visour pulled down. The Princess was
somewhat afraid to see so big a man all armed: but the Emperor pulling off
his helmet, quickly showed his: lovely face, the which she had imprinted in her
remembrance, and with hasty paces he made toward the princess, whom he
kissed on the mouth so sweetly that their tongues this while were slent, not
to interrupt the joy of their first meeting. Anon after, the Princess which
indeed, had the chiefest wrong, spoke to the Emperor thus.

My Lord and only life, what cruel Fortune has detained you from this land,
and bannished you so long from my presence? In what strange and hidden
countries have you been, that we could never bear word of you? Madanie
answered the Emperor, you may call that Fortune cruel, for it has offered
you a great wrong, by forcing you to endure a far greater penance, then
Penelope did by Ulysses absence: But one thing you may assure your self off,
that the fault was not in me, though I am not to be excused, for if I had had
life, and lybertye, and judgment, all the world should not have stayed me from
you.

Since my freedom, if I have not had as loyal a regard of your constancy
and my duty, then blame all mankind for my sake of unsteadfastness and
wrong: and for this time, let these things slyppe* with less grief, to
entertain our present joy.

So he kissed the Princess again, and they both satte nowne together kissing
and colling each other like two young lovers. Whaen they were thoroughly entered
this delyght, and that the Emperor was sure of her good lyking toward
himself, whosomeuer he were, he bewrayed to her the whole matter, first that
he was not ye Prince Edward as she thought, but the Emperor Trebatio, and so
in few words, he told her the whole story of his first heat by the
Prisoners confession, and from thence in order to this delyuerance, wrought by
the Knight of the Sun.

The Princess for a great while stood heereat amazed, and began to gather
more of the words which Rosicleer had written to her, and not being
displeased with her former error, in the end she told him, that whosomeuer
he was in deed, yet was he the same to whom she was married, and that vow
which she then made, she said she would perform to him alone.

The Emperor courteouslye thanking her, badde her say on what had happened,
whereat she graciouslys blushing, told him, that she had been delivered of two
children at one burden, being two goodlye Boys with strange marks in their
bodies. Of them she told him farther (pouring down many a tear) the manner
of their loss, the one called Donzel del Febo, at three years of his age, the
other named Rosicleer, at seventeen: and for Rosicleer, (says she) he has
proved a right manlye Knight, and therewith she gave him the letter which
Arinda had brought.

The Emperor read the letter, and was very glad to hear of that hope which
Artemidoro had put him in, as touching the recouerye of his Brother. And in
good time while we have occasion to entreat of Trebatios children, let us
hold on with the Knight of the Sun, whom we left in the way trauayling to
the court of king Tiberio, which shall be declared in the chapter following.

The Knight of the Sun riding to the Court of King Tiberio, iusteth with a
Knight for passage.

Cap. 52.
THE Knight of the Sun and the Gentlewomen with their Knights rid toward
the City of Ratisbona, where the King Tiberio and his Court for that time lay.
Three days almost they trauayled, hearing of naught that might be told you,
till toward noone upon the third days they met with a fair Gentlewoman upon
a palfray, which saluted them courteouslye in this manner: God save you sir
knights, I pray you tell me whether you are going to the Court of King
Tiberio or no, for if you go thither, I have certain news to tell you.

Marry said one of the Knights, that we do, what do you command us
thither fair Gentlewoman? I will tell you that willynglye says she, if the
Knight which has the device of the Sun, will grant me my asking. I grant
it you Gentlewoman; answered the Knight of the Sun, if it be neither let to
my journey nor prejudicial to my person. I am content with these conditions
says she, and so I accept of your promise.

Now Sir Knight, truth it is, that riding this way, I must of force pass
over a Bridge, stretching over Danubia, not passing two miles from the great
City of Ratisbona, over which you must also pass, if you would go to the
City, This Bridge says she, is kept by a Knight called Florinaldes, for the
love of a Lady named Albamyra, equally beloved of two Knights, the one is this
Florinaldes, the other is an Earl named Orfeo, and they two have been at long
strife for her love. She to be rid of the one, she cares not whether, has
commanded that in her presence, they should severally keep this passage
fifteen days space, promising that he which does best shall be her Knight.
Florinaldes has been the first, and has kept this Bridge twelve days in
Albamyras presence, where are many Knights and Gentlewomen. Now, it being so
near the Court, there come daily many good Knights to prove themselves,
but he has the masterye of them all, and his praise is spredde far abroad.

This morning, my self riding toward Ratisbona for certain business I have
there, would have passed the Bridge, but I could not be suffered, except I
would have confessed Albamyra to be the fairest Lady in all Hungary. This if
I would not do, they bad me bring some Knight that should win the passage
for me. When I heard this, I called to see the beauty of Albamyra, that I
might judge whether it were so or no. Then was I led into a rich Tent,
wherein Albamyra satte accompanied with many Gentlewomen, and I beheld her at
the full: but truly, if my Glass at home lie not, wherein I was wont to see
mine own beautye, hyrs is nothing equal to mine. So I told them that for
ought I had seen, I must be feign to return back, and to find a Knight,
which would break the passage.

Now the gift which I demand of you sir Knight is, that heerevpon you just
with Florinaldes, and in the maintenance of my beauty against hirs, be you
assured of the victory.

When the gentlewoman had said thus, those that were present, laughed a good,
and the Knight of the Sun to shifte her off, answered.

Gentlewoman, if your business had been so great to the Court, as you would
have us think, you would not have stayed for so small a matter. The
Gentlewoman very angry, replied shortly. Call you it so small a matter? mark
what I say, you are not so courteous as I took you for, if you so little
esteem women's suits, you being a Knight. Now know you, that a woman esteems
her beauty above all, and that there is no injury so great for a woman, as to
say that another is fairer then she: I tell you that I had rather be called any
other name of reproach, then not a well favored woman, and being as I am, I
account my self much fayrer then Albamyra, or rather would I al my great
business undone, then to confess that which the Knight of the Bridge does
will me too. Now since you have given me this grant, perform it, or otherwise
during my life I will complain me of you. The Knight of the Sun and those
which were with him, laughed to see the Gentlewoman so hot, for the light
regarding of her beauty: and they said: Since we must pass the Bridge, we
will see the beauty of Albamira, and if it be less then yours, then will we
do our best, that you shall pass uncontrolled.

Of the one part be you sure quoth the Gentlewoman, that my beauty is more,
and if I had the maintenance which Albamyra has, Florinaldes or the Earl
Orfeo would rather quarrel for my beauty than for hyrs. At this and other
like things they laughed till they came to the Bridge, where they saw a big
Knight armed, and a fair rich Tente pitched, with certain Knights and
Gentlewomen walking by the River side, who so soon as they saw these Knights
come, gathered unto the Tent.

The Knight of the Sun and his company offered to ride over the Bridge, but
there came a Gentlewoman out against him, saying: Sir Knight this Bridge is
defended you by Florinaldes, over may you not pass, unless you just with him,
or confess that Albamira is the fairest gentlewoman in this Kingdom, and that
Florinaldes is the Knight which best deserves her, the which also must these
Gentlewomen say which are in your company, or bring Knights to answer for
them.

We could be content answered the Knnight of the Sun, to agree to these
conditions which you speak off, but the Gentlewomen in our company make such
account of their beautyes, that they will rather return back, then confess
that which you would. Now that they are in our company, we must answer for
them.

Determine what to do, and for your choice, it must be one of these two,
said the Gentlewoman, and so she departed.

Florinaldes and Albamyra heard all this, and presently they caused the Tent
door to be set open, where these strangers saw Albamyra amongst the
Gentlewomen, much excelling them all, which made the^ take up a fresh laughter
at their merry Gentlewoman. Florinaldes issued forth of the Tent taking a
spear in his hand, and coming toward the Knight, he spoke saying. You have
known already knights, that this Bridge is kept by me, if you say not that
which I demand of you, or else presently just with me. The Knights answered,
We will do what we like best, and therewith they required the knight of the
Sun that they might just first, which he granted them, and so the one
taking a spear in his hand, ran to encounter Florinaldes, but he was
unhorsed: and so the second, and the third: all of them as easily, and with
no more a do, then I have had in tellyng you.

The Knight of the Sun seeing these three Knights thus cast down, spoke
unto the Gentlewoman which had brought them thither. Gentlewoman, this Knight
is no babe you see, were it not better for us to say as he says, then might
we go free. And the rather, for that I have seen Albamyra, which in my eyes is
much fairer then you.

Blessed Marie, says the Gentlewoman, if Albamira be saiter then I, it is for
her apparel only, but since you have promised this, you must perform it, and
although I gain nothing herein, yet shall it do me good to see you fly from
your saddle, for the little skill you have in discerning beauties. Albamira
heard this, and the other Gentlewomen, and knowing that this was the
Gentlewoman which had been there before, they laughed much at her, whereat she
waxed angry.

The Knight of the Sun then took a spear from the ratler, and called for
Florinaldes. Then ran they together with such force, that they made the
Bridge to shake. Florinaldes only burst his spear upon the Knight of the
Sun, but the Knight of the Sun bare Florinaldes over and over so strongly,
that he had a sore bruise and might not rise, his Knygtes took him in their
arms into his Tent, where he was heavy: and it is uncertain whether more
grieved with the sore of his bruise, then the shame of his fall, so to be foiled
before his Mistress: but if I may meddle in school points, I think he had
rather burst an arm, then so to have cracked his credit with both Lady and
friends, such as many resort thither from Tiberios Court to see him just.

And the Knight of the Sun seeing Florinaldes so unhorsed before his Lady,
was as sorry for him, and presentlye departed. The Gentlewomen and their
Knights in whose company he travailed, were glad of the hope given them of a
farther trial, but above all, ye gentlewoman which had required him to these
Iustes, tryumphed now, as if rather in her quarrel, then by the Knights
strength, Florinaldes had been overthrown, and she bad them aloude, to
remember the comparison of Albamyras beauty and hyrs, from this time she lyked
much better of her self, but age coming upon her, her beauty decayed, as
there is nothing more uncertain, either empayred by sickness, or withered by
age, or by sundry accidents in man's life corrupted and depraved, and what
should I talk of the harm that thence issues.

It is at home a breeder of unrest, a robber of ease abroad, a continual
care, a cause of many dangers, a sea of trauayles, and an everlasting grief,
whether coming or going: But what needs this so long a digression, the rest
let us leave to those that are idle, to discourse at leisure: now, more at
large of our necessary matter. The Knight of the Sun with his company rydeth
to Ratisbona, whether they came ere full Sun set, and lodged for that night
at a friends house of Elisea. The story says also, that Florinaldes and his
company dislodged their Tent, and came that night to Ratisbona also, all
greatly amazed at the Knight of the Sun, to whom Florinaldes bare such an
evil will, that it had almost cost him his life, as the next book shall tell
you hereafter.

The Knight of the Sun answered before the King Tiberio for the Duchess
Elisandra, and the battle was appointed between him, and Arydon of the
black wood.

Cap. 53.
THe next day being come the Knight of the Sun ^emed himself, and being
ready, only with Eli^^a went toward the Pallaice, whether when he came he
found the King amongst his Nobles, and w^^h t^em the Duke of Pannonia, and
Arydon of the black ^^^de, either of them not a little puffed up with vain
glory, that the time prefixed was now spent almost, and no man daring to
answer the Duchess. Now at the coming of this knight with the device of
the Sun, there was sodeinely a great silence, belike by occasion of some in
the company which had seen his valor proved upon Florinaldes. And the knight
of the Sun glad of such convenient time of hearing, after he had humbly
bowed to the king spoke as follows. Mighty king, I am a Knight and a
stranger neither of your Court, Country, nor religion: but fortune casting me
upon this coast, it was my chance to meet with this Gentlewoman, sister to the
Duchess of Pannonia, whom you hold prisoner. This Gentlewoman travailed to
seek a knight whith would answer the accusation that the Duke her husband
lays against her, and lighting upon me she has opened to me the whole
treachery and packing of the Duke her husband, with the perjured Aridon of the
black wood. In the justifying of which words spoken by the Gentlewoman, and
the improuing of Aridons false and shameless slander, I am hither come to
prove that he belieth the Duchess upon his body. The king now and all which
were present beheld the Knight of the Sun very earnestly, and were abashed
to see him being so young speak so courageously. Aridon very angry rose up,
and to the knight of the Sun spoke on this wise.

Sir Knight, it appears thou art both young and a stranger in this Country,
for if thou were of years, or knew Arydon which now talks with thee,
thou would not be so hardy as to defy him in presence, and were it not
for the King my Lord, I would in some wise tell thee of thy rudeness, but
there needs no such have, I hope I shall have time enough, since thou can
not betract the battle, whereto thy self have first made offer, but let us
go to it presently, and end it in this place. Aridons high disdain sore
displeased the Knight of the Sun as appeared by his look, but he refrayned
for honor to the King, and for the rest he desired the king to authorize the
lists. The king answered him gentlye, that day it might not be, both for
that it was needful the Duchess of Pannonia should appear openly to put her
quarrel into his hands, and for that also Judges must be ordained of the
field, and the lists erected: which could not be provided in so short warning.
The knight of the Sun yielded to the kings pleasure, and after that he had
witnessed his forwardness to defend the Duchess, he took his leave of the
king, and to his host he goes. The king as soon as he was gone, by occasion
of this young knight, calling to mind his son Liriamandro whom he had not
heard of in long time, wept bitterly and said aloude that diverse heard it. If
my son Liriamandro be like to this lusty knight, and have a care to be
notable, no doubt he will excel all his ancestors. Whereat those which were
there by declared to the king what themselves had seen of this knight, and
how stronglye he had overthrown Florinaldes: which report did in a manner
discomfit Aridon, that he would have wished his stake out at that dealing with
all his heart, but indeed a very desperate contempt both of God and the world,
brought him to his end.

The battle between the knight of the Sun and the strong Aridon.

Cap. 54.
THe next day the king rose earlier then he was wont to do, because of the
battle which was to be made between Aridon and the Knight stranger. And
Aridon likewise made more have, nor the knight of the Sun falled for his
part. When all were in the field, the king caused the Duchess to be
brought, which came thither in a mourning weed, and with so sorrowful a
countenance, that no heart so stony but would have pittyed her, for she had
been very fair, always accounted as wise and honest, the king demanded of
her whether she would refer the trial of her cause to the success of her
knight, whether good or bad, whereto she answered yea, and that she had no
other help but in God and the innocence of her cause. So was she lead to a
scaffolde provided for her and other Gentlewomen. The Judges next were called
for, which were named by the king, the Duke of Austrich, and the Duke of
Saxony, two ancient Knights, and then restaunt in that Court. The Judges thus
placed, Aridon and the knight of the Sun took their Spears in their hands,
forcing themselves against each other. Now sounded a Trumpet and a Heralde
cried. Go too knights, and God defend the right. With this they ran together
with all the force they could: their encountrie was such that Aridon burst his
Spear and diseased not his enemy, but the knight of the Sun both hurst his
spear and unhorsed Aridon, and with the fall he gave him, almost burst his
back while he pained himself to keep the Saddl.

Aridon thus bruised lift up his eyes to heaven, and in despair of conscience
murmured to himself some like thing. Thou O God as I believe have sent this
young man from heaven to revenge my misreporte, otherwise who is he in this
world which might have sat so quiet in his Saddle after so violent a push as
I have given him, or who might have annoyed Aridon so, and with a desperate
rage he drew out his sword to have sheathed it in the knights horse belly, but
the knight descended, and with his sword before him went toward Aridon, that
between them the battle begins. The king and the Princess there present
were very glad to see so good a beginning of the Duchess deliverance. And
Aridon failed not to do his best, that the knight of the Sun could not but
take him for a strong knight, the battle endured a great while no man being
able to judge who had the better, till that the knight of the Suns courage
grew as his honor increased, for he was not angered at the first. The end of
this battle (for it was not long neither very equal) was in this manner,
Aridon hit the Knight of the Sun on the head-peece, that he bowed his knees
to the ground. Then the knight of the Sun gave him another that he
staggered with it, the second time Aridon hit the Knight of the Sun a blow
upon the head piece, where at the last time the knight of the Sun stretching
himself and following his blow, with all his might hit Aridon so sure, that
Aridon fell upon the ground, moving neither hand nor foot. The Knight of
the Sun thinking it to be but an amaze, stood still while Arydon might
recover again.

The whilst all the beholders much praised the Knight of the Sun for the
best Knight living, as well commending his courage as his actiuitie. The
Duchess Elisandra likewise having now some hope by her knight, gate her
color again, and her joy was as much as her husbands sorrow. But you have
not yet heard the worst of the wicked Duke, for Aridon revived: whom when the
knight of the Sun saw raising himself up, he came hastily, and holding the
point of the swoorde against Arydons throat he spoke saying. Thou shall dye
false Arydon unless thou confess the treason that thou have devised against
the Duchess, and if thou do dye in this obstinate mind of concealing so
great outrage, thou hazardest thy souls health. Aridon as it were half
awake, and yet not so loath to die as stricken with terror of his own
conscience, answered. Thy words have abashed me more then the death which
thou threatenest, the fault which I have committed, has bread a greater
horror in my flesh, but make the Judges come near and I will declare the whole.

The Knight of the Sun called the Judges, they coming near heard these
words of his own mouth, the substance of the Dukes shifting to wring his
wives inheritance to himself, in such manner as you have heard in Eliseas
report. The Judges straight ways declared it to the king, who detesting their
fact, caused the Duke to be apprehended, and both to be executed in that place.

For albeit many of his nobles entreated for their pardon, yet the king so
abhorred the villainy that naught auailed: and at this time was the law first
enacted in Hungary, that the law of punishment for whoordome, should stretch
as well to the man as to the woman, and that equal penalty should be assigned
to like offenders, whereas before the men escaped, the women only were in
danger. Now after this execution, the Duchess Elisandra was set at large,
and the Queen Augusta received her with great honor into her company. The
Knight of the Sun was very desirous to leave the City: but the king desired
much to know him, and to have him abide for some time in his Court. In the
time of his abode, the Knight of the Sun grew in more familiar acquaintance
with the king, and was much lyked of him, because he seemed to resemble the
Princess Briana, but one day the king importuning the young Knight to know
his kindred, used such like words.

Sir Knight, we thank you heartely for the pains that you have taken in the
Duchess of Pannonias behalf, and for the maintaining of her honor, whereby
if she have received commodity of living and avoiding shame: so have I
received some quietness in my Realm by the open detecting of such
malefactors, and their punishment will be occasion of fear in others: for
this cause I have willed you to stay here, as thereto I pray you heartely,
but I pray you let me know your name and where you were borne, for I know not
how to call you. The Knight of the Sun well nurtured in the Souldans Court,
after his humble thanks for his Majesty's most gracious proffer and the
promise of acceptaunce, being a thing in deed very convenient for the
certifieng of the Emperor, began as follows. For your majesty's favor I
shall most willingly do your highness service, and for the Duchess, I am
glad that the equity of her cause furthered my attempt, and for my name and
Country, I can better tell you the story of my life since I came to years,
then declare that. Yet am I called the Knight of the Sun by my device, and my
education has been in the Souldans Court at Babylon, thither I being brought
by the kings son in law, the king of Persia, when I was but a child, and as
it has been told me, found in a little boat upon the Sea, for my life
hitherto it has been in arms, and that do I mean to pursue. The king and
those which were with him were greatly amazed that he had come from so far a
Country, and had been found upon the Sea, and that he knew no more of his
estate, but they thought that he was of some noble birth. The king thanked him,
and in this order the Knight of the Sun stayed with the king Tiberio for
certain days, where he gained many friends, and one only enemy, by name
Florinaldes, which could not forget the shame received before his mistress,
although it had done him no scath: for in the end Albamira preferred him
before the Earl Orfeo. So as I say, yet Florinaldes seeing the honor of the
Knight of the Sun daily to increase, to the discredit of the borne Hungarian,
his stomach rose against him, and one day he set upon the Knight of the Sun
at unawares, but to his own loss, had not the knight of the Sun been more
merciful, after they were made friends. But let us break off this story to
dispatch the Prince of Lusitania out of England.

Don Siluerio demanded the Princess Oliuia for wife of the King Oliuerio.

Cap. 55.
THe great sorrow which the loss of Rosicleer caused in the court of king
Oliuerio, has ere this been declared to you, for all the good knights his
friends went to seek him, leaving the Court bare and naked for noble men, and
above all the Princess Oliuia was worst wringed, albeit her grief was not so
manifest. Now is there stayed in the Court the Prince Don Siluerio straungelye
surprised with the love of Oliuia, and using the help of his sister Rodasylua
to the persuading of Oliuia. One day the last I take it he unfolded his grief
unto her, telling her, that unless she found the means, he should here
leave his life in a far Country. The matter is mine old suit that you wot
off, my desire is, that at least I may be assured of her good will. Sure I am
if I move the king in it I shall obtain it. The Princess Rodasylua moved
indeed with her brothers affliction, promised the uttermost of her pains, and
within a while after she had some talk with the Princess about that matter,
her words tending to like effect.

Madame, you know right well the great love which since I came to this Court I
have borne unto you, and how I have done you service in all that I was able,
that which more is, in what manner I have absented my self from my parents
only to be in your company, which if you know and confess to be true, you
must likewise believe that, that which I shall say now, rather proceeds of
good zeal toward your honor, then of any purpose to work mine own
contentment, though I cannot deny but that if I obtain, it will content me
highly. But I do not besire the thing which stands not with your honor, and
for my pains reward seek I none, but that I may be heard.

If I err in ought wherein I shall counsel you, then may you blame me, and
yet I doubt not but when you shall have thoroughly examined the whole, you shall
rather impute the fault to lack of skill, than to any lack of good meaning,
and as I am certain that you have this same opinion of me without any
farther suspect, so will I tell you my mind flatly. You know that you are the
only inheritrixe of this kingdom, that your Father the king, my Lord, must
needs marry you with such a one as may equal your estate, both for the
natural care which he has over you in respect that you are his daughter, and
for the profit which shall thereby redounde to his subjects, which cannot be
well governed, the seat wanting a^rightfull heir: you are withal at this
time marriageable, my suite therefore is, that herein you will have a more
regard of the Prince Don Siluerio my brother, a worthy knight of personage
and valor, of an high birth, a kings son and heir, besides loving you so
entirely as he can nothing more, long has he endured this torment, and never
would bewraie it to any but to me, and I have hitherto suppressed it not to
molest you, now for compassion toward him whom I must love and honor, mine
own brother, I require this, that at least you show him some good
countenance, whereby he may be encouraged to demand you of the King your
Father, which suite shall not be impossible, if only your liking may be
won.

The Princess angry at the heart with this speech, for it was the thing most
contrary to her wish, replied shortly. Madame Rodasilua, if I had thought that
the zeal and love which hou have professed and I do confess had tended to
this issue, I should less have lyked your company, and I cannot think well
of it, that either you should break with me of such matters, or should have
communication thereaboutes with your brother, who as you say lacks boldness
to discover his affection, which cannot be, does he love so earnestly when he
vouchsafes not to speak unto me but by a messenger. I suspect your words,
perhaps if I had heard the man speak, I might have judged in his
countenance whether he had lied, yea, or no.

But for truth you know I am of young years at this instant, neither have I
will to marriage, I pray you therefore name it no more unto me, and yet when I
am of years I may not choose my husband, and I am at the Kings commandment
whom I must obey. The Princess Rodasylua so sharply rebuked by the Princess
Oliuia, and thereby gathering the lystle good will she bare unto her brother,
demanded pardon of her speech, and returned to her lodging, whether she sent
for the Prince Don Siluerio, and to him she told the whole talk, with the
Princess answer, willing him notwithstanding not to give over, but to make a
better show, as if her answer misliked him not, and covertly to labor to
the King for his consent. This can he not deny you, and after you may win
the Princess: for as yet her excuse is but of years.

The Prince liking her counsel, departed from the Princess his sister, and
the next day finding the King at leisure, he required his Majesty of a
secret matter. The King commanded those in presence to avoid, and took him
to a window, where the Prince after his duetye done, began on this sort.
With your graces favor (I trust) I have this long time ben a welwiller to your
daughter the Princess Oliuia, and to have her to wife, whereto if it might
please your highness to condiscende, I know my parents would well agree
thereto, for the great love which they bear to your Majesty, and to me their
son, and thereby should I take my self to be the best rewarded for my long
tarrieng, that ever Prince was: I humbly beseech your highness to let me know
your mind herein. The demand of the Prince was nothing strange to the king
Oliuerio, for he suspected this matter long before, and therefore his answer
was short, that he was content to accept him for son in law, as well for his
own worthiness, as for his birth, and for the friendship betwixt their
parents: yet says he, you shall give me leave to think thereon, and you shall
have a more resolute answer: the prince hoping yt his desire would take
effect. Now the King to know the Princess mind therein, went himself to
the princess lodging, where finding her alone, he counsayled her in this
sort. It has pleased God that the Prince Edward thy brother should be lost in
the realm of Hungary, I having none other child but thee, think it
convenient both for mine own liking, and the common profitte of my subjects,
to have thee married with some Prince of like estate. This have I thought on a
long time, and now upon mature deliberation had with some special of my
counsel, I have found one: a Prince which both for his power may, and for
his courage will, and for his nobility is worthy to bear swaye in so great
an estate as this is: him am I content to take for son in law, and to
commend my title unto you. This Prince is Don Siluerio Prince of Lusitania,
whom you know right well, a comely knight of personage, valiant in arms, of a
courageous spirit: above all, virtuous, and in his dealings circumspect,
courteous of speech, and of high estate, as I know few like. There are
besides to commend this march, the intercourse of traffic between our
subjects, and the friendship between his parents and me. Herein therefore
say your fancy, for so far as reason will, I am content to hear you. Thus
said the King. But the Princess whom these words more galled, then either
sword or spear, not knowing how to shifte off the King her father, and not to
answer his demand, stood in a maze for fear. The King seeing her so silent,
asked the cause why? she answered nothing yet a while. In the end forced to
say somewhat, she rather excused her silence then resolved the doubt: My Lord
and father says she, I have not answered you heth^r^^^, because I know not
how to do, neither may you now look for a full answer. The matter is so
strange unto ^ee, as that I never thought of it before, and your Highness
knows that I am of young years, and as yet I have no desire to marry, the
time grows on when I shall be of more age, end then perhaps shall I have more
desire, which when souer it falls out, shall be of your choice more then of
mine own. The king thinking that she had spoke as she meant, and that her young
age had been her only stay, took in good part this excuse, willing her
notwithstanding to remember what he had said. So the King departed and the
Princess remained somewhat better apayed by the Kings liking of her answer,
but her hope was, that Rosicleer would come, and that he being present, the
Kings mind might be altered as touching Don Siluerio, and for this cause she
made many a secret vow for his speedy return, but above all she looked for
Fidelia. The King at his return, caused Don Siluerio to be called, to whom
he declared his talk with his daughter, and her answer, adding moreover,
that hereafter he thought the matter possible enough, for her good liking,
besides his, whereof he might be assured. Don Siluerio was the gladdest man
alive and thanking the King for so high favor, for that time he departed from
the King, but the Princess grew to be more melancholic then before, for she
espied what courage he had taken by the comfort which the king had given him.
After Don Siluerio thinking the matter sure enough departed the realm with his
sister Rodasilua, where let us leave him, and turn to the Emperor Trebatio.

The Emperor Trebatio carried away the Princess Briana from the Monestarie
of the River.

Cap. 56.
IN great pleasure and contentation did the Emperor Trebatio remain with the
Princess Briana, at the monestarie of the River, where, by their continuance
together, their loves increased so toward each other, that either of them
delyghted in the other, and either of them thought themselves happy when they
were in the others company.

This love between them was in other manner, then that which arises by a
blast of beauty: and it endured so long between them, that neither years nor
sickness, nor death scarcely could once impair it, and for this loves sake
could the Emperor Trebatio willingly have forborne both kiffe and kindred, and
acquaintance in his own country: and for his love, durst the Princess
adventure to fly her fathers Realm, and to abandonne her self to unknown
passages, and to travail with Trebatio into Greece, As the Emperor Trebatio
finding opportunity told her that he had counseled with the Knight of the
Sun as touching their departure, by whom he understood that both for
themselves and for the King Tiberio it was meetest to depart, otherwise says
he, may the King your father be blamed for the death of the Prince Edward, and
our joy might find end if I were discovered, but for the dispatch of this
whole matter, he said that he would leave a letter in her chamber, wherein
should be showed both how and in what manner all things had been done which you
have heard of. The Princes yielded there to gladly, and between themselves
they provided things necessary for their departure, none being privy thereto,
but Clandestria and the other Gentlewoman. The day before the Princess should
depart, she told her Gentlewomen, that she had vowed nine days fast in her
lodging, charging that for that time none should trouble her, save that she
would have Clandestria as she was wont and this Gentlewoman for necessary
occasion. The Princess was thus wont to do very often, which made it
probable. The next day when all were ready and had voyded the Princess
lodging, the Emperor threw in his letter, and Clandestria shut the door:
So by the secrette posterne, they all departed. This was a good while before
day, and they took such horse as had been provided by the Princess. By the
opening of the morning they had ridden a pretty way, and the Princess being
weary turned out of the way to rest her self in a shade, as every thing made
her afraid and weary, till that Clandestria hastened her on, by saying that
she thought her business would be suspected, in that she fetched not the
broths as she was wont. So up to horse they go, and here breaks of the
first book, what happened by the way the second book declares. Now let us
remember by the way where we left our worthy princes, that when we have need
of them, we may there find them. The Emperor in his way to Greece: the
knight of the Sun abides in Tiberios court: Don Siluerio is upon the Sea
toward Lusitania: Rosicleer now departs from Thessalie after the
establishing of the kingdom to the Queen Arguirosa: Brandizel and Clauerindo
stay in the king of Polonias Court, where the Prince Brandizel makes love to
the Princess Clarinea: Zoylo Prince of Tartarie, Bargandel Prince of Bohemia,
and Liriamandro Prince of Hungary, all three together soiourne at the
Emperors Court of Trabisond, with the Princess Claridiana, a woman knight, of
whom this whole story specially entreats, but more at large hereafter. And
thus ends the first book.

FINIS.
A TABLE CONTAINING ALL THE Chapters which are in this book.
CAPVT. 1. The description of the kindred and choosing of the Emperor
Trebatio. Fol. 1. Cap. 2. The king of Hungary pretending a title to the
Empire, sets himself against the Emperor Trebatio. 3. Cap. 3. The Emperor
Trebatio by the hearesaie of her beauty was surprised with the love of the
Princess Briana. 5. Cap. 4. Prince Edward enters into Belgrado: the Emperor
bethinketh himself of his remedy. 7. Cap. 5. Prince Edward riding toward the
monestarie of the river, was by the Emperor Trebatio encountered and slain. 8.
Cap. 6. The Emperor Trebatio was received at the Monestarie by the Archbishop
of Belgrado, and there betrothed by the name of Prince Edward. 9. Cap. 7. The
Emperor Trebatio drives in his conceit the order how to consummate the
marriage, which in the end he brings to pass accordingly. 11. Ca. 8. The
Emperor Trebatio pursuing those which had stolen his Lady, left all his
knights, and took another way. 1^. Cap. 9. The adventures of the Emperor in
following the inchaunted chariot. 14. Cap. 10. The Emperors knights find not
their Lord, and the Hungarians miss the prince of England. 18. Cap. 11. The
Princess Briana takes great sorrow at the loss of Prince Edward. 19. Cap.
12. The Princess Briana was delivered of two sons* Clandestria christneth
them, and causes them to be nursed. 20. Cap. 13. The king of Boheme raised the
siege, and the king of Hungary returned the Princes knights into England. 22.
Cap. 14. Clandestria deuiseth with the princess Briana how her sons might be
brought up in her company. 23. Cap. 15. Donzel del Febo was lost by
misaduenture. 25. Cap. 16. The pedigree of the valiant Prince Florion, and
other matters as touching him. 29. Cap. 17. Prince Florion in his way
homewardes, finds by adventure the young Gentleman Clauerindo, son to the
king Oristeo king of France, and brings him with the Gentleman of the Sun
to Babylon. 31. Cap. 18. Prince Florion with the two young Gentlemen enters
Babylon, and were there honorably received by the Souldan. 35. Cap. 19. The
delivery of the Souldan by the Gentleman of the Sun. 36. Cap. 20. An adventure
in the court of the Souldan, which befell to the young Gentleman of the Sun.
41. Cap. 21. Donzel del Febo is dubbed knight, and overcomes Raiartes. 46.
Cap. 22. Africano king of Media and Persia, inferred war upon the Souldan of
Babylon. 50. Cap. 23. The knight of the Sun makes answer to Africano, as to
his letter. 52. Cap. 24. A cruel battle between the knight of the Sun and
Africano: with the discomfiture of Africanos host. 56. Cap. 25. The knight of
the Sun, the two Princes, Florion and Claueryndo, with a great host entered
into Persia and there put Florion in possession of the crown. 61. Cap. 26. The
knight of the Sun and the Prince Claueryndo being in their way toward
Babylon, were divided by a sodeine adventure. 63. Cap. 27. The Princess Briana
discovered to Rosicleer secretly that he was her son. 66. Cap. 28. Rosicleer
departed from the monestarie of the river, without the knowledge of the
Princess his mother. 68. Cap. 29. Rosicleer in Liuerbas name slaieth Argion
and remooueth the laws. 71. Cap. 30. Rosicleer departed from the valley of the
mountains, meets with two Princes christened, and by adventure is carried
from them again. 74. Cap. 31. Certain accidents which befell Rosicleer after
his departure ^^m the two Princes. 79. Cap. 32. The great feasts began in
Oliuerios Court. 82. Cap. 33. An adventure which chanced in king Oliuerios
court. 90. Cap. 34. A dangerous battle between Candramarte and Rosicleer.
93. Cap. 35. A Gentlewoman came to the court from the Princess Briana, which
made him follow Brandagedeon. 97. Cap. 36. A cruel battle between Rosicleer
and Brandagedeon, with his knights. 100. Cap. 37. Rosicleer and the two princes
seek adventures in the land of Britain, and the two Gentlewomen carry the
Giants body to Oliuerios court. 104. Ca. 38. The Gentlewomen brought the body
of Brandagedeon to the Court, and the Princesses receive the letters of their
knights. 160 Cap. 39. Arinda the Gentlewo^^^ belonging unto the Princess^ P^na,
told the bringi (...) ^^sicleer unto the Princess Oliuia. Fol. 113. Cap. 40.
Fidelia being on her way to carry the letter to Rosicleer, was taken by six
knights, and from them delivered by Rosicleer. 118. Cap. 41. The Princes,
Bargandel and Liriamandro retourning from the Forest, miss Rosicleer. 125.
Ca. 42. Rosicleers departure is published in the Court of king Oli^^rio, Oliuia
after knowledge whose son he was, reuerseth judgment, passed by a
countermaund in another letter, whereof Fidelia likewise is the bearer. 127.
Cap. 43. Rosicleer was betrayed into the Island of Candramarte, that Giant,
whose hands had been cut off before by Rosicleer. 131. Cap. 44. The knight of
the Sun was carried to the Island of Lindaraza, where he achieved many
strange and fearful adventures. Fol. 135. Cap. 45. The three Princes which
went in the quest of Rosicleer were transported into the Empire of Trabisond,
where chanced to them a fair adventure 149. Cap. 46. The two Princes,
Brandizel and Clauerindo, stale secretly out of the kingdom of Persia, to
find the knight of the Sun. 153. Cap. 47. Rosicleer departs from the Island
of Candramarte, and meets with certain adventures on the Sea. 156. Cap. 48.
The battle which Rosicleer had with Rolando. 161. Cap. 49. The Emperor
Trebatio and the knight of the Sun are in their way to the kingdom of
Hungary 163. Cap. 50. The Emperor and the knight of the Sun riding toward
the Monestarie of the river, are by an adventure separated. 165. Cap. 51. The
Emperor came to the monestarie of the river and there was made known to his
wife the Princess. 169. Cap. 52. The Knight of the Sun riding to the Court
of king Tiberio, iusteth with a knight for passage. 179. Cap. 53. The knight of
the Sun answered before the king Tiberio for the Duchess Elisandra, and
the battle was appointed between him and Arydon of the black wood. Fol. 172.
Cap. 54. The battle between the knight of the Sun and the strong Arydon.
173. Cap. 55. Don Siluerio demanded the Princess Oliuia for wife of the king
Oliuerio. 174. Cap. 56. The Emperor Trebatio carried away the Princess
Briana from the Monestarie of the river. Fol. 178.
FINIS TABVLAE.

