THE PICTVRE OF a Papist: OR, A Relation of the damnable heresies, detestable
qualities, and diabolical practices of sundry heretics in former ages, and of
the papists in this age.

Where in is plainly showed, that there is scarce any heresy which the
ancient Church knew, and withal condemned to the pit of hell, which the Romish
Church has not raked up again, and propounded to the world with new Varnish
and fresh Colors.

Together with a discourse of the late treason, and of the late execution of
some of the Traitors: wherein is showed the haynousnesse of their crime, and the
lawfulness of their punishment.

Written to stop the mouths of those, that complain of rigor, and scandalize
the state of cruelty, in their just severity.

Whereunto is annexed a certain treatise, entitled Pagano-Papismus: wherein is
proved by irrefragable demonstrations, that Papisme is flat Paganism: and
that the Papists do resemble the very Pagans, in above seuenscore several
things.

At London Printed for Nathaniel Fosbrooke, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the west end of Paul's. 1606.

To the Right Honorable, right virtuous, and most truly religions Earl,
Robert, Earl of Salisbury: principal Secretary to the Kings Majesty, Master
of the Wards and Lineries, one of his Highness most honorable pri^^e Counsa^le,
and Chancellor of the samous University of Cambridge.
IT is a notable policy, Right Honorable, yea the very cunningest stratageme
the devil has, to ^
transform himself into an Angel of light, he being a fiend of darkness.
And the same is, and ever has been the policy of his ministers and
instruments in all ages. For, the idolatrous Jews, thereby to inueigle simple
souls, shrouded themselves under the glorious titles of the ^
Children of Abraham, the ^
Scholars of Moses, ^
the temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. And the false Apostles in
Saint Paul's time, ^
transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ, as though they were the
Ministers of righteousness. As for the false teachers in the times next after
the Apostles, they did all set a fair gloss upon a foul matter, and bare the
world in hand, that the ^
Scriptures, the ^
Church, and all the Orthodox Ego babe^ testimonia sanctorum patrum ego defendo
patrum dogmata, etc* Dioscorus in Council. Chalced: Act. 1.
Fathers thereof, were on their side. And this their dealing may fitly be
paralleled by the practice of popish teachers at this day, in taking unto
themselves the title of the Catholic church, and in making great brags, that
their Catholics in their supplication to the kings majesty.
religion was bel^eued by all Primitive Pastors, established by all
oecumenicall Councels, vpheld by all ancient Doctors, and agreeable to the
sacred text of Gods word and Gospel. And by this very practice have the
Jesuits and Seminary Priests (who compass sea and land, to make many
Proselytes) ensnared many a seely soul in this land: and no marvel, seeing
that these are the times of which Christ foretold, that there should Math, 24
24.
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and should show great signs and
wonders, so that if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect: and
of which Saint Paul prophesied, that Antichrist should come 2. These* 2. 9* 10.
through the efficacy of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,
and in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish.

Nay, they have not not only set the mark of that Antichristian beast in
their forheades, and made them the children of error, as deeply as
themselves: but they have also sown the Cursed seeds of sedition in their
hearts, and do seek to make them as very Machiavelians, or rather as
matchelesse villains, as themselves,

With what cords of Papisme, and with what cartropes of machiavelisme, they
draw men to this their faith and faction (I should say, to their faith which is
faction), I have showed at large, in these two treatises following: which I
have thought good to publishe for no other purpose, but only (if the will of
God so be) to estrange peoples minds from them* to alienate their affections,
and to bring them quite out of love of their doctrine, and out of liking of
their persons. And I doubt not but these my labors will greatly move them
thereunto, the rather, if it will please your Honor to vouchsafe them your
countenance: to whose Patronage I here commend them both, as saint Luke did
both his Histories to the most Noble Theophilus: desiring hereby to testify
my humble duty unto your Honor, and my thankfulness to God for reserving
your Honor (who has religiously vowed nec deo, nec patri, nec patri patriae
vnquam deesse) unto these times, wherein so many bear a foreign and
unnatural conceipte, touching the god we serve, the Prince we obey, and the
Country we live in: yea, wherein Satan stretches all the strings of his wit,
renews al his heresies, reuiueth al his policies, and practices al his
treacheries. And so fearing to hinder the course of your serious cogitatio^s
and actions, I humbly take my leave; besee ching the lord long to preserve your
Honor, that the commonwealth for many years may enjoy such a Counsailour, our
University so Honorable a Chancellor, and poor Scholars (whom poverty
constrains to leave the University, and to wander up and down, and offer
their service, and serve for ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suite of
apparel, and meat and drink, as the poor Leuite Judge. 17. 10,
did in Michahs house) so favorable a Mecoenas.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, OLIVER ORMEROD.

To all favorites of the Romish faith and faction, peace and truth.
Caesar Baronius in the front of his book of Annals, places the picture of
the Romish Church in for me of a woman, with an he any wodden Cross on her
shoulders and the triple Crown upon her left hand with two great keys hanging
down under it, and on the one side setting these words vicit haereses and on
the other, subegit gentes*

That this your Romish Cardinal wants the oil of verity, to make his
colors cleave and endure, I hope to make it more then manifest in these two
treatises following, wherein his picture of the Romish Church is defaced, and
the true picture thereof pourtraied.

These my labors I commend to the blessing of the Almighty, ^ (...) 16. 14*
and you to his gracious protection, beseeching him to open your hearts, as he
opened the heart of Lydia: that you may attend unto the things which are
herein delivered. For unless it please the Lord to make you attentive, I
shall have b Master Fue^a^d Digby in his diswasiue from taking away the livings
and goods of the church, page 3.
just cause to say to this my little book, as the Father of an ungracious
child (alluding to the speech of the exiled poet) said to a learned book of
his: Parue nec inuideo: my little book I do not envy thee, nay, rather I
pity thine estate, since thou art now to pass into the world, whose ysie ways
ar opposite to God, and crauest attentive ears of those, whose foul
deformities thou openly displaiest.

^. (...) 13 11*
Finally brethren, fare ye well, be perfect, ^ Per. 2. 17.
fear God; honor the King: ^. C^r. 13, 11,
be of one mind; live in peace, and the god of love and peace shall be wirh
you.

To the gentle Readers, and to the biting Censurers.
PLutarch mentions a certain painter, who when he had made a goose and a
cock both alike, was feign to write over their heads for distinction sake*
this is a goose, this is a cock. I have now drawn ( courteous Readers) the
picture of a Puritan and of a Papist, and have set over their heads with
Plutarches painter, this is a goose, this is a cock: this is a Puritan, this
is a papist.

And since I drew the former, (I speak to you biting Ce^surers) I have found
that Poetical proverb most true pronounced by thar Ancient Alceus: (...),
under every stone there lies a serpent: for there are certain serpentine and
venomous tongued Puritanes, that have bruted abroad in london, that the Author
hereof, was an arrant papist, and either one of the late traitors, or a
special fauorer of their Religion. So that J have good cause to say of b
Master Perkins in his treatise of applying Gods word to the conscience page ^lt,
them as a zealous preacher said of them long since; The poison of Aspes is
under their lips.

But why art thou so vexed O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within
me? They have called the master of the house Beelzebub, much more those of the
household* they have called our reverend Fathers Petti-popes, and (as Elias said
in an c As I have showed in my Picture of a Puritan,
other case) am I better then my fathers? Nay the Bishop of our souls Christ
Jesus, when he was upon the earth, was slaundered of the Scribes, and pharisees
to be a drunkard and a glutton, a friend to publicans and sinners: and
think thou to live upon the earth, and that among the like slanderers, and
live without the like slanders? Thou art but the son of man, but thou ought
to say with the son of God, John 18, 37.
For this cause am I borne, and for this cause came I in to the world, that I
might bear witness unto the truth. Thou art ordained (as the Apostle says) to
approve thy self in all kind of patience: by honor and dishonor, by good
report and ill report, as a deceiuer, and yet behold thou art true, and as a
treacherous Papist, and yet behold, thou art a loyal Protestant To Conclude,
say to those Gnat-strainers and Camel-swallowers, If one name will not make an
idle book sell, the Stacioners will be Godfathers to it, and give it a new
name, and father it on an other man.
as saint Paul said to the like biting Censurers, and sharp-toothed Carpers in
his time: I pass very little, to be judged of you, or of man's judgment.

And thus I leave you, beseeching you to suspend your judgments of me, until
you see the True picture of a Protestant which I am now drawing and shadowing
with orient colors, wherein I purpose to make known to the world, in what
religion J have hitherto lived, and wherein I will die, though the world should
turn vpside down,

Nulladies sieve linea. A Postscript.
There is a certain book latelye published, entitled, the double PP, *alias,
the picture of a Jesuit, altas the picture of a traitorous Jesuit: which some
in london have reported to be of my drawing: But be it known unto you, that I
am so far from being the Author of that frivolous Pamphlet, as that J hold
both it, and another that was thrown abroad upon the stage at the late
execution of the traitors, together with many other Among the rest there is one
book lately printed against the Papists, wherein the author ^latly denies the
Epistle of Saint James to be Canonical scripture. It is a very un fit thing,
that histrionicall iesters and stage players should be suff^ed to writ books
of such matters and in deed a great disgrace to our Religion.
toys lately printed against the Papists, as fit for the fire as the
coniuring books in the 19 of the Acts, verse, 19, And were J worthy to give
mine advise to those that are in authority, those that did publish any such 2.
Cor 68 2 Cor 43,
Pha^tastical books hereafter, as the double PP is, should have for their
pains, either a single Greek P, or at the least, nigrum theta.

The Picture of a Papist: OR A Relation of the damnable heresies, detestable
qualities, and diabolical practices of sundry heretics in former ages, and
of the Papists in this age: compiled in form of a Dialogue, or conference
between a Minister and a Recu^ant.
The first Dialogue.
Wherein is proved, that the Papists are Staurolatrians, or Chazinzarij.



The Recusant. Ve caput Christ's gratum, a Oration ad quisque plegas Jesus Christi
in com. suffrag. sol. 137.

duris spinis coronatum:
nos conserua, ne

The Minister. A How now neighbor, have I found you crouching to a Crucifixe?


The Recusant. Sir, what make you here?


The Minister. Sir, I am to confer with you.


The Recusant. To confer with me? What authority have you?


The Minister. I have authority sufficient: for it was decreed in the late
Synod holden at London, that Synod. Lond^nens. cau. 66.
every Minister being a Preacher, and having any Popish Recusant or Recusants
in his Parish, and thought fit ^y the Bishop of the Diocese shall labor with
them diligently from time to time, thereby to reclaim them from their errors.


The Recusant. Well, let me make an end of my prayers, and then I will come and
confer with you.


The Minister. No neighbor, God loves alacrity in his work; excuses he much
disliketh. The delay that Elizeus made, let me go kiss my father; and those
shifts in the Gospel, let me go bury my father, or take leave of my frinds,
are not admitted in the Lords business: noe more is this of yours, let me
make an end of my prayers.


The Recusant. Yes, I pray you give me leave.


The Minister. I pray you entreat me not: for I dare not give you leave to
commit idolatry.


The Recusant. Idolatry? do you charge me with idolatry?


The Minister. It is an old saying, and I see that it is true, not only in
corporal whoredom, but inspirituall Prou. 30. 20
an adulterous woman eats; and after wipeth her mouth, and says, I have not
committed iniquity. With what face can you deny your self to be an idolater?
have I not taken you in ipso facto?


The Recusant. You have taken me indeed praying before a crucifixe; but I hope
you account not that Idolatry.


The Minister. Yes, Saint Ambrose tells you, that to worship the Crucifixe is
gross idolatry: and before him d Ambros. de obitu Theodo^^.
Arnobius made this answer in the behalf of all true Christians: Arnob. aduers
Gentes, lib. 8.
Cruces nec colimus nec optamus: vos plane quiligneos deos consecratis, cruces
ligneas, vt deorum vestrorum parts, forsitan adoratis: We neither worship
crosses, nor wish for them, you that consecrate wooden Gods, ^ Chaz^s crux est
NicephorM. lib, 18. cap. 54.
de happily adore wooden Crosses, as parts of your Gods. In a word, you may as
justly be termed *Chazinzarij and Staurolatrae, as the Armenij* for you
worship the f Euthymius in Panoplia, et Nicephor, H^s^^ib, 18 cap, 54,
Cross of Christ as well as they.


The Recusant. No we worship not the Cross it self, but Christ h Alexand. de
Hales, part 3, quaest, 30 art, v^t,
that was crucified on the Cross.


The Minister. i Greg, de, Valentia, tom, 3, de ^d^ lolat. punct, 6, k B^liarm.
de i. mag. lib, 2. ca. 23
Yes, Them. Aquin, part 3. quest, 25 art. 4.
Thomas Aquinas, Alexander de Hales, Gregory de Valentia, and the rest of your
chiefest doctors do teach, that Crucifixes are to be worshipped with the very
same worship, wherewith Christ himself is to be worshipped.


The Recusant. I Answer with Cardinal Bellarmine, that albeit Crucifixes are
to be worshipped with the same worship; yet is it with respect to Christ; and
that the worship passes by the image to him.


The Minister. This shift will not serve your turn; for to co-adore the
crucifixe with CHRIST, is palpable Idolatry, as may be proved by the
determination of the Council of Ephe^u^.


The Recusant. How I pray you?


The Minister. Nestorius conceived the manhood of Christ to be a distinct
person from the word, or son of GOD: and withal he framed a co-adoration
whereby this manhood was to be adored with the word. Now the Counsel of
Ephesus condemned this co-adoration: in like sort may we condemn your
coa-doration of the crucifixe with Christ. But to leave this particular, why
did you bow your knees, and lift up your eyes, and hands to the crucifixe?


The Recusant. Why may I not?


The Minister. Why? because God requires this outward honor of eyes, hands
and knees as due to him alone, Isay, 45. 2^
I have sworn (says he) by my self: the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness: and shall not return, that every knee shall bow unto me.
Ephesians, 3, 14,
For this cause, (says n Lamen, 3, 48*
Paul) I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let vt lift up
our hearts with our hands (says the Prophet Hieremie) to God in the heavens.
And Psalm. 123, ^.
I (says the Psalmist) lift up mine eyes to thee, that dwell in the heavens*


The Recusant. ^ If this honor of eyes, hands, and knees, be due to God alone,
then why do you give it to your parents and Magistrates?


The Minister. God allows parents and Magistrates that present his person in
blessing and judging, to have some part of his external honor: and in that
respect do we lift up our hands to them, and bow our knees before them. But
as for Images, God himself has made a flat prohibition, that they shall have
no part of his honor, Exodus, 20, 5.
Thou shall not (says he) bow down to them.

But I pray you Sir, what is the principal cause that moves you, to keep this
crucifixe in your house?


The Recusant. Truly to pu^ me in remembrance of Christ's bitter passion forr y
sins; and to stir up my self to sorrow, compassion and tears, by
considering the pitiful handling of Christ upon the Cross.


The Minister. I cannot but judge you to be not only very dull, but wicked,
that cannot remember Christ crucified, except you have a crucifixe before your
eyes, to kindle your appetite, and to move your heart with such a carnal
commiseration and pity, as we often find in our selves, when we see
deserved torments inflicted upon malefactors. Let me therefore entreat you,
to content your self with such means as God himself has commended unto you*
thereby daiely to renew the memory of your redemption; and not to devise such
your self, as serve only to provoke you to a natural and humane affection.


The Recusant. What means has God commanded unto us, to put us in mind of
the passions of Christ.


The Minister: Truly, the true preaching of the word of God, and the right
administration of the Sacraments.


The Recusant. Is there any representation of Christ's passion in these two?


The Minister. Yes, there is as lively a representation of the passion of
Christ, in the preaching of the word and in the administration of the Lords
Supper, as if Christ were yet in crucifying, and as though his precious blood
were now distilling from his hands, and sides. This appears by the very
words of the Apostle Saint Paul, who taxes the Galathians, saying: Gal, 3.
O foolish Galathians who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the
truth: to whom Jesus Christ before was described in your sight, and among you
crucrified, that is, to whom was preached the doctrine of salvation by Christ,
in as lively and evident manner, as if Christ had been painted with orient
colors before your eyes, and crucified, in, or among you. As for the
administration of the Lords Supper, the same Apostle tells you, that, Cor,
ii, 23 24. 25
the Lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and said, take eat: this is my body, which is
broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me. He said not, keep y^
Crucifixes in your houses in remembrance of me.


The Recusant. Although he said not so; yet I see no reason, but that we may as
lawfully paint Christ in our houses with colors, as you paint him with words
in Sermons, and in the administration of the Lords Supper:


The Minister. Sir, there is not the like reason: for the Lord allows the
one, namely the description of Christ in speech, and in the administration of
the Lords Supper. But the other, to wit, the caruing or painting of his image
in your houses, and that for a religious use* he utterly condemns in the
twenty of Exodus, saying: Exodus, 20. 4.
Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the
waters under the earth.

But I marvel, that you stand thus in defense of Images, seeing that all the
ancient fathers, whom you pretend to be on your side, do in express words
condemn the use of the^: and are so far from teaching you with your late
writers, that images are Laymens books, as that they tell you with the Haba.
2, 18
Prophet HABACVK, that they are teachers of lies.


The Recusant. Do the ancient fathers condemn the use of Images? Which of them
I pray you?


The Minister. Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of his time, says this Clemens,
Alexand. orat, exh^^tat, ad Gentes, et in 6, Strom.
not is non est ^nago sensilis de materia sensili, sed quae percipit^r
intelligentia* etc. With us there is no Image that is material, and seen with
eyes, but only such as is perceived by the understanding and inwardman,
because that God, who is the only true God, is apprehended by the
understanding and inward man, and not by the outward senses.

And of the same mind is the other Clement, as appears by these his words
Clemens epis^ Rom, de Ia^ob fratre Dom, lib. 5
run not unto these Images of wood and stone, to honor pictures and images,
that have no soul. Again, this is nothing else but the suggestion of the old
serpent, who makes you believe, that you are very devout, when you honor the
insensible things. Yea, he cries out saying; What manner of impiety, and how
great ingratitude is it to receive the benefit from God, and to give thanks
unto sticks and stones.

Tertullian likewise says, that Tertul. de cor. mil.
it is great indignity, that the Image of the living God, should be translated
into the Image of an Idol, or of a thing that is dead. And answering an usual
objection, he says: Tertul. de id^^a^
It is noe hurt that the same God by his law forbad a similitude, to be made,
and by an extraordinary precept commanded the similitude of the brazen serpent
to be set up. If thou will obey God, thou have his law, make thee no
similitude. If thou look to the precept that was given after for making a
similitude, then see thou imitate Moses* make no image against the law, unless
God bid thee as he badde Moses.

And Arnobius pointing at the true image of God says thus, Arnob, contra
(...), 8
Quam imaginemdeo faciomus, cu^as im^go, si recte iu^ic^mus* homo est: what
image shall I ma^e to God, whose image, if we judge aright, man himself is

Lactantius, also affirms, that there is no religion, where Images are
worshipped. Lactant, lib, 2* Instit. (...) c. 18,
Non est dubium (says he) qum religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrum est.

With him agrees S, Austen, saying: Aug, ^e^onsen^u E^ang. lib* 1, c. 10
errare meruerunt qui Christum and Apostolos eius non in sanctis e^dici^us, sed
p^ctis parietibus quaesierunt. They are worthy to be deceived that seek Christ
and his Apostles, not in the holy Scriptures, d Or^g co^tra Cells, lib. 7,
but inpainted walls.

And not to stand any longer upon this particular, (...), lib, 1, cap, 24*
Irenaeus, Origin, Athanas. contra Gent,
Athanasius, Epiphan. ad 1. ban. Hierosol.
Epiph^nius, Chrysostom, in Gen, cap, 31, homil. ^ 7.
Chrysostom, (...). (...), 3
Hierom: and the rest of the ancient fathers do fully subscribe to the same
truth. Yea, the whole Counsel of Eliberis detested painted and carved images,
and banished them quite out of their Churches, as idols. Council, Elibert, ca^,
36.
Placuit (say they) picturas in ecclesius esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut
adoratur, in parietibus depingatur. We have decreed that pictures ought not to
be in Churches, least that which is worshipped or adored, ^e painted on walls,


The Recusant. Although the Council of Eleb^ris did banish Images out of their
Churches, and would not suffer them to be adored: yet the second Council of
Nice did authorize both the having of them, and the adoring of them.


The Minister. What tell you me of the second Council of Nice? that Council
was not held till almost eight hundredth years after Christ. Secondly, I
answer you that their authorizement of images wa^ted universality: for there
was shortly after a Synod of the Bishops of France, Italy and Germany (in
which Charles the great, and the Legates of the Bishop of Rome were present)
that condemned the second Council of Nice, as heretical.


The Recusant. How prove you that?


The Minister. I prove it by the testimony of Huicmarus Archbishop of Rhemes
who lived when these things were fresh in memory. His testimony is this.
Huicmarus Rhemens. c^nt^ Hui^mar. Ian da^ensi* episc. cap 20
The seventh general Counsel so called by the Graecians (indeed a wicked
Counsel) touching Images, which some would have to be broken in pieces, and
some to be worshipped, was kept not long before my time, by a number of Bishops
gathered together at Nice, and sent to Rome, which also the Bishop of Rome
directed into France. Wherefore in the reign of Charles the great (and the sea
Apostolic willing it so to be) a general Council was kept in Germany, by
the convocation of the said Emperor, and there by the rule of the s^ripture,
and doctrine of the fathers, the false Council of the Graecians was confuted,
and utterly retected: of the confutation whereof was a good big book sent to
Rome by certain Bishops from Charles, which in my young years I read in the
Palace.

Thus you see, how that Images were not established in Churches in these west
parts of the World, till almost eight hundredth years after Christ.


The Recusant. Well, be it granted, that other images were not established in
churches before that time: yet it seems by the testimonies of Lactant cari^,
de passione.
Lactantius, M^^^t ^^^l, in Oct^uio.
Minutius Faelix Tertul, lib, 3. ^^ntr. Marcion.
Tertullian, and Chrysostom. ^o^^il. 55. i^. Math.
Chrysostom, that Crucifixes were used in the times next the Apostles.


The Minister: No, they were not publicly received in the Church till above
seven hundred years after Christ: for it was not decreede till about that
time, that the image of Christ should be set up, Synod Trullens. ^an. 82,
proveteri agno, (that is) in the Room of Agnus Dei. As for the ancient
fathers that you allege to prove the contrary; they speak not of the formed
Crucifixe, but of the real Crucifixe, thatis, of Christ himself crucified
upon his own proper Cross.

To make an end now of this days conference, Iexhort you, as Saint Paul did
his auditors at Lystra, to turn, Act. 14. 15,
(...), from these vain, foolish and paltry Idols. And to break this your
Crucifixe in pieces, and the rest of your Images.


The Recusant. Break my Crucifixe in pieces? marry God forbid.


The Minister. If you will not, I will.


The Recusant. Will you?


The Minister. Yes, see here.


The Recusant. What reason is there, that you should thus break my Crucifixe
in pieces?


The Minister. Truly, great reasons: for it is Gods commandment, that we
should Exodus, 34. 13.
overthrow the altars of idolaters and break, their images in pieces, and cut
down their groves: We have also the examples of sundry godly men, as fit
paternes for our imitation herein. To begin with Moses, Exodus 32 20,
He took the Calse which the Israelites had made, and burned it in the sire,
and ground it unto powder, and strewed it upon the water, and made the children
of Israil drink of it.

Hezekiah likewise 2, reg. 13. 4.
took away the high places, and brake the images and cut down the groves, and
brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made, and called it Neh^shtan
that is, a piece of brasle.

Lo here you see, that though the brazen Serpent was an ordinance of God a
figure of Christ, and a monument of the Israelites deliverance from fiery
Serpents in the Wilderness, yet when it was abused to idolatry, this good
King brake it in pieces, and (not thinking it worthy to be called a Serpent)
called it (by contempt) Nehushtan, a piece of brass.


The Recusant. I see that Kings may lawfully break images in pieces: but it
follows not, that you may therefore lawfully do the same.


The Minister. Yea but Epiphanius also, though he was no King; yet finding a
painted cloth in the Church of Anabletha by Jerusalem, he did Epiphan. epist an
Johan. Hierosolymit.
(as he himself reports) tear it in pieces, and pronounced that painted
imagery, notwithstanding it represented Christ or one of the Saints, to be
quite contrary to the sacred scriptures. And thus for this time I leave you;
trusting that you will not impute that to me as a vice, which in Epiphanius is
accounted as a virtue.


The Recusant I cannot but impute thi^ unto you as a vice; because it appears
hereby, that you are an enemy to the Cross of Christ, and are ashamed thereof.


The Minister. No sir, August. de ver bu Apost. ^erm, 8
Non pudet nos crucifixi; sed in part vbi signum pudoris cst, signum crucis
eins habemus. We are not ashamed of him that was crucified; but in that part
where the sign of shame is, have we the sign of the Cross. And for mine own
part, Aug, in Psa. 141,
Vsque adeo de cruce non erubesco, vt non in occulto loco habea^ crucem
Christi, sed in front portem: I am so little ashamed of the Cross of Christ,
as that I bear it, not in a secret place, but in my forhead. Yea, I am so
far from playing either the Insultet P^ga ^us (...) Christ, videa^ ego in
front ^as r^gum ciucens Christi, Aug. in Psalm, 141.
Pagan or Puritan, as that when I Baptize any, Iu^^^us Martyral Orth^ ^oxos,
a^ quest, 118 a Bu^er.
Dextramanu in nomine Christi eos consigno. With my right and ^^gne then, in
the ^ame of Christ. a Signum hoc nontam quo^ est vsu^ inecclesits anti
quissimi, quam quod est adm^^um simplex, and praese it is admonitionis crucis
Christi, adhiheri neciu decens necinuttle existimo si adhibeatur modo pure
intellectum and religiose excipiatur, nulla superstitione adiuncta, etc. And I
hold it neither unseemly, nor unprofitable, that the sign of the Cross
should be used in Baptism, not so much, because it is of that long time and
continuance in the Church, as that it is of so good use, and tends to such
good end, as being most simple and of present admonition, as putting us in mind
of the Cross of Christ, so it be rightly understood and religiously
entertained, wihout any addition of superstition,


The second Dialogue.
Wherein is plainly showed, that the Papists do give that honor to the Saints
which is due to God alone: and that a great part of their Popish Letanie, was
composed by the heretic Gnapheus and his fellows.



The Recusant. SAncta Maria. Ora pro nobis (...) Rom, (...) 8^ 86.
Sancta dei Genitrix. Ora. Sancta Virgo Virginum. Ora. Sancte Michael. Ora.
Sancte Gabriell. Ora. Sancte Raphael Ora Omnes sancti angeli et Archangeli Dei,
Orate pro nobis Omnes sancti beatorum spirituum ordines; Orate pro nobis Sancte
Johannes baptista, Ora Omnes sancti Patriarchae et Prophetae, Orate pro nobis
Sancte Petre, Ora, Sancte Paul, Ora Sancte Andrea, Ora Sancte Johannes, Ora
pro Nobis Sancte Iacobe, Ora Sancte Thoma, Ora Sancte Philippe. Ora Sancte
Iacobe, Ora Sancte Matthee, Ora Sancte Bartholomee, Ora pro nobis Sancte Simon,
Ora Sancte Tathee, Ora Sancte Matthia Ora Sancte Barnaba, Ora Sancte Marce, Ora
Sancte Luca Ora Omnes sancti Apostoli and Euangelistae, Orate pro nobis Omnes
sancti discipuli and innocents, Orate pro nobis Sancte Stephane, Ora Sancte
Line, Ora Sancte Clete. Ora Sancte Clemens. Ora pro nobis Sancte Sixte, Ora
Sancte Corneli, Ora Sancte Cypriane Ora Sancte Laurenti. Ora Sancte Vincenti.
Ora pro nobis Sancte Cosma. Ora Sancte Damiae, Ora. Sancte Fabiane. Ora. Sancte
Sebastiane. Ora. Sancte Prime. Ora. Sancte Fae^ciane. Ora p^o^ bis Sancte
Thoma. Ora. Sancte Erasme. Ora, Sancte Edmunde. Ora. Sancte Christophere. Ora.
Sancte Georgi. Ora pro nobis Sancte Blasi. Ora. Sancte Adriane. Ora. Sancte
Dionysi, cum s^cijs tuis. Ora. Sancte Maurici cum socijs tuis. Ora. Sancte
Gereon cum socijs tuis, Ora, Omnes sancti Martyrs Orate pro nobis Sancte
Edmunde, Ora, Sancte Withelme, Ora Sancte Siluester, Ora Sancte Leo, Ora pro
Nobis Sancte Hieronime, Ora Sancte Augustine, Ora Sancte Ambrosi. Ora Sancte
Gregori, Ora Sancte Isidore, Ora Sancte Iuliane, Ora pro nobis Sancte Gilderde,
Ora Sancte Medarde Ora Sancte Albine Ora Sancte Swithune, Ora Sancte Berme, Ora
Sancte Lamberte Ora Sancte Martine, Ora Sancte Antoni, Ora Sancte Nicholae, Ora
pro nobis Sancte Leonarde. Ora Sancte Erkenwalde Ora Sancte Edmunde, Ora Sancte
Benedicte Ora San cte Dunstane, Ora Sancte Cuthberte Ora pro nobis Omnes sancti
confessores, Orate pro nobis Omnes sancti Monachi et Eremitae, Orate pro nobis
Sancta Maria Magdalena, Ora Sancta Maria Aegiptiaca, Ora Sancta Anna, Ora
Sancta Susanna, Ora Sancta Katherina, Ora Sancta Margareta Ora Sancta Perpetua,
Ora Sancta Faelicitas Ora pro nobis Sancta Genouefa, Ora Sancta Praxedis, Ora
Sancta scholastica, Ora Sancta Petronilla, Ora Sacta sotheris, Ora Sancta
Prisca, Ora Sancta Tecla, Ora pro nobis Sancta Afra, Ora Sancta Editha, Ora
Sancta Barbara, Ora Sancta Helena, Ora Sancta Apollonia, Ora Sancta Agatha, Ora
Sancta Lucia. Ora Sancta Agnes. Ora pro nobis Sancta Christina, Ora Sancta
Scytha, Ora Sancta Cecilia, Ora Sancta Wenefreda. Ora Sancta Fredesweda, Ora
pro nobis Sancta Gertrudis. Ora Sancta Othilia, Ora Sancta Brigitta, Ora Sancta
Vrsula cum sodalibus tuis, Ora Sancta Wilgefortis, Ora Omnes sanctae Virgins
Orate pro nobis Omnes sanctae viduae et continentes. Orate pro nobis Omnes
sanctiet sanctae Dei. Orate pro nobis


The Minister. O gross! what a number of Gods have you?

I^^enal in satyr.
Nec turba Deorum
Talis vt est hodie, contentaque sydera paucis
Numinibus, miserum vrgebant Atlanta minore
pondere.
There were not wont to be so many Gods, as now a days; the heavens were
content with a smaller number of them, and laid less burden upon the
shoulders of poor. Atlas.


The Recusant. Gods? Bellar^. de beatitud. Sanct. lib. ^ cap, 19,
We make them not our Gods, but our intercessours only to God for us.


The Minister. Yes, you make them not your intercessours only, but your
protectors, and you hope not only to be heard by their intercession, but to
be saved by their merits: for of Gregory, you say thus in your prayers.

Hic nos saluet a peccatis
Vt in Coelo cum beatis
Possimus quiescere.
That is, let him save us from our sins, that in heaven we may rest with the
blessed. And of Sabbas you say: Missal, Rom ^x council Trid^at (...)* in (...)
D^c^mbr^, p^ge 5.
Let blessed Sabbas by making intercession for us, protect us, O Lord: and of
all the Apostles in general. Missal* Rom, in prefat, ^eria^^ de Apo^^o^is.
by thy Apostles keep us, continua protectione, with thy continua^l
protection. And of Saint Peter and of Saint Paul in particular: (...), Romans
Concede vt amborum meritis, aeternitatis gloriam consequamur: grant that by
the merits of them both we may obtain eternal glory. And of Mathias:
Missal, Rom, in festis februarij page. 38,
persancti Mathiae orationem nos expiari facias et defendi: by the prayer of
Mathias make us to be cleansed from our sins, and defended. And Missal, Rom* in
festis Ianuarij page 27.
let not the prayer of Saint Chrysostom be wanting unto us; quae et munera
nostra conciliet, and tuam nobis indulgentiam semper obtineat, which may both
cause our gifts to be accepted, and also obtain thy pardon for us.

As for the Virgin Marie, you make intercession to her, not only by
requesting, but also by meriting; yea, by commanding; as appears by this
speech of Damianus: Damian sermon. 2 de not* Mari^*
Accedis ad illud aureum reconciliationis altar, non solum regens, sed etiam
imperans, non ancilla sed domina: thou have access unto that golden Altar of
reconciliation, not only governing, but also commanding; not an handmaide, but
a Lady. And you apply that unto her, which in the Psalms is spoken of God the
father and the son: for thus you pray: In te Domina speraui, miserere mei
Domina: dixit dominus dominae mea, sede matter mea adextris meis, etc. that is,
in thee O Lady have I put my trust, O Lady have mercy upon me, the Lord said
unto my Lady, O my mother sit thou on my right hand, etc. And thus, Missal.
parisiens.
O foelix p^erpera,

Nostrapiaus scelera,
Iure matris impera
Redemptori.
That is, O happy mother, which d^est purge away our sins, by thy mothetly
authority command our redeemer. And again

Oration ad bea^. Mariam in co suff^ag, fol, 57.
D^le culpas miserorum,
Terge sordes peccatorum,
Dona nobis beatorum
Vitam tuis precibus,
Blot out the sins of us miserable wretches, wipe away the filthiness of us
sinners, and by thy prayers give unto us the life of the blessed.

Yea, you commend your selves unto her alone, saying.

O regina poli
Matter gratissimaproli
Spernere me noli,
Me commendo tibi soli.
O Queen of heaven, mother most dear to thy son, do not thou despise me,
unto thee alone I commend me. And you exclude our Savior Christ from his
office of redemption, and make her Innocentius in orat, ^e 300, di^r. indulgent.
Desperatorum spem vnicam, peccatorum saluatricem, The only hope of them that
are in despair, and the savior of sinners: You do also hold it lawful to
say the Pater noster to saints; and to say unto them vide Fox. Act. et mon.
page, 1274.
hallowed be your names, because God has made their names holy, and that their
kingdom may come, because the kingdom of heaven is theirs by possession: and
farther that their wills may be done, seeing that their will is Gods will: and
so of the other petitions.

But to adioyne one answer more, though you did but pray unto saints, as
intercessors only. Yet thereby do you make them Gods* and consequently idols:
for by praying unto them you acknowledge that they have power to hear and
help in all places, and at all time, s and that they know the secrets of your
hearts. Now to hear and to discern the very heart, is a proper action of the
Godhead: for the Lord (as Solomon says) 1. Reg* 8. 39.
only knows the h^arts of the children of men. Prayer also is a proper part
of Gods worship, as Christ our savior teaches, saying, Matthew: 4 10.
Him only shall t^ou serve. Now then it follows by necessary consequent,
that you make the saints Gods, by your ascribing to them the proper actions of
the Godhead, and by giving that to them, which is Gods in property: for to
what thing soever the glory that is due unto God, is ascribed; it is made
another God, as appears, by these places of scripture, Gen, 30. 2. Am I as
God who has deprived thee of the fruit of the womb, 2. Reg. 5. 7. Am I a God
to kill and to give life, Isay, 48. 11. My glory will I not give to any other.

But to proceed, how do you prove, that the Angels, the Virgin Mary, and the
rest of the saints, do hear our prayers, and make intercession for us: and
that we are to pray unto them.


The Recusant. Our chiefest argument is drawn from the testimonies of the
ancient fathers.


The Minister. From the ancient fathers! I have perused some of them, yet
could I never find in them any ground for this matter. Nay I find much to the
contrary. To begin with Saint Origin he tells us, Ori^, contra Cels^m lib,
5,
Quod omnia vota, omnes interpellationes, deprecationes, et gratiarum actiones
destinandae sunt ad deum rerum omnium dominum, that all vows, all requests,
prayers, and thanksgiuings, are to be directed to God the Lord of all
things: Ibid.
and that none should dareto offer prayers, nisi soli dommo deo, but only unto
the Lord God. And what need we to ofter our prayers to any but to him? Ambr.
s^in epist ad, Rom, 1.
ad deum promerendum suffragatore non opus est, sedmente deuota: to win God
unto us we need none to speak in our behalf, but only a devout mind.
Chrys^st* de paenitentia, hom. 5.
Let us therefore (to use Saint Chrysostomes words) fly unto God, who is both
willing and able to ease our miseries. If we had a suit to men, we must first
meet with porters and warders, and persuade parasites and iesters, and
oftentimes go a great way. But in God there is no such thing. Sine mediatore
exorabilis est, sine pecunia, sine impensa precibus annuit, without a mediator
he is to be entreated; and he yields unto our prayers withoutmony, and
without v Lactant, divine. Iustit, 2, 17.
cost and charges. Yea, it is but in vain for us to offer any such honor to
the Angels and saints: u nullum enim sibi honorem tribui volunt, quorum henor
in deo est, for those whose honor is in God, will have no honor gine^ to the^.
But to give you a blow with the hammer of heretics August de cura promortuis
gereda, cap, 15.
saint Augustine, was persuaded, that if the dead did know the actions of the
living, and understand the secret thoughts of the heart, that then his mother
Monica, who loved him dearly in her lifetime, would sometime have appeared to
him after her death: and that she being in a life offarre more felicity,
would not have grown so cruel toward him. But he says, that she was never
present with him, neither by dream, nor any apparition whatsoever, and
therefore he suspected greatly, that she had no knowledge of him. Yea, Aug.
ibid
he alleged Isai. 63. 16. Doubtless thou art our father: Though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord art our father and
our redeemer: and thy name is for ever.

Which confession of the people, made him to think, that the dead do not know
the deeds of the living. Ibid.
He alleged also 2. Reg. 22, 20, where it is said, that Josias was taken
away; that he might not see the evil, which was to come upon the Land.

But not to stand any longer hereuppon; your Angelical Doctor acknowledges,
that the souls of those that are departed out of this life, do Exse. Aq^^n
part, 1, quae^ 89 art, 8,
of themselves know nothing that is done here below upon the earth. The place
of Scripture that made him acknowledge this was Job. 14. 21. Where it is said,
that a dead man does not know, if his sons shall be honorable, neither does
he understand concerning them, whether they shall be of low degree. And
truly this is a very pregnant place: for if a dead man do not know that
which is sensible to the eye of man; how is it possibly that he should know
the secrets of men's hearts, which are insensible, and cannot be seen but by
the all-seeing eye of God.


The Recusant. Sir, although you can find no ground for this matter, in the
writings of the ancient fathers, yet I can: for I find that S. Austen
himself, prayed both to the Aug, in sermon. 19, de San^^.
Virgin Mary, and to Aug in med^a tiombus.
other Saints, and that he was of opinion, that the Aug, de vera Relig, cap, 55,
Angels do both hear our prayers, Aug, ^pt^^, 120
and deliver our prayers unto God, yea that we may Aug, tra^^, 84. in Johan,
pray to the Martyrs that they may pray for us, that we may walk in g Aug
co^fess, 93
their steps. q He did also verily think that his friend Nebridius did think
on him in heaven. And before him S. Chrys^n ps^ 8
Chrysostom, made mention of the intercession of the Virgin Marie, and of
other of the saints. And in the works of Gregory Nazianzene, I find certain
prayers of his both to the Virgin Gre^, naz^anz, ^^^, 29.
Marie, and to Orat, 31,
Athanasius. Join hereto the testimony of saint Hieron, epist. 25
lerome who says, that Blesilla being dead, did pray for her mother Paula
being alive.


The Minister. I answer you four ways*

First, I say that there are many things in the writings of the ancient
fathers, which are fathered on their names: whereas indeed they are not
theirs, but some base fellows, who to win credit to their writings assumed
noble names, as an one of our judicious m (...), in Problemat.
divines has showed at large.

Secondly, I answer, that the fathers which you all eadge for the proof of
this matter, did not at the first ponderously consider of this question, and
that afterward when they did iudiciously sift it, and discuss it, they were
either of acontrarie opinion to their former, or spoke thereof very faintly,
waueringly and doubtfully. To verify what I have said, take a view of saint
Austen, who being to dispute this very question, says thus: August, de ^ura^ro
mo^tu^^ ge^enda cap, 13.
vt volet accipiat quisque nod dicam: let every man as it pleases him, take
that which I shall say. Nazianzene, also speaking of saint Basile being dead,
uses this doubtful speech: Greg Naztanz. or ^t, 30.
Now is Basile in heaven, and there, vt opinor as I think, he offers
sacrifices for us and powers out prayers for the people: and speaking of his
dead sister Gorgonia, he says thus: Idem cra^, 25,
St quid nostros etiam honores curas, etc. If thou take any care of the
honoring of us, and if this reward be given by God unto holy souls, that they
shail perceive these things, then receive my prayer.

Thirdly, although, some of the ancient fathers, were happily of this opinion;
yet all were not: for I have showed, that some of them did hold the quite
contrary.

Fourthly although the ancient fathers had all jointly embraced this opinion;
yet are not we therefore bound to receive it. For Aug. epist. ^^^
we are not to esteem the disputations of any, yea, albeit they be Catholic
and commendable men, to be as the canonical scriptures, so that, saving the
honor whichis due to those men we may dislike and reject any thing in their
writings, if we find that they have thought otherwise then the truth has, as
it shall by Gods assistance be understood, either by others or by our selves.
But to draw toward a conclusion, by who think you, were these Saints put into
the Letanie.


The Recusant. Doubtless they were put in by the Catholic fathers.


The Minister. No Sir, they were not put in by any Catholics, but by
Heretics: for I find that the heretic Gnapheus was the first, that caused
the Virgin Marie to be put into the public prayers of the Church, and to be
named in Vt in pre^atione omni Dei gen^trix nomin^tur et diui^um e^s nomen in
ve^a^^tur* (...), lib, 15* ^^
every prayer, and inuocated. And I make no question, but that he and his
fellows put in the rest of the Saints: and that your pretended Catholic
Church does tread in their steps.


The Recusant. It seems then, that you hold the honoring of Saints to be
heretical.


The Minister. No I hold, that the Saints are to be honored, and that three
ways; viz. by a reverent esteeming of them, by a godly imitating of them, and
by praising God for proposing such holy examples to us, as paternes for our
imitation

1 They are to be honored, by reverent esteeming of them, and ^y keeping them
in perpetual remembrance. Thus the Prophet 2 Samuel* 1. 16.
David commended Jonathan for his fervent and constant love; Elizeus Elias; and
our Savior Christ the woman that powered on him a Box of ointment, saying:
that Mark. 14 19
whersoeuer the Gospel should be preached throughout the world, that which the
woman had done in anointing him should b^ spoken of, for a memorial of her.
And thus the Virgin Marie as a Prophetess foretells that Luke* ^, 48.
all nations shall call her bl^ssed. And this kind of honor did the ancient
Nos (...) no^ templa si^ut (...), sed memorias sicut hominibu^ ^ortuis, quo^^^^
apud deum v^^^nt spiritus, ^abricam^^, August (...) dei, lib, 22, cap, 10,
fathers likewise give to the Saints.

2 They are to be honored by a godly imitating of their faith in Christ, the
fear of God, and all good virtues wherein they excelled. And for this cause
the examples of the godly are called a cloud of witnesses, by an allusion to
the cloud that did guide the Israelites through the Wilderness: for as that
cloud did lead them to the Land of Canaan; so should the examples of the
faithful, lead us to the heavenly Canaan. And this kind of honor was also
given to the Saints, by the Orthodoxe ^lla quidem anima in societa^e recepta
^idelium, (...) curat nec quaerit buma nas, imitationem tantum quaerit Aug,
epist, 125 Honorand^ sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem,
Idem.
fathers.

3 They are to be honored by giving God thanks for them, and for the benefits
that God vouchsafed by them to his Church. Thus did the Gal, 1, 13.
Church glorify God for Saint Paul's conversion. And thus do we honor the
Saints, but we dare not go further, and rob God (as you do) of his honor,
and give that honor to them, which he has appropriated to himself, least
we should be accounted guilty of robbery to our only Lord and Master, who
is a Exodus, 20, 5.
Jealous GOD, Isay, 48, ^^.
and will not give his glory to any other.

1 Timothy, 1, 17
Now unto the King everlasting, immortal; invisible unto GOD only wise be
honor, and glory for ever, and ever,


Amen.
The second Dialogue.
Wherein is plainly showed, that the Papists, do depend as much upon the Popes
expositions, as the Rabbinicall Jews did upon the expositions of their Jewish
Rabbines, and that they are so far from joining with the ancient Fathers, as
that they join, both in matters of Doctrine and Manners, with the Arrians,
Abellians, Adam^ans, Aetians, Apostolicks, Angelicks, Anthropomorphites, Anomi,
Armemij, Bonosians, Basilideans, Beguaraines, Caians, Carpocratians,
Circumcellions, Cathari, Cataphryges, Capernites, Dositheans, Eutychians,,
Eunomij, Ethnophronians, Euphemites, Gnosimachi, Hemerobaptists, Herodians,
Helzaits, Helcestees, Hieranchit^s, Heracleonites, Monothelites, Maletians,
Messalians, Marcosij, Montanists, Manich^^s; Marcionites, Nestorians,
Nouatians, Nudepedales, Nazarites, Nicolaites, Osseni, Priscillians, Pepuzians,
Pelagians, Prodicus, Pharisees, Scribes, Sampsees, Seuerians, Simonians,
Tatians, Valentinians, and Zuenckseldia^s.

The Recusant. Sir, what news hear you from London?


The Minister. Great news:


The Recusant. What I pray you?


The Minister. Truly, that one Thomas Percie, and other Popish Gentlemen are
discovered to have contrived the most horrible treason that ever entered into
the hearts of men.


The Recusant. What treason?


The Minister. They had thought (horresc^ referens) to have massacred, Se the
discourse of the manner of the discovery of this (...) intended treason, page
3, et. 4^*
the King our head, the Queen our fertile mother, and those young and hopeful
Olive plants, not theirs, but ours. Our Reverend Clergy, our honorable
Nohilitie, the faithful Councellers, the grave Judges, the greatest part of
the worthy Knights, and Gentry, as well as of the wisest Burgesses, the whole
Clerks of the Crown, Counsel, Signet, Seals, or of any other principal
judgment ^eate. All the learned Lawyers, together with an infinite number of
the common people. Nay, their furious rage should not only have lighted upon
reasonable and sensible creatures, without distinctio either of degree sex or
age; But even the insensil le shockes and stones should not have been free of
their fury. The Hall of Justice; the house of Parliament; the Church used for
the Coronation of our Kings; the Monuments of our former Princes, the Crown
and other marks of Royalty; all the Records; as well of Parliament, as of
every particular mansright, with a great number of Charters and such like,
should all have been comprehended under that fearful Chaos. And so the earth
as it were opened, should have sent forth of the bottom of the Stygian lake
such sulphured smoke, furious flames, and fearful thunder, as should have by
their diabolical domes day destroyed and defaced, in the twinckeling of an
eye, not only our present living Princes and people, but even our in sensible
Monuments reserved for future ages. So as not only our selves that are
mortal, but the immortal Monuments of our ancient Princes and Nobility, that
have been so preciously preserved from age to age, as the remaining Trophies
of their eternal glory, and have so long tryumphed over envious time, should
now have been all consumed together; and so not only we, but the memory of us
and ours, should have been thus extinguished, in an instant.

So that, b if the Lord had not been on our side, (may England now say) if the
Lord had not been on our siae, when men rose up against us, they had then
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Then the ^
Psa, 124.
waters had drowned us and the streams had gone over our soul then had the
swelling waters gone over our soul. Praised be the Lord, which has not given
us as a pray unto their teeth. Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the
snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken and we are delivered. And let this
our deliverance move you to worship our God, and to embrace our religion.


The Recusant. Why should this move me?


The Minister. Surely, if there were nothing else to move you to an embracing
of our Orthodoxe Catholic faith; yet this our late deliverance, meethinkes,
should inuit you thereunto. Darius, (you know) when he had seen Daniel
delivered from the power of the Lions, he was thereby induced to fear the God
of Daniel, and to make a decree, that in all the dominions of his Kingdom,
Dan, 3, 26,
men should tremble and fear before the God of Daniel. And Nabuchodonosor made
the like decree before, when he saw the deliverance of the 3 children, Dan, 3,
29
that every people, Nation and Language, which spoke any blasphemy against the
God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, should be drawn in pieces, and their
houses should be made a Iakes, because there was no God that could deliver
after that sort. Now let the sameminde be in you, that, was in Darius and
Nabuchodonosor: let our deliverance from this devilish plot, which was within
twelve hours of the execution, move you to tremble and fear before our God,
and to turn Protestant.


The Recusant. Turn Protestant? no, I will never turn.


The Minister. Why will you not?


The Recusant. Why? because your religion is a new religion.


The Minister. A new religion? you are like the Stoike Philosophers, of whom
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that they disputed with Saint Paul, and
called him Act. 17, 18, 19
a sower of words, a setter out of strange Gods, and a teacher of new doctrine.
But I pray you sir, do you think, that your religion is the old religion?


The Recusant. Do I think so? I am past thinking: for I am sure that D. Hill in
his quartron of Reasons of Catholic re^igion, p, 44,
it is, (to use the words of one of our learned doctors) most plainly taught
by all the ancient fathers of the first, second, third, fourth, sift, and
sixtage after Christ: and that it has been (ever without all controversy)
taught by the fathers of every age since until this day.


The Minister. It is no wonder to hear an heretic brag of antiquity; for
it has been the usual manner of heretics in all ages, to take unto
themselves the Chuch, Scriptures, fathers, all antiquity, consent,
continuance, and perpetuity unto the end of the world.

To insistin some particulars, Dioscorus, though he himself was an heretic,
yet cried he out in the Council of Chalcedon, that he defended the opinions
of the ancient fathers; that he had the testimonies of Athanasius, Gregory,
Cyrill, and of the rest of the holy fathers: that he had them, not by snatches,
or at the second hand, but uttered in their own books: that he did not vary
from them in any thing: and that he was cast out with them. His words were
these: Council. Chal*
Ego habeo testimonia sanctorum patrum* Athanasis, Gregorij, Cyrilli: non
transgredior in aliquo; ego cum patribus ei^cior: ego defendo patrum dogmata:
ego horum habeo testimonia, non simil^citer aut transitory, sed in ipsorum
libris.

The like out-crie made the heretic Euty ches, and Carisius his follower in
the same Act, 1, ^^ 4.
Council. And weeread how that Vid^ Aug, contra. Cres^on. lib. 4. ^. 17.
Cresconius the Donatist, disputing with Saint Austen, cited Saint Cyprian:
that the Vide council, (...) 1, page, 877,
Nestorian heretic alleged the authority of the Council of Nice: that the
Vide Socrat. lib, 4, c, 26,
Arrian heretic produced the testimony of S. Origin; and that the Nouatian
heretic, Simiarum more, Cypria^. epist, ad lub.
after an apish manner, took unto himself the authority of the Church, and
of all the ancient fathers thereof.

Now to make application hereof; by the like apish imitation do you take unto
your selves the Church, Councels, fathers, and all antiquity whatsoever.

But what do I term it an apish imitation? you do indeed imitate the Ass
that Aesope tells of, which to make other beasts afraid, put on a Lions
skin, and therewith ietted abroad terribly, thinking thereby to deceive his
fellows; for as the Lions skin was but lapped about him, and grew not to his
body: so although you be no true members of the Church; yet cover you your
selves with the title and name thereof; thinking thereby to Diabolus excogi
tauit no^ ^afrade, vt sub ipso nomin^^ Christian t^tulo fallat (...) tos,
Cyprio de Simplicit. (...) rum,
deceive simple people, that are soon inueighled to fa^cy any thing. And
albeit your religion has not continued the age of ^n man of the old world, nor
come to the age of Methushelah, being not yet nine hundred years since first
it came to light; yet bear you the world in hand, that it has been most
plainly and evidently taught by all the ancient Fathers of the first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, and sixte age after Christ: and that it has continued
ever since until this day* ^ cap. (...) ^.
O quantum togmen est falsitatis! O how great a show does falsehood make!


The Recusant. Not to triffle out the time in words, can you disprooue what I
have said.


The Minister. Yes, I can prove, that you are so far from joining with the
ancient fathers, as that you have indeed joined with sundry ancient
heretics, both in matters of doctrine, and man's.


The Recusant. With what heretics?


The Minister. With the Arrians, Adamians, Abelians, Aetians, Apostolickes,
Angelickes, Anthropomorphites, Anomi, Armemij, Bonosians, Basilidians,
Beguardines, Caians, Carpocratians, Circumcellions, Cathari, Cataphryges,
Capernites, Dositheans, Donatists, Eutycheans, Eunomij, Ethnophronians,
Euphemites, Gnosimachi, Heremobaptists, Herodians, Helzaits, Helcesees,
Hierarchites, Heracleonites, Monothelites, Meletians, Messalians, Marcosij,
Montanists, Manichees, Marcionites, Nouatians, Nudipedales, Nazarites,
Nicolaites, Osseni, Priscillians, Pepuzians, Pelagians, Prodicus, Pharisees,
Scribes, Sampsees, Seuerians, Simonians, Tatians, Valentinians, and
Zuenckfeldians.


The Recusant. To observe this your Alphabeticall order, wherein do we join
with the Arrians.


The Minister. The Arrians, though they were abominable Heretics, yet bragged
vide, August, sermon. contra Ar^a nos, tom, 6,
they, that they alone were the true Catholics, and called all those that were
not of their sect, Ambrosians, Athanasians, and Iohannites, so you, although
you be indeed nothing less then Catholic; yet you do usurp the name of
Catholics, as due alone to your selves, and do call all those that are not of
your faction Harding in his Con^at, of the Apol, 42, 81, 222
Zwinglians, Lutherans, Caluinists, and Turkish Hugenotes.

2 The Arrians made great bragges of the long continuance of their Church,
saying; that they could show, that it had continued circiter mill ducentes
annos, about a thousand and two hundred years: so do you likewise make great
boasts, that you can Rhemist, annot. in Act, 28, sect, ^,
show the descent of your Church from Adam.

3 The Arrians made universality a note of their Church, as appears by this
speech of Naziauzene: Nazianz. in sermon. (...) con. Arriann^^
Vbinam illi sunt qui multitudine ecclesiam definiunt and gregem exiguam
aspernantur? Where are they that define the Church by a multitude, and do
despise the little flock? Yea, the Arrian heresy was diffused throughout the
whole world, as is apparent by this testimony of saint Hierome: Hieron in di^^
aduers, Luciferia nos.
Ingemuit totus orbis, and se Arrianum miratus est. Now with these vile
heretics do you agree; for Pellarm, lib 4. de ec^les. ca^, 4, Rhemist, in
^ct. cap. ^, sect, ^.
you make universality to be a mark of the true Church.

4 The Arrians taught, that the Church might expound the Scriptures, at one
time one way, and at another time another way: which made Saint Hylary to say
thus unto them; Fides ergo magis temporum est, Hi^^r. ad constantium,
uam Euangeliorum: that is, faith therefore follows the time, and not the
Gospel. To this heresy of the Arrians do you fully subscribe: for you teach,
that the sense of Scriptures may be diverse according to the variety of your
practice and diversity of times. The h Magister sa^ri, pa^atij Romae, ad
lega^os Bohemico^* su^ felice papa. page 1447.
Pope (says one of your chief Masters) may change the holy Gospel, and may
give to the Gospel, according to the place and time, another sense. Yea,
Nicol. C^^^. ad ^o^^mo^ epist, 7
Non est mirum (says another) si praxis eccl^siae vno tem pore interpretatur
scripturam vno modo, et alio tempore alio modo: nam intellectus currit cum
praxi: intellectus enim, quia cum praxi concurrit, est spiritus viuificans.
Sequuntur ergo scripture ecclesiam: and none conuerso. That is, It is noe
marvel, though the practice of the Church do expo^nd the Scriptures, at one
time one way, and at another time another way: for the understanding or sense
of the Scriptures runs with the practice: and that sense so agreeing with
the practice is the quickening spirit. And therefore the Sriptures follow the
Church: but contrariwise the Church follows not the Scriptures.

5. The Arrians denied Christ to be Autotheon, God of himself: so do you
likewise deny, that Christ is Autotheos, God of himself; and do affirm, that
he had not only his person, but his substance of the father: whereupon
Rhemist. in Io^^n, 1, sect, 3,
you are bold to charge M. Calvin with blasphemy, for saying, that Christ is
God of himself as well as the father.

But what need I observe any semblances betwixt you and the Arrians? your own
writers confess, that Pope Liberius, gave his hand and heart unto them.
Alphons, de ^ar^^, lib, 1. ^, 4.
De Liberio Papa (says Alphonsus) constat fuisse Arrianum: as for Pope
Liberius, it is well known, that he was an Arrian.

The same also acknowledges Sabellicus: Sabellic Ennead. 7, lib, 8.
Arriani precibus suis apud Constantium Liberio reditum ad vrbem confecere: quo
ille beneficio commotus, ex confesso Arrianus, vt quidam scribunt, est factus.
That is, The Arrian heretics, by their entreaty unto the Emperor
Constantius, obtained of him, that Pope Liberius might be restored again into
the City: with which good turn Liberius being moved, as some write, became
an Arrian in good earnest, and with his heart.

With them both agrees Cardinal Cusanus: Nicol, Cus^. d^ concord, lib, 2, ^, 5
Liberius consensit errori Arrianorum: Liberius gave his consent to the error
of the Arrians. And in an other place: Cusan* de concord. lib, 1, ^, 14.
Liberius et Honorius, et alij in cathedra Petri aliquando insidentes, in
errorem schismaticum seducti ceciderunt: Liberius and Honorius, and other Popes
sitting for a while in Peter's chair, being misled, fell into schismatic
error. And thus much concerning your agreement with the Arrians, now let us
proceed in order to the rest.


The Recusant. What agreement is there betwixt us and the Adamians.


The Minister. The Adamians August, d^. ^^^e^, cap, ^^*
condemned marriage in priests; so do you.

2 The Adamians, though they held it unlawful for priests to marry, yet they
held it to be lawefull, to have women and curtizans in common: so do your
divines of Lovaine hold, that Polluitur sacerdotium matrimonio non
mere^^^cibus,
priestehoode is polluted with Matrimony, not with harlots. And one of your
Jesuits affirms, Hoffaeus apud (...) de a^^^^e Jesus ^^* cap, 6, et. sect.
^, page, 105.
minus peccare sacer^otem adulterando, quam coniugem ducend^; That a priest
sins less by committing adul^erie, then by marring a wife.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agr^e with the Abelians?


The Minister. The Abelians, though they August de ^eres, cap* ^*
thought it unlawful for any of their sect to live without wives; yet they
never kept company with them. To this heresy of theirs do your Rhemist. in,
Act, 21, sect, 1,
Rhemists incline over far: for they hold, that Priests which are married
before orders, ought not afterward to have access to their wives; and yet are
they their wives still, neither is the marriage knot dissolved between them.


The Recusant. Wherein do we resemble the Actians.


The Minister. Actius the old heretic, used to say thus: Epiphan, lib, 5,
hae^^s, 56.
dormire cum muliere extra coniugium, non magis est peccatum, quam aurem
scalpere: To have the company of a woman out of marriage, is no more a sin,
then it is for a man to claw his ear. So some of your faction have not been
ashamed to say, as Jacob* de Valentia, in ps. 118
one of your own side reports, that single fornication may be lawfully used.
q Fornicationem ^mpli^em esse ^^itam.



The Recusant. Wherein do we join with the Apostolickes?


The Minister. The apostolicks, August, de haeres, cap, 40, et Epiphan, haeres,
61,
received none into their order, that had wives or, possessed any thing in
property; but those only that vowed poverty and single life: so does your
Church condemn all Monks and Friars that possess any goods in property, and
both Monks and Priests that match themselves in marriage.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Angelickes, Anthropomorphites,
Anomi, and Armenij?


The Minister. The Angelickes were vide Epiphan. de Ange^cis, Aug, de haeres,
cap, 39. Isidor, lib, 8, Originum. et council, Loadicen can, 35
reputed heretics, because they worshipped Angels: so are you likewise to be
reputed, because you pray unto Angels, saying.

Vide missale Roman, ex council, Trident. restitutu^, page, 249. 250
Sancte Michael Ora pro nobis Sancte Gabriel. Ora Sancte Rhaphael, Ora Omnes
sancti Angeli et Archangeli. Orate pro nobis

The Anthropomorphites Aug, de hares, cap, 50,
imagined God to be like a mortal man: so do you, when you figure the image of
the most blessed and sacred Trinity, sometimes with three faces, as in your
Horae Mariae
comnmo^ prayer books printed in the year of our Lord, 1555. And sometimes
like an old man, having a long graye bearde, and his son sitting by him,
with a dove beetweene them.

The Anomi were reputed heretics, for that they either contemned, or
corrupted the law of God; how then can George Do^^^e (...) plai^e in^^^u^^ion
^a^ely pr^nt^d.
you wipe away the blot of heresy, who take away the second commandment out
of the decalogue, and do hold concupiscence to be no sin, which God in his
Exodus 20, 17
law condemns for a sin?

The Armenij E^thymius in Panoplia.
worshipped the cross of Christ: so do you the sign of the Cross.


The Recusant. Let us now come to the Bonosians: wherein do we resemble them?


The Minister. The Bonosians preferred humane traditions before the word of
God, so do you. So^o in confess Catho^. de Eccles page, 138.
Traditio, (says one of your approved writers) est anti quior et efficacior
sacra sciptura: tradition, is of more antiquity, and of more efficacy then
the sacred scriptures. Canus locorum theol. lib. 3. ^ol, 98
Add hereunto, (says another) that for confounding of heretics, there is
greater strenght in tradition, then in the scripture.


The Recusant. Wherein do we join with the Basilidians.


The Minister. The Basilidians did (as both Iraenaeus and Epiphanius do record,
Iron. lib, 1, ^, 23 ^t Epipha^ haeres, 24.
conceal and hide the mysteries of their Religion, least holy things should be
cast to dogs; so do you, for the self same cause, as appears by these
speeches of Harding a popish doctor; Harding, con^ut 213.
Ye prostitute scriptures as baudes do their Harlots, to the ungodly,
unlearned, and rascal^ people. And in in another place: Harding in his Ans,
art* 15. ^^vis, 7.
the unlearned people were kept from the reading of the Scriptures by the
special providence of God, that precious stones should not be thrown before
swine.

2 The Basilidians Iren, lib. 1, advers, haer^^* ^* 2^*
worshipped Images, and enjoined all their followers to do the same: so do you
worship the Images of the Virgin Marie, and of sundry other Saints, and do
Council, T^^d^^ sesse, 9*
enjoin all men to do as you do.

3 The Basilidians Iren. lib, 1, ^. 2.
used enchantments, and superstitious admirations: so do you conjure water,
saying: exorcizo te creatura aquae: and salt saying, exorcizo te creatur a
salis, you do also conjure and enchant sundry other things, as appears by
your Vide Meng^^ de exorcism^^.
books of exorcismes, yea you make exor^ists and coniurers an holy n
Rhemists, ^^ ^, Tim, 3, sect, 7. Council. Trident. sess, 7, cap, 1.
n order, and that order a o sacrament of the Church


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Beguardines?


The Minister. The Beguardines held that Hominem hic perfectum esse posse,
Clementin. lib, 5, tit, 3, cap. 3
a man may be perfect in this life: so do your Rhemist, in Joan, 4, sect, 1,
Rhemists in their annotations upon the Gospel after Saint John.

2 The Beguardines held that Spiritualem humanae ob^dientiae non esse subiectu:
Clementin, lib, 5, tit, 3, c. 3,
a spiritual man is subject to no humane obedience: so do you hold, that Papa
solutut est omni ^ege humana Casus Papales a^ud Hosi^ens.
the Pope is not bound to any humane law, Yea, he subiecteth not himself
unto the laws of God; but takes upon him, to dispense with them at his
pleasure, and thinks that he may lawfully break them. And if any man chance
to tell him of the breach of any law: He will by and by answer. Johan* 23.
Am not I a Pope? Thereby signifying, that being Pope, he is subject to no law.


The Recusant. What semblances have you observed betwixt us and the Caians?


The Minister. The Caians (...), (...) 38.
worshipped Angels, and prayed unto them: so do you, as has been already
showed.

2 The Caians (...), Ibid.
avouched all their follies and heresies, not by the Scriptures, but by
tradition, as they said, from Saint Paul: so do you avouch all your fictions
and forgeries, not by the Scriptures, but by tradition from Saint Peter. The
Popes Territories and Lordshippes are (forsooth) Innocent, 3, ^xtrav. cap, per
venerab^^em.
Saint Peter's Patrimony: his tyra^nicall usurpations, (...) ^sperg. in Chren,
Henric 3, et Onuphrius de 7 vrb. eccles, in Palate, latera^.
Saint Peter's Royalties: his dignity, Leo epist, 45
Saint Peter's honor: his praerogatiue, Ibid.
Saint Peter's right: his stateliness, Leo epist, 87.
Saint Peter's reverence: his closet, Innocent, 4. extrav. cap maiores
Saint Peter's see: his City, Onuphrius de
Saint Peter's borough: and his poll money, vrb, eccles.
Saint Peter's pence. Yea you depend so much upon Saint Peter, as that you are
not ashamed to affirm, that Christ took Peter, in consortium indiuiduae unit
at is, into the company of the indivisible unity: and that the Popes speak by
the inspiration of Saint Peter. Leo, Ibid,
Obtestamur h Denarius beati Petri, Math, Pa^^^^in Henric, 7. ^ Leo epist, 89,
(says Leo) vt e^ quae a nobis, Deo inspirante, and beatissimo Petro Apostolo,
discussis, probatis que nunc omnibus causis, decreta sunt, seruetis; That is,
We beseech you to keep those things, which, all causes being discused and
proved, have been decreed by us, by the inspiration of GOD, and of the most
blessed Apostle Peter.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Carpocratians, and Circumcellions?


The Minister. The Carpocratians used (as both (...), (...), 1, ^ 2*
Irenaeus and Aug, (...) cap* 7*
Augustine do record) to worship Images, and to burn incense unto them: so do
you.

The Circumcellions (...), (...), (...)
thought it a matter meritorious, to kill those that were contrary to their
sect:

So do your Romish Doctors account it lawful: yea meritorious to murder those
Princes and people that are not of your Religion. For the proof here of, I
refer you to Cardinal Comos letter that was dated at Rome, January the 30.
Anno Dom. 1584. Wherein he thus wrote to William Parrie. The ^^.
Mon signore la santita de. V. S. have ^^to le lettere d^. US. ael primo c^nla
feed in^lus^, et not p^^ se nea ^^udare la buona dispositone et risolutione,
the schri^e di tenere verso^^ servitio et beneficio publico, ^^^che la Santita
sua lesserta di persevere are, confarne rinscire lieffetti che V. S. promette:
et accioc^e tantom iggiorme te, V. S. sia, aiutata da quel buon spirito chel
(...) le corcede sua ^eneditione, plenaria indulgenz let remissione: di tutti
li peccati, secondo cho V. S. ha chieso, assicur and ossiche oltre il merito,
ch ^ hauero in cielo Vuo, le anco sua Santi^a constituir si debitore aricc*
noscere li meriti di, V, S. (...) mighor modo che potra, et cio tanto pi^
quonto che, V. S. vsa maggior modestia in non protender mente. Metta dun^, ad
effetto li suot santi et honorati pensieri, et ^ttenda aestar sano, Che per
fine io me l^ offero di core, et le desidero ogni buono et felice successo. Di
Roma a 30 di Genuaro M. D, Lxxxiiij.


The English, Sir, the holiness of our Lord has seen your letter with the
credence enclosed, and cannot but praise your good disposition and resolution,
which (as you write) te^deth to the service and benefit public* where in his
holiness exhorts you to continue, and to bring to pass that which you
promise. And to the end that you may be aided by that good spirit which has
induced you to this, his blessedness grants you full pardon and forgiveness
of all your sins, as you requested, assuring you that besides the merit
which you shall receive in heaven, his holiness will make himself a farther
debtor, to acknowledge your deserving in the best manner that he may: and so
much the more, because you use so great modesty, innot pretending any thing.
Put therefore in act your holy and honorable thoughts, and look to your
safety. And so I present my self heartily to you, and wish you all good and
happy success. From Rome the 30 of January. 1584.

Lo, here you see, how that Pope Gregory the 13* granted to Parry full pardon
and forgiveness of all his sins; and assured him, that he should receive merit
in heaven, if that he could murder his sovereign. But 1. Sam. 26 9. The Pope
takes upon him to do that, which the very Scribes condemned, Mark 2, 7.
his assurance is little worth, For, * Who can lay his hands on the Lords
anointed and be guiltless? * and who can forgive sins but God only?


The Recusant. Wherein do weresemble the Capernites and Cataphryges?


The Minister. The Capernites dreamed (as the John. 6.
Evangelist testifies) of a carnal manner of eating of Christ's flesh: so do
you, when you affirm that the natural and substantial body of Christ is
really eaten with teeth, and locally descends into the stomach. Yea, some of
your writers teach, that the body of Christ may be received of brute beasts,
which the Capernites never were so gross as to avouch, Alexande^ de (...) pa^
3. (...), 45.
If a d^gge or a hogg* says Alezander de Hales) should eat the whole
consecrated host, I see no cause but that the Lords body should go therwithall
into the belly of that dog or hog. Thomas Aquinas also sharply reprooueth
them which think otherwise. His words are these: Them, (...) part, 3* (...) ^.
art, ^,
Some have said, that as soon as the Sacrament is taken of a mouse or a dog,
straightway the body and blood of Christ cease to be there: but this is a
derogation to this sacrament. And of the same blasphemous opinion, is Petrus de
Palude, Johannes de Burgo, Nicholaus de Orbellis, with the whole sect of
Thomists.

The Cataphryges did make their Eucharist* of the ^de infantis (...), (...), de
t^to (...) corpore m^n^t^^ (...) vulneribus extorqu^t, quasi (...) ^ ristia^
(...) b^tur Aug. d^ haeres, c. 26, s Aug. de (...), c, 38, et Isid. ^tym, lib,
8 ^. de b^^sib^^ Christian.
blood of children: so have your Priests showed the people in the Sacrament the
blood of duckes, and Pigeons; making them believe, that it was the blood of
Christ.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Cathari.


The Minister. The Cathari s boasted much of their merits, purity and
perfection, and accounted all men wicked that were not of their sect: so did
the late traitors; as appears by a certain letter, which one of them wrote
a little before their late intended massacre: wherein are these words: God and
man has concurred to punish the wickedness of this time.

Lo, these Cacolikes believed, that they had speech with God, and that he
enjoined them to kill all the wicked in the Realm, and to constitute a ne we
WORLD, consisting only of the innocent.

2 The Cathari Theodo, et, haeresie lib. 3
rebaptized those that were already baptized: so we read in the histories of
France and Flaunders, that the Popish Priests there have rebaptized those that
were already baptized by Protestant Ministers.


The Recusant. Wherein do we resemble the Dositheans, and the Donatists?


The Minister. The Epis^an, here is. 13 an e Christum
Dositheans abstained from the use of marriage, although they were married, and
gave not that ane benevolence, which Saint 1, Cor. 7, 3
Paul bids the husband to give to the wife, and the wife to the husband.

They were also noted for their voluntary fastings, and for their superstious
afflicting of their bodies.

Now, with these heretics do you go hand in hand: for you account it great
holiness for married comples to Petrus de soto in ass^^tione Cath o^. de votis.
live a sunder, and to take upon them the vow of Monkerie. Yea, you hold,
that ^ xor catholica v^ro haerelico de bitum reddere non tenetur Simancha
episc. pascens, Iussit, catho. a Petrus de Soto in ass^^. cath, de Ie^umo.
wives are not bound to give to their husbands due benevolence, if they be
heretics: you hold it also to be a work meritorious, to a wear sackcloth,
to be given continually to fasting, to lie hard, to fare meanly, and by other
such ways to punish and afflict the body.

The Donatists August, de hares, cap 69, it Cassianus psalm. 60.
abstained from the assemblies of all other men whatsoever, which were not of
their opinion; and tied to a small corner in Africa, that Catholic Church
which is diffused over the face of the whole earth.

Now as the Donatists believed, that the Church was only contained in
Affricke, and consisted only in the obedience, or part. Donat^.
part of Donatus: so do you in like manner believe, that noneare true members
of the Catholic Church, which do not take the Popes d Geron* mo* Can. po^m
(...), Camsius de praecepus eccles, ar^, 9, Linda^ut lib, 4, 8^, Bella^m, de
ecclesia. lib. 3, c, 2, ^^ (...), 12,
part, live under his obedience, and acknowledge him to be their chief
pastor, and the vicar of christ upon earth.

2 The Donatists denied the true preaching of the word of God, to beean
infallible note of the Church of Christ: hence was it that Saint Austin
disputing with the Donatists, tied both himself and his adversaries to the
scripture. His words were these. Aug. de, vnitate eccles, c, 16.
Ecclesiam suam demonstrent si possunt, non in s^rmonibus et rum^ribus Afrorum,
non in Concilijs Episcoporum suorum, non in litteris querumlibet disputatorum,
non in signis and prodigijs fallacibus, quia etiam contra ista verbo Domini
praeparati and c^uti redditi sumus; sed in prascripto legis, in Prophetarum
pradictis, in Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsiusp storis vocibus in Euangelistarum
praedicationibus and lahoribus, hoc est in omnibus canonicis sanctorum libroru^
autoritatibus: That is, Let the Donatists, if they can show their Church, not
in the speeches and rumors of the men of Affricke, not in the council of
their bishopes, not in the discourses of any disputers whatsoever, nor in lying
signs and miracles, because we are forewarned and forearmed against these:
but in the prescript of the law, in the predictions of the prophets, in the
verses of the Psalms, in the voice of the shepherd himself, in the
preachings and works of the Evangelists, that is, in all the canonical
authorities of the holy scriptures.

Now as the Donatists rejected that which is the true and infallible note of
the Church, and depended upon the speeches of the men of Afric, upon the
Council of their Bishops, and upon lying signs and miracles: so do you as
the writings of sundry Popish Hosius Cardinal, in Confess, Petroc^uiens cap
21, in explicat Symboli. Lindanus in Pa^oplia lib, 4, cap, 83, So^us contra wit
tenbergens, in c, de eccles, Cauerus de notis eccles. Canisius in suo
Catechism. in tract de praecept eccles, Bellarm, de notis eccles, lib, 4, c, 3,
Stapleton. lib, 1, de princip, doctrine, cap, 19, and Horantius contra Caluini
Iustitut. lib. 6, cap, 6,
writers give sufficient testimony.

3 The Donatists thought that a man ought not to be forced to the truth, as
appears by these words of Saint Austen to Aug, epist, 5, h Aug, lib, 2.
contra Petil, c, 78,
Vincentius: Think thou, that noe man ought to be forced to righteousness,
whereas thou read that the Master said to his servants: compel all that you
find to come in. The same father also testifies, that Petilian another
Donatist, cried out thus: b Jesus Christus it a fidem venerat facere, non vt
cogeret homines, sed potius inuitaret. Quod sicogiper legem aliquam vel ad
bonalicuisset, vosipsi miseri a nobis ad fidem purissimam cogi debuistis. Sed
absit, absit a nostra conscientia, vt ad nostram fidem iliquem compellamus:
That is, Jesus Christ came so to work faith, not that he might compel men,
but rather inuit them. But if it were lawefull that any should by the law be
compelled, yea even unto, good things, you wretches ought to be compelled by
us, to the most pure faith: but far be it, far be it from our consciences,
that we should compel men unto our faith.

This frantike error of the Donatists, have some of your Popish Doctors lately
reviued and renewed with fresh and new colors. D. Hill in his Quartron of
reasons, of Catholic religion. page, 181,
If your service (says one of them) were good and godly indeed, and the very
true service of God, etc. yet are you not to request me, much less urge me to
go to your service. Again, Page, 182.
greatly do you offend GOD there in England, in forcing people to go to the
CHVRCH, contrary to their conscience.

4 The Donatists, albeit they in words professed meakenesse, and said, that
they would use no compulsions in matters of religion: yet would they have used
compulsion, had they been able to have done it.

August, contra Crese, lib, 4, c, 5^
Hoc modo et miluus, says Saint Austen, cum pullos rapere tertitus non potuer
t, columbum se nominet: That is, after the same sort, the Kite; when he is not
able to snatch away the chickens, may name himself a dove.

So you profess the meekenes of doves, because you are not able to snatch away
the chickens: I mean, that you would use compelling means, to bring us to
your Romish faith, if power were not wanting in you.

We are well enough acquainted with the furious rigor and violence, that the
Popes agents used in this Land, in the days of Queen Mary: with their Read
the, 11 book of the Acts and monuments.
imprisoning, chaining, scourging, scorching and burning of old, young men,
women; learned, and unlearned. O quot Nerones, quot Domitiani, quot Commods,
quot Bossiani, quot immites Dionisy hanc terra^ peragrauere?

5 The Donatists (as Saint August. cotra, epist, Parmen, lib, 1, c, 7, et, lib,
2 c, 9, et, contra, 2, Gaudentij, epist, lib, 2, c, 11 et, c, 26, et contra
Crescon, lib, 3, c, 51, et, lib 8, c, 5^ contra literas Petil^ lib, 2, c, 9^ et
epist, 50, 48, 166,
Austen testifies in sundry places of his writings) held, that Christian
Princes ought not to meddle with men and matters ecclesiastical; so do
Bellarm, de Clericis, c, 28, ^ de Po^^ifice, Rom lib, 1, cap, 7, et, Rhemist,
in Heb. 13, 17, in Rom, 13, sect, 5, in 1, cor 14. 16,
you.

6 The Donatists viuebant, vt, latrones, honorabantur vt, martyrs, Aug. epist,
68,
lived as the eues, and were honored as Martyrs: so do you honor Millions as
Martyrs, which died for conspiracies, treacheries, idolatries, and other such
like capital crimes: See the Catholics Supplication, exhibited to the King at
his first entry into this Realm.
Our religion (say you) is sealed with the blood of Millions of Martyrs.


The Recusant. All this which you say, will not move me to forsake my religion:
for herein was I baptized, herein have I hitherto lived, and hearein will I die.


The Minister. You are much like the heretic Eutiches, who being required by
the ancient fathers assembled in the Council of Calcedon, to join with them
in the profession of the Apostolic faith: when he was not able to answer
such arguments as were objected against his recusancie, pretended his baptism,
and said: Council, chalced Act. 1,
Sic aprogenitoribus meis accepi, et credidi: in hac fide baptizatus sum, and
signatus: et us que ad hunc diem in ea vixi, et in eaopto mori: that is, thus
have I received of my forefathers, and thus have I beeleeued: in this faith was
I baptized, and signed: and in the same have I lived until this day; and in
the same I wish to die.

But tell me I pray you, did you in baptism profess the Romish Religion? were
you baptized in the name of your holy father the Pope, or in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy Ghost? and do you stand bound in baptism
to yield faith and obedience to any person, save to God only, the ordainer of
the sacrament of baptism? Did the Pope, or any of his polshorne Priests
baptize you? No August contra. Petil, lib, 3 6, 49
it is Christ that baptizeth, as Saint Austen has well observed And (to use
Saint Chrysostomes words) Chrysostom. in Mat. bomil, 51
It was not the Priest that Baptized thee: it was God himself that held thine
head. Thy baptism therefore binds thee, not to the Bishop or Church of
Rome, but to the will and precepts of God, who held thine head, and in whose
name thou was baptized.


The Recusant. Well, have you observed any other semblances betwixt us and the
Euticheans.


The Minister. Yes, the Euticheans Vide Aug, de haeres. c. 92.
denied, that Christ after the union of the two natures, had a true body; but
(as Leo signifies) Leo, de ieiu^i^ 7, miens, sermon, 6,
a body without shape, dimensions or circumscriptions: so do you hold, that
Christ's body in the sacrament is without all shape, and dimensions, that may
be perceived.

2 The Euticheans said, that Christ was whole both in heaven and earth, as
appears by Vigilius his speech against them: V gellius lib, 4 cotra Eutich, ^
4,
the flesh of Christ when it was on earth, surely was not in heaven, and now
because it is in heaven, certainly it is not on earth.

Now your transubstantiation brings in this Euticheanisme: for you hold that
the body of Christ is both in heaven and earth at one time; Yea, on as many
altars, and in as many places, as the sacrament is.

3 The heretic Eutiches, although the Scriptures were against him; yet did,
he bear the world in hand, that they were on his side. Council. Chalced, 4.
Tell me (quoth he, jesting with them that reasoned with him) in what scripture
lie the two natures? So although your religion be repugnant to the sacred
Scriptures, yet you blush not to avouch that See the Catholics Supplication,
before alleged,
it is agreeable to the sacred text of Gods word and Gospel.

4 Carisius, Eutiches his follower boasted, that the ancient fathers' were on
his side, when as indeed they were against him; Council. Chalced, act, 4.
Ego (says he) secundum expositionem trecentorum octodecim paetrum sis credo:
thus do I believe according to the three hundred and eighteen fathers. So do
you make great bragges, that all antiquity is on your side, and that your See
the Catholics Supplication.
religion was believed by all primitive Pastors, established by all
oecumenicall Councels, and vpheld by all ancient Doctors. But I hope to make it
more then manifest before I leave you, that it is indeed the common sewer of
heresies.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Eunomij, Ethnophronians and
Euphemites?


The Minister. Eunomius taught, that so a man were of his faith and religion,
it skilled not greatly what sins he committed: Aug, de haeres, cap, 54,
fertur atiam (says Saint Austen) vsque adeo fuisse bonis moribus inimicus, vt
asseueraret, quod nihil cuiquam obesset quoru^ libet perpetratio, ac
perseuerantia pec catorum, sihuius, quae ab illo docebatur, fidei particeps
esset.

To this heresy of Eunomius subscribeth Cardinal Bellarmine: for he
teaches, that so a man adhere to the Church of Rome, and profess outwardly
this Roman religion, it skilleth not whether he have any inward virtues, or
no. His words are these. Bellarm, de eccies, milit, cap, 2,
This is the difference between all other opinions and ours: that all other
require inward virtues, to make one a member in the Church, and therefore they
make the true Church invisible: but we although we believe, that there are to
be found in the Church all virtues, faith hope, and charity: yet that one may
be said in any sort to be a member of the true Church, whereo Damascen, de
haeres 6.
the Scripture speaks, we do not think that an inward Virtue is required,
but only an outward profession of faith, and fellowshippe of Sacraments.

The Ethnophronia^s fobserued diverse heathenish customs: so do you, as
hereafter (God willing) shall be showed at large.

The Euphemitae would needs (as Epiphan, haeres, 80.
Epiphanius reports) be called Martyriani, because of the multitude of their
supposed martyrs: the like conceit have you of your selves; otherwise you
would not brag of your Millions of Martyrs, and honor every traitor as a
Martyr, as you usually do.


The Recusant. wherein do we resemble the Gnosimachi and Hemerobaptists?


The Minister. The Gnosimachi held, that Damascen do haeres,
Vulgar Christians were not to study the Scriptures, so do Navarius in
Enchirid, et, Hosius, lib, 3, de authorit art scripturae.
you.

The Hemerobaptists were Isidor. Etymol, lib. 8, cap, de haeres, Iudaeorum et
Epiphan, de haeres, 17, ante Christum.
reputed heretics, because of their continual washings: so may you be
reputed, because you use to sprinkle your selves with holi-water.

2 The Epiphan de haeres, 17. ante, Christum,
Hemerobaptists thought they were cleansed from their sins by these their
washings: so do you, as heareafter (God willing) shall be plainly showed.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the heretics, which Saint Aug, de
haeres. cap, 47,
Austen calls Hierarchitae, and Isidor, Etymol, lib, 18, cap, de haeres,
Christien.
Isidore Heraclitae?


The Minister. They held (as the same Ibid.
fathers testify) that children, dying young, shalnot possess the kingdom of
heaven: so do (...), Tridet. sess, 7 ca^* 7* Be^a^m, lib, 1, de baptism, c. 4.
Position. Ingolsta ai ens de purgat et. George D^di^ in his instrut^on of
Christia religren page 13.
you exclude all children out of the kingdom of heaven that die unbaptized,
and do place them in limbo puerorum.


The Recusant. Wherein do we join with the Herodians.


The Minister. The Herodians ^^^ Damas^en de ^ares,
gave the name and honor of Christ to Herod: so do you give the names and
honor of Christ to the Pope; allowing these words of Bernard to Eugenius:
Bernard, ad Eugenium.
unction Christuses, Rog. Cup^rs de (...),
et Christu^ domini: That is, Thou art by unction Christ, and art therefore to
be called the Lords Christ. Yea, you say, that the Pope is, (...) in (...), 22.
aeque ac Christus deus, ens secundae intentionis, compositum ex deo et homine,
That is, a God as well as Christ, a being of the second intention, compounded
of God and man: and that ^ Cu^^^s de (...), p. ^28. (...) 6 ^ (...) regum et
Dominus Domi (...).
Christ and the Pope in the Church are vnum et idem caput, one and the same
head.

But to speak particularly of Christ offices, you give to the Pope, Christ's
Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical offices.

To begin with his Kingly office, the Pope is (say your blasphemous writers)
1 The R. Cu^ers de (...)* page 43. ^t. Paul. 4, ad D^ce^ (...), in Pulla
King of Kings* and Lord of Lords, (...) et (...), 6.
the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, (...). lib, 1, sect. 7,
to whom al^ power is given in heaven and earth. As for his priesthood, this
also you give to the Pope: calling him Distinct* 40, (...) Papa^^ R, Cupers
page, 29 Andreas in cap. quanto de traslat et Pa ^^m. ^ap, (...).
Pontificem optimum maximum, and that great Priest according to the order of
Melchisedeke.

And as touching his Prophetical office, what do c Amicius epist ded^^at^ad,
Greg, 13.
you not oppugn it? for you give unto the Pope supreme authority, in
interpreting of the Scriptures, account him the supreme judge in controversies
of religion, and prefer his judgment before the judgment of the whole world.

Cuperi de eccles page 11.
Papae sententia (says one of your writers) totius or^is placito prefertur.
Ioharmes de Turre cremat^ lib, 3. cap. 64.
Et si totus mundus (says another) sentiret contra Papam, videtur quod
sententiae Papae standum esset. Yea, you make old wives fables, of equal
authority to the words of the Gospel, and command, that their traditions,
be honored Council, Trident sess. 4,
paripietatis affectu ac reuerentiae, with the like affection of pi^ty and
reverence.


The Recusant. Wherein resemble we the Heracleonites?


The Minister. The Heracleonites did August de haeres, cap, ^6, et Epiphia*
haeres* 6
anoint their followers departing out of this life, and gave them a kind of i
Vide Bellarm. de sacra^, extrem. vnct, cap, 10, et Compend theol, lib* 6 c, 35.
extreme unction: so have you devised a sacrament of Council, Tria^nt sess. 14.
can, 1* Bellarm, de sacram. extrem, vnct, cap, 2, Catech, ^o^, p, 495 Gregor.
de Valentia, lib, de numero sacram no^ae legis cap, 1, Canisius de sacram sect,
5, Henricus Henriques lib, de Sacram* cap* 7.
extreme unction; wherein you anoint the five senses of the sick party; his
eyes, ears, nostrels, mouth and hands; also theireynes which is the seat of
concupiscence, and his feet which are the instruments of execution.

2 The Heracleonites used certain Aug. de haeres* c, 16, et, Epipha^.
prayers, or rather magical enchantments over the sick: so do you.

3 The prayers which the Heracleonites used over the sick, were in a
Hebraicisverbis, August de haeres, c, 16.
strange language; so are yours.

4 The Heracleonites grounded their annointings and prayers, upon the first
Chapter of Saint James; so do you, as appears by these words of Canisius;
Canisius de Sacram, extrem. vnctionis,
huic sacramento testimonium long clarissimum praebet Iacobus Apostolus, cum
in haec verba scribit: infirmatur quis in vobis? inducat presbyteros Ecclesiae,
et orent super eum, vngentes eum oleo in nomine domini. How sandy a
foundation this is, I hope to make it appear most evidently, in an other
place. I will now but touch and go.

5 The Heracleonites, ascribed remission of sins, to their prayers, charms and
annointings, as these words of Saint Austen give sufficient witness, Aug, de
haeres, cap, 16.
feruntur morientes suos nouo modo, quasi redimere, id est per olcum, balsamum,
et aquam, and inuocationes, quas hebraicis verbis dieunt super capita little.

The same power ascribe you to your prayers over the sick, and annointings:
for you affirm, that this unction Canisius de Sacram, extrem. vnct, et Catech
Rom, page 500
gives health to the body, Pellarm, de, Sacram, extrem. vnct, ca, 7, et, 8.
Gregor, de valent, lib, 1. de, numero Sacram, c, 1, Council, Trident, less 4, c,
4, Catech, Rom, page 505 et Canisius, de sacram extre^ vnct, sect, 1,
wipeth away the relics of sin, and Catechism, roman, page, 507,
causes the Devil to flee from them.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Helcesees, and Halzaits?


The Minister. The Theod, hae^ericarum fabular lib, 2, cap, de Helcesees.
Helcesees, made a twofould Christ: the one above in Heaven; the other below
here upon the earth: so do you faigne a twofould Christ, the one above in
heaven which is visible, palpable, and circumscriptible: the other in the
sacrament, which is invisible, incircumscriptible. etc.

1 The Epipha haeres, 19, ante Christu^
Helzaits prayed in a tongue not understood of the common people: so do you. 2
The Epiphan, Ibid*
Helzaites worshipped the relics of Saints: so do you.


The Recusant. Wherein do we join with the Meletians, and Messalians?


The Minister. The Theod, haeres fabul, lib, 4.
Meletians used mauy sacring belles in their service: so do you. Yea, ye are
worse then the Meletians: for the Meletians did not baptize bells. But ye Vide
Heshus^ de er^o^^bus Pontif, loc, 16,
baptize belles, and ascribe unto them a spiritual power against evil
spirits, thunder, lightning, etc. Vide fox, martyrolog, p. 865. col, 1, ed*
This was one of the grieuances which the Princes of Germany complained of, in
the assembly at Noremberg, that the Suffraganes exacted of the people such
great sums of money, for baptizing of belles.

Yea, we read, that Pope John the fourteenth, At the coronation of the Emperor
Otho.
baptized the great bell of the Church of Laterane, and gave unto it his own
name.

^ The August de haeres, cap, 57
Massalians did mumble over their prayers with their lips, having their
hearts far from God; and believed that they were heard for their much babbling:
so do you mumble over your prayers, upon a pair of beads, and rehearse a
number of Aue Mary's, Pater nosters, and Creeds. To give an instance in your
Printed, anno Dom* 15 83,
Jesus Psalter, in the Preface of that book; You give us to understand, that
there be three kinds of Psalters. The first is David's Psalter, which
contains thrice fifty Psalms: The second, our LADIES Psalter, and
contains thrice fifty AVE MARY'S: and the third is Jesus Psalter, containing
fifteen petitions, which being ten times repeated, do make in all thrice
fifty. And just suitable hereunto there are fifteen petitions, where Jesus
Jesus, Jesus mercy, is ten times word for word to be repeated, in the
beginning of them. And if you fail in the account, your denotion is imperfect.

2 The Theod. divine, decret. cap, de baptismo,
Messalians affirmed, that baptism was only auaieleable to cut away former
sins: so do Conc^l, Trident sess, 7, ^an, 10 Petrus Lomb. lib 4, did, 14,
Rhemist, Heb, 10* sect ^*
you affirm, that baptism does only purge and respect sins past, and that
sins commttted after baptism are to be done away by other remedies.


The Recusant. Wherein do weresemble the Marcosij?


The Minister. The Irenaeus lib, ^, c, 18.
Marcosij did baptize in an unknown language: so do you baptize in a language
not understood of the vulgar sort*

2 The Epiphan. haeres, ^4.
Marcosij did anoint those, whom they baptized, with Chrisme, and
Opobalsamum: so do you use anointing in Hugo, lib. 2, de Sacram, part* 6. ^t
Ga^r^* ^i^^. lib ^* distinct, 6, quaest, 3.
baptism, and in Catech* Rom, p, 324.
confirmation.

3 The I^enaeus lib ^, aduers haeres, ^a^, 15*
Marcosij accounted themselves perfect: so do your orders of religion account
themselves, to be in the state of perfection.

4 The Iren lib. 1, ^* 1^,
Marcosij alleged a multitude of Apocryphal writings: so do you.

5 Epiphan. haeres ^4*
Marcus the founder of their faction, went about to make his followers believe,
that he could transubstantiate wine into blood, in the Sacrament: so do you.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Marcionites?


The Minister. 1 The Epip^a^ haeres. 42.
Marcionites gave women power to baptize: so do Can. Adijcim^^ 10, quaest. 1,
et. ^an mul^er. deconsecrat did, 4, Bellarm, de baptism. cap. 7.
you.

2 The Epiphan, haeres 42.
Marcionites separated married folks, under the pretense of Religion: so do
Bellarm. c, 21, propos^t,
you.

3 Epiphan. Haeres 42
Marcion, though he extolled virginity; yet lived he unchastly: so do your
popish Priests.

4 Epiphan. Haeres. 42. et Tertull lib 4 contra Marcion.
Marcion, taught that diverse men's souls were delivered out of hell, by Christ's
descending thither: so do Canisius de fid: et symbolo sect. 1^
you teach, that the souls of the Patriarchs were in hell before Christ's
descension: and that they were thence delivered thereby. Rhemist. in Act* 2
sect 12, e^ George Douly Priest in his p^aine instruction page. 13.



The Recusant. Wherein do we join with the Manichees?


The Minister. The August. de cant^^o no^o cap. 6.
Manichees taught that Christ had not a true body, but an imaginary body: so
do you, when you affirm, that the body of Christ lies hidden in the Eucharist
under the form of bread, which cannot be, unless his body be a fantastical
body: for every true body is visible, palpable, and circumscriptible; and has
the dimensions of height, breadth, and depth.

2 The Leo sermon, 4. de, quadragesima ^t Gelasius apud Gratia, in part. 3 de
conse^rat, distinct 2. ^. ^elatum est, e^c comperimus.
Manichees abstained from the Cup of the Lords Supper, and received one kind
only: so do Council. Trident sess, 21 ^c^n 2. Rhemist. in Ioha^ 6 sect. 11.
Bellarm lib. 4, de eucharist, cap, 20,
you.

3 The Aug epist. 74,
Manichees condemned marriage in their Priests, whom for their excellency they
called electos; so do (...), 28, c, nu^^um fa^ere^ s^^d^aconum. et Catech, Rom,
page. 526.
you in yours.

4 The August de moribus Manich, ^ib, 2, c, 13,
Manichees although they abstained from flesh in their feasts, yet used they
diverse other dainty meats: so you, albeit you are Dist^nct, 4, can, Denique,
enjoined to forbear^ flesh, yet may you with the Fide ^rasmum in Colloquio
militi^ et Carthusian^.
Carthusian Monks, feed on most dainty fish, and power in wine withal.


The Recusant: Wherein are we like the Monothelites?


The Minister. The Monothelites taught, that there was but one will in Christ:
so did Honorius the Pope, as appears by this his speech: Council Constant, 6,
act, 12,
vnam fatemur voluntatem domini nostri Jesus Christi:

2 Polychronius a Monothelite heretic, went about to confirm his false
doctrine by visions and apparitions: and affirmed before the whole Council,
Constant, 6, act, 15,
Council of Constantinople, that a certain beautiful young man appeared unto
him, and taught him to say, that there was but one will in Christ.

Many such like apparitions produce you for the confirmation of such doctrines
as cannot be confirmed by the scripture: as namely, your blasphemous doctrine
of transubstantiation, and adoration of your breaden God, your superstitious
prayers for the dead, your heathenish doctrine of Purgatory, and other such
like doctrines of Devils, and lies of Antichrist.


The Recusant. What agreement is there between us and Montanus.


The Minister. Epiphan, ^ae^^s, 48,
Montanus, albeit he rejected not the sacred scriptures; yet disputed, he that
they did not contain all things necessary to salvation: so albeit you reject
not the scriptures, yet dispute Bellarm, de verbo Dei, lib, 4, c, 4, et, 5,
Stapleton, in prefat, in Ret^ct, p^in, (...) tr^^. A^bertus Pig^i^^ d^ eccles
Hierarch, l^, 1, ^ 2 (...) Ca^^^ ^^cor, theol, lib, 3, fol, 98, L^^danus lib*
^^ Andradiu^ Payva lib, 2,
you, that they contain not all things necessary to be known concerning
faith and manners.

2 Tertul, lib, de anima.
Montanus taught, that small sins are to be purged after this life; and that
souls shall not depart out of prison, until they have paid the uttermost
farthing: so do Council, Trident. sess, 9 Po^itiones Iugo^stadiens* de Purgat.
Ecclus in positionibus anni. 1519, (...), 6 Petrus de Soto in Confess, Cathol
de Purgat, Bellarm, de Purgat, lib, 1. c. 1, et lib, 2 c, 6. et Rhemist, in,
Math, 12, sect, 6.
you teach, that there is a certain infernal place in the earth, called
Purgatory, in the which, as in a prison house, the souls which are not fully
purged in this life, are there to be cleansed and purged by fire, before they
can be received into heaven.

3 Tertul, de ^oron^, (...)
Montanus taught, that prayers, oblations and sacrifices should be offered for
souls departed: so do Council, Trident, sess, 9, Cat^^^. Romans page 127.
you teach, that the souls tormented in Purgatory, do find great ease by
the prayers, sacrifices, fastes, indulgences, and also by the alms of the
living.

4 etrus de Soto. in Confess. Cathol. de Purgat, Bellarm, ^ib. 2, de Purgat, c.
15, ^^ 18, et Rhemist in Thessalo, 2 sect* 19 p Aug, de haeres, cap, 26
The Montanists held the prophecies of Prisca and Maximillain great reverence:
so do you the lying Legends of Catharine, Brigit, and of others.

5 The Tertul. de, Corona mili^es
Montanists boasted of their Martyrs; so do you, as has already been showed.


The Recusant. Wherein do we resemble the Nudipedales, Nestorians, Nouatians
and Nicolaites?


The Minister. You resemble the Aug* de haeres, cap, 8,
Nudipedales in taking it for an act meritorious, to go barefoote in
pilgrimages and processions.

You resemble the Nestorians, in covering your selves Theodoret.
with a cloak and color of the right faith.

You resemble the Nouatians in intituling your congregations by the name of the
Catholic Church: Cyprian. (...)* 73* (...)* Iubanum
Nouatianus enim (as says Cyprian) simiarum more, quae cum homines non sint,
homines tamen imitantur, vult ecclesia catholicae authoritatem sibi et
veritatem vendicare, quando ipse in ecclesia non sit, imo adhuc in super contra
ecclesiam rebellis et hostis extiterit: That is, For the Novatian Heretic,
after the manner of apes, which being not men, yet do counterfaite men, and do
covet to seem men, will challenge to himself the authority of the Catholic
Church, and the truth; whereas he himself is not in the Church, but
contrariwise a rebel against the Church.

You resemble the August, de haeres, cap, 5.
Nicolaites, in holding it to be lawful to commit adultery, Et habere
faeminam semel in mense ad expurgandos renes: si non cast, tamen caute.


The Recusant. Wherein do we come near the Nazarites?


The Minister. The August, de haeres, cap, 9,
Nazarites mingled Jewish ceremonies with Christian religion: so do you as
appears by sundry particulars.

To insist in a few of the^, you Vide missale Rom,
consecrate every year, a paschal Lamb after the fashion of the Jews, as is
appare^t in the end of your According to the use of Saru^*
Mass, where there is annexed the form of consecating the Paschall Lamb,
with this prayer: Vouchsafe to sanctify this Pascall Lamb, that as many of
thy people as do eat thereof, may be replenished with all heavenly
benediction* etc. And I have been credibly informed, that there were certain
Monks near our University of At Barnewell Abbey by Cambridge*
Ca^bridg, that did use once a year to roast a Lamb whole, and so to eat it
with herbs.

2 You borrow your Iubily from the Jews, as both Extra^* commu^. lib, 5, tit,
9. Clement, 6.
Clement the 6* acknowledges in his Bull, and others of your fat Bulls of
Basan.

3 Your Decret. part 3 distinct* 4* c, 127
sprinckeling of holy water, your Distinct, 4, cap, 11.
hallowing of Churches, your Decret* Gregor, lib, 1, tit, 15 cap, 1, gloss.
anointing of men and women, and many other Galat, 4, 9
impudent and beggarly rudiments, are begged of the Jews.

The ^piphan* de haeres, Nazar.
Nazarites also bragged of their revelations and miracles: so do Bellarm* de
notis Ecceles. lib. 4, cap, 3, et Cunerus in lib* de notis eccles.
you.


The Recusant. wherein do we join with the Heretics called Osseni?


The Minister. The Epiphan, haeres. 19. ante Christum.
Osseni affirmed, that prayer should not be used in a known language: so do
you affirm, that the service of the Chuch, should not be celebrated, in the
vulgar tongue, but in the Latin only.

And this tongu^ your setter forth of the Complutense edition, does so much
exalt, as that he is not ashamed blasphemously to In Praefat.
write, that he has placed the Latin text between the Hebrew and and Greek,
as CHRIST between two thieves*


The Recusant Wherein do we join with the Priscillians?


The Minister. The Priscillians separated Viros a nolentibus faeminis, et
faeminas a noletibus viris* August* de haees, cap* 70.
husbands from their wives, and wives from their husbands: so do you separate
married folks, and place them in monastical places. Yea, one of your chief
Bella^m* de matrim, cap, 21 Propos. 1*
writers sets down this proposition: That a man or wife before marriage
consummate, may enter into a Monastery, albeit the other party be most
unwilling.

2 The Nihil scripturarum canonicaru^ repudiant, simul cum Apochryphys lege^tes
omnia, et in authoritate sumentes, etc. Aug. de haeres* cap* 70.
Priscillians boasted that the sacred scriptures were on their side, so do you.
(...) in his Quaitron of Reasons* p* 39
We do not teach (says one of your Doctors) any doctrine, but such as is
derived out of the holy Bible.

3 The Sed in suos sensus vertentes, quicquid in sactis libris est, quod little
eve^tat errorem* Aug. in loco supra c^tato.
Priscillians wrested the scriptures from their true sense and meaning, and
gave unto them such expositions, as served for the confirmation of their
errors: so do you wring the text till you make it bleed, and so press the two
dugges of the scriptures, the old and new testament, that (to use the words
of an ancient Volusia* epist. i* ad Nichol* 1, Scriptutarum mammillas du^
durius presserunt, sangu^^^m pro lacto biberunt.
writer) instead of milk you drink nothing but blood.

4 August* Ibid.
The Priscillians made the books Apocryphal of equal authority with the
Canonical: so do Council, Trident* ^^ss. 4
you.

5 The Aug, de haeres cap* 70
Priscillians made no account to forswear themselves, so that thereby they
might cloak their filthiness and villainies: no more do you, as appears by
these words of your Rhemists Remist* in Act, 23
If thou be put to an oath, to accuse Catholics for serving God, or to utter
any thing to Gods The Papists account all the Magistrates in this Realm, for
Gods enemies.
enemies, thou cughtest first to refuse such unlawful oaths. But if thou have
not constancy and courage so to do: yet know thou, that such oaths bind not
in conscience, and in the law of God. Yea, Tollet, lib. 4, Instit. Sacerd* cap,
21. et 22
cum index (says one of your Romish Cardinals) non iuridice petit iuramentum,
vel contra iustitiam, licet vti aequive. catione secundum mentem suam contra
mentem iudicis, vtputa* quaerenti fecistene illua? responde at non feci*
intelligendo intra se non hoc tempore, aut vt uarrem tibi, aut aliquid fimile:
That is, when a judge demands an oath unjustly, then may the examinate use an
aequiuocation according to his own mind, contrary to the Judges mind: as
for example, being thus demanded; did thou that fact? He may answer; I did
it not. Understanding secretly in his mind: not at this time, or to tell it to
thee, or some such like shift.

Lo here, your Rhemish and Romish doctors, (to use Saint Austens words) Aug.
de haeres* cap. de Priscillians.
Propter occultandas contaminationes et turpitudines suas, habent in suis dog
mati bus and haecverka:

Iura, periura, secret^m prodere noli. And answeareable to this their doctrine,
is the practice of your Seminary Priests: for they when they are brought
before a Judge, or Justice, do (I warrant you* commonly answer by the
aforesaid aequivocation. And it is indeed noe marvel: for one of your Saints
did the same, as witnesleth Nauarrus in these words Navar. Tom* 5, cap. ^2*
Sanctus Franciscus rogatus qua perrexisset quidam homicida, qui iuxta cum
transier at; manus per manicas immitt ens, respondit non transijsse illac;
intelligens, non transijsse per illas manicas: Saint Francis, being asked which
way a certain mur therer did run, which had passed by him, putting his hands
into his sleeves, answered that he went not that way; meaning that he went
not through his sleuees.

And the like answer (I fear) will you, and many of your fellow Recusants
make, if you be demanded, which way any of the late traitors went, that are
not yet apprehended. But let us come to the Pepuzians.


The Recusant. Wherein do weresemble them.


The Minister. The August, de haetel, cap* 27.
Pepuzians held it lawful, for women to enter into the ministry, and to
administer the sacraments: the same power give Bella^m, de Ba^t^s^ sin cap. 7.
you, not only to laymen and women, but to Pagans, that are not baptized
themselves.

2 The August de (...) cap* 27
Pepuzians honored their Town Pepuza, and called it Jerusalem: so do you
honor the City of Rome, and callit the holy City, and the seat of the Popes
holiness. But you are greatly deceived: for as Jerusalem was first an Mat. 27.
53
holy City, and afterward became a a killer of the Prophets, and Math. 23. 37
stoner of them that were sent to her: so Rome, albeit it was once a Rom* 1. ^
faithful City; yet is she now Reu^l, 1. 6,
drunke^ with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martys of Jesus.
Yea she is become such a sink and sewer of all wickedness, as that your ^wne
Friars ^rie out: Mantua^us in ^^log, ^.
Heu, Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat; exilium virtus patitur: Idem fastor* lib*
2. de Ca^nispriuij co^su^tud.
Vrbs est iam tota Lupanar: that is, Alas at Rome now nothing but money does
reign: virtue is quite banished: the whole City is become a Stews.

3. The Aug. de haeres cap* 27.
Pepuzians bragged, that in the said Pepuza, there once appeared Christ in the
form of a woman: so may you brag, that in the said City of Rome, there
once appeared Christ (for sog you call the Pope) in the shape of a woman: for
there was once a woman Pope, as sundry Platina in Johan 8, ^acob Bergom. lib,
de clatis muheribu^. Sabellicus Ennead 9. li^, 1 Leomcus Chal co^dyl h^, 6,
Volatera^, lib, 22 Rauisius ^ ^x^ot in off^cina, ^ faeminae (...) vi^ile^ (...)
Mantu (...) lib, 3. ^ob^^tus ^a^^es (...) Roman ^um Pontif: Rodrigo Sanches in
don Alonso 3, Pero Mexia^^ Silua vat^^^um ^ect, Johannes de Pineda part 3, lib,
1^. cap 23. Johannes de* Parisijs lib. ^^ potesta^e Regia et Papali. Balam
Monachus in lib. contra pri natum Pap^. Anton^nus (...) ^. (...) 6. Alonso,
Venero in Enchyrid, et Theodericus Nie^^^s. lib*
writers testify, who in a most solemn procession, as she went with
accustomed pomp to visit Saint John de Laterane, was openly delivered of
child between the Church of Saint Clement, and the Theater which is now called
Coliseo, to the wonderful amazement of those that were present.

And to prevent the like mishap ever after, there was immediately provided
Sabellicus (...) 9. lib, 3.
Marmorea sella circum medium inanis: qua novus Pontifex continuo ab eius
creatione residet, vt sedentis genitalia ab vltimo diacono attrectentur, a
chair of


The Recusant. What need you English this? I pray you leave this matter and
come to some other particular.


The Minister. It is no marvel that you are loath to hear any more of this
matter: for it is a great blot to your success^on, that a whore sat sometimes
in Saint Peter's chair. But proceed to the Pelagians.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with them?


The Minister. The Council* milevitan c. 1 Council Aphrycan, c, 76 ^t Aug. de
haeres* cap, 88. August, Stenchus in Annot. in Genesis a. et Bell
Pelagians held, that Adam, if he had not sinned, should have died, and that he
died not by reason of his transgression, but by the condition of nature: so
some of arm. de gratia primi hominis cap. 9.
your Doctors hold that Adams body was by nature created mortal, and that
sin was not the cause of the mortality thereof.

2 The Aug, de haeres, cap, 88* et Council* milevit* c. 2, et Council. Aphrycan,
c. 77 u Pighius in lib. de ce^trouers* in controuers, de peccato origi. et
Bellarm* de amissione gratiae cap. 15.
Pelagians held, that Children are conceived and borne without original sin:
so do n you hold, that the Virgin Marie was conceived* without original sin,

3 The Aug. contra* Julian. lib, 6. c. 6
Pelagians taught that concupiscence is sanctified by baptism; and that it
being evil before baptism, does afterward begin not to be evil: so do
you teach, that concupiscence in the regenerate is Council. ^rident* ^est, 5, ^.
5 Censur. Colon page, 46, et 54, et Catechi^* Romans in praecept. 9
no sin, but indeed Franciscanus quidam coloniens, apud M^lan. part, 4. in
disput. theol.
a good thing: not considering that of Saint Austen: Aug, contra Julian. lib.
5, c, 3
concupiscentia ^arnis, aduersus quam bonus concupiscit spiritus, et peccatum
est, et poena peccati, et causa peccati. The concupiscence o^ the flesh,
against which, the good spirit lusts, is both sin, and the punishment of
sin, and the cause of sin.

4 The Pelagians said, that the Gentiles might by Philosophy know God, and be
saved; so do Catharinus in Comment in, 1 Timothy, 4. et Andradius lib. 3,
Orthodox, Explicat.
you.

5 The August, co^tra* Julian lib, 4. c, 3*
Pelagians would not subscribe to this doctrine of the ancient Council.
Arausica^* ca^, 22, et ^0 Cyprian, lib, 2 epist, 2 Hie^o^, in Gal. 3 Greg, lib,
2, moral, cap, 15 August de nuptijs et concupis. lib. 1, cap, 3
fathers, viz: that all the works of unbelievers are sins. Noe more will
you; for it is your resolute sentence, Vide Alex. de Hales part, 3, quest. 66,
Tho^, Aquin* in 1, Secund, quaest. 109 Bonauent. in 2. Sent. distinct. 2^.
Bellarm* de great. et libero. Arb. lib. 5 cap 4, ^, et 9 Gabriel Biel. 3,
Sentent-dist. 27, et Ruard Tapper de great. et libero, Arb. page 291.
that a man pressed with no temptation, may without faith, by the special
help of God, and without it, by his own strength so do that which is morally
good, that noe sin at all be committed therein.

6 The Pelagians, define that only to be sin, Quod libera voluntate, et a
sciente committitur.
which is done voluntarily, and upon knowledge: so do some of your Popish
Andradius lib, 3, Orthodox. Explicat*
doctors.

7 The August, lib, 1, de great* cap, 18*
Pelagians held, that a man is endued with freewill, before he has received
the grace of God: so do you all jointly.

8 The Pelagians taught, that man's freewill Aliquantum ad non pecca^d ^m valet.
somewhat avails to cause him not to sin: for which cause Saint Austen
speaks thus of Pelagius the Arch-hereticke: Augustine epist. 106.
Sometimes he poysed the power of the will with such equal waights in even
balance, that he might determine how it auailed somewhat to cause us not to
sin: which if it be so, there is noe place reserved for the help of grace,
without which, we see freewill has no force at all, in causing us not to sin.

To this haerisie of Pelagius subscribeth d Tapper, Ruard, Tapper de libero
Atb. p. 294, et 288
and the whole C^^il, ^rid^t. Sest* 6, can, 7.
Counsel of Trent.

8 Yea some of the Pelagians held, that a man by f August, de haeres, c. 88, et
Innocent epist, 93 apud. August.
the strength of his own free will, may keep all the commandementes of God:
so do some of your Gab^ell. Biel 3. Sent, did, 27 et Ruard, Iap. de libero,
Arb. p 291.
Doctors.

9 The Pelagians ascribed more to man's freewill, then they did to Gods grace:
so do you, when you say Gratiae auxilia, quod effiacia sint, habent dependenter
ab ar bit^j liberate, Molina de great. et libero, Arb quaest, 14, art, 1.
disput, 12. Thom. Aquin. contra, Gent, lib, 3, c ^59. et Greg, deval.
that the efficacy of Gods grace does depend upon the cooperation of man's will.

10 The August. de haeres, cap, 8.
Pelagians affirmed, that grace is given to the merit of our works: so say
Gabriel Biel. lib, 2, did, 27. et Andrad lib, 6. page 507.
you that to the merit of our works, is given both gratia de congrue, et
condigno.

11 It was the heresy of August, de haeres, cap, 88
Pelagians to teach; that grace is* not only obtained by good works, but also
by them kept and augmented: with this iumpeth the determination of the Council
of Trent, when it says, Si quis dixes it institiam accept Council, Tride^t,
sess, 6, ca^. 24
non conseruari, atque etiam non augericoram deo per bona opera: sed opera ipsa
fructus solummodo et signum esse instificationis adeptae, non etiamipsius
augendae causam, anathema sit.

12 The Aug, de bono Perseuerant, lib 2, c, 5, et de, haeres. cap. 88.
Pelagians taught, that it is not impossible for a just man, to be quite
without sin in this life. And you are not far from this heresy, when you
say, Council, Trident, sess, 5, c 18 Sot in assert. Cathol. de lege. Ruud. T^p.
p. 189, et Bella^m lib. 4, de Iustisi^at. cap.
That a man is able in this life to perform the law of God perfectly. But we
may say to you as Orosius did to that heretic Pelagius: * Thou say est, that
it is not impossible that a man should be without sin. I repeat it again
and often times, the man which can do this, is Christ the Son of God. Either
take that name unto thee, or lay aside thy boldness, God has given that but
to one, and that is he which is chief and first borne among many brethren.

13 The Pelagians when the ancient fathers told them, that no man is perfect
and void of sin, answered thus; Aiunt ad co^perationem d^^ null um esse
percontra, Pelag. fectum Hieron ad Ctesiphont.
no man is perfect in such a degree of perfection, as God is perfect. So when
we tell you, that our righteousness in this life is imperfect, and such as (to
use Saint Austens words) Iustitua in hao vita tanta est vt, potius constet
remissione peccatorum, quam persectione virtutum. Aug, de, Civita te dei li. 19
c, 26
rather consists in the remission of our sins, than in the perfection of
our virtues: your a unsweare is this: Ruard Tapper page, 189
Quamvis imper fect a sit nostra iustitia, eius comparatione quam in coelis
habebimus, perfecta tamen est habito nostrae imbecillitatis spectu: although
our righteousness be imperfect, in comparison of that which we shall have in
heaven; yet it is perfect in respect of our weakness.

14 The Pelagians interpreted (as Saint Hieron, in Ies* cap, 13
Hierome says) these sentences of scripture; our justice is lik a cloth, of a
menstrous woman, and no man is good, noe not one, in this sort of as if the
holy Ghost had meant, that man in comparison of God is not just, or good: And
the self same slight and evasion use Iodocus Tilestanus in lib co^tra
confess, Antuerp ens. cap, 6 de iustifiat.
you.

15 The Pelagians, to prove the strength of free will, and the perfect
fulfilling and accomphshing of the Law, usually objected on this wise. God
has give a sundry commandments to man, since his fall, some pertaining to the
Law, some to the Gospel, as commandments to turn unto God, to believe, to
repent. And all commandments are given in vain, unless there be freedom
of will, to do them, or not to do them. Aug, de great, et lib. arb, c. 4
Magnum ^ liquid Palagiant (says Saint Austen) se scire patant, quando dicunt,
non iuberet dens quod sciret ab homine non posse fierr, the Pelagians think
themselves cunning men, when they say, God would not command that thing, which
he knows a man is not able to do. The self same objection uses Cardinal
Bellarm, lib, 5 de great. cap, 18
Bellarmine: not considering that these commandments, set not down what we
can do, but what we should do, not our ability but our office and duty
August, de great. lib, 5, ca, 4
Ideo iubet (says Saint Austen) aliqua, quae non possumus, vt nouerimus, quid
ab ipso petere debeamus: That is, God does therefore command us to do some
things that we are not able to do that we may understand, what we ought to
crave of him.

Saint Ambrose also is of the same mind with Saint Augustine, as appears by
these his words: * Non ob aliud vnquam datur praeceptum, nisi vt quaeratur
praecipientis Ambros, epist ^4
auxilium: the precept is given for no other cause, but that the help of the
precept giver may be sought.

16 Bellarm. lib, 5 de great, c, 15
You object with the Aug, de nature. great: cap, 67
Pelagians, that if there were not in man freewill, there should be no place
left for reward or punishment: for if a man (say both they and you) do evil
of necessity, he deserves no punishment, and if he do well unwillingly, a
Aug: ibid
he is worthy of no reward. We answer with Saint Austen: In recte f^ciendo
ideo nullum est vin culum necessitatis, quia libert as est charitatis, quae
diffusa est in cordibus nostres per spiritum sanctum: in well doing there is
noe bond of necessity, because freedom or liberty comes of love, which is
shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost.

17 Bellarm, de great, lib, 5, c, 14
You object also with the Peccata caueri non possunt, peccata no^ funt.
Pelagians, that sin is either necessary or voluntary: if necessary, it
cannot be avoided, and so consequently is noe sin: if voluntary it may be
avoided: therefore man has free will, and may avoid sin. We answer with
Saint Austen: Aug, contra Caelestinum de perfect, iustit.
Arbitrij libertas semel data est homini, sed quiapeccauit voluntas, sequuta
est peccantem, peccatum habendi necessitas: Man had once free will given him,
but because he sinned willingly, there followed as a reward of his sin, a
necessity of sinning.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the heretic Prodicus?


The Minister. Prodicus said, that Licet palam et aperte forn? cari, prodicus
apud Clement. in Stromat, li. 3
it was lawefull to commit open fornication: so say some of you. Iacobus de
Vale^tia in ps, 18
Tam Iudaei, quam Saraceni and mali Christiani (confesses one of your own
side) vt detestabilem vitam suam excusent, et defendant, asserunt fornicationem
simplicem esse licitam: as well Jews as Saracens, as also bad christians, to
the intent to excuse and defend their wicked life, say that single fornication
may be lawefully used. And Erasmus speaking of some of the best of your Roman
clergy, says thus. Erasmus in Enchirid. mil: Christiani c. 14
bona pars eorum, quas vulgus integros, et incorruptos appellat, simplicem
fornicationem, and moderatum voluptatis vsum vt leave commissum, neutiquam
refugiunt: a great many of them, whom the common sort takes for good and
godly men, not a whitte abhor single fornication, and a sober use of
pleasure, reckening it to be but a petie fault. Yea this vile opinion was s^
eagerly maintained by some of your side, as that the bishops assembled in the
late Council of Basil were constrained to decree h Council, Basili* Sess, 20.
that h fornication should be sin. Antoninus also, the Archbishop Florence,
was feign to stand up against them saying Antoninus in Sum. part, 4, tit. 22,
cap, 2, S, 3
confutatur error dicentium simplicem fornicationem non essepeccatum, hereby is
confuted the error of them that say, that single fornication is no sin.


The Recusant. Wherein do we resemble the Scribes and Pharisees.


The Minister. The Pharisees separated themselves from the common sort of men;
as more holy then they, and contemned the poor Publicans as sinners: and
therefore Fosterus in dictionar, hebraic.
some learned men think, that they be called Pharisees, quasi segregati, quod
vitae sanctimonia a vulgi moribus separati essent non aliter atque Monachi quos
Carthusianos vocant, as separated and divided from the common sort in holiness
of life, much like unto your Monks, which be called Carthusians.

2 The Scribes and Pharisees, Mat, 23, 23
tythed Mint, and Annise and cummin, and left the waightier things of the law,
as judgment, and mercy, and fidelity: so do you; for you are so precise, as
that you will not eat an egg in Lent; and yet will you not stick to lay your
hands on the Lords anointed, and to murder the Nobles.

3 The Pharisees were Josephus lib. Antiquit, tom* a, lib, 17, cap, 3
astutum hominum genis, arrogans, and interdum regibus quoque infestum,) a
subtle kind of men, arrogant, and sometimes enemies to kings and rulers: so
are you as appears by your late traiterous and unnatural stratagems.

4 The Scribes and Pharisees Mat, 23. 15
compassed sea and Land to make one of their profession: so do you Jesuits and
Semina^ie priests.

5 The Scribes and Pharisees despised Christ and his disciples, and called them
Nazarens, in dispite of his Country, and hence came this scornful question o
John t. 4^
used by Nathaniell: o can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? After the
same manner do you scoff at our Religion, and say with Harding, that it
began not at JERUSALEM, but at Wittemberge. p Harding in his confutation of
the APol.


6 The Scribes and Pharisees boasted much of their succession. and said. We
be John, 8, 33
Abraham's seed: We be John, 9, 28, 29
Moses disciples: We know that God spoke with Moses: but this man we know
not from whence he is, or what he can show for his succession.

And when Christ began to confute their errors, they said unto him: Luk,
20, 2 Catena in Luk, 20
tell us by what authority thou do these things? or who is he that has
given thee this authority? Which words of theirs Saint Cyrill frames in this
sort* Cypril in^^
tu ortus ex Judah, commissosnobis fasces vsurpas: thou being of the tribe of
Judah (and therefore having no right by succession unto the Priesthood) take
upon thee the office that is committed unto us.

S. Chrysostom likewise imagines the Pharisees to say thus: Chrysostom in Mat,
homil, 39 Bellarm, lib, ^ de eccles, c, ^, ^^ Rhemist, in* Act 23, sect, ^,
Tu de sacerdotali familia natus non es: Senatus tibi hoc non concessit:
Caesarno^ donauit: thou art not of the house of priests: the Senate has not
granted it thee: the Emperor has not given it unto thee.

The like boasts make ^ you of your succession. Yea, Pope Symmachius was not
ashamed to avouch, that if the Pope want virtues, and goodness of his own,
the virtues that are given him by Peter his predecessor are sufficient. His
words are these, Distinct, 40. non vos.
In Papa si desint bona acquisitaper meritum, sufficient quae a loci
praedecessore praestantur. And your gloss upon the same says thus; Petrus
fecit Papam haeredem bonitatis sua, Peter has made the Pope heir of his
goodness. z Glossa. ibid.


7 The Pharisees put their confidence in their works, and thought they could
merit eternal life by them: for so Saint Phil, 3. 7
Paul says of himself, that being a Pharisee, his works were his gain and
advantage, in the matter of Salvation. * Andrad. lib. 6, page 5 17 Soto in
assertione Cathol, de bonis operibus. et Lindan. lib. 3 cap, 20,


The very same doctrine of confidence in works, and of the merit of Salvation
thereby, do Council. Trident sess, 6, c, 32
your Popish Doctors teach in their books and Pamphlets extant to the view of
the world.

8 These Pharisees Mark, 7, 8
laid the commandments of God a part, and observed the traditions of men: so
do you.

9 The Epiphan. haeres* 15, ante, Christum.
Scribes were reputed heretics, for that they brought in a sophistical
exposition of the law.

And for the self same cause, may you well be ranged amongst heretics: for
there was never any heretics, that ever devised more vain and sophistical
expositions upon the word of God, nor more contrary to the meaning of the holy
ghost, than you have done.

1 To insist in some particulars. To prove, that whosoever accuses the Pope
shall never be forgiven, Pope Sixtus Vide Council. tom. 1, purgat, Sext*
alleged Math. 12, 32. Whosoever shall speak against the holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world nor in the world to come.

2 To prove, that the Pope is greater than the Emperor, Innocentius the third
Decretal. lib. 1 tit. 33* de mayor et minor obed.
alleged Gen 1. 16. God made two great lights: the greater light to rule the
day, and the less light to rule the night And he interpreted it thus: Ibid,
God created two lights in the firmament of heaven; so in the firmament of the
earth two rulers; a greater light, and a lesser light, that to the Pope and the
Emperor; the one to govern the day, the other the night, that is, the Pope to
govern the Clergy, the Emperor the Laytie.

3 To prove that the Pope may set his foot in the neck of the Emperor, Pope
Alexander the third Vide Na^cler generat, 40*
alleged Psalm. 91. 13. Thou shall walk upon the Lion and aspe: the young
Lion and the dragon shall thou tread under feet.

4 To prove that the Popes power is greater then all other created power,
extending it self unto things caelestiall, terrestrial and infernal,
Antoninus alleges Psalm 8. 6. 7: Thou have put al things under his feet
all sheep and oxen: yea and the beasts of the field: the fowls of the air,
and the fish i Anton in: Su^. part, 3, tit, 22, c, 5, S. 4 et 5, 6.
of the sea, etc. where (says he) By oxen are meant Jews and Heritickes; by
beasts of the field, Pagans and infidels; by sheep, Christians both Kings and
subjects; by birds of the air, Angels in Heaven; and by fishes in the sea,
souls in purgatory.

5 Io, Capistr. de Papa et eccles. authori. 1, 2, fol, 21.
Did not the Lord (says another of your sophistical Scribes) command Peter,
Luke 5. 4. To lanch out into the deep, that he might signify the height of
power in Peter. Again, why did the Lord send Peter only to the sea to fish
with an angle or hook, but chat he would insinuate, that he intended to set
Peter over the whole surging sea of the tempestuous world? and why did he
command him to fish with an iron hook, but that he was disposed to commit
unto him the sword both of the spiritual and temporal Empire.

6 To prove the antiquity of the Cardinals of Rome, Andreas Barbat* apud
Polyd de Invent, lib, 4 cap, 9
Andreas Barbatius alleged, 1. Samuel 2. 8. Domini sunt cardines terrae, the
corners of the earth be the Lords.

7 To prove that the Church of Rome has the m Anacletus epist. ^
pre-eminence over all other Churches, Anacletus alleges Math. 16. 18. Upon
this rock will I build my Church; And he expounds it thus: Super hanc
petram, id est super ecclesiam Romanam aedificabo ecclesiam meam, upon this
rock, that is, upon the Church of Rome will I build my Church.

8 To prove that the Church is built upon Saint Peter, Bellarm, de Pontif*
Romans lib, 1, cap. 17
Bellarmine alleges the self same place; and expounds it thus: upon this
rock, that is, upon thee Peter will I build my Church.

But, the ancient fathers expounded this text, far otherwise. Hear the
words of Saint Austen: Aug. de verbis dom. secundu^ Mat. sermon. 13
It Is es ergo (inquit) Petrus; et super hanc petram, quan confessus ^s; super
hanc petram quam cognovisti, dicens; tu es filius dei vivi, aedificabo
ecclesiam meam, id est super meip sum filium dei vivi aedificabo ecclesiam
meam. Super me aedificabo te, non me super te etc. Thou art Peter (says
Christ) and upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon this rock which
thou haste acknowledged by saying; thou art Christ the son of the living GOD
will I build my Church; that is, upon my self the son of of the living God,
will I build my Church. I will build thee upon me, notme upon thee: for men
intending to build upon men said, I hold of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas;
and others that would not be builded upon Peter, but upon therocke, said, I
hold of Christ, for the rock was Christ, upon the which foundation Peter
himself was builded, since no man can lay any other foundation besides that
which is laid, which is Christ Jesus.

Saint Hierom subscribeth to the same exposition. Hieron. in Math, 16, 18
By the rock (says he) we understand Christ whom Peter confessed: for if
we take Peter for a stone of the foundation, all the Apostles shall be alike,
according to that which we see in the Apocalypse.

And in the same current runs Eusebius. in homil* in fest, Paul et ^ etri,
Chrylost* homil, 55, in Math et in psa* 32, et in sermon. 21, de Pentecost.
Eusebius Emissenus, Ambros. in Ephesians* c, 2* et in lib de Incarnatione Dominici
sacramenti,
Ambrose, r Chrysostom, Epiphan in lib 2, contra haeres*
Epiphanius, Origin, in Mat, 16* tract. 1.
Origin, Beda in Johan. cap, 21.
Gregory, Beda, Hilar* ^de Trinitate lib, 2. ^
Hilarie, b Fabianus, and the whole stream of the ancient Fathers.

But to wound you with your own weapons Titelman a Friar agrees with the
forenamed writers. His words are these: Fabianus epist. ad Zenone^
Imperatorem. b Titelmanin Math, 16.
Upon this rock, up on this truth of faith which thou haste confessed, and
have uttered saying: thou art CHRIST the Son of the living GOD: and also
upon my self a most sure rock, which in thy foresaid speech thou have
confessed; I will build and found my Church.

So does also, Ferus an other of your writers, Ferus in Math 16.
It is not (says he) for man that he should be a rock, even as Job says is
my strength the strength of stones. Nay, on the contrary all flesh is grass
and every man living is altogether vanity. It belongs only to Christ, that
he should be a rock, etc. Again, Ibid.
when Christ says: I will build my Church upon this rock; he mean eth nothing
else then he will build his Church upon a sure and immovable foundation,
against which all the assaults of his enemies can be able to do nothing.

By this it is manifest that Christ built not his church upon Peter, as a
chief foundation (for we are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the head cornerstone) or upon any other
man: for no man is so firm and constant, that he cannot be moved, as we may
also see in Peter; and therefore an other Rock is to be sought for, and truly
in the scriptures Christ himself is often called a Rock or stone, as in Isai,
I will put in Sion a cornerstone, approved and chosen, whosoever believes in
him shall not be confounded. And in the Psalm, the same stone which the
builders refused is beecome the head stone in the corner.

9 To prove that Saint Peter was not only the head of the Church, but of the
Apostles also, Bellarm, de Pontifice Romans lib, 1, cap* 12
Bellarmine alleges Math. 16, 19. I will give unto thee, the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound
in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose one earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven.

But this text of scripture proves no such matter, as the ancient fathers have
well observed. Orig* in Mat, 16, tract. 1.
Hoc dictu^, (says Origin) tibi daho claues reg^i coeloru^, caeteris quoque
commune est: and quae sequuntur, velut ad Petrum dicta, sunt omnibus communia:
this saying, to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, is common
to the rest of the Apostles: and the words that g Si super vnum illum Petrum
tantum existimas aedificaritotam ecclesia^ quid dicturus es de Iohanne filio
^onitrui et apostolorum vnoquo. etc. Orig. ibid.
follow, as spoken unto Peter, are common unto all.

Again, if only upon Peter thou think the whole Church to be built, what
will thou say of John the son of thunder and of every of the Apostles? shall
we dare to fay, that against Peter only the gats of hell shall not prevail, and
against the rest of the Apostles they shall? and not rather in them all, and
every one of them, that to be true which is said; the gates of hell shall not
prevail? and that also, upon this rock will I build my Church? for if this
speech to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, be common to
all; why then should not all that which goes before, and follows after, as
spoken to Peter be common to them all?

Saint Cyprian is of the same judgment with Saint Origin, as appears by
these his words. Cyprian de Simplicitate Prelat.
Hoc erant vtique et caeteri Apostoli quodfuit Petrus, pari consortio proediti
et honoris et potestatis; sed exordium ab vnitate proficis^itur, vt ecclesia
vna monstretur* the same were the rest of the Apostles doubtless, that Peter
was, endued with equal fellowship, both of honor and of power: but the
beginning came of unity, that the CHVRCH might thereby be showed to be one.

Hierome also holds that the place before alleged, is not sufficient to
prove Saint Peter to be the sole ministerial foundation of the Church. His
words are these: Hieron. lib 8 aduers* Iouinian
thou will say, the Church is founded upon Peter: yet in another place, the
same thing is done to all the Apostles; and they all received the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: et ex aequo super eos ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur, and
equally upon them all, is the strength of the Church settled.

Beda likewise is of opinion, that the power of binding and loosing was given
to the Apostles with out any perogatiue of one morethen other. I will give you
his express words. Bead homil. in Euang. quem me dicunt.
Potestas ligands et soluendi, quam vis soli Petro a domino data videatur;
tamen absque vlla dubitatione noscendum est, quodet caeteris Apostolis data
est: the power of binding and loosing although it seem to be given of the
LORD to Peter alone; yet without all doubt we must know, that it was also
given to the rest of the Apostels.

To this doctrine also have whole Council. Aquigranens. c. 9. ex Is^d et Synod.
Colone^s. med. 96, c, 1.
Councels subscribed, But what need I stand in quoting of ancient fathers and
Councels? I will wound you again with your own weapons, and make you cry out
with Julian: Theodoret, Tripart, histor* lib, 6* cap. 17
Proprijs pennis configimur etc. Behold we are wounded with our own quilles,
out of our own books they take armor which in fight they use against us.

Hear the words of one of your own School Doctors: victoria de potestate
ecc es 1 elect* 2 can, 3 et 4, page 84
Apostoli habuer unt aequalem potestatom cum Petro; quam sic intelligo, quod
quilibet Apostolorum habuit potestatem ecclesiasticam in toto orb* and ad
omnes actus ad quos Petrus habuit: all the Apostles had equal power with
Peter; which I thus understand, that every one of the Apostles had power
ecclesiastical in the whole world, and to all those acts to which Peter had
the same*

Couarruvias, also one of your own Canonists, comes with this canon shot
against you: Iuxta n Covar* tom* 1. part, 2, S. 9* page 242* col* 4
Catholicorum virorum authoritates, etc. According to the authority of
Catholic writers; and the common tradition of all men, the Apostles received
Aequalem cu^ Petro potestate^ ordinis et iurisdictionis: etc:
equal power with Peter, both of order and jurisdiction? in so much doubtless,
as every Apostle had equal power with Peter, from God himself, and that both
over all the World: and to all actions that PETER could.

10 To prove that Peter was at Rome, your popish Rhemist, in 1, epist* Petri et
Ballarm* de Pontif, li* 2, c, 2
Doctors quote, 1. Peter 5, 13. the Church that is at Babylon saluteth you; by
quoting whereof they have gained thus much, that Rome is Revel, 17, 5
great Babylon the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth.

11 To prove that the Pope sitting in Peter's chair cannot err in matters of
faith and Doctrine, your Bellarm. lib, 4 de Pontif, cap* 3, et Rhemist. annot*
in Luk, 22. sect, ^^
Doctors quote, Luke, 22, 32. The Lord said Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired you, to winnow you, as wheat. But I have prayed for thee; that thy
faith fail not. In which words our Savior Christ promises not, that Peter's
judgment should never err, but that in his great and dangerous temptation,
into the which our Savior foresaw he should fall, his faith should not utterly
fail. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, that is Chrysostom, in
Iohannem ho-mil 72
Chysostome, ne in fine pereas, that thou finally perish not. And in another
place; Idem in Math homil 83
non dixit quippe non neg abis, sed vt non deficiat fides tua: cura enim ipsius
factum est ne omnino Petri fides euanesceret: Christ did not say, thou shall
not deny me, but thy faith shall not fail; for by his care and favor it came
to pass, that Peter's faith should not utterly be extinguished.

Reverend Beda in Lu* 22
Beda likewise says, that our Savior prayed for Peter, not that he should
not fail, that is, that after he was fallen by denying him, he might rise
again by repentance to his former estate.

Now mark I pray you, how ridiculous this illation of Romish doctors is: I
have prayed that though thou do thrice deny me, and shamefully forswear
me; yet nevertheless thy faith shall not quite fail: therefore neither Peter
nor the Pope can err in any point of Religion.

Secondly, suppose that CHRIST had prayed that PETER should neither err in
judgment, nor fail in the temptation now at hand; what does this advantage
your holy father the Pope? for if this be to be understood of the Pope, then
must he also first be sifted by Satan as Peter was, and* deny Christ as
Peter did: for if the one part must be understood of the Pope, then of
necessity must the other be also: and so consequently must you needs confess
(as well you may) that the Pope is a denier of Christ, and a shameful
forswearer of him

Thirdly, this text does indeed quite overthrow your Romish Religion: for
your doctors jointly, teach that Christ's prayer is availeable for the Pope, to
keep him from error, not in the Temple, or Pulpit or closet or any other
common or private place; but only in his chair, consistory and Council, in
debating doubtful causes of Religion: as if Christ had prayed not for the men,
but for the walls, which is directly against the words of our Savior: for he
says not, I have prayed for thy chair, tribunals, Courts, consistories, and
Councels, that they shall not err; but he says, I have prayed for thee,
noting his person, that thy faith, that is the persuasion of thine heart
believing in me, shall not utterly fail. Lo here, Christ prayed for Peter's
person, and not for Peter's chair.

Lastly, although Peter had great confidence in him self, saying: Luke. 22. 33
I am ready to go with thee into prison and to death. John, 13 37
I will lay down my life for thy sake: and Math. 26* 33.
though that all men should be offended by thee, yet would I never be
offended. Notwithstanding (I say) all this Peter demed him thrice, and swear
that he knew not the man.

Now as Peter trusting two much in himself, and esteeming more of himself
then his fellow disciples did, chanced to fall more shamefully then all they:
so your holy father the Pope, trusting to much in his own strength* and
esteeming more of himself, then all other Bishops do, happens to oppose
himself against Christ, and to do far worse then all others.

As Peter therefore, finding his faith to have quailed, acknowledged his fault,
and went out at the crowing of the Cock, and wept bitterly: so your pretended
successor of Peter, finding himself to have fallen away from the true God
into idolatry and apostacy, should with Peter acknowledge his fault, and go
out of BABYLON, and weep bitterly,

12 To prove that the Church cannot err, Bellarm* de eccles* lib* 3. cap. 14
Bellarmine alleges 1. Tim. 3-15, That thou may know, how thou ought
to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God
the pillar and ground of truth. But he is greatly deceived herein: for that
Church which the Apostle here calls the house of God, and the pillar of truth
is not any visibly company but an invisible, that is, the elect only in a
visible congregation: for they alone are that house wherein God dwells; as it
may firmly be proved by these words of the Apostle: Heb. 3, 6*
Christ as the son, is over his own house. But what house is it? is it a
visible Church? Ibid.
No; we are the house, if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of the
hope unto the end.

Secondly the Church is called a pillar metaphorically; because it is like unto
a pillar. For as a pillar does support and vnderprop^e a building and makes it
more stable, firm and strong: so the Church does sustain and support the
truth: for the truth is no where preserved but in the Church, neither is there
any place or seat in which it rests, save only among the godly in the Church.

Now then if your will reason thus: Truth is nowhere to be found but in
the Church. therefore whatsoever the Church decrees is truth, you do in
reasoning committ a fallacy: for the Church may preserve truth, and yet be
not altogether free from error.

3, The Argument which Bellarmine draws, from this text of scripture
follows not: for James, Peter, and John; Galat, 2, 9
were accounted, (...), to be Pillars; and yet these Pillars erred both in
matters of Doctrine, and manners They erred in manners, when they Mat, 16, 56
forsook Christ, and fled; and they erred in doctrine, when they John, 20, 9
knew not the Scriptures, that Christ must arise again from the dead; and when
they dreamed of the restoring of an earthly kingdom. h Act, 1, 6


To conclude this particular, the Apostle calls the Church (...), the Pillar
of truth, and not (...), the foundation of the truth, and Saint Chrysostom,
least any should take occasion i Chrysostom, in 1 Timothy, 3, 15
from the Apostles words, to ascribe overmuch (as you do) to the Church,
conuerteth the proposition, and says, (...): truth is the pillar and the
establishment of the Church.

13 To prove that the Church cannot err, your The men's, annot. 1, Tim, 3, 15
Doctors also allege, Math, 28, 20, Lo, I am with you always until the end
of the World: which promise is not (as Bellarm, de eccles, lib, 3, c, 14
Bellarmine would have it) made to any visible Church or congregation, but unto
the godly and elect only, as the learned fathers expound it. To begin with
saint Chrysostom* Chrysostom, in Mat, cap, vlt.
Noncumillis (says he) solum modo futurum esse dixit, sed cum omnibus qui
post eos credituri fuerant, neque enim Apostolivsque ad consummationem seculi
victurierant. Sedtanquam vni corpori, loquitur cunctis fidelibus: he says not,
that he will be with them only, but with all that afterward should believe.
Neither were the Apostles to live until the end of the world. But as unto on
body, he speaks unto all the faithful.

Saint Hierome subscribeth to the same exposition Hieron, in Mat. cap, vlt.
Ostendit Christus se nunquam a credentibus recessurum esse. Christ here
shows, that he will never go from believers.

So does, also Rabanus Maurus an ancient Divine; Raban in Comment. in hurclocum.
Ex hoc intelligitur quodvsque ad finem seculi non sunt defuturi in mundo;
quidiuina mansione and inhabitatione sunt digni: by this is meant, that until
the end of the world there shall not be wanting in the world such, as are
worthy an heavenly mansion and dwelling place,

To adioyne one answer more, this text which your popish Seducers allege,
does rather make against the^, then for them: for Christ (according to his
promise) is with every one of his elect, and not with so^e one particular man
only, as they would have the place to sound. And (to use saint Origens words)
Orige^ in Ro^. 15
Nulli Apostolorum dictum est singulariter and nulli sidelium, ero terum; sed
multitudini ecclesiarum pluraliter, ero nobiscum. It is spoken to none of the
Apostles, and to none of the faithful singularly, I will be with thee; but
to the multitude of Churches, plurally, I will be with you. Yea, some of your
Illa est vera et sine co^^adictitione probatio, quae etiam ab aduersarijs ipsis
singula testifica tionis prosert. Iren. lib, 4
own writers acknowledge, that Christ said not, I will be with thee Peter,
and with thy successor only; but Dyonis Carthusianus in hunc. locum.
ero vobiscum hoc est, cum vobis et successoribus vestris, cunctisque
fidelibus: I will be with you, that is with you and your successors, and with
all the faithful. And the said Dyonisius gathers not hence, as your later
writers do, that the visible Church cannot possibly err. Dyonis. ibid,
sed quod nunquam deficiet fides in toto, sed vsque in finem seculiper sever
abit in aliquibus christiana religio; but that faith, shall never fall away
totally, but that Christian religion shall abide in some until the end of the
world 14 To prove that not only the predestinate, but the reprobates also may
belong unto the true church and be members thereof Bellarm, de eccles, lib, 3*
c, 7
Bellermine quoteth Math. 3 12, where the Church is compared to a Barn floor.
wherein is both chafe and wheat; and Math. 13. 47, where it is compared to a
draw net cast into the sea, that gathers of all kinds of fish: and 2. Tim. 2.
20. where it is compared to an house, wherein there be not only vessels of gold
and of silver, but also of wood and of earth, and some for honor, and some
unto dishonor.

All which places must be understood of the visible Chuch, whereof the
reprobates may be members for a time; and not of the invisible, whereof none
can be members, but those only, that are truly ingrafted into the body of
Christ Jesus; for (to produce your own decrees against you) Decr part. 2 cons
24. quaest. 3. cap. 8
ad ecclesia^ non pertinent illi, qui in eius vnitate corporaliter misti per
pessimam vitam separantur, they belong not to the Church which being corporally
mixed in the society thereof, are separated by a most lewd life.

To be short, the places alleged by Bellarmine, do prove, that wicked men may
be in the Church, but not of the Church. This my distinction is grounden upon
the very words of Saint John; 1 John. 2. 19.
they went out from us, but they (...) not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would have continued with us. But this comes of pass, that it might
appear, that they are not all of us.

15 To prove that the Catholic Church is, and has been always visible,
Bellarm. de eccles. lib. 3, ca. 12
Bellarmine heapeth up these places of Scriptures: Math, 18, 17: tell it unto
the Church. Act, 15. 4. When they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of
the Church. Phil. 3. 6, concerning zeal, I persecuted the Church.

For an answer hereunto, I will lay down the sundry significations of the
word ( ecclesia Church) in the sacred Scriptures.

This word (not to speak of it as it is Psalm, 26, 5 Act. 19 32, 40.
used in malampartem, viz. For a company of wicked people) is taken six ways.

1 For all the elect that have been in the world, are, or shall be. and in
this sense it is used in the Symbol of the Apostles: I believe the Catholic
Church: and Math, 16, 18. Upon this rock will I build my Church. Ephesians. 1,
22, God has appointed Christ over all things to be the head to the Church,
and Chap, 5, 32, I speak concerning Christ and concerning his Church.

2 For that part of the elect, which triumphs with Christ in heaven, and is
commonly called the try umphant Church

This is that Church which S. Paul calls Ephesians 5. 27
a glorious Church not having spot etc., or any such thing: and that Revel. 7.
9.
great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds and
people and tongues which stood before the throne, and before the Lamb clothed
with long white robes, and palms in their hands, in token of victory:

3 For that part of the elect, which warreth upon earth and is called the
militant Church; And of this the Apostle speaks Acts, 5, 11, great fear came
on all the Church, and 1, Tim, 3, 15, the house of God, which is the Church of
the living God:

4 For particular congregatio^s confessing Christ's true Religion, as Revel, 2,
1, unto the Church of the Ephesians, etc.

5 For the governors of the Church, as Math. 18, 17 tell it to the Church,
that is, to the governors of the Church.

6 For the people or flock committed to every Pastors charge, as Act. 20.
28, take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy Ghost
has made you overseers to feed the Church of God etc, in which words poimnion
and ecclesia do signify one, and the same thing.

Now to apply this distinction; the places alleged by Bellarmine, do prove
that particular Churches and the members thereof, are visible; but they prove
not, that the Catholic and universal Church is visible. Now we grant* that
particular congregatio^s are visible: but we deny with the ancient Clemens,
Alexand, lib. 7 Strom. Ambros in Epes, c, 3, et Aug. in psa, 90 concione, 2
fathers, that the Catholic Church is visible: and do hold that it cannot be
espied but by the eyes of faith. Therefore your Cardinal disputes, not ad
idem,

16. To prove that it is impossible that the visible Church should utterly
fail upon the earth, and fall from God, Bellarm, de eccles, li, 3, c, 13
Bellarmine quoteth Math. 6. 18. The gates of hell shall not peruaile against
it. In which place our Savior speaks of the universal invisible Church, and
not of a particular visible Church, as Bellarmine expounds it; for had he
spoken of a visible Church, he would have said aedificabo ecclesias meas, I
will build my Churches: because many particular visible Churches were then
about to be in the world.

But he says, aedifica^o ecclesiam meam, I will build my Church; noting one
Church, not many, even as it is also in the Creed: I believe the Church; not
this or that Church, but the Catholic Church, which is an invisible company
of the faithful, elected and chosen to eternal life, and not a visible
company of men, professing the same faith and religion, and acknowledging the
Bishop of Rome to be their chief pastor, as your Popish Lindan. lib, 4 cap,
84. Canisius de praecept. eccles. ar^, 9, et Bellarm, de eccles, lib. 3. cap. 2
Doctors define it. Again, had Christ here meant any other Church but the
Church universal, then had he not been as good as his word: for the gates of
hell have prevailed against the four great Patriarchall Seas of the Churches,
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Ephesus, and against all other
particular Churches that flourished in the former a^es: It remains therefore
that we expound this place, not with Bellarmine of a particular visible Church,
but of the Catholic universal Church, against which the gates of hell Valitura
and indicat. praevalitaras negat.
shall be of strength, but they shall not pruaile by strength.

17 To prove that general Counsels ought only to be called and appointed by
the Popes authority, Bellarm. de Council lib. 1, cap* 12
Bellarmine alleges Math. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there am I in the mids of them. Lo hear your learned writer
says, that to assemble in the name of Christ, is to assemble in the name of
the Pope. A goodly exposition.

18 To prove that all men are bound of necessity to receive the decrees of
Counsels, without any trial or examination of them, Bellarm. de Council. lib.
1. cap. ^8.
Bellarmine quoteth* Deuteronomy 17. 12* That man that will do presumptuovsly, not
hearkening unto the Priest (that stands before the Lord thy God, to minister
there) that man shall die. But he quoteth not the words immediately going
before; Verse ^^
according to the law, which they shall reach thee, and according to the
judgment which they shall tell thee, shall thou do. See here, there is no
absolute judicial power given to the Priest, but according to the law. Thus
does your Cardinal dispute with us, as the Matthew. 4. 6*
Devil did with Christ: quoting only that which serves for his turn, and
leaving out that which makes against him.

19 To prove that the goods of the Clergy both secular and ecclesiastical,
ought to be exempted from paying tribute to Princes, Bellarm, de Clericis. ca.
2^*
Bellarmine quoteth, Ge* 47. 22 only the land of the Priests bought he not:
for the Priests had an ordinary of Pharaoh, and they did eat their ordinary,
which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their gound: and verse 27.
Joseph made it a law over the Land of Aegipt unto this day, that Pharaoh should
have he fifth part; except the land of the Priests only, which was not
Pharaohs.

But Bellarmine considers not, that the word Cohen here used, signifies as
well a Prince as a priest; To quote some places for the verifying hereof, In the
41. of Genesis, verse 45. Joseph is said to marry Asenath the daughter of
Potipherah Cohen, that is prince not Priest of On: for I do nor think, that
Joseph would marry the daughter of an idolatrous Priest.

Likewise in the 2. of Samuel, chap, 8. verse, 18, it is said that the sons
of David, Cohanim haiu, were chief rulers or Princes, not Priests.

So in the 20 of the same book, verse, 26. Ira the Iairite is called Cohen le
David, that is a chief prince about David, as Saint Hierome expounds it
saying Vide Hieron, traditi. du. hebraic* in lib, Regum*
Ira Iairites erat sacerdos David, id est magister; sicut alib^ scriptum est.
filij autem Dauiderant sacerdotes, id est magistri fratrum suorum. Ira the
Iairite was a Priest of David, that is, a ruler, as it is else where written:
the sons of David were priests, that is rulers of there brethren.

Now to make application of this that has been said: whereas the text only
proves, that the Princes or officers of Pharaohs household, who were maintained
by Pharaohs provision, were exempted from paying tribute to Pharaoh: Bellarmine
pretends to prove thereby, that priests were exempted too.

To conclude, be it granted, that they were thereby exempted, It was but a
politic law made by JOSEPH for that Country only: Princes of other
Countries were not bound to that constitution

20 To prove that every one has from his nativity an Angel for his custody,
the Rhem. in Apoc. 1, sect, 9
Rhemists quote Act, 12. 15. It is his Angel: which place me thinks might
better be translated thus; it is his messenger: for the Act. 12. 5
Church that made earnest prayer unto God for him, were not so simple as to
think, that an Angel Ibid* verse. 13
knocked at their entry door: but they verily thought, when Rhode told them
that it was Peter that knocked, that it was a messenger come from Peter.

21 Rhem. ibid.
They do also for the same purpose, quote Genesis 48, 16. The Angel, which has
delivered me from all evil, bless the children, etc. But here by Angel is
to be understood Christ: as appears by Genesis 31, 13, where the same Angel
is called the God of Bethel. and by Genesis 32, 28. where Jacob is called Israel,
because he had power with God: and by the 30. verse of the same Chapter, where
the place where Jacob wrestled with him, is called Peniel, because he had
there seen GOD face to face.

22 To prove that the Angels do offer up our prayers unto God: your Rhem. in
Apocal. 8.
Rhemists quote Revel. 8. 3 Then another Angel came and stood before the altar
having a golden censer, and much odours was given unto him, that he should
offer with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden altar, which is before
the throne.

But they considered not, how that Saint Austen upon this place, says, that
Aug. quaest, in Euangel. 34*
this Angel is Christ: that the golden censeris his body, out of which God u
Aug homil. in Apocal. 6.
smelt a sweet savor; and that CHRIST does sanctify our prayers, as the
Altar sanctifies the gift.

23 To prove that Angels may be worshipped, your Rhemin. Apocal, 19* lect. 4
Rhemists quote Joshua. 5. 14. Joshua fell on his face to the earth and did
worship.

But herein Joshua non adorasset, ni si: agnouisset deum, etc. Origin, homil.
6, in Ioshuam.
Joshua (to use Saint Origens exposition) would not have adored and worshipped
him, had he not known him to be God: for who else is the Prince of the army
of the power of God, but our Lord Jesus Christ?

Thus you see, how that Origin thinks, that Joshua worshipped not an Angel,
but the Lord Christ x the Captain of the Lords host,

24 To prove that the Virgin Marie was free from Original sin, Joshua 5, 14
and 15 * Bellarm, lib, 3 de calt. Sanct. cap, 15.
Bellarmine quoteth Cantic. 4, 7. thou art all fair my love, and there is noe
spotte in thee,

But Saint Paul, who was a better expounder of the scripture, then Cardinal
Bellarmine, took this place in the Canticle, to be meant of the spouse of
Christ, and not of the mother of Christ: for he y appli eth it to the Church
which is all glorious, and without spot or wrinckle: and not to the Virgin
Marie, who (to use Saint Austens words? Aug de sanct. Virginit, cap, 4
was more blessed y Ephs, 5. 27
percipiendo fidem Ceristi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi; by perceiving the
faith of Christ, then by conceiving the flesh of Christ.

25 To prove that there are seven Sacraments, viz. Baptism, the Eucharist,
Confirmation, Penance, Matrimony, orders, and extreme unction; your Bellarm,
lib, 2. de Sacram* c. 26 et Rhem, in Apocal, 1, sect. 3
Doctors heap up together sundry places of Scripture, where the number of
seven is mentioned, as, 2, Reg. 5. 10. Elisha sent a messenger unto him,
saying; Go and wash thee in Jorden seven times, and thy flesh shall come
again to thee, and thou shall be cleansed. Exodus. 29, 37. Seven days shall
thou cleanse the Altar, and sanctify it, so the Alter shall be most holy.
Job, 42. 8, Take unto you now seven Bullockes and seven Rams and go to my
servant Job, and offer up, for your selves a burnt offering, etc. And the
Revel, where mention is made of seven Churches, seven Angels, seven stars,
seven Candlestickes, and seven thunders. I wonder that Iud, 8
these dreamers did forget to quote Genesis 41, 18 19, 20. Where Pharaoh dreamed
that he saw come up c Revel, 17, 8
out of the river, seven lean and evil favored kine, which did eat up
seven fat kine: and Revel. 17, 3. Where Saint John saw a woman sit upon a
scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy which had seven heads, etc.
For this beast with seven heads is called a Mystery, or a Sacrament, as your
vulgar translation has it. I will not say, that by this beast with seven
heads, is meant the Pope with his seven sacraments: for d the seven heads are
seven viz, Caelius, Auentinas, Exquitinus, Capitolinus, V^minalis, Palatinus et
Quirinalis.
mountains, whereon the woman sits: they are also seven Viz. Reges,
Consules, Dece^ viri, Tribuni, Dictatores, Imperatores, et Papae.
kings: viz. Reges, co^sules, December viri, Tribuni, Dictatores
five are fallen, and viz. Imperatores.
one is, and viz. Papae,
another is not yet come. But I say, that they may as well pick out hence
their seven popish sacraments, as from the places which they allege: for the
number of seven is here my sticall, and prophetical, as well as there.

26 To prove that all which die unbaptized, unless the want of baptism be
recompensed either by martyrdom or penance, must needs be deprived of
eternalllife, your Bellarm, lib, ^* de baptism. c; 4 et Rhem, in John. 3.
Doctors quote. John 3. 5, Except that a man be borne of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God, whereby water is not to be
understood material water, but spiritual water wherewith the holy ghost
dothwash us into newnes of life, or if it were to be understood, of the Element
of water, yet (as the master of the sentences expounds it) Petrus Lombard. lib.
4, Sent did, 4
intelligendum est de illis qui possunt et contemnunt baptizari: It must be
understood of those which may: and yet contemn to be baptized. Yea, one of
your Innocentius 3 apud Greg, Decret. lib. 3. tit. 42. cap, 3
Popes judged, that this place makes nothing against baptizing of infants, as
appears by these his words: Ex vi literae satis patet praedictas
authoritates, etc. By the very letter it is apparent, that the foresaid
authorities (he spoke of this place and of diverse others such like) must only
be understood of those that are of age, which have a multitude of sins, and
cannot be understood of little ones, which only have original sin. But if
the Pope had not said it; Bernard. epist, 77
Nequaquam possum omnino desperare salutem, si aquam non co^temptus, sed sola
prohibe at imposibilitas: I cannot altogether despair of their salvation, if
contempt do not prohibit the water of baptism, but only an impossibility of
having of it. Clemens, epist, 4
Bonum enim est, et puritati conveniens etiam corpus aqua diluere; bonum dico,
non quasi principale illud, in quo men's purificatur, sed quod hoc sit sequela
illius boni, in quo caro diluitur: for it is a good and a convenient thing, to
wash the body in water; good I say, but not that principal good, whereby the
mind is cleansed, but that this is a sequel or a consequent good thing to
that, whereby the flesh is washed.

27 To prove that the body of Christ is really and substantially in the
Sacrament, you usually quote Math. 26. this is my body. But you must know, that
the scripture usually speaks tropically in the declaration of the Sacraments,
and says (this is) for (this signifies and represents) for example sake and
for verifying what I have said, take a view of Genesis 17 10. Where Circumcision
is called the This is my covenant. genesis 17, 10*
covenant it self, whereas it was a It shall be a figne of the cou^na^t gen,
17 11
sign only of the covenant: and of Exodus 12. 11. where the lamb is said to
be the It is the Lords Passover*
Lords passover when as it was only a It is the sacrifice of the lords
Passover* Exodus 12, 27.
sacrifice and The blood shall be a token for you Exodus 12, 13.
token of the Lords passover.

Saint Paul also speaking of the Sacrament of the Jews, says, that ^, Cor*
10* 4
the rock was Christ, that is, signified Christ.

Now to apply this, in the same sense Christ here speaks of this sacrament
of the new testament, saying: this is my body, that is this signifies,
exhibiteth and presents unto you my body.

This my exposition is confirmed by the judgment of Saint Augustine: Augu.
contr Adimant. cap. 12
non dubitauit dominus dicere, hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis
sui. The Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when he gave a sign of
his body. And in another place: August. in Psalm. 3.
Christus corporis sui figuram discipulis commendaeuit: Christ did commend to
his disciples a figure of his body. Yea, the seventh general Council, upon
these words, hoc est corpus meum; inferred thus: Vide Council. tom. 3. in Nicen,
2, Act. 6
Ecce igiter viuisicantis illius corporis imaginem totam, panis scilicet
substantiam, quam mandauit apponi, etc. Behold therefore the whole or only
image of that quickeninge body, to wit, the substance of bread, which he
commanded to be set before them.

Lo here, they held, that our Savior commanded to be set before his
disciples, not the form only of bread, but the substance of bread; and not
this body but the image and figure of his body; August. in Psalm. 3.
quid ergo paras dentem et ventrem? creed et man ducasti: why do thou
therefore make ready thy teeth, and the belly? believe in Christ and thou have
eaten him.

28 Canisius de sacram. extrem. vnct. et Rhem. in hunc, locum.
You ground your sacrament of extreme vnctio^ upon the 5th, chapter of James
verse. 14, Is any man sick among you? let him call for the elders of the
Church, and let them pray for him, and anoint him with oil, etc. whereunto I
answer, that the gift of healing was then in the Church, as appears in
Mark. 6, 13, and that this anointing with oil, was in those days a sign of
that miraculous gift; and that the gift being now taken away, the sign is to
no use.

2. it follows not, that this annoynting with oil is therefore a sacrament,
because the Apostles used it in healing of the diseased: for Christ himself did
oh. 9* 6
spit on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and anointed the eyes of
the blind with claie. Now does it therefore follow that this anointing the
eyes of the blind with clay, is a sacrament, because Christ used it in curing
of the blind?

Mark 7, 33
He did also put his finger in the ears of one that was deaf, and stammered
in his speech, and did spit, and did touch his tongue. Does it follow then that
it is a sacrament to put our fingers in the ears of deaf men; or to spit or
touch the tongues of them that are dumb?

29 To prove, that it was lawful for the Patriarchs of the Hebrews, by way of
dispensation to have many wives, Bellarm, de matrim, cap, 11 propos. 4
Bellarmine quoteth, Gen, 16, 2 Where Sara gave consent to Abraham to take
another wife, which she (says he) would not have done, if it had been
unlawful. Whereunto I answer, that from the falls and infirmities of holy
men or women, the argument follows not, to prove the thing to be lawful Genesis
9, 21
Noah offended in drunkenness, and Genesis. 19, 33
Lot in incest, and 2 Samuel 11, 4,
David in adultery, and 1 Reg, 11. 1
Solomon in marrying many outlandish women, and Matthew. 26
Peter in thrice denying his master: does it follow, that it is therefore
lawful for us, to do the like? No; Aug. in psa. 51
non cadendi exemplum propositum est, sed sicecideris resurgendi, etc. There is
not proposed to thee any example of falling, but of arising when thou art
fallen.

Take heed thou do not fall, let not the slip of the greater, be the
delight of the lesser; but let the fall of the greater be a trembling to the
lesser; for the Aug de doct. Christan: lib, 3. 23
falls of the greater are written to this purpose, that the saying of the
Apostle may every where be tre^bled at, where he says, let him that stands
take heed least he fall. Bellarmine therefore plays the spider, and out of a
good flower sucketh deadly poison:

Secondly, I answer, that Hagar was not Abraham's wife, while Sara lived for
she was still under Saraes correction, and was called her maid, as you may
see in Gene. 16, 6. Then Abraham said unto Sarah. Behold, thy maid is in thy
hand, do with her, as it pleases thee. etc. and verse. 9, Then the Angel of
the Lord said to her, return to thy Dame, and humble thy self under her
hands.

30 To prove that the Patriarchs and Prophets before Christ's coming were not
in heaven, but were kept in an infernal place of darkness called Limbus
Patrum, and were thence delivered by Christ's descending into hell, Bellarm. de
Christi anima lib, 4 cap. 11
Bellarmine alleges Zachar. 9 11. I have loosed thy prisoners out of the pit
wherein is no water.

But Saint Austen does far otherwise expound this text, and in a better
sense: for he is of opinion, that the Prophet there speaks of the
deliverance of the people from their cruel, and unjust bondage and captivity:
and that, by the pit without water he meaueth Humanae misenae sicca^
profunditatem et sterile^ vbi non sunt fluenta iustitiae, sed iniquitatis
lutum. Aug. de civitate Dei, li. 18. c* 5
the dry and barren gulf of humane misery, where there are noe flowing
springes of equity, but standing pudles of iniquity.

31 To prove that Antichrist shall be one particular man, and shall have a
proper name, Bellarm, lib, 3 de Pontif. ca. 10
Bellarmine alleges, Revel. 13, 18. Here is wisdom Let him that has wit,
count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number
is six hundredth threescore and six. But of an other mind is Irenaeus, who is
a most ancient doctor of the church, even the Vide Trithemium descriptoribus
ecclesiasticis, cap, 8
scholar of Poly carpe, who was the disciple of Saint John that wrote the
Revelation* His testimony is this: Iren, lib. 5 adv* haeres, c. 30
Sed et Latemos nomen sexcentorum sexagint a sex annorum in secontinet; et
valde verisimile est, quoniam verissimum regnum hoc habet vocabulum, Laetini
enim sunt, quinuncregna^t: But the name Lateinos also contains the number
666. and it is very likely, because the most true kingdom has this name,
for they are Latins which now reign.

Thus you see, how that Irenaeus thought, that Antichrist shall not have a name
proper to one man; but a name that agrees to a kingdom, state, company or
succession of men. And of the same mind was Arethas Cappadox, as one of your
own Feu-arde^tius in Iren. l. 5. c. 30
writers acknowledges.

Yea, the said father reports, that those who had seen Saint John Facie ad
faciem* Iren* lib: 5 de haeres, ca. 30
face to face, did testify that the number of the beasts name Numerus nominis
bestiae, secundum Grae little compuputationem, per literas quae in eo sunt,
sexcentos habet et sexaginta, et sex; hoc est, decadas aequales hex acontasin,
et hec atoncadas ae* quales monasin, Iraeneus ibid.
according to the co^putation of the Greek, by the letters that are therein,
shall contain 666. and that it Valde verisimile est. Ibid.
is very likely, that his name shall be Latinos.

Whitakerus in resp. ad tricesimam nonam Sanderi demonstrationem.
Quod Irenaeus verisimile esse dixerit, nos proculdubio verum certumque
possimus affirmare: that which Ireneus said was very likely. we without doubt
may boldly affirm, to be a most certain and apparent truth: and that which
he could but Nos non in eo periclitabimur, nec asseuerantes pronuntiabimus hoc
cum nomen habiturum: scientes quoniam si oporteret manifest praesenti tempore
praeconiari nomen eius, per ipsum vtique editum fuisset, qui et apocalypsin
viderat, Iren, lib. 5 cap. 30.
guess at in his time, We may now define; time (which is the best
interpreter of a prophecy) having made that plain and perspicuous, which
until the Certius et sine periculo est, sustinere adimpletionem prophetiae,
quam suspicari et diuinare nomina quaelibet. Iren Ibid.
prophecy was cleared by they fulfilling and event thereof, was dark and
ambiguous*

To conclude then, I hold it to be an oracle for truth, had Ireneus not
ghessed at it, that Antichrists z Omnes prophetiae priusquam habent effectum,
aenigmata et ambiguitates sunt hominibus Iren. lib, 4* cap. 43.
name is Roman, or Latin: for these Characters (...) do signify 666. and
this number is gathered of the small number, (...), which in the whole makes
666. as appears by this computation of Feu-ardentius in Iren. lib. 5 cap. 30.
Fen-arden^tius.

l 30 a 1 t 300 e 5 i 10 n 50 o 70 200 chx / 666.

I have set down this computation, not to play the Cabalist upon letters, but
to show, that this Antichristian beast is a Latin, and to bring you to a full
detestation of the Romish Church. For what Church is there in the world, that
can so justly be called the Latin Church? Is not the head of that Church a
Latin? does he not reign in Italy, which inolde time was called Latium or
Latinum? does he not make the Latin translation of scripture only
authentical? uses he not the Latin tongue in his idolatrous Synagogues? Does
he not Revel. 13, 16.
make al, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to give unto him
their fidelity, oath and obedience; and to come to his Latin service? And does
he suffer any to Revel. 13, 17.
buy, or sell, or to live within his territories; save he that professes
himself to be a Roman or Latin, in respect of his Religion?

32 To prove that Antichrist shall reedifie and c Bellarm, de Pontif lib* 3, c*
13, et Rhemist. in 2, These. 2
build again the Temple of Jerusalem, and have his imperial seat there, your
Doctors allege 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. He does sit as God in the Temple of GOD, etc.
Whereunto I answer, that it is impossible for Antichrist, to sit in the
Temple at Jerusalem, because it was destroyed within the compass of 40 years
after Christ by Vide Joseph de bello Iudaico li. 7. c* 9, et, 10
the army of Titus Vespasianus, in such sort, that their was not Luk, 21, 6,
a stone left upon a stone that was not thrown down.

But you will say, that though a stone does not now lie upon a stone, yet is it
not impossible to make one stone to be upon another there. I answer, that is
impossible: for we Vide Ruffin. inst, li, 8* c* 38* et Theodoret. hb. 3* cap.
20
read, that the Jews by the leave and help of Julian the Emperor,
endeavored to build again their temple and city about 330 years after the
death of Christ. But the Lord, to show that he was not pleased, as Sozomen.
lib 5, cap, vlt.
Sozomen says, with the renewing of the temple, hindered this their
enterprise, first by fire from heaven, and after out of the earth, and by
terrible earthquakes, whereby many of them were slain.

But you will further say, that the reason why God hindered Julian from
building agine the temple, was because he will suffer none to build it again,
save only Antichrist. I answer, that he will never suffer any man that
either is, or shall be to the end of the world, to reedifie and build again
that temple: for Erit in templo abominatio de solationis, et vsque ad consum
mationem et finem persevera bit. Vulgar, editio.
there shall be in the temple, as the Prophet Daniel i Daniel, 9* 27
has foretold, the abomination of desolation, and that desolation shall
continue unto the consummation and end, that is, Vsque, ad consummationem mundi
et finem perseuerabit. Hieron. in Dan. 9
until the consummation of the world, and end of all things. Yea, Luk, 21, 2^
Jerusalem (as says our Savior) shall be torden under foot of the Gentiles,
until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled, that is, until there Mat, 24,
29 et 30
appear the sign of the son of man in heaven, and there be signs in the
sun and moon, and the powers of heaven be shaken: which shall be immediately
before the last judgment.

Now then, seeing that God has thus accursed Jerusalem with perpetual
desolation: I gather hence that Antichrist shall not sit in the Temple there,
as Bellarmine teaches you: and consequently, that by the Temple in this place,
is not to be understood the Temple of Jerusalem.

By the Temple therefore he means these congregatio^s, that were sometimes
true visible Churches: that should (notwithstanding their reuolting) be
reputed and taken to be true Churches, by the members and favorites thereof.

To this exposition do both the Greek and Latin fathers subscribe.
Cathisthesetai eis ton naon tou theou he shall sit in the Temple of God, that
is, (says Saint Chrysostom. in 2. Thessal. ^
Chrysostom) Ou ton en Ierosolumois alla eis tas ecclesias not in the Temple
of Jerusalem, but in the Churches, whereunto agrees that of Oeucumenius: Ou
ton en Ierousalem legei, alla eis tas ecclestas tou theou the Apostle says
not, he shall sit in the Temple of Jerusalem: but in the Churches of God, o
Oecumenius in 2, These 2.
that is in such Churches as both have been true visible Churches of God, and
do also retain the name and shadow of the Church.

As for the Latin fathers, they were so far from thinking that Jerusalem
should be the seat of Antichrist, as that they confidently avouched, that Rome
is mystical Babylon spoken of in the Revelation* and consequently that the
Church of Rome is the seat of Antichrist, and not the temple of Jerusalem, I
will acquaint you with their express words. Hieron. lib. 2 aduersus Iouinian.
Roma (says S. Hierome) aut fortitudinis nomen est apud Graecos, aut
sublimitatis iuxta Hebraeos. Serua quod diceris: virtus te excelsa^faciat, non
voluptas humile^: maledictione^ qua^ tibi saluator in Apocalypsi co^minatus
est, potes effugere per panitentiam: Rome is either with the Greeks a name of
strength, or with the Hebrews, a name of height and sublimity. Rome, see that
thou be aunswerable to thy name. Let virtue exalt thee, not pleasure debase
thee; thou may by repentance escape that curse, which our Savior has
threatened thee with.

Many other such like places, has the same Hieron. Epist. ad Marcellam.
quaest. 11* ad Algasiam. in comment. in Isaia cap. 4, et in praefat. de spiritu
sancto. r August. de Civitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 22. et cap. 27.
father in his worthy writings. Saint Austen also agrees with him, and says
that Rome is, altera Babylon, another Babylon, and August. de Civitate Dei lib.
18. cap. 2.
secunda Babilonia: a second Babylon. Yea, Cusan. lib. 2. de Concordia Cathol.
cap. vlt.
Cusanus your own Cardinal confesses that Beda and all the ancient
interpreters have so expounded this place in the Revelation.

Thus you see in part, how that your expositions are quite contrary to the
expositions of the ancient fathers, and as sophistical as the expositions of
the Scribes.

Many other places of scripture might be produced, which your writers have by
their false expositious corrupted: but I have thought good, to make mention of
these only, as being places of greatest consequent.

Now let me entreat you, that you would vouchsafe from henceforth to embrace
these our expositions, and to reject the corrupt glosses of your own
expositours.


The Recusant. Embrace your expositions? No, I will embrace the Popes,


The Minister. The Popes? why I pray I pray you?


The Recusant. Why? because he cannot err in expounding of the scriptures,


The Minister. Not err* Alphons. de haeres, lib. 1, cap 4.
Non credo aliquem esse adeo impudente^ Papae assentatorem, vt ei tribuere hoc
Velit, vt nec errare, nec in interpretatione sacrarum scripturarum hallucinari
possit. Nam, cum constet, plures eorum adeo esse illiteratos, vt Grammaticam
penitus ignorent, qui fit, vt sacras literas interpretari possint? I do not
believe that there is any so impudent a flatterer of the Pope, that will give
him this pre-eminence, that he can neither err, nor miss in expounding of
the sacred scriptures: for seeing it is well known, that many Popes be so
utterly void of learning, as that they know not the principles of Grammar;
how may it be, that they should be able to expound the scriptures?

Besides this, I have already showed you that your expositions agree not with
the words of scripture.


The Recusant. What though? Hosius de expresso verbo Dei.
Si quis habeat interpretationem, ecclesiae Romanae de loco aliquo scripturae,
etiamsi nec sciat, nec intelligat, an, et quomodo cum Scripturae Verbis
conueniat, tamen habet ipsissimum verbu^ Dei: If a man have the exposition of
the Church of Rome, touching any place* of the Scriptures, although he neither
know, nor understand, whether and how it agrees with the words of the
Scripture, yet has he the very words of God.


The Minister. O horrible blasphemy! You have (I see) the same opinion of the
Popes expositions, that thee Rabbinicall Jews had of the expositions of their
Rabbines? for they (as Lyra reports) cried out thus: Lyra in Deuteron. cap. 17
Recipiendum est quic quid hoc modo proponatur, etiam si dicant dextram esse
sinistram: we must needs receive, what soever the Rabbines propound unto us,
although they tell us, that the right hand is the left. Yea, Rabbi* Abraham
Hispanus.
notwithstanding (say they) our expositions seem to us never so true, and
right; yet must we throw our truths to the ground: for the truth indeed is with
them.

To be plain with you, had we no other cause to eondemne you for heretics;
yet this one (me thinks) should be sufficient.


The Recusant. What! do you repute all those to be heretics, that a
Quicunque aliter sacram scripturam intelligit, quam sensus spiritus flagitat, a
quo scriptaest: sicet ab ecclesia non recesserit, tame^ haereticus appellari
potest. Hieron. in Galat. 1. et Isid. lib, 8. Orig.
expound the scriptures amiss? admit we did err in expounding of the
scriptures: are we therefore to be ranged amongst heritickes? O horrible
blasphemy!


The Minister. Yes, I hold with the ancient fathers, that he is an heretic,
that expounds the scriptures otheerwise then the meaning of the holy Ghost
requires; so be it he persist and persevere therein after that the true sense
thereof has been showed him.

But not to stand any longer upon your expositio^s: let us proceed on, and
take a view of your agreements with the Seuerians, Sampsees, Simonians,
Tatians, valentinians and Zuenckfeldians.


The Recusant. Wherein do we agree with the Seuerians, and Sampsees?


The Minister, The Seuerians, (as testifies Aug, de haeres. cap. 24.
Saint Austen) depended much upon such miracles, as they either forged
themselves, or effected by the help of the devils: so do you, as your own
writers acknowledge. Alexand. de Hales, part. 4 et quaest. 53. mem. 4.
In sacramento (says Alexander de Hales) apparet caro, inter dum humana
procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica: In the sacrament appears flesh,
sometimes by man's procurement, and sometimes by the operation of the Devil.

The Epiphan* haeres. 53.
Sampsees kept the spittle of two women whom they worshipped; and the dust of
their feet, and carried it about with them to cure diseases withal: so do you
worship the ashes and relics of saints, and carry them about with you for the
same purpose that the Sampsees did.


The Recusant. Wherein do we resemble the Simonians?


The Minister. Simon Magus gave his own image, and the e August. de haeres.
cap* 1.
Image of his whore Selene; to be worshipped of his followers: so the present
Church of Rome gives the image of the whore of Babylon to be worshipped, and
the images of those that were the authors of their pretended religious orders.

2 Simon Magus, Docebat detestandam turpitudinem in differenter vten di
saeminis. August, Ibid.
taught, as Saint Austen witnesse^h, that it is no sin to use women
indifferenter, that is, without making difference betwixt wife, concubine, and
harlot: so do you teach, that he that has no wife, may instead of her have a
concubine, as is apparent in some copies of your Did. 34. Is qui Parisijs.
anno 1505
decrees; where these words are to be found: Qui non habet vxorem, loco illius
concubinam debet habere: he that has not a wife, ought in steed of her to
have a concubine.

And in the Chapter immediately following it is thus written: Christiano non
nisi vnam tantum habere licet, aut vxorem, aut certe loco vxoris, si coniux
deest, concubinam: It is lawefull for a Christian man to have only one woman,
either his wife, or in steed of his wife, if his wife be wanting, a concubine.
Yea, Episcopus (says your great Abbate De Cohabit. Clericorum et mulier.
Panormitan) non tenetur deponere clericum concubinarium: the Bishop is not
bound to deprive a Priest that keeps a Concubine.

3 Simon Magus Act, 8, 20.
thought that the gist of God, might be obtained with money. And thereuppon
those that buy and sell orders are by the ancient fathers accounted Simonians.
Council. Chal* ^ed. Act 15, can. 2,
Siquis episcoporum (say the three hundredth and thirty fathers assembled in
the Council of Chalcedon) acceptapecunia, ordinationem fecerit, et sub precium
deduxerit impreciabilem gratiam, at que ordinauer it per pecunias episcopum,
sieve chorepiscopum sieve presbyterum, sieve diaconum, aut quemcunque alium, qui
connumeratur inter Clericos; aut acceptapecunia, ordinauerit aeconomum id est,
defensorem, sieve paranomarium: qui cunque ergohoc meditatus furit, si conuictus
fuerit, ipse quidem subeat gradus sui periculum: et qui sic ordinatus fuerit,
nullum habeat sructum ex huiusmodi et creatione probrosa et mercimonio, sed sit
alienus et dignitat is et solicitudinis eius, quam per pecunias introiuit. Sed
et ille, qui instans tam turpibus et illicitis datis, intercessor apparuit,
siquidem clericus fuerit, de proprio decedat gradu: si vero laicus, sieve
monachus fuerit, anathema sit.

Those also are reputed Simonians, that obtain their orders by flattery, or
by the letters of great personages, Chrysostom, in Act. Apost. cap. 1, homil. 3
Cogita (says Saint Chrystome, speaking of this kind of Simonians) quid
acciderit Simoni: Quid enim refert si non das peccuniam, sed pecuniae loco
adularis, subornas, multaquae machinaris? pecunia tua sit tecum in perditionem,
quoniam putasti ambitu humano parare donum dei.

Of both these sorts of Simonians there was great store in Saint Hieromes
days, as may appear by this speech of his: Hieron, in epist. ad Tit. c, 1.
Nunc cernimus plurimos hanc rem beneficium facere, vt non quaeranteos, qui
possunt ecclesiae plus prodesse, etin ecclesia erigere columnas: sed quos vel
ipsi amant, vel quorum sunt obsequijs deliniti, vel pro quibus maiorum quispiam
rogauerit, et vt deteriora taceam, qui vt clerici fierent, muneribus
impetrarunt.

And of both these sorts, there is also great store in the Romish Church at
this, day, as appears by this Spanish Collect. ex Herma^ Nunes.
proverb: Obispo de cahahorra haze los asnos de corona: with bribes the
Bishops are made blind, that crowne-shau'd asses orders find.

But what do I speak of those only that buy and sell orders? Mantuan. lib.
Calam. 3.
Venalia nobis (says Friar Mantuan. speaking of the Church of Rome) Templa
sacerdotes, altaria, sacra coronae, ignis, thura, preces, caelum est venale,
deusque Amongst us, Churches, Priests, altars, sacrifices, garlands, fire,
franckencense, prayers and heaven are set to sale, yea God himself may be had
for money amongst us.

But what do I produce only one witness? you shall have more, the^ those, of
your own religion, to verify what I have said. Matthew Paris a monk of
Saint Albons, says, that the Mat, Paris in Henrico 3 sub anno. 241,
insatiable greedines of the Church of Rome so increased confounding right and
wrong; vt deposito pudore, velut meritrix vulgaris et effrons, omnibus venalis
et exposita vsuram pro paruo, simoniam pro nullo inconueniente reputaret, that
laying shame aside as a common and impudent harlot, she prostituteth, herself
to every man for money, accounting usury for a small fault, and Simonie for none.

Hereunto might be added the testimonies of Durand, de modo celebran di Council
lib, 2.
Durande, and of Bernard of Clunice, who speaking of Rome, says thus: Bernard
Cluniacens. in Satyra.
Roma dat omnia omnia dantibus: Omnia Romae cum pretio: Rome gives all things
to them that give all things: all things at Rome will pass for money.

And unto them might be adoyned Thomas Becket, who, when for his wilful
disobedience, and treason committed against his Prince, he had fled to Rome for
aid and succor, and saw that nothing would be wrought there without money,
wrote thus thereof to the Bishop of Mentz: Matter Roma facta est meretrix, et
prostituta est pro mercede: Rome our Thomas Beck. epist. ad Archiepisc. Moguntin
mother is become an harlot, and for money prostituteth herself to sale.

But to come to the Popes themselves, we Platina in Benedict. 9
read, that Pope Benedict the ninth sold his Popedom to Gregory the sixth:
that Sixtus the fourth Agrippa de Lenocinio, et orat, ad Louaniens.
built a sumptuous stews in Rome, appointing it to be both masculine and
faeminine, and making a gain of that xVid. Muscul, in Johan. cap. 6.
beastly trade: and that these verses were made of Pope Alexander, and spread
abroad in his time: viz.

Vendit Alexander, claues, altaria, Christum,
Vendere iure potest: emeratipse prius
Thatis, Pope Alexander makes sale of his keys; of his altars, and of Christ
himself. Well may he sell those things: for he paid dear for them. To
conclude, on of your Johannes Monachus.
Canonists speaks thus of your Romish courts.

Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit et arcas:
Si bursae parcas, fuge papas et patriarchas:
Si dederis marcas, et eis impleveris arcas,
Culpasolueris quaque ligatus eris?
And an other of your Johannes Andreas.
Canonists, alluding to the name of Rome, versifieth thus: Roma manus rodit:
quas rodere non valet, odit.

Yea* Theodoric, de Schismate*
Theodoricus, Felinus deofficio Iudicis delegati.
Felinus, Extrau. de Simonia. ap, 1 number. 5, fol. 18
Panormitane, Archideaci florent. in tract, de haeres,
Archiadocus Florentinus, Extrau, de Simonia.
Hostiensis, and others of your own writers acknowledge, how that the Romish
Church pruiledgeth both the Pope and his Cardinales, to sell Bishoprics,
Deaneries, Abbeys, Archdeaconries, yea, and all other things, that are simonia
call by law positive.

And thus much concerning your agreement with the Simonians: Now let us come to
the Tatians, Valentinians and Zuenckfieldians.


The Recusant. Wherein agree you with the Tatians?


The Minister. Epiphan, haeres, 46
Tatianus the Heretic, and author of the sect of the Encratites, did condemn
all marriage as an impure state of life: so did Pope Syricius^apud Gratian^.
distinct, 28, cap proposuisti.
Syricius condemn all marriages as unclean both in the Clergy and the Laity.

2 Both the heretic Tatianus, and the heretical Pope Syricius, to prove that
marriage is simply evil vide loca supracitata.
alleged Romans 8. 8* they that are in the flesh cannot please God. And
Galathians. 6, 8. He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption. In which places, the Apostle speaks not of the works of nature,
but of corrupt nature which ouerturneth the divine order, which God in the
creation set in nature.


The Recusant. Wherein resemble we the Valentinians?


The Minister. The Valentinians used a barbarous and unknown tongue among the
common people as appears by these words of Saint Jerome: Hieron, ad Theodor.
Barbaro simplices quosque terrent sono, vt quod non intelligunt, plus
mirentur: the Valentinians terrify the simple people with a barbarous sound of
words, that whatsoever they understand not, they may the more wonder at, and
have in reverence. And this practice of the Valentinians, may fitly be
paralleled by the practice of the Romish Church at this day, in using an
unknown and barbarous tongue in their Church-seruice. I call it a barbarous
tongue, because the common people understand it not: for 1 Cor* 14, 11
except I know the power of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks,
abarbarian, and he that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me.


The Recusant. Wherein do weioyne with the Zuenckfieldians.


The Minister. The Vide. Hosius Polonus in lib. de expresso* Dei verbo.
Zuenckfieldians, refused to be judged by the scriptures calling them egena
elementa, beggarly elements, and fled unto the inward and secret revelations of
the spirit: and in like sort do you refuse to be judged by the scripture,
calling it dead ink, and what not? I will give you the express words of your
approved writers Pighius Controuers. 3, de eccles.
Si dixeris (says Albertus Pighius) haec referri oportere ad iudiciu^
scripturarum, communis te sensus ignarum esse comprobas; Sunt enim scripturae
muti iudices: If thou say, that these matters ought to be referred to the
judgments of the Scriptures thou show thy self to be void of common
sense: for the Scriptures are dumb Judges: and in another place: Pigghius, de
Hierarchia eccles. lib, 3, cap. 3
Sunt scripturae, (vt non minus vere quam festiue dixit quidam) velut nasus
cereus, qui se horsum, tllorsum, et in quamcunque volueris partem trahi,
retrahi, fingique facile permittit: the Scriptures are (as one no less truly
than pleasantly said) like a nose of wax, that easily suffers it self to
be drawn backwarde and foreward, and to be fashioned this way, and that way,
and howsoever you list.

Eckius is of the same mind with Pighius, and u Vide kemnicium in Examine
Council, T^^dent, page, 32
most impiously calls the scriptures, Euangelium nigrum, et theologiam
atramentariam, the black Gospel, and inken divinity.

Citatur ab Illyrico in nor ma Concilij.
Lodouicus a canon of the Church of Laterane, in an oration openly pronounced
in the Counsel of Trent, came not far short of them both, saying: Ecclesia
est viuum pectus Christi: scriptura autem est mortuum atramentum, the Church is
the lively breast of Christ, but the scripture is as it were dead ink.

And with him iumped the bishop of Poitiers in the said Council: Hosius lib. 2
contra Bre^tiu^,
Scriptura est res inanis, et muta; sicu^ b Vide Sleid. lib. 23.
etiam sunt reliquae legespoliticae: the scripture is a dead and a dumb thing,
as also are all other polique laws.

Hosius also the Popes legate and president in the said Council, when
objection was made, that King David, being not a bishop, but only a
temporal Prince had written the Psalms, blushed not to give this blasphemous
answer; q Quidni scriberet? scribimus indocti doctique poematapassim: What if
King David wrote the Psames? we write ballades every body learned and
unlearned.

But to come to the Pope himself, Pope Leo the 10. when he had received a
great sum of money for indulgences, he said to Cardinal Bembus: Vide
Sibrand. Lull* de Papa Rom, lib, 10, cap, 2,
O Bembe quantum nobis profuit illa de Christo fabula! O Bembus, how much has
that fable of Christ profited us! And another time, when the said Cardinal
alleged a testimony out of the Gospel, he answeted: Quid mihinarras as
fabulam illans de Christo? What do thou tell me of that fable of Christ?

Thus you see how that your writers do fly from the scriptures, and when they
are convinced by them, fall to accuse them: for which cause they may justly be
ranged amongestheretickes; Iren, aduers. haeres. lib, 3 cap. 2.
Heretici enim cum ex scrip turis arguuntur, in accusationem conuertuntur
ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non certe habeant, neque sunt ex authoritate, and
quod vary sunt dictae, and quod ex his non possit inue niri verit as ab illis,
qui traditionem nesciunt: for heretics when they be reproved by scriptures,
they begin to find fault with the scriptures, as if they were not well
written, and as if they were not of sufficient authority, or were doubtfully
uttered, or that they which know not tradition, were never able by the
scriptures to find out the truth.

Thus also you see, what gross errors you maintain. August, Epist. 166,
Vindicet nos dens de vobis, vt ipse errorem vestrum in vobis occidat, et
nobiscum de veritate gaudiatis, God so revenge our cause against you that he
may kill your error in you, that ye may rejoice together with us.


The fourth Dialogue
Wherein is firmly proved that the Papists, are in sundry things as bad as
the Turks, and in some things worse: and that it is a crying sin for a
subject to attempt the murdering of his Sovereign:

The Minister. SIr, at my last being with you, I acqvainted you with some
London news, now let me entreat you, that you would vouchsafe to show me the
like kindness and to relate what you have heard since.


The Recusant, I have heard a long discourse of the manner of the discovery of
the late intended treason.


The Minister. Sir, I would gladly hear that: for I have heard of diverse that
it is discovered; but I do not yet certainly know how it was discovered.


The Recusant. It was discovered by the means of a certain The letter was
written without a name in a disguised hand
letter that Master Francis Tresham sent to the Lord Mountegle, some ten
days before the Parliament. The contents whereof are these.

My Lord out of the love I bear to some of your friends, I have a care of
your preservation Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life, to
devise some excuse to shift off your attendance at this Parliament: for God and
man have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time, And think not
slightly of this advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where
you may expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any
stir; yet I say, they shall receive a terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet
they shall not see who hurts them. This Counsel is not to be contemned,
because it may do you good and no harm; for the danger is past so soon as
you have burnt the letter: And I hope GOD will give you grace to make good use
of it: to whose holy protection I commend you.


The Minister, Did he say indeed, that God had eoncurred with them to murder
the KING and his Nobles? He may fittely be herein compared to one Thomas
Muncer, an Anabaptist whose ordinary preachinges were these: God has
warranted a Johan, Sleidan, Com, 5. Ipsemet, mihi coram pro misit.
me face to face, he that cannot lie has commanded me, to attempt the change
by these means, even by killing the rulers. And his bloodthirstie companions
may also as fittlie be compared to Phifer the lewed companion of the said
Muncer, who did but dream in the night time, of the killing of many mice; and
presently bare his companions in hand, that God had warned hm in a dream, to
make away the Nobles.

But I pray you sir what did the Lord Mountegle with the letter, did he burn
it as he was advertised?


The Recusant. No, See the discourse of this late intended treason.
he no sooner did conceive the strange contents thereof, but he concluded not
to conceal it, what ever might come of it. Whereupon, notwithstanding it was
somewhat late in the night and dark, he presently repaired to his Majesty's
Palace at White Hall, and there delivered the same to the Earl of Salisburie;
and the Earl of Salisburie showed it to the King upon Alhallows day in the
afternoon.


The Minister. The Lord Mountegle did therein discharge the part of a most
duetifull, and loyal Subject: for he imitated Mordecai, who no sooner knew
that Bigthan and Teresh sought to lay their hands on the king Ahashuerosh, but
he told it unto Queen Ester, and Ester certified the King thereof in Mordecais
name. To apply this to a good use if you know any Romish Bigthan and Teresh,
that seek to lay their hands on our dread Sovereign; it is your part to
certify him thereof. And if you have intelligence of any King of Aram that
takes Counsel with his servants against Israel; if God by any means reveal
it unto you; it is your duty with 2, Kings, 6, 9 elbid verse, 12.
Elisha to make known to the King of Israel, e even the words that the King
of Aram speaks in his privy chamber. And if you know any Ishi-benob that
intends to slaie David, and to give him a terrible blow: you must with 2,
Sam, 21, 17
Abishai, though with exposing your self to peril, presently succor him and
smite the Philistin. Yea, you must with the 2, Sam. 23, 16.
three mighties, even with the hazard of your life, break into the host of
the Philistines, and draw water out of the Well of Beth^lehem, and bring it to
David if he long for it. To conclude, if any treacherous letters come to your
hands, it behooves you to be Eagle-winged, and speedily with the Lord
Mountegle to disclose them, least as David said to Abner, it be said to you;
1, Sam, 26, 16
ye are worthy to die, because you have not kept your Master the Lords
anointed. But in this letter (me thinks) there was only given a general
obscure advertisement of a terrible blow to be given: how (I pray you) was
the meaning thereof found out?


The Recusant. Truly See the discourse of this late intended treason.
the King himself considered the former sentence in the letter. That they
should receive a tirrible blow at this Parliament, and yet should not see who
hurt them; and joining it to the sentence imediately following, for the danger
is past as soon as you have burnt the letter, did thereupon conjecture, that
the danger mentioned, should be some sudden danger by blowing up of powder:
understanding by as soon the quickness of the danger, which should be as
quickly at an end, as that paper should be in bleasing up in the fire.


The Minister. Acceptus, faelix, et gratiosus sit iste, quem Dominus iMuscal,
in Psa. ^18, 26,
nobis regem dedit. Welcome, happy, and acceptable be he whom God has raised
up to be king over us: for he has (according to the Emblem of the
Aegiptians) oculum cum sceptro a scepter for power and jurisdiction, and with
it an eye for watchfulness, and discretion. And of him may we say as Pharaoh
said of Joseph, when he k Gen, 41. 38
had expounded his dream; can we find such a man as this? and as the Queen
of Saba said of King Solomon: happy are the men, happy are these thy
servants, which stand ever before thee, k 1. Kings, 10, 9.
and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set
thee on the thrown of Israel, because the LORD loved Israel for ever,

To make use hereof, why do you seek to mur there our Sovereign, that has
received such an extraordinary measure of GODS spirit? David durst not lay his
hands on king Saul albeit 1. Sam. 16, 14
the spirit of the Lord was departed from him, and an evil spirit sent of the
Lord vexed him; for when he had Saul alone in the cave and might have slain
him, he spared him, saying: 1. Sam, 24, 7
the Lord keep me from doing that thing unto my master the Lords anointed,
to lay mine hands upon him, for he is the anointed of the Lord. And after to
Abishai offering to smite him wirh a spear to the earth, he said, 1, Sam, 26, 9
destroy him not, for who can lay his hands on the Lords anointed and be
guiltless? And to the young man that slew him, 2, Sam, 1, 14
How wast thou not afraid, to put forth thy hand to destroy the anointed of
the Lord? and commanding him to be slain for this his fact, he said: 2* Sam,
1, 16
thy blood be upon thine own head; for thine own mouth has testified
against thee, saying, I have slain the Lords anointed. Yea he him self was
touched in his heart, because he had but cut of the lap of Saules garment:
whereupon Saint Austen says thus: 1, Sam, 24, 6
Quaero, si non habebat Saul sanctitatem, quid in eo David Venerabatur? nam eum
propter sacrosanctam vnctionem et honorauit vivum, et vindicauit occisum. Et
quia vel panniculum ex eius vest prae Aug, contra literas Petiliani lib, 2,
cap 48
cidit, percusso cord trepidauit. Ecce Saul non habebat innocentiam, et tamen
habebat sanctitatem, non vitae sed vnctionis: if Saul had not the holiness
of his anointing, I demand what it was that David reverenced in him? For he
both honored him being alive, for his sacred and holy unction, and revenged
him being slain. And he himself had but cut off the lap of his coat, his
heart smote him, and he trembled for the fact. Behold Saul was not innocent,
yet had he the holiness, not of life, but of unction.

Now if David trembled because he had cut off the lap of Saules garment,
who had but the holiness of unction only: how dare you cut the throats of
those Princes that have the holiness both of life and unction?

If he durst not lay his hands on Saul, from whom the spirit of the Lord
was departed: how dare you (my tongue faultreth in pronouncing the word, and
the Lord confound him that entertaineth any such intent) spill his blood, in
whom the spirit of God dwells so plentifully? how can you touch the lap
of his garment without trembling, that is such a constant professor, such a
perfect textuary, such a sound expositor, such a Christian liver and such a
living Library, and walking study? Bibliothece it is empsuchos, kai peripatoun
mouscion. Eunapius.



The Recusant. Why use you this speech to me: am I one of those that sought to
spill the Kings blood.


The Minister. What though you be not? A Scorpion you know) has his stinge
within him, though he does not always strike: and a grounded Papist (I know)
carries always a woluish nature, which prepares him ever to the spoil,
though he never did hurt.

But proceed (I pray you) in relating the discovery of your Catholics
tragicomicall treason, how did they purpose to have performed it?


The Recusant. They See Guido Fawkes his confession,
propounded to have it performed by Gunpowder, and by making a mine under the
house of Parliament: which place they made choice of the rather, because
Religion having been unjustly suppressed there, they thought it fittest that
justice and punishment should be executed there.


The Minister. So it is thought fittest that their heads should be set up upon
the Parliament house, because they thought to have blown up the Parliament
house. And as Heliodorus told Seleucus of the Temple of Jerusalem: so may we
tell the Pope of the Parliament house: 2. Maccab. 3 38. 39.
If thou have any enemy or traitor send him thither, and thou shall receive him
well scourged, if he escape with his life; for in that place, no doubt there is
a special power of God; for he that dwells in heaven has his eye on that
place, and defends it, and he beats and destroys the^ that come to hurt
it. For The Earl of Salisburie in in answer to certain scanda lous Papers
page, 20, et. 21
as (to use the words of one of our worthy Nobles) where this prodigious
Massacre should have been committed, is the same place where the ancient
Religion of the primitive Church, shook off the bonds and fetters of the
Roman corruption under which it had long continued in servitude: so whiles the
same faith shall be religiously and constantly professed, it shall never be in
the power of mortal man, to shake the least corner stone of that blessed and
sure foundation.

But what store of powder had they provided, to have it blown it up withal?


The Recusant. They had (as I am credibly informed) provided thirty six
barrels of powder, a thousand of billets, and five hundred of faggots, besides
many huge stones, iron crows, pikeaxes, and hammer heads.


The Minister. What Machiavelians, or rather Matchless villains were these?
What dogged dogs? what bloodthirstie Neroes? what bloody minded Ioabs? who
would ever think, that the affections of men could be steeled with such
cruelty and barbaritie? And who would ever imagine, that the sons of men,
cold be thus savage, and have such sanguinarie conditions? But why do I term
them men? I am deceived, they have the faces of men indeed, but the minds of
wild beasts. And why do I call them the sons of men? the rocks surely
fathered them, and they sucked not the daughters of men, but the dragons in the
wilderness. The dragons in the wilderness? No, they are more savage then
Dragons. Woe worth their treason: it is the vnnaturallest that ever was heard
of; I would give it an epithet if there were any to express it. And thus I
leave them, wishing that they might be drawn on hurdles from the prison to
the execution, to show how they have been drawn by brutish affections: that
their priuities might be cut off, and thrown into the fire, to show that they
were unworthy to be begotten, or to beget others: that their bellies might be
ripped up, and there hearts torn out, and thrown into the same fire as being
the fountain of such an unheard of treachery; that their bodies, having
harbored such wicked hearts might be cut off from their heads and divided into
many quartars, as they were in the body politic divided by treason, from
the head and other sound members: and that their quarters might be fixed upon
the gates of our Cities, and exposed to the eyes of men: that as their
nefarious attempts were an evil example to others, so their quartered Limbs
might be a heedfull caveat to others. But to proceed by whom should this
powder have been set on fire?


The Recusant, By Guido Fawkes their Sentinel: for when he was taken, there
were found three matches, and all other instruments fit for blowing up the
powder in the vault, ready upon him.


The Minister. What a vile miscreant was this; what a villain in a vault? what
a Machiauellian with a match? what a blood-sucker without a match? did Caligula
his predecessor match him? no; for he was but Lutu^ sanguine maceratum.
dirt soken with blood; but this would have been dirt swimming in blood. Did
Caligula himself match him? no: for he but wished that the people of Rome had
all one neck, that at one blow he might have cut them off; but this
runnagate of Ephraim not only wished it, but contrived it, and was ready with
his matches, to have given us all at once a terrible blow. Nay, did the Devil
match him? no: for though he caused the house to fall upon Iobes children:
yet Job, 1, 19.
left he one alive to tell Job: But this more then devilish varlet had thought
to have blown up all at once, and not to have left one to escape, to have told
who hurt them. Fie Guido, fie: art thou so far from being (according to the
ancient exiled proverb) homini deus, as that thou art worse then homini demon?
how art thou fallen from thy kind, and become so degenerate and wild? has the
Pope (whom you commonly call your holy father, and sometimes your Papa est
deus vindictae R, Cupres de eccles, page 61, number Papa aeque as Christus deus
est extrau, in Johan, 22.
Lord GOD) taught thee this? Qualis, malum, deus iste est qui tam impuros exse
filios et seeleratos genuit? si pater Benzo in hist. Ind.
filiorum similis, minime profecto bonum esse oportet. What kind of God, with a
mischife; is this, that has begotten such impure and wicked sons? If the
father be like the chrildren, there can be no goodness in him.


The Recusant. Sir, what mean you, to speak thus sharply against our holy
father, and his Children, how dare you speak thus of him, that is Peter's
successor at Rome, and Christ Vicar upon earth? and who Nou minus
authoritatis a Christo collatum est Vicario suo, ad ouium tutelam et com modum,
quam a villico datur Mercenario qui pecora pas cit. Tosterus Apol, pro port. 1.
Enchirid. page 64,
has no less authority over all Christians, given him of Christ whose Vicar
he is, then an hireling has over brute beasts.

If his holiness have intelligence hereof, he will surely excommunicate you,
and it will be lawefull for any CATHOLIC to Heretici. filij vel Co^sanguinei
non dicuntur, sed iuxta lege^ sit manus super cos, vt fundas sanguine^ ipsorum.
Apud Great. glossa in Decret. lib, 5, ex decret, Gregor, 9. cause, 23. quaest, 8.
cap. legi,
kill you Nos exco^municamus vniuersos haereticos, vt absoluts se nouerint om
nifidelitatis debito, qui ijs iuramento tenebantur astricti. Gregorius, 9. lib.
5. Decret^, tit. 7. cap, 5, glossa,



The Minister. A Fig for him, and his excommunications; I care no more for
him then Charles the fifth, who being menaced by Pope PAVLVS the third, with
excommunication, if he would not yield up Physance into his hands, answered
thus: let him understand by his Ambassadors, that if he will needs be
thundering out of his excommunication, I will thunder at Saint Angelo with my
Canons and attilerie. In like manner say we to you, let him understand by
those that fly to a foreign nest after the Partiche has bred there, that if
he will needs thunder out his excommunication against us Protestants that
lays open his Antichristian pride, we will batter the very Walls of Babylon
with the Canon of Scripture.

And to give him a warning peale, if the Pope (be as you say he is) the Vicar
of Christ, he should give you that Math, 22 21. Mark. 12. 17. Luke. 20 25.
thrice recounted precept of Christ: Give unto CAESAR the things which are
CAESAR'S: and give unto GOD the things which are GOD'S: But the Pope gives you
not that precept, but this insteade thereof: Give unto me, the things which
are CEASARS, and give unto me also the things which are GODS. For the first;
he says in effect, give unto me the things which are CEASARS, when he vide
Antonium in Sum part 3. tit. 22, cap. 5.
chalengeth an Universal Dominion and sovereignty over the whole WORLD, not
only over Ecclesiastical persons, as Bishops and other inferior Minister,
but also civil, as Emperors, and Kings; for this Universal Dominion
appertains not unto him, neither did the Ancient Bishops of Rome ever
challenge it, as may appear by these arguments.

1 Had this Universal Soueraintie appertained to the ancient Bishops of
Rome, or had been challenged by them, then it is very likely; that the ancient
fathers would have made mention thereof: but the ancient fathers are so far from
mentioning of it, as that they mention the quite contrary. Chrysoft. ad Popul.
Antioch, homil. 2.
Imperator (says Chrysostom) parem vllum super terram non habet. The Emperor
has noe peer on earth. And before him Tertullian: Tertull, ad Scapulam.
colimus imperatorem vt hominem a deo secundum, et solo Deo minorem: we
reverence the Emperor as next unto GOD, and inferior only to GOD. With them
both agreaeth, Optatus; Optatus contra Parmenian. lib. 3.
super imperatorem non est, nisi solus deus qui fecit imperatorem: none is
above the Emperor, but only God, who made the Emperor.

2 Vide Eusebius: de vita Constant. lib, 3. cap, 23, et lib, 4, cap, 42, et
Socrat. lib. 1 cap, 34,
Constantine, vide Euagriu^ lib. 4, cap, 9
Justinius, Vide Nouel, constit 123,
Justinian, vide Sozomen, lib. 7, cap, 9, et Council, Chalcedon, Act. epist.
Theodosij et Valentiniani ad Dioscorum
Theodosus Vide. Theodoret. lib, 4, cap, 8.
Valentinian, Vid, lib, 1, Legum Franciae, cap, 76,
Charles, and other ancient Emperors, claimed a Soueraintie over the Bishop
of Rome, and other Bishops of that age; yea they exercised this their
soueraintie, and showed themselves to be their superiors, by their commanding
of them in causes ecclesiastical; and that they did not usurp in this case,
Saint Austen plainly shows in his 162, Epistle.

3 Vide Aug, epist, 166.
Constantine, Vide nouel, constit, 123.
Justinian, Vide Euagriu^ lib, t, cap, 12
Theodosius Vide Theodo ret; lib, 5, cap, 2.
Gratianus, Vide Cod, lib 1, titul, 3, de Epise et cler. cap, si quenquam.
Anthemius and the rest of the ancient Emperors, showed their authority to
be far greater then the authority of the Bishops of Rome and other Bishops
in their times; not only by commanding of them, but also by correcting of them
for their offenses, and by their appointing of penalties to be imposed on them
that did not yield obedience to their imperial laws and constitutions. Cause,
2, quaest 7. cap. nos si.


4 The Ancient Bishops of Rome were so far from claiming a superiority over
the Emperors in their times, as that they did prostrate themselves at their
feeete, and became suppliants unto them, and that about Church Matters. As for
example, Leo the 4. submitted himself, and became an humble suppliant to r
Ludouicus, Distinct, to, cap, de capitulis.
Lotharius, Leo epist, 9, et epist. 24
Theodosius, that Councels of Bishop might be called, and controversies
decided.

5 The ancient Bishops of other Sees were so far from acknowledging the
Bishop of Rome, to have any Sovereignty over the Emperor in their days, as
that they did not acknowledge them to be their Superiors, but their fellow
Bishops only: as may easily be gathered out of the writings of Cyprian. de
Simplicitate Clericorum et in Sententijs Episc,
Cyprian, Chrysoft. in homil, 43. in Math. cap. 23
Chrysostom, Hieron, in epist. ad Eua griu^
Hierom, Eusebius, li. 5. c, 20
Eusebius and Council. Car thag. 6. et Council African, cap 92, et cap, 105 et
Galfred, monumetens, lib, 8 cap, 4.
others; yea Boniface the 3. was the first that challenged to himself the name
of universal Bishop, as hereafter (God willing) shall be plainly showed, I
come now to the second part of the forenamed precept.

That the Pope says in effect, give unto me the things which are Gods: I
prove it by these particulars.

1 Because he chalengeth to himself infinite knowledge, and suffers his
Canonists to give unto him an Decret Gre got. lib, 1, tit. 7 cap. 5
heavenly arbitrament, and (as it were) a divine and infallible judgment: yea
to say, that he is a Cornelius Episc, Bitoni in orat. habit in Council, Tride^t.
sub Paulo tertio.
light come into the world, but men have loved darkness more then light.

2 Because he chalengeth to himself infinite power, and suffers himself to
be called Ecce venit Leo de tribu Judah Simon Beg nius Epist, Modrusae in
Council. Laterani sub Leone decimo.
Leonem de tribu Judah, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah: and to have ascribed
unto him Vide Council Lateran sess. 10 in orat Stepha^, Patracensi 10
power above all powers in heaven and in earth: yea, Papa, excepto peccato
potest quasi ommia facere, quae potest Deus. Panorm ex Hostiens, Extrau, de
Translat, Praelat. cap, quanto, in glossa.
power to be able to do all things that God can do, except sin only.

3 Because he suffers himself to be called Papa est causa causarum, et non
est de eius potestate quaerendum, cum primae causae nulla sit causa Bald. in c.
eccles, vt lite pendente,
causam causarum, the cause of causes, which title the very heathen Arist, 2,
Metaph. cap, 1.
Philosophers knew to be proper to God.

4 Because he suffers himself to be called Cupres de eccles. page 61, number,
52 kRomans. 13, 19.
Deum vindictae, the God of revenge: which title God does appropriate to
himself, saying, k vengeance is mine: I will repay.

5 Because he suffers your Canonists to call him Lord God, even in that new
Impress, Lugduni anno Dom. 15 55.
edition which by the authority of Pope Gregory the 13. was corrected and
published. Their words are these: Extrau, de mayor, et obedientia.
credere Dominum Deum nostrum papam, conditorem dictae decretalis, et istius,
non sic potuisse statuere prout statuit, haereticum censeatur: To believe that
our Lord God the Pope the author of this, and the aforesaid decretale, could
not decree; as, he has decreed, it ought to be judged heretical.

6 Because he is said to be Extrau in Johan 22.
ac Christus Deus, ens secundae intentionis, A GOD as well as CHRIST, and a
being of the second intention.

7 Because he looks to be feared of men as much as God, yea more then God as
appears by the complaint of Frederick the second: Fredericus 2. epist. ad
Othou, Bauar. ducem, apud Aventinum, l. 7
Papae affectant dominationem et diuinitatem, atque vt ab hominibus haud imo
magis quam Deus timeatur: Popes affect Lordshippe and divinity, and that they
may be feared of men no otherwise than God, yea, more then God.

8 Because he takes upon him to command the Angels of heaven; for so we
read, that Clement the 6. in his bull concerning those that should come to Rome
to celebrate the iubiley, Prorsus ma^damus Angelis Paradisum etc. Clement. 6,
in Bulla de Iubil, ^
commanded the Angels, that if any one should die in that journey, they should
bring their souls, being wholly freed from Purgatory, into the glory of
Paradise.

9 Because he makes his own decrees, constitutions, and traditions, of equal
authority to the sacred word of God, and enioyneth men to receive and honor
them Council, Trident. sess. 4.
Pari pietatis affectu acreuerentia, with as great affection of piety and
reverence, which iniunction a certain Iacobus Nachiantes Clodiae fossae
Episcopus Magister sacri palatij Romae, ad legatos Bohemicos sub Felice Papa
page 144
Bishop in the Tridentine Counsel, misliked, but he was therefore expelled
out of the Counsel, by the Popes Legate.

10 Because he suffers the master of his palace, Quitacet consentire
videtur.
to give unto him (he not r gainesaying it) power to Siluester Priereas,
contra Luther, Conclus, de Potestate Papae.
change the holy Gospel, and to give unto the Gospel, according to place and
time, an othersense.

11 Because he suffers another master of his palace, to sauerre, that the
authority of the Church and Pope of Rome, is greater, then the authority of
the Scripture.

12 Because he takes upon him, to abrogate the law of God, yea, to George
Douly leaves the ^ commandment quite out, in his rehearsal of the
co^mandemets See his plain instruction, or rather his destruction.
take the second commandment quite out of the decalogue and to Idem, S, 8
divide the last commandment into two, against all reason, and Vide Origin.
homil, 8, in Exodus Chrysostom. homil, 49, in Math, et Athanasiu^ in synopsi
scripturarum
antiquity.

13 Because he takes upon him, to Vide Extrau. commun. lib, 5. tit, 9. cap, 4.
Paulum Aemilium lib, 7 Orat. Innocent. 22. in com. Suffrag. fol. 132. pro
defunctis et, Balaeum in vita Leonis. 10.
forgive sins, which is a proper action of the Godhead, as the very Mark.
2. 7.
Scribes denied not.

14 Because he suffers his Canonists to give unto him, a potestas in diuiois
leges ordinare in Romano pontifice residet. Michael Modina in christian. para
naesi. lib, 7, cap. 17,
power over the laws of God, yea to dispense Distinct, 38, lector, et did. 8
7. presbyter*
against the Apostle, and Felin. de constit. cap, statut; Canonum;
against the whole new restament also. Now (to wound them with their own
quilles) Antonin part. 3 tit. 22. cap. 6
inpraecepto superior is non debet dispensare inferior, the inferior may not
dispense with the commandment of the superior.

By these particulars it appears not only that the Pope chalengeth those
things which are Gods, but that he aduanceth himself above God, and shows
himself that he is God* and so consequently, that he is that man of sin,
that son of perdition and that adversary, prophesied of by Saint Paul: 2 Thessalonians. 2.

But to come unto the second title which you give unto the Pope; if the Pope
be (as you say he is) the successor of Peter, then should he teach you with
Peter, Pet, 2, 13, 14.
to submit your selves unto all manner of ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the King, as unto the superior, or unto governors, as
unto them that are sent of him. But the Pope teaches you, not to submit your
selves to your Sovereign, but to murder your Sovereign, and to take arms
against them. Volumus et iubem us vt ad uersus Elizabetham Angliae reginam
subditi arma capessant. Bulla Pij Quinti.
We will and command (said that impious Pope Pius) subjects of England to z
take arms against Elizabeth the Queen: William Parrie (said See Cardinal
Comos letter before allead god.
Pope Gregory the 13) shall receive merit in heaven, is he can make away
his Sovereign: yea See the defense of English Catholics. c 5
subjects (say the defenders of our English Catholics) may take their
Sovereigns, and hang them up upon gibbets against the sun, and to prove
this, they allege Numbers 25. 4. The Lord said to Moses take all the heads
of the people and hang them up before the Lord against the sun. But if these
defenders were not more then blind, they would perceive this their treacherous
illation to be erroneous: for first, the Lord commanded this revenge to be
taken; and secondly, the Magistrate was appointed to be the revenger. They do
therefore erroneously and treacherously infer upon this, that subjects may
hang up their Sovereigns, seeing that subjects are noe sovereign Rulers;
and have also a strait commandment from the Lord, Psalm, 105, 15
not to touch his anointed. Yea, this place is so far from making for you,
as that indeed it makes much against you, for seeinge that you are idolaters,
it may hear be gathered, that his highness may lawfully take the chief of
you, and hang you be fore the Lord against the sun, as Moses did the chief
idolatrous Israelites. Nay, it is (in all humility be it spoken,) his bounden
duty to do it: for (as says saint Cyprian alleadginge this very precept,
and Deuteronomy, 13* 9
another of the same Communis iuris.
nature) Cyprian in libello de Exhor tatione martyrij*
si ante aduentum Christi, circa deum colendum, et idola spernenda haec
praecepta seruata sunt, quanto magis post aduentum Christi seruanda sunt?

But to return again to your Romish Cannibals r: what was the cause that
moved them, to attempt the murdering of the kings majesty and the whole
Senate of the Parliament?


The Recusant. Truly they are thereunto moved (as both Guido, Fawkes, and
Thomas Winter See their co^sessions.
confessed, only for Religion and conscience sake; they are therefore (me
thinks) more to be borne withal.


The Minister. They are never a whitt the more to be borne withal: for it is
not lawful for subjects, to attempt the murdering of their Sovereign for
religion sake, or for any other pretense soever. Go with Cresset and Torch
light throughout the whole book of God, and throughout the spacious volumes of
the Ancient fathers, and tell me whether any priest high or low, or Leuite,
Prophet, Evangelist, Apostle, ancient Father, ever has taught, counseled,
and much less practiced the like, I say not against lawful magistrates, but
tyrannous rulers, and such as were by the express sentence of God reprobated.
To produce a few examples, Jeroboam was an Idolatrous king, and 1. Reg, 12, 28
29.
made two calves of gold; and set the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan,
nevertheless the man of God that came out of Iudath albeit he 1. Reg, 13
reprehended the king, and foretold him the ruin of his Realm: yet did he not
persuade any of his subjects to murder him, or any forraigner to make war
against him. King Ahab 1. Reg, 16, 3^*
walked in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and took Iezabel the
daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians to wife, and went and served Baal,
and worshipped him.

And the Lords Prophets were so evil entreated in his time, as that they were
1, Reg, 18, 4
hid in caves an hundredth in one cave, and an hundredth in an other, and there
fed with bread and water. Yea some of them were slain by Iezabell.
Notwithstanding r 1, Reg, 18, 18
all this Eliiah the chief Prophet of that time, albeit he reproved AHAB,
because he had forsaken the commandementes of the LORD, and had served
Baalim: Yet did he not incite any to murder either the KING, or the QVEENE.

In the time of the Prophet Isaiah, the Princes were so wicked, as that he
cried out against them, saying: Esaias, 1, 23, 24
Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves, every one loves
gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherless, neither
does the widows cause come before the^. Therefore says the lord God of Hosts
the mighty one of Israel: Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge
me of mine enemies. Verse 26
And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy Counsailours as at the
beginning. Thus did the holy Prophet complain of the exactions of the Princes,
showed them their faults, admonished them of Gods vengeance, and foretold them
of their restoring of the good judges* and counsailours: he did not animate,
encourage, and incite the people to avenge themselves of their princes, and to
lift up arms against them, as the Pope does.

The Prophet Amos also notes the vices of the Princes in his time, and calls
them the Amos 4, 1,
kine of Basan, which oppressed the poor and destroyed the needy. The Prophet
Micha taxes them, for Mich, 3, 2
plucking off the skins of the people, and their flesh from their bones. And
the Prophet Zephan. 3* 3
Zephaniah calls them roaring Lions, and their judges ravening woolues: all
which titles give sufficient testimony, that the Rulers and judges in their
times were very wicked men, and such as did grind the saces of their subjects.
And yet all this notwithstanding they did not advise the subjects to mutiny or
rebel against their Princes.

Yea the captive Jews in Babylon, were so far from seeking to take away the
life either of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, or of Balthazar his son,
as they wrote to their brethren at Jerusalem, to Baruch, 1, 11
pray for the life of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon, and for the life of
Balthazar his son that their days might be upon earth, as the days of
heaven, and that God would give the^ strength, and lighten their eyes, etc. And
answearable hereunto is that advise which the Prophet Jeremy gave the captives
in the 29 of his prophecy, though in words somewhat different, Ierem, 29, 7,
seek the prosperity of the City, whether I have caused you to be carried
away captive; and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof shall
you have peace,

But to come nearer Christ's time, John Baptist the forerunner of Christ, saw in
his time Herod Idu mean.
a counter faite Jew usurping the Realms of Galilee and Jury; and knew well
enough that the Romans were Gentiles and idolaters; and that they had deprived
the people of Israel of their liberty, and unjustly brought them to be
tributarie unto them: And yet notwithstanding, when the Luk, 2, 14
soldiers demanded of him, saying, what shall we do? he said unto them, do
violence to no man etc, he said not, revolt against the Empire, or take arms
against the Romans. Yea albeit, he knew that his death was plotted by
Herodias; yet did he not animate his disciples to murder her or Herod,
neither practiced he any mean to escape, but submitted his neck to the
excutioner.

And to come to Christ himself, he was so far from blowing up houses with
powder, and from making a fiery massacre of those that were not of his
religion, as that he Luk, 9, 59
reproved the wish of saint lames and Saint John, who desired that fire might
come down from heaven, and consume the Samaritans because they received him
not. And he was so far from making Princes to pay tribute to him, as that he
Math. 17. 27
paid tribute himself, and being demanded whether it were lawefull to pay
tribute or no, he answered thus: Math. 22. 21
give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. Yea, when the officers of the Jews
took him and bound him, he forbad Peter to use the sword, saying: John 18, 11,
put up thy sword in the sheath. He said not to Peter, as Catesby said to
Winter: See Thomas Winters confession.
stad by me Tom, and we will die together.

There was also great difference between the Disciples of Christ, and the
Disciples of Antichrist, for we read, that when Saint Peter was held prisoner
by King Herod, there was earnest prayer h Act. 12 5
made of the Church unto God for him; and not any Jesuitical plot laid by
them, thereby to deliver him, yea he enjoined the Church to Pet. 2. 17
honor their king. To omit the rest, S. Paul exhorts Timothy to make 1. Tim
2, ^.
supplicatio^s, prayers, intercessio^s, and giving of thanks for all men, for
Kings etc. albeit such as reigned in his time were Pagans and idolaters. And
agreeable herunto was the practice of the primitive Church, as Tertullian
plainly shows; Ter tull. Apol. cap. 30.
Nos (says he, describing the prayers which the old Christians of their
loyal affections made for their heathen governors) precamur pro omnibus
imperatoribus vitam prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam exercitus fortes,
populum probum, orbem quietum: we pray for all Emperors, that God would
bestow upon them a long life, a peaceable government, a safe palace, strong
armies, obedient subjects, and a quiet world. To which let us add the practice
of S. Ambrose, who, when Valentinian required him to yield his Church, answered
thus; Ambros, lib. 5, Epist 32.
with my consent I will never forgo my right. If I be compelled, I have noe way
to resist: I can sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh, tears are my weapons; etc. In
a word, *you neither carry (as a The Earl of Salisbury in his late answer to
certain seandalous papers page 11, et 12.
noble Beraean has well noted) the marks of Rome heathen, nor of Rome
Christian; for under heathen Emperors the victories were scorned, which were
barbarously gotten, mixtis veneno fontibus: And when Rome was pure and
primitive, you shall find the arms of the Church were tears and prayers. But
now their Oracles are so far degenerate from the former purity of that
ancient Church, as they make murder spiritual resolution, and openly threaten
the lives of Kings that are Gods breathing images; When the prophet David
trembled to violate the skirt of King Saules garment.

To make use hereof these ancient Romans shall in judgment rise against you,
and condemn you; for they conspired not the death of Pagans, Infidels, and
tyra^ts, that made havoc of the church of god; but you wish and watch to
destroy the most christian king, to ouerturn the little world of his dominion,
to shake the pillars thereof with mutinies and seditions, and reple nish it with
worse then Catilinarie conspiracies.


The Recusant. Sir, although some of us have wished and watched to destroy the
king; yet al of us have not: you must not condemn al for some.


The Minister. Sir, I condemn you not all; but I condemn the religion of you
all: for your religion binds you all to attempt the like. Populus Christianus
(says m Creswell. in suo ^pilopat^r page, 201
one of your seducers) obsistere tenetur conscientiae vinculo arctissimo, et
extremo animarum periculo; si praestare rem possit, Christian people are
strictly bound in conscience, and hazard of their souls, to make the like
resistance, if that they be able to perform it. And, excusandi sunt Angli
(says an other) qui non se eximunt ex superiorum potestate, necbellum contra
eos gerunt; quia non suppetunt illis vires, the English Catholics, who n
Bannes in 20 28. Thom. quaest. 12. art, 2
exempt not themselves from the power of their superiors, and who wage not
war against the Protestants in that Land, are in some sort to be excused
because they have not sufficient power.

Out of these words of Bannes and Creswell, I gather these two things.

1 That your religion binds you all to play the traitors, and to take up
arms against your country.

2 That the reason why you do not take arms against your country, is only
because you have not power sufficient to match us: for had you sufficient
power, your Romish Doctors would hold you inexcusable, if you did it not. You
may therefore fitly be compared to serpents, which may be handled, whilst the
cold has benumbed them; but when they are warmed, they will hiss out their
venomous poison. My meaning is no mystery: if you be harbored a while longer
in the bosom of this common wealth, you will in time get such warmth, and
become of such a co^petent strength, as that you will be able to match us, if
not ouermatch us.

But I doubt not, but that his Majesty and the state will look to this
betimes, and not nurse up Lions whelps for their own overthrow, as Amilcar
brought up his sons for the ruin of Rome.

I will therefore leave you to the justice of his Majesty and the state, who
know well enough, that it behoneth wise Princes (as a great The Earl of
Salisbury in his late answer to certain scandalous papers page: 10*
statesman has well observed) to keep down faction, which is ever humble
till it get the key of power. And now let me entreat you, to confer with me
about some point of Religion.


The Recusant. I will confer with you no longer,


The Minister. Why will you not?


The Recusant. Because you are (to use Doctor Hardings term) a Harding in his
confession foll. 222.
Turkish Hugenote.


The Minister. A Turkish Hugenote? Sir, if you will vouchsafe to confer with
me a while, I will prove that you are Turkish and not we.


The Recusant. Are Roman Catholics Turkish?


The Minister. Yes, as may appear by these Semblances which I have observed
betwixt them and you.


The 1. Semblance. The Turks at this day, for all that Sozom. lib. 6 cap, 38,
histories make plain mention, and themselves also cannot deny, but that they
took their first beeginning from Agar the bond woman: yet for the very name
and stocks sake, they choose rather to be called Saracens, as though they came
of Sara the free woman. So you, although you be (as I have formerlie proved)
abominable heretics; yet do you challenge this title to be called Catholics.
But This surname Catholic was not used in the Apostles time. Biblioth, sacra
tom 3. ad Sympronian. Nouation. de Cathol. nomine Epist. 1
sub Apostolis (as says Pacianus an ancient father) nemo Catholicus vocabatur,
under the Apostles noe man (though Baronius says the contrary) was called
Catholic.

And albeit, cum post Apostolos, haereses d Annalium eom 1, page, 3. 9
extitissent, diuersisque nominibus columbam Dei atque e This surname
Catholic was used after the Apostles time and that by the Apostolic people*
Pacian. ibid.
reginam lacerare per parts, and scindere niterentur, cognomen suum plebs
Apostolica postulabat, quo incorrupti populi distingueret vnitate^,
neintemeratam Dei virginem, error aliquorum per membra laceraret, when after
the Apostles there were heresies, and men began to rend in pieces and divide
Gods Dove and Queen, by sundry different names; the Apostolic people
required their surnames, whereby they might distinguish the unity of the
vncorrupt people, least the error of time, should rend in sunder Gods
undefiled Virgin: yet see I no reason, why you should require the same Surname
which the Apostolic people did, seeing that you embrace not that doctrine
which they main tained, but the heresies which they condemned, as I showed you
at large in our first, second, and third days conference.

But it is no marvel, to here you entitle your congregations by the name of
the Catholic Church: for (as says Lactantius) This surname Catholic was,
and is challenged by here tickes.
Singnli quique haereticorum coetus se potissimum Christianot and suam esse
catholicam ecclesiam putant: every conuenticle of heretics do imagine
themselves to be true Christians, and their Church the Catholic Church. But I
proceed to another Semblance.


The 2 Semblance. The Turks (as I have showed already) called themselves
Saracens, of Sara: so do some of your Popish Friars call themselves
Franciscans of saint Francis; and others call themselves Dominicans of Saint
Dominicke; for which cause we may justly hold you to be the synagogue of
Antichrist: for (as an ancient Hieron. advers. Luciferia^
father says) si cubi audieris eos qui dieuntur Christiani, non a Domino Jesus
Christo, sed a qu^qua^ alionuncupari, puta Marcionitas, Valentinianes,
Montenses, Campates, scito non ecclefiam Chisti, sed Antichristi esse
synagogam, whenever thou shall here those, that are called Christians not to
have their name from our Lord Jesus Christ, but from some other, as
Marcionites, Valentinians, Montenses, Campates, know thus much, that they are
not the Church of Christ, but the synagogue of Antichrist. We may also for the
same cause, hold you to be carnal 1 Cor, 3 4
, for when one says, I hold of Paul, and another, I hold of Apollos, are ye
not carnal?


The 3: Semblance: By succession the Turk at this day possesses and holds
the 4: great Patriarkal Sees of the Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem, which were once sanctuaries of Religion, and places of
greatest faith and devotions: so by succession the Pope chalengeth at this day
the Sea of Rome, which was once (I deny not) the eye of the west, and the
anchor of true piety.


The 4. Semblance. Albeit the Church of Rome was once the eye of the west, and
the true Chuch of God; yet fell she away from God into idolatry and
Apostasy, about the year of our Lord 607. for in the year 602, did Gregory
the first (who was the last true and godly Bishop of Rome) In lib. 6. Epist 30.
auouche this solemnly as a manifest truth, that whosoever did take to
himself the name of universal Bishop, the same was Antichrist. Now five years
after, viz: in the year 607. did Boniface the third (who was the first
Antichristian Bishop of Rome) take unto himself the title of universal
Bishop, and since him all his successors have taken unto them the same
Antichristian title.

Now as this Antichristian Pope arose in the Western Churches in the year of
our Lord 607. So did Mahomet arise in the Esterne Churches about the same time,
as is proved in sundry Vide Euthymium Zigaben. in Elench Isma. elit.
Vincentius Beluacens. lib, 23, cap, 39. Breidenbachius in hist suae Peregrin.
Philippus Lonicerus, in Turcic. Hist, Laonicus Chalcondilus de rebus Turcicis
lib. 3 N^uclerus Generat. 22, and Danaeus in Auguit, de haeres, cap. 96,
books extant to the view of the word.


The Recusant: It is true indeed, that Mahomet arose in the Eastern Churches,
about that time, in the reign of the Emperor Heraclius: but I deny that
there arose up any Antichristian Pope in the western Churches about the same
time.


The Minister. Well, to make it most evidently appear unto you; the aforesaid
vain glorious Bonifacius* tertius*
prelate, in the year 607. began to dispute, that Rome was always the Lady
of the whole World: and therefore that it was meet that the Bishop of that
City should go before other Bishops in degree and dignity.

Now to attain this, was a thing most difficult: for albeit that the Emperor
did let it slip; yet did the Bishops of other nations confidently gainsay
him alleging lawful causes why they withstood him: unwilling to acknowledge
the Bishop of Rome, otherwise then for a brother, companion and in power equal
with them. Notwithstanding all this, the said Maleface of Rome desisted not but
continually urged to attain unto his purpose, until he had by many
requests and gifts obtained of wicked Phocas the Emperor (who murdered his
Master the Emperor Mauritius and his children, to come to the Empire, and was
after slain himself by Heraclius that succeeded him) that he might be called
the head of the Catholic and universal Church, or the oecumenicall and
universal Bishop. which title of blasphemy, when as John the Patriarch of
Constantinople had challenged not long before, viz. about the year 602. Pope
Gregory Fidenter dico quod quisqui ^ se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat vel
vocari desiderat, in ela tione sua Antichristum praecurrit, Greg. lib, 6,
epist, 30
affirmed confidently that therein he was the forerunner of Antichrist: that
the Rex, superbiae prope est, et quod dici nefas est, sacer do tum ei
praeparatur exercitus Greg, lib, 4, epist, 38
king of pride (meaning Antichrist) was then at hand, and had an army of
priests (thereby insinuating that he should be the Prince of priests)
prepared for him. Now the Pope is your Prince of Priests, (for so Cardinal
Bellarm. de Pontif. Rom, lib, 2, cap, 38
Bellarmine calls him) who far exceeds John of Constantinople, in all
Antichristian pride; chalenging a sovereign and universal authority not
only above all other Bishops and Priests, but also above all Princes and
Potentates.

By this then it appears, that the Church of Rome did then become
Antichristian, when the said Pope Boniface took unto him and his successors
the title of Vuiuersall and Catholic Bishop. And about the same time (as has
been showed) did Mahomet arise in the Esterne Churches. I proceed now to
other Semblances.


The 5. Semblance. This Mahomet was an Arabian and an Ismaelite, i Vide, Au.
Danaen, in ang, de haeres, cap, 96.
and took wages of the Emperor Heraclius, to serve him in his wars. And
when the Saracens and Arabians revolted from the Emperor, he encouraged them
in their defection, and in this mutiny he was chosen to be a commander of
these Rebels. Thus growing from a seditious soldier, to be a captain of a
rebellious host, he with his Mahometicall forces subdued Phaenicia, Palestina,
Syria, Mesopotamia, and diverse other countries. And as for the CHRISTIANS, he
made havoc of them as sundry writers do testify. g Sophron epist, ad
Sergium in Synod. 6 Constantinop* Act. 11, Zonaras tom, 3 Annall. Vincent.
Beluacons, lib, 23, Paulus Diaconus lib, 18 Histor, et Simo neta lib. 1, epist.


Now to apply this, as the Saracens were traitors to the Emperor Heraclius,
so were the Popes to the Emperors and Princes of Chrystendome: for first the
Emperors of Greece by the Popes rebellious opposition against their Sovereign
Lords, in the ungodly defense of images, were bereaved of their dominions in
the west: by which means the Empire being rent asunder, way was made for the
Turk. And although at the first, they seemed to honor their newely erected
Emperors in the west, 4. whom they created for their own defense; yet
afterward they never ceased until they had gotten superiority over them.
And ever since it has been their practice to strengthen and advance
themselves, by weakening and deiecting the Emperor, and all other Christian
Princes, as much as they could.


The 6. Semblance. Mahomet Vide vincent lib, 23. cap. 4 1 specal, histor
Platinain Bon ifacio. 7
committed many robberies and such like villainies: so we read, that Boniface
the 7. (having gotten the Popedom by ill means) robbed Saint Peter's Church of
all the jewels and precious things he could find, and so ran his ways. But
to insist in that which is fresh in memory, there was lately See the discourse
of the late intended treason, page, 48
one Grant a Gentleman who having associated unto him some others of his
opinion, al violent Papists and Recusants, came to a At warwick.
Stable of one Benocke a rider of great horses, and having violently broken up
the same, stole out all the great horses that were therein, to the number of
seven or eight, belonging to diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen, who had put them
into the riders hands to be made fit for their service. But not to speak
only of the robberries of these traitors, it is one of your decrees, made and
decreed amongst the Papists, that Haereticis licitum est aufer ri quae habent
Decret, Papale apud, Great, cause 15, q glossa.
it is lawful to rob Protestants (whom you call Heretics) of their goods.


The 7. Semblance. Mahomet Vide Vincet. lib, 23, cap, 41 specul, hist.
committed many bloody murders: and so have the Popes. To make this plain by
enumeration of particulars, it is A Ben, Cardinal.
said that Gregory the 7. poisoned six Popes to make himself a way to the
Papacy, and sought to murder Henry the Emperor as he was at his prayers in
the Church Vide Matthew Paris in Henric 3.
: and that Innocentius the 4 sought to poison Conrade the Emperor; There was
also a massacre intended in the Church of Florence, and Iulianus Medices
murdered by the Vide Raphael Volateran. et Politian, de con jurat. pact.
appointment of Pope Sixtus the 4. Iomit Vrbanus the 6. who Vide Cyprian de
Valerain Urban, 6
put five of his Cardinals into sackes, and drowned them, because they favored
Clement the 7. and Alexander the 6. who commanded Antonius Mancinellus his
tongue, and both his hands to be cut off, because he made an inuectiue
oration against his impure life: and who was so cruel, as that a Zanzarius.
famous man of that time an excellent Poet, made these verses of him.

Pollicitus calum Romanus, et astra sacerdos,
Per scelera et caedes adstygapandit iter.
that is, the Roman Bishop, who promised heaven to other men, is gone himself
to hell, by reason of his villains and murders.

I come to Stephanus the 6. and Sergius the 3. who were so barbarously cruel,
as that they Vide Martin, Polon, anno 898. et 907, et Platin. in Stephan. 6, et
Serg. 3.
pulled Formosus their predecessor out of his grave, the one cutting of his
fingers, the other his head, and cast his carcass into Tyber.

And Sixtus the last was (as your own Quod lib. 3 art, 2, page, 57
Quodlibetaries report) so full of cruelty, heresy, and villainy, as that the
Jesuits preached openly in Spain against him, It seems that Pope Sixtus was
better then other Popes; otherwise the Jesuits would not have railed on him in
this sort.
railing on him, and calling him a Lutheran heretic, a wolf and what not? Yea
Cardinal Bellarmine being asked by one, what he thought of his death answered
thus: Conceptis verbis, quantum capio, quantum sapio, quantum intelligo,
descendit ad infernum, as far as I can perceive, understand, and apprehend,
our Pope is gone to hell; Lo, this does Bellarmine write (as it were) upon
the tomb of one of your Popes, as the people of Sicilia wrote (abusing an
article of Athanasius creed) upon the tomb of a cruel Viceroy of theirs,
Theater du monde lib, 2.
Hic iacet, etc.

Quipropter nos bomines
Et nostram salutem,
Descendit ad inferos.
But what do I insist upon the immane cruelty of Popes toward those that
are of their own religion? let us take a view of their brutish immanitie
toward those that are of the contrary religion, what can I speak of this?
nay rather what can I not speak? how hideous are the torments that are
invented by the Pope, and inflicted by his inquisitors upon Protestants in
foreign Countries.

First Vide Reginaldum Gone salvium Monta number in detectione Inquisit. fol 23,
24, 25, 26. et 27.
they command an officer, to have the imprisoned Protestant into a certain
place where the Rack stands, which commonly is a deep and a dark dungeon
under the ground, with many a door to pass through ere a man can come unto
it, because such as are put thereto, should not be heard to shrike or cry. In
the which place there is a scaffold reared, where the Inquisitour, the
Prouisor, and the Clearke do sit, to see the anatomy made of him that is
brought thitherto.

Then the linkes being lighted, and all the Players entered that have parts in
this Tragedy, the Executioner, who tarieth last to make all fast (as they
say) and to see every man in before him, comes also at the length, and of
himself alone makes a show worthy the sight, more then all the rest of
that route, being wholly arrayed all over from the top of his head, to the sole
of his foot in a suit of black canvas, such as superstitious people wear on
Mandy Thursday when they scourge and whip themselves, as the custom is in most
places under Popery, if not in all (much like that apparel which the devils
in stage plays use here with us in England) moreover his head is covered with
a long black hoode that reaches over al his face having two little peep holes
to see through, and al to this end, to make the poor soul the more afraid
both in body and mind, to see one torment him in the likeness of a devil.
After the Lords be set down each in their places, they begin with him
again, and exhort him afresh to speak the truth freely and voluntarily:
otherwise at his own peril be it. For if either his arm, or his leg, or
any other joint be broken in the rack, as it happens to diverse, so that
he chance to die thereof (for more gently then so they mean not to deal with
them) let him blame no man but himself: for they think that after they have
given him this fair warning, they are now discharged in conscience both before
God and man, and therefore are guiltless, what harm soever come unto him by
means of the Rack, yea though he die thereon as innocent as the child
newly borne.

After this, with sharp rebukes and men acinge words, they command, that the
party be stripped stark naked, be it he or she, yea, though it were one well
known to be the most honest and chaste maiden or matrone in all the City (as
they be never lightly without sundry such in this their shambles) whose
grief (no doubt) is not half so great in respect of any torments, that
presently they endure, as it is to beeseene naked in such a presence. But to
proceed, when they are stripped naked, they draw on a close linen breech, and
then the Lords signify to the tormentor by some token, in what sort they
would have the party punished: for as their torments be in number many; so in
sorts they be sundry. But the most usual be the Ieobite, and Pullie with
water, cords and fire. Yet, before they inflict these torments upon them,
they persuade them to utter whatsoever they know either by them selves, or by
others of their acquaintance; in the mean space while they are thus commoning
with him, one comes beehinde him, and binds his hands with a cord, eight
or ten times about: and because nothing should be thought to be done without
authority and order of law, the Inquisitour calls upon him to strain each
harder then other: Being thus bound to the Rack, they begin yet once again
to persuade with him, and beside the binding together of his hands, they also
cause his thombes with some smaller line drawn very strait, and fasten both
the lines that tie both his hands and thombes, to a certain Pullie which
hangs on the Ieobite.

Then knock they great and heavy boltes upon his heels, if the party have
none already, or else hang betwixt both his feet upon those boltes which he
has certain waightes of iron, at the first time but five pound, and so hoyse
him up from the ground: Whiles the poor Protestant hangs in this plight,
they fall to their persuasions once again, commanding the hangman to hoyse him
up on high to the very bcame, till his hands touch the Pullie. Then cries the
Inquisitor and the Clearke upon him to confess somewhat. After that he has
hung a good space, and will grant nothing, they command him to be let down,
and twice so much iron more to be laid on his heels, and so hoyse him up
again, one inch higher, if it may be; threatening him that he shall die none
other death, excepthee declare unto them the truth in such matters as they
demand of him, and therefore charge the hangeman to let him up and down, that
the weight of iron hanging at his heels, may rent every joint in his body
from other. At which intolerable pain, they bid the hangman slip the ropes
suddenly, that he may fall down with a swinge, and in the half way stop and
give him the Strippado: which being done all his body is out of frame, arms,
shoulders, back, legs, and all the rest of his joints, by reason of the sway
tearing each part from other. Then (if he will not then yield) they cause more
iron to be added the third time: so that the fiely Protestant being half
dead and more, is by their commandment hoysed up again, and to augement his
grief they then begin to tail upon him, calling him dog and heretic.
And if this pitiful creature do call upon Christ (as for the most, all that
are persecuted for his truth sake do) then fall they (says mine Reginaldus
Gonsaluius Montanus in loco citato.
author) to mocking of him; saying Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ. Let Jesus Christ
alone, and tell us the truth; what a crying out upon Christ make thou?
confess what we ask thee, and makevs no more ado. And herein does my author
very fitly resemble them to the Jews that mocked and derided Christ, saying;
Math, 27
Behold he calls for Elias. He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if
he will have him. But to return to the Tragedy, if the party be let down
promising to tell them somewhat, and perform it indeed, that is the very
ready way to make him be worse handled then before, because they think that
now he begins only to broch his matters. This horrible butcherie
continues from nine of the clock in the morning till high none or an hour
after: which being ended, the Iailer begins to play the bone-setter so well
as he can, and to put his arms and legs in their right joints again: and
putting on his clothes, brings him back to his prison, or rather carries him
having never a leg to stand upon, yea sometime draggeth him by the arms or
legs too too pitifully. And within two or three days, they send for him forth
again into the audience, and provide so, that in the way from the prison as he
passes by the place where the racke-stocke stands, the hangman shall stand
for the nonce to show himself in the said likeness of a devil, that the party
in passing by, may have a sight of him, and thereby be occasioned the more to
remember his former torments, who coming into the Court, finds the
inquisitour, the Ordinary, and the Clearke, ready set each man in his place,
which after their manner fall in hand with him; at which time, if they cannot
get any thing out of him, they cause him to be carried to prison again. But if
he declare any thing, they press him the more; and such matter it may be his
hap to disclose, that it may chance to purchase him the rack once more*
upon hope of getting some greater matters at his hands. But if they were
resolved before, to put the party to the rack once again, then about three
days after his last being there, they send for him again to come before
them: and what with earnest entreatie and terrible threats, they labor to
have him shriue himself of al his opinions and heresies, (as they call them)
and to appeach as well such persons with whom he has had conference in such
matters, as also all other whom he knows to be of the same mind. And if
the poor Protestant continue constant then the keeper is commanded that once
again he provide the rack, and strip him out of his clothes, and put him either
to the aforesaid torment or a worse, viz* after this manner.

The Protestant having his hands bound behind him and hanging at the Pullie,
they bind both his thighs together with strong cords, and so in like manner
his legs about the calfe. Then put they betwixt the cords and his legs a
short piece of wood, wherewith they wrest the stringes so stiff, till they be
so deep suncke into his flesh that they are past sight: a very extreme and a
terrible torment and much worse then any that he has yet endured: In this
pitiful plight, the poor soul lies for the space of two or three hours,
abiding the Inquisitors pleasures: who nevertheless cease not to flout him all
this while, orinstead thereof they practice as they think best, another kind of
torture, which albeit it be used upon offenders in other places as well as in
that; yet for one especial point of cruelty added by them, we may justly
ascribe it to their holy Court as a devise of Antichrist. The name of it is
Buri or Aselli; and the manner of it is this. There is a great bench made out
of whole Timber, wrought hollow in the upper part like a trough, so large that
a man may lie open in it on his back, and thereabouts as his midriffe lies,
there is a sharp bar going cross ouerth wart, whereon the parties back
rests that it cannot settle to the bottom, because he should have no ease:
his heels also lying higher then his head, and his arms, thighs, and
legs, bound with small cords, strained till they settle into the flesh and
pierce almost to the very bone, in so much that they beclean out of sight: and
then comes in a new devise of their own, viz* they take a piece of linen
cloth, and ouerspread the parties mouth there with as he lies upright, so as
it may stop his nostrels also, that when the water is powered into his mouth,
he should take in no air at his nose. Then power they water upon the cloth,
not by drops, but in the manner of a long stream, which bears down the
cloth into the furthest part of his throat: so that when they pluck it out of
the bottom of his throat (as many times they do,) the cloth is so wet with
water and blood together, that a man would think the very intrals come out of
his body.

To conclude, some are tormented there in another sort, viz: they take a pan
full of hot coals, which they set against the soles of Protestants feet,
before he go to the aforesaid Rack, and to the end that the fire may have
more force to brusle them, they bast them with lard or bacon.

Lo, here you see, what grievous torments the Papists use to bring men to
their pretended Catholic Religion; and yet our Popish Recusants (forsooth)
are grown so delicate, that neither religion nor obedience may be forced on
them: for (the Doctor Hill his quartron of Reasons of Catholic religion, page
182.
word being now out of their bloody hands) they complain of rigor, and cry
out, that we do greatly offend God here in England, in forcing people to go
to the Church contrary to their consciences. But the time was, when they cared
little for driving us to sin against our conscience; the strange torments
they devised and practiced on See Fox. Act. et Mon. lib, 11
Rogers, Sanders, Hooper, Taylour, Tomkins, Bradford, Ridley, Latimer, and
diverse others of our Country men, to compel them from the confession of the
true Catholic faith without any regard had of their consciences, can witness
the same. Now what reason can they bring that they may enforce others, and none
must enforce them?

To conclude, this particular, it appears also by ^ Revel, 17. 6
this Tragedy that the Whore of Babylon is drunken with the blood of Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. God almighty stir up the hearts
of Christian Princes, that they may not only hate the said whore of Babylon,
but also (according to the Prophecy of the Holy Ghost) Revel, 18. 9
Reward her even as she has rewarded the Saints of Jesus, and give her double
according to her works: and in the cup that she has* filled them, fill her
the double.


The 8. Semblance. Mahomet was (as sundry Vincont li, 23 specul, hist, et
Zigaben in Elencho Ismaelit
writers testify) a great Magician, and kept a dove, that revealed (as he
informed the people) sundry things, so were some of your Popes known
Necromancers and sorcerers. To y Vide Cypria^ de valera, in Benedict, 9
insist in some particulars, Benedict the 9, alias the 8, was wont in woods and
mountains, to sacrifice to the devil, and by magical art to allure women unto
him and to make the^ follow him up and down like Cades: he kept also a sparrow
that brought him news from all Quarters. And (as it is in the Spanish
proverb) Perque de mal Cuerno mal bueno, of an evil Crow an evil egg: for
the said Pope Ibidem.
had two Cardinals, namely, Laurentius, and Gracianus, that were such
Necromancers, as that they knew what passed in the East, West, North, Platina
in Syluest: 2* Sabellic, Enead 9 lib* 2, Volateran, lib, 22, Bergomas lib, 12.
Johan. de Pineda part. 3. lib, 19, cap* 15* Cyprian de Valera in Syluest, 2,
and South. And we read in sundry Writers, that Syluester the 2. even from his
youth gave himself to enchantments, and witchcraft; and that (the better to
effect his enchauntments) he made a covenant with the Devil, and be took
himself both body and soul to the Devil, conditionally; that the Devil
should help him to great preferment: and that by his wicked Art he came first
to be Bishop of Rhemes, and afterward Archbishop of Rauenna, and in the end
Pope of Rome. And not to rake any longer in this dunghill of Popes; all the
Popes from the said Siluester to Gregory the 7. were known Necromancers.


The 9. semblance. Vincentius lib, 23, specul. Hist.
Mahomet was a whoremonger, and given to all kind of impurity: so have many of
your Popes been. To begin with Alexander the 6. he not being contented with
other strumpets which he kept, by whom he Vide Onuphrium in Alex and. 6,
had quatuor filios, et duas filias, four bastard sons, and two bastard
daughters, committed incest with his own daughter Lucretia, as witnesses
Johannes Iouinianus Pontanus in his Epitaph upon Lucretia the daughter of the
said Pope. The Epitaph is this.

Pontan, Tumul, lib* 2, in tumulo Lucreriae Alexandri filiae*
Hoc tumulo dormit Lucretia nomine, s^dre:

That is; Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus. Here lies Lucretia in name, indeed
a shameless whore; the daughter of Alexander, her fathers and brothers harlot.
Adioine heereunto Paulus the 3, who Sleidan, in Com.
committed incest with two of his Nices, prostituted one of his sisters to
Alexander the 6. to get a Cardinalship, and poisoned another, because she
affected some other of her lovers more then himself: and who (not staying
here in these vile lusts, which were not yet against nature) fell into
unnatural filthiness, even into the sin of Sodom. Of Sixtus also the 4. it
is said, that he was a filthy Sodomite, and that to incite and encourage others
to the same filthiness, he Agrippa de Vanitate Scient cap. de lenocinio.
built a sumptuous Stews in Rome, appointing it to be both masculine and
faeminine, and gave license (as 2, Vesselus Groninigensis tract* de indulgent.
Gronningensis says) to the Cardinal of Saint Lucie, and to all his family,
that they might in June, July, and August, freely use Sodomie. And it is Herman
Contract. and Paralip* Vrs. perg.
recorded, that Clement the fifth was a public fornicatour, and kept a
certain beautiful Countess as his Paramour. Gregory the seventh Pizarrus
in Hist, Gennens.
was also very familiar with another Countess in his time. And Innocentius the
eighth was such a common whoremonger, as that he had sixteen bastards by
several strumpets, as these verses give sufficient testimony.

Marul* de Innocent. 8.
Octo nocens pueros genuit totidemque puellas. Huic merito, poterit dicere Roma
Patrem: That is, Innocent begat eight sons, and just so many daughters; Rome
therefore might justly call him Father. I omit John the twelueth, who Luitprand
Ticinenfis lib. 6* cap, et 7. et Martin. Polon. in anno 986.
gave orders in his Stable, amongst his Horses; abused his Fathers Concubine,
and made his Palace a Stews, put out his ghostly Fathers eyes, gelded one of
his Cardinals, drank to the Devil, and at Dice called for help of Jupiter
and Venus.

I come to John the three and twentieth, of whom a whole Counsel says thus:
Council. Constant* sess* 11.
A tempore iuuentutis suae fuit homo malae in dolis, in verecundus, impudicus,
mendax, parentibus suis rebellis et inobediens, plerisque vitijs deditus,
actalis et pro tali fuit communiter dictus, tentus, creditus etreputatus ab
omnibus. Et ad huc dicitur, tenetur, creditur, et reputatur pro tali, et vt
talis: That is, John the five and twentieth from the very time of his youth,
has evermore been a man of an evil disposition, unshamefast, unchaste, alyar,
vnobedient to his Parents, and given to many other vices, and such an one, and
for such an one, was he commonly named, holden, believed, taken, and reputed
of all that knew him. And still is he named, holden, believed, and reputed
such an one, and for such one.

Add hereto Pope Nicholas the third, who begat t Cyprian de Valera in nicol.
a child by his Concubine, which in nails and hair was like a Bear; which
some impute to the pictures of Bears that he caused to be made in his house.
And therefore Martine the fourth, who kept the same Concubine after him,
fearing belike the like mischance, caused the pictures of the Bears to be
taken away.

But I will not warble any longer upon this untuneable harsh string, neither
set down of the hundredth part of what I am able to justify out of credible
Writers: for (to use the words of one that was afterward Pope himself) Aeneas
Syltrius de gestis Council: Basil: lib: 1*
De Romany Pontificibus liceret exempla admodum multa adferre; si tempus
sineret; qui aut haeretici, aut alijs imbuti vitijs, sunt reperti: If time
would permit, I might bring forth very many examples of Roman Bishops, that
were found either to be heretics, or else defiled with other vices.


The 10 Semblance. Albeit Mahomet was (as has been showed) very vicious; yet
made he the Arabians believe, that he was Breidenbach* de Peregrin. sua, cap. 3.
Propheta, et nuntius Dei, a Prophet, and a messenger of God: so albeit the
Pope be that man of sin spoken of in the 2. Chap. of the 2 Epist. to the
Thesla, verse 2. Yet bears he the world in hand, that he Johan. de
Turrecremata, lib. 2. summae de eccles: cap, 26:
is Vicarius Christi, Christ's Vicar upon earth.


The 11 Semblance. Mahomet Lonicerus de rebus Turcic and Breidenbach* de
peregrin* sua
professed himself to be both a Priest, and a King, and challenged to himself
the power of both swords: so did Boniface the 8. when he Vide Vspergens.
caused the two swords to be borne before him, in a year of Iubiley, thereby
to show his power: and when he Bonisacius de mayor* et obed. cap. vnum sanct.
alleged that place in the Gospel, where one of Christ's Disciples said, ecce
duogladij, behold two swords. The Popes favorites also in these days, do
solemnly dispute, that R* Cupers page 251, Number. 62.
the Empire or temporal rule, as well as the priesthood or ecclesiastical
dominion, is translated unto the successor of Peter.


The 12 Semblance. Mahomet boasted, that he had received Zigaben. in Elench.
Tas cleis tou paradeisou, the keys of Paradise: so does the Pope boast that
he is Did. 22; cap, omnes.
aeternae vitae clauiger, the Key-bearer of eternal life. And albeit it was
avouched by the Scribes, and not denied by Christ, that Marc, 2, 7:
none can forgive sins but God only: yet does the Pope take upon him to
forgive sins, and to give heaven to whom it pleases him. Yea one of the
Popes suffered the Ambassadors of Sicilia to lie prostrate on the ground, and
thus to cry unto him, as if it had been unto Christ: Vide Paulum Aemilium,
lib, 7,
Quitollis peccata mundi miserere nostri: qui tollis peccata mundi, dona nobis
pacem: thou that take away the sins of the world, give us peace.


The 13. Semblance. Mahomet not only to gratify his companions, but also the
more easily to allure al nations received all religions. As for example, to
allure the Jews, he exalted h Vide Alcora ni Azoar. 12, et 16,
Moses, and retained circumcision; not to estrange the minds of Christians, he
confessed Christ to be Alcorani. Azoar 16.
a Prophet and the Word of God; to please the Arrians and Cerdonians, he
Alcorani Azoar 9, et 11.
said that Christ was not the very Son of God; to win the Pelagians, he
Alcorani Azoara 18, et 41
taught, that men may merit Heaven by their works. In a word, Bibliander in
prefat, in Alcor.
Mahometismus ex veteribus haeresibus consutus est, Mahometisme is patched
together of old heresies: So is Papisme like wise patched, as I showed you in
our first, second, and third days conferences.


The 14. Semblance. Mahomet composed of the traditions of the Hebrews, and
other such like fables, his Alcoran, that is, a certain book: wherein are
contained all those Turkish mysteries, and ceremonies that have no ground in
the word of God: so have your Popes made you an Alcoran of Traditions,
constitutions, tales and decretalls.


The 15. Semblance. The Turks make more account of Mahomets Alcoran than of
the sacred Scriptures: so do you make more account of the popes Constitutions
and Traditions, then of the Word of God; for you hold with Melchior Canus,
that Melchior Canus locor, Theol* lib. 3, fol. 98.
for confounding of heretics there is greater strength in Tradition, than in
the Scripture: and with Siluester Prierias, that Siluester prierias contra
Luther. co^clus. de potestate Papae.
iudulgences are warranted unto us, not by the authority of the Scripture, but
by the authority of the Church and of the Pope of Rome, which, says he, is
greater.


The 16. Semblance The Turks Vide Ziga ben. in Elench. Ismael. et Vincent.
specul. hist. lib. 23. cap. 36*
believe that Mahomet conferred with the Angel Gabriel and received their
Alcoran from him: so do you labor to make simple people believe, that you
received your traditions Council. Tride^t Sess. 5.
from Christ and his Apostles.


The 17, Semblance. The Turks (as the forenamed writers report) bear the
world in hand, that their religion was confirmed by miracles, signs, and
wonders; so do you.


The 18. Semblaeuce. The Alcorani Az^ ara 10.
Turks account some sins venial; so do Guilielmus pe raldus Sum. Virtut*
ac vitior. tom 2. cap. 20,
you.


The 19. Semblance. The Alcorani. Azoara 23.
Turks take whoredom to be either no sin at all, or if it be a sin, to be a
very small sin: so do your popish shauelings, as appears by these words of
Erasmus: Erasmus in Enchyrid. mil. Christiani cap. 14.
bona pars eorum, quos vulgus integros et in corruptos appellat, simplicem
fornicationem, et moderatum voluptatis vsum, vt leave commissum neutiquam
effugiunt: a great part of those whom the common sort takes for perfect and
incorrupt men, do not a whit aborre simple fornication, and a sober use of
pleasure, reckoning it to be but a petty fault. Yea, you account it to be so
small a fault indeed, as that you hold that no Priest ought to be deposed
from his benefice for single fornication. These be your express words in your
own gloss upon the decrees: Distinct. ^^. Presbiter.
dicunt neminem hodie propter fornicationem simplicem esse deponendum they say
that for single fornication no man ought at this day to be deposed. And least
ye should mis* trust your gloss to be corrupted, it is also thus noted of
purpose in great letters in the margin: Fornicationis causa hodie nemo est
deponendus: quia corpora a hodie y Ibid in glossa.
sunt fragiliora: no man now a days ought to be deprived for fornication: and
that because our bodies are frailer, then they were wont to be.

Panormitane also your greatest Canonist, says thus: Vide Extrau* de Consangui
nit* et affinit, no^ debet, Abb.
advarietatem temporum debent mutaristatu^a humana: ideo hodie ex simplice
fornicatione Clericus non deponitur: the laws of men ought to be altered,
according to the change of times: and therefore now a days no priest is
deposed for single fornication. And Archer the Jesuit (as your secular In
their relation, page* 47* ^
Priests testify) defended this proposition, viz. that the stews are as
lawful at Rome, as the Pope himself, or any order of Religion.

The Jesuit Weston likewise defended the same, against Doctor Bagshaw.


The 20 Semblance. The Multi Tureis sunt peculiares sancti, quorum alii a
peregri nantibus, alii a parieutibus, alii a calamitosis, alii a viatoribus
inuocantur, Septe^castrens. de Religion* Turcic* cap, 15.
Turks' pray to Saints, and have certain peculiar Saints, for peculiar
purposes: so have you, as hereafter (God willing) shall be largely showed.


The 21. Semblance. The Menauin, de sepultura Turcar.
Turks pray for the dead; so do you, and that especially when you go over any
Churchyard saying: Orat. pro De funct. in com. suffrag. fol. 132
Auete omnes anims fideles, quarum corpord hic et vbique requiescant in puluere
Dominus* Jesus Christus qui vos et nos redemit suo pretiosissimo fanguine,
dignetur vos apanis liberare, et inter choros suorum sanctorum Angelorum
coll^care: etc.


The 22, Semblance. The Alchorani Azoara 10, 21, 25.
Turks dream of a purgatory after this life: so do your dreaming Bellarm. de
purgat. lib. 1. cap. 1. et lib. 2, cap. 6 et Rhemist. in mat 12, sect, 66.
Doctors, that there is a certain infernal place in the earth, called
purgatory, in the which, as in a prison house, the souls which are not fully
purged in this life, are there cleansed and purged by fire, before they can be
received into Heaven.


The 22. Semblance. The Septemcastr. de Relig. Turc. cap. 15.
Turks honor and reverence the Sepulchers of their Saints: so do your
Bellarm. de reliquijs Sanctorum lib. 2. cap. 21. et council. Trident. sess. 25,
Doctors teach you, that the relics of Saints, that is, their bodies, and
bones, and sepulchers, where they are buried, are to be honored and
reverenced.


The 23, Semblance. The Septe^cast. de Relig. Turic. cap. 14, et Anto^ Menauin.
cap. 15. et Breiden bac. de peregri not, sua cap, 3,
Turks use to go on pilgrimage, to certain supposed holy places: so do some
of you usually walk on your bare feet, with a Peregrines staff in your hand,
and with a scrip about your necks, to Saint James of Compostella, to the Lady
of Lauretto, and to sundry other such like places.


The 24, Semblance. The Septemcast^ de Relig* Turst cic. cap. 13, et Ri^her.
lib, 2. demoribus Turcar.
Turks were strictly commanded by Mahomet to pray five times a day; so are you
Masse-mongring Priests Innocent. in cap. 1, de cele brat. missar.
enjoined to observe their Canonical hours.


The 25. Semblance. Them Turks think their priests sufficiently learned, if
that they can read their Alchoran, and their form of service: so do you
account those Priests sufficiently m Anton, Genfreus lib, 2, de Relig. Turcic.
learned, that can read the mass book. Witness one that was once the Popes
scholar, who thus reports of the Italian Priests: John Nichols in his
Recantation,
The Priests in Italy for the most part are altogether unlearned. I demanded
of some of these Italian Priests in the Italian tongue, whether God the
Father, and God the Holie-Ghost had bodies, they answered, yea. The Scottish
Priests also, (as their own Countrie-man reports of them) were found to be
so blockish in the last reformation of Religion there, that the very Nouitatis
no mine offensi condenterunt novum testa mentum nuper a Martino Luthero fuisse
scriptum, ac vetus testamentu^ reposcerent.
name of the new testament was much offensive to them, they thought it to be
new devised and invented by Martin Luther, and asked for the old again. Yea,
there was then a Bishop of Dunkelden there in the time of Popery, that replied
thus one a minister which said he had read the old and new testament: Vide
Johan, Fox in Histor. Scotic. inter. annos. 1540. et 1543.
I thank God I never knew what the old and new Testament was.

But what need I relate the ignorance of your Priests? Alphons. de Castro. lib.
1. de haeres, cap, 4,
Constat (to use the words of one of your own side) plures Paparumadeo esse
illiterates, vt Grammaticam penitus ignorent: it is well known, that many of
your Popes have been so utterly void of learning, as that they knew not the
principles of their Grammar.

To conclude, you are greatly beholden to me, in that I do resemble you to
the Turks; for in some things you are worse then they.


The Recusant. Are we Catholics worse then the Turks in some things?


The Minister. Yes, for there is (that I may use his Majesty's words) no other
Sect of Heretics, not excepting Turk, Jew, nor Pagan, no not even those of
Calicute, who r See his Majesty's speech in the late Session of Parliament.
adore the Devil, that maintain by the grounds of their Religion, that it is
lawful, or rather Meritorious (as the Romish Catholics call it) to murder
Princes or people for quarrel of Religion, And although particular men of all
professions of Religion, have been some thieves, some murderers, some
traitors; yet even when they came to their end and just punishment, they
confessed their fault to be in their nature, and not in their profession (these
Romish Catholics only excepted) Now sir, what say you to this speech of the
Kings Majesty?


The Recusant. Sir, I dare not say what I think.


The Minister. Eceles. 10, 20
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: for the fowls of the Heaven shall
carry thy voice, and that which has wings shall declare thy matter.


The fifth Diologue.
Wherein is showed the lawfulness of the punishment that was lately inflicted
on some of the traitors, the heinousness of whose crime is laid down in the
precedent Diologue.

The Minister. SIr, I come to tell you news.


The Recusant. What news I pray you?


The Minister. The Traitors that you told me of, were lately arraigned,
condemned, and executed.


The Recusant. Executed? I hope not.


The Minister. What! did you hope, that such notorious malefactors should
escape unpunished.


The Recusant. Yes, I was in good hope, that the Senate of Parliament, to whom
the King referred the judgment of the crime would have pardoned them.


The Minister. Sir; it would have been a wonder to all the world, if that they
had pardoned such a viperous intended parricide. It is reported that a Norman
Gentleman, confessing to a Franciscan Friar, that he had once a thought to
kill Francis the first of France, was for that very thought (albeit he had
changed his mind, repented, and asked pardon) condemned to die by his high
court of Parliament at Paris, to whom the King referred it.

Now then, if that Parliament of Paris condemned him to die for thinking
treason only: how could you think, but that his Majesty, and the state,
would condemn these your Romish Catholics to die, who not only thought
treason, but contrived it, prepared for it, and were ready to execute it? If
they condemned him to die, albeit he had changed his mind, and repented;
should not his Majesty, and the state condemn these to die, who were so far
from changing their mind, and repenting, as that Guido Fawkes.
they repented only with Mutius Scoeuola, there failing in the execution
thereof?


The Recusant. Well, what punishment was inflicted on them?


The Minister. Truly, they were punished just as I wished they might be at
our last conference. For first they were drawn on hurdles from the prison to
the place of execution, to show how they had been drawn by brutish and
Cassian affection. Secondly, they were hanged up, to show, that they were men
unworthy to tread upon the earth. Thirdly, they were no sooner turned off the
Ladder, but the Rope was cut, and they let fall down, to show the sequel and
effect of treason, viz* how that they dig a pit for others, and fall into it
themselves. Fourthly, they were noe sooner fallen down, but the executioner
snatched them up, laid them on a block, cut of their secrets, and cast them
into the fire, to show that traitors are unworthy to be begotten, or to beget
others. Fifty, their bellies were ripped up, and there hearts torn out, and
thrown into the same fire, because they were the fountain of such an
unnatural and unheard of treachery. Sixthly, as they though to have cut off
the head from the members in the civil body; so were their heads cut off from
the members of their bodies. and their wickedness turned on their own heads,
Seuently, their heads being cut off, their bodies were divided into quarters,
as they were divided from the found members in the civil body. Lastly, their
quarters were set up upon the gates of the City; that as their graceless
attempts were an ill example to others: so their quarters there exposed to the
eyes of all men, might be a good caveat to others.


The Recusant. I pray you sir, what warrant have you for these bloody
ceremonies, which you used at their execution?


The Minister. Sir, our warrant is the word of God: for we Ester, 7. 9.
read that treacherous Haman was banged on a tree of fifty cubits high.


The Recusant. Yea, but where read you, that it was lawful to tear out their
hearts, they being alive.


The Minister. We read in the second of Samuel, that when that unnatural
tray tour Absolon, was hanged in an Oak by the hair of his head, 2. Sam* 18 14
Ioab took three darts in his hand and thrust them through Absolon, or (as it
is in the original text) in the heart of Absalon, while he was yet alive in
the mids of the Oak. From which words I gather, that as traitors hearts
contriue treason, and have a time of pride and presumption: so should they also
have a time of woeful paining, for their contriuing of treason, and for their
proud and presumptuous sins.


The Recusant. What though Ioab pearsed Absalons heart, while he was alive?
are you sure that this fact of Ioab was lawful.


The Minister. Yes, it was (no doubt) the just judgment of God on his heart,
for breeding and bringing forth such an horible treason;


The Recusant. Yea, but which of the ancient fathers says so?


The Minister, Ignatius a very ancient father has these express words:
Ignatius epist. 2. ad* Tr^^ian?
Absolon parricida existens diuino iudicio arbori appensus, sed et cor eius
quod male cogitauerat, sagitta transfixumest: Absalon a Pharricide by Gods
judgment was hanged on a tree, and his heart that had thought evil, was
thrust thorough with an arrow.

But what do I speak of thrusting the hearts of traitors through with
arrows, or of tearing them out of their bodies? David a man after Gods own
heart, grated the very flesh, and rent asunder the bones of such like enemies
to GOD and their Country, with 2 Samuel* 12, 31
iron harrowes, sawes, and axes of iron.

And thus you see, how that there is no punishment inflicted upon traitors in
this Land which is not agreeable to the word of God, and less then they
deserve.


The Recusant. Yes, you punish not the traitors only themselves, but their
wives, their children, yea their whole posteririe: for you take from them their
Lands, their houses, their offices, and what not?


The Minister. This is also agreeable to the word of God. 2* Sam, 16. 4
Ziba having falsely accused Mephibosheth to David, until the truth was found
out, had Mephibosheths lands, and all that pertained unto Mephibosheth, given
unto him by King David. And Ester, 8, 1, 2.
King Ahashuerosh gave the house of treacherous Hamon unto Queen Ester, and
Queen Ester gave it to Mordecai, as a reward of his loyalty. As for offices
it is 1* Kings. 2. 26 27, 35.
recorded of Abiathar, that albeit Solomon spared his life because he had borne
the Ark of the Lord God before David his father, and because he had suffered
in all, wherein his father had been afflicted: yet cast he him out from
being priest unto the Lord, and placed Zadocke in his room. Yea the Persians
rooke not their houses, their offices, their Lands, and their liuinges only
from traitors wives and children, but their lives two, For Ester, 16, 18
Haman was hanged at Susis before the gates, with all his family, as the
Apocryphal story has it. But what need I allege the Apocryphal? the
Canonical says, that Ester, 9, 14
they hanged Hamans ten sons upon a tree at Shusan.

Now to apply this, if the Persians so detested treason, as that they
punished both the traitor with death, and every one of his family two: I see
no reason why you should complain of rigor, and accuse his Majesty of more
then Scythian cruelty. Nay, you should rather commend his clemency, in sparing
their childrens lives, and punishing them only in lands and liuinges, and
sometimes not in that neither.


The Recusant. Well to leave this, how many I pray you were executed? were
there any of the Lords executed?


The Minister. Noe, but I do not doubt but that they shall be in the same
Inpraedicame^* to Passionis.
predicament shortly, if that they be found guilty.


The Recusant. What? do you think that they shall be beheaded?


The Minister. Be beheaded? they may thank God and the king, if they escape so.


The Recusant. Thank the king? Sir, he may not inflict any other punishment
upon such great men.


The Minister, Yes, if it please his majesty, he may as lawfully cause them to
be hanged, drawn, and quartered, as he caused their inferiors. But you tell
me, that they are great men. What though? Haman was a great man, an honorable
man, yea the very next person unto the king, as appears by these words of
Artaxerxes: Ester* 16, 11
he was called our father, and was honored of every man as the next person to
the king. And yet was he Ester, 7. 9
hanged on a tree of fifty cubits high. Hamans seven sons were great men,
yet were they hanged before the gates of Shusan, and that (which me thinks
was a pitiful case) for their fathers fault.

Bigthan and Teresh were great men; yet because they sought to lay their hands
on king Ahashuerosh, Ester, 2, ^^
they were both hanged on a tree together.

King Saul's seven sonns were great men, yet king David 2* Sam, 21. 9
delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, which hanged them in the
mountain before the Lord. To* Gagwin. in anno. Reg. Franc. lib, 5 1 Ibid.
Hebert Earl of Vermendoies was a great man, yet because he invited Charles
surname^ the simple king of France, to lodge at his castle of Peron and slew
him there: Jews the fifth with the Lords of, his Privy Counsel assembled in
the city of Laon, caused him to be carried, (as Robert Gagwine records) to
an hill without the city of Laon, and there to be trussed at the gallows and
strangled with a rope. But before the Hangman had fully strangled him, the king
turned to him, (says r Gagwine) and said: thou Hebert art the same Countrieman
that made away my Lord, and father, and thy Sovereign in prison and bonds,
now according to thy desert suffer thy deserved death.

Lord Harkeley, Earl of Carlisle, was a great man; yet for treason against his
Sovereign Edward the Second, Fabian in an. 12 24. et Polidor Hist, Angl, i* i^
he was hanged drawn and quartered, and his head sent to London, and set on
the bridge. Chronica fructus Temporum tells us, how that he was first
disgraded, his spurs hewed from his heels, his sword broken over him, and
then disgarnished of the robes of his estate, and after tortured for his
treason, as is before said.

Bertopus was a great man; yet for his treason, Jews surnamed the gross King
of France, To. Gag* in anno, Reg. Franc, lib, 6
appointed, that he should be hanged at the gallows, and by him a mastife
dog alive, whom when the hangeman smot, he snatched at the traitors body
hanging by him, rent his flesh, and so was he baited to death. Queen Brunchild
wife sometime to Sigisbert King of Mees or Austracia, was a great woman; yet
because she had been the death of ten princes of the Royal blood, King
Clotare taking her in the field, Robert. Gag. in anno, Reg Franc. lib. 2
after she had been well beaten with a cudgel four times, commanded her to
be set on an horse, and to be carried about all the host, and then by the hair
of the head and arms to be tied to the tail of a wild horse; and so to be
trailed and drawn to death. And no less strange judgment and execution was
that which Frotho a King of Denmark inflicted on two of his Chamber convicted
of treason against him: he caused them to be tied to two great maine stones,
and to be thrown into the sea, and so (to use the words of Saxo Gra^maricus
in lib. 2 histor, Danic.
Saxo the writer of the story of the Danes) animi crimen annexa corporibus
mole mulctando, with weight put to their bodies, he punished the weighty
sin of their souls. But not to insist any longer in this enumeration of
particular examples, God commanded Moses, Number, 25, 4
to take the heads of the people; that is, the chiefest of the malefactors, and
to hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that the indignation of the
Lords wrath might be turned from Israel. And why must Moses take the chief of
them? truly, because they had not corrupted themselves only, but also others,
and done more evil by their evil example, then by their sin. For the force
of example is very great to draw to similitude, and the greater the example
is, the greater force it has to induce likeness of manners.

The crime therefore of those great men that had an hand in the late horrible
treason, was a great crime, an exemplar crime; and consequently a Bis peccar
qui exemplo peccat.
double crime, and deserves more then a single punishment.

I speak not this (God is my witness) as holding it a maine point of piety,
to be in this case quite without pity. But to stop your mouths, that
scandalize the Kings Majesty and the state of cruelty in their just
severity: and to show that it behooves all men, to be more compassionate to
the life of the Commonwealth, then to the life of a man.


Melius est vt pereat vnus, quam vnitas.
FINIS.
Pagano-Papismus: OR, A Discovery of Popish Paganism: wherein is plainly
showed that the Papists do resemble the idolatrous Heathen in above sixscore
particulars: and that in many things they are worse then they, and are whollye
departed from the very principles of Philosophy, reason, and outward sense:
made Dialogue-wise in a most plain and familiar manner.
The Minister. IF any sheep (says Saint Chrysostom) go out of the right
way, and leaving the a Chrysostom de Sacerdot* lib* 2.
plentiful pastures, graze on barren and steep places, the sheephearde must
somewhat exalte his voice, to reduce the dispersed and straggling sheep, and
to compel them to the flock.

The consideration of this my duty, moved me to come unto you, that leave
the plentiful pastures, and graze on the steep places of Popery: and to do
mine endeauoure, to bring you into the right way again, from the which you
have a long time strayed.


The Recusant. Sir, I am in the right way already: for I keep Jeremiah 6. 16.
the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein.


The Minister. Sir, you keep not that old way, wherein the Patriarchs and
Prophets walked; but that wherein the Pagans and Ethnicks walked.


The Recusant. Do we Catholic walk in the way of the old Ethnickes?


The Minister. Yes, J find that the ancient Heathen were indeed the The true
Anti quity of the Romish religion.
first inuenters of your Religion; and that the forenamed heretics borrowed it
from them, and you from them both.


The Recusant. Js our Catholic religion borrowed from the ancient Heathen?


The Minister. Yes, as may appear by these semblances, which I have observed
betwixt them and you.


The 1. Semblance. The Heathen had a multitude of Gods, as is apparaunt in the
second of Jeremiah, verse. 28. so have you likewise, as appears, in your
common Calendar, where for every day in the year, you have either an He
Saint, or a She saint.


The second semblance. The heathen had several Gods for several Countries, for
the Chaldeans and Assyrians, Judge. 8. 33.
Baal was found out; for the Zidonians, 1. Reg. 11. 5
Ashtaroth; for the Ammonits Ibid verse. 7.
Molech or Milcom, For the moabites, Ibid.
Chemosh: for the Syrians, 2. Reg. 5. 18.
Rimmon: for the Philistines; Iudie. 16. 23.
Dagon, and for every nation that came out of Ashur to inhabit Samaria, there
was a several God appointed, for the men of Babel 2. Reg. 17. 30*
Succoth-benoth. for the men of Cuth Ibid.
Nergall* for the men of Hamath Ibid.
Ash ima for the Anims, Ibid. verse. 31.
Nibeaz and Tartak, and for the Sepharvims, Ibid.
Adramelech and Anammelech the gods of Sepharvaim. The like may be said of the
inue^tors of your Romish superstition, For they have assigned several
Countries to the patronage and protection of several Saints. S George is for
England, Saint Patricke is for Ireland, S Martine is vide orat. ad sa^ctu^
Iacobum maiorem, in ^ com. Suffrag. ^ fol. 138.
for Germany, S Peeter and saint Paul for Italy. S Michael is for France, and
Saint James is Lux, decus, et singular prae sidium Hispaniae, the light, the
ornament and the Lord protector of spain.


The third semblance, The heathen had protectors for their cities* Venus she
was for Troy, and Pallas she was for Greece* and Jupiter Stator for Rome. And
in like sort have popish Countries * vide Heshus. de erroribus Pontif. Loc, 28
protectors for their cities. Saint Peter is for Rome, Saint Roch for Venice,
saint Ambrose for Millaine, saint Genovefa for Paris, saint Stephen for
Vienna, saint Vlderick for Augusta: and for Colleyne, are the three kings: and
saint Vrsula with her eleven thousand waiting maids: yea we may say, as
Jeremy said of the idolatrous Jsraelites, According Ierem. 2, 28,
to the number of thy cities are thy gods.


The fourth semblance, The Singulae fraternitates, siagulae familiae, certos
habent patronos and tutelares. Prudentius lib. 2 contra Symmachum.
, Heathen had their household saints and tutelar powers: so have you,


The fifth semblance, The heathen found out Gods for their arts and sciences so
do you, for you have Saint Gregory for scholars, saint Luke for painters,
saint Crispin for shoemakers, etc:


The sixth semblance, The August* de Ciuitate Dei lib. 4. cap. 21,
Heathen had Gods for several diseases: so have you for saint Anthony is for
ulcers and gangren, and Saint Fracrius, for quartan fevers. Saint Petronel for
Agues, Saint Otilia and saint Raphael for soar eyes, saint Libarius for the
stone, saint John for poison, saint Quirine for the fistula, and saint
Dominicke, and saint Francis for the french pockes, and other diseases.


The seventh Semblance. The Vide August. de Ciuitate dei, lib. 3. cap. 17. and
liu, lib, 10. and Orph. hynm. in Aesculap, and Plaut Curcul. act. 2. Orat. ad
beatu^ Rochum, in com. suffrag. fol. 138.
Heathen when they were visited with the plague and pestilence, prayed to
Aesculapius, so do you to saint Roch, saying,: confessor Deivenerande,
obtineat in caelis deprecatio tua, vt qui deinceps in afflictione deuote ad te
clamauerint, ab omni epidemiae ac pestis periculo tuis meritis protinus
liberentur; etc Or thus Missal: and Breuiar. Sarish in missa S, Rochi.
,

Tu qui deo es tam charus,
et in luce valde clarus,
sana tnos famulos.
Et, a peste, nos defend,
opem nobis ac impende,
contra morbi stimulos.
And before the Circa annum Dom. 1300 Rochus natus est: Albert. Crantz. Metrop,
lib. 9. cap. 25.
birth of Roch, your forefathers prayed to Sebastian. when they where visited
with the plague, as appears in your missals.


The 8 semblance* The heathen erected Fanum Aesculap.
temples, in honor of Aesculapius: so did your forefathers erect temples,
Chapels, altars and images, in honor of saint Roche, as is apparaunte by
Baronius: Baronius notat. in martyrolog. Romans Aug. 16.
Decreuerunt Patres concilii Constantiensis vt ad Missal. advsum Romae and
Lusitaniae
propulsandam ingruentem vrbi Constantiensi luem, non imago tantum eius a clero
comitanti omni populo, per vrbe^ solemni po^pa deferretur, sed impe^dere^tur ei
etia^ caeteri honores sa^ctis debiti, quo facto, quia pestis illa mox euanuit,
inde exemplu^ sumptum est vt vbique locorum eius venerandae imagines, altaria,
sacella, ac denique templa erecta fuerint.


the. 9, semblance. The vide Loca supra citat: de Aesculap, a De sancta
Apollonia Anti phona. in Com. Suffrag.
Heathen also prayed to Aesculapius when they had the tooth ach: so do you to
Apollonia saying.

Virgo christie gregia,
Pro nobis, Apollonia,
Funde preces ad dominum,
Vt tollat omne noxium.
Ne pro reatu criminum,
morbo vexemur dentium. etc

the 10, semblance, The heathen joined Apollo and Aesculapius together Propter
aegros medicus vel Apollo, vel Aesculapius, vel ambo simul quando esset grande
periculum. August de ciuit Dei lib. 4. ca. 21
and implored their joint help, when they thought that the one of them alone
was not able to help them, so do ye join fourteen saints to gether, and
pray unto them all jointly, when your danger is such, as that you think one
alone not to be able to deliver you from it, their names are these, vide
Missal, de 14. auxiliatoribus.
George, Blase, Erasmus, Panthaleon, Vitus, Christopher. Dennis, Cyriacus,
Achacius, Eustachius, Gyles, Margaret Barbara and Catherin,


the, 11. semblance, The vide August. de ciuit. dei cap. 18.
heathen had a god to deliver them from danger by fire, so have you, saint
Laurence for the same purpose.


the, 12, semblance,, the August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 4. cap, 11.
heathen had their god Summanus, and their god Jupiter, to preserve them from
thunder and lightning: so have you In com. Suffrag. fol. 26.
god and saint Sotheris.


the, 13 semblance, The Romani veteres nescio quem summanum, cui noctur na
fulmina tribuebant, coluerunt magu quam Iouem, ad quem diurna fulmina
pertinebant. Augu. de ciuit dei. l. 4, 11.
heathen gave more worship to Summanus, then to Jupiter, so do you give as
much honor to Sotheris or rather more then you do to god himself: as is
apparent in your old popish In com. suffr. fol. 86.
letany,


The 14, Semblance. The Heathen worshipped Hymeneus as a God, and Seru: in
Aeneid 1.
called upon his name, quia inter bella saeuissima virgins liberauit, because
in time of cruel wars, he delivered certain virgins from the peril of the
sword: and for the like cause have you deified saint George, and do call upon
his name blasphemously, saying: Georgi martyr inclite, te decet laus and gloria
praedotatum militia, per quem puella regia existens in tristitia, coram dracone
pessimo saluata est: Ex animo te rogamus cord intimo: vt cum cunctis fidebilus
De sancto Georgio Antiphona in Suffragijs fol. 71.
coeliiung amur ciuibus: nostris ablutis sordibus: and simul cum laetitia tecum
simus in gloria?


The 15. Semblance. The August de ciuit. dei. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Heathen commended their warriors to Mars and Bellona: and you would have us
Englishmen, to commend our warriors to saint George, as appears by this
speech of Stephen Gardener, Stephen Gardener in his book against George loye,
fol. 58.
We Englishmen to whom god has given many victories under the banner of S.
George may not we say: god and saint George: as they said under Gedeon, Domino
and Gedeon?


the 16. semblance. The Heathen commended their seafaring men Horat. lib. 1.
earm. od. 3.
to the mighty goddess of Cypres, and the two brethren of Helen and the father
of the winds, that is, to Venus and the two twins, Castor and Pollux. and
Aeolus: and you Vide heshus. de erroribus pontif. loc. 28.
commend your Seafaring men to saint Nicholas and saint Christopher.


the 17. semblance. The Heathen commended their wayfaring men, Deo Statilino
Stantes, d^ae Adeonae adeun tes. Abeonae abeuntes. August de ciuit. dei. lib.
4. ca. 21
when they went from home to Abeona, when they came toward home, to Adeona,
and when they stood still, to Statilinus: and In orat. ad beat. mariam and
Sanctum Johan. Euang. in com suffrag. fol. 69.
you commend your wayfaring men to the Virgin Mary, and saint John the
Evangelist.


the 18. semblance. The propter fessos diua Fessonia Augustide ciuit dei lib. 4
c. 21, s In com. suffrag. fol. 86. vide Donatum in Pho^m. Terrentij v. In com.
Suf frag. fol, 60.
Heathen commended those that were weary with travailing to Fessonia: so do you
commend them to Wilgefortis.


the 19. semblance. The t heathen, when they laid them down to sleep,
commended themselves to Cuba, so do you commend your selves to the Virgin
Mary, saying: custodi domina me dormient em, etc.


the 20. semblance. The Tres deosifli posuerunt, forculum foribus, cardeam
cardini Limentinum limini. Ita non poterat forculus simul sores et cardinem
limenque seruare august. lib, 4 c, 8
Heathen had one god for their doors, another for the henges of their doors,
and a third for threshholdes of their doors: so have y you Protasius and
Geruasius to keep your doors, and to guard you from thieves, Heshus.


the 21 semblance, The Iuga montiu^ Iugatino: collibus deam collinam: vallibus,
valloniam prefecerunt aug. de ciuit. Dei lib, 4, cap. 8
Heathen had one god for the mountains, and another for the valleys: so have
In com suffrag fol, 86
you, Barbara for the hills, and Agatha for the valleys.


the 22. semblance. The Heathen had one goddess for their Pomonia
apples, and another for their honey: so have you Polyoron for your Bees, and
Polycarpe for your apple trees. Mellona August de ciuit. dei, lib 4, cap 24, et
34. In com. Calend,



the 23. semblance. The Augst de ciu. dei li 4, cap, 11,
Heathen had their goddess Diana for their woods and forests: so have In com
suffr. fol, 85:
you saint Siluester.


the 24 semblance. The August de Ciuit Dei. lib, 4 cap, 11
Heathen had Minerua for learning: so have vide Hesh, de errorih: Pontif, loc,
28.
you saint Katherine.


the 25. semblance, The Hethen had Bacchus for wine: so have you Heshus. ibid.
S. Vrbane,


the 26. semblance. The August de ciuit: dei lib, 4, cap 11,
Heathen had Castor for health, so have you Heshus, loc. 28.
saint Valentine.


the 27 semblance. The heathen had their Deam Pecuniam, Deum argentium et
filiu^ eius Aesculanom: miror autem quod Argentinus no^ genuit Aurinu^ quia et
aurea subsequuta est: Aug, de Ciuit. Dei, lib, 4, cap, 21. Heshus. loc, 28,
gods for wealth: so have n you saint Erasmus and saint Anna,


the 28 semblance, The heathen prayed to Honorius, August de ciuit dei. lib 4
c, 21,
vt honorentur, that they might be honored; so did Guido Faukes, and the rest
of the traitors (I warrant you) pray to their idols that they might be placed
in the rooms of our honorable Nobles: But their gods (praised be our god)
has deceived them; they had therefore best imitate Licinius apud Eusebius: de
vita Constant. lib, 2 cap 15,
Licinius, who when his old gods in whom he put his trust had deceived him, he
sought out new ones to worship.


the 29, semblance, The August de. ciuit. dei, lib, 4 cap, 11,
heathen, when they stood in need of connsayle, prayed to Consus: so do yon
to the virgin Mary, saying: orat: ad beata^ Maria in co^ Suffrag fol. 128
da mihi domina consilium and auxilium.


the 30, semblance. The heathen, that their children might prove acute and
sharp witted, commended them to qui cautos. i. acutos faceret, August, de Ciu.
dei lib. 4, c. 21,
Cautius: so do you commend yours to saint Nicholas for the same purpose:
Stephen Gardner in his book against Georg Joy, fol, 59,
the young boy (sais Stephen Gardener) that in the entry to learn his letters,
was taught to say, Christ's cross me speed and saint Nicholas, was for so much
taught no error at all, but saint Nicholas well named, as one by Christ's
cross advanced here, to learning and virtue, and now by power of the same
cross, placed in felicity, where he may pray for other, to be helped as he
was.


The 31. semblance, The heathen commended their children Deo vagita no
vagitantes, dea Cuninae su. gentes. August. de Ciuit, Dei lib, 4, cap 2^.
when they did cry to Vegetanus, when they did lie in their cradles, to
Cunina; and when they did suck, to Rumina: so do you in like sort commend your
children to saint Erasmus, saying orat, ad sanct Erasm, in com Suffrag, fol 137,
Tibi sancte Erasme commendo filios meos, filias meas et omnes mihi confessione
et oratione vel consanguinitate coniunctos, et omnes coetus meos,


the. 32, semblance, The Iunolucina fer opem in paeriundo. Terent: in Andria et
August de ci uit. dei lib. 4, cap, 11.
heathen commended their women when they labored of child to Juno Lucina: so
do you commend them (as Heshus de^er rorib, Pontif, loc, 28.
Heshushius reports) to saint Margaret.


the 33, semblance, The August, de ciuit. dei, lib, 6 cap, 9 ex varrone qui
mulieri faetae post parta^ tres deos custodes commemorat adhiberi, ne Siluanus
deus per noctem ingrediatur et vexet.
heathen committed the care and keeping of women in childbed, to Intercido,
Pilumnus and Deuerra: so do In com. Suffr. fol. 85, and 86.
you commend your wives when they be in childbed, to saint Marye, saint Anna,
saint Susanna, saint Perpetuasaint Felicitas, Paraxedis, saint Winefride,
saint Frideswide, saint Gertrude, and sundry others.


the 34 semblance. The hethen taught their young me^ that wa^ted the Barba est
viri hierogliphica, Pier in hier.
Hierogli phick of men, to pray to Fortuna Barbata, as this speech of saint
Austen gives sufficient testimony: August, de Ciuit, dei, lib. cap. 1, ^
Multi fortunae barbatae supplices, ad nullam, vel deformem barbam peruenire
potuerunt, et si qui eam pro barba impetranda venerantur, a barbat is eius
contemptoribus irridentur. And I make noe question but that you have likewise
your gods; propter excrementorum incrementum, For you have gods for far baser
matters, as shall be showed hereafter,


the, 35, semblance, The heathen had their Aug. de ciu. dei, lib, 6, cap. 9
Deam virginensem, so have you your Deas virginenses, as apparent by this
prayer of yours to your eleven thousand supposed virgins,

Orat ad vndena mil, virg. in com. suffrag. fol. 671.
O vos vndena millia, puellae gloriosae, Virginitatis, lilia, marty riique
rosae, in vita me defendite prebendo mihi iunamen: in morte vos ostendite,
supernum ferendo solamen etc.


The, 36, semblance* The heathen had their Nuptiales Deos, and when they joined
August. de Ciuit, Dei lib, 4, cap, 21.
any together in matrimony, they enjoined the^ to pray to Plutarchus, in
Problem. quinque, deos precari illos qui matrimonio coniunguntur scribit, Iouem
adultum, Iunonem adultam Venere^ Le pora^ et inprimis Dianam, ideo quinque
cereos nuptys accendi in rem esse, nec pauciores nec plures.
Jupiter, Juno: Venus, Lepus and Diana, and that you have your nuptial Gods,
it is not unknown to any that have been at your marriages.


The, 37, resemblance, The heathen when they solemnized matrimony lighted
candles, though the sun shone never so bright: so do you: of which hethenish
custom I will (god willing) speak more hereafter,


The 38 semblance, The i Heathen commended their minds to their God desse
Men's, and their wills to their god Volumnus and their Goddess Volumna: so
do you commend your minds, your wills, yea your souls and bodies, and all
the implementes of them both, to the virgin Mary, saying: Sancta Maria, regina
coeli et terrae, matter domini nostri Jesus Deae mentis vt bonam haberent mentem.
deo volumno, et deae volumnae. vt bona vel lent. Aug, de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 4
cap, 21 l: orat, specialis ad beatis. virg, Mariam, pro vitae incolumitate. In
co^suffrag. fol, 60. in Augnstsde ciuit, dei, lib. 6 cap, 19,
Christi: in manus tuas commendo hodie, et quotidie, et omni tempore animam
meam, corpus meum, sensum meum, visum meum, labia mea, manus meas, pedes meos,
oculos meos, et omnia membra mea. etc,


the 39, Semblance, The m Heathen, when they were at the point of death
commended their spirits to their gentile gods; so do you commend your
spirits into the hands of the Virgin Mary,: As may be proved by a certain
form of prayer which is to be found in all old English books: wherein you are
taught to pray thus at the hour of death: O blessed Mary holy Mother of
Christ, grant that I may end my life in the true faith of holy kirk, and J
commend my soul to thee. etc

This may also be proved by another prayer of youres wherein I find these
express words. Rogo te per illud gaudium Orat. advirg: mariam, in com Suflrog
fol, 167
quod habuisti in illa hora, qua concepisti dominum nostrum Iesum Christum: vt
laetifices, cor meum in hora defunctionis meae: subuenias mihi tam in corpore,
quam in anima: nec dimitte me perdi propter nimia peccata mea: sed subuenias
mihi in omnibus necessitatibus meis, etc


the 40, semblance, The, August de Ciu Dei. lib, 6, cap. 9
Heathen besought victus and vestitus,, to give to give them food and raimente:
so do you beseech saint Erasmus, saying Orat. ad sanct Erasm in. com-Suffrag.
fol, 137
Deus per tuam orationem dignetur mihi tribuere victum et vestitum, etc,


the, 41, semblance, The Aug de Ciuit Dei, lib, 4, cap. vlt, Et Donatus in
Phorm. Terentii.
Heathen commended themselves (when they did eat) to Educa; and when they did
drink, to Potina: so whether you eat or drink, or what soever you do, you
do you commend your selves to one saint or other, there by robbing god of his
honor, and giving it to his creatures:


the, 42, semblance, The Heathen commended the keeping of their sheep to their
god Pan, so do you to Wendeline.


Tht 43: semblance. The r heathen had Bubona, for their oxen: so have you
August de Ciuit Dei, lib, 4, cap, 24.
Pelagius for yours,


The 44, semblance, The heathen had a Stercarius.
God for dunging their land, and (the basest thing that could be imagined) a
Cloacina.
goddess for draught-houses: so you, which is in deed as base Jdolatrye
commend your geese to Gallus, and your Pigs to saint Anthony,


the: 45: semblance: The August de ciuit Dei, lib, 4 cap 21.
heathen prayed to their god Spinensis. that their lands might not be
ouergrowne with thorns and thistles: so do In com. Suffrag fol 85,
you to Saint Gereon: cum socs suis.


The 46, semblance, The heathen had gods for their Cur portis domibus, thermis,
stabulis soleatis assignare suos genios, etc, Pradent. lib, 2 contra simmacbum,
stables, and for their horses: so have you Eulogius, and Ludouicus for the
same purpose.


The 47. Semblance: Thieves also amongst the heathen were not left Lauerna
without their Patrons: no more are they amongst the Papists. For Turseline, a
popish Jesuit, in his fourth book Turselin lib. 4. cap. 19. and 20.
of the Lady of Lauretto, says, that the Lady of Lauretto sometimes breaks
the halter when men be in hanging: and when they are in hanging, she preserues
their lives till they be taken down-Were J worthy to give advise, there should
be strong halters provided for Guy Faukes, and the rest of the traitors, least
the Lady of Lauretto should chance to break them, And because the said Lady
does (If we believe Turseline) often preserve thieves lives, till they be
taken down, I could wish, that their flesh should be grated, and theite bones
rent a sunder with sawes, iron harrowes, and axes of iron (as the people of
Rabbah were 2. Sam. 12, 31.
dealte with:) for their traitorous and unnatural stratagems


The, 48, Semblance. Yea so endless was superstition with the Heathen, as that
they had a god (as saint Austen does observe) for every thing: Yea, many
oftentimes for one thing. As for their corn Seia, Segetia, Entelina,
Prosperpina, Nodotus, Volutitina, Patelena, Hostiliua, Flora Lacturnus, Matura
and Rancina August de Ciuitate Dei lib, 4. cap. 8.
. Nou potuerunt (says he speaking of the gentiles) vna^ Segetiam inuenire, cui
semel segetes commendarent: sed satis frumentis quandin sub terra essent,
praepositam voluerunt dea^ Seiam: cum iam essent super terram, et segetem
facerent deam segetiam: frumentis vero collectis atque reconditis, vt tuto
seruarentur, deam Tuteliuam praeposuerunt, cui non sufficere videretur illa
Segetia, quandiu seges ab initiis herbidis vsque ad aristas aridas perueniret,
praefecerunt Proserpiuam frumentis germinantibus: geniculis nodisque culmorum,
deum Nodatum: inuolument is folliculorum, dea^ Volutinam: cum folliculi
patescuut, vt spica exeat, deam Patelenam: cum segetes nouis aristis aequantur,
(quia veteres aequare hostire dixerunt,) Deam Hostilinam, florentibus frumentis
deam Floram: lactescentibus deum Lacturnu^ maturescentibus, deam Maturam, cum
runcantur. (id est, terra auferuntur) deam Runcinam.

this supersticion of the heathen may be fifthly paralleled by the practice of
you superstitious Papists at this day, in finding out a God for every thing:
Yea* many oftentimes for one thiug, As for your corn Iodocus, and other, one
for it under the ground, another when it is sprunge up; this when it is in
the blade, that, when it is in the Ear, and one other for it: when it is in
the barn,

Nec omnia commemoro; quin me piget quae vos non pudet, ^ August ibid:



The 49* Semblance, The, fornamed gods of the Heathen had diverse names
according to the place where they were worshipped: as for example, Baal, was
sometimes called Baalzebub, and sometimes Baal-Peor, because he was worshipped
in the hill Peor, The like may be said of your Romish Gods* For you sometimes
call the virgin Mary, the Lady of Lauretto, sometimes the Lady of
Mounteferratte, and sometimes the Lady of Walsingham.


The 50, semblance. The false gods of the heathen, were of two sorts, Alii
selecti, alii viliores. Aug. de ciuitate Dei, lib, 7. c, ^. ex Varrone,
some were superior gods, others inferior: their superior false gods were
these: Ibid.
Janus, Jupiter, Saturn, Genius, Mercury Apollo, Mars, Vulcane, Neptune, Sol,
Orcus, Liber, Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Luna, Diana, Minerua, Venus and Vesta; their
inferior false gods, were these: Aug. de ciuit. dei lib. 4. cap. 8.
Volupia, Ibid.
Libentina, Ibid. cap. 11.
Diospiter, Ibid.
Mena. n Opis, Leuana, Pauenta, Venilia. Agenoria, Stimula, Strenua, Numeria,
Camaena, Ibid. cap. 21,
Rubigo, Ibid, cap. 32,
Pauor, Pallor, Febris, Terminus, Idem. l. 6. c. 9
Subigus, Drema, Partunda, Priapus, Naenia, and the rest before mentioned, with
many others.

Now take a view of your popish E^kius in Enchir* de venerat sanct, and Bellar
min: de Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 15.
writers* and you shall find, that herein they just iumpe with the Heathen: for
they make the virgin Mary (by their giving to her an m higher kind of service,
then they give to the rest) a superior god; and the rest of the saints, they
make inferior Gods; giving unto them a lower n kind of service, as hereafter
( James 4. 15.
If the Lord will) shall be showed more at large. I proceed now to other
particulars.


The Recusant. Sir. J have hitherto heard you patiently: therefore I hope you
will now give me leave to speak a little, and to interrupt your speech.


The Minister. With all my heart.


The Recusant. You have made mention of a number of our saints, and with all
you have termed them our gods: but you do greatly wrong us herein. For, we
acknowledge there is but one only true god: and that the rest whom we pray
unto, were gods creatures, and men that excelled in guiftes. So that there is
great difference betwixt us and the Heathen?


The Minister. The 51. semblance. I see no difference at all. For the learned
among them knew, that there was one chief and true maker and governor of
heaven and earth, and all things therein: and that the rest whom they prayed
unto, were men that were famous for their excellent guiftes. I will acquaint
you with their very words, god (says Citatur a Cicerone, Plutarcho, Clemente
Alexand. and Cyrillo.
Pythagoras) is but one; not as some thing, without gouernemente of the world,
but all in all. He is the orderer of all ages, the light of all powers, the
original of all things, tht cresset of Heaven, the Father, mind, Quickner,
and moouer of all, and the infinite power fromwhe^ce all other powers flow. And
Architas, one of the same sect, says: that he Architat.
esteemed no man wise, but him that reduces all things to one self same
original: to weet, unto god, who is the beginning, middle, and end of all
things. Join hereto the testimony of Trismegistus: Trism^gist. in Pae^and.
we call them gods, not in respect of their nature, but for honors sake.
Socrates also (whom Apollo by his oracle deemed to be the wisest of all
Greece) confessed one only god, and (as both Aulus Gellius, and Ap^leius do
report) was condemned to drink poison, for teaching, that the gods which were
worshipped in his time, were but vanitye: and for that, in scorn of them, he
was wont to swear by an Oak, by a goat, and by a dog: thereby giving the
people to understand, that he thought there was as much godhead in the one, as
in the other* And Plato, Socrates his scholar, lays down this rule, that
his s Plato epifl. ad Dyonis,
followers might thereby discern his meaning: When I write in good earnest,
you shall know it hereby, that I began my letters with one god only: and when
I write otherwise, I begin them with many gods; the same rule is also
observed by Iamblichus, and the rest of the Platonists.

But let us leave the Academickes, and come to the Peripatetickes; Arist. de
mundo
this world (says the pince of philosophers) and the order of all things is
preserved by god. And that which is highest in the world, is the seat of god;
and there is nothing in the world, that is sufficient of it self to preserve
it self, and that can be without his help; to the same truth subscribes his
scholar Theophrasts, saying; there is onediuine u Theophrast. de Odoribus.
beginner of all things whereby they have their beginning and co^tinua^ce. So
does Alexander Aphrodisaeus also, But to com x Alexand. Aph^odis. de Provident.
to the stoics, Zeno.
there must needs (says the chief of them) be but one god, for else there
should be no god at all: because it behooves him to be singularly good, and
also Almighty, which were utterly impossible, if there were any more but one.
Add hereunto the testimonye of Epictetus the stoic, Epictetus in A^phag.
the first thing that is to be learned, is that there is but one god, and
that he provides for all things, and that from him neither deed nor thought
can be hidden. And of the same mind is Seneca, who says; that Seneca de vita
beat, and in lib. de consolat.
from things discovered, we must proceed to things undiscovered, and seek out
him, that is auncienter then the world; of whom the stars proceed; yea all
the aunciente poets were like minded. Sophocles apud Cyrill. contra Julian.
Certes (says Sophocles) there is no more gods but one. And Aratus
acknowledged, (as that place alleged by saint Paul gives sufficient
testimonye) that we are the generation of god. But not to c Act. 17. 28.
stand in quoting of any more, even Orpheus, who opened the gappe to the
plurality of gods, in his hymn unto Musaeus which is called his last will and
testament; recantinge his former folly, says thus: Orpheus in hymno ad Musaeum
Lift up thine eyes to the only maker of the world; he is but one bred of
himself, and of that one are all things. He is all in all; he sees all, and
is seen of none. He sits in heaven, governing all things; with his feet he
touches the earth; and with his right hand the uttermost shores of the sea,
etc; If you list to be further satisfied, read the ancient Fathers, who have
faithfully related the opinions of the Heathen: to begin with Lactantius, he
speaking of the Heathen in his time, says thus; Lactantius lib, 2, cap. 1,
when they swear, when they wish, when they give thanks, they name neither
Jupiter, nor gods in the plural number, but the only one god; so greatly does
nature constraiue them to acknowledge the truth. And Tertullian testifies the
same Tertul, Apol. cap, 17,
As wholly as their souls, (says he, speaking of the Heathen) are brought in
bondage to false Gods: Yet when they awake as a drunken man out of his sleep
they name but one god, and the speech of every man is, as it pleases god. They
call upon him as their judge, saying, god sees it. I refer my self to god,
god requite it me, And in uttering these words they look up to Heaven, and
not to the capitol of Rome, for they know that Heaven is the seat of living
god.

Saint Austen also brings in the heathen, speaking thus, August de Ciuit. Dei
lib, 4, cap, 24 et lib, 8 cap 26.


Why sir, think you that our forefathers were so foolish and blind, as to
believe that Bacchus. Ceres, Pan and such others were gods? It is not possible.
Nay, they believed but in the only one god: whose gifts and functions they
honored under diverse names, and whatsoever is more, is but superstition. And
thus you see, that the Heathen did acknowledge there to be but one true god,
as well as you.


The recusant. But I see not, that they did worship the true god, as well as we.


The Minister. The 52. semblance. Yes, the very heathen worshipped the true god
as well as you. For Lactantius, lib, 2 cap 1,
Lactantius reports, that when they did swear, when they did wish any thing*
when they gave thanks, they named not Jupiter, or the other gods, But god:
specially in the i Tertul. Apol. cap. 17
fear of wars, and other dangers, and Tertullian says, that the Heathen
being brought in bondage to false gods, used nevertheless to name god, and to
say that god will give this or that. k Athanasius also shows, that the
gentiles worshipped Athanas. orat. contra Gentes*
one god unbegotten, and many gods made or created.


The Recusant. Jf the Heathen worshipped the true god, as well as we; why were
they then condemned of idolatry?


The Minister. the, 53, semblance, They were condemned of idolatrye, because
they gave divine or religious honor to their supposed gods, in their exercises
of religion: for (to use Lactantius his speech) it cannot be, that the true
god be worshipped, and other gods too: because if his honor be given to
others, he is not worshipped l Lactantius lib, 1, cap. 19.
at all; considering his religion is to believe, that he is that only true
god. Now because you do the very same, when you canonize saints, and give unto
them divine honor: I must needs herein also resemble you to the idolatrus
Heathen, and say unto you as Lactantius said unto them; it cannot be that the
true god be worshipped, and other gods too.


The Recusant. Sir, although we worship others besides god: yet do m Eckius in
Enchirid. de venerat. sanctorum Bellarm de sanctis lib. 2 cap. 15.
we not give unto them the same degree of worship, which we give unto them.
For, we give (...) to god; (...) to the Virgin Mary; and (...) to the rest of
the saints.


The Minister. The 54. semblance, Sir, this your distinction is borrowed from
the Heathen for they gave the highest degree of honor to the true god; the
next to Pallas, and the lowest degree of honor, they gave to the rest of their
false gods. For proof hereof, I refer you to these words of the Heathen Poet.
Horat. lib. 1. Carm, od. 12.
It is he (says he, speaking of the highest god) that governs the affairs of
men, and gods, which rules the sea and land, and the whole world with diverse
seasons: so that nothing is brought forth greater then he, neither is there
any thing like him, or second to him. Proximos illi tamen occupauit Pallas
honores; Yet Pallas receives the next honor to him. Thus you see, how that
heathenish idolatry, and your idolatrous worshipping of saints, are for
substance both one.


The Recusant, Sir, you are deceived: for we worship saints for Gods cause, or
god in them, that is, we a door them in respect they were the ministers of
Almighty God: But the Heathen worship not their inferior Gods in this
respect.


The Minister. the 55. semblance. Yes, the very Heathen did the like, as
witnesses Paulus Orosius, who speaking of them says thus: they confessed that
they followed not many gods, but that they worshipped o Sub vno deo magno
plures ministros vener rari. Oros. lib. c. 1.
under one great god, many inferior gods, as being his ministers.


The Recusant. Yea: but the Heathen worshipped Jupiter, Saturn, Mercuric, Mars,
Venus, and others that were known (as Saint p August* de ciuit* Dei lib. 3.
cap, 3. and 17.
Austen reports) to have bin adulterers, and notorious male* actours,


The Minister. the 56 semblance. So do you worship Patrick: Cuthbert, Brigit,
Modwen, Fiacrius, Foilanus, Gertruide, Erkenwald, Becket and others that were
known to be whooremongers, and lewd persons.


The recusant, Sir you do greatly slander these holy Saints.


the Minister: No sir, J will verify what I have said. To begin with Patricke
the great Apostle of Ireland, it is reported by credible Ranulphus Cestren sis
in Polychron. lib. 4* cap. 29. and Johannes Capgrauius in catalogo sanctorum
Angliae
writers, that he had a boy waiting on him, that called him father, he not
denying it: and that one Modwenna, an Irish woman, was very familiar with him
And so cruel was Cuthbert unto women after he became a Saint of yours, that
none might come within his sa^ctuary at Doylwem, Caruen, and Mailros in
Scotland, nor yet at Durham, Tynmouth, and Lyndefarne here in England, under r
John Balein his acts of English Votaries dedicated to king Edward the sixth*
pain of death, their chambers and sellars exempted always: yet was the said
Cuthbert very familiar in his time with Ebba, Elsteda, and Verca, three holy
Nuns, and built for his pleasure, a solemue nonnery at Carliel. Finally for the
special good love he had unto Verca above all other, he commanded in his
Testament, that his body after his departing, should be wrapped in a fine
linen cloth that she had given him. As for saint Briget, Johannes Capgrauius
in Catalogo S^nct. Angliae.
when she was at the point of Marriage, she stole away privily with her three
maidens, and waited on Bishop Machil* And saint Modwen after such an other sort
Idem.
waited on Bishop Hiber and his brethren. Saint Fiacrius also a scottish
Hermit, John Bale in his acts of English votaries.
had (as Master Bale says) so great Malice unto women, that he plagued with
the foul evil, so many of them, as came withiu the precinctes of his
monastery. And saint Foilanus was (as John Capgrau* in Catalog, Sanct. (...)
gliae.
Capgraue reports) very familiar, with your saint Gertruide and her Nuns
at Nigella. And your saint Erkenwalde did (as the same Ibid.
writer reports) build a Nunnery at Barking, and because there was at that
time in England no nuns to his mind, he sent over the sea for an old
acquaintance of his called Hildelitha, and made her Abesse there. And such like
saints were your Saint Godrycke, Aldelme, Etheldreed, Wilfride, Drithelme, O
since Petrocke, and sundry others: of wose acts you may read at large in (...)
^^dam de G^stis Ang^nu^, Galf^id M^n^methen. de Origin and G^st: B^^tonu^,
Alphred. Beuerla^ens* in Chronolog. and Ranul^h* Cestrens. in Polychronic^.
books extant to your view. I come now to Thomas Becket, who ( See Fox. Act and
mon. pa, 225
because he died in the popes quarrel, which like a traitor, he maintained
against his soueraign Henry the 2) was canonized for saint by Pope Alexander,
anno dom: 1180, and appointed to be prayed unto by the name of saint Thomas of
Canterbury* And accordingly do you pray at this* day blasphemously saying:

Tuper Thomae sanguinem, quem prote impendit: fac nos Christ scandere quo
Thomas ascendit.

By the blood of Thomas, which he for thee did spend.

Make us Christ to come, whither Thomas did ascend:

By this it appears, that Ethnick-like you make those your intercessours
which were known to be whoremongers. Traitors and notorious malefactoures: and
that you honor those as Martyrs, which died as traitors* like the followers of
Alexander, of whom Eusebius* lib. 5. ecclesiast. hist. cap. 17.
Eusebius makes mention, showing that they did honor their Master as a
martyr, though he lived as a thief, and died justly for his offenses.

But be it granted that all those whom the Pope has canonized, were Saints
indeed: I see no reason why you should therefore make them your intercessoures
and mediators:


the Recusant, Yes there is great reason, For as he that has a suite to the
King, has need to make way for the same by the fanour, and mediation of some
great Lord, who is employed near about his person: even so he that has a
suite to the King of Heaven, has need to request the Angels and saints to
admit them into presence and to bring them to speech with god.


the Minister. the 57 semblance* Sir, this your reason is borrowed from the
heathenish idolaters, and therefore J will answer you as saint Ambrose c Ambrose
in epist. ad Romans cap. 1.
answered them. when they are ashamed (says he, speaking of the Pagans) of
having neglected God, they are accustomed d Solent mis^r^ vti excusatione
dicentes per istos posse (...) deum, (...) per Comites peruenitur ad Regem
to use a certain pitiful excuse, saying that they had access unto God by
these gods, as by the lords or carls about the court, subjects have access
unto the King. But I heseech you is there any man so foolish and so retcehlesse
of his own preservation, as that he will give that honor unto any such
Earl, which is due unto the King? seeing that to do that is a point of
treson, And these men, shall not they think them selves guilty of having
transgressed* who give to the creature the honor due to god alone: and which
forsake him, to adore and pray unto their companions, with service, as though
besides that there were nothing reserved for god: For verily in that me^ make way
to have acces to kings by tribunes or Earls, it is because the king is a man
and knows not to whom to trust in matters concerning the Commonwealth. But to
make god favorably inclined unto him, from whom nothing is hid, who knows
what every man wants* and wishes a man needs not any to speak for him, but
only a devout mind, For in what place soever he would speak with him, he is
ready there to give him an answer.

Among the works also of saint Origene, is found the self same oblection of
the Paganes. viz: that none e Origin. contra Cells. lib. 8.
dare to approache the person of an earthly prince for any suite, but by the
intercession, of some courtier or other about him: therefore it should be so
on our part toward god; unto whose mighty majesty, we must use the mediation of
some which are in his favor, The absurdnes of this comparison, is there in like
manner answered: that the reason is most unlike, because princes are men, and
know not of themselves, to whom to commit the comon-wealth He means that the
multitude of their businesses requires larger audience, then the ears of any
mortal man can affoorde and that Princes having their power, and presence, and
understanding limited, must be helped by the information of such as are their
Eyes, ears and hands, as Xenophon wrote in his institution of Cyrus, that is,
their subordinate Counsailors, ministers, and assistants, by whom they
discharge the burden of their places. But god needs not to be helped by the
information of any: for (as the Poet says) Panta hora dios ophthalmos; kai
pant' epakoues Gods eye sees all things, and gods ear hears all things.
And as there is no defect in his hearing, so is there no danger in his person:
for he rides upon the Cherubims, and makes his enemies his footstool. But
there is great danger in the persons of Princes: for though they lie in beds
of Iuorie, decked and trimmed with the laces and carpets of Egypt, yet over
their heads hangs a naked sword, the point down-ward, by a small horsehaire,
threatening their continual slaughter: So that it is very necessary that they
should have warders, and porters, and masters of requests, to admit suitors
into their presence, and to receive and commence their requests. But the Lord
is porter himself at the gates of heaven: and whosoever asks receives, and
^ Math. 7. 8.
he that seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shallbe opened. And
that without any interuention of time: for 145 18.
the Lord is near unto all that call upon him; yea, to all that call upon him
in truth.


the, 58 semblance, The Heathen worshipped Vide Origin* contra celsum. lib. 4,
and 5.
Angels 2. Reg. 23. 5.
and all the host of heaven: so do you, saying Tu sancte Michael cum omnibus
millibus Angelorum ora pro me, vt eripias me de potestate aduersariorum meorum:
adiu^a me: etc,


the recusant, c Orat. ad omnes Angelos and sancto^ ^n com. Suffrag. fol. 62.
We worship Angels indeed, but it is only because they are the ministers and
messengers of Almighty God, but the heathen worshipped them not in this
respect: there is therefore great difference betwixt us and the heathen.


the Minister, the, 59* semblance, No sir, you do herein also resemble the
Heathen: for saint Austen recording their speech says, That the Heathen d
Aug. in Ps. 96
worshipped not wicked spirits, but Angels, the virtues of the great god, and
the ministers of the great God. And to adioyne one answer more, Orig. contra
cells. lib, 5.
we are not bid to adore the Angels, or worship them with divine honor,
although they bring the gifts of God unto us. For all vows, all requests,
prayers, and thanksgiving, are to be directed to god, who is the Lord of all
things, by the chief priest who is greater then all angels, that is, the
living word and god.


The 60. semblance, The Heathen thought vide Euclid. Socraticum and C^nsorinum.
that every one had from his nativity an Angel for his custody and patronage,
against the wicked Angel: so do you, as appears by this your prayer to your
proper Angel.

Orat ad praprium Angel, in com. suffrag. fol. 69.
Angele qui meus es custos, piet ate superna
Me tibi commissum serua, defend, guberna etc.

the 61. semblance. The Heathen worshipped Amos 5, 26.
the star of their gods, which they made to themselves; so do you worship
the i Orat, contra p^stem, in com: suffrag* fol* 60,
star of your Gods, saying: Gloriosa stella maris a peste succurre nohis. And
again, Ibid.
ipsa stella nunc dignetur syd^ra compescere: quorum bella plebem caedunt dirae
mortis vlcere, etc.


the 62. semblance. The Heathen consecrated for Gods, the sons of men, and
that whilst they were living: of which foolish Idolatry, Theocritus one of
their own Sophists, spoke thus in derision: bono estote animo, quando dij
moriuntur ante h^^ l Theocri^: in Clem: Alex: Protrept.
mines: Sirs, be of good courage, since gods die before men. Jn like sort may
we deride you, who consecrate for a god, the Bishop of Rome, and say unto him:

In arca triumph: ad sixth 4
Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas,
Et merito in terris crederis esse deus,
that is, thou gouernest the world by the Oracle of the voice, and worthily art
thou believed to be a god upon earth, yea Christophorus Marcellus in council:
Lateran sess. 4:
tu es alter deus in terris, thou art another god upon earth,


the Recusant Albeit it pleases some to call him their God upon earth yet does
his holiness neither take that Title to himself nor bid any call him so,


the Minister, the 63 semblance, Yes: Christopher Marcellus (as I have showed)
said to the Pope in the counsel of Laterane, thou art another God upon earth:
and the Pope took it to himself: yea, we read, that Pope Nicholas produced
the testimony of the godly emperor Constantine, to prove himself to be a god
and consequently not to be judged by any secular power. His words were these:
satis euidenter ostenditur a saeculari o Nichola^s Papa epist: ad Michael and
did: 96: cap: satis:
potestate nec ligari prorsus, nec solui posse pontificem, quem constat a pio
principe Constantino Deum appellatum: nec posse Deum ab hominibus indicari
manifestum est. And his argument was this,

God cannot be judged by any man,
but the pope is god:
Therefore the pope cannot be judged by
any man.
Thus you see, that the Pope both takes unto himself the title of god, and
also calls himself so; he may therefore (me thinks) fifthly be resembled to
the Emperor Domitian, who (as Eusebius reports) charged all men to call him
Dominum Deum Domitianum, Lord God, Domitian, and to Sapor, the King of Persia,
who would needs be called Rex Regum, frater solis et lunae, particeps
syderum, King of kings, brother to the Sun and Moon* and partner with the
stars. To conclude this particular, as Hanno, taught his birds to cry, Deus
est Hanno, Hanno is a God: so does the pope teach his In Extrau: de maiori and
obedient:
Canonists to cry. Papa est dominus Deus noster: the pope is our lord God.


The 64. Semblance. The Rex Anius, rex hominum, Phaebique, sacerdos: Virgil:
Aeneid: 3
Heathen poet makes mention of one Anius, who would needs be both a King, and
a Priest, in like sort do the Popes favorites solemnly dispute, that the
Cupers de Eccles: page: 251 number. 62*
Empire or temporal rule, as well as the Priesthood or ecclesiastical
dominion is translated unto the successors of Peter: and that the Pope is both
the Paulus 4. ad ducem florent: in duel, et Red: Cupers, page 42* number: 39
King of kings, and C^pers page 25 number. 62.
prince of Priests: yea Anucij epist: dedicat. ad Gregor^ ^3.
Pontifex Optimus maximus, as the Hethen called their god Jupiter.


the 65. semblance. The Heathen Emperors thought, that their willl and
commandment was warrante unto them enough, for whatsoever they enacted:
ancording to that of the Satyr.

Sic, volo, sic iubeo, sit pro rationale voluntas.
So I will, so I command, my will must stand for reason.
And this kind of masterles and lawles will have your Popes challe^ged to their
chair at Rome. For howsoever the pope behaueth himself no man may enquire into
his actions, neither may any man say unto him: Domine cur ita facis? Sir why
do you thus? For the proof hereof, I refer you to those words of your
popish Lawyers: Papa dicitur x Extrau* de translat* Episc. Quant. in glossa
and Felin: de Rescriptis ad Audientiam.
habere coeleste arbitrium: vnde in ijs quae vult, est ei pro ratione voluntas.
Nec est, qui dicat illi, Domine cur ita facis? quia sicut ex sola voluntate
potest per Papam lex creari, ita per solam voluntatem potest cum ea dispensari,
that is, the Pope is said to have an heavenly judgment, therefore in such
things as he wills, his will stands in steed of reason: neither may any
man say unto him; sir why do you thus? because as a law may be made by the
only will of the Pope; so may the same law be dispensed withal, only by the
will of the Pope. Yea your Canonistes are not ashamed to say, that y if the
Pope do carry with him innumerable people by troops y Can. si Papa. did, 40.
into hell, no man in this world might presume to reprove his default; because
he is to judge all, and to be judged of none; unless he be found to err from
the faith, which (say you) as he is Pope, he cannot do.


The, 66, Semblance. The scholars of Pythagoras an Heathen philosopher,
usually alleged the yea and nay of their Master, in their disputations, for
all the reasons and aunswers whatsoever: so do the popes scholars allege the
yea and nay of the pope their Master, and depend as much thereupon as the
Pythagorea^s did on Pithagoras his opinion. Siluester Prierias co^tra Luth* a
Heruaeus de potestate Papae
Whosoever (says Prierias) rests net on the doctrine of the Romish Church,
and Bishop of Rome, as the infallible rule of god* from which the holy
scripture draws strength and authority, he is an heretic. The pope (says
another) has authority so to expound the scriptures, that it is not lawful to
hold or think the contrary: yea, Johannes de Turrecremata sum. lib. 3. c. 64.
si totus mundus (says a Romish Cardinal) sentiret (or as Nemo the In c. 9.
q. 3.
gloss reads sententiaret) contra Papam, videtur quod sententiae Papae
standum esset: if the whole world should determine against the pope, we must
nevertheless stand to his sentence.


The 67. Semblance, The Heathen Tyrant Casigula Pom peio Paeno absoluto,
gratias agenti porrexit ad osculandum sinistrum pedem auro and margaritis
ornatu^* Seneca de Benefic. lib. 2 and Zonaras in vita eius.
Caligula would hold forth his foot to be kissed of those, over whom he
did tyrannize: so the pope causes Kings and Emperors, Lib. Caerem, 1 sect. 5.
cap. 3, and lib. 3, sect. 1. cap, 3.
when they come into his presence, after obeisance done in three several
distances, to fall down before him and kiss his foot, even as Mantuan says
of him,

Ense potens gemiuo cuius vestigia adorant
Caesar, et aurato vestiti murice reges.
Nay, he will Vide Naucler generat. 40.
set his filthy feet on the necks of Emperors, and say unto them: it is
written thoushalt walk upon the Aspe and Cockatrice, and shall tread upon the
Lion and the dragon,

It is great pitiy that Emperors had not the stinges of Aspes and Cockatrices
to thrust forth against him: and to conclude, if it be his holiness pleasure
to be carried aloft on men's shoulders, he will cause the Lib. caerem. 1. sect.
2, and 5 de processione Pontificis and Caesaris per vrbem
Emperor, Kings, and princes that are present to put under their shoulders,
and help to carry him. And thus, whereas Kings in former ages, did ride upon
asses, now asses ride upon Kings.


the 68. semblance. When the Pope is to travail abroad, he Vide Ioannem
Monluciu^ lib. de religione ad Reginam matrem.
sends the Eucharist on horseback some three or four days before,
accompanied with muletors and horsekeepers, and with the scumme and baggage of
the Romain court. Afterward follows the Pope attended with Cardinals,
Bishops, and Potentates: And when he comes near the place whether he
trauaileth, the Eucharist (that is Christ their maker) is brought to meet him
on the way, that it might be carried before him into the town, as his
attendaunte. The Popes herein do imitate the kings of Persia, who when they
were to travail abroad, usually sent an horse before them, carrying a little
Altar upon him: whereupon, i Vide Alciat. Emblem non tibi, sed religioni page,
17.
among a few ashes, shone a small flame of holy fire which the Persians
worshipped as the papists do the Eucharist. And as the kings of Persia were
more reverenced then that holy fire: so are the popes more reverenced then the
Eucharist, and carried with far greater magnificence then then the Eucharist
is. And this is a forcible argument to prove that the pope is that man of
sin which aduanceth 2 These, 2, 4
himself above the sebasmata that is, the things which are worshipped as God
in the Romish church,


the, 69, semblance, The heathen planted fur trees, and after cut them down,
Isaiah 44, 15, 16.
with some part thereof they warmed themselves, with an other part they roasted
meat, and of the third part they made themselves gods and worshipped them: so
do you sow your Corn, and afterward reap it, carry it into your barnes,
thresh it, grind it and bake it; of one part thereof you make food for your
selves: and of Another part you make Christ your breaden God, and Council.
Trid: sess, 13
decree that it shall be worshipped with the highest degree of worship. What
gross idolatry is this? so to worship that, which in show is bread: in
taste bread, and in feeling bread, and what is it is else but bread?


the. 70 semblance. You do also worship Crosses, which is like-wise gross
idolatrye and popish paganism, as appears by this speech of saint Ambrose,
Inuenit Helena crucem domini, regem adorauit, non lignum vtiquae, n Ambros de
ibitu Theodosii
quia hic gentilis est error: Helena found the cross of our Lord, she adored
her King. (He means Christ) and not the wood, Because this is an error of
the Heathen. And into this error are you fallen; for you call upon the cross
and say, Breuiar, infra Hebdom 4 quadrag.
all Hail O cross, our only hope in this time of the passion, increase
righteousness to the godly, and give pardon to guiltye persons, which words
are directed not to Christ, but to the very wood of the Cross: as appears
by these words in the hymn immediately going before: blessed is that cross on
whose arms the prince of the world did hang: it was made a beam to weigh
his body, and took the pray from hell.


the 71. semblance. The idolatrous Israelits, learned of the idolatrus heathen,
Ierem, 2. 27
to say to a piece of wood, thou art my father, and to, a stone, thou have
begotten me: so have you learned of them both, O pie crucifixe redemptor
omnium populoru^ etc. Orat. ad Crucifix, in com Suffrag, fol 67.
to say to a crucifix of wood, thou art my redeemer, and to a piece of metal,
Concionatores alloquntur imaginem Crucifixi eique dicunt, tu nos redemisti, tu
nos patri reconciliasti. Bell arm de Imagine. lib, 2, cap, 23.
thou art my reconciliator.


The, 72, Semblance. It is also Jdolatry to swear by Angels, Saints, or any
other creatures: as may be proved by these words of the Prophet Ieremyah:
Ierem 5, 7,
thy children have forsaken me, and swerve by them that are no gods. Where he
shows that to swear by any thing then by god, is to forsake him and to commit
idolatry, And this kind of Idolatry did the Heathen commit, when they swear by
Hercules, and said, vide Tertul de idololatria cap, 20
me Hercule medius, fidius: so do you commit the same when you swear by the
mass, by saint Mary etc. and say, as god me help, and our lady: not
considering, how that the Lord has threatened Zephan 1, 5,
To cut them off that swear by the Lord, and by Melchom. To conclude this
semblance with the words of an Ancient writer: Ecce in le ge precipit ur, vt
per nullum iuretur, t Author operis imperfecti in math, homil 12 reperitur in
tomo 2 operum diui Hierony mi.
nisi per Deum: qui ergo turat per coelum aut per terram, aut quicquid aliud
est per quod jurat, deificat illud. Propterea idololatram se facit omnis qui
per aliquid aliud a deo jurat, etiamsi iurare liceret: quia non reddit Domino
Deo suo iuram euta, sua, sed elementis: et sic duplicit er peccat: primum quia
jurat, deinde quia deificat per quem jurat. Behold it is commanded in the law,
that a man should swear by none but by God: whosoever therefore swears by
heaven, or by the earth or what soever else it be, by which he swears, he
makes it a God. Therefore every one that swears by any thing besides god,
albeit it were lawful for him to swear; yet makes he himself an idolater,
because he perfourmeth not his oaths to his Lord god, but to creatures, and so
he sins two ways: first because he swears, and secondlye because he
makes him a god by whom he swears.


Tht 73: semblance. The Heathen Rom 1, 23
turned the glory of the incorruptible god to the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man, and of birds, etc. so do you, when you paint God the father in
the form of an old man, and the holy ghost in the form of a dove.


The 74, semblance, The Heathen (as ancient Ambros: in Psalm, 118. Cyprian de
Idol. vanit. Gregorius Neocaesar. in Council. Nicen. 2 Act: 6. and Euse. Histor
Eccles. lib 7. cap 17.
writers report) were the first inue^ters of images: your imagery then is but
an heathnish devise; and yet are you so in love therewith, as that you set up
images in Churches, in windows, and upon the walls of your houses, yea, you
fasten them to your beds, and carye them privily in your bosoms, as Gen, 31. 34
Rachel hidd her fathers idols in the Camels straw.


the: 75: semblance: The images of the Heathen were but the inventions of their
own brains, very unlike their originals. Praxiteles made Venus to the likeness
of Cratina, whom he loved. All the painters of Thebes painted her after the
image of Phrine, a beautiful, but a notorious harlot. All the caruers in
Athens cut Mercury, to the imitation of their Alcibiades,

The like may be said of your supposed imaginary gods, for they are but
Pigmalions pictures, works of your devising, as unlike the originals, as
Cratina and Phrine were to Venus, and as Alcibiades, was to Mercury. And your
supposed relics of Saints, are also but forged things and devises of your
own. For examples sake. saint Peter's brain at Geneua was found to be a
pumice stone, and saint Anthonies arm was found to be an hearts pisle. And the
blood of Hales in England. was descried to be but the blood of a drake. You
are also deceived in making of your Crucifixes: For the cross was made with
three pieces of wood, whereof one was fastened vprighte in the ground to the
which the body and back leaned: the second was fastened to the top of the first
oue rth wart, to the which the hands were nailed, and the third was fastened to
the bottom of the first, to the which the feet were nailed a sunder with two
distinct nails. But your popish caruers and painters do make the cross of two
pieces of wood; and do nail the feet to the very body of the cross, and
that one upon another, with one nail,


The 76, Semblance. The prophet David speaking of the images of the Heathen,
says thus; they have mouths and speak not: they have eyes and see not: they
have ears and hear not: they have no a Psalm, 115, 5, 6, 7,
ses, and smell not: they have hands and touch not: they have feet and walk
not: neither does any voice pass through their throat. So have your images,
eyes, ears, noses, hands, and feet; but they neither see with their eyes:
nor hear with their ears, nor smell with their noses, nor handle with their
hands, nor walk with their feet, neither does any voice (albeit they gape
wide) pass through their throats.


the. 77 semblance. Albeit the images of the Heathen were without sense and
motion, Yet the Heathenish priests (thereby to deceive simple people) used
certain engines to make them move: so do your popish priests, as your Legend
of saint James de Voragine gives sufficient testimony: for we read there,
that a certain image of Christ did lift up his foot, and cast off his slipper
to a poor pilgrim, that stood devoutly before him, and would have offered
somewhat, but b In Fox. Act. and mon. page 1188,
that he had nothing to offer. We read also that there was a certain idol in
King Henry's days, called the Roode of grace, which was made so with wiers and
engines, that one standing within it, could make every part of the idol to
move. And if a man brought but a small piece of silver to offer, it would
hang down the lip, as being not pleased: but if it were a good big piece,
then would his jaws go merrily, This abominable idol was broken down by the
Lord Cromwells means, and the engines and parts thereof, were showed at Paul's
cross, thereby to bring men to a detestation of your imagerie, and to acquainte
them with your double dealing. To ad one example more, there was at Chester, in
Queen Mary's days, an image of Saint Nicholas, which was made with such a
devise, as that if one standing behind it, did pull a certain string that was
in the back part thereof, it would move the hand as if it blessed the people.
This image with many others was burnt at Chesterby the appointment of Doctor
Downame then Bishop there, as his own D. Dovvnam in his treatise of Antichrist
page, 112.
son (who saw them burned) reports.


The 78, semblance, Albeit the images of the Heathen had mouths and spoke not:
yet would some Heathen Titus Liuius lib. 5, and Valerius Maximus lib. 1, cap.
vlt.
writers have men believe, e In monasterio Kiouiensi tra^s Boristhenem fluuium
Seuerin, de vita, miraculis and actis canonizationis S. Hyacin thy lib. 1 cap.
13
that the image of Juno spoke unto a soldier, that said unto it: vis ne Romam
ire Juno? so would your Popish writers have us to believe, that an image of the
Virgin Marie spoke unto Hyacinthus, and said: O fili Hyacinthe, etc.


the 79 semblance, The Heathen carried their Baruch 6, 3,
Gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood, on their shoulders: so did the Popes
clergy g Baronius Notat. in Mar tyrolog. Romans
assembled in the city of Constance, carrye the image of Rochus on their
shoulders, in the time of the plague there.


the 80, semblance, The reason that moved the Heathen to carry their Gods on
their shoulders, was Baruch, 6. 3.
to cause the people to fear: so do you carry your Gods on your shoulders, in
your processions, thereby to make simple people fear them: But we may say unto
them, as Baruch said unto the Heathen: Baruch. 6, 21, 22.
The Owls, swallows, and birds fly upon their bodies, and upon their heads,
yea, and the cats also. By this yea may be sure, that they be no Gods;
therefore fear them not.


the, 81, semblance, The Heathen put golden Bar* ch* 6, 9.
crowns on the heads of their gods: so do your Popish priests set Coronets on
the heads of your idol Gods.


the, 82, semblance, The Heathnish Priests Baruch 6, 9, 10.
Conveyed away the gold and silver from their gods, and bestowed it upon
themselves, and upon their Harlots; so do your Popish clergy, as Bernard a
man of your own side reports, Bernard. in sermon* ad Cleru^ in Council.
Rhemens. congreg.
with the patrimonye of the cross of Christ, you (says he, speaking to the
Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Priests, and Monks of that age) Feed
whoores in your chambers, you fat your flesh, you furnish your horses with
Pectorals and headestalles of gold.


The, 83, semblance* The Heathen u covered their idols with clothing of gold,
n Baruch, 6, 12.
so do you cover yours, with purple and scarlet, as you were enjoined in the
Council. Trid. sess, 7.
Council of Trent.


The 84. Semblance: The Heathen Baruch. 6, 12.
placed their Images in their Temples; so do you; not considering that the
aunciente fathers (whom you pretend to be on your side) did utterly condemn
this Heathenish practice. To insiste in some of them, Epiphan* ad Ioannem Hiero
solym. August. de fide and Symbolo.
Epiphanius flatly avouches, that to place images in Churches, is contrary to
scripture and religion. And Saint Austen accounts it to be a wicked thing,
to make the Image of God, and in temple collocare, and to place it in the
temple of god. Yea the whole council of Eliberis (as has been showed
heretofore) decreed Council Eliber tin, can, 36.
picturas in Ecclesiis esse non debere, that pictures ought not to be in
Churches,


the 85, semblance. The Heathen could not Baruch, 6, 12,
keep the faces of their gods clean from dust: so when your gods (To use
Baruch hiswords) u Baruch, 6. 16,
be set up in your Temples, their eyes be full of dust, by reason of the feet
of those that come in.


the, 86, semblance, The Heathenish Priests Baruch, 6, 17,
Kept their Temples with doors and with locks, and with bars, least their
Gods should be spoiled by robbers: and such are your Gods: Baruch, 6, 57.
They can neither defend themselves from thieves nor robbers, for they that are
strongest, take away their gold and silver, and aparrell, wherewith they be
clothed: and when they have it, they get them away: yet can they not help
themselves. We may therefore say of your Gods, as Saint Chrysostom said of the
Gods of Laban, Chrysostom. in Gen, cap 31, bomil, 57.
Tales sunt dii tui, vt quis eos furari queat? non erubescis dicens: quare
furatus es deos meos? Are thy gods such that a man may steal them? art thou
not ashamed to say wherefore have thou stolen my gods.


the, 87, Semblance, When their came any war or plague upon the Babilonia^s,
a Baruch, 6. 48,
their Priests consulted together, where they might hide themselves with their
gods: so do your Romish Priests: otherwise, they do not, as the image of the
Virgin Mary taught (as ( b) you say) Hyacinthus to do, in the time of Mary:


The 88. semblance. Albeit the Gods of the heathen could neither defend b
Seuerim de vita mira*
themselves from war nor from plagues. Yet were they made as though they
could have defended them selves ul: et act: ano^. niz. Sanct Hyacinth, lib. 1,
cap 13. Baruch, 6, 13.
holding weapons in their hands: so do also your Romish Gods: one holds a
scepter, as though he were a certain judge of the country, yet can he not slay
such as offend him. Another d Ibid,
has a dagger, or an ax in his right hand: yet is he not able to defend
himself from battle, nor from thieves.


The 89, Semblance. We may also say of your Gods, as Baruch said of the
Babylonish Gods: Baruch, 6, 54,
when there falls a fire upon the house of your Gods of wood, and of silver,
and of gold, your Priests will escape and save themselves: but your Gods burn
as the balkes therein: how can it then be thought or said that they be Gods?


the Recusant, Sir, there is no Catholic so simple, as to think that images
be Gods; you do therefore greatly wrong us, in resembling us to the Heathen
therein.


The Minister. The 90: semblance.

Sir, no more did the Heathen think them to be gods; and yet for all that,
they were condemned of idolatry. To verify what I have said, quis ea nisi
stolidus (says Celsus in Origin) prodijs habuerit? who but a very fool will
accounte f Orig. contrae Celsum: lib. 7.
them to be gods? I worship (says another Pagan in Saint g Aug. in Psalm. 113.
co^cione. 2
Ansten) neither the image nor the devil, but in a bodily figure I behold the
sign of that which I ought to worship. Lactan^ius de falsa Religione lib: 2
cap. 20.
Non ipsa inquiunt, timemus, sed eos ad quorum imaginem ficta, and quorum
nominibus consecrata sunt: we fear not images, say they but them after whose
likeness they be figured, and to whose names they are consecrated.


The 91, semblance, Albeit the Heathen did not think, that images were Gods in
deed; yet did they Baruch,* 6, 5, 54:
call them their gods: so do your popish priests; for upon Easter day in the
morning, the Conrad, de imaginib* ca. 17
priest takes the image of the Crucifix out of the sepulcher, carries it about
the temple, and knocks at the gates being shut, saying; at tollite aportas,
Lift up your heads Oye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the
king of glory shall come in. And to one within asking, quis est iste rexglori^?
Who is this king of glory? the Priest answers Dominus fortis et potens; etc:
the Lord strong and mighty in battle, the Lord of hosts, he is the King of
Glory. And upon the feast of the Pentecost Conrad. ibid.
there is a dove let down in your idol temples, and with it falls fire and
water together with a great noise the Priest crying out and saying: accipite
spiritum sanctum, receive the holy Ghost.


the, 92* semblance, Albeit images be (as the Prophet calls them) Habak, 2, 18
teachers of lies, Yet did the Heathen say, that they were Vide Athanas: orat.
contra gentes.
elements or letters to know God by: so say you, that images are laymens books.


the, 93, semblance, The Vide Lactantium lib 2, cap, 21,
Heathen passed not by their Images, without bending of their knees, and
saluting of them: no more do you, as is apparent by this caveat, which you
give to p Vide Com. Suffrag, de beata Maria fol, 167,
them that pass by the image of the Virgin mary

Virginis intactae cum veneris ante figuram,

Praterundo ca^e, ne taceatur Aue.


The 94. Semblance. The idolatrous Israelites, after the manner of the Heathen
1 reg, 19* 18, et Hos, 13, 2.
kissed their images: so do you use to kiss your Jmages, and the Vid, Missale
rom: de riticele brandi missam.
Pax,


the 95 semblance. The Hea then Baruch, 6, 29.
brought Gifts to their Gods of silver, and gold, and wood* so do you offer
gifts to your idol gods, t Baruch. 6, 32 v, See the history of Bell and of the
Dragon, verse, 15.



the 69. semblance. Their Priests took away that which they offered: so do
your priests take away that which you offer; yea, as the Babilonish priests
did eat and drink up all that was offered to Bell, the idol of the
Babilonians: so do your popish priests eat and drink up that which you
offer to your idols,


The 97,* semblance, The heathenish priests Baruch, 6, 31,
roared and cried before their gods. so do your popish priests before your
Gods.


The 98. semblance. The priests of Baal cut them selves as their manner was, y
1, reg, 18. 28
with knives and launcers, til the blood gushed out upon them: so do your
popish priests whippe themselves till the blood run down their backs, and
sides,


the 99 Semblance. The priests of the Heathen, had their Baruch, 9,
heads and beards shaven: so have your romish priests Tondentur ca pilli, ad
co^onae speciem et similitudinem, qua^ perpetuo co^servare oportet, et vt
quisque, in altiori gradu c^llocatur, sic eius orbis form^ latior circumscribi
debet. catechism. Rom page, 5. 22,
ad coronae speciem et similitudinem.


the 100, semblance. there were certain priests of the Heathen called
Hierophantes, who because they were forbidden to marry made themselves chaste,
(as saint Hieron, lib. 2, c^ntra Iouinia^
Hierome testifies) with the use of Hemlock And of them (says a learned
Clemens Alexandr. inlib 3,
father) did the first heretics learn to condemn marriage. And of whom I
pray you have you learned, to condemn marriage in priests but of them? sure J
am, you have not learned it of god: for he tells you that Heb, 13. 4
marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled: and rhat it is ^ Tim,
4, 1,
a doctrine of devils, to forbid any to marry,


the 101, semblance, The vide Liuium in decad: 4,
heathen had their Vestall virgins, whom they forbad to Mary: so have you your
nuns to whom you likewise forbid marriage.


the 102, semblance. The Heathen prests being forbidden to marry; burned in
lust, and lived unchastly, as appears, by these words of Arnobius: Arnob,
lib, 8 contra Gentes.
where do these priests more willingly commit their whore domes, and
fornications, then in their own Temples, then in the midst of their altars
where do they contain their bandery, where do they be think themselves of
their adult eryes but there? And that your Romish Priests came not short of
the heathen priests herein, I prove it by the report of men of your own
side. Bernard speaking of the Priest^s of his age, says thus: Bernard in in
Sermon ad Clerum in Council Rhemens congregat,
How keep they the ornamente of Chastity, which being de liuered into a
reprobate sense, do that which, is not fyt? it is a shame to name those things
which the Bishops do in secret, But why should I be ashamed to speak that which
they are not ashamed to do? Yea, the Apostle is not ashamed to write, me^ upon
men wrought filthiness, etc: And Robert Holcote speaks thus of the priests in
his time: sacerdotes moderni sunt demones incubi, per luxuriam et sacerdotes
Priapi vel Beelphegor, et angeli abyssi* The priests of our time by their
luxury and lech^ry i Holcot in lib S^pient. lect: 18
are like the spirits called Incubi, and the Priest^ of Priapus or Beelphegor,
and the Angels of the Pit of Hell.

And it is no marvel, rhat your priests are become so abominable in their
doings, For you have devised a special Praemunire, to embolden them in
fornication, and to free them from all danger of any of your laws made in
that behalf. Your Praemunire is this: Cause. 2: Quest 7, Laic
si laicus instigante Diabolo, accuset clerium incontinentiae, statim
repellitur If a layman by the instigation of the Devil, accuse a priest of
incontinency, he is strait way thrust back, and put to silence again. Did, 84
max imi in gl^ssa.
Laicus non potest clericum de fornicatione accusare, a lay man may not accuse
a priest of fornication. And In decretal
Petrus Ra vennas, one of your famous Canonists, says thus Cause: 11 Quaest,
Absit in glossa.
quamuis tactus et oscula sint praeludia incontinentiae in laicis, secus tamen
est in clericis: nam clericus praesumitur ista facere pro charitate et bono
zelo. Notwithstanding handling and kissing in lay persons, be the occasions or
beginnings of incontinent behavior; yet in priests it is far otherwise, for
a priest is presumed to do these things of charity, and of good zeal.

It is also noted in your gloss, Cause: 11 Quaest, Absit in glossa.
Si clericus amplectitur mulierem, interpretabitur, quod causa benedicendi eam
hoc faciat. If a Priest embrace a woman, a lay man mu^^ judge of it, that he
does it to the iutent to bless her.


the 103 semblance, And not the Priests only amongst the heathen, but the
common people also because they gave themselves to spiritual fornication, were
in the judgment of God Rom 1. 14*
given up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, and to defile their own
bodies between themselves: so are the People of Rome: as appears by these
words of one of your friars Mantuan. fa* florum lib 2 de Carnispriuii
consueuud:
. Vrbs est iamtota lupanar, the the whole city is become a stews, Yea
Cornelius, one of the Bishops that were present at your late council of Trent,
openly vide orat Cornelij epist ^itonti in council Trid: babit.
complained of the filthiness, and uncleanness both of the Priests, and
people,


The, 104, Semblance. Socrates in Vide Plat* dial, ^ de repub*
Platoes commonwealth says, that conjunction of men and women, and
procreation of children Cause, 12 qnaest 1 ^ lectissimus
ought to be common. So do your decrees report out of Clemens his
decretall Epistles, that a mongest christians all thnges onghte to be common,
even wives and all. These are your express words: Communis vita omnibus
(fratres) necessaria est: commnnis euim vsus omnium quae sunt in hoc mu^do,
omnihus hominibus esse debuit. In omnibus autem sieve dubio et coniuges: a
common life (brethren) is necessary for all men: For a common use of all things
that are in the world, ought to be common to all men. And in all things (no
doubt) are wives contained.


the: 105: semblance: The Heathen were much given to witchcraft, sorcery, and
Necromancy, as both the sacred Isai 47, 9 Dan* 2, 2,
scriptures, and profane Tul, de Diui* not. lib. 2 Tacitus hist, lib, 1, et
Annalium lib, 6, Herodot, lib, 5, et Virgil ec* cloga, 8,
writers give sufficient testymony; and this Ierem, 10, 2*
way of the Heathen (to use the Prophets Phrase) have many both of your
Popes and Cardinals learned, and professed, as J showed at large in our fourth
days conference.


the 106. semblance. The Heathen put great sanctity in odd numbers, and when
they were to use charms for some purposes, they vsuallye made (as the poet
shows) three streakes, and three pictures of a man, and gave this reason for
it: Numer y Virgil Eglog. 8
o Deus impare gaudet, God delights in an odd number. And herein do you
fully agree with the Heathen: for in your blind devotion, you stand much upon
odd numbers: and have three Credoes for such a matter, five Pater nosters for
this, and seven Aue Mary's for that. And least you should fail in your
reckoning, you have your beads for that purpose: for which cause J may also
fitly resemble A Pharisaicall fellow,
you to one Paul, who (as Sozomen. Histor. Eccles. lib. 6. cap, 29.
Sozome^ reports) seemed to dedicate his whole time to prayer, so that every
day he said three hundred prayers: and because he would not fail in his
account, he put three hundred little stones into his lapp and at the end of
every prayer, he cast out one: by which means he knew when his tale was up,


The, 107, semblance, The Heathen also put great sanctity in the bare
rehearsal of words, and thought that the bare repeating over of certain
words, were of force to save them from perils and dangers, as appears by
these words of the poet, concerning the witch Medea.

Verbaque ter dixit, placidos facientia som^os, ^ Ovid, lib. 1, Metamorph.


Quae mare turb atum, quae concita flumina sistunt,

And thrice enchanting words she spoke,

Which causes quiet sleep,

Which stilles the surging Ocean lake,

And quelles the roaring deep.

To this inchaunting witch, may we fitly resemble you, who are of opinion,
that the bare rehearsal of certain names, together with the crossing of your
foreheads, four and forty times: will assist you in all your needs and
necessities, defend you from all dangers both bodily and ghost lie, and keep
you from all evils past, present, and to com. That J slander you not, it may
appear by this your Magical form of prayer, which I have found thus
prescribed in an old popish book: In com. suffr* fol. 149.
Omnipotens Dominus Christus Messiah Soter Emmanuell Sabbath Adonai Vnigenitus
Via Vita Manus homousion saluator Alpha and omega fons origo spes fides
charitas osa agnus ouis vitulus serpens aries Leo vermis primus nouissimus rex
pater filius spiritus sanctus Ego sum qui sum creator Aeternus redemptor
Trinitas vnitas Clemens caput Otheothecos Tetragrammaton ista nomina me
protega^t, and defendant, and ab omni aduersitate, plaga, and infirmitate
corporis and animaeplene liberent, and assistant mihi in auxilium: etc.


The 108. semblance. It was the manner of the heathen to c obser^e times and
seasons, thas is to make difference of times in respect S. Paul reprooueth the
Ga^ians, for observing of times, after the manner of the Heathen: Gal, 4, 10*
of god or bad success: so it is the manner of your popish Prognosticators
(and J would it were but their manner only) to put difference of days in
their Almanackes, as though some were luckie unto us, some unlucky, according
to the course of the stars. They do also (and I would they only did so)
observe Planetary hours, Critical days, Climactericall years, and the
Horoscope or time of a man's birth, and the constellation of the Heavens at that
time: yea they dare presume (and so dare others besides they) to take the
placing of the stars for certain signs of accidental events to com: of the
change and variety of weather, for every day in the year: and thereupon
determine before hand, This day will be fair, this foul this frosty, this
rainy, this hot, this cold, this windy, this calm. But we may say unto them:
as the prophet Isaiah said to the blind idols: Isai 41, 23.
declare the things to come, and so we^ shall know that you are gods; for is
it not proper to God only to foretell things to come? and are there any among
the vanities of the Iereme* 14, 22,
gentiles, that can give rain? or can the heavens give showers? is it not thou
O Lord our god? is it not thou that sendest rain sometimes for a blessing, and
sometimes for a plague? how then dare man ascribe this to thy cretures? how
dare they then set down what day will be rainy, and what windy? But they will
say, that The Prognosticators Poesy in their Almanacks.
Art has no greater adversary then the ignorant. I answer, that the learned
fathers were adversaries to this their Heathenish practice. The In assertione
fidei cap. vlt*
Council of Toledo, houlden in the year 400. decreed, that if any man did
think, that Astrologers and Mathematicians (they meant Prognosticators of
weather, famine, plague, wars, treacheries, etc*) were to be believed, he
should be held accursed. And the Can. 16,
Council of Venice, which was holden in the year of our Lord 460 decreed,
That if any man did study Astrology, or take upon him to foretell thiags to
come, or give credence to any such thing: if he were a minister, he should be
deprived, and whatsoever he were, he should be excommunicate. This Act was also
afterward confirmed in the Council of Agatha, and after that again in the Can.
32:
council i Can. 42.
of Orleance. And not to omit Tertullian, he tells us plainly, that Tertul
in Apol cap, 35
astrology was invented by evil spirits, and forbidden by the Lord: and that
Christians ought not to use it, though they might have benefit by it. And to
the same truth subscribeth Saint Homil. 19. in Ephesians.
Chrysostom, Saint Hierome, saint De moribus Eccles. lib, 4. cap 21, and
Confess: lib. 4, cap, 3.
Austen, and the rest of the Orthodox fathers. But what n Comment. in Isaiam
cap* 27:
need I allege the writings of men against them? Their particular conjectures
which are gathered from the position of the Heavens, of the change of the
weather for every day, of famine, Earthquakes, wars, conspiracies, treacheries,
and such like, are flatly forbidden by the word of god. Ierem: 10. 2,
Learn not (says he) the way of the Heathen, and be not afraid for the
signs of Heaven, though the Heathen be afraid of such. Jn which words God
forbiddes his people to give credit to, or fear the co^stellations and
conjunctions of stars and Planets, which have no power of themselves, but are
governed by god: and their secret motions, influences, and operations are not
known to man: and therefore there can be no certain judgment thereof in any
accidental or casual things. To conclude, reason it self may teach you,
that it is impossible for man to know the operation of the stars: for their
lights and operations are all mixed together in all places upon the earth:
therefore no observation can be made of this or that star. And thus much
concerning your observing of times or seasons: Now let us take a view of your
observing of years, which the Gal. 4, 10,
Apostle also condemns.


the 109. semblance. Your Iubilies are either borrowed of the Heathen; who vide
Plin. lib, 7. cap. 40.
had every hundred years their ludos seculares, plays so called, to which your
plays and pageants may fitly be resembled: or of the Jews, who every fifty
years celebrated s Ludi seculares ita instituti erant, vt non nisi cen^esimo
anno fierent, postea principu^ ambitione minore spatio inter iecto saepius
erant instaurati Calepinus in verb. secularis
a Jubilie. And this Jewish manner of observing of years, is condemned by the
Apostle.


The 110* semblance. The heathen had their ludos seculares, at the first, every
hundred year; but afterward they had them with in that compass of time: so
have you varied much your devise of the Iubilye, since it was first taken up.
For Extran. commun, lib. 5. tit; 9. cap, 1 Ibid. cap. 2. and 3.
Boniface the eight appointed the Iubilye every hundred year; u Clement the
sixr abridged it afterward to every fiftieth year: Urban the sixth brought it
after that again to every thirty third year. Paul the fourth brought it to
every twenty five year: Julius the second brought it to every tenth year:
and the Popes now adays, will, when they please, grant extraordinarye
Iubilyes, and as great pardons, as are granted the very year of Jubilye.


the 111, semblance. Your fantasy of Purgatory sprang first from the heathen,
and was received of them in that time of darkness, long before the coming of
Christ, as may be proved by sundry Heathen Homer Odi^. Plato lib, de Anima et
lib 10 de Repub: et in Timilo: Virgil Aneid, 6, O^id lib, 15, metamorph.
writers. And hereat (no doubt) S Austen aimed, when he said that August de
ciuit dei lib, 21 cap 13
Purgatory was one of Platoes doctrines.


The 112 Semblance, Bellarm. de Purgat lib. 1 cap 1. et lib 2 cap, 6 et
Rhemist, in math, 12 sect, 6
You say* that in this Purgatory, as in a Prison house, the souls which, were
not purged in this life, ar there cleansed and purged by fire, before they can
be received into Heaven: the like fabulos dream we find in the Heathen Poet,
who in the person of Anchyses his Ghost talking with his son Aeneas, sings
thus of souls departed, Virgil, lib, 6,
Suspensae ad ventos, etc:

Some hanged abroad, endure the piercing blast,

Of sharpest winds, and thus are purged at last.


the 113. semblance. The Heathen feigned, that souls in Purgatory did Boosi ^e
kika. lousin, Plato in lib de de Anima
cry for help and deliverance from thence; so do you faigne, that a soul in
Purgatory does cry, Vide Heshus de errorib Pontif: loc, 34.
miseremini mei, miserimini mei, saltem amici mei,


the 114. semblance. The Heathen fained that men upon earth Ei si de hoimen
opheloumenoi, etc, Plat Gorg.
might help souls out of Purgatory; so do you faigne the Pope by his
indulgences, is able to deliver thence so many souls e Antoninus part 3 tit,
22, cap, 5, ^ 6, ^t 7
as it pleases, him. o The Pope (says the Archbishop of Florence) in respect
of his absolute jurisdiction, by communicating his indulgences, may absolve all
that are in Purgatory from that pain. Yea t some monks at this age (says a
noble Frenchman) have taught that the souls which are in Purgatory, do f Du
Plessis de miss lib: 3 cap 10.
leap at the sound of the Money, when it is cast into thee basen for them,


the 115, semblance. The heathen Homer, Odys: 11
offered sacrifices for the dead, and had a sacrifice, which they called A^g,
de Ciuit Dei lib: 7 cap, 7,
a Purgatory sacrifice: so have you an Eucharisticall sacrifice, (which say
you) is propitiatory for the dead, as well as for the living. The i Council
Tride^t sess. 9.
souls in Purgatory (says the council of Trent) are thence delivered Fidelium
Suffragiis, potissimum vero acceptabili altaris sacrificio: by the suffrages of
the faithful, but chieflye by the acceptable sacrifice of the altar, And to
the same Hethenish and Hellish Doctrine subscribeth Gue^ne^us, saying:
Gu^rnerus de Valor missae. ^arad, 12.
hoc sacrificium est expiatiuum dehitae poenae tam hic l men's. sebruar: August
de, Ciuit Dei, lib, 7 cap 7, et Plutarch in Romul,
quam in futuro exoluendae.


the, 116, semblance, The heathen had a certain time especially assigned them
when they were to offer their Purgatory sacrifices so have you a certain day
in the year appointed, when you are to m, Diem omnium animarum,
pray for all souls, and to offer sacrifices for them:


the. 117 semblance. The Heathen Vide Peregrinat* Prin^ip page, 84
feigned that there are nine mansions in Hell, appointed and prepared for the
souls of men, The first place is for young infants: the second for idiotes:
the third for them that kill themselves: the Fourth for them that are tormented
with love: the fifth for those which were found guilty before judges: the sixte
for strong men, And Champions: the seventh where the souls be purged: the
eight, where the souls being purged do rest: the ninth is the pleasant
field Elisius. The like fiction has Georg Douly and the rest of your popish
writers, George Douly Priest in his plain Instruct: on of Christian Religion,
page, 13,
In hell, (says he) there be four places; one of the damned, an other of
Purgatory a third of children that die without baptism, and the fourth p Aug
in Hypognostic, lib, 5
which was called Abraham's bosom, and now, is commonly termed limbus patrum.
But this Heathenish fiction is condemned by Saint Austen: There is but two
places, the first place the Catholic faith by Gods authority, believes to
be the Kingdom of heaven: the second place, the same q Aug de Verb Apost
Sermon, 18,
Catholic faith, believes to be helll, where all runneagates, and whosoever
is without the faith of Christ shall taste everlasting punishment, As for any
third place we utterly know none, neither shall we find in the holy
scriptures, that there is any such. And in an other place. There be two
inhabitations or dwelling places, the one in fire everlasting, and the other in
the kingdom that never shall have end,


the, 118. semblance. The Heathen fained, that Hercules descended into Hell, and
fetched thence Theseus and Pyrithous, and brought with him in a chain,
Cerberus the dog of Hell, having three heads: so do Georg Donly in his
Instruct, page, 14 et Canisius de Fide et Symbolo sect 13,
you faigne, that, Christ descending into hell, fetched thence the Saints and
holy Patriarks of the old teststament, and vanquished there thef great red
Dragon, s Revel, 12, 3,
having seven heads and ten horns, and seven Crowns upon his heads. You
bear us also in hand, that Gregory the t Vide Cyprian de Valera in Gregor. 1
first brought back from hell, the soul of the Emperor Traian, and the soul
of an idolater called Falconilla. But we know this to be but a pagan-popish
fiction, for the scripture teaches us; that u none can come from thence. v Luc
16, 26,



the. 119. semblance. Justin Martyr in Apel, 2
The Heathen (as witnesses Iustine Martyr and others) when they entered into
their temples, did sprinkle themselves with water: so do you sprinkle your
selves, with holywater y Theodoret lib 3 cap. 15, 16, Hypocrates de morbo sacro
et Virgil, de venere.
as you commonly call it,


The, 120, semblance, The Heathen (had a peculiar, and proper form of making
the holiwater, dipping there in (as Athaenaeus lib. 9
Athenaeus tells us) a Firebrand taken from the Altar, whereupon they offered
their sacrifices: so have you like wise apeculiar form of making your holy
water, Vide Dura^d lib 4, cap 4
exorcizing the salt first, and then the water, and after that, them both
the other,


the, 121, semblance, The Heathen thought that their holiwater did purge c
Hipocrates de morbo sacro,
away sins In going (says Hypocrates) we sprincle our selves with this
water, to the end if we have any sin we may be purified and made clean, And
Proclus says that it was d Proclus de sacrif: et magia,
made, not only of fresh water, but of sea water too because salt is detersiue.
And to this Heathenish error subscribe your popish Doctors August Steu^hus Eug:
in Number cap, 19:
Non inane institutu^ est, says Steuchus, quod a quas sole et orationibus
sanctificamus, vt ad eorum aspersum delicta nostra dele antur it: it is no
vain invention that we hallowe water with salt and prayers, that by the
sprinkling thereof, our sins maybe forgiven,


The, 122, semblance. The vide Turns. in advers, lib. 13, cap 21
Heathen used Holliwater, not only for the purging and clensing of men, but
for the purging also of cities, temples, and other things without life, so
your Deuines of Lovaines have taught as Copus. in Dia log 1 page 18,
one of your Jesuits reports, that in India holy water is very wholesome to
drive a way mise, and to make barren women to conceive. Yea, John Nichols in
his Recantation,
the poor Romans (says the Popes scholar) bring their asses to the Church,
and cause the pri^est, to say a few prayers over them and to sprinkle holy
water upon them,


The, 123, Semblance. The Heathen Baruch, 6, 18
lighted up Candles before their idols So do you: for which cause we may
fitlye say unto you, as Tertullian said to the Heathen in his time: who
forces you to play the male contents, and to light torches at highnoon?
accendant quotidie lucernas, quibus lux k Tertul, in Apol:
nulla est: let them that have no light, light Candles daily.


the, 124, Semblance, The Pagans (says Rhenanus:) in the beginning of February
did Celebrate the feast of Proserpina, with burning l Tertull de idololat
Tapers. so do you like wise in the beginning of February Celebrate the feast
of the Purification of the virgin m Rhenan in Tertull de corona mil:
Mary, with burning tapers, torches and candles, and do call that day
Candlemas day, n Lactantius lib, 6, cap, 2,



The, 125, semblance, The Heathen offered Candles to their Gods: so do you to
yours: we may therefore say unto you as Lactan tius said unto them: Number meant is
suae compos putandus est, qui authori and datori luminis, Candelarum et
cerearum lumen offert pro munere? Is he well in his wits, that unto God the
maker and giver of lights, will offer up the light of candles and Tapers, for
a present.


the, 126, semblance, Burning also of incense was so common a custom among the
Heathen, as that Julian the Apostata, to the end that he might cunningly bind
the Christians to the same, vide Theod, lib. 3, cap. 16, and Sozomen lib, 5,
cap 17,
ordained, that when any came unto him, according to the custom, to receive
any gifts at his hands, they should burn incense before him. And in his steps
trod Pope Leo the 3. who was the first that ordained, that incense should p
Vide Polydor Virgil. Invent. rerum lib, 5,
be used in masses.


the. 127 semblance. The Heathen bragged much of their miracles, Cornelius
Tacitus lib, 4, Hist.
Tacitus says, that Vespasian made the blind to see, and the lame to walk:
And Valerius Maximus tells us, that a certain Virgin Vestall drew water in a
fine sieve. Liuius in lib. de bello Punico
Liuie also makes r Val, Max. lib, 8 cap 1*
mention of another Virgin called Claudia, who (as he says) drew a ship to the
haven with her girdle, which could not be drawn by any sorce of man or beast.
And Cicero lib. 1. de Diuinat.
Cicero mentions a certain southsayer, who cut a whetstone with a rasour.

With these Heathenish miracle-mongers do you fully agree, as is apparent by
that fabulous discourse of yours, which you call Legenda aurea. To insist in
some particulars, In the Legend of Saint Patricke, we read, that on a time a
sheep being stolen, Saint Patricke admonished all the people committed to his
charge; that whosoever had stolen it, he should within seven days restore it
to the owner. The seven days being expired, the sheep was not restored. Then
(says your Legend) Saint Patricke commanded by the virtue of god, that the
sheep should bleat in the belly of him that had eaten it. And so it happened
that in the presence of all the people, the sheep bleated in the Belly of him
that had stolen it. Res miranda quidem, risu celebranda bimestri. In your
Legend also of the Annuntiation of the Virgin Marie: we are told of a noble
Knight who betook himself to an Abbey: and because he was unlearned, there
was a master assigned unto him. But the Knight was so dull, that in a long
time, he could learn no more but these two words, Aue Maria. Which words as
he had always in his mouth, whiles he was alive; so they grew out of his mouth
when he was dead. For these words (says your Legend) he had so sore imprinted
in his heart, that always he had them in his mouth, wheresoever he was. At
last he died, and was buried in the Churchyar de of the brethren. It happened
that after that, there grew upon his grave a right fair flower de luce, and in
every flower was written in letters of gold. Aue Maria. At which miracle all
the brethren maruailed, and they did open the sepulcher, and found that the
root of this flower de luce, came out of the mouth of the said knight, and
anon they understood, that our Lord would have him honored for the great
devotion he had to say these words, Aue Mariae.

These and a thousand such Heathenlike miracles, are to be found in your lying
Legends: concerning all which, I say with Saint Ansten: August tract, 13 in
Johan,
contra istos mirabiliarios cautum me fecit Deus men's, dicens, in nouissimis
temporibus exurgent Pseudoprophetae facientes signa and portenta, vt in errorem
inducant (sii fieri potest) etiam electos: against these miracle-mongers my God
has made me wary, saying, there shall arise in the last days false
prophets, working signs and wonders, that they may bring into error (if it
were possible) the very elect.


The 128. Semblance: The Heathen gave credit to vain and foolish apparitions,
and visions of Phantasmes* of spirits, and of souls comen (as they feigned)
from an other world. Plutarch in Brut,
Plutarch telletth us, that when Brutus was determined to transporte his army
out of Asia into Europe, being in his tent about midnight, he saw a terrible
monster standing fast by him, wherewith he being sore afraid, ventured boldly,
and dema^ ded of him, what he was, unto whom the monster answered and said: I
am thy evil ghost, which at Philippos thou shall see again: whether when
Brutus came, being vanquished by Auguflus Caesar, he remembered the words of his
foreseen vision, and to escape the hands of his enemies, slew himself.

The same Plutarch, in Tbes.
writer also reports, that certain men which were in the battle of
Marathonia against the Medians, affirmed, that they saw the soul of Theseus
armed before the host of the Greeks, as their chief general, running and
setting them on the barbarous Medians.

And we read in Suetonius, that when Julius Caesar stayed in a maze at the
River Rubico in Italy, musing whether it were best to pass the water or no,
there appeared a comely tall man piping on a reed, about whom Caesar's
soldiers flocked, especially his trumpetters: from whom he suddenly snatched
one of the trumpets, and leapt forthwith into the said river, and sounded
alarm; wherewith Caesar was moved, and said, Good luck mates, let us go where
the Gods do warn us.

We read also in Virgill, that Palinurus and Deiphobus appeared unto Aeneas:
the one being his shipman, the other his brother in law: and that their
wandering ghosts never ceased, until such exequies were done unto them, as
Aeneas had promised, And Cicero reports, that Romulus z Lib, 1, de legibus.
appeared after his death, walking up and down by Atticus his house unto
Julius Proculus, charging him to erecte him up a temple in that place where he
walked, and saying that he was now a God, and that his name was Quirinus.

Rhemus likewise Romulus his brother, is reported to have appeared unto Faustus
and his wife, complaining of his miserable death, and desiring them to procure,
that the same day wherein he was slain, might be accounted among their holy
days. And Lucan tells us, how that the souls of Sylla and Marius were ever
walking and appearing unto men, until they were purged by sacrifice.

Now to make application of all this: as the father of lies did make the
Heathen to believe, that the spirits of dead men appeared unto them, when the
devils themselves appeared like men, telling them that they were the souls of
such men as they appeared like unto: so does he deal with you likewise, as
may be proved by the writings of one of your own Johannes de Pine da part.
3, lib. 19. cap, 17.
Friars, who reports, that after the death of Benedict the seventh, there
appeared a horseman on horseback (or rather on the devils back) to a certain
Bishop that was the said Popes very friend, The Bishopp being amazed thereat,
demanded saying: What? art thou Pope Benedict that latelye dyed? The same that
thou say, said the Horseman: Father (said the Bishop) how do thon?
Grieuonsly tormented, answered the Pope: but I may well be helped: Go then
and tell my brother that now is Pope, that he must needs give to the poor the
treasure that is hidden in such a place. And appearing unto the Pope himself,
he said: Oh, would God that Odilus Cluniacensis would pray for me!

You do also tell us in one of your Popish Legends, that the blessed Virgin
appeared after her death, to a certain priest, and said unto him: if thou will
cause a festival day yearly to be celebrated, upon the eight day of
December, in remembrance of my conception; thou shall be crowned with me in the
kingdom of mine only begotten son.

And to add such another fable of yours, albeit the sacred scripture teaches
us, that Act, 3. 21.
Heaven must contain christ Jesus, until the time that all things be
restored, which god had spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets, since the
world began: yet one of your popish doctors tells us, that Christ was seen
walking upon the earth, since he ascended into heaven, and appeared to his
apostle S. Peter: his words are these; Smith in a Sermon preached in Queen
Mary's days, in Whitting to^ Collledge Church in London,
Masters, you are in a great error, as concerning that blessed sacrament, and
al your trust was in Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer. As for Latimer he said in an
open disputation in Oxford, that he had no learning in that matter, but out of
Cranmers book. Besides this, I disputed with Latimer 20. years ago the^ he had
no learning (he belied that learned father) As for Cranmer he said, that his
learning came from Ridley. As for Ridley, I disputed with him my self at
Oxford the other day, and I proved my Argument thus, (a weak argument to prove
so weighty matter) Illc cui Christus obviauit Romae, fuit Romae: at Christus
obuiauit Petro Romae: ergo Petrus fuit Romae That is, be whom christ met at
Rome, was at Rome. But Christ met Peter at Rome: therefore Peter was at Rome. By
this I proved two things and singular mysteries of our faith. First, that
Petr was at Rome, against them that chatter that Peter was never there.
Secondly that if Peter met christ bodily (as Abdiasreporteth, and which I am
sure is true or else such an Ancient and holy father would never have written
it) then co^se quently he may as well be bodily in the blessed sacrament, as he
was met bodily. To this (as this slanderer reports) Ridley stoood like a
block and feeling him self convicted answered nothing. Then said I, cur non
respondes haereticoru^ haeriticissime? Did not I handle it well? then denied he
the Minor, which I proved thus: Christ met Peter going out of Rome, and said
good morrow Peter whither go thou? Peter answered, good morrow, good man?
whither go thou Then said Christ I go to Rome to suffer. What (says
Peter) I trow, unless I take my mark amiss, ye are Jesus Christ Good Lord!
how do you? I am glad I have met you here. Then said he to Peter go back,
and suffer, or else I must et prote et me. And thus I confuted Ridly in the
audience of a thousand that he had not a word to say: Yet you say that christ
was not on earth since the Ascension bodily: believe with me that he is under
form of bread and wine.

This tale of Doctor Smith, is both Heathenish, and Haeretical and much like
that, of the Haeritick Polycranius, who affirmed before the whole Council
Constant, 6, Act. 15
Council of Constantinople: that a certain beatifull young man appeared unto
him and taught him to say, that there was but one will in Christ: and gave him
this for a sign, that he should lay the schedule of his confession, upon a
dead body, and so raise it to life The Council hearing this immediatlye
caused a dead body to be brought, but Polycronius muttering over the same a
great while, could do nothing, and so was condemned by the whole Council for
a liar and an Heretic; and so may you, because you labor to confirm your
doctrine by visions and apparitions, as he did.


the, 29, semblance, The Ovid, lib, Metamorph^^
Heathen make mention of sundry strange Metamorphoses: so do you, To produce
some examples for the verifying hereof: in the life of your Saint Babara, we
read that when her father had drawn his sword to slaye her, she was
miraculouslye taken up in a Stone, and carried into a mountain where two
sheephardes were feeding their sheep. And when one of them bewrayed her to her
father: she cursed him, and presently his sheep were turned into Locusts, and
he in to a stone,


the, 130, semblance, The Arist. in Ethicis
Heathen taught, that a natural man has free will in actions merely moral:
and of them have Council Trident Sess, 6. c. 5
you learned to mantaine a freedom of will not only in natural and moral
actions. (For that we deny not) but in spiritual, and supernatural, But the
Apostl teaches you in plain words that Cor, 2, 14
a natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, much less
wills the^. He does also tell you, that the flesh lusts against the spirit,
the spirit against the flesh and they are contrary one to an other Now then if
the flesh beflat co^tra trary to the spirit, it follows by a necessary
consequent i, Gal, 5, 17.
that a man has no freedom of will in spiritual actions before his
conversion: for he is then wholly flesh, and wants the spirit of God: and
the flesh is contrary to the spirit: and one contraty has no power at all to
bring forth the effect of his contrary.


The 131. semblance. Bellarm. lib 3 de Great, cap. 14,
Bellarmine your Archpapist affirms; that the viz, eternal life.
end is not properly the object of the will, but the means tending to the end,
and, And of whom (I pray you) learned he this doctrine but of the Arist, Ethic
lib, 3, cap, 2.
Heathen Philosopher?


The 132, Semblance. The Heathen boasted much of their outward actions of Civil
virtues; as namely, of their justice, temperance, gentleness, and liberality.
And they did indeed the things of the law, as the Apostle Paul testifies,
saying, rom 2. 14.
The gentiles that have not the law, do the things of the law, by nature, that
is by natural strength, and he says of himself, that before his conversion,
he Phil, 3. 6,
was unrebukable touching tht righteousness of the law.

Now with these Gentiles, do you bost of your virtues: and I deny not but that
some of you have far more civil virtues, then our impure Puritanes; and that
you ar more unrebukable touching the righteousness of the law, the^ they But I
deny that you have any true virtues, for (as saint Austen says August de
Ciutt, Dei lib, 19 cap 25,
) non possunt ibi esse verae virtutes, vbi no^ est vera religio: there cannot
possibly be any true virtues, where there is not the true religion, Nay, your
civil virtues are nothing else but splendida peccata, gorgeous sins.


The 132: semblance. The Heathen were of opinion, that those that lived well c
Plato apud Eusebius* lib. 11, de Preparat, Euangel. cap vlt, lib, de anima.
and virtuously did thereby merit the Elisian fields: so are your of opinion
that those that do good works, do thereby merit eternal life But we hold with
the Apostle Paul, that we are so far from meriting Heaven by our good works d
2 Cor, 3, 5,
as that we are not sufficient of our selves, to think any (good) thing as of
our selves, but from the spirit of god, who works in us both the will and the
deed: so that our deeds are indeed Gods works in us, and therefore being not
ours but e August in Psalm 120
his, we can merit nothing by them at the hands of God. And hereunto
agrees, that of Austen: He crowns thee, because he crowueth his own
gifts in thee, and not thy merits. To conclude, August in manuali cap, 2^,
all my hope is in the death of my Lord, His death is my merit, and my merit is
his death; And J will daylyesay unto him, August in psalm 142
Lord thou will quicken me in thy righteousness, not in mine, not because I
hauo deserved it but because thou have compassiou,


The 134 semblance, The Heathen held, that a man may merit not only for h
Plato in Gorg, et in lib de anima
himself, but for those also that are cast (as they say) into burning floods:
so do you hold, that Rhemist, in, 2 Cor, 8 sect, 3
the fastings and satisfactory deeds of one man may be available to others,
yea and that holy saints or other virtuous porsons may in measure and
proportion of other men's necessityes and de seruings, allot unto them
supererogation of their spiritual works, as those alms of their
superfluities, to them which are in necessity. And herein (me thinks) you
ascribe more to the rigteousnesse of sanctification, then you do to the
righteousness of imputation, that is: more to that righteousness which makes us
righteous before me^, then to that which makes us righteous before God, For
albeit you hold, that a man's satisfactory deeds may be availeable to others
and that his righteousness may make others righteus: Yet deny you that a man can
be made righteous by the righteousness of Christ imputed unto him, as if the
Lord would accept the righteousness of man, which is Isay 64, 6
all as fylthy cloutes, Phil, 3, 9,
and not that which is through the faith of christ, even the righteousness which
is of god through faith. The 135. Semblance:

It was the usual manner of the Heathen, to justify themselves and evermore to
Vide Tertul in Apol,
except against the Christians, as men void of all good works: so it is your
usual manner, both in private co^fere^ces, and in your public writings, to
inveigh against us Protestants, and to convey in withal a secret apollogy of
your own justice, Yea, Bellarm'de Iustificat, lib, 5, cap, 8, Binsfeldius de
Justif, et m ersect 4, m*em. 5, conclus, 15, et Rhemist in Annot, in Luc, 14, 1
et in Apocal, 3, 5,
you do notoriously slander us, bearing the world in hand we teach that none
ought to do good in respect of reward. For albeit we flatly deny, that good
works are the proper causof reward; yet do we (I speak only of us Protestants)
co^sta^tly affirm that we ought to encourage, animate, excite and stir up our
selves to the performance* of al good duties, by setting before our eyes the
reward which is promised, to wit the Crown of glory, which we are to receive
after this life, Yea, be it known unto you, that we are so far from teaching
that a man ought not to do good in respect of reward, as that we exhort
servants with saint Paul, that Coloss. 3: 23,
what soever they do, they would do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men,
knowing that of the lord they shall receive the reward of inheritance And we
still show it to be the duty of all the saints of God, ^ Cor 9: 24.
so to runn that they may obtain. And to move them the rather to the
perfourmaunce of this Christian duty, we beseech them to set before their
eyes, the practice of the saints of God: as namely, of Heb. 11. 26.
Moses, who esteemed the rebuke of christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt, because he had respect unto the recompense of reward: and of Abraham,
who Heb: 11. 9. 10
abode in the land of promise, as in a strange country, as one that dwelt in
tents, etc. because he looked for a city, having a foundation, whose builder
and maker is god.


The, 136, Semblance. The Heathen excepted against the old Christians, not
only as men void of good works; but full of evil works* Tertul. in Apol
They called them (says Tertullian) incestos, homicidas, Infanticidas,
sacrilegos, pessimos, nocentissimos, publicum odium, hosts humani generis,
omnium scelerum reos: Deorum, Imperatorum, legum, morum, naturae totius
inimicos. Incestuous; manslayers, killers of children: Church-robbers, most
wicked, most hurtful, the public hatred, the enemies of mankind, guilty of
all kind of wickedness: enemies against the Gods, against the Emperors,
against the laws, against good order, against nature it self.

And in like sort do you slander us Protestants, and call us Harding in
Confut. fol. 75
Leacherous Lurdanes, fol. 323.
Sacrilegious Churchrobbers fol. 114.
profane Helhounds, fol. 256,
Devilish villains, fol 131.
the devils children, fol 24.
the devils bondslaues, fol. 131.
the devils clawbackes, fol, 81.
Sathanists, fol. 69.
Satan's scholar fol, 111.
Sathanicall spirits, fol. 338
Satan's brood, fol. 342.
Satan's captives, fol, 202.
Limbs of Antichrist, fol. 195.
ministers of Antichrist, v fol, 288,
fol, 48.
the head of Antichrist, fol. 212.
the synagogue of antichrist, and Lucifer, fol, 323,
Apostates, fol* 155,
thieves, fol, 131.
despisers of god, fol, 81,
Caluinists, fol, 222:
Turkish Huguenots, fol 114,
wicked Chams brood: fol, 121,
cursed Cananites, nshamelesse hetetiques, fol, 42,
Zuing lians rabble, fol, 207.
Mad Dogs, b Possivinus de Atheismis protestantium
fol 1.
axes, fol. 1.
asses, Atheists, and what not? Yea, (which all the world knows to be a most
vile slander) Andraea* Iure giuicius lib, tit Euangel quinti professores
Protestants (say you) articulum omnino nullum tenent Symboli apostolici,
Protestants hold not one article of the apostles creed.


The 137. Semblance. The Heathen reputed Christians to be the very cause of
all Gods plagues, and punishments. August de ciuit, Dei lib: 2 cap. 3.
Factum est (says Saint Austen) Vulgi prouerbium, pluuia defecit causa
christianorum, it is become a proverb among the common people, our rain
fails us because of the christians: so it is become a proverb in my native
Country, (as a learned Master Leygh Pastor of Standish in Lancashire in a
Postscript to the Papists joined to his souls Solace: against sorrow
preacher that dwelles there reports) it was a good world when mass was up,
for then all things were cheap.


the: 138: semblance: The Heathen despised the religion of the old Christians,
because it came not from Rome, Athens, or some other such like place. Orig
Contra Celsum lib, 1
Dogma christianum (says Saint Origin, speaking of the pagan Celsus) affirmat
a Barbaris accepisse ortum, hoc est a Iudaeis. Celsus affirmed, that the
doctriu of the christians had it beginning from barbarous people, that is, from
the Jews. To this pagan may you fitly be resembled: for you despise our
Religion, because it began g Harding in his confut, of the Apol,
(as you usually say) not at Jerusalem, but at Wittenberg, and was delivered
unto us first by an Apostata, and not an apostle. But one that was Iulium
sydus, a Jewel in his time, has answered fully to this your vile Cavil, and
wicked slander.


the 139 semblance, The Heathen were at great strife among themselves, and some
were of one sect, some of another: so are your Thomists, and Scotists, at great
strife about the distinction of Merits, of Congruity, and Condignity: and your
Canonists and Schoolmen are by the ears together, about auricular confession:
the h one sort concluding it to be, de iure humano and positiuo: the other, de
iure diuino. There is also great contention between your Nominalls and
Realistes, and between your Jesuits, and secular priests. So that we may say
of them, as Saint Basil said of the like wrangling Sophisters in his time*
Basil, in Hexam,
Non op us est, vt nos contra illos pugnemus, cum illi mutuis dissensionib us
sufficiant ad suam ipsorum doctrinam euertendam: we need not contend against
them, seeing that they themselves may suffice to overthrow their own doctrine,
by their dissentions one with another.


the 140. semblance. Albeit the Heathen were at strife among themselves; yet
did they upbraid the old Christians, from their strifes and contentions, Vide
Clem Alexaend lib: 7 Strom:
Vos Christiani dissidetis inter vos ye Christians dissent among your selves.
Ibid,
Licet omnes, Christianismi titulum sibi vendicent, tamen alia aliam execratur,
and condemnat: quare vestra religio vera non est, nec a deo originem ducit.
Albeit all claim the title of christian religion, yet one sect ourseth and
condemns another: your religion therefore is not true, neither has it
beginning from god. Yea, Chrysostom. in Act: homil, 33:
venit Gentilis, and dicit, vellem fieri christianus: sed nescio cui adhaeream.
Multae inter vos sunt pugnae, seditiones, ac tumultus. Nescio quod dogma
eligam, quod praeferam. Singuli dicunt, ego verum dico: the Hethen man comes
and says I would be a christian, but I know not whom I should follow: there
are many quarrels, seditions and tumults among you. I cannot tell what
doctrine to choose, and what to set before other. For every one of you says, I
say the truth. So do you come, and say, we would be Protestants; but we know
not whom to follow. There is much strife and contention among you: for some are
Protestants, some Puritanes, some Brownists, some Familists, and some are
mungrils in religion, to day with the Protestants: tomorow with the Puritanes,
and constant in nothing so much, as in inconstancye.

It is true indeed, there are some hare-braind, inconstant, and fickle-headed
fellows among us, that are much like Ekebolius the Sophist of Constantinople,
who (as Socrates ^ Socrates Histor. eccles, lib 3, cap, 13,
reports) before Julian was Emperor, carried himself as an earnest Christian:
under Julian he became an Apostata, and a pagan? and after Julian he would be
a Christian again.

There are also some hote-braind, inconsiderate and giddie-headed fellows
among us: who are still scalding hott in desire of their pretended reformation,
and consider not that it is very decent, and becoming their duty, to apply
them selves to the custom of the place where they live and not to divide
themselves in matters of Ceremonye, from the unity of the Church. When Christ
himself was upon the earth, he accommodated him self to the customs of the
Countries where he co^uersed, and observed their common customs, for the
avoiding of offense math, 17, 27,
Least we should offend them (says he to Peter) go to the sea, and cast in an
angle, and take the first fish that comes up, and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of twenty pence: that take and give it unto
them for me, and thee. And in his steps trod the Apostle saint Paul, when
he Act 16. 3
Circumcised Timothy* Act, 21. 24
shaued his own head in Cenchrea, and s Purified the Men that had made the
vow, and contributed with them, that they might shave their heads,

But these men decline the path, which the blessed Entitled the Picture of a
Puritan,
Apostle trod, and renew the ways of the cursed Anabaptists, as I have
showed at large in a book extant to the view of the world. By this then you
see that we that are Protestants, do abhor them that are the Authors See
his Majesty's speech in the upper house of Paliament march. 19. 1603
of contentions in our Church: and do hold their sects (to use his Maiestyes
words) unable to be suffered in any well governed common wealth. Let v 1 Cor,
^ 10.
me therefore entreat you to join with us that are x vide Minutium foel. in
Octauio.
peaceble Protestants, and are n knit together in one mind, and in one
judgment, as the Apostle has commanded us,


The, 141, semblance. The Doctor Hill in his Quartron of Raysens
Heathen contemned the religion of the old Christians, and would not come to
their places of devotion because (forsoothe) they wanted altars so do you
contemn our Religion, and refuse to come to our Churches, because we have no
altars. But we answer you, as Clemens Alexandrinus answered them: Clemens
Alexand lib, 7: strom
We have an altar* and what manner of one? The earthly congregation, and
company of those that bow themselves in prayers, etc: or as S. Origin answered
Celsus, Orig. Contra Celsum lib 8
our altars and our temples are the spirits of good men, which smell as sweet
incense, to gether with the vows and prayers of a good conscience. What
co^pariso^ is there betwixt those of thine and these, O Celsus?


The, 142, Semblance. The Heathen looked for a Day: and this Day was the
destruction of the Christians, and the setting up of altars and idols. Apud Aug
in Psalm 70
Ad certum tempus sunt christiani: postea peribunt et redibunt idola: redibit
quod erat antea: these christians are but a while, fall they shall, and that
shortly, then shall our Idols come again, and it shall be as it was before, Yea,
Ecce Aug ibid,
veniet tempus: vt finiantur, et non sunt Christiani, Sicut caeperunt ab aliquo
tempore, it a vsque ad certum tempus eru^t. Behold the day will come, when all
these Christians shall have an end. As they had a time to begin, so shall they
have a time to continue. Jn like sort did your resolute and high aspiring
catholics look for A day: and this day was the late intended dismal day, and
their setting up of idols and altars again in our churches. But in stead of
idols and altars which they looked to have, they shall have gallows and
halters which they deserved to have.


The, 143, semblance, Themistius an heathen Philosopher, went about (as
Socrates lib. 4 cap 27
Socrates records,) to persuade Vale^s the Emperor, that the variety of sects
was pleasing unto God, while he was worshipped in sundry sorts: so do you
exhibit supplicatio^s unto the Kings most excellent majesty, for a toleration
of your Romish religion, and therein In a suppli. cation exhibited to the Kings
Majesty
you go about to perswad his Highness that it will be acceptable to god, grateful
to all catholic Princes and Honorable to his Majesty. But give me leave to
reason with you a while: do you think, that the tolleration of more religions
then one in one kingdom, is a thing acceptable to God? why then did Revel, 3,
16
God threaten the Church of Laodicea to spewher out of his mouth, was it not
because she was Ibid,
Lukewarm and neither whot nor could in religion, and will he not as strictlye
examine this church of England, whether she be hot or could, zealous or
remiss, in his service? why did the Revel, 2 14
Lord reprove the Church of Pergamus; was it not because she Ibid et verse,
15,
tolerated them that maintained the doctrine of Baalim, and them that
maintained the doctrine of the Nicolaitans? and will he not as sharply reprove
this Church, if she tolerated them that maintain the doctrine of the Romish
Revel 2 20,
Baalites, and Nicolaitans. Why did the i Lord blame Thiatyra? was it not
because she ibid,
suffered, the woman Iezabel, which called her self a Prophetisse, to teach,
and to deceive his seruaents, to make them commit fornication, and to eat
meat sacrificed to idols: And will he not as greatly blame this Church, if
she suffer the whore of Babylon, which calls her self the Vicar of Christ,
to teach, and to deceive his servants, to make them commit spiritual
fornication with her, and to be drunken with the wine of her fornication? Why
was the Number, 25. 3
Lords wrath kindled against Israel? was it not because Ibid.
Israel worshipped the idol God of the Moabites, which was in the hill Peor?
and will not his wrath be kindled against us, if immunity be given to serve
such Gods, as likes our selves, and to deal in his service, otherwise then he
has prescribed? Oh no: his Jealousy burns like fire, and we are to think,
that he that executed his fierce wrath upon those that offered but strange
fire, will much more execute his fierce wrath upon us, if we offer to strange
Gods. In a word; Eliah rebuked King Ahab and the commons of Jsrael, and said, 1
reg 18, 21*
How long halt ye between two opinions? Jf the Lord be God follow him: But if
Baall be he, then go after him. He said not to the King and Commons of
Israel why permit you not those that will to the lord, and those that list to
Baal. But if the Lord be God, follow him: forsaking all other, For he will
not surrender any piece of his glory to any other, but is so Ielous of it, as
that he will be served alone, without any corriualls, with all our heart, soul
and strength, as he has often enjoined. And thus you see, that your wished for
toleration is not acceptable to God: now let us see, whether it would be
grateful to all Catholic Princes, as you pretend it would be.

But admit it would be so, what though? do you think, that a King furnished
with so rare gifts of wisdom, learning, and virtue, will displease God to
please men, and break the very first of Gods moral Exodus 20, 3.
precepts to content them? I deny not but that his Highness may lawfully
content foreign Princes in some things: as namely, he may (though some
Puritanes have In my hearing.
said the contrary) make a league and covenants of peace with them, upon even
and just conditions, as appears by these places of scripture: Romans 12. 18. If
it be possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men, Heb. 12. 14.
follow peace with all men. Deuteronomie 20. 10.. When thou come near unto a
cittye to fight against it, thou shall offer it peace, and if it answer thee
again peaceably, and open unto thee, then let all the people that are found
therein, be tributaries unto thee, and serve thee. But if it will make no
peace with thee, but war against thee, then shall thou besiege it.

Thus Abraham made a league of peace, Gen, 14. 13.
with Eshcol and Aner, Kings of the Amorites, and Genesis 21. 24.
with Abimelech, King of the Philistims. And thus Isaac made a league with s
Gen* 26. 31.
Abimelech, and Jacob with Laban: and Heber the Kenite, ^ Gen 31, 44 45,
Judges 47. 17.
with Iabin the king of Hazor, and in like sort did Joshua 9, 16.
Joshua make a league with the Gibeonites, David with 1. Sam 27,
Achish, king of Gath, and Solomon with Hiram king of Tyrus. z 1. Kings, 5,
It is not then to be denied, but that his Majesty may lawfully make a league
of peace with Kings that are different in religion, and thereby gratify them:
but he may not gratify them, by reuersing that heavenly decree^ ^f the king of
Kings, ( Mat. 4 10.
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve) with
establishing two religions in one kingdom: the one authorized by Christ Jesus,
and bequeathed in his last will and testament, to the Church: the other devised
by Antichrist, and flatly repugnaunt to the verdict of the sacred scriptures,
and to the iudgmente of the ancient church.

But you say in the third place, that to tolerate your pretended Catholic
religion, would be a thing Honorable to his Majesty. J answer, that herein
you are both deceived your self, and also labor to deceive his Majesty: for
the Lord has promised to honor those, that honor him: and threatened to
despise those that despise him. His words are these: ( 1. Sam 2. 30.
) them that honor me, I will honor, and them that desptse me, shall be
despised.

To draw toward a conclusion, in the end of your supplication to his
Highness, you say thus: the free use of our religion we request, if not in
public Churches, at least in private houses: if not with approbation, yet
with toleration, without molestation. I answer with the words of a Reverend
Bishop: B. Bilson in his book, entitled the true difference between Christian
subjection and vnchristia^ rebellion. part 1, page, 36.
The priuatenesse of the place, when the fact is ill, neither acquiteth the
dooer from wickedness, neither excuses the permitter from negligence: No
corner is so secret, no prison so close, but your impiety there suffered, does
offend God, infect others, and confirm your own frowardness. If your
religion be good, why should it lack Churches? if it be naught; why should it
have chambers? A Christian Prince may not pardon or wink at falsehood. This
Reverend Bishopp may fitly be compared to S. Ambrose, who when Valentine was
requested to wink at the renewing of an altar for the Pagans in Rome,
dissuaded him in these words: Ambrose lib, 5 epist* 3:
all men serve you that be Princes, and you serve that mighty God. He that
serves this God, must bring no dissimulation, no conniuence, but faithful
zeal and devotion: he must give no kind of consent to the worship of idols,
and other profane ceremonies: for god will not be deceived, who searchesh all
things, even the secrets of our hearts.

But J forget my self very much, in speaking thus much against toleration of
more religions, then one, in this king dome: for God has given us a King, who
is so far from granting a toleration, as that he has made this solemn
protestation: I do protest before God and his Angels, that I am so constant for
the maintenance of the religion publikelye professed in England, as that I
would spend my dearest blod in defense thereof, rather then the truth should
be overthrown. And if I had ten times as many more kingdoms as I have, I would
dispend them all, for the safety and protection thereof: and likewise if I had
any Children, that sholdyeld either to the Popish faith or faction, J desire of
God, that I may rather see them brought to their graves before me, that their
shame may be buried in my life time, never to be spoken of in future ages.


the, 144, Semblance, The Athenians (as Diodorus Diodor. Sicul Bibl: lib. 13,
Siculus records) threatened to kill those that spoke any thing against their
heathenish Religion: so there are five of your Romish, or rather Roguish
Catholics, that have vowed, and bound themselves by the sacrament, to kill
the Honorable Earl of Salisbury, ( Ester 16. 13 The Earl of Salisbury in his
answer to certain scandalous papers
) our preserver, which has done us good in all thiugs: as Artaxerxes said of
Mordecai. But his honor has vowed that he will not so much, c as once
entertain a thought to purchase a spanne of time, at so dear a rate, as for
the fear of any mortal power, in his poor talent (as it pleases his Honor
to call it) aut Deo, aut Patriae, aut Patri patriae deesse. He sings to his
soul, with the sweet singer of Israel: Psalm, 27, 1:
The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom shall J be afraid? Yea, Psalm: 3 6,
I will not be afraid for ten thousand of the people, (much less for five)
that should beset me round about. Good Luck have you with your Honor, we wish
you prosperity.


the, last, semblance, The Socrat Hist, Eccles lib, 3, cap, 12.
Apostata Julian was very eger to get money from the Christians by his polling,
exacting, and oppressing of them: but when he Commanded the Jews to build
the temple of Jerusalem, in spite of Christ who had foretold that it never
should be builded again, it is certain, that he spared no cost at all, to
further that vain work. In like sort may we say of you Popish Recusants* you
are not now so liberal to the poor, (I speak what J know to be true of many
of you, both in the Northren and Western parts of this Land) as you have in
former times been. In steed of hospitality heretofore maintained* now hedghogs
lie under your walls, and we sells dwell in your parlours, and Martins breed
in your windows. You remove your households to London; and take a Chamber
there, where you may live priuatelye, and no man call you to account, whether
you be Protestants, or Papists. But albeit you are straight-handed enough, in
doing good to those that are of the houshoulde of faith, yet stretche you out
your hands to the Jesuits and seminary priests, whom you keep in g close
loftes, without either windows, or doors that can be espied: for proof
hereof, (besides mine own experience) I refer you to your own writers. The
Jesuits (say your In their discouerye Page 19
Secular priests) became our collectors, or rather not ours, but their own;
to whom for their accountes, the false steward in the Gospel, may give
place. One Jesuit has taken up at times above five hundred pounds that was
given to the imprisoned Priest* then at Wisbich, viz employed the same, at his
own pleasure, Piercy the Jesuit escaping from Wisbich, took frandulentlie
from benefactours abroad fifty seven pounds, seventeen shilinges. And in
the year after he stole twenty seven Pounds, of the common money, by the
consent of other his fellows Jesuits, they have also so fleeced their
fauorits, as that over and above their own expenses (which are exceeding
great) they have been able to send out long since, two thousand and two
hundred pounds to the low countries. Yea the Jesuit Holt and his companions
gathered (as the seculiar Priests report in an other In their Abstract page 75
book against them) such an infinite mass of money from the Catholics in
England, for dispensations, or under color of expending it to their own uses,
as many crediblye affirm it, to exceed the sum of fifty thousand pounds
English: which makes two hundredth millions of Italian scutes, Not to omit your
Vault-enginers, See Thomas Winters Confession:
Sir Euerard Digbie toward the maintaining of the Popish Pioners, and the
buying of powder to blow up the Parliament house with, etc: promised fifteen
hundred pounds: Master Frauncis Tresham promised two thousand pounds: and
Master Percie promised all that he could get of the Earl of Northumberlands
rents, which was about four thousand pounds, and to provide many galloping
horses. And thus, as the Mat. 26. 15
chief priests offered Judas thirty pieces of silver, if that he would betray
Christ unto them: so did the chief of these your traitors, offer to their
fellow Judasses, some fifteen hundred pounds, others two thousand, and others
four thousand, toward the betraying of the most christian King, and the most
carefuil nursing father of the Church of Christ. But what need I extrauagate
from my theme? what need J wander from the Gentiles to the Jews? Did they not
resemble the Heathen herein? yes verily; for the forenamed m Athenians put
forth a proclamation, that Diodor. Sicul. Bibl, lib, 13.
whosoever it were that could kill Diagoras, one that spoke much against their
heathenish superstition, and their false and feigned Gods, he should have an
honorable reward, that was, a Talent of silver for his labor. And thus you
see, how that Papisme is flat Paganism: and that you come not behind the
Paganes in above seuenscore several things: now it remains, that I set down
some things, wherein you go beyond them, and are worse then they.


(1)
The Heathen knew, that every true body is circumscribed, that is to say,
limited and bounded: and that to be a body, and not to be circumscribed,
imports contradiction. For if the dimensions be essential to a body, and if
it be necessary, that the dimensions be terminable; (which was never denied of
any of the Hethen:) then it follows of necessity that it is circu^scribed.
And if this necessity does accompanye all bodies in general, how much more
does it accompany an humane body, which is not mathematical, neither composed
only of matter and form, but which is organicall, composed of unlike parts?
now then, August de essent. diuinit.
we must believe (to use Saint Austen words) that the son of God according to
his deity is incorporeal: and incircum scriptible, but according to his human
nature, corporeal and local. And we also believe with Aug. ad Dardan. and
Tract. 50 in Johan.
him and with the stream of the Vigilius contra Eutichet. lib, 4, cap. 4.
Theodor. dial. 2 Fulgentius ad Thrasymund. lib: 2, cap. 5. Origin. Tract. 33.
in math. Ambrosolib. 10 in Luc. 24.
Doctors, that this circumscription agrees with the body of our Lord, who is
above, clothed with heavenly glory, but not spoiled of his human nature. To
conclude then, it follows hereupon, that you assigning to christ such a body
as is not circumscriptible in the sacrament, are indeed de far worse then
the Heathen, who grant that every true body is circumscribed in a place.

(2)
The very Heathen know it to be impossible, for one body to be in more places
then one, at one time. But you deny this true principle of Philosophy, when you
fondlye imagine that the body of Christ can at one time be in heaven in earth,
yea in as many places upon the earth, as is the sacrament,

(3)
The Heathen accknowledge it to be an apparent truth, that no natuarall body,
can at one and the same time have contrary and diverse qualities. But you deny
this, when you teach, that the body of Christ can be in one place local, in
an other place not local, in one place with quantity, in an other without
quantity, in one place finite, in an other infinite.

(4)
The Heathen granted, that every natural body, is subject unto the natural
dimensions of a natural body, viz, to height, breadth and depth, But you deny
this, when, you assign to Christ such a body in a sacrament, as has not the
said natural dimensions.

(5)
It was held for an axiom among the Heathen, that no Accident can be with out
his subject. But you hold, that accidents may be with out their subjects
when you teach, that the roundnes, sweetness, whitenes and the relish of bread,
can be with out bread.

(6)
The heathen held, that an argument drawn a testimonio sensuum, from testimony
of the outward senses, is of great moment. Sensuu^ (says the Heathen Cicero
2. Academ.
Orator) it a clara et certa sunt indicia, vt, si optio detur naturae nostrae,
et ab ea aliquis aliquid requirat, contentane sit suis integris incorruptis que
sensibus, aut postulet melius aliquid, non videam qnid quaerat, amplius:
whereunto agree that of the Poet, Lucretius:
Quid referemus enim, quod nobis certius ipsis,

sensib usesse queat, etc. Yea, this kind of reasoning is so forcible, as that
the very Angels of Heaven have used it. For the Enangelist testifies, how
that the Angel of the Lord which descen ded from Heaven at Christ's
resurrection, did draw an argument from the sense of seeing, to prove an
article of the faith. math. 2, 8, 5, 6
I know (said he to Marie Magdalen and the other Mary) that ye seek Jesus
which was crucified: he is not here, he is risen, as he said: come, see the
place where the Lord was laid: And again, Verse 7,
behold he goes besore you into Galilee: there ye shall see him.

Nay, Christ himself used this kind of Reasoning, when he proved the truth of
his body, by an argument drawn from the evidence of the out ward senses Luk
24, 39,
. Behold (said he to the Eleven, and them that were with them) mine hands and
my feeet, for it is I my self, handle me. and see: for a spirit has not flesh
and bones, as ye see me, have.

And the same Argument may we fitly use against you that hold that the
bread and wine in the Eucharist are transubstantiated and changed into the
very body and Blood of christ. Behold (may we say unto you) the bread and the
wine in the Eucharist: for it is not the very real body and blood of Christ:
for see, smell, touch, and taste it, for by seeing, smelling, touching, and
tasting thereof you shall find, that they have neither flesh, blood, nor
bones, as Christ had The very Heathen shall rise in judgment against you, and
condemn you: for verily they were not so void of sense and reason, as you are.

(7)
The Heathen held it as a principle among them, that one disparate cannot be
predicated of another. From whence I reason thus: One disparate cannot be
predicated of another: but bread and she body of Christ, are ex genere
disparatorum, disparates: therefore the one cannot thus be predicated Hic panis
est corpus meum
of the other, except a tropicall predication be admitted. And consequently,
you do very absurdly, in taking that properly, which is to be taken tropically.

(8)
The Heathen did not privilege any man from erring, as appears by these
their common speeches.

1 Humanum est errare, labi, decipi. 2 Plura ignoramus, quam scimus, 3 Maxima
pars eorum quae scimus est minima pars eorum quae ignoramus. Bellar lib 4 de
Pontif, romans cap 13, Greg^ride Va. lentia Analis. fidei. Cathol. lib, 8 cap 2,
et, 3 et Rhemis, annot, in Luc, 22, sect, 11, Bellarm, lib, 4, de Pontif, romans
cap, 52

But f you privilege the Pope from erring, and hold, that he by himself alone
decreeing any thing concerning faith, cannot be deceived: and that in precepts
of manners also prescribed to the Church by the Pope, there is not any fear
or danger of error. But I showed you at large heretofore, that many of the
Popes have erred both in matters of doctrine and of manners, and that your own
writers have been driven to confess the same. J will only at this time
acquaint you with a wo^s then heathenish heresy of one of your Popes.

Take a view of the Council of Constance, and there you shall find, that Pope
John the 23. denied the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead,
life everlasting, nay, any life at all after this life. The words of that
Council are these: Council Constantiens, sess 11
Dictus, Johannes Papa vigessimus tertius saepe et saepius coram diuersis
prelatis et probis viris pertinaciter Diabolo suadente, dixit, asseverauit,
dogmatizavit et astruxit vitam aeternam non esse, neque aliam post hanc:
quinimo dixit, et pertinaciter credidit animam hominis cum corpore humano mori,
et distingui adinstar animalium brutorum, dixit que mortuum semel etiam in
nouissimo die minime resurrecturum, contra articulum de resurrectiane
mortuorum. Hereunto I will adioyne one of your own writers definition of an
heritick, and so prove by an invincible argument that this Pope John was a
blasphemous George Doulie in his Instruction of Christian religion, page, 2,
heretic. An heretic (says one, of your Priests) is he which being
baptized: does wilfully deny any article of the Catholic Roman faith; or
believes any thing that is contrary to the same: But I assume Pope John the
23, being baptized, did wilfully deny articulum de resurrectione mortuorum,
the article concerning the resurrection of the Hermes in Paemand. Plato lib. de
Anima Cicero lib de natura Deorum et in Somnio Scip, Ovid, lib, 1 Metamorphos.
Plutarc. de sera Vindicta.
dead: therefore he was an heretic. An heretic? nay, he was worse then a very
Pagan, or Ethnic: for the very k Ethnickes believed, that the soul is
immortal and that there is a life after this life, and that they should ek
gaies es phaos elthein, come again out of the earth into light: as said
Phocilides.

(9)
The Heathen Arist, Topic lib, 1. cap, 1,
Philosopher held that to be probable, which either all men held to be a
truth, or the most of the wiser sort. So that he preferred the judgment of
many before the judgment of one, But you prefer the judgment of the Pope
before the judgment of the whole Papae sententia totius or bis beneplacito
praefertur Rod. Cupers de Ecles
world, And yet it is well known (as I showed heretofore out of one of your
own writers) that many of your Popes have not understood their Grammar.

(10) Asphonsus a Castro de haeres: lib. 1 cap, 4,

I would they were as wise in one thing as Sybilla, an Heathen Prophetisse,
was, who in one of her books of Oracles, lays down an Oracle for truth
saying, Sybil lib 8 Oracul.
Esset anax Policranos echou pelas onoma pont ou: there shall be a king with
many heads, (which is either to be understood Synechdochechally for the
succession of Popes, or metonimychally for his triple crown) having a name
near to Ponti, that is Pontifex.

(11)
In your Mass (which you accounte the very marrowe of your mattins) your
Priests have more Apish tricks, and histrionical gestures, then the very
Heathen Mimickes or Tragedians used upon the stage. Yea they do nothing else
almost but make a dumb show, which I take to be the cause, why the people in
Italy do not say to their neybors, when they are going toward the Church,
Let us go hear a Mass: but, Let us go see a Mass. And indeed they do
nothing else there, but see a Popish shaueling, first bowing his body:
secondlye arising in histrionicall manner, and kissing the altar on the right
side: then bowing again and looking toward the hoaste, joining his hands,
wiping his fingers lifting up the host, after that bow ing again, lifting up
his eyes and lifting up the host above his shaven Crown. Then he sets it
down, uncovers the cup, and holds it between his hands, Keeping his
thumb and forefinger together: then he boweth and lifts up the cup a
little, then to his breaste, or above his head. This done, he sets it down
again, wipeth his fingers, spreads his arms a cross, boweth his body,
kisseth the altar on the right side, smites his breaste. Then he uncovers
the cup, makes five crosses with the host, twice beyond the cup, on each
side, under the cup and before it. Then he lays his hands upon the Altar,
and the Deacon reaches him the Paten, which he puts to his right ey, then
to his left, and makes a cross with it, kisseth it, and lays it down. This
being ended, he breaks the host in 3, holds two pieces in his left hand, and
one in his right over the cup, which with a cross, he lets fall into it The
priest then kisseth the Corporas, the Deacon takes the pax from the priest,
gives it to the Subdeacon, and he to the Queere: then bowing himself, he
first takes the body, then the blood, and so goes to the right horn of the
Altar. Then the Subdeacon Powers in wine; and the Priest rinseth the cupp,
washes his hands, turns himself to the people, comes again to the Altar,
and turns himself to the people the second time. Then bowing his body, and
closing his eyes, he prays to himself. After that he rises again, makes
the sign of the cross, and so bowing again, he goes from the Altar, and
the people go home: having seen these Popish tricks, which are fitter to
mock Apes withal, then to edify the flock of Christ Jesus, which he has
purchased with his precious blood.

(12)
There were some of the Heathen that saw the vanity of their religion, Seneca
said to this effect: Magis ad morem, quam ad rem pertinere, August: de
Ciuitate Dei lib, 6, cap. 6,
we will do worship: yet so as we remember that this worship, is rather for
fashion sake, then for any thing else. And Lactantius speaks to Tullie on
this wise: Lactant, de Orig. error. lib 2, cap. 3.
thou do worship to these earthly things, made with hands, thou do the
same things which they do: which thou confessest to be the veriest fools of
all. To apply this, Seneca and Cicero, shall rise in judgment with you Popish
recusants, and condemn you: for they (albeit they were Heathen) saw the vanity
of their religion, but you (albeit you are Christians, and may have the Bible
in your mothers tongue, among you) yet do you not see, nay you will not see
the vanitye of those Popish tricks and toys before mentioned.

(13)
The Fraus non dissoluit, sed distrin git periurium Cicero. The Earl of
Salisbury in his answer to certain scandalous papers
Heathen held, that craft in an oathe does not attenuate, but aggrauate the
periurye. But you hold, (as has been already showed) that a pretended
Catholic, is he be conuented before any of our Magistrates: may lawfully
swear by an equivocation, and deny all truth under a mental reservation.

This your new trick of aunswering by an equivocation, has the Right
Honorable s Chauncellor of our University, lately showed to be a strange and
gross doctrine an irreligious Principle: yea a dissembling trick of the
Priscilianhereticks.

(14)
The Fides Hosti data sernanda,
Heathen held that covenants of peace were to be kept, albeit they were made to
an enemy. But you hold it for a good Catholic doctrine, that fides non est
seruanda cum hereticis, id est protestanti bus, as you interpret it. But this
your opinion I have heereto fore touched and refuted;

(15)
The very Heathen perceived and confessed that Kings should meddle in matters*
of religion. For Aristotle writing of the first institution of Kings, shows
how many things they were by office to meddle with Arist in P^lit, lib 3 cap,
11,
strategos en, (says he) ki Dicastes ho basileus, ki ton prostous theous
kurios, that is, a king in old time was the leader in wars, pronouncer in
judgments, and ouerseer of religion, And again, tapros tous theous apodidotai
tois basile usi: divine things were committed to Princes.

How far do you come short of Aristotle, who Rhemin Cor, 14 16, et Bellarm,
de Pontif, lib 1, cap, 7,
hold that princes have noe authority to give voice deliberatiue or definitive,
in matters of Religion: nor to make laws ecclesiastical concerning the same:

(16)
Themistocles an Heathen said, that he had rather die then bear arms against
his country. But your holy Pius 5, in bull la Volumus et iubemus vt aduersus
Elizabetham Angliae reginam subditi arma capessant
father has taught you, yea commanded you to take arms against your
Sovereign.

(17) in his Speech before allead. geds

Lastly the very Pagans (to use his majesty's words) did never maintain by the
grounds of their religion, that it is lawful to murder, Princes or people
for quarrel of Religion. But you, and all other grounded Papists, do hold it
lawful to murder Protestants Princes and People: and that the Pope is the
right Papa et verus dominus tempora li. um, etc Ioh, de Parisiis de potestate
Regin et Papali cap 5.
Lord of the Temporalityes: so as he may take from any man that which is his
own. And by houlding these two dangerous positions, you make your selves
unable to be tolerated in his Majesty's Dominions.

And thus I leave you, wishing first of all your conversion: if that cannot be
had, my next wish is, that his Majesty would deal with you, as a skillful
surgian deals with his patient, a part of whose body being putrified, and
eating on by degrees, threatens the loss of the whole, if it be not stayed in
time.

Resecandae sunt putridae carnes, and scabiosa ouis a caulis repellenda, ne
tota domus, massa, corpus, and pecora ardeant, corrumpantur, putrescant,
intereant. Hieron: apud Alphons. de just a haereticorum punitione

lib. 2. cap, 12.
FINIS.

