AN ADDITION UNTO THE USE OF THE INSTRVMENT CALLED THE CIRCLES OF PROPORTION,
For the Working of Nauticall Questions.

Together with certain necessary Considerations and Advertisements touching
NAVIGATION.

All which, as also the former Rules concerning this Instrument are to be
wrought not only Instrumentally, but with the pen, by Arithmeticke, and the
Canon of Triangles.

Hereunto is also annexed the excellent Use of two Rulers for Calculation.

And is to follow after the 111 Page of the first Part.

LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATHEWES. 1633.

OF NAVIGATION.
CHAP. I. Certain general Advertisements concerning the use of this
Instrument; together with the description of such Circles as are newly added
thereto, serving for Navigation.
WHen I penned the rules which have been The first part of this Chapter.
formerly set out to show the use of this Instrument, I was careful to do it
with as much plainness and perspicuity, as might be in a subject not as yet
obvious to vulgar knowledge, so that any one but moderately exercised in
Arithmeticke and Geometry, might (as I conceived) apprehend the works and
practices taught therein. But being since certifyed that some few difficulties
seem, or indeed rather are feared, to be in the manner of the delivery of
those Rules: I thought it would not be impertinent, and alien from this
present purpose, if in the very beginning I shall endeavor to explane such
doubts, for the satisfaction of any that shall stick thereat.

The scruples, which chiefly seem to cause their difficulty, are these two:
First, that the parts or fractions are not set down with their Numerator and
Denominator, as is usually done; but are contained with the whole Numbers, as
it were in one sum, with a small rectangular line only between them to
separate the parts from the Integers. And secondly, most of the examples are
not wrought at large, but the summarie and final resolution thereof briefly
intimated. The former of which two scruples arises from the ignorance of the
true nature and manner of Decimall fractions: and the latter, from want of
rightly considering the Rules, whereby the valor of the number emergent or
found out by proportion, and other Arithmeticall operations, is estimated:
which are those that are delivered in the second and fifth Chapters of the
first part of that book.

That we may the better conceive the nature of Decimall fractions, let us
imagine a line either straight or circular, of any length, be it a foot, or a
yard, or one degree, or many; or else an hour, or a day, or any other
continuity. This being considered in it self entire and undivided is an Unite
or one whole thing of that kind, as one foot, one degree, one hour, etc. Then
imagine that Unite or whole to be divided to 10 equal parts, that whole shall
be 10. Again imagine every one of those tenth parts to be subdivided into
10: the whole shall be 100, and each first division shall be 10: and these
second divisions shall be hundredth parts. Thirdly, imagine every one of those
hundredth parts subdivided into 10: the whole shall be 1000, and each first
division shall be 100: and each second division shall be 10: and these third
divisions shall be thousanth parts. And so proceeding in this Decimall
subdivision, you may in your imagination divide the Unite or whole into
ten-thousanth parts, and hundred-thousanth parts, and millioneth parts, and so
infinitely. And so that segment which in the first division was 10, 20, 30,
etc. shall in the second division be 100, 200, 300, etc. and in the third
division 1000, 2000, 3000, etc. As for example, 3/30 is 30/100 or 300/1000 or
3000/10000: and 45/1000 is 450/1000 or 4500/10000: and 374/1000 is 3740/10000
or 37400/100000: etc.

Hence follows that you may increase the Numerator of any Decimall fraction
by putting thereto as many ciphers or circles as you please without altering
the quantity thereof, so that also you join so many ciphers to the Denominator.

Now therefore a Decimall fraction is that which has for his Denominator the
figure 1 with one or more circles after it, as 10, 100, 1000, etc. And seeing
the use of the Denominator in a fraction is to show into how many such parts
the whole or Unite is divided: if otherwise by any convenient sign the
Denominator may easily and certainly be known by the Numerator only, it
will be a needelesse labor still to set it down.

The most fit and convenient sign to know the Denominator of a Decimall
fraction is by a separating Line. For if the number mixed of integers and parts
be written together in one rank, with a small rectangular line drawn next
after the Unite place, cutting off the parts from the Integers: the number of
figures or places in the parts so cut off shall show how many circles or
ciphers are to be set after 1 in the Denominator. As for example, 37006 is all
one with 37006/10 that is 3700 Units, and six tenth parts. Again 37006 is all
one with 370 6/100, because after the separating line follow two figures 06.
Likewise 37006 is all one with 37 6/1000, because three figures 006 follow the
separating line. Also 37006 is all one with 3 7006/10000. And 037006 is all one
with 37006/100000, that is no unite at all, but that fraction only. And 0037006
is all one with 37006/1000000, because after the separating line are six
places of figurss 037006. By all which diversities of placing the separating
line it is apparent that the number of circles in the Denominator of any
Decimall fraction must be equal to the number of places of figures following
the separating line.

Wherefore though there be no Unite, but that it be a pure fraction, yet it will
be convenient to note the Unite place with a circle before the separating Line;
that so the value of the fraction, through the number of places therein may
more plainly appear.

And besides that the setting of Decimall parts thus in one line with the
Integers, has more concinnity and neatness with it, then either with a
Denominator, or by noting (as some have done) with small figures the primes,
seconds, thirds, and the rest. These fractions both mixed and pure are ready
without any further reduction, for any Arithmeticall operation.

For in Addition and Subduction, the numbers given, being fitted together by
their separating lines, having the like places or degrees set under one
another, each in their own file, may be added or subducted in the very same
manner as if they were all whole numbers.

And in Multiplication the numbers given being multiplied one by the other,
according to the usual manner of whole numbers, the product found cut shall
have so many places of parts, as are in both the numbers multiplied.

And in Division the ordinary manner of whole numbers is to be used; only
remembering that every figure of the Quotient shall be of that degree, whereof
that figure of the Dividend is, under which the Unite place stands in the
finding our of it, is.

Thus have I with as much plainness and brevitie as possibly I could cleared
the first scruple, by showing the true reason of Decimall fractions.

The second conceived difficulty is for not setting down at large the
operation of most of the Examples, but only of some few here and there.

It is true that in every work I do not say (as some have done) bring that
hither, or remove this thither: But having first taught the manner of working
proportions upon the Instrument, and also delivered proper rules for particular
questions, and wrought at the full sum of the hardest, I would not in every
Example show the like punctuallnesse, that neither I might blunt the edge and
industry of the ingenious Practicer with too much easiness, nor the Book
grow to an enormous bulk and greatness.

That therefore the studious Reader may not need such verbosity and taedious
instructions, he is to be advised oftentimes (and that attentively) to peruse
the first chapter of the first part, where the description and use of the
several circles are declared: and also the second Chapter concerning the
working of proportions, and of Multiplication and Division: and therein those
four Considerations, or Rules for finding out the true value of the fourth or
emergent number sought for: And thereto the fifth Chapter of the quadrating and
Cubing of numbers. For in assigning a true quantity unto the Emergent number
lies the greatest difficulty of this operation, especially if the work be
in the fourth Circle.

In Signs and Tangents it is not altogether so hard, because all the
revolutions or circuits of both are actually set down in several Circles.

The Signs have two Circles, which in this new additament for Navigation are
these; The tenth Circle from about 35 minutes, unto 6 Degrees; and the First
from 6 Degrees, to 90, the end of the Quadrant.

The Tangents have four Circles: namely the Ninth from about 35 minutes to 6
Degrees. The Second from 6 Degrees to 45. The Third from 45 Degrees to 84. And
the Eighth from 84 Degrees till about 89 Degr. and 25 minutes.

But the fourth Circle being actually but one, does potentially contain all
Degrees and places both of Integers and Decimall parts. For the nine figures
written in the spaces may signify unites, or tennes, or hundreds, etc. or else
tenth parts, or hundredth parts, or thousanth parts, etc.

If any number be to be constituted upon the fourth Circle of the Instrument,
take evermore one of those nine figures in the spaces for the first significant
figure of that number: and among the subdivisions thereof reckon the true point
or place of the number proposed. As if 2 were proposed: seek the figure 2 in
the spaces, and upon that line set one arm of the Index. Again if 375 be
proposed: seek the first figure 3 in the spaces: and in the subdivisions from
3 toward 4 account 75: and at the end thereof set one arm of the Index.
Likewise if 0092 be proposed: because the two Circles are not significant,
seek the figure 9 in the spaces: and in the greater divisions thereof from 9
toward 1 account 2, and there set one arm of the Index.

If any ratio be proposed to be taken on the Instrument: set the two arms of
the Index upon the two terms of the ratio found out, as was even now taught.
Then consider the distance or arch between those two terms, counting from the
place of the Antecedent to the place of the consequent forward, or according to
the order of the figures, if the antecedent term be less then the
consequent: Or else backward, contrary to the order of the figures, if the
antecedent be greater.

This distance or arch between the places of the two terms in the Instrument
(which is also the aperture of the arms of the Index) I may fitly call the
Isntrumental difference: but it is not evermore the real or true difference:
which also is most needful to be known. The rules whereof are these three.

First, if either the numbers given be of the same degree: Or if they differ
but one degree, and the line of the Radius fall between the places of the two
terms in the Instrument: the Isntrumental difference shall also be the true
and real.

Secondly, if the numbers given be not of the same degree, and the line of the
Radius fall not between the places of the two terms in the Instrument: look
how many degrees the numbers differ one from the other, so many whole circuits
of the fourth Circle shall be added to the Isntrumental difference to make
the real or true difference.

Thirdly, if the numbers given be not of the same degree, and the line of the
Radius does fall between the places of the two terms in the Instrument: look
how many degrees the numbers differ, so many whole circuits, wanting one, of
the fourth Circle shall be added to the Isntrumental difference to make the
real.

As in example: If the ratio of 375 to 2 be proposed: the same being taken upon
the Instrument; the true difference between them, over and above the arch or
angle of aperture, shall be two whole circuits, by the second rule. And if the
ratio of 375 to 0092 be proposed: the same being taken upon the Instrument; the
true difference between them, over and above the arch or angle of aperture,
shall, by the third rule be but three whole circuits, (although the terms
differ four degrees) because the line of the Radius falls within that arch,
reckoning it from the antecedent arm to the consequent backward.

Again, the antecedent term of any ratio being given, together with the real
or true difference (that is both the due aperture of the Index, and also the
number of circuits) between the terms, and whether of the two be the
greater: it is also needful to know how to estimate the consequent term. The
rules whereof are these two.

Fourthly, if the true difference be less then one circuit, and the line of
the Radius fall not between the places of the two terms; the numbers are both
of the same degree. But if the line of the Radius fall between them they differ
one degree.

Fifthly, if the true difference contain one or more circuits, and the line of
the Radius fall not between the places of the two terms; the numbers differ
so many degrees as there are whole circuits. But if the line of the Radius fall
between them they differ one degree more then there are whole circuits.

As in example: If the ratio of 375 to 2 be proposed: and also another
antecedent 0092: unto which a proportional consequent is required to be
sought. Because the true difference of 0092 unto his consequent in the
Instrument is equal to the true difference of 375 to 2, that is two whole
circuits more then the aperture: and the antecedent 0092 is greater then the
consequent sought for: set the antecedent arm of the Index upon 0092, and the
consequent arm reckoning backward, at the same aperture, will cut 49+. But of
what vallue or degree this fourth number is, is yet uncertain. Now forasmuch
as the real difference between the terms of the ratio proposed is two whole
circles above the aperture, as was showed in the former example after the third
rule; And in this present position of the Index the line of the Radius falls
not between the arms: the difference of degrees shall also be two, by the
fifth rule. Wherefore the first figure of 49+ shall be two whole degrees
backward from the first significant figure of 0092 that is 000049+ (viz)
somewhat better then 49 hundred thousand parts.

Again, if the ratio of 375 to 0092 be proposed: and also another antecedent
2, unto which a proportional consequent is required to be sought. Because the
true difference of 2 unto his consequent in the Instrument, is equal to the
true difference of 375 to 0092: and the antecedent 2 is greater then the
consequent sought for. Set the antecedent arm of the Index upon 2, and the
consequent arm reckoning backward at the same aperture will cut 494 as before.
Now forasmuch as the real difference between the terms proposed is three
whole circuits above the aperture of the Index, as was showed in the latter
example after the third rule. And in this present position of the Index the
line of the Radius falls between the arms the difference of degrees shall
be one more then three, that is four by the fifth rule; wherefore the first
figure of 494 shall be four whole degrees backward from 2, that is 000049+. I
will conclude this part, with a summary recapitulation of all the former rules
into these two branches.

The terms of a ratio being proposed, to find the real or true difference
between their places in the fourth circle of the Instrument. I. If either the
numbers given be of the same degree: or else differ but one degree, the line of
1 falling between them: they differ less then a circuit. II. If the numbers
be not of the same degree: they differ so many whole ciruits as they do
degrees. But yet if the line of 1 fall between them: they differ one circuit
less.

The antecedent term of a ratio being given, together with the real or true
difference of the terms in the Instrument: to find out the consequent term.
I. If thereall difference be less then one circuit, and the line of 1 fall not
between the places of the two terms: the numbers are both of the same degree.
But if the line of 1 fall between the places: they differ one degree. II. If
the real difference contain one or more circuits: the numbers differ so many
degrees as there are whole circuits. But if the line of 1 fall between the
places: they differ one degree more.

Thus have I with as much perspicuousnesse as I am able, explained the general
rules of working by this Instrument, which have been delivered in the first,
second, and fifth Chapters of the first part: and exemplifyed the documents
with as hard examples as any I could bethink my self of. And now I suppose
the solertious practizer will be able easily to find out a fourth
proportional unto any three numbers given, and certainly to estimate the
value thereof: so that now he will not be troubled for want of working the
Questions at large.

For the use of Navigation are added two circles, The second part of this
Chapter.
the sixth and the seventh: and a small alteration in the fifth. For the fifth
circle is here divided also into 50 parts: and is conceived to have two
circuits. The first circuit is unto 50: The second circuit from 50 unto 100.
Wherefore the figures are doubly noted: on the nearer side of the long lines of
tenth divisions are set 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, for the first circuit: And on the
further side of those lines are set 60, 70, 80, 90, for the second circuit. And
the ten subdivisions in every one of those 50 parts are the Decimall parts
thereof.

The sixth and seventh circles are divided into degrees: and every degree into
ten parts, containing 6 minutes, or rather 10 hundredth parts a piece, The sixth
circle has the degrees unto 445: and the seventh circle has from 445 unto 70.
And these degrees serve for so many several Latitudes, or Elevations of the
Pole.

The manner of using these circles is double. First, Two Latitudes being given
in the same Hemisphere, that is both Northern, or both Southern, to find the
sum of all the Secants between them. Set one arm of the Index upon one
Latitude and the other arm upon the other; then remove the arm that stood
upon the lesser Latitude unto the line of the Radius: and the other arm with
the same opening, shall in the fifth circle give the number of Secants between
the two Latitudes proposed. As if the number of Secants between these two
heights of the Pole 483 and 567 be desired. Set one arm of the Index upon 483
and the other arm upon 567: then remove that arm that stoood upon 483 unto
the line of the Radius: and the other arm with the same opening, shall in the
fifth circle give 13853, the number of Secants between the two Latitudes
proposed.

Secondly, The sum of all the Secants between two Latitudes in the same
Hemisphaere being given, together with one of the Latitudes, to find the other
Latitude. Set one arm of the Index on the line of the Radius, and open the
other arm unto the sum of Secants given (in the fifth circle): then remove
the arm that stood on the line of the Radius to the Latitude given, if it be
the lesser: or if the Latitude given be the greater, remove that arm that
stood at the end of the sum of the Secants, unto that greater Latitude: and
the other arm at the same opening shall give the other Latitude. As if there
be given 13853 the sum of Secants from the Latitude of 483 to the Pole-ward:
Set one of the arms of the Index on the line of the Radius, and the other arm
at 13853 in the fifth circle. Then remove the arm that stood at the line of
the Radius, unto the Latitude 483: and the other arm, at the same opening
shall point to 567 the degrees of the other Latitude sought for. Again, if the
same sum of Secants 13853, with the greater Latitude 567 degrees, be given:
set one of the arms of the Index on the line of the Radius, and the other arm
at 13853 in the fifth circle. Then remove the arm that stood at 13853, unto
567 degrees: the greater Latitude, and the other arm, at the same opening shall
cut 483 degrees: which is the lesser Latitude sought for.

And if the two Latitudes be in the several Hemisphaeres, that is one
Northern and the other Southern, the manner of working differs in effect
but little from the former. As if the sum of the Secants between these two
heights of the Pole, viz. 65 on the North side of the Aequinoctiall, and 134 on
the South side be desired. Set one arm of the Index on the line of the
Radius, and the other arm on either of the Latitudes given, suppose on 65.
Then bring that arm on 65 unto the line of the Radius: and where the other
arm, at that opening, chances to light, there hold it fast: and open the arm
that stands on the line of the Radius, unto the other Latitude 134. Afterward
bring the arm that stood on the former Latitude 65 unto the line of the
Radius, and the other arm, at the same opening, shall in the fifth circle cut
20037, the sum of Secants sought for.

Lastly, the sum of all the Secants between two Latitudes, of which one is
on the North side of the Aequinoctiall, and the other on the South side, being
given; together with one of the Latitudes, to find the other Latitude: As if
the sum of the Secants be 20037 and the Latitude degr: 65. Set one of the
arms of the Index at the line of the radius: and open the other arm unto
20037 in the fifth circle: and keeping the same aperture, bring the arm that
stood on the line of the radius unto the latitude 65: and the other arm shall
show 134, the other Latitude sought for.

Or else peradventure you may more easily find out the sum of the Secants
between any two Latitudes given, thus: Set the edge of the Index upon one of
the Latitudes: and look what division it cutteth in the fifth circle: keep it
in mind. Again, set the edge of the Index upon one of the Latitudes: and
look what division it cutteth in the fifth circle: keep that in mind also.
These two numbers kept in mind are the sums of the Secants for the two
Latitudes given: And are to be subducted one out of the other, if the Latitudes
are both in the same Hemisphere: or else to be added together, if the Latitudes
are in diverse Hemisphaeres.

Also in like manner, The sum of the Secants and one of the Latitudes being
given, you may find out the other Latitude thus: Set the edge of the index upon
the Latitude given; and look what division it cutteth in the fifth circle. To
this number add the sum of the Secants, if the lesser of the two Latitudes
be given: Or else out of it subduct the sum of the Secants, if the greater of
the two Latitudes be given. But if the two Latitudes are in the contrary
Hemisphaeres, the number found in the fifth circle is to be subducted out of
the sum of the Secants. And so shall you have the other Latitude.

CHAP. II. Of the Latitude, and Longitude of places in genetall: and of keeping
the account of time at Sea.
THe care and skill of the perfect Seaman is to guide the ship at sea unto any
port that shall be desired: which cannot be done unless he be able to find out
in in what place the ship is at any time.

The place of the ship at sea is estimated and understood by comparing it with
any known place: that is how much the same is situated from the place, where
the Ship is, either toward the North or South, which is called the difference
of Latitude: or else toward the East or West, which is called the difference of
Longitude. For it being once known how far any place upon the Globe of the
earth is wide of the Aequinoctiall unto either Pole: and also how far the
Meridian of the same is distant from the Meridian of any known place: the true
situation thereof is said to be had.

The Latitude or distance of the place wherein the Ship is from the
Aequinoctiall (which is all one with the height of the Pole there) is taken by
observation of the Meridionall altitude, either of the Sun by day, or of any
Star by night: as is not unknown to almost every common Mariner: Or also by
the 47 proposition of the 12 Chapter of the first Part. And therefore being so
vulgarly known, and taught of most that write of Navigation, I shall not need
to spend time about it: Especially my intent here being to teach the use of my
Instrument only, in tracing the Ships course.

The Longitude of the place wherein the Ship is, that is the Easterly or
Westerly distance of the Ship from the place whence the Voyage began, is the
difficulty, and Masterpiece of Nauticall science: Which has set on work the
wits and inventions of many men, proceeding therein on diverse grounds.

For some have labored to find the reason thereof by the variation of the
Magneticall needle, supposing certain Poles or points, unto which the ends of
the needle does in all places exactly respect. But besides that the Meridian is
difficultly to be had with sufficient preciseness, especially at Sea, where
the chiefest use of Longitude is: the conceit is only imaginary, without the
warrant of any natural principle.

Some considering the swifnesse of the motion of the Moon, which is every day
above 13 degrees, have supposed that either by the true place of the Moon, to
be observed by exact Instruments; or else by the moment of the Moons coming
into the Meridian, the Longitude might be obtained. But neither the true
motion of the Moon is so exactly known, nor observation can at Sea be so
precisely made, that any certain truth in so subtle a business may be argued
thereby.

Some have thought to observe the Longitude with automata or artificial
motions of long continuance: but not without great error and hallucination.

Some by Sand-glasses, or Waterglasses: but both oblioxious to the diverse
alterations and temperatures of the air and climate wherein they are,
especially that of sand. The other by water is more probable: wherein I should,
in my judgment, prefer some chymicall spirit or liquor: because it is not so
subject to the impression of the air. And that there should be three glasses
used, one to run, and two to receive successively: That which runs to be
open above, to pour in the liquor, and to let in the air, that the issue of
the water be not hindered for want of air to supply the vacuitie: The receivers
to be cylindricall, with marks set on the outside distinguishing hours and
parts: and that there be two of them, that when the liquor is come to the just
height, another may instantly be substituted, without loss of any liquor or
time. This manner of observing the time is, in my opinion, the most likely of
any that I know in use to conduce to the attaining of the difference of
Longitudes of places. For by this means the true time in the place where the
account began being known; and the time by observation of the Sun or some
Star in the place, whither the Ship is come, being found; the difference of
those times resolved into degrees of the Aequinoctiall will show the difference
of Longitude between the place of beginning the account, and the place where
the Ship is, Eastward, if the excess be of the time in the former place: or
Westward, if the excess be of the time in the present place of the Ship.

And in this manner of keeping the reckoning of Longitude it will be expedient
to make as frequent observations as the serenity of the sky will permit: that
thereby your account may the rather be freed from such subreptious errors,
which else will be very incident.

This or any such way of keeping the time, which shall by experience be found
most certain (until it shall please God to open a more natural and proper
way for the discovery of Longitude) I would advise were carefully, and with a
kind as it were of religious diligence practiced in all, specially long
voyages: and that in computing and tracing the course of the Ship by the
Compass and log-line, it also together with the Latitude observed be
discreetly called into consultation.

CHAP. III. Of the Mariners Compass, and Rumbes or points thereof: and of
finding the circuit of the earth in miles.
THere be four things therefore whereof a Seaman should be most careful and
circumspect, that he may happily with prosperous success and a good conscience
perform his intended voyage: First the angle of inclination with the Meridian,
on which the Ship makes her course: which angle is directed by the Compass:
and is commonly called the Rumbe or point of the Compass. For the ordinary
Mariners (by a rude and gross division of the Horizon into 32 parts) observe
32 points, whereof four are cardinal; other four half points; eight are
quarter points; and sixteen are by points. Others more curiously divide each
point into four parts making in all 128, which they denominate by a quarter,
an half, and three quarters of a point. A point contains degr: 11, that is
degr: 11, min: 15, or degr: 1125: and a quarter of a point therefore is degr: 2
13/16, that is degr: 2, min: 4875, or degr: 28125. By the continual addition
of which number this table of Rumbes ensuing is composed.

THE TABLE OF RVMBES.
Rumbs. Rumbs. Grad. Gr. min. Rumbs. Rumbs. NORTH. The Meridian Line. SOVTH.
28125 2 4875 5625 5 375 84375 8 2625 NbE NbW 1125 11 15 SbW SbE 1 140625 14 375
16875 16 525 196875 19 4125 NNE NNW 225 22 30 SSW SSE 2 253125 25 1875 28125 28
75 309375 30 5625 NEbN NWbN 3375 33 45 SWbS SEbS 3 365625 36 3375 39375 39 225
421875 42 1125 NE NW 45 45 00 SW SE 4 478125 47 4875 50625 50 375 534375 53
2625 NEbE NWbW 5625 56 15 SWbW SEbE 5 590625 59 375 61875 61 525 646875 64 4125
ENE WNW 675 67 30 WSW ESE 6 703125 70 1875 73125 73 75 759375 75 5625 EbN WbN
7875 78 45 WbS EbS 7 815625 81 3375 84375 84 225 871875 87 1125 East West 90 90
00 West East 8

The second is the measure of the Ships way on the Rumbe or point, which is
ordinarily reckoned in miles; supposing a mile on earth to answer to a minute
of a degree; and that 60 miles on a great circle give the difference of one
whole degree. But I rather reckon the way of the Ship in hundredth parts of a
degree, and have framed my rules of Navigation thereto: because this has a
more easy and convenient calculation then that by sexagesme parts: and as I
believe (for so I would have it) will hereafter grow into public use. This
measure or quantity of the Ships way is found by the Logg-line and
minute-glasse.

The other two are, The observation of Latitude as often as it may be for the
weather: and the keeping of time: Of both which I spoke sufficient for my
purpose in the former chapter. The two former, that is the Rumbe and way of the
Ship, more properly fall within my present consideration. For these are the
continual companions and faithful guides of the Seaman, which must direct
him still in shaping his course: unto these therefore he must apply his
study, and acquaint himself most familiarly with them.

And first for his compass he must be careful or rather scrupulous that it be
exactly made, and not bungled up, as those usually are, which are made for
sale: but that they be framed by some skillfull and conscionable Artificer. The
manifold cautions which are fit to be had therein, are very gravely advertised
by that reverend Divine and learned Mathematician Master William Barlow in his
Navigators supply near the beginning.

And as he is in the making of his compass to show his care, so specially in
the using thereof he must exercise all industry and diligence, that the course
be steered aright, and kept to the just point or Rumbe: and not to commit his
own and all his companies safety, and the good success of the voyage to the
negligence of a loose and idle Steeresman: whereby it cannot be but that the
account of the Ship shall be much confounded, and made uncertain.

Again for measuring of the quantity of the ships way, It must first be known
how many English feet of 12 inches to the foot, answer to one degree of (...)
great circle upon the earth. For if this be enormously mistaken, it cannot be
that the computation of the Ships course shall agree with the observations: but
must needs make a maine difference, to the amazement of the Seaman, and the
casting of the whole Ship and company into unforeseene dangers.

Now an English mile by statute is the length of 8 furlongs: and every furlong
is 40 perches: and a perch is feet 16: so that by this reckoning a mile
contains 5280 feet in length: though it be usually taken, or rather mistaken,
that 60 of such miles make a degree (which would be very strange, that our
English mile drawn from Barley corns should so happily fall out to answer to
one minute) yet the truth is that above 66 of our miles answer to a degree, as
by the observations of the most diligent enquirers is found out: so that in
voyding of every ten degrees above one degree is lost: which is a maine
enormity. But of this inquiry it will not be amiss from our purpose if we
shall a little discourse.

Diverse ways by diverse Artists have been practiced for finding out the true
compass of the earth: And I know not whether any have given full satisfaction
therein: but either the grounds they have wrought on have been uncertain; or
the distances of the places of observation too short; or the diligence of the
practiser to be suspected. That way which is by the height of an hill, and a
tangent line from thence to the superficies of the sea, is rather a fantasy,
then a thing of actual performance. For neither the perpendicular h^ight of
the hill above the level of the water can with any certainty be obtained: nor
such a tangent line by reason of the refraction of the vapors continually
rising out of the sea can be estimated.

But it would for the performance hereof be an excellent work, if the height
of the Pole at two towns of this Land, distant Northward one from the other
some scores, or rather hundreds of miles, being with Instruments of sufficient
magnitude by some learned Artists exactly observed: there were also employed
certain skillful Surveyors (such as are indeed lovers of art and truth) to
take the true distances and positions from place to place between the said
towns. Which survey I could wish were made with good plain tables, and with
the same scale, which should not be less then a foot by standard for 10 miles
and that these measures of a foot according to a standard were all made in
brass by the same Workman: and their chains exactly fitted thereto: and that
the measure be taken not along the Highways, but by side stations where
Steeples and other places eminent and of note may be seen. If the two towns
of the observations were London and Edenborough, it would be preciseness
sufficient: nay if they were but London and Cambridge, it would yield a greater
certainty then any that I know has yet been used. This I say were an
excellent work, and worthy the heroical magnificence of some great man: and
yet not of any very chargeable performance: but it would bring a marveilous
light and furtherance to Navigation and unto all Astronomy.

In the mean time till it shall please God to stir up some truly noble
spirit for the effecting thereof, I will make bold to propose away, which any
ingenious student, whose sight both of his eyes and understanding is quick and
perspicacious, may himself privately with much facility practice: the reason
whereof consists upon these three principles.

The I. is, that if with a levelling Instrument set up in any place parallel to
the Horizon a man take a true level unto another place: the visuall line by
which he levelled, shall be a tangent to such an arch of a great circle on the
earth, as is contained between the station and the mark: Because that the
visuall line, together with the two lines imagined, out of the center of the
earth, do include a right angled Triangle* having the right angle at the
level.

The II. is, that if the same Instrument he set just even with the former mark,
and you level backward to the former station, this last visuall line shall
overshoot the former place of the Instrument: and shall enclose a new and
greater right-angled triangle, having the right angle at the second station.

The III. is, that the former of the two visuall lines shall cut this latter
and greater right-angled triangle into two right angled triangles like to it
self and one like to the other: by the 8 prop: of the 6 book of Euclide. As in
the scheme, the center of the earth is C, the first place or station of the
levelling instrument is A, and the visuall line thence is A B to the mark B,
which is also the place of the instrument in the second station, from whence
the visuall line backward is B D, overreaching the first place A. Here are 3
like right-angled triangles, namely the greatest C B D, cut into two other C A
B, and BAD, with the line AB. Wherefore A B. AD:: AC. AB: that is; as the
distance diagram illustrating the use of a leveling instrument for measuring
distances between the two Stations (for by reason of the vast greatness of the
earth, and the exceeding small distance between the two stations in comparison
thereof, the visuall line AB shall be the same with the ground line AE) is to
the over-shooting of the second line of level: so is the Radius to the tangent
of the arch A E, intercepted between the two stations. The quantity of which
arch being sought out in the Canon of tangents, either in sexagesime or
Decimall parts of a degree, say again, As the same arch in sexagesime or
Decimall parts of a degree is unto a degree in the like parts; so is the
distance between the two stations in feet, to the number of feet answering to
a degree upon the earth. As for example, suppose the distance between the two
stations to be 528 feet, which is the tenth part of a mile: and that the second
line of level over-shooteth the former 138/10000 of a foot: or 00138, which
you shall find will be near about the matter. Say,

528. 00138:: 100000,00. 2,61: the tangent of the arch Min, 009+

Say again, 009+ the number of feet answering to a degree upon the earth.

Thus have I set down the rule, and illustrated it with an example. But in the
practice (by reason of the weakness of our sight, not able to discern a
thing distinctly at any great distance, we are constrained to take but short
stations, whereby the over-shooting of the second line of level above the
first is but very small) there is required great preciseness. For the
performance whereof it will not be amiss to set down some directions, both
concerning the Instrument, place, and time.

The levelling Instrument to be used in this work, I would not have to be
either with a channel for water; nor with sights. For the water, besides that
it does continually exhale vapors, has a certain tenacity, whereby to avoid
any dryness near to it, it will rather collect it self, and stand in a
heap, then mix with its enemy: and contrariwise very gladly diffuseth it
self in pursuit of any moisture. And as for Sights, if the sight-hole be very
small, it hinders our seeing: if any whit large, it admits too many
visiverayes; which dilating themselves cannot fix on the true and individual
point of the object. But I would have it only with a ledge, one inch thick,
and three inches broad: and so broad also I would have a black stroke to be in
a square white board, for the mark to level at, that having set the ledge of
the Instrument by the plumbe-line parallel to the Horizon in one station, you
standing aloof off, and guiding your eye along the two edges of the ledge, and
your companion at the other station raising up or letting down the
marke-board, as you shall direct him, you may see the upper line of the black
stroke level with the upper edge, and the lower line level with the lower
edge.

The place for the trial of this experiment, I would have to be a plain
field, wherein you are to have for your use ready measured out by the foot,
directly East and West, such a distance, as you can discern distinctly
thereat: which to a good and perfect sight may be 1000 feet, or to an
indifferent sight 528 feet, which is the tenth part of a mile. And at both ends
of that distance (which are to be your stations) the ground to be handsomely
plained and beaten, for the more exact setting up of your Instruments thereon.

The time for making your observation I would have about Midsummer, in a
seasonable, constant, dry, and calm weather: when, having set up your
levelling Instrument in the Eastern station, you may take your first level
about eleven a clock in the forenoone. Which being done, you may remove your
Instrument to the Western station, and about one a clock in the afternoon
(when the Sun is gone so far past the Meridian) take your back level.

These are the most necessary and accurate cautions that I can devise: and all
little enough for so curious and subtle an inquiry. I have also here set down
the forms of the levelling Instrument and of the mark.

leveling instrument and mark

CHAP. IIII. The manner how to measure the Ships way; or how many degrees, and
parts of a degree, either centesimes, or sexagesimes, the Ship moves in one
hour; or in any space of time assigned. And also of certain necessary
reductions.
We shall therefore come near the matter if we take miles 66, that is 349800
feet to answer to a degree upon the earth.

Now because the measure of the Ships motion or way is observed by the
watch-glasse and Log-line: let us for brevity sake call the number of seconds
(whereof there are 3600 in an hour) which the Watch-glasse runs, by the
letter G: and the number of feet vered in the Logg-line while the glass is
running, by the letter F. Which grounds being thus laid, we may find out a
rule to know how many hundredth parts of a degree the Ship sayleth in one hour;
after this manner.

Say G. F:: 3600. 3600F / G: so many feet gone in an hour

Say again 349800. 100:: 3600F / G. 360000F / 349800G: Or by reduction into
parts having the Denominator one Unite 1092F / G: which are so many centesimes
of a degree gone in an hour.

Hence arises this general rule for Centesimes. As the number of seconds in
the Watch-glasse, is to the number of feet vered in the Log-line:

So is 1029, to the number of hundredth parts of a degree, which the Ship
runs in one whole hour.



But to know how many minutes of a degree the Ship sayleth in one hour: Say
again 349800. 60:: 3600F / G. 216000F / 349100G: Or by reduction into parts
having the Denominator one Unite 06175F / G: which are so many sexagesimes of a
degree gone in an hour.

Hence also arises this general rule for sexagesimes. As the number of
seconds in the watch-glasse, is to the number of feet vered in the Log-line:

So is 06175, to the number of minutes of a degree sailed in one hour.



These two numbers 1029 and 06175 (or whether of them you mean to follow)
being of most frequent, and indeed continual use, it were fit to note in the
fourth circle of your Instrument with some apparent mark: that you may not be
still searching them out, when you have occasion to use either of them.

And after this very manner you may find a general rule for any other number
of feet contained in a degree upon earth, both for the Decimall parts of a
degree, and also for the Sexagesimes wherein only the third terms in every of
the second proportions will be changed.

Because the true finding out of the way, which the Ship makes in an hour,
estimated in the parts of a degree, is the maine ground and principle, by which
the place of her being both for longitude and latitude is argued and computed:
I will set down the practice thereof at large in two Examples: the first for
centesimes of a degree: and the second for sexagesimes:

Example I. Suppose the Watch-glasse to contain 40 sec: and that in the
running out thereof the Ship has gone 175 feet by the Log-line. The rule is,
As 40* to 175: so is 1092, to the number of hundredth parts of a degree sought.
Set therefore the antecedent arm of the Index on 40 in the fourth circle,
taking the figured divisions 1, 2, 3, etc. for so many tens: and open the other
arm unto 175, taking the same divisions for so many hundreds: the distance
between the arms will be above half that circle. Then remove the antecedent
arm unto the third term 1092, taking the same divisions for so many unites:
and the consequent arm shall point at 450, which shall be 4 centesimes and a
half, or 45 thousanth parts of a degree, (viz) degr: 0045, in the same circuit
of that circle: because the distance from 40 to 175 out reaches not the line
of I. Wherefore the Ship at that swiftness shall go in an hour degr: 0045.
Which in sexagesimes will be found to be Min: 27.

Example II. Suppose the same watch-glasse of 40 sec: and that in the running
out thereof the Ship has gone 512 feet. The rule is, As 40 is to 512: so is
06175, to the number of sexagesimes or minutes of a degree sought. Set
therefore the antecedent arm at 40, and the other at 512: the distance
between them exceeds one whole circuit. Then remove the antecedent arm to
the third term 06175: and the consequent arm shall point out 7902: which
because the distance exceeded one circuit shall be Min: 7902. Which in
centesimes would have been degr: 01317.

The proportion of the Ships sailing for one hour being thus given either in
centesimes or sexagesimes of a degree: multiply the same by the whole time of
the continuance at the same swiftness reckoned in hours and Decimall parts of
hours: and the product shall give the whole way the Ship has made, either in
degrees or minutes accordingly. As for Example; If the Ship sailing after degr:
0045 in an hour, continue so for Ho. 29, Min: 37, that is Ho: 29617: Multiply
29617 by 0045, and the product shall be degr: 1333, the whole way that the
Ship has made. Or if the Ship for so long continuance has sailed after Min:
27 in an hour: Multiply 29617 by 27 and you shall have Min: 79966, which being
divided by 60, will give degr: 1333, as before.

Now follow certain reductions, which are of frequent use. I. To convert
degrees or hours into Minutes, is to multiply them by 60. And to convert them
into seconds, is to multiy them by 3600. And contrariwise.

II. To reduce minutes into degrees or hours, is to divide the minutes by 60.
And to reduce seconds into degrees or hours, is to divide them by 3600.

III. To convert minutes of degrees or hours into centesimes or hundredth
parts: Say, As 60, is to 100: so is the number of minutes, to the number of
hundredth parts. And,

IIII. To reduce centesimes of degrees or hours into minutes: Say, As 100, is
to 60: so is the number of centesimes or hundredth parts, to the number of
minutes.

CHAP. V. The division of sailing into circular and spirall. Two fundamental
theorems. Of sailing, by one of the four Cardinal Rumbes: and certain
Questions belonging thereto.
THe motion of the Ship upon a Rumbe is either circular, or winding with a kind
of spirall line. If the ship sail upon one of the four cardinal points* it
describes a circle: which is either a great circle or lesser, according as the
circle of the heavens is, under which it moves. For if the Ship saileth
directly North or South under some Meridian, or directly East or West under the
Aequinoctiall, it describes by the motion thereof an arch of a great circle.
But if it sail directly East or West wide of the Aequinoctiall on either side,
it describes a lesser circle, according as the parallel in the heavens is,
under which it moves.

All great circles are equal one to another, and have equal degrees: but the
parallels are greater or lesser one then another; and consequently have greater
or lesser degrees, as every one is nearer or farther distant from the
Aequinoctiall. And because in computing the motion of the ship we shall have
continual occasion to speak of degrees both of the greater and lesser
circles, let this be advertised, that as often as I shall mention Just Degrees, I
understand the measure of so many degrees of a great circle; else speaking of
lesser degrees, I call them proper degrees of such a parallel.

These two proportions following are the fundamental Theoremes for the
computation of the motion of the ship: and are therefore faithfully to be
imprinted in our memory. The second is but the converse of the first: and are
so familiar, that they shall need no demonstration.

Theor. I.
As the Radius, is to the sine of the complement of the parallel:

So is an arch of the Aequinoctiall in Just Degrees, to the number of Just
Degrees contained in a like arch of the same parallel.

Theor. II.
As the sine of the complement of the parallel, is to the Radius: Or

As the Radius, is to the secant of the parallel:

So is the number of Just Degrees contained in an arch of the same parallel, to
a like arch of the Aequinoctiall.

If a Ship sail under a Meridian, that is upon the North or South Rumbe, it
varyeth not the longitude at all: but only changes the Latitude: and that
just so much as the number of degrees it has run in that whole time
amounts unto, which number is to be added to the latitude of the place, where
the account began, if you have sailed from the Aequinoctiall-ward toward
either Pole: Or else to be subducted out of the latitude of that place, if you
have sailed toward the Aequinoctiall.

Again if the Ship sail under the Aequinoctiall upon the very line it self
Eastward or Westward: it varieth not the Latitude at all: but only changes the
Longitude: and that just so much as the number of degrees it has run in that
whole time amounts unto. Which number is to be added to, or subducted from
the longitude of the place wherein you began your account, according as you
have sailed East or West.

And thirdly if the Ship sail directly East or West under any parallel circle,
that is upon the East or West Rumbe, be it in the Northern or Southern
Hemisphaere, it there also changes not the Latitude at all, but only the
Longitude: yet not according to the number of Just Degrees it has gone, as
under the Aequinoctiall: but more then so many, according as the proportion is
between that parallel and the Aequinoctiall. For the lesser every parallel is,
the greater must needs be the difference of the Longitude in sailing so many
Just Degrees under it.

Quest: I. By the way of a Ship upon a parallel being given in Just Degrees, to
find how many degrees the Longitude is varyed.
This is done at one operation by Theor: I. As the sine of the complement of
the parallel, is to the Radius:

So is the way of the ship upon that parallel in just degrees, to the degrees
of the difference of longitude.



An Example. A ship making her course upon the parallel distant from the
Aequinoctiall degr: 51, min: 32, by the estimation of the way has sailed 94 in
Just degrees: how many proper degrees of that parallel has she gone?

The complement of 51, 32 is 38, 28, the sine whereof is 62206. Say therefore. ^

The difference of longitude sought is degr: 15111+: Which arch so found is to
be added to, or subducted from the longitude of the place where you began
your account, according as you have sailed either East or West.

Quest: II. How many English miles change one degree of longitude in going
Eastward or Westward at the elevation of the Pole degr: 51, min: 32.
It was supposed in the beginning of Chapt: IIII, that miles 66 do answer to
one degree of a great circle upon the earth.

The complement of 51, 32 is 38, 28. Say therefore by Theor: I. ^

Wherefore miles 41211 make a degree on the parallel 51, 32.

Keep this number 41211 in mind for the resolving of the two questions
following.

Quest: III. There are two places having the same latitude of degr: 51, min:
32: and the difference of their longitudes is degr: 15111+: How many miles are
they distant by the parallel?
First find out the number of miles answering to one degree in the parallel 51,
32, by Quest: II. which you shall find 41211. Then multiply the same by the
degrees of the difference of longitude 15111+: thus, 1. 41211:: 15111+. 62274.
Their distance is miles 62274.

Quest: IIII. There are two places having the same latitude of degr: 51, min:
32: and they are distant by the parallel miles 622740: how many degrees are
they distant in longitude?
First find out the number of miles answering to one degree in the parallel 51,
32, by Quest: II. Which you shall find 41211. Then by the same number found
divide the sum of the miles given, that is 62274: thus, 41211. 1:: 62274.
15111+. The distance of longitude is degrees 15111+.

CHAP. VI. Of the oblique Rumbes between the Meridian, and that of East and
West; what they are, and how composed: of finding out certain fundamental
Theoremes for oblique sailing.
THat circular sailing upon any one of those four cardinal points, whether it
be a great circle, or a parallel, has (as we have seen) no great difficulty
in understanding or computing: so that you be sure of the true measure of the
ships way: because that therein either only the latitude, or only the longitude
is altered.

But there is greater difficulty in oblique sailing when the Ship runs upon
some Rumbe between any of the four cardinal points, making an oblique angle
with the Meridian: because therein the ship continually changes both latitude
and longitude, And the difficulty is so much the greater by how much the voyage
is more distant from the Aequinoctial toward either Pole: and upon a Rumb more
remote from the Meridian. For near the Aequinoctiall, where the Meridians are
almost parallel; and in those Rumbes which are near the Meridian, where the
longi^ude is but little altered; there is no such lubricity and propensenesse
to err.

In this kind of oblique sailing, the ship is so directed by the Compass, and
guided by the helm, that the line of the ships length is every where kept
firmly in one and the same angle with the Meridian, according to the distance
of that Rumbe from the North and South line. And because the Compass is as it
were a moveable Horizon: and the lines of direction thereupon are the
intersections of Azumiths or verticle circles with the same Horizontall plain,
dividing it into so many parts, which are called Rumbes: it comes to pass
that in such oblique sailing toward the apparent pole, the place whereunto the
Compass leads is evermore between the parallel through the place wherein
you are, and the Pole. Wherefore the line of the Ships oblique course is a
helix or spirall line, approaching nearer and nearer to the Pole, but never
falling into it. As in the Scheme, suppose the center of the circle P to be the
Pole of the world; and all the concentric circles to be parallels described at
equal distance one from the other; and the straight lines schematic depiction
of navigational method for oblique sailing out of the Pole, PAC, PEB, PID, POF,
etc. intersecting those parallels in the points C, B, D, F, etc. to be
Meridians: so that all the segments of the Meridians CA, BE, DI, etc. be
equal: and all the segments of the parallels KC, BA, DE, etc. be of equal
length, though not of equal degrees; every one of those arches containing
four or more degrees, according as every circle is greater or less then
another. Suppose also that the ship keeping a just North-East course describes
the crooked line CBDF, which therefore must needs be the North-East Rumbe: and
in the continuation of it does approach unto the Pole nearer and nearer: but
can never fall into the Pole: because it still keeps the same distance upon
the Compass between the Meridian, and the parallel in which it is, and makes
with the Meridian an angle of 45 degrees.

These Helices or spirall lines (which are the oblique Rumbes) ought to consist
of most minute and insensible, yea indivisible parts: for if they be any whit
great, the account of the Ships motion will be confounded, and carried down
from the true place whither the Ship is gone, toward the Aequinoctiall:
neither can you return by the Rumbe you came. For imagine in the former Scheme
two Meridians PAC, and PBK, and that AB and CK be like segments of two
parallels, so that ABCK shall be a kind of sphaericall right-angled
quadrangle: draw therein diagoniall-wise the arch of a great circle CBL, in
which the ship is supposed to have gone from C to B: first the outward angle
PBL being (as may easily be demonstrated) greater then the inward angle A C B,
shows that you are fallen from your Rumbe into another point; and had need
to bear up the Ship again into the Rumbe BD, making with the Meridian an
angle P B D equal to that other A C B. Again, the diagoniall arch CB cutteth
the quadrangle into two triangles unequal one to the other: for though in both
the sides AC and BK (which we will call the catheti) be equal, and the
hypotenusa CB be the same: yet the bases AB and CK, and likewise their angles,
are unequal: yea though the distance of the parallels AC and BK be but one
scruple of a degree. But yet the less you take the distance of the parallels,
that inequality will also be the less. So that if by any artifice it may be
brought about that the arch AC be not one minute of a degree, which on the face
of the earth answers to above an English mile, but the hundred-thousanth, or
if need be the millioneth part of a minute, scarce exceeding one fifteenth
part of an inch (which thing by the help of God the giver of all light I have
discovered, and am able to perform in tables unto the Radius 10000000, yet
nothing at all differing either in their form or manner of working from those
that are now commonly in use) all that inequality will be taken away, and those
most small triangles will indeed, and unto all use, become plain rectangled
triangles: and the spirall line of the ships course be recalled to a precise
exactness. By what artifice this is done, together with other secrets of that
nature, I may peradventure hereafter be induced to declare; if so be I shall
first see the practisers of this most noble and useful science (which is as it
were the band and tie of most disjunct countries, and the consociation of
nations farthest remote) willingly to relinquish their inveterate errors, and
to use thankfully and conscionably, without envy and selfe-conceited
stubbornenesse, such light and helps as the due and mature study of true art
shall afford.

In the mean time we will here make use of the ordinary canon of the Meridian
divided according to Mercator: which I have therefore set upon the sixth and
seventh Circles of this Instrument, unto 70 degrees: as has been before
showed in the second part of the first Chapter.

And first out of the inspection of the Rumb in the last diagram compacted of
the hypotenusae of an infinite number of those minute rightangled triangles, I
will in certain Theoremes demonstrate the ground of oblique sailing: And then in
the next Chapter apply the same foundations to the answering of the several
questions in Navigation.

And because those triangles are all supposed to be equal (or rather the same
triangle so often multiplied) let them be also noted with the same letters A B
C, as the lowest of them is: the catheti C A being all on the Meridians: and
the bases B A being all on the several parallels: and the hypotenusae C B are
the motion of the ship upon the Rumbe.

The Theoremes are set down in these proportions.

Theor: I.
As the Radius, is to the sine of the complement of the Rumbe: So is the way of
the Ship in degrees upon that Rumb, between any two places on the earth, to
the difference of latitude between those two places.

For R. s co:: BC. CA:: many BC. so many CA. And so conversely.

Theor: II.
As the Radius, is to the sine of the Rumbe from the Meridian: So is the way of
the ship in degrees upon that rumb, etc. to the sum of the bases of all the
triangles intercepted between the parallels of those two places.

For R. sC:: BC. BA:: many BC. so many BA.

Theor: III.
As the Radius, is to the tangent of the Rumbe from the Meridian: So is the
difference of latitude between any two places, to the sum of the bases of all
the triangles intercepted, etc.

For R. tC:: CA. BA:: many CA. so many BA.

Theor: IIII
As the Radius, is to the sum of the secants of all the parallels between
any two places upon the earth: So is the base of one of those triangles, to the
difference of longitude between those two places.

For by Theoreme II, Chap: 5. R. sec: parall:: base AB. diff: of long: in base
BA:: many sec: parall. diff: of long: in so many bases BA. Again because by
the last Theoreme R. sum: sec. parall:: BA. diff: long: in BA. and by Theor:
III. R. tC:: CA. BA. and because that CA is but 1, be it sexagesime or
centesime, etc. therefore by composition of those two proportions arises,

Theor: V.
As the quadrat of the Radius, is to the sum of the secants of all the
parallels between any two places upon the earth:

Or, As the Radius, is to the sum of the secants of all the parallels
between any two places, divided by the Radius:

So is the tangent of the Rumb from the Meridian, to the difference of
longitude between those two places.

CHAP. VII. Of the several questions which are incident unto oblique sailing.
IT is needful to be advertised: First, that in working the questions
following upon the Instrument, the degrees of the ships way (found out by
Chapt: IIII.) and of the differences both of latitude and longitude, and also
the sum of the secants of parallels, are all to be taken on the fourth
circle, after the manner of absolute numbers: for which cause they are still to
be set down in degrees and Decimall parts of degrees. But the Sines and
Tangents are to be accounted in their own circles. That hereafter we may not
need evermore to be telling unto what circle every number or term does
belong,

And secondly, that if you please to work these questions with your pen: you
may do it by the tables for the division of the Meridian line according to
Mercator: Which tables are nothing else but a perpetual addition of secants.
And are to be found both in Master Wrights Errors of Navigation, and in
Willibrordus Snellius his Tiphys Batavus, for every minute: and in Master
Gunters Book for every tenth part of a degree. Which last for more readiness
sake I do herein make use of.

But in using the tables of Master Wright or Snellius, you must reckon the
latitudes in degrees and minutes; with Decimalls of Minutes, and not in
Decimalls of Degrees.

In the examples I have set down the numbers so, that you may work them
either by the Instrument, or with the pen. The manner of working the Decimall
parts with the pen you shall find in my Clavis Mathematica, Chapt. 1, 2, 3,
4, 6. But by the Instrument, in the first Chapter of this present tractate at
large: which I could wish were dilligently studied and practiced.

And now I come to the Questions.

QVEST. I. By the Rumbe and way of the Ship given, to find the difference of
latitude between two places.
This is done at one operation by Theor: I. in the former Chapter. As the
Radius, is to the sine of the complement of the Rumbe:

So is the way of the ship in degrees upon that rumb, between any two places
on the earth, to the difference of latitude between those two places.



An Example. A Ship beginning her course in the latitude of degr: 507, that is
50, 42, has sailed on the NWbN Rumbe degr: 936: into what latitude is she come?

Here the angle of inclination which the NWbN Rumbe makes with the Meridian is
(by Chap: III.) 33, 45: the complement of which is 56, 15: and the sine thereof
83147. Say therefore, ^. the difference of latitude which being added to the
Latitude 507 given (because the greater latitude is sought) gives degrees
58482. that is, 58, 29.

But if the lesser latitude had been sought: the said difference should have
been subducted out of the latitude given. And if the difference of latitude
found (the Ship sailing toward the Aequinoctiall) chance to exceed the latitude
given, subduct the latitude given out of the said difference found: and the
remains shall be the second latitude, but in the contrary Hemisphaere. For if
the two latitudes be in the contrary hemisphaeres, the sum of both is the
difference between them.

QVEST. II. By the way of the Ship and the difference of latitude between two
places given, to find the Rumbe leading from one place to the other.
This is done also at one operation by the said Theoreme I. As the way of the
Ship in degrees upon the Rumbe sought between any two places, is to the
difference of latitude beween those two places:

So is the Radius, to the sine of the complement of the Rumbe sought.



An Example. A Ship beginning her course at the latitude of degrees 507, that
is 50, 42, has sailed up to the latitude of degrees 58482, that is 58, 29: in
which space it has gone degrees 936 upon one Rumb* What Rumb was it that she
followed?

Here the difference of latitude is degrees 7782. say, ^ the complement of
which arch found is 33, 45: which is the angle of inclination of the Ships
course to the Meridian: and is (by Chapt: III.) the NWbN Rumbe.

QVEST. III. By the Rumbe, and difference of latitude between two places, to
find the quantity of the Ships way in degrees.
This is done at one operation by the converse of the said Theor: I, As the
sine of the complement of the Rumbe, is to the Radius:

So is the difference of latitude between any two places to the measure of the
Ships way in degrees.



An Example. A Ship beginning her course at the latitude of degr: 58482, has
sailed upon the SEbS Rumbe unto the height of degr: 507: how many degrees has
she gone upon the Rumbe?

Here the difference between the two latitudes given is degr: 7782. And the
angle of inclination of the SEbS Rumbe is 33, 45, by Chapt: III: the complement
of which is 56, 15: and the sine thereof 83147. Say therefore. s 56, 15. Rad::
7782. 936: which is the measure of the Ships way in degrees.

QVEST. IIII. By the Rumbe, and difference of latitude, to find the difference
of longitude.
This is done at one operation by Theor: V, in the former Chapter. As the
Radius, is to the tangent of the Rumbe:

So is the sum of the secants of the parallels between any two places,
divided by the Radius: as they are set down in the tables, to the difference
of longitude between the Medians of those two places.



An Example. A Ship beginning her course at the latitude of degr: 382, sayleth
upon the WbN Rumb, unto the latitude of degr: 505: how many degrees of
longitude has it varyed in that course?

Here the angle of inclination of the WbN Rumbe with the Meridian is 78, 45:
the tangent whereof is 502734. And the sum of the secants for 505 is 58691:
and the sum of the secants for 382 is 41392: the difference of which is
17299, the sum of the secants of the parallels between those two latitudes:
which else by the Instrument is found out by the second part of the first
Chapter. Say therefore, ^ Which is the difference of longitude between the
Meridians of the two places.

But because this question is of excellent and very frequent use, it will not
be amiss to set down at large the manner of working this Example upon the
Instrument. Thus,

Set one of the arms of the Index upon 382 in the sixth circle, and open the
other arm unto 505 in the seventh circle, according as has been taught in
the second part of the first Chapter. Then move the arm of the Index, which
stood on 382 to the line of the 1: and the other arm at the same opening shall
in the fifth circle cut 17299, the sum of the secants.

Again set one of the arms of the Index upon the line of the Radius, and open
the other arm unto the tangent of 78, 45. Then move the antecedent arm of the
Index, which stood at the line of the Radius, unto 17299 in the fourth circle:
and the consequent arm shall in the same fourth circle cut 87927, which are
the degrees of the difference of longitude sought for.

QVEST V. By the latitude and longitude of any two places given, to find what
Rumbe leads from the one place to the other.
This is done at one operation by the same Theor: V. As the sum of the
secants of the parallels between those two places, is to the difference of
longitude between them:

So is the Radius, to the tangent of the Rumbe sought.



An Example. There are two places, the one having the latitude of degr: 505:
and the other the latitude of 382. And the difference of longitude between
their Meridians is degr: 87927. By what Rumbe shall a Ship sail from one place
to the other?

Here the sum of the secants of the parallels between the two latitudes
given is 17299, as was found out in the example of Quest. IIII. Say therefore,
^ Which is the angle of the inclination of the Rumb leading between those two
places, with the meridian: and is therefore (by the third Chapter) the WbN or
EbS Rumb: if the latitudes be on the North side of the Aequinoctiall.

QVEST. VI. By the Rumbe, and difference of longigitude between two places,
whereof one is given, to find the difference of their latitudes.
This is done at one operation by the converse of Th. V. As the tangent of the
Rumbe, is to the Radius:

So is the difference of longitude between the Meridians of those two places,
to the sum of the secants of the parallels between those two places.



An Example. A Ship beginning her course at the latitude of degr: 382, sayleth
upon the WbN Rumbe until it has changed the longitude degr: 87927: Into what
latitude shall she then be come?

Here the angle of inclination of the WbN Rumbe with the Meridian is 78, 45.
Say therefore, t78, 45. Rad:: 87927. 17299: Which is the sum of the secants
of the parallels between the latitude degr: 382 given, and the latitude of the
place wherein the Ship is. Wherefore if unto the sum of the parallels for
degr: 382 found out by the second part of Chap: I. namely 41392, you add the
fourth term found 17299: the sum 58691 shall be the sum of the parallels
for the latitude sought: which by the said second part of Chap: I. you shall
find to be degrees 505.

QVEST. VII. By the Rumbe, and measure of the way of the Ship in degrees, to
find the difference of longitude between two places, whereof one is given.
This is done by two operations.

The first is, By the Rumbe, and way of the Ship given, to find the difference
of latitude: which is Quest. I.

The second is, By the Rumbe, and difference of latitude given, to find the
difference of longitude, which is Quest. IIII.

An Example. A Ship beginning her course in the latitude of degr: 504 has
sailed upon the WNW rumb degrees: 137: how much has she changed the longitude?

Here the angle of inclination of the WNW Rumbe with the Meridian is 67, 30:
the compl: of which is 22, 30 the fine whereof is 38268. Say first by Quest. I.
^ Which is the difference of latitude between the beginning and place where
the Ship is. Now because the Ship sailing toward the Pole increases the
latitude: Add degr: 524 to degrees. 504 the latitude given: and the sum degrees: 5564
shall be the latitude of the place whither he Ship is come.

Seek the sum of the secants of the parallels for both those places, by the
second part of Chap: I, which will be found to be 58534, and 67259: the
difference of which two numbers is 8725, the sum of the secants between
those parallels. Also the tangent of the Rumbe, (viz) of 67, 30; is 241421.

Say therefore again by Quest. IIII. ^ Which arch of degr: 21064 is the
difference of longitude sought for.

QVEST. VIII. By the difference of latitude, and measure of the way of the Ship
in degrees: to find the difference of longitude between two places, whereof
one is given.
This also done by two operations.

The first is, By the difference of latitude, and the way, to find the Rumbe:
which is Quest: II.

The second is, By the Rumbe, and difference of latitude, to find the
difference of longitude: which is Quest IIII.

An Example. A Ship beginning her course in the latitude of degr: 5564, has
sailed degr: 137 upon one and the same Rumbe, even unto the latitude of degr:
504: how many degrees of longitude has she changed?

Here the difference between the two latitudes given degr: 524

Say first by Quest. II, ^ the complement of which arch (viz) 67, 30, is the
angle of the Rumbe: And the tangent thereof is 241421. Seek also the sum of
the secants of the parallels for both those places, by the second part of Chap.
I: which will be found to be 58534, and by 67259: the difference of which two
numbers is 8725, the sum of the, secants between the parallels.

Say therefore again by Quest. IIII, ^ Which arch of degr: 21064 is the
difference of longitude sought for.

QVEST. IX. By the differences of latitude and longitude between two places
given, to find the measure of the way of the Ship in degrees.
This is also done by two operations.

The first is, By the difference of latitude and longitude to find the Rumbe
leading between those two places: which is Quest. V.

The second is, By the Rumb, and difference of latitude, to find the measure of
the Ships way in degrees: which ss Quest: III.

An Example. A Ship beginning her course in the latitude of degrees 504,
sayleth still following one and the same Rumbe until she comes to the
latitude of degr: 5564: in which time she has changed the longitude degr:
21064: How many degrees has the Ship gone upon that Rumbe?

Here the sum of the secants of the parallels for both the places proposed,
by the second part of Chap. I, will be found to be 58534, and 67259: the
difference of which two numbers is 8725, the sum of the secants of the
parallels between those two latitudes.

Say first by Quest. V, ^ Which is the angle of inclination of the Rumbe, with
the meridian: the complement of which is degrees: 22, min: 30: the sine whereof is
38268. And the difference between the two latitudes degr: 5564, and degr: 504,
is degr: 524.

Say therefore again by Quest. III, ^ Which is the measure of the Ships way in
degrees.

QVEST. X. By the Rumbe, and difference of longitude between two places,
whereof one is given, to find the quantity of the way in degrees between
those places.
This is also done by two operations:

The first is, By the Rumbe, and difference of longitude, to find out the
difference of latitude: which is Quest. VI.

The second is, By the Rumbe, and difference of latitude, to find out the
measure of the way of the Ship in degrees: which is Quest. III.

An Example. A Ship beginning her course in the latitude of degr: 5564, sayleth
upon the ESE Rumbe so long till it has changed the longitude degr: 21064: How
many degrees has the Ship gone upon that Rumbe?

Here the angle of the ESE Rumbe with the Meridian is degr: 67, min: 30; the
tangent whereof is 241421.

Say first by Quest. VI. t67, 30. Rad:: 21064. 8725: Which is the sum of the
secants of the parallels between the latitude of degr: 5564, and the other
latitude sought.

Now the sum of the secants of the parallels for the latitude of degr; 5564
is 67259, by the second part of Chap. I. Out of which number if you subduct
8725 last found (because the course is toward the Aequinoctiall) the remains
shall be 58534, the sum of the secants of the parallels for the other
latitude of degr: 504, by the same second part of Chapt. I. So that the
difference of the latitudes is degr: 524. And the fine of 22. 30, the
complement of the ESE Rumbe is 38268.

Say therefore again by Quest. III. ^ Which is the quantity of the Ships way in
degrees.

QVEST. XI. By the way of the Ship and the difference of longitude between the
Meridians of any two places, whereof one is given, to find out the Rumbe
leading from one place to the other. and
QVEST. XII. By the way of the Ship, and the difference of longitude between
the Meridians of any two places, whereof one is given, to find out the
difference of their latitudes: by which the other place may be had.
These two Questions, as they are of little or no use in Navigation; so also
they have no direct and immediate solution. But are performed after the manner
of the rule of false position, by supposing reasonably either a Rumbe, or
another latitude: and then according to Quest. VII, and Quest. VIII, to find
the difference of longitudes: which if it chance to fall out to be the same
that is given in the Question; you have your desire. If not: suppose the second
time. And lastly by comparing of both errors argue the truth.

These two Questions are not so material, that I should spend more time in
setting down Examples thereof. I will leave that work to the studious
practiser.

QVEST. XIII. If it be required to know the distance upon the Rumb between any
two places, the measure of the way being known in degrees. You may multiply
that measure of the way in degrees by miles 6625, which is the number of miles
contained in one Just degree upon the earth, as was before assumed in Chapt.
IIII.
And thus have I showed the use of the Instrument in the solution of all
nauticall Questions: which thing I specially in this small tractate aimed at.
Which if it shall give any light and satisfaction to such as are studious in
that most noble and useful art, I have my desire: which indeed only is, that
the society of mankind may be benefited, and God glorified, by every poor
ability he has been pleased to bestow upon me. I was also in part minded to
have annexed hereunto certain problemes, how by reasonable conjecture the
course of the Ship may be most probably rectifyed, when the reckoning thereof
by the Compass and way estimated, shall be found to disagree from the
celestial observations: Wherein I should have occasion to speak of the
currents or hidden motions of the Seas, how they are to be observed, and how to
be considered of in computing the motion of the Ship: And also of the deflexion
(or as I may call it, the bias) of the Ship bending and wheeling it self about
continually to the one side; how, and what allowance may most reasonably be
made for it. But because these do not properly belong to the Instrument, and
are to me only in speculation (which by reason of my want of experience in
Nauticall affairs, I cannot so well direct and ordain for practice at sea) I
will for this present praetermit, contenting my self with what has been
already delivered.

And if the Masters of Ships and Pilots will take the pains in the journalls
of their voyages dilligently and faithfully to set down in several columns,
not only the Rumbe they go on, and the measure of the Ships way in degrees,
and the observations of latitude, and variation of their compass; but also
their conjectures and reasons of the correction they make of the aberrations
they shall find, and the quality or condition of their Ship, and the
diversities and seasons of the winds, and the secret motions or agitations of
the Seas, when they begin, and how long they continue, how far they extend,
and with what inequallity; and what else they shall observe at Sea worthy
consideration, and will be pleased freely to communicate the same with Artists,
such as are indeed skillful in the Mathematics, and lovers and inquirers of
the truth: I doubt not but that there shall in convenient time be brought to
light many necessary praecepts, which may tend to the perfecting of navigation,
and the help and saftie of such, whose vocations do enforce them to commit
their lives and estates in the vast and wide Ocean to the providence of God: to
whom be all praise, honor, and glory: And this is

The End.
I have at the request of Master Elias Allen, given way that Master Gunters
Table of the division of the Meridian line after Mercator, should be here
inserted, for the use of such as will take the pains to enter into a unmerary
calculation of the former Problemes. The other Tables of natural Sines and
Tangents are every where to be had.

A Table for the division
M Gr Par M Gr Par M G Par M Gr Part M Gr Part 0 0 0 3 3 001 6 6 011 9 9 037 12
12 088 100 3 101 0 111 9 138 12 190 200 3 201 6 212 9 239 12 293 300 3 301 6
312 9 341 12 395 400 3 402 6 413 9 442 12 497 501 3 502 6 514 9 543 12 600 600
3 602 6 614 9 645 12 702 700 3 702 6 715 9 746 12 805 800 3 803 6 816 9 848 12
907 900 3 903 6 916 9 949 13 010 1 1 000 4 4 003 7 7 017 10 10 051 13 13 112 1
100 4 103 7 118 10 152 13 215 1 200 4 204 7 219 10 254 13 318 1 300 4 304 7 319
10 355 13 421 1 400 4 404 7 420 10 457 13 523 1 500 4 504 7 521 10 559 13 626 1
600 4 605 7 622 10 661 13 729 1 700 4 705 7 723 10 762 13 832 1 800 4 805 7 824
10 864 13 935 1 900 4 906 7 925 10 966 14 038 2 2 000 5 5 006 8 8 026 11 11 068
14 14 141 2 100 5 106 8 127 11 170 14 244 2 200 5 207 8 228 11 272 14 347 2 300
5 307 8 329 11 374 14 450 2 400 5 408 8 430 11 476 14 553 2 500 5 508 8 531 11
578 14 656 2 601 5 609 8 632 11 680 14 760 2 701 5 709 8 733 11 782 14 863 2
801 5 810 8 834 11 884 14 967 2 901 5 910 8 936 11 986 15 070 3 3 001 6 6 011 9
9 037 12 12 088 15 15 174 M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Part M Gr Part 15 15
174 18 18 303 21 21 486 24 24 734 27 28 058 15 277 18 408 21 593 24 844 28 171
15 381 18 513 21 701 24 953 28 283 15 485 18 619 21 808 25 063 28 396 15 588 18
724 21 915 25 173 28 508 15 692 18 830 21 023 25 282 28 621 15 796 18 939 22
130 25 392 28 734 15 900 19 041 22 238 25 502 28 847 16 004 19 146 22 345 25
613 28 959 16 107 19 251 22 453 25 723 29 072 16 16 211 19 19 356 22 22 561 25
25 833 28 29 186 16 316 19 463 22 669 25 943 29 299 16 420 19 569 22 777 26 054
29 413 16 524 19 675 22 885 26 164 29 526 16 628 19 781 22 993 26 275 29 640 16
732 19 887 23 101 26 386 29 753 16 836 19 993 23 210 26 497 29 867 16 941 20
100 23 318 26 608 29 981 17 045 20 206 23 427 26 719 30 095 17 150 20 312 23
535 26 83^ 30 300 17 17 255 20 20 419 23 23 643 26 26 941 29 30 324 17 359 20
525 23 752 27 052 30 438 17 464 20 632 23 861 27 164 30 553 17 568 20 738 23
970 27 275 30 667 17 673 20 845 24 079 27 387 30 782 17 778 20 952 24 188 27
499 30 897 17 883 21 059 24 297 27 610 31 012 17 988 21 165 24 406 27 722 31
127 18 093 21 272 24 515 27 834 31 242 18 198 21 379 24 624 27 946 31 357 18 18
303 21 21 486 24 24 734 27 28 058 30 31 473 M Gr Part M Gr Part M Gr Part M Gr
Part M Gr Part 30 31 473 33 34 992 36 38 633 39 42 415 42 46 362 31 588 35 111
38 757 42 544 46 496 31 704 35 231 38 880 42 673 46 631 31 820 35 350 39 004 42
802 46 766 31 936 35 470 39 129 42 931 46 902 32 052 35 590 39 253 43 061 47
0^7 32 168 35 710 39 377 43 191 47 173 32 284 35 830 39 502 43 320 47 309 32
400 35 950 39 627 43 451 47 445 32 517 36 071 39 752 43 581 47 581 31 32 633 34
36 191 37 39 877 40 43 711 43 47 718 32 750 36 312 40 002 43 842 47 855 32 867
36 433 40 128 43 973 47 992 32 984 36 554 40 253 44 104 48 129 33 101 36 675 40
379 44 235 48 267 33 218 36 796 40 505 44 366 48 404 33 336 36 917 40 631 44
498 48 542 33 453 37 039 40 757 44 630 48 681 33 571 37 161 40 884 44 762 48
819 33 688 37 283 41 011 44 894 48 958 32 33 806 35 37 405 38 41 137 41 45 026
44 49 097 33 924 37 527 41 264 45 159 49 236 34 042 37 649 41 392 45 292 49 375
34 161 37 771 41 519 45 425 49 515 34 279 37 894 41 646 45 558 49 655 34 397 38
017 41 774 45 691 49 795 34 516 38 140 41 902 45 825 49 935 34 635 38 263 42
030 45 959 50 076 34 754 38 386 42 158 46 093 50 217 34 873 38 509 42 287 46
227 50 358 33 34 992 36 38 633 39 42 415 42 46 362 45 50 499 M Gr Part M Gr
Part M Gr Part M Gr Part M Gr Part 45 50 499 48 54 860 51 59 481 54 64 412 57
69 711 50 641 55 010 59 640 64 582 69 895 50 783 55 160 59 800 64 753 70 080 50
925 55 3^0 59 960 64 924 70 263 51 068 55 460 60 120 65 096 70 449 51 210 55
611 60 280 65 268 70 635 51 353 55 762 60 441 65 440 70 811 51 496 55 913 60
602 65 613 71 008 51 639 56 065 60 763 65 786 71 195 51 783 56 217 60 925 65
960 71 383 46 51 927 49 56 369 52 61 088 55 66 134 58 71 572 52 071 56 522 61
250 66 308 71 761 52 215 56 675 61 413 66 483 71 9^0 52 360 56 828 61 577 66
659 22 140 52 505 56 981 61 740 66 835 72 331 52 650 57 135 61 904 67 011 72
522 52 795 57 289 62 069 67 188 72 714 52 941 57 444 62 234 67 365 72 906 53
087 57 598 62 399 67 543 73 099 53 233 57 754 62 564 67 721 73 292 47 53 380 50
57 909 53 62 730 56 67 900 59 73 486 53 526 58 065 62 897 68 079 73 680 53 673
58 221 63 063 68 258 73 875 53 821 58 377 63 231 68 438 74 071 53 968 58 ^34 63
398 68 618 74 267 54 116 58 691 63 566 68 799 74 464 54 264 58 848 63 734 68
981 74 661 54 413 59 006 63 903 69 163 74 859 54 562 59 164 64 072 69 345 75
057 54 7^1 59 322 64 242 69 528 75 256 48 54 860 51 59 481 54 64 412 57 69 711
60 75 456 M Gr Part M Gr Part M Gr Part M Gr. Part M Gr. Part 60 75 456 63 81
749 66 88 725 69 96 575 72 105 579 75 656 81 970 88 971 96 854 105 904 75 857
82 191 89 219 97 135 106 230 76 059 82 413 89 467 97 418 106 558 76 261 82 635
89 716 97 701 106 888 76 464 82 860 89 967 97 986 107 220 76 667 83 084 90 218
98 272 107 553 76 871 83 310 90 470 98 560 107 888 77 076 83 536 90 723 98 849
108 226 77 281 83 763 90 978 99 139 108 565 61 77 487 64 83 990 67 91 232 70 99
431 73 108 906 77 694 84 219 91 489 99 724 109 249 77 901 84 448 91 746 100 018
109 594 78 109 84 678 92 005 100 314 109 941 78 317 84 909 92 264 100 612 110
290 78 526 85 141 92 525 100 910 110 641 78 736 85 374 92 787 101 211 110 994
78 947 85 607 93 050 101 513 111 349 79 158 85 842 93 314 101 816 111 707 79
370 86 077 93 579 102 121 112 066 62 79 583 65 86 313 68 93 846 71 102 427 74
112 428 79 796 86 550 94 113 102 735 112 792 80 010 86 788 94 382 103 044 113
158 80 225 87 027 94 652 103 356 113 526 80 441 87 267 94 923 103 668 113 897
80 657 87 508 95 195 103 983 114 270 80 874 87 749 95 468 104 229 114 645 81
091 87 992 95 743 104 616 115 023 81 310 88 235 96 019 104 936 115 403 81 529
88 480 96 296 105 257 115 786 63 81 749 66 88 725 69 96 575 72 105 579 75 116
171 M Gr. Part M Gr. Part M Gr. Part M Gr. Part M Gr. Part 75 116 171 78 129
075 81 145 650 84 168 947 87 208 705 116 559 129 558 146 292 169 912 210 649
116 949 130 045 146 942 170 893 212 668 117 342 130 536 147 600 171 891 214 745
117 737 131 031 148 265 172 907 216 909 118 135 131 530 148 937 173 941 219 158
118 536 132 034 149 618 174 994 221 498 118 639 132 542 150 307 176 067 223 938
119 345 133 055 151 003 177 160 226 486 119 755 133 572 151 709 178 275 229 153
76 120 166 79 134 094 82 152 423 85 179 411 88 231 950 120 581 134 620 153 147
180 569 234 891 121 000 135 151 153 878 181 752 237 991 121 420 135 687 154 620
182 960 241 268 121 843 136 228 155 372 184 194 244 744 122 270 136 775 156 132
185 454 248 445 122 700 137 326 156 903 186 743 252 402 123 133 137 883 157 685
188 062 256 652 123 570 138 445 158 478 189 411 261 243 124 009 139 012 159 281
190 793 266 235 77 124 452 80 139 585 83 160 096 86 192 210 89 271 705 124 898
140 164 160 922 193 661 277 753 125 348 140 748 161 761 195 151 284 517 125 801
141 339 162 612 196 680 292 191 126 258 141 936 163 475 198 251 301 058 126 718
142 538 164 352 199 867 311 563 127 182 143 147 165 242 201 529 324 455 127 649
143 763 166 146 203 240 341 166 128 121 144 385 167 065 205 005 365 039 128 596
145 014 167 999 206 825 408 011 78 129 075 81 145 650 84 168 947 87 208 705 90
Infinite.

The Declaration of the two RVLERS for Calculation.
THe Rulers are so framed and composed, that they may not only be applied to
the Calculation of Triangles, and the resolution of Arithmetical Quaestions:
but that they may also very fitly serve for a Crosse-staffe to take the height
of the Sun, or any Star above the Horizon, and also their distances. In
which regard I call the longer of the two Rulers the Staff, and the Shorter
the Transversarie. And are in length one to the other almost as 3 to 2.

The Rulers are just four square, with right angles: and equal in bigness:
they are thus divided.

The Transversarie at the upper end noted with the letters S, T, N, E, on the
several sides, has a pinnicide or sight: at the lower edge of which sight is
the line of the Radius, or Unite line, where the divisions begin.

On the left edge of one of the sides are set the Degrees from 0 to 33 degrees.
And on the right edge of the same side is set the line of Sines from 90 to 1
degree.

In the next side are set two lines of Tangents, that on the right edge goes
upward from 1 to 45 degrees: and that on the left edge goes downward from 45
to 89 degrees.

In the third side, on the right edge is set the line of Numbers, having these
figures in descent, 1, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 9, 8, 7, etc.

In the fourth side on the right edge is set the line of Aequall parts: And on
the left edge are diverse chords for the dividing of Circles.

The Staff at the further end of it has a socket with a pinnicide or sight:
at which begins the 30 degree, and so goes on to 90 degrees at the end of
the Staff next your eye: which degrees from 30 to 90 are set on the right edge
of one of the sides of the Staff.

Then applying your Transversarie to the Staff with the lower end set to 90,
mark on the four sides of the Staff the line of the Radius or Unite: at
which on every left edge must begin the single line of Sines, Tangents, and
Numbers, the very same which were in the Transversarie (that of the Sines being
on that side where the degrees are) only the line of Tangents, and numbers are
continued beyond the line of the Radius, to the further end of the Staff.

And on the fourth side of the Staff in the middle are double divisions: that
on the right hand is a line of Aequall parts to 100, reaching the whole length
of the Staff: And on the left hand contiguous to the former, is the line of
Latitudes or Elevations of the Pole unto 70 degrees marked with the leter L.

The degrees both of the Staff, and Transversarie, and also of the Sines and
Tangents may be divided into 6 parts which contain 10 minutes apiece: or
rather into 10 parts containing 6 minutes apiece: for so they may serve also
for Decimals.

Thus have you on the two Rulers the very same lines which are in the Circles
of Proportion: and whatsoever can be done by those Circles, may also as well be
performed by the two Rulers: and the Rules which have bin here formerly set
down for that Instrument, may also be practiced upon these: so that you be
careful to observe in both the different propriety in working. It will not
therefore be needful, to make any new and long discourse, concerning these
Rulers, but only to show the manner, how they are to be used, for the
calculation of any proportion given.

In working a Proportion by the Rulers, hold the Transversary in your left
hand, with the end at which the line of the Radius or Unite line is, from you
ward: turning that side of the Ruler upward, on which the line of the kind of
the first term is, whether it be Number, Sine, or Tangent: and therein seek
both the first term, and the other which is homogene to it. Then take the
Staff in your right hand with that side upward, in which the line of the kind
of the fourth term sought for is: and seek in it the term homogene to the
fourth. Apply this to the first term in the Transversarie: and the other
homogene term shall in the Staff show the fourth term.

As if you would multiply 355 by 48: Say 1. 355:: 48. 17040. For if in the line
of Numbers on the Staff you reckon 355, and apply the same to 1 in the line of
Numbers on the Transversarie; then shall 48 on the Transversarie show 17040 on
the Staff.

Again if you would divide 17040 by 48: Say 48. 1:: 17040. 355 For if in the
line of Numbers on the Transversarie you reckon 48, and to the same apply 1 in
the line of Numbers on the Staff: then shall 17040 on the Transversarie show
355 on the Staff.

The true value of the fourth term found, may be had by the 5 and 6 sect: 2
chap: 1 part.

Some Examples of working Proportions we will borrow out of 3 chap: 1 part

Example I. If 54 elnes of Holland be sold for 96 shillings: for how many
shillings shall 9 elnes be sold? the work shall be thus 54el. 96sh:: 9el.
16sh. for if in the line of Numbers on the transversarie you seek the first
term 54 elnes, and in that line on the Staff you seek 96 shillings: and
apply one to the other: then shall 9 elnes sought out on the Transversarie
point out 16 shillings on the Staff.

Example IIII. There is a Tower whose height I would measure.

I take two stations in the same right line from the Tower: and at either
station having observed the height by the sights of the Staff, I find the
nearer station 28 degrees: 7 min: almost: and the further station 21 degr: 58
minutes almost: and between both the Stations the distance was 76 feet.

The rule of measuring heights by two stations is contained in these Theoremes.
THEOR. As the difference of the Tangents of the arches cut in either Station,
is to the distance between the stations: so is the Tangent of the lesser arch,
to the nearer distance from the Tower. Again

THEOR. As the Radius is to the Tangent of the greater arch; so is the nearer
distance found, to the height.



And therefore because according to 6 sect: 1 chap: 1 part, by application of
the line of Numbers to the line of Tangents (that is by applying the Unite line
of the Staff, to the Tangent in the Transversarie, if the arch be less then
45 degr: but if the arch exceed 45 degr: by applying the said Unite line, unto
the arch it self, or the complement thereof, which in the Transversarie is all
one) the Tangent of 28, 7 is 5343, and the tangent of 21, 58 is 4033: whose
difference is 1310: the Proportions will in the lines of Numbers be thus First,
1310. 76:: 4033. 234 wherefore 234 feet is the nearest distance Second, Radius.
tang: 28, 7:: 234. 125 wherefore 125 feet is the height sought for.

Or else you may resolve it at one operation thus, THEOR. As the difference of
the tangents of the complements of the arches cut in either station, is to the
Radius;

So is the distance between the stations, to the altitude.



Because accordingly as was before showed, the tangent of the complement of 28,
7 is 18715: and the tangent of the complement of 21, 58 is 24792: whose
difference is 6077. the proportions will in the line of Numbers be thus 6077.
10000:: 76. 125.

And these Rules may be also applied to find out the distances of objects.

Example V. To find the declination of the Sun the ninth day of May.

Because upon the ninth day of May the place of the Sun is in 29: which is 59
degrees distant from the next Aequinoctiall point. Say in the line of Sines
Radius. sine 59:: sine 23, 30. sine 19, 59. And so much is the declination
sought for.

If the distance of the Sun from the next Aequinoctial point exceed not
degrees 2, 30. Break that arch into minutes, or decimal parts of a degree: and
by the lines of Sines and numbers say As the Radius is to the Sine of 23, 30;

So is the distance (of the Sun from the next Aequinoctial point) in minutes,
or Decimals, to the declination in minutes, or Decimals.



As if the declination of the Sun being in 27, 45 be required: the distance
of it from the next Aequinoctial point is 2, 15 that is minutes 135, say
therefore Rad. sine 23, 30:: 135. 537. which is the declination of the Sun in
that place.

Example VI. To find the right ascension of the Sun upon the ninth of May.

Because upon the ninth of May the Sun is 59 degr: distant from the next
Aequinoctiall point: say in the line of Sines on the Transversarie, and the
line of tangents on the Staff Rad. sin: compl: 23, 30:: tan: 59. tan: 56, 46.
which is the Suns right ascension upon the same day.

Or else (because the Radius is the mean proportional between the tangent of
an arch and its complement) the same proportion might have been thus set
down. t: com: 59. Rad:: sin: com: 23, 30. t: 56, 46, In which manner of
proposure happening only when there is in the proportion the Radius and two
tangents, because the two homogenes of the one kind are both extreme terms,
and the two homogenes of the other kind are both middle terms: the tangent is
to be turned into the tangent of the complement: and must change places with
the Radius. As by comparing the two former proportions does plainly appear.

Because that the greatest difficulty of working by these Rulers falls out
in the tangents, when the arches are in the second mediety of the Quadrant, it
will be convenient to set down some cases wherein the work differs from
the ordinary manner.

Case I. If the four proportionals being all tangents, the arches of two of
the terms given exceed 45 degrees: and the arch of the third be less then 45
degr: as in this Example ^: here the tangent of 31 on the Transversarie being
applied to the tangent of 56 on the Staff, the tangent of 79 on the Staff
will outreach the Radius or end of the Transversarie. Wherefore to find out the
fourth proportional, mark what point of the Staff, the line of the Radius on
the Transversarie does touch, and to it (turning the Transversarie) set the
other end of the line of the Radius, and so shall the tangent 79 in the Staff
give you tangent 64, 24 in the Transversarie.

Case II. If the four proportionals being all tangents, the arches of the
three terms given exceed 45 degrees. as in this Example ^. turn the
Transversarie, and set the tangent of 56 therein to tangent 79 on the Staff:
and because the Radius or end of the Transversarie reaches not to the tangent
64, 24 on the Staff: to find out the fourth proportinal, mark what point of
the Staff the line of the Radius of the Transversarie does touch, and to it
(turning the Transversarie) set the other end of the line of the Radius, and so
the tangent 64, 24 in the Staff, will give you tangent 31 in the Transversarie.

These two Cases, being nothing else but a supplying of the shortness of the
Transversarie, may serve as a rule, and direction for all other works of the
same kind.

Concerning the manner of working by Quadrats and Cubes upon the line of
Numbers. And of duplicated and triplicated proportions.

The difference of a Quadrat from a Quadrat is double the difference between
their sides.

And the difference of a Cube from a Cube is triple the difference between
their sides.

Example II, chap: 6, part I. How many acres of Wood-land measured with a Perch
of 18 feet, are there in 73 acres of Champane-land measured with a Perch of 165
feet?

The measures given, 18, 165 being reduced into the least terms, are as 12 to
11, and the proportion is reciprocal. Say therefore, Q: 12, Q: 11:: 73. 6134
Which is thus wrought: In the line of Numbers apply 11 on the Staff, to 12 on
the Transversarie, then shall 73 on the Transversarie give 67 -- on the Staff:
which 67 -- being reckoned on the Transversarie (the Rulers standing as they
did) shall on the Staff give 6134 the number of acres in Wood-land measure.

Example III, chap 6, part 1. If pounds 043 of gunpowder suffice to charge a
Gunne whereof the concave Diameter is yaches 15: how many pounds of powder will
suffice to charge a Gunne whose concave Diameter is inches 7?

The capacities are one to the other as the Cubes of the Diameters. And the
proportion is direct. Say therefore C: 15. C: 7:: 043. 437 Which is thus
wrought: In the lines of Numbers apply 7 on the Staff, unto 15 on the
Transversarie, then shall 043 on the Transversarie give 201 -- on the Staff:
which 201 -- being reckoned on the Transversarie (the Rulers standing as they
did) shall on the Staff give 9333: and again the same 9333 being reckoned on
the Transversarie shall on the Staff give 437 the quantity of pounds of powder
suffising.

Example in 46 page of Navigation. A ship beginning her course at the Latitude
of degrees: 382, saileth upon the WbN Rumbe, unto the Latitude of degrees: 505: how
many degrees of Longitude has it varied in that course?

Here the angle of Inclination of the WbN Rumbe with the Meridian is 78, 45,
the tangent whereof is 502734. And by the double divisions on the fourth side
of the Staff, the Sum of the Secants for the Latitude of 505 is 58691: and
the sum of the Secants for the Latitude of 382 is 41392: the difference of
which is 17299; the sum of the Secants of the parallels between those two
Latitudes. Say therefore. Rad. tang: 78, 45:: 17299. 86068 which is the
difference of Longitude between the Meridians of the two places.

But because this question is of excellent and very frequent use, it will not
be amiss to set down at large the manner of working this Example upon the
Rulers.

Look the two Latitudes 505, and 382 given, in the line of Latitudes or
eleuations of the Pole on the fourth side of the Staff: and either mark what
number each of them shows in the line of Aequall parts there, which you shall
find to be 58691, and 41392, the difference of which is 17299, as was before
said: or else more easily, set one foot of your Compasses on one of the
Latitudes given, and open the other foot to the other Latitude given: then
keeping that aperture, set one of the feet in the beginning of that line of
Aequall parts, and the other foot shall upon the same line show the difference
of Secants between the said two Latitudes given, that is 17299.

Then in working the Proportion; because the angle of inclination of the Rumbe
78, 45 is more then 45 degrees: turn that edge of the Transversarie on which the
tangents of arches above 45 are, toward the Staff in your right hand: and to
the line of the Radius apply 17299 sought out on the line of Numbers on the
Staff: and so shall tang: 78, 45 on the Transversarie: show 8697 -- on the
Staff.

The Use of the Crosse-Staffe.
FOr the more ready use of the Crosse-staffe, you are to remember that the
degrees serving for the Crosse-staffe are placed both on the Staff and
Transversarie, on the same side on which the line of Sines is. And that in
framing thereof the Transversarie is to be set in the Socket so that it may
stand on the right hand of the Staff.

The degrees on the Transversarie are only the first 30. and serve to show an
angle not exceeding 30 degrees.

Yet it would not be unusefull if both the Transversary and Staff were made
somewhat longer that the Transversarie might contain 5 degrees: after 30; and the
Staff 5 degrees before 30.

To find an angle less then 30 degrees* between any two objects.
Place the Socket at 30 degrees: on the Staff; and skrew it fast there: then
setting the end of the Staff to your eye, draw the Transversarie up and down
through the Socket, till you may see with your eye the two objects upon the two
sights of your Crosse-staffe: and so shall the degrees cut on the Transversarie
show you the angle of their distance, if it be not above 30 degrees.

To find an angle greater then 30 degrees, between any two objects.
Place the Socket at 30 degrees of the Transversarie, and skrew it fast there:
then setting the end of the Staff to your eye, draw the Socket up and down
along the Staff till you may see with your eye the two objects upon the two
sights of your Crosse-staffe: and so shall the degrees cut on the Staff, show
the angle of their distance, if it be above 30 degrees.

And thus much, together with that which has been before taught in Example
IIII: will be sufficient for the Use of the Crossestaffe: especially seeing so
many men have already written upon this Argument.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
The Translator to the Reader.
Gentle Reader, by reason of my absence, whilst this Book was in the Press,
it is no mervaile though some faults have escaped, which you will be pleased to
amend thus.

Page 3, lin. 1, the third circle p. 8, lin. ult. so 240/320 is 075. page 14,
lin. 14, 2* 0413927 page 15, lin. 1, the first term of a progression p. 16,
lin. 24, 10833+; page 17, lin. 17, the antecedent arm lin. 28, 4 chap. page
18, lin, 19, term given from page 19, lin. 11, in the fifth circle page 20,
lin. 19, lie hid. As in this lin. 20, D. rat. multa -- 1 in R:: a. Z. lin. 28,
and Rat. multa in R in a -- R in a, lin. ult. and Rat. multa in R -- R, in a,
page 21, lin. 1, and Rat multa in a -- a, in R,

And also in the Aequations page 21, 24, 26, which have a magnitude aequall to
a fraction: the same magnitude together with the note of aequality, ought to be
set right against the line that is between the Numerator and Denominator of
the fraction, as in these, Rat. multa -- 1 in R in a / D = Z. And ZD / a = Rat.
multa in R -- R. And so of the rest.

page 24, lin. 25, Rat. multa -- 1 in R in a / Rat. multa in D

page 25, lin. 20, arm at 71382: lin. 23, (for it is Rat. multa -- 1 in R in
a) page 26, lin. 16. Ratiocination* page 29, lin. 29, number of figures page 35,
lin. 5, 61 49/144 page 36, lin. 11, 437. 1748. lin. 14,:: 1748. 326+ page 37,
lin. 11, 31416, page 39, lin. 15, 3392928 page 41, lin. 19, or as 1 is to
10472: page 44, lin. 8, is a roof lin. 26, thereof page 45, lin. 10, feet
529175. page 46, lin 3, more sides then four page 53, lin, 10, Cylindrical
vessel. page 53, lin. 18, if false, why lin. 20, error? page 57, lin. 14,
common opinion is, that at London a Cylindrical lin. 28, 165 page 74, lin. 28,
the Sum, page 78, lin. 6, third houses lin. 28, Add 90 degrees page 79, lin.
22, and the 90th degree page 82, lin. 5, 26 page 94, lin. 21, a circle, or 90
degrees. page 95, lin. 34, angle D be obtuse, page 96, lin. 4, sign + lin. 21,
q: Z + X: page 100, lin. 3, and then the side DC In the VIII diagramme of
right-lined Triangles the leter A is wanting at the perpendiculer. And in the
VI the angle B ought to have been marked with a little line. page 113, lin. 7,
the delineation page 127, lin. 1, the sun goes not under page 131, lin. 19,
in the paper page 132, lin. 10, 10 the tangent of the arch. page 134, lin. ult.
North or South direct inclining: page 135, lin. 1, North or South direct
reclining. lin. 8, either face of the Plain looks: p. 143, lin. 3, In North
reclining and South inclining page 144, lin. 19, instrument through the Pole of
the Aequinoctial, is one of these three. page 15^, lin. 30, North dyal declining
Eastward 35 degrees

In the Additament of Navigation.
page 2, lin. 11, for valor read value page 6, lin. 9, and 12, for signs
read sines page 29, lin. 20, 21, 24, for 45 read 48 lin. 20, for an half
read eight thousanth parts and lin. 25, for min: 27 read min: 288 page 46,
lin. 20 page 47, lin 9, and 28, page 48, lin. 17 and 21, for 87927: read 86968
page 47, lin. ult. for 205734, read 502734. page 28, lin. 8, 216000F / 349800G:

and keeping the same aperture, bring this latter arm unto the Latit: 65: and
where the former arm shall light, there hold it fast, drawing in the latter
arm to the line of the Radius. Lastly with this new opening bring the other
arm to the line of the radius: and so shall you find 134, the other Latitude
sought for.




