An Homily of Marye Magdalene, declaring her fervent love and zele toward
CHRIST: written by that famous clerk ORIGENE.

Newly Translated and Imprinted ANNO DOM. M.D.LXV

Prouerbiorum. 1. Audiens Sapiens, sapientior erit.

Proverb. 18. Non recipit Stultus verb^ prudentiae:

Nisi ea dixeris quae versantur in cord cius.

This worthy man Origene lived and taught in the year of our Lord, 225.

The Gospel, Iohannis. ^0. MARY stood without at the sepulcher, we pinge: And
as she wept, she bowed herself into the Sepulcher.

And saw two Angels in white, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at
the fete, where the body of IES US had layne.

And they said unto her: Woman, why weepest thou? She said unto them: They
have taken away my lord, and I know not where they have laid him.

When she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw JESUS standing,
and knew not that it was JESUS.

Jesus says unto her: Woman, why weepest thou? whom sekest thou? She
supposing that he had been the gardyner, said unto him: Sir, if thou have born
him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away. JESUS
said unto her: Mary. She turned her self, and said unto him: Raboni, which
is to say, Master.

JESUS says unto her: Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father,
but go to my breethern, and say unto them: I ascend unto my father, and to
your father, and to my GOD, and your GOD.


Marye stood without at the Sepulcher, weeping. etc.
PVRPOSING to speak to your charytable ears at this present solemnity, (most
derely beloved) the godly love of that blessed woman Mary Magdalene recoursed
to my remembrance, how, for that she loved our Lord above all things,
followed him going to his death, where his Disciples forsook him: And how for
that she was kyndled with ye fire of true love, in her vehement desire wepinge
continually, departed not from his sepulcher. For Marye (as says the
Evangelist) stood without at the Sepulcher weping. We do hear (welbelo^^d) of
Mary's standing without at the Sepulcher, we hear also how she wepeth, let us
(if we can) consider the cause of her standing, let us also se why she wepeth:
for both of this her standing may we take profit, and also of her weeping may
we be edifyed. Love it was that made her to stand, and sorrow constrained her
so to weep. She stood lookyng about, if perchance she could see him whom she
loved. But wept therefore, because whom she sought for, she thought was quite
taken away, whereby her sorrow was doubled: First sorowynge for him being dead,
and now sorowing for him taken away: and of both griefs this last was the
greater, for it was without comfort. The first cause of her sorowynge was for
that she had lost his life: but of this sorrow had she some comfort, for that
she thought to have retained him dead as he was* But yet of this heauynes could
she not find comfort, for that she found not his dead body. Thus fearing if
that she found not his body, the love of him her Master would sone wax cold
within her breaste, by the syghte yet whereof she hoped she might ware warm
again. In deed Mary was com to his sepulcher bringing with her the odours and
ointmentes which she had prepared, that as before when he was alive she had
anointed with precious oyntme^t his fete, so now she might anoynte his whole
dead body with oyntme^t and with her spyces embaulme it. And like as first she
had at Luc. 7.
his feet shedd her tears and wept bitterly, and with her tears watered his
feet for ye death of her own soul: so now she comes to water the Sepulcher
with tears for the death of her Master. But fyndinge not the body in the
Sepulcher, her labor of anointinge was lost, but the sorrow of her waylyng
more increased. Present he was not to have her service, and yet absent he was
not to cause her to sorrow. Present he was not whom she would have embau^ed,
and yet absent he was not to cause her to weep. Therefore the more she wept,
the further he was absente. Certes Mary bitterly wept, for Sorrow was heaped
upon sorrow. And two great sorrows she carried in one heart, which feign she
would have eased with her tears, but they could not. And therefore was
wholye plunged in sorrow, fainting both in heart and body, and what she should
do she knew not: for what could this woman do but weep? which both had dolor
intolerable, and found in comfort no remedy? In deed Peter and John came
with her to the Sepulcher, but when they found not the body, they went
forthwith their way home again, But Mary abode without at the Sepulcher
weeping. And as one Romans 4.
hoping against hope, did yet pet souere in hope. Peter and John were afraid,
and therefore stood not, but Mary feared not, because she had nothing left her
(as she thought) for which she ought to fear, for she had lost her
Master, whom she loved so singularly, that beside him she could love
nothing, could hope for nothing: she had lost the life of her foul, and now
she thought it better to dye than to live, thin king perhaps in her death to
have found, whom in her life she could not find, without whom
notwithstanding she was not able to live. Strong as the ^anti^. 8.
Death is love: for what more could death do in Marye? She became as it were
without life, without sense: having sense she used no sense: Saying, she did
not see: hearing, she heard not, neither was she where she was, for wholly was
she there where her Master was: who notwithstanding where he was, she knew
not: she sought for him, but found him not, and therefore continued standing at
the Tomb and wept, altogether lamentable, all together miserable. O Mary what
hope, what cou^sail, what heart was in the, which alone did stand at the
Sepulcher when the Disciples were departed? Thou came before them, thou
returnedst with the^, and after them also there remainedst. Why dyddst thou
this? were thou wiser then they? Or did thou love more then they, because
thou fearedste not as they? Truly Mary was now wise in nothing but in
louinge, and to sorrow for her beloved. She had forgot to fear, forgot to joy,
yea forgot her own self. What should I more say? She had forgote all things,
except him whom she loved above al things. And (which is wonderful) she was
so forgetful, that she knew not him neither. Believe me, if she had known
him, she had not searched for him in his Tomb: and if she had kept his words
still in mind, she had not forowed as of one dead, but should have rejoiced
of him, as living: nor should she have wept as of one which was taken away but
she should have rejoiced for that he was risen again. For Jesus had forespoken
that thus he Luce. 14.
should dyc, and that he should rise again the third day. But alack for
pity, overmuch sorrow had filled her heart, and had quite blotted out the
remembrance of these words. In her no sense remained, al counsel in her was
lost, all hope failed: to weep her belly full, did only remain. She wept
therefore, for weep she might. She bowed down her self and looked into the
Tomb, and saw two Angels sitting in white, one at the sea te, the other at
the head, which said unto her: woman, why wepeste thou? O Marye, lo, now thou
haste found great comfort, and perchance it has happened unto thee better
then thou haste hoped: for thou soughtest one, and have found two. Thou
soughtest one dead, and have found two living. Thou have found that seem to
take care for thee, and that will ease thy heaviness. For he whom thou sekest
seems to set naught by thy sorowinge, he seems not to regard thy tears.
Thou callestc him, and he hears not: Thou prayest, and he gives no favorable
care unto thee. Thou sekest him, and find him not: Thou knockeste, but he
opens not. Thou foloweste him, and he flies. Alas what meneth this? O lord
what a great change is this? Alas how is al turned vpside down? For this is
JESUS who of late went from the: and how comes this thus to pass?
Peradventure thou know not whether he loves thee. Once he loved the, once
he defended thee from Luc. 7.
the Pharisey, once he excused Luc. 10.
the to thy sister diligently, once he commended thee as when thou annoyntedst
his feet with oyntmente, water edst them with Luc. 7.
thy tears, and wypedst them with thy hear, he assuaged thy sorrow, forgave
thy sins. Once Ioh. 11.
he sought thee when thou werte not present, he called for the when thou were
away, he commanded the by thy sister to come unto him, she saying: Thee Master
is here and calls the* O how quickly did Mary the^ arise after she heard
that, how carefullye came she, and after her acustomed manner fell at thy fete?
O sweet IESV, thou when thou saw her weep, weeptst also. O how pitifully
diddeste thou comfort her when thou saidest: Ioh. 1^.
Where have ye laid him? To conclude, for the love of her which much loved
thee, thou did raise from death her brother Lazarus, and so thou turnedst the
mourning of this thy lover into joy. And O most gentle Master, what has this
disciple since offended the? And wherein has this thy d^relouer displeased the
kyndenes of thy heart, in that thou go so from her? We have since that time
heard of no offense do^ by her, except because when thou were puried, She came
in the morni^g and that very* early before all other to the Sepulcher, brynging
ointeme^tes wherewith she might an^oynte thy body. And when she Ioh. ^0.
found the not in the Sepulcher, she ran and told this thing unto thy
disciples. They came, they sa^we, and they straighte went their way again:
but she stands still and wepeth. And if this be an offense, if all this be
done for love of the, and of a fervent desire she bears toward the, wherefore
go thou thus from her? why do thou thus hid thy self? thou that loueste
all that love the, and thou that art found of al the^ that seek the: for thou
say: I love those that love me. Prou. 8.
Why does not therefore this sely woman find the, which did so early watch
for the? Why doste thou not comfort her tears which she sheddeth for the her
lord, like as thou did once comfort her tears which she shede for her
brother? If truly thou louedst her after thy wo^ted manner, what meanest thou
to prolonge her desire? O true and faithful Master, call to thy remembrance
the good report and testymony thou once gave of her to her sister Martha.
For thou said: Mary has chosen the best part, which shall not be taken from
her. In deed Mary Luc: 10.
did chose the best part, for she did chose to stand at thy fete and to
hear thy preaching. She chose in deed ye best part, for The she chosed. But
how is this true which shall not be taken from her, if thou be taken from her?
and if the best part that she chose be not taken away, why then wepeth she?
Or what the^ does she seek? Certes Mary seeks nothing else but ye which she
chose. And for this alo^e she cease not to weep for that which she has
chosen she has now lost. Therefore (O thou man savior and keeper) either save
in her the part she has chosen, or else I know not how this is true, which
shall not be taken from her, unless yt may be thus understood, that although
thou art taken from her sight, from her corporal eyes, yet art thou not
taken away from her heart. But alas Mary why make thou any longer tariynge?
why art thou trobled? why wepest thou? Lo, see thou have Angels, let the
sight of Angels suffice the. For paraduen ture, he whom thou sekest, for who^e
tho^ wepest, espieth in the something for which he will not be seen of the:
(...) of now thy sorrow, measure thy tears: ca^ to mind what he said both to
the and to other women: Weep Luc. 23*
not for me. Therefore what is this thou do? He forbad the to weep, and yet
thou spareste not to weep. I fear me least by the weping yt offend him for
whom thou doste so continually weep. For if he loved thy tears, he could
perchance no more now the^ he did once suffer thy teres. Now therefore hear my
advice. Let the comfortinge of Angels content and satisfye the, abide thou with
them, ask and inquire of them. And it may fortune yt they shall tell what is
become of him thou sekest, and for whom thou wepest. And I believe assuredlye,
their coming was to be are witness of him, as also believe that he whom thou
wepest for, has sent them for himself and for thy self, to tell the of his
Resurrection, and to comfort thy lamenting. For they said to her: woman, why
wepest thou? What is the cause of this thy great heaviness? hyde not thy tears
from us, open to us thy grief, and we shall show the thy desire. Marye wasted
with to much sorrow out of measure, and as it were wholly cast in a trance,
receives no comfort, and resorteth to no comfort, but museth thus within her
self and says: Alas that ever I was borne, what comfort is this? what manner
of visitatio^ is this? All co^fortes be but ^ burden unto me, they do but
grieve me, and not comfort me, For I seek the Creator, therefore heaui to my
sight is al manner of creature. I will not behold Angels, with Angels will not
I abide, for they may augmente my sorrow, but they can not utterly put away my
sorrow. If they shall begin to tell me many things, and I to every thing shall
make them a^swere, I fear me they will rather hinder my love, then further my
love. To be short, I seek not for Angels, but him who made me and Angels. I
seek not angels, but the Lord of my self and of angels. They have take away my
sovereign Lord, him only will I seek, he alone can comfort me: but I ca^
not tell where they have laid him. I look about if I can see him, but I se him
not: feign I would find the place where he is laid but I find it not. O
woeful Wtoman that I am, what shall I do? whether shall I go? and whether is my
beloved gone? I sought for him in his Sepulcher, and there I found him not. I
called him, but he answered me not: woe is me, where shall I seek him? where
shall I find him? I will rise truly, I will go about, I will search in all
places I can, I will give no sleep to mine eyes, I will give no rest to my
feet, until I shall find him whom my Soul loves. Weep ye mine eyes, gushe
out with tears and stynte not, walk ye my feet, run about and rest not.
Alas alas whether is my joy gone? where does my love hyde him? where is my
sweet Lord? why have thou m^ health forsaken me? O insufferable sorrows: O
intolerable perplexity of mind, I se troble on every side, and what to choose
I know not. If I abide next his Tomb, yet I find him not. if I go from his
Tomb, I know not wretch whether to go, I know not whereto seek him. To depart
from the Tomb is death unto me, to stand at the Tomb is grief incurable:
how be it, better it is for me to keep still my Lords Tomb, then to go far
from it any further: for in goinge further, perchance at my return again, I
shall find both him taken away, and also his sepulcher destroyed. I will
stand therefore, and here will I dye. that yet at least wise I may be buried
nigh the sepulcher of my Lord. O how happy shall my body be, if it be buried
nighe unto my Master. O how blessed shall my Soul be, which passing forth of
this bryckle vessel of my body, may by and by enter into my Lords glorious
Sepulcher. My body has always ben to my soul labor and travail, my Lords
sepulcher shallbe unto me rest and honor. Therefore I will not forsake this
Sepulcher, because thus to die it shall be my comfort, and in my death it
shall be my rest. So long as I live I will abide by it, when I dye I will
cleave fast unto it, neither alive nor dead I will be separated from it. Alas
what a wretched woman I am, wherefore did I not then this foresee when I
beheld my lord buried? why did not I stand with him? wherefore did I not
with true attendance keep the Sepulcher: then had I not bewailed his taking
away, for I had either withstanded them which took him away, or else had gone
after them. But O woeful case, I would have kept the law, and have let go the
Lord of the law: I would have obeyed the law, and have not kept him to whom
the law it self is obediente, though with Christ to abide had not ben to
transgress the law, but to fulfill the law. For the paschal Lamb is not
disteined by the death of him, but is again iterate and renewed. His corpse
does not defile the clea^e, but cleanses the defiled: he heals all such as
touch him, and does illuminate all such as come to him. But what do I renew
the memory of my sorrow? I went, I returned, I found the Tomb opened, but
found not him I sought for. I will stand therefore, I will wait, lokinge if
happily he may any where appear. But how, shall I stand alone desolate? The
Disciples be gone their way, and have left me alone weping. None do appear
who would sorrow with me. No where does he appear, which with me would
seek the Master. Here have appeared Angels, but I know not for what cause
they have appeared. If to comfort me, they ought not then to be ignorante
wherefore I weep. If they be not ignorante for what I weep, why say they to
me: Why wepest thou? Do they therefore question with me, to let me from
wepinge? I beseech them, not to swade me to that, that they will not counsel
me to that, for or else let them kill me. What needs mo words? I will not
obey them, I will not cease to weep duringe my life but I find my lord. But
what may I do to find him? whither shall I turn me? to whom shall I go? of
whom shall I inquire? of whom shall I ask counsel? who shall have compassion
on me? who shall comfort me? who shall Cant. 1^
show me whom my soul loves, Cant. 2.
where he is bestowed, where he lies at noontide? where he rests? I beseech
you tell him how I pyne with love and consume with sorrow, and that there is no
dolor as is my dolor. Turn Tren. ^.
again my beloved, turn again Cant: 6.
my hearts desire and dearling. Psalm. 50.
O amiable, O delitable, give again to me the gladness of thy comfortable
presence. Show me Cant. 2.
thy countinaunce, let thy voice Psalm. 90.
sound in mine ears, for thy ^0, 118.
voice is sweet, and thy visage is beutiful. O my hope, confou^d me not in
mine expectation. Show me thy face, and it shall suffice my soul. While Marye
did thus mourn and thus wept as she spak these things, She turned her self
back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not it was Jesus. Jesus said unto her
woman why weepest thou? and Whom seek thou? O thou the desire of her soul,
why doeste thou ask her why wepeste thou? and whom seekeste thou? She but a
little before, with her very eyes, to the great dolor of her heart, beheld the
her whole hope, to be hanged upon the tree, and saieste thou now unto her, why
wepest thou? She the third day beheld thy hands wherewith she has been often
blessed, thy feet which she had kissed, and which she had watered with her
tears nailed upon the cross, and thou being her whole sorrow, say unto her:
Why wepest thou? She beheld ye geui^g up of her spirit, yt is to say, thy
spirit: and say thou now, why wepest thou? Yea furdermore she supposes thy
body is stolen away which she came to anoi^t, yt by some mea^es she might
comfort her self, and say thou, why wepest thou? whom seek thou? Thou
well know, yt the alone she seeks, the alone she loves, for yt she
contemns all things, and sayeste thou, What seekeste thou? Sweet Master, for
what purpos I pray yt do thou provoke this woman's spirit? for what purpose
doeste thou vex her Soul? She wholye depends on thee: she wholye abides in
thee. All her hope is in the, all despair in her self. She does so seek the,
that seekinge the, she can seek nothing but the, she can mind nothing but
the: and therefore perchaunte she does not know the, because she is not in her
self, but for thy sake is out of her self: why therefore say thou: Why
weepest thou? whom sekest thou? Do thou think that she can say: I weep for
the, I seek the, except thou first inspire her, and say in her heart: I am he
whom thou we peste for, and for whom thou sekeste? Doeste thou think that she
can know the, so long as it shall please the to hide thy self? But she
supposinge that he had been the gardener, said unto him: Sir, if thou have
carried him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him up. O
sorrow miserable, O love unspeakable. This woman was so covered with a thick
cloud of woe and sorrow, that she saw not the Sun, yt in the morning tide
arising, shone by her windows, and by the ears of her body was now entered
into the house of her heart. But because she la^guished in her love, of this
languishinge the eyes of her heart became so dym, that she could not se him
whom she saw. For she did see Jesus, but she knew not it was Jesus. O Mary,
it thou sekest Jesus, why doeste thou not acknowledge Jesus? And if thou
know Jesus, why sekest thou Jesus? Behold, Jesus comes unto the, and he
whom thou sekest asks of the? Woman, why wepest thou? and thou supposest him
to be a gardi^er, to show thou know him not. For Jesus is also a gardener,
because he sows all good seed in the gardin of thy soul, and in the hearts
of his faithful he planteth every good Herb, and waters it in the souls of
his saints. And it is JESUS himself which talks with the. But therefore
perhaps thou do not know him, because he corporally talks with ye. Thou
sekest a dead one, and therefore thou do not acknowledge him as living. Have
I not truly espied, that this is the cause wherefore he went from the? and why
he appeared not unto the? For why should he appear unto the for whom thou
do not seek? Thou verily soughtest for that which was not, and soughtest not
for ye which was. Thou did seek Jesus, and didste not seek Jesus: and
therefore in saying Jesus, thou did not know Jesus. O pitiful and sweet
Master, I can not altogether excuse this thy disciple: I can not freely defend
this her error: And yet for all that she erred, because she sought the for
such an one as once she had seen the, and for such a one as she had left
the, when thou were laid in thy grave. For she had seen thy body taken down
dead from the cross, and laid in a tomb, and so great sorrow had taken hold
of her for thy death, yt she could not hope of thy life. And such sorrow had
possessed her heart for thy burial, that she could think nothing of thy
resurrection, To conclude, Joseph put thy body into a tomb, and Mary had
buried there her spirit also, and so unseparably joined it, and as it were,
united it with thy body, yt she could more easily separate her living soul
from her living body, the^ her loving spirit from thy dead body: for the
spirit of Mary was rather in thy body, the^ in her own body. and when she
eaftsones sought for thy body, she did then also seek for her own spirit: and
when she lost thy body, she lost with it her own spirit: what marvel the^ if
she had no sense, which had lost her spirit? what maruail was it if she knew
not the which had no spirit where with she should know the? Restore
therefore unto her again her soul, which thy body has within it self, and
she shall recover furthwith her sense again, and forsake her error But how
did she err which did so sorrow for the, and did so love the? Truly if she
erred, I speak without doubtinge, that she wist not she erred, and so her
error proceeded not of error, but of love and grefe. Therefore O merciful and
just Judge, the love she bare to thee, and the sorrow she took for the, may
excuse her before the, if perhaps she erreth of the. And mark not the error of
the woman, but the love of thy disciple, which did not weep of error but of
sorrow and of love, and said unto the: Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell
me where thou have laid him, and I will take him up. O how skilfully is she
ignorante, and how learnedly does she err? To the Angels she said, They have
taken him away, and they have laid: And she said not? Ye have taken him, and
Ye have laid him, because the angels neither took the out of thy Tomb, nor
laid the in any place: but to thee she said (If thou have borne him away)
and, (where haste thou laid him) because thou indede did bear thy self out
of the Tomb, and layds^e thy self in the place where thou art. To the angels
she said not Tell ye me. because thee Angels could not tell wholly what had been
done of the, nor how it had been done of the, but to the she says: Tell thou
me, because it is not impossible for the to tell that which was possible for the
to do: for thou rosest again by thine own power, and that which was done of
the, thou diddeste it thy self. But what is this (Lord) that Mary so often
speaks and repeteth this word, Where haste thou laid him? For she had said
to the Apostles first of all, where have they laid him? The selfsame answer
she spoke unto ye Angels, Where have they laid him? And now speaks to the of
thy self, Where haste thou laid him? This word wax eth exceeding sweet in her
heart that so abou^deth in her mouth. Lertes thy swetenes makes it more
sweet, and she does this for thy love sake, because she reme^breth that thou
said once Ioh. 11.
of her brother, Where have ye laid him? for since yt she heard this word of
thy mouth, she has kept it diligently in her heart, and has delighted to use
it in her speech. O how does she love thy person, that so loves thy voice?
O how much does she desire to see thy countinaunce which so desirously
pronou^ceth thy word? And how gladlye would she kiss thy feet, which so
gladly uses thy sayings? what is this also (O good Jesus) that she speaks to
the of the? And I will take him up. Joseph feared and durst not take down thy
body from the Cross but in the night, and but askinge it of Pilate: but Mary
abides not Ioh. 19.
for the night, nor fereth Pilate, but boldly pronounces saying, I will take
him up. O Mary put the case that the body of Jesus were laid in the palayce
of the high Priest where the chief Apostle did warm him self at ye fire,
what woldeste thou do? I would take him up. O wonderful woman in boldenes. O
woman, no woman. and what if the Dam sell, the door keeper should ask^ the?
what will thou do? I will take him up. O unspeakable love of this woman. O
marvelous audacitye of a woman. O woman, no woman: she excepter hno place she
prefers none, she speaks without fear, she promises absolutely, Tell me
where thou haste laid him, and I will take him up. O Woman great is thy
faith, great is thy co^stancy. Therefore (O good Lord) why haste thou forgotten
to say: Let it be don unto the as Mat. 1^.
thou will? And, Be of good cher, Mat. 1^*
thy faith has made you safe. Have Psalm* 76.
thou forgotten to have mercy? wherefore then do thou not te^ her where thou
haste laid thy self, that she may take the up upon her heart, and bear thee
in her body, and show the unto thy disciples. Do not (I beseech the sweet
Master) prolonge her desire any more: for lo now these three days she has
endured waytinge for the, and has nothing Mat. 8.
to eat, and has naught where with to feed her hungry soul: but thou by
disclosinge thy self, do reach unto her ye bread of thy body, and do
fyl her with thy fragments of the basket of her heart. Wherefore, if thou will
that she faynte not by the way, refresshe and comfort the bowels of her soul
with the plesau^tes of thy taste. For thou art Sapi. 16.
the living bread which haste in the al manner delectablenes and all savor of
swetenes: for the life of her body will not long endure, onles you quickly
show thy self, which art the life of her soul. Jesus said unto her: Mary.
She turned her self and said unto him. Rabboni, which is to say: master,
Jesus said un to her. Touch me not. Opermutatio^ of the right hand of the
highest. Great sorrow is now turned in to great joy. The tears of sorrow be
changed into the tears of love. So sone as Mary heard this word, Marye, (for
so was her Master wont to call her) she did perceive before in that name, a
certain singular swetenes of calling, and by that she knew him to be her
Master, of whom she was called. The^ her spirit revived, and her sense came
again. And when Jesus would more have added, Mary could not patiently tarry to
hear any more: but for very great joy interrupted him, saying: Rabboni. for
she thought she needed no word that had found ye word, and thought it far
more profitable to handel the word then to hear any manner of words. O love
strong and impatient. It was not enough for her to se Jesus, and to speak
with Jesus, Luc. 6. and. 8.
onles also she touched Jesus, for she knew that virtue went out from him,
and how that he healed all men. O most pitiful Lord, and most sweet
Master, how good art thou to those that be of a pure heart: Psalm. 73.
how sweet art thou to those yt be of an vprighte heart, and be ^ap. 1.
lowly in spirit. O how blessed be they that seek the in singelnes of heart:
and how happy be they that trust in the. It is verily true, and undoubtedly
true, that thou love althat love the, Prou. 8.
and doste never forsake them yt Psalm. 9.
put their trust in thee. For behold, this thy lover did seek the unfeignedly,
and has found the trewly. She trusted in the, and she is not forsaken of the,
but has obtained by the, more then she looked for at the. Let us therefore
(brethren) follow the good affection of this woman, that we may come to the
like effect. Let eueri one weep unto Jesus, and seek faithfully Jesus, that
will not hyde him self from a sinner that seeks him. Learn sinful man of a
sinful woman, whose sins notwithstanding be forgeuen her: Learn to weep for
Gods absence, and to desire his presence. Learn of Marye to love Jesus, and to
trust in Jesus, and by seekinge Jesus in this search, to fear no adversity,
and besides Jesus to receive no comfort, and for Jesus to contemn all things.
Learn of Mary to seek for Jesus in the Se pulcher of thy heart, Roll away the
stone from the door of the Sepulcher of God, remove all hardness, and put
away every thing that may hinder thy faith: take away all wordly desire from
thy heart, and search diligently whether Jesus be in it. And if thou find not
Jesus in it, stand without and weep: persiste in faith, and look outwardly to
others, whether happily you may see him in any. And with weepinge pray
Jesus that he will vouchsafe to enter into the, and will dwell in the, and
lest perchance with a proud stiff up right neck, thou put him away from the:
humbly incline thy self and bow down unto him, and look often into the
Sepulcher of God which is in thee, and if thou shalt see Angels there
sittinge, one at the head, an other at the feet, that is, if thou shalt know
in thy heart as it were heavenly desires, appertaining as well to this active
life as to ye contemplative life, by ye which nevertheless thou can not see
and have Jesus, be not with these contentid, do not yet faint and give over,
but weep and seek still Jesus in thy self, until thou find him. And if he so
chance at any time to appear unto ye, and to present him self unto thy
desire. do not presume of thy self as though thou know him, but inquire of
him, and beseech him he will show him self unto the. I dare boldly undertake,
if in faith thou shalt stand at the tomb of thy heart, if wepingly you shall
seek Jesus, and shall continue in seki^g: if you shall bow down thyselfe with
humbl^nes, if by Mary's exaumple thou will receive no comfort of Jesus, except
you receuest Jesus, he will reuele him self unto the, and thou shalt find him
and know him. So that thou shall not need to ask of other, where is Jesus,
but thou shalt rather tell and show him to others, and say: For I have seen
the Lord, and he spoke these things unto me. To whom with the Father and the
holy ghost be all honor and glory, world without end.

AMEN.
AN HOMILY OF ABRAHAM, how he offered by his son Isaac. written by ORIGIN.

Newly translated.

Anno. M.D.LXV.

An Homily of Abraham, how he offered up his Son: written by ORIGIN.
AFter these things, God did prove Abraham, and said unto hi^: Abraham,
Abraham. Take thine only son Isaac whom thou love, and offer him up for
a brent sacrifice un to me, in one of those mountains which I shall show the.


Give ear to this which I have to say (I speak to you you drawnye to the Lord)
you I say which think your scluesto be faithful, and consider diligently how
ye faith of the faith full is proved: as by the words which have been rehearsed
unto you, shall appear. And it came to pass, that after these things
almightye God did prove Abraham, and said unto him: Abraham, Abraham: and then
answered he, Lo here I am. Mark well every thing as it is written: for in every
one of the^, if a man can dig deep, he shall find treasure. and perhaps where
it is not thought, shall be hidden some precious Jewels of secret mysteries. This
godly man is called Abraham: and no where we read that God called him with
that name, or that he spoke to him saing, Abraham Abraham: for he could not
be called of God by a name which should be diminished, but he called him with
that name which himself did give him: and not with ye name only he called
him, but he dubleth his name, Abraham, Abraham. And when he had answered, Lo
here I am, he said unto him: Take now thine only son whom thou love,
Isaac I say, and offer thou him up for a brent sacrifice, in one of the
montaines, which I will show unto the. For what cause God gave him a name, and
called him Abraham, himself declares it, for (says he) I have apoited the to
be the father of many nations. This promise made God to him after he had
Ismahell his son: how be it he made the promise to be fulfilled in that sone
which Sara should be are unto him. Thus therefore had he kyndled his heart in
the love of his son, not only in consideration of the posterity, but also in
the hope of the promises. And yet is he commanded to offer this his son to
the Lord for a bre^t Sacrifice in one of the mountains: his only Son in whom
so great and marvelous promises were made: I say even that son, in whose
respect he had his name to be called Abraham. What say thou to this
Abraham? what manner cogitations are tossed in thy heart? A word is come from
God him self, which will discuss and try thy faith: What say thou to
this? What think thou? what musest thou? do thou think thus with thy
self, within thy heart: that if in Isaac yt promise is made unto me, and I
offer him up for a burnt sacrifice, it must needs fall out yt the hope of ye
promise is frustrat? or rather do yt thus reason within thy self, and say:
because it is not possible for him to lie who has made ye promise, therefore
what so ever yt promise be, it shall stand? How be it, because I am so base, I
am not hable to search out the cogitations of so excellent a patriark, nor yet
am I able to find out what manner of deliberations that voice which came from
God to prove him stirred him to, what counsel it brought with it, when he
was commanded to call his only son. Notwithstanding because ye spirit which
is in prophettes is subject to prophettes, Romans 4.
Paul the Apostle which (as I believe) was instructed by ye holy spirit, what
mind, what counsel Abraham bare in his heart, has reveled it saying:
Abraham in his faith staggered not when he was about to offer up his only
son, in whom he receued ye promises: iudgi^g thus in himself: God was able
to raise him up again, though he we are dead. Thus therefore does the Apostle
declare unto us the cogitations of this faithful man, that the faith of the
Resurrection was then seen to have a beginning in Isaac. Abraham therefore did
hope that his son Isaac should rise again. And he believed that it would be
hereafter fullfilled which as yet was not don. How the^? be they Abraham's
children which do not believe to be fulfilled in Christ, which he believed would
be fulfilled in Isaac? yea if I should speak yet more plainly: Abraham knew
that he did form out before as it were an Image of that truth which was to
follow: That is, he knew before that Christ should be borne of his seed,
which should as a more parfa^ct sacrifice be offered up for ye whole world:
and that he should also rise again from death. But thus in the mean while
(writes Moses) God did prove Abraham, and said unto him: Take up thy on lie
beloved son whom thou derelye love. It was not enough to say: Take up thy
son, but thy only beloved son. Let it be so, what is more added? And whom
thou love. O see and consider ye weighty gravity of this tentatio^, how with
so dear and sweet names, so often and often repeted, is the Fathers heart and
affecrio^ sturred up: whereby the fresh remembrance of his love, this father
should hold of his righthande to offer up his son: whereby the whole power of
his flesh should fight against ye faith of his heart. And further is added
even in the very rune when he proved him: Take up (says he) thy most dear
Son Isaac, I say, whom thou love. Let it so he O Lord, that thou put
the father in remembrance of his son, and commau^dest him to kill him, why
addest thou, Thy most dear Son? Let this suffice to the torment of a Father,
Thou ioynedst to it again, Yea whom thou love. Let this doble and treble
affliction be enough and enoughe to the Fathers heart. What need it to
rehearse to memory the name Isaac: was not Abraham advised of this, that his
only so well beloved son, he whom he loved, was called Isaac. But why is mention
made of him at this very time: was it for ye Abraham calling to his
remembrance how thou said unto him, that in Isaac thy sede shall be called,
and yt in Isaac should ye promises be fulfilled: and by rememberau^ce of his
name he should be driven to despair of all the promises which were made unto
him under that name? But what? All these things thus were don, for that God did
prove Abraham. And what yet follows? Go thy way, says he, into the hie land,
to one of the mountains which I will show the, and there offer thou him for a
brent sacrifice. Consider every thing by it self, how the tentations abounded.
Get the up into the hye land. I pray you would not Abraham first be led with
the child to ye high land, and to be placed upon the hill which the lord had
chosen out, and there to be said unto him that he should offer his son? But
it is first said unto him yt he should offer his son, and the^ is he
commanded to go to a high Land, and to ascend up into ye hill. What means
this? Truly, that whilst he went and made his iournye, he should as I might
say, be torn in pieces by his own thoughts throughout the wholl way: and that
he should be crucified of one side through the commandment of god urging
him, on the other side through the Fatherly affection of his only son,g
repining and abhorring the fact. Therefore, for this cause he was enjoined to
go a long wave, to clyme up an hye hill, to this intent, that his fansy and
faith, the love of God, and the love of his own flesh, the desire of things
present, and the lookinge after things to come, should strive together for a
time in all those things, he is sent therefore into an hye land. And it
sufficed not to prescribe unto the Patriarche which should do so not able a
work unto the Lord, for to go unto an hye land, but also he is commanded to
ascend up into an hye hill: Truly that he might forsake earthly things being
exalted by faith, and ascend to those things which are above in heaven. Ahraham
then rose earlye in ye morning, he sadled his Ass, and cut wood for to burn
at the sacrifice: he took his son Isaac with him and two servants, and came
at the third day to the place that God appointed him to go unto. Abraham rose
early. Wherefore does the text add, Early in the morninge? paraduenture it
would declare that light began to shine in his heart. He sadleth his Ass, he
prepares wood, he takes up his son, he takes no deliberation in ye
matter, he makes no stickinge or staying, he makes no man privy of his
purpos, but forth with he takes him self to his Journey, and came (as the
text says) to the place which the Lord told him of, on the third day. I
here pass over to say what secret misterye the third day does signify, I
only have a regard to the wisdom and purpose of God that minded to prove and
try him. Was there no hill at al nigh at hand, seeing the whole country was set
in hills, but that his Iournye must be drawn out three day long, and for
the space of those three days, his fathers heart must be tormented with so
many cares recoursinge together? so that all this long time the father should
behold his son, he should eat meat with him, and so many nights the son
should be embraced of the Father, should sit in his fathers lap, and lie in
his bosom? Se I pray you, how greatly his temtacions were multipled and
increased. But yet the third day is very apt to express mysteries: For when
the people of Israel came out of Egypt, they did offer sacrifice unto god on
the third day, and on the third day were purified: and Christ's resurrection
was upon the third day: and many other mysteries bec comprehended within the
third day. Abraham (says the text) looked up and saw a far of the place
appointed, and he said to his servants: Stay ye here with the ass, I and the
child will go together to yender place, and when we have don our offering, we
will return unto* you again. And thus he leaves his servants: for the
servants might not ascend with Abraham unto the place of sacrifice which god
had prescribed. Therefore says he to his servants: Sit ye here, I and the child
will go up into the hill, and when we have made our sacrifice, we will return
unto you. Abraham I pray the tell me, doeste thou say the truth to thy
servants, that thou mindest to do sacrifice and to return with thy child again
unto them, or doeste thou dissemble? If thou say the truth, ergo thou shall
not make him a sacrifice. If thou do dissemble, it becomes not so great a
patriarch to disse^ble. What mind therefore does this word bewray in th? Truth
says he I speak, and I offer the child for a burnt sacrifice: for to that
intent do I carrye wood with me, and with him will I return unto you. For I
do believe and this is my faith, that God is hable to raise him up, yea though
he be dead. After this (says the text) Abraha^toke wood to the sacrifice, and
laid it upon Isaac his son: and he took fire in his hands and a sword, and
went for ward together. In that Isaac carried for him self wood unto sacrifice,
it was a figure of that that Christ him self bare his own cross. And yet to
carry wood to sacrifice, is ye priests office. Thus is he made both Sacrifice
and Priest. But where as it is added in the text: They went both together, is
referred unto this consideration: for when Abraham (as minding to make a
sacrifice) carried fire and a knife, Isaac does not drag after him, but goes
jointly with him, to signifye that he iointlye with him e^ioined the
preisthod. And what follows after this? Isaac, says the text, spoke to his
father Abraham: Father. even this word spoken at that time of his son, was a
word of much tentario^. For how think you? did the son which was straight
way to be sacrificed, shake his fathers bowels by this word? And although that
Abraham was so^what the more consta^tly set for the faith that was in him, yet
he puts out a word of like affection and a^swered: What me nest thou my
son? Whereunto he said: Behold (says he) fire and wood, but where is the
sheep to sacrifi^e? To these answered Abraham: O my son, God will provide for
him self a sheep to sacrifice. Certainly this precyse and ware answer of
Abraham moves me much: for I can not tell what he saw in spirit, for that
he answered not of the time present, but of the time to come: God himself
will provide a sheep for his sacrifice. He answered with a Shall to his son
which asked of him a thing present, For in deed the Lord him self provided to
him self a sheep in Christ, for that wisdom it self has bulded to him self his
house and he him self has humbled him self eue^ to death: And what soever else
yt readeste of Christ, thou shall find them done, not by any necessity, but
by free election. Then they both went forward together, and were come to the
place which God did show him. When Moises was come to the place which God did
show unto him, he is not permitted to clyme up to it, before it was said to
him, Unloose the latchettes of thy shoes from thy fete. But to Abraham no such
matter is said nor to Isaac, But they clime vptogether, and put of no shows.
The reason peradventure thereof, was because Moises (how great soever he was)
yet was he come out of Egypt, and therefore had his fete snared with some
ba^des of car^alitye. But Abraham and Isaac had no such matter, but they
came to the place, they builded the Alter, Abraham laid wood upon the Altar,
and binds the child, he prepares him self to slay him. Many of you yt hear
these things in the Church of God, are Fathers your selves: And which of you
think thou, by hearing this historye told, has attained to such constancy
and strength of mind, yt if your son, yea your only son, your derly beloved
son perhaps be taken a way by death (both common and dew unto al me^) frames
to him self Abraham for a patron, and lays his stoutnes before your ^yes?
yet truly ye like stout mind is not required of thee, that thou thy self bynd
thy Son, yt thou thy self make him fast, yt thou thy self prepare ye sword,
that thou thy self should slaye thine only child: (all these mysteries are
not required at thy hand) but at the least be constant in thy purpose and will,
steadfast in faith, and cherefully offer thy Son to God: be a priest touchi^g
the soul of thy son. And it becomes not a priest that offers sacrifice to
God, for to do it wepingly.

Will thou understand that this is required of thee? Our Lord says in the
gospel: If ye Ihon. (...)
were the children of Abraham, ye would truly do the works of Abraham. Lo this
is a work of Abraham: do ye works which Abraham did, but not with grief 2.
Cor. 9.
and sorrow: For God loves a chereful geuer. And if ye shall be thus readdy,
it shall be said unto you of God: Clyme up unto this high Land, and to the hill
which I will show thee, and there offerre unto me thy son. And offer thy son
not in the deep places of the earth, nor in the vale of wepinge, but in the
great and high hills. Declare thou then, that faith in the Lord is stronger
then any carnal affection.

For Abraham (says he) loved Isaac his son, but he preferred ye son of God to
his own fleshly love: And so he was found not in the bowels of his flesh, but
in the bowels of Christ, that is in the bowels of the word of God, of truth
and wisdom.

Abraham (says the text) stretched forth his hand to take the sword, and kill
his Son. And the Angel of the lord called unto him from heaven, and said:
Abraham, Abraham And he answered: Here I am, And he said: Lay not thy hand upon
the child, neither do any hurt to him. For now I know that thou fear God.
It is commonly out of this place objected unto us, how god says that he
knows that Abraham did fear him, as if he had been ignorante there of
before. Well, god which in deed knows all things before they be done, did
also know this thing, and was not ignorant of it: but it is thus written for
thy cause, for thou haste a faith in God, and yet except yt accomplish the
works of faith, except thou obey, yea all the hardest commandments, except
thou offer up sacrifice, and show plainelye that thou do not set more by
father, mother, and children the^ by God, it shall not be acknoleged that thou
fear God, neither shall it be said of thee: F or now I know that thou
fear God.

And besides this, we may here consider yt the Angel which is said here to
speak these words to Abraham: in process afterward is evidently showed to
be the Lord. Whereupon I think thus: that as among us men, he was found in
his behauiuiour as man, so among the Angels, ^^^. 15*
he was found in his behavior as an Angel. And so the Angels in heaven
following his exaumple, are glad of one Sinner which repentith, and rejoice
greatly, when men go forward in god lines.

For these Angels have as it were the ouersighte of our souls, unto whom as
tutors and Gal. 4^
governors, we whiles we are yonglinges are committed, until the time
appointed by the father be comme. Therefore they say now concerning the goinge
forward in godliness of every on of us, that now I know that you fear the
Lord. But for a plainer exaumple hereof: Be it so yt I purpose in my mind to
suffer martirdom, yet ye angel can not save unto me, that now I know that
thou fear ye lord? for God only knows ye secret of ye mind. but if I abide
torments if I boldly publish a good confession, if I constantly bear what
soever shallbe done unto me, then the Angel as comfortinge and confirming
me, may say: Now I know that thou feareste the Lord.

Thus the^ these things were spoken to Abraham, and he so was pronounced to
fear ye lord. And why? Because he spared not his own son. But let us
compare these things with the words of the Apostle, where he says Romans 8.
of god: which spared not his own son, but did give him for us all. Behold
here how God contendeth with men in bountiful liberality. Abraham offered to
god his mortal son not yet like to dye: God gave his immort all son for all
men to death. What shall we say to these things? What shall we render to ye
Lord, for all that he has beslowed upon us? God the Father has not spared his
own son for us. And which of you al (thin kest thou) at any time shall hear
this voice of the Angel saying unto you: Now I know that you fear God,
because thou haste not spared thy son, thy daughter thy wife: or thou have not
spared thy wealth, thy worldly honor and the pomp of the world, but have
despised them all, haste counted them as dunge, that thou might gain Christ,
but haste sold all and haste given it to ye poor, and have followed the word
of God? Which of you, (think thou) shall he are such a voice of the Angel?
Yea Abraham heard this voice again the second time and it was said unto him,
Because thou have not spared thy beloved son for my sake. etc

And Abraham (says the text) looking back, saw with his eyes, and behold. A
ram was holden by the ^ornes in the busshes of Sabet. I suppose, that we have
said here tofore, that Isaac* bare the figure of Christ, and yet
notwithstanding, this ramm seems to bear the figure of Christ also. But how
these two agree unto Christ, both Isaac which was not slain, and the ramm
which was, it is expediente to understand. Christ is the word of God, but
this word was made flesh. There is the^ in Christ one thing which is from
above, and an other which is taken of ye nature of man and the woombe of the
virgin. Christ the^ suffered his passion, but yet in his flesh: he suffered
death, but yet in his flesh: whereof this ram was a figure, according to the
saing John, 1.
of John, Behold the Lamb of God, behold him which takes away the sins of
the world. But ye word which is Christ according to the Spirit, did
continue in incorruption, whose Image this Isaac was. So he is the sacrifice
and high priest after the spirit. For he that offers ye sacrifice to his
father according to the flesh, the self same is offered upon the altar of ye
cross. and likewise as it is said of him, Behold the Lamb of God, Behold him
who takes away the sins of the world: so is it also said of him, Thou art a
priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Therefore this ram is holden
by the horns in the bushes of Saber.

And he took (says the text) the ram, and offered him a burnt offeringe for
Isaac his son. And Abraham called the name of that place, the lord says.
Here is a broad way of spiritu all understanding, laid open for all them that are skilful to hear these things. For all that be here done, do ^ende to some
spiritual vision, because it is said: The Lord sees. This vision of the Lord
is in spirit, that thou also may behold these things which are written in
spirit: and as in the Lord there is nothing corporal or gross, so also that
thou in all these things savor nothing corporally or grossly, but that thou
inwardly in spirit beget to thy self a child which may be called Isaac, when
thou shalt obtain the fruit of the spirit, joy and peace. This child at the
length thus thou may conceive: if, (as it is written of Sara, yt it was not
with her, after the manner of women, and so she bare Isaac) all womanly
affections so cease out of thy mi^d, so that thou have no work and effemina^
things in the soul: but do things manfully, and manfully girdest up thy
loins, and have thy breast fensed with the breast plate of righteousness, and
thy self armed with the helmet of health, and the sword of the spirit. Yt
therefore such womanly ma^ners cease in thy life, thou begettest a son, that is
joy and peace, of thy wife virtue and wisdom. Thou begettest joy, if thou
suppose it all joy, when thou shall fall into diverse temptations, and can
offer that joy a sacrifice to god. For when thou Jacob. ^
doeste come cherefully to God, he rendereth to thee that again which thou
haste offered, and says unto the: Again ye shall see me, and your heart
shall be glad* and no men shall take your joy from you: So then shalt thou
receive those things increased, which thou shalt offer to God. Such a thing
is set furthe in Luc. 19.
the gospel although by an other figure, as where it is said, that one
received a pound for to occupy, and get gains for ye good man of the house:
And if you bring five increased into ten, they are given to thee thy self for a
reward, they are granted thee. Harken what he sayethe: Take from this man his
pound, and give it to him yt has te^ pound. Thus though we seem to occupye
for our Lord, yet the gains of this matchandise returns to our selves:
though we seem to offer sacrifice to ye lord, yet those things which we
offer are restored to us again. For God has not need of anyething, but he
would have us rich he wishes by all manner of means our wealth.

This manner of doctrine is set forth unto us in those things, which happened
to Job: Job. ^.
who being rich, lost all for Gods sake. But because he endured well the
fight of pacicnce, because he was of a stout courage in all things he
suffered, saying: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: as it pleased
the Lord, so is it come to pass, the Lords name be blessed: behold at the
e^de what is written of him: He received again (says the text) twice as much
as he lost. Thou perceauest the^ what it is to loose any things for the
Lord: yt is, to receive for thy self duble: Yea the gospel does promise some
yet more; that is, it promises an hundred fold to the again: and besides that
also eternal life, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and empire
for ever and ever.

AMEN.
A prayer for married persons.
ETERNAL GOD and most merciful father, which of thine inestimable love
toward man (after thou haddeste created all things for his use and comfort)
woledeste also for his more comfort ordeine, an helper for him of like
substance and nature unto him self, thereby knittinge the one to the other in
felloship inseparable. Which institution of holy wedlock thus made by the
gracious contemplacion, which thou had to ma^in paradise, to have it esteemed
more honorable, thou did preordinate thy only begotten son to be borne
therein, of a most pure virgin. Who also of his favorable grace to the further
co^mendacion of the said institution vouchsaued to be present personally thereat
with his blessed mother and holy Aposties, in Cane a city of Galily, and there
wrought his first and notable miracle, of tourni^g unsavory water i^to
pleasant wine, in mystical signification and i^structio^ of the same state.
Furdermore have by the mouth of thy elect vessel Saint Paul declared the state
thereof to be the great misterye and sacrament of that maruailous unspeakable
unity that is betwixt Christ and his Spouse the church: And for as much as
thou have comma^uded by the said Apostle, that the husband should so love his
wife as Christ loved his congregation, And that the wise should so reverence
her husband, as the Church is reverently subject unto Christ her Spouse.

We beseech the yt this our matrimony once begu^ne by thy fatherly providence
(as we doubt not thereof) may be still prosperouslye continued betwixt us. So
that we may be of one heart and mind, to know, so love, to obey and serve ye
above al creatures, as thou would us twain to be one body together, to love
and serve ye one the other in our mortal life. And that we may by the aid of
thy holy spirit persevere without strife, discord and variablenes, in
perpetual amity and godly love. Charitably in our vocation to live with our
neighbors instlye in our occupations, with the sweet of our brows to eat
our bread, and equally with thanks to receive of thy hands what so ever thy
fatherlye wisdom has decreed to send unto us: Besechinge furderthy godnes,
that as thou haste by thy bounteous liberality given us fruit in this our
matrimonye, so we may be assisted and maintained by thy fatherly
benediction, as well to norishe them up in their bodily life, as to instruct
them in soul in thy holy Religion, to glorify thy blessed name in this world
to our lives end, that in the next world we may all appear in the sight of
thy heavenly Majesty, to be united to thy self in perpetual felicity,
accordig to ye assured promises made unto us through our lord and savior
Jesus Christ. To whom with the and the holy ghost be all honor and glory for
ever.

AMEN.
A prayer generally for all parsons.
Grant me grace O most merciful father, to have a fervent desyer, ever to
such things as be pleasinge to the, dilige^tlye to search them, wiselye to
knowledge them, parfectlye to fulfill them, to ye land and praise of thy holy
name. Guide thou O Lord my life and living, and that which thou requirest of me
to do, grant that I may have a knowledge, a will and power thereto. And
stre^gthe me so to ensue it, as may be to the honor of thy name, to the wealth
of my neighbor, and to the health of my soul. Make the way O Lord sure and
streghte to thee, that I fainte not from the, neither in prosperity, neither
yet in adversity: yt in prosperity I give me not unto pride and insole^cy: and
that in adversity I keep my self in hope and patience: So that in adversity
I be not borne down to low, nor yet in prosperitye I be lift up to hie.
Suffer me not to joy of any thing but of that which may further me unto the,
and to morn of nothing but of that which might draw me from the: so that
all heavenly things may be louesom to me, and all transitorye things
lothsom, all fleshly things yrksom, and all grievous things lightesome. Let
all joy be tedious to me that is not in the, Let all pain be pleasant that
is for the, Let me not delight to please any creature against the, nor yet
aferde to displease any creature for the. Give me grace often to list up my
heart unto the, and to lead my life straight before the. Make me sone to rise
again when I fall away from the, and truly to acknowledge and confess my
sins unto the. Strength my faith to ask pardon only at the, and for Christ's
sake mercifully to obtain it of the. Make me O father to dred the without
desperation, and to love the without presumption. Make me faithful without
doblenes, chaste without fylthines, liberal without wastefulnes, sparinge
without carefulnes, merry without wantonness, sober without sowernes, constant
with out stubbornes, traitable with out childishnes, quiet without quareling,
meek without murmuringe, pacient without s^ryuinge, obediente without
grutchinge, prudente in simplicitye, and simple in prudence, cherefull in
charity, and seruisable in diligence. Give me grace to teach my neighbor
without presumption, to reform him without his confusion, to edifye him in
life without offension. Give me a watchinge heart O Lord, that no curious
thought disturb it, make it strong, that no unworthy affection pervert it,
make it constante, that no violente assault subdue it. Grant me O father
understanding to know the, diligence to seek the, wisdom to find the,
perseueraunce to keep the, and hope in the conclusion to embrace thee. Let me
here be excercised with thy cross to my humiliation, to recogne thin
assistau^ce, therein to my consolation to use thy benifite; by grace, and at the
last to obtain thy fruitio^ in glory, to the laud and praise of thy blessed
name: To whom with the Son, and the holy Ghost be all honor for ever and
ever.

AMEN.
Imprinted at London by Reginalde Wolf Anno. Do. M. D. LXV.


