THE BLESSED PVBLICANE.

Briefly showing forth the happy estate of humble repentant Sinners.

Written by John Orphinstraunge.

PRVDENTIA
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by T.C. For John Orphinstraunge.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR JULIUS CAESAR, One of his Mties most Honorable
Privy Council: Together with the Right Worshipful, the Doctors of the Civil
Laws, and the Masters of the Honorable Court of Chancerie.
Right Honorable, etc.
IT may be esteemed folly in me, if I should ouer-boldly press into your
Honors studies with a few lowly Inuocations, or the safe Rule to Celestial
Repentance, which is the only scope of this small Treatise, if I had not some
likelihood of your favorable and worthy acceptance; two reasons inciting me
hereunto; First, for that it is compacted and fastened together by the Author,
who before he knew the world, yea, before, was deprived by death of a great
Loss, being made fatherles, of such a Father whose power was eminent in the
Civil Laws and Courts of Chancerie: before his childbirth, by the which
loss, who knows not the miseries that such occasions inuit miserable people
unto: The Prophet David herein is a perfect form for such as truly repent, in
the 37. Psalm, the 25. verse, saying, J have been young and now am old: and
yet saw I never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread: The
other reason, is, because whosoever he be, that does truery read it, first, the
efficacy and pith of the words; secondly, he pains of the poor Author, in
digesting and framing the same; thirdly, the profit and benefit of them whose
zeal thirst after eternal felicity. And thus desiring your friendly
acceptance, of my poor endeavors, I humbly, and in all bounden duty rest;

Your Honors, and Worships to the vttmost of his power, I. Orphinstrange.

royal blazon or coat of arms
The humble and lowly Invocation to GOD the FATHER.
GReat God of wisdom, earth, men, waters framing,
Giver of light, of life, of breath and being,
Glorious Jehovah at whose mighty naming,
All creatures rest, thy self all creatures seeing.
Melchizedeks God, him King of peace anointing,
Noah's Deliverer, by thy sole power appointing,
Lots blessed Sauer from the fyred City,
God of all mercy, grace truth, and endelesse pity.
Father of Abraham and his Family,
Righter of Jacobs bound calamity,
Keeper of Joseph from his brethrens rage,
Sauer of Moses in his infant age.
Guyder of Iosuah in the promised land.
Scater of David with thy out stretched hand,
Direct thy servant whose poor pen assayes.
To add one mite to thy e're-lasting praise.
An humble and lowly Invocation to GOD the Son.
Son of the Blessed, blessed everliving,
Sunshine of Glory, and our good thoughts gracing,
Storehouse of treasure, righteous, euer-giuing.
To us thy mercy and our souls chief placing,
The Port, the Haven for all men distressed,
Thou free deliverer of all poor oppressed,
Thou Paschall Lamb, thou Ensign of the just,
Thou Fort of glory thou surest hold of trust,
Thou true Messiah, searcher of all hearts,
Thou Giver, Granter, Gracer of all Arts.
Direct thy servant, whose poor pen assayes,
To add one mite to thy e'relasting praise.
An humble and lowly Invocation, to GOD the Holy Ghost.
GRacious true Godhead, and Immortal Spirit,
The light of goodness and the path to life,
The rich Jerusalem, true heavenly merit,
Hater of Folly, and the scourge of strife,
Ruler of Sapience, council of the Wise,
The blessed step whereby our souls do rise,
The glass of knowledge, and the prop of bliss,
All only glory which all glory is,
Inspire thy servant, whose poor pen assayes,
To add one mite to thy e'relasting praise
THE BLESSED PVBLICANE.
IS there on Earth ought worthy estimation,
That sinful man should covet for to live?
Is it an outward sign deserves salvation,
Or he be praised which with vain hands does give
Then should the Pharisee have won the praise,
And been a Light unto our rich-mens days.
He humbly kneeled, and did devoutly pray,
Whom our sweet Savior so much esteemed,
He gained the Glory of that Sunshine day,
That prayed the lest, yet was the most redeemed,
He won the bays, him Christ did justify,
That growning begged in his extremity.
Down is he couch't within that Sacred bower,
Where Christ our Savior sees his poor distress,
His contrite heart gives not his head the power,
To look to heaven, from whence comes all redress,
His hands are up, and [LORD] he first begins,
To knock his breast, for his o're-swelling sins.
A Sea of tears from forth his eyes proceed,
And inwardly his heart to heaven ascends
His grieved soul does on Ambrosia feed,
And ever faint the Publican descended,
[Be mercifull] he cries, O wonders merrour!
That cries for mercy being clogd with terror.
[BE] is the next this wreched sinner speaks,
Which word does show a perfect confidence,
He is espied of him he weeping seeks,
Who cheers his heart and pardons his offense,
And notes the manner of his humble kneeling,
Adding more courage to his Christian feeling.
Forward he goes unto mercies Seat,
Armed with the resolution of his heart
Seeking for mercy though his sines be great
To mitigate the rigor of his smart,
[BE MERCIFVLL] he cries and pardon me,
Who humbly begs this mercies gift of thee.
He calls to mind the follies of his youth,
His foul transgressions and his false reports,
His great neglecting of diuinest Truth,
Not reading that which unto good exhorts,
His gluttony his sin yclyped shame,
His vile oppression, loss of Christian fame.
He thinks upon his drunken exercise,
His perjured swearing and his hateful pride:
These fond misdoings come before his eyes,
Making him beg for mercies sacred Giude,
Flying the folly of his former sin,
With humble prayers mercies gift to win.
And as a child that see's the Fathers rod,
Held up as instance of his Fathers ire;
Strait cries for mercy at the hands of God,
And of his Father pardon does desire:
So this poor wretch, drengh't in a Sea of grief,
Humbly begs mercy for his best relief.
Unto me LORD, [BE MERCIFVLL,] he cries,
That of all men offended have thee most,
Receive thy servant and do not despise
Me wretched creature Sea-wrack't on thy Coast:
Mercy great LORD, in such extremes are sweet,
As ayds poor souls in a distressed fleet.
For had I not too much offended thee,
My true contrition would not urge me so,
Nor could my stubborn heart contented be,
Thus humbly for thy mercyes gift to go:
But God of mercy thou have me transformed.
And with thy mercy let me be adorned.
[TO ME A SINNER] that is my heinous crime,
A wr^tched man in mis^rable plight;
Continuing so all my uncertain time,
Shuning cl^a^ed^y, still walking in dark night:
Fast locked in bondage and in Satan's chain,
Till thy sweet mercy set me free again.
Long have I SINNER run a desperate course,
In which my folly wounded my poor soul
Like to a mischief ever worse and worse
Which spreads far greater seeming moostrous foul,
And I foul monster now do humbly pray,
Thy mercyes gift to wash my sins away.
So shall my substance being changed anew,
Ever give thanks to thy e'r-lasting Fame:
To thee, O LORD, to thee belongs the due,
Praised, Blessed and honored, be thy glorious Name:
Let all the earth adorn thy Majesty
That feeds all flesh, the earth, the Sea, the Sky.
Thus with true confidence he hastes hence,
Fully p^rswaded that he is forgiven,
A^ b^eing purged from all his vile offense,
Endeavors still to serve thee Everliving.
And Isreal's God does arm his heart with joy,
Which (but er'e-while) was chok'd with sins annoy.
Being departed; now our blessed Light*
All-^eeing, Everliving, Son of Bliss,
Notes the behavior of this humbl^d wight,
Whose contrite prayer well accounted is,
He takes his offering, and accepts his tears,
Freely forgiues the folly of his years.
He adds unto this poor man's commendation,
An everlasting style of dignity,
A settled state, a state of preservation,
The Scepter, Crow^e, and Mace of Royalty,
He makes him Crystal, Glorious, pure within;
Gives him rich clothing, free's his soul from sin.
And having thus with odours him anointed,
Framing a Garland of the purest Bays,
Thousands of Angels attend^nts he appointed,
To guard this creature in all righteous ways,
That if by chance his foot should step awry,
They still might shield him from iniquity*
And taking glory still in this perfection,
He ever circles him within his arms,
Giving him such a blessed safe protection,
As sure defends him from all envious harms,
Making his foes aghast that now behold him,
Which but e're-while with hateful words controld him
This true Messins, and this wonders framing,
This Way, this Life, this Pearl of Paradise,
This heavenly Vine, this Word past words of naming,
Did not this beggar, nor this wretch despise:
But iustify'd him. O most happy man,
Being thus Blessed, though a Publican!
If he, sole Heavenly, earth's great Arch-protector,
Thee viewed, thee praised, thee rai'd with admiration,
True Judge of hearts, hearts rightest true Director,
The Sap, the Marrow, Life of our Creation,
The Faithful Shepherd, and true Husbandman,
Rejecting riches, blessed the Publican.
Not only blessed him, but he sets him forth
As a pure Light unto the worlds beholding,
Willing all Christians to behold the Worth
Of this rich Truth, and his rich Truth's enfolding.
And with an humble heart he wills us kneel,
If er'e we wish his mercies gift to feel.
It Is not too late to call unto the Lord,
If we ore-slip the mornings Sunny rays.
It Is not too late to read his holy Word,
Though we in folly spend our younger days,
If we with sorrow strike our hardened breast,
Our sinful souls shall with these gifts be blessed.
What time soever, says our greatest God,
A Publicane shall turn his wicked ways,
I will lay by my heavy iron rod,
And teach his heart my everlasting praise,
And lead his steps into the Blessed Land,
Where as a Sarre of Life, he e're shall stand.
Sure is that place where is no dread nor doubt,
Sound is that Hope which does on thee rely.
Safe is that Fort, where danger is kept out,
And blessed are such, whom thou do justify,
Happy, thrice happy is that wretched weight,
Whom thou protectest by thy glorious might.
When sinful man does fall in Satan's snare,
And being fallen lies groueling in the mire,
Then does the Feind urge him to deep despair,
Till thy sweer mercy grant Celestial fire.
Which does refine and cleanse the drossie part,
Framing a new, perfect, and contrite heart.
And though our sins be more then we can bear,
Yet let us creep unto thy mercie-Seate
With true contrition let us never fear
Thy mercies favor though our sins be great:
For our misdoings more thy mercies grace,
Since thy great mercies proves the surer place.
Is then thy mercy, and All-sauing grace,
The only thing thy servants do request,
Is the beholding of thy glorious face,
A certain sign our silly souls are blessed:
Then, mighty Lord, on us thy mercy shower,
So shall we praise thy everlasting Power.
FINIS.

