A LEARNED AND VERY ELOQVENT Treaty, written in Latin by the famous man
Hieronymus Osorius Bishop of Sylua in Portugal, wherein he confuteth a certain
Answer made by M. Walter Haddon against the Epistle of the said Bishop unto
the Queens Majesty.

Translated into English by John Fen student of Divinity in the University of
Louen.

LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, Anno 1568.

Cum Gratia and Priuilegio.

TO THE Catholic Reader.
I Was moved (gentle Reader) to translate this Book into our mother tongue,
for diverse and sundry causes. First the fame of the author provoked me
thereunto, who is, not in my private opinion, but in the estimation of alsuch
as know gim, a virtuous Priest and godly Bishop, in the judgment of the
world, for gravity, wisdom, eloquence and profound knowledge in all kind of
learning in these our days a singular, yea an odd man. Then I thought it
expedient, to impart the benefit thereof unto my unlearned country men, because
as it was written generally for the commodity of all the Church of Christ, so
it was especially meant and as it were dedicated to the Church and common weal
of England, unto the which, as it may appear both by the epistle which he wrote
before unto the Queens Majesty, as also by this Book, he bare siugular good
will. Moreover I judged, that mylabour in translating it should be the more
profitably employed, because there are in it many goodly exhortations to stir
a man up to the love and fear of God, many wholesome lessons, by the which a
Christian man may direct and order his life, many points of Catholic doctrine
(which are in these days called in controversy by our Adversaries) so
plainly set out, that the unlearned may take great profit thereof, so lernedly
disputed, that such as are well exercised in Divinity, may find wherewith to
increase their knowledge. To be short, the thing that most moved me to take
these pains, was, because it contains a brief confutation of many
erroneous opinions, of much heretical and pestilent doctrine, comprised in a
little book, set out these late years in the name of M. Haddon: wherein was
pretended an answer to the Epistle of Osorius, (which I spoke of before) but
in effect was nothing else, but a number of stout assertions faintly proved,
be sprinkled here and there with bitter tauntes, unsavory gyrdes, and other
the like scomme or froth of undigested affections. These were the things that
cawsed me to spare some time from my study to translate this book into
English for the commodity of such as understand not the Latin tongue:
whereof if thou shall receive any profit (as thou may very much, if thou read
it with diligence and good judgment) thank God of it, and with mindful heart
acknowledge his great mercy and goodness toward us, in that it has pleased him
in this perilous time, not only to send us at home in our own country most
virtuous, godly, and learned men, to be unto us a perfect rule both of good
life and true belief: but also to move the heart of this grave Father and
reverent Bishop (whose learned writings have deservedly obtained so great
authority thoroughout all the Church of Christ) to pity the lamentable state
of our most miserably decayed Church, and to lay his helping hand to the
repairing of it, employing thereunto the rare gifts and graces of God, with the
which (as thou shall perceive by reading this book) he is most beawtifully
adourned and decked. And thus I bid the heartily farewell, commending my self
to thy devout prayers, and thee to Almighty God, whom thou shall most humbly
beseech, that it may please him, either of his mercy to turn the hearts of
such as are maliciously bent against the true faith of Christ, or else of his
justice to turn the wicked devises and devilish practices of Achitophel and
all his confederacy to the glory of his holy name, and aduaunceme^ of the
Catholic Church.

From Louen, the first of November. Anno Domini. 1568. John Fen.

THE FIRST BOOK.
I Think it a great grace and benefit of God M. Haddon, that your book,
which ye set out against me a few years past, with much a do at the length,
this last day came unto my hands. Such care has God put into the heart of
Henry the Cardinal, who is a most godly Prince and wise governor, to use al
possible diligence, that no such books, as may disteine the pureness of godly
Religion, be brought in amongst us. Had it not benne, that Emanuel Almada
Bisshoppe of Angra, a man excellently well furnished with all good qualities and
virtues, to me most intiere, both for the straight friendship, as also for
the long acqueintaunce between us begone and continued even from our
Ancestors, had accompaigned the most virtuous Lady Marie Princess of Parma,
into the low Countries of Flanders, I had not as yet heard any thing either of
the book, or of the Writer. But he, after his arriual into those parties,
chauncing upon the book, thought he could no less do of friendship, but
take upon him my cause, and confute your reprocheful words. Howbeit in the
work, which he wrote with singular diligence, he took upon him the defense,
not so much of me, as of Religion, of piety, of godliness.

After his return into his country (which was much later then we hoped) it
was rumored forthwith, that an English man, whose name was unknown, had
written against Hieronymus Osorius, and that the Bishop of Angra had earnestly
taken upon him the defense of Osorius, and this much was signified unto me by
my friends letters. At the same time, I was painfully occupied in visiting my
Diocese, the which notwithstanding, I was not so let, but that I found a
time to salute my frind, and welcome him home by my letters, in the which I
required of him, that he would send me your book together with his defense.
He answered me to every point of my letters, as humanity, courtesy and
frindship required. But as touching your book, he said he was moved in
conscience not to send it, until he had obtained license of the Cardinal.
whereby ye may perceive, how heinouse and wicked offense it is amongst us, to
read the books of such men, as have with many errors infected Religion.

This wise man, albeit he had had very exact and perfect trial of my Religion
by long experience, and saw that I was placed in the room and dignity of a
Bishop, and therefore might of mine own authority search and try out what
soever wilines or craft lay hidden under the covert of your writings: yet
durst he in no wise make me partaker of your book, before he understood our
Cardinals pleasure. You will here peradventure scorn and laugh at his
overmuch superstition. But I shall never think any diligence that is employed
to put away the contagion of such a deadly or mortal pestilence, to be
overmuch. After many months at the length when he understood the Cardinals
pleasure, he sent me your book willing me withal to spare some time from mine
own most earnest affairs, to answer you, and so did the rest of my friends
also counsel me to do. And although it might seem a discourtesie not to
regard the request of my friends, yet I would not have yielded unto them* if
in this your work my estimation only had been touched, and not the purity of
the Catholic Religion violated. I was also moved thereunto so much the more,
because I thought it a point of Christian charity to try, whether you might
be brought through my diligence, to lay down somewhat of your engraffed
lightness. For doubtless I may well gather of these your writings, that in the
writing thereof, ye stood very much in your own conceit, yea and that in
some places as it were ravished with good liking of your self, ye stood still
looking earnestly about you even for the favorable applause of your frinds.
But how much your conceit has deceived you, it shall forth with appear.

First of al whereas ve say that I am a great framer of words and sentences:
whether ye mean truly, or whether ye disse^ble, I can not tell, but the praise
that you give me, I do not acknowledge. If there be in me any commendable
grace of speech, truly it is because I have bestowed my time and study, not
so much in words, as to atteine the knowledge of the highest points of
learning. Besides that, this quality of speech, how simple so ever it be in me
(if it be any thing at al) I have used, not to the damnable forging of false
Religion, but with earnest and zealous good heart, to the setting forth of
true godliness.

In the very beginning of your book ye lay to my charge a great crime of
rashness and presumption: for thus you say. You took much upon you, that
being a private man, separated from us by land and sea, and unacquainted with
our affairs, durst so boldly speak unto the Queen's Majesty. Now Sir, I
beseech you, let me learn this one thing of you. What mean you by this word
private? Is it a word of reproach only? Or may it not be applied also to good,
virtuous, and noble men? Are there not amongst you many noble men that bear
no office, neither serve in any place of the common weal? Say you so Sir? Are
al those that serve not in the Office of Requests to be thrust out by you from
the presence and speech of Kings? For so you lay the name of a private man to
me, as though ye esteemed it to be a word of villainy and dishonor: as though
you would say, that my father were some vplandish man, and I brought up in
baseness, of so small account, that I was never worthy to look any King in
the face, and therefore had committed a fault worthy of greuouse punishment,
that durst in my letters to name Queen Elizabeth, (whom I always name for
honors sake dew unto her Princely Majesty). But admit I were not (as I am
in deed) of a very ancient gentleman's house: yet it was not the part of a
man brought up in liberal sciences, to esteem any kind of men, or any kind of
honor more then the ornaments of virtue. For all cognisaunces or Arms either
of nobility, or of honor, although they be fair and goodly in show, yet
when true virtue is away, being false, vain, and void of al sound fruict, are
despised and holden as worthy of no account with every wise man. So that, if
ye mean to speak to my rebuke, charge me with some crime or grievous offense,
lay not unto me the name of a private man. For before I had the office of a
Bishop, I was, both for favor, authority, and worship, preferred before a
great number of your calling. If the name of a private man did signify dulnes
or lumpishnes of wit, if it did importe any heinouse crime or dishonestie of
life: then surely, he that should object that name to me, should reprochfully
speak of me, and contrary to my deserts. But for so much as we see
oftentimes, that, amongst Princes those me^ are in the highest places of
honor, which are of al honor most unworthy, and contrariwise those void of al
honor, which could most faith fully and honorably serve their Princes: it
comes to pass, that the name of a private man signifies not the unworthiness
of the persons, but the vnluckines of the Princes. For they are so besette and
holde^ with the service of lewd fellows that they can not use the virtue of
good men. Now whereas you say, that it is nothing decent, that I being a
stranger separated from you by land and sea, should write a letter to your
Queen: I beseke you Sir, teach me: were letters devised to advertise me^ of
things behouesul, in their absence, or in their presence? Doubtless in their
absence. Why then do ye blame me, that bearing very hearty good will unto your
Queen, I admonished her being absent and separated from me by land and sea, of
things apperteining unto the establishment of her estate? If I had benne
present, I would have humbly besought her, not by letters, but by word of
mowth in presence, that, if she minded to save her life and maintain her
honor, she should eschew the company and familiarity of infamous persons.

You obiecte also unto me, that I am not skilled in your affairs. As though I
talked not of such matters as are most perfectly known of al men.

Last of al you increase the unworthiness of my fact with the name of a
Princely Majesty: as though your Queen did excel rather in richesse and
puissaunce, then in gentleness and humanity, and as though I were such a man
as could not by my letters advertise the greatest Prince in the Christian
world of things of greatest importance. Acknowledge now, I pray you, your
most unadvised rashness in this your talk, for thus much you seem to say.
Whereas you have never had the practice of the Law, never borne in any common
weal office (I mean such office as apperteine to me^ of Law) never offered
supplications to any Prince: Who has made you so arrogant and presumptuous, as
to take upon you to speak unto the Queens Majesty, a thing granted to me al
only, and to such as I am, and that for great good cause? If you perceive not
M. Haddon, how fond and childish this your talk is, I must needs deem that
you are bestraught of your senses. But if it greaueth you to see, that the
Queen gives ear to some other man that is not of your quality, I can not
blame you. For why, certain it is, that you can not long enjoy this your
felicity, if many wise and virtuous me^ shall unto her good will and authority
join their service and industry. For the counterfeicted attendaunce of feined
virtue, in the presence of true virtue vanishes away. Wherefore, I give you
counsel to exclude al honest men (of whom, as I understand, there is no small
number in England) from the familiarity of the Prince, expel them, thrust them
out, by proclamatio^s force them to flee out of the Realm. As for me, that am
so far of, there is no cause why ye should be greatly careful, for so much
as it can not be suspected, that I should take away from you your gains,
after which as you show your self, you gape so greedily. But by your patience
Sir, me thinks ye are of nature very base and abiecte, that for so mean a
promotion take so great stomach and courage. If ye can not bear so mean a
condition, but that you must needs in respect of your office, lay unto me
the name of a private man, what would you do, if you were called to some
higher degree of worship?

You say, that I do go about to appaire the estimation of laws, whereas in
deed I do think, that the good estate of a common weal stands and is
maintained by laws, and am heartily sorry, that through these pestilent sects
al good laws customs and ordinances are fallen to ruin and decaie.

You say that I appeache all the whole Realm of England, I can not tell, of
what, hateful newfanglednes: the which is also false. For I have heard of
credible persons, that the greatest part of that Island do continue in the
Old Religion.

Now whereas you require of me to bear with you, because you have talked
somewhat freely with me, as being an English man, fostred and brought up of
the Queens Majesty, and of the affairs of England not ignorant: I commend
your love toward your country, I commend your loyalty toward your Prince,
I commend your knowledge of things gotten by long experience, I commend also
your freedom in speech. But beware you do not (so much as in you lies)
overthrow your Country, beware you bring not the Queen into danger of her
estate and life, and when you are pricked and yearked forth with the goades of
your own madness, beware you cloak not your erroneous belief and licentious
life under the honest name of liberty. Ye promise assuredly that you mean to
do it, for no debate or dissension of mind, whereas there can not be devised
any greater dissension then this, you taking upon you to maintain, and I
contrariwise to inuey against the most wicked and heinouse malefactors of the
world.

And where you say, that your purpose is to pull out of men's hearts certain
false opinions that they have conceived of the state of England: if you can so
do, you shall do me a very friendly pleasure. But this one thing I marvel
much at, that you say, that my writings might happen to cause this false rumor
and infamy, that is now bruted of England. What say you Sir? Are you only
ignorant, how long time it is sense England was first charged with this
infamouse report? How was it possible, when the holy men John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, and S. Thomas More were openly put to death for their constancy in
their faith and Religion: when the good Religiouse Fathers the Carthusians were
with most cruel torments slain and murdered: when the houses of Religion, in
the which was appointed a mansion or dwelling place of perpetual chastity,
were laid wide open, and turned to profane uses: when many other momentes of
holiness were utterly overthrown and defaced: how was it possible, I say, that
England should be without a very exceeding great infamy? But without cause,
say you. Be it so (if it please you) for I will not as yet dispute for either
part. Yet this much I say, that even at that time there was a great brand of
dishonestie burnt into the estimation of English men. But you forsooth, that
should have defended al those things with maine policy and counsel, were
not yet come to bear the swaie, and therefore the matter being destitute of
such a spokesman as you are, that opinion that was by the constant report and
brute of al men diuulged, took place in all the Realms of Christendom. How is
it then true, that I should caus^ this infamy (which is so old) by my
writings set out but the last day?

You commend my kind of writing, the which is more then I requir^ of you. For
that I use in matters we known, words not necessary (as yo^ think) you
reprove me. But your reproach I am nothing offended withal for my desire is to
talk of things mo^ clear and plain, and what were to b^ put into my Oration,
and what to be put out, I think it depends of my judgment, and not of
yours, which peradventure know not, what my meaning is.

You say that, whereas I pretended in the beginning to do some other thing, I
fell at the length to taunting and defacing of Religion. That is true in deed,
if most vile and seditions heresy may be called Religion. You say that it is
to no purpose for me to go about to discharge many Inglish men of the envy
of the fact, for that, (as you say) their case and cause is al one. And to
prove that, you declare the manner of England to be such, that no law binds
the people there, unless it be first decreed by the whole communaltie,
received of the nobility, approved by the Clergy, and last of al authorized
by the King, and therefore can not stand, that a law being made by the full
consent and agreement of al, some men should sustain blame, and some others
should be altogether void thereof. The law I like well: But that it is not kept,
I think itmuch to be misliked. If the giving of voices were free, and not
wrested and gotten out from men by threatening and punishment, I would like your
saing well. But here to pass over with silence the lightness and inconstancy of
the multitude, which may very easily be brought to any inconvenience either
with the hatred of severity, either with the show of gentleness: and withal to
leave that point untouched, how it is a thing impossible for every particular
man to geaue his voice, but of force they must give over their authority of
giving voices unto a few: I would you would teach me this one thing, (for I
confess plainly, that I am a stranger, and nothing expert in matters of your
commonweal) what horrible fact had the bishop of Rochester committed, that
neither the gravity of his person, neither the dignity of a Bishop could save
him from death? Went he about any treason against his country? Had he
conspired the death of the Prince? Had he entered into talk with foraine
ennemies to betraie his own common weal? Nothing less. But because he most
constantly refused to yield his consent unto a wicked statute, the holy and
innocent man was so punished, as though he had been the most detestable traitor
in the world. What had Thomas More committed, a very good man, and
excellently well learned? Had he forged the Kings letters patentes* Had he
embeseled the Kings treasure? Had he killed or grievously inuried any of the
Kings subjects? No such matter. But only because ^e would not claw and
flatter the ^ing, but rather would speak his ^inde freely: they chopped of
his head before all the people, as though he had been a fellon or traitor. But
now what say you to the Carthusia^s, most virtuous, godly, and religious
Fathers, men in pleading at the bar vnacqueinted, in the common affairs and
practices of the world unskillful? Why were they so cruelly handled? Why were
they trussed and hanged upon gibbets? Why were they disme^bred and quartered
in peaces? Why were they finally burned and consumed with fire? dowbtlesse
because they would not with their voice allow and make good a thing, that unto
them seemed wicked, heinouse, and unworthy to be named. What shall I say of the
holy bishops, whom you have lode^ with yro^s fetters and chains, whom you
have shut up in dark and close prisons, whom you have robbed both of goods and
honor? Have you any thing else to lay to their charge, but that they would
not give their asfent to your statutes, which seemed to them unjust? And
therefore it is no wonder, if other men being with such cruel and horrible
punishments put in extreme fear be not over bold to declare their mind freely
in open place. For where the giving of voices is not free, but forced of men by
fear and terror, there reigns, not the counsel of the whole, but the lust
and outrage of a few. You do not therefore sufficiently prove, that those
laws were made and allowed by the common agreement and consent of al states.
For it is manifest, that they were violently forced, and that who so ever did
gainesaie them, was extremely punished.

As touching my humble suite unto the Queen, wherein I besought her Majesty,
that, if I were able by good argument to prove, that these authors or brochers
of new fanglednes did most daungerously and perniciously err, it might please
her to esteem and hold their doctrine as ungodly and detestable: you say, that
it is a false accusation without strength of argument: that it proceeds of
stomach, and not of love toward the truth: that it is grounded upon a
slander, and not upon reason: that it is a reproach, and not a disputation
laid upon the ground work of religion* You require of me the very same
thing, as I required of your Queen: that is to wit, that if you were able to
show, that I had without good cause found fault with the government of your
common weal, I should repent me of mine offense.

First of al, I take Christ Jesus to witness (who only knows the secrettes of
my heart) that I wrote those my letters neither for hatred, neither for
displeasure, neither for reproach (as you say) but for earnest good zeal and
love I bear to the truth and to the welfare of the whole realm. For what
have Inglish men hurt me more then other men? What wrong or displeasure have
they done me? Truly never a whit. But contrary wise I have been informed by
the letters both of Antonius Augustinus Bishop of Ilerda, a man for his
excellent virtues and singular knowledge in the liberal sciences, well deserving
the dignity of a bishop together with immortal fame (who was sometime sent
from the bishop of Rome legate unto Queen Marie) as also by the letters of John
Metellus a Burgonion, a man, whom for his courteous and sweet conversation
joined with rare gifts of learning I love very intierly: that many great
learned men in England did geaue m^ a very honorable report. Wherefore there
was good cause, why I should rather love English men, then malice or revile
them. Neither did I ever think to reprove your common weal, but the corrupt
lewdnes of a few, which disquieteth the whole realm. And whereas you charge
me with curiosity for meddling in a strange common weal: I think it is no
strange common weal, but mine own. For I did not reason of the laws of your
Realm and civil ordinances, but of Christian religion, for the which I am
not afraid to loose my life. And therefore shall I never think any thing to be
impertinent to me, whereby I may maintain and set forth the honor of this
common weal. Consider now, M. Haddon, how just your request is. This is your
demand. If you can convince and manifestly prove, not that I am in any error
(for that were tolerable) but that I wrote my epistle for hatred, evil will, and
reproach: you require of me to confess my fault and to say that I was over
rash, when I took upon me to control your matters, which I knew not. Can you
on the other side prove, whereas I mea^t lovingly, frindly, and religiously,
that it was done slanderously, enuiously and untruly? But lest you should say,
I deal to straightly with you, this much I promise you faithfully. If you be
able to prove, not that I wrote for any evil intent (for that is impossible)
but that the rearing up of this your newly framed religion is without all fault
and blameless, I will repent me of my doing. I am not ignorant, how dangerous
a matter it is, to promise thus much to a man of law. But because I have a good
affiaunce, that you shall not be able to circumuent me with any malicious and
crafty fetch of the law, and my desire is to discharge honest men of
slanderous reports: I promise you thus much of mine honesty: if you be able
to prove, that those fellows be honest, godly, and religious men, which I
take to be lewd and wicked verlettes, I will never speak one word against you.

You take it in snuff M. Haddon, that I deal so boisteously with your new
masters, saing that I do oftentimes thunder out against them most horrible
and fyerie reproaches, yea so much, that man's heart can not devise any thing more
detestable. Wherein I perceive that you can not well discern, what an argument,
and what a reproach is. For I contended not with reprochful words, but with
arguments, such as you can not yet answer. Than you say. Where are these
monsters of Religion? What are they? How long have they continued? Where are
those misshapen fellows to be found? If you think to shift the manifold
arguments which I have used, with such a glittering show of words, you are
much deceived. For I look for reasons, and not for a vain noise of words. But
that, that you bring in upon this, is a very toy and mockery. Your words be
these. Declare the things, name the persons, note the times, add the
circumstances, that we may have some certainty, wherein to stand with you, as
also to withstand you. I think, M. Haddon, it was long, ere you were set to
the Rhetorike schole, and that ye were not very apt to learn it. You would
be counted a Rhetorician, and yet you know not that Rhetorique is a prudencie
or discretion in speaking: so that what so ever is against discretion, is not
convenient in this art, which you went about to learn at an inco^uenient
time. There is a rule of the law, usual in iu^dgeme^tes, which is this. When
the question is, not of the law, but of the fact, the offense being secret,
we must use al arguments and conjectures possible, to bring the truth of the
fact to light. For it must be considered, of what conversation, of what life,
of what audacitie the party arreined was: it must be weyed, what fear, what
desire, what envy, what hatred might move him to commit the fact: it must
be declared, what opportunity he had, what time, what occasion, what policy
to co^ceale, what hope to escape, what suspicio^ went before, what came after,
with all other circumstances, which may before the judges increase the
suspicio^ of the fact. Now sir when your master (which as it seems, was but
meanly seen in these matters) had taught you this rule: you thought it would
serve in all causes, not only in judgment, but else where: and therefore you
require of me such circumstances as the cause did nothing require. For my
meaning was not to accuse any man, but to advertise the Queen, that she should
not suffer her self to be brought to any inconvenience. If you or any such as
you are were to be arreined, what? should we, in a matter openly known and
not denied, but defended to be lawfully done, use such arguments, conjectures
and circumstances as you require? Not so. But it were sufficient to declare,
that your doings were heinouse and ungodly. And he that should otherwise do,
might worthily be laughed to scorn as a trifling and a foolish babbler. Why then
Sir? If you neither understand what is decent, neither consider what the cause
requires, neither perceive the difference of things: is it meet, that I
should be punnished for your ignorance? I think not so. But whereas my
meaning was, not to arreine any man, but only to admonish your Prince, that
she would put away from her self and her realm the peril that hangs over
them: could I do any less, but set the greatness of the danger before her
eyes? And because the greatest danger in the wordle is, to take a false
religion for a true: I showed certain marks, by the which a man might
discern false and devilish heresy, from true and godly religion. Those
marks, if they be false, reprove them: if they be not manifest, convince me of
ignorance: if they offend not you, hold your peace: if unawares I touched you at
the quick, show your grief.

Monsters of Religion I know there are very many, if they be not yet come
into England, I am glad for your countries sake: and I confess I was in an
error, when I thought that your Island had been pestered with diverse and sundry
kinds of such monsters. But your bare denial is no sufficient Consutation. You
must use manifest proofs: you must declare by good reason, that I was in an
error, and then I will say, that you are an eloquent fellow. But if you can
not do this, but only prate and talk: I am not bound to believe you. A little
after ye say thus. You cry out against religion, you fight against the
setters forth of religion, in these two points you use much bitter talk, and
yet in neither of them both do you tell us either what it is, or where it is.
Sir either you have not read my letters, or if you have, the meaning of them,
which is very plain, you understand not (such is peradventure the dulnes
of your wit). Could any man set forth more plainly with words, the infamous
doings of men, the great owtrage, and cruel impiety of their procedinges?
Anon after, ye take a piece as it may appear out of some other ma^s oration,
and set it in for your own, in a place nothing to the purpose. these be your
words. This your accusation is very pitiful, the which if I answer but with
one word, there is no remedy, you must needs hold your peace. It is even so,
sir, you have made a great speak. The things that you have done, the devises
and practices that you have wrought, al was don in darkness and huggermugger.
There are no witnesses, there remains no footesteps to tracke you ou^, no
signs and tokens by the which a man might come to the knowledge of your
doings. Then you say thus. You cry, yea with gaping mowth, and that very
lamentably: that this newly devised Religion is to be shunned, abandoned, and
abhorred, that the begynners of it were mischievous persons, murderers,
cutthrotes, poisoners, ouerthrowers of commonweals, ennemies of mankind.
Surely this talk that you ascribe unto me, is yours, and not mine, how be it I
am not angry with you for the devising of it. For such heinouse offenses would
be shaken up with much sharper words then these be. But sir how answer you
these things? Full stowtly I warrant you, they can not be denied. Yet thus you
say. I constantly affirm, that there is no such thing: I believe not you, I
require to be instructed. What say you? What prove you? Oh what an eloquent
fellow is this, that ca^ so easily with one clause or sentence, and that very
short, shut up the whole matter? How manfully you stand to your defense? How
warily you keep out your ennemie? In good sooth I can not but muse at your,
folly, to see, upon how small occasion (when you have said nothing at all) you
fall to crying out, as though you had uttered some excellent matter. I said in
that my epistle, that the Virgins or Nuns consecrated unto God, were defiled
with incostuous wedlock: I said that the images of Saints, and of the Cross,
yea and of Christ him self crucified, were pulled out of their places, and
broken in peaces. I said, that the old Religion was overthrown, and a new set
up in the place of it. Other things I let pass, reserving them to their
convenient places. What says M. Haddon to all this? Al these things confuteth
he, like an Orator, with one word: and drives me to the wall, that I can go
no farther. I believe you not, says he, I require to be instructed. What say
you? What prove you? Why then what shall I do? Whether shall I go? M Haddon
an Inglish man, a man very expert in the affairs of his country, ^aieth
pla^inly, that things that are commonly reported to have been done in England,
were never done. If it be so, I must bring witnesses. And principally I will
^ite you to geaue witness. If you will confess so much as I require of you,
you shall rid me of great trouble. If you deny it, then will I call other
witnesses to testify for me, if need shall so require. Afterward yo bring in
these words. You cry out as loud as you can, heaping together all the
villainous words in the world, which, it seems, you have sorted out, and
set a side for the nonce, to deface this your counterfaict religion, and to
stick and kill certain persons, which no man knows but your self. I
pray you, M. Haddon, sobre your self a little, but even so long, as you may
peruse, again this your talk. You shall see your self, that you were stark
mad, when you wrote these things. For you utter such matter, as neither I,
nor you your self do understand.

You say, that I do deface my counterfaicte religion with words of
villainy. I omit the name of counterfaicte Religion, as though I had been the
author or begynner of any new Religion at all. But how should I my self
deface mine own Religion, which I do maintain and with dew praise set out?
This would I feign learn of you.

Then for the persons, which you say I stick, I would gladly understand what
they are. As for Luther with his adhere^tes and folowers I take them for most
wicked and infamous persons, and such in deed I do a little prick in my
writings. These are the persons, which you say no man knows but I. And you
for sooth, know them not: and yet you commend them highly, which is a point of
meruelouse great oversight in you to commend such as you know not. But you,
will neither say so, neither can you well tell, what you would say. Doubtless
it were better, to be do^me, then to utter such matter, as no man neither sad
nor mad can understand.

You accuse me that I have defamed your most noble Island, being thereunto
brought by pelting rumors of maliciouse persons. Why then, sir, you grant,
that I have devised nothing, but what I have spoken, I was moved to speak by
common report. Moreover I have already declared, that I spoke not against the
whole Island, as you say, but only against the brochers of your new fangled
Religion.

Now whereas I said, that heresy and sects are popular, which is very
dangerous and noisome to Princes, that mind to rule like kings, (wherein you
M. Haddon, find great fault with me) if I prove it not by good reason, I am
content, you shall take me, yea and proclaim me as a slaunderer. But of this we
will talk hereafter.

The mischieuouse practice of poison, wherewith it is reported that certain
Princes have been killed, you pourge with two examples taken out of your
ancient Cronicles. For you say, that the Emperor Henry the fourth was made
away by the treason of a monk, that gave him the blessed Sacrament infected
with poison. You say also that John king of England was by the like man and
manner poisoned. I know that both these tales are proved to be slanderous lies
by good and approved writers. But to my matter, whether it were so or not, it
skilleth little. Neither did I ever say, that before Martin Luther there was no
man that could I kill in poison, or that besides him there was never ill monk
or friar in the wordle. But thus much I said, that when such offenses are
committed in commonweals, by men not so well trained in godly life: it were
expedient, that they were reformed, by the purity of this your most unspotted
discipline, by the wholesome virtue of your gospel, by the goodly redress
that your Doctors have brought to the wordle. The which being nothing so, but
all together to the contrary, (for it is manifest that within these thirty
years last past many more conspiracies have been wrought against Princes, then
in many hundred years before) I may boldly say, that the operation of this
your medicine is not so effectual, as you take it to be. Soon after ye say
thus. But to rehearse these things particularly unto you, is not nedeful,
which being nearer unto such mischiefs then I am may the better learn out
of your neighbors books: how often the cuppos of poison have walked amongst
the Princes and rulers of the Church of Rome* and how and by whom the seeds
of discord and wars have suffered thorough all the commonweals of the
Christian Dominion. You are a wonderful fellow M. Haddon. This obscure and
intricate manner of speaking likes you meruelously well. I pray you what
would you say, when you say that I am nearer unto such mischiefs? Mean you
that I am nearer, as accessarie to such faults? If you say so (as your words
seem to importe), you are not well acqueinted with my manners. If you say, I
am of that countrei, where poison is oftentimes given to Princes in meats and
drinks, that is false also. For there is no country in the world, where the
name of a king is more reverenced then here. If you say that I am nearer unto
Rome, where such things are sometimes used, surely you have not well learned
the situations and distances of countries. For we are much farther from the
city of Rome then you are. Whereas you say, that the seeds of wars have
suffered, what your meaning is, I assure you I can not tell. Except peradventure
the printer mistook, and for this word Dispersa, put in unawares perpessa.

As towching the heads or prelates of the Church, which were made away with
poison: I grant that such wicked acts have sometimes ben committed. For it
chances often, that, where a man would least look for it, there reigns
most the heinouse vices of coueteousnes and ambition: out of the which two
fountains springs al evils to the destruction of mankind. Yet this I warn
you, that it is much looked for, that the redress of al these evils should
proceed from your Euangelike discipline, which pretends in outward show to
make an end of al enormities.

But sir, what is it, that you bear your self so hohly, so godly, so
religiously, yielding unto God thanks with so kind and mindful heart, for the
benefit of this your Gospel. Thus you say. I humbly hold up my hands unto
the immortal God, thanking him heartily, that it has pleased him, by the rising
of the son of his Gospel openly ^mongest us, to drive away the most deep
darkness of the times past: through the lack of whose knowledge, and through
the affiaunce of superstition, we walowed before without care in the sink of
vice, believing that by the lead of Bulls, and by the mumbling of prayers not
understood, was purged, what so ever sin might be committed in this life.
What more godly prayer could be devised than this? You thank God, that you
are delivered from most perilous darkness, yea and that through the light and
shining of the gospel, which was written and set out, not by Matthew, John or
any other holy Evangelist, but by Luther, Melanchton, Zwinglius, and such
other worshipful squiers lately dropte out from heaven. And so being delivered
through the benefit of this prosperous and luckie gospel from the stinking
dich of al filthiness, in the which you wallowed before (as you confess your
self) having affiaunce in superstition: you are now no more subject unto the
brandes of fleshly lust: you are no more troubled with ambition: you are not
occupied in the troublesome cares of coueteousnes: you are not puffed up with
pride and vain glory: you trust no more to fraud, deceit, and lying. For it
is like, that having received the brightness of heavenly light, ye despised
forth with all worldly things, and were inflamed with the desire of heavenly
life, yea and (that more is) of the divine nature it self. Who ca^ deny, if
this be so, but that so wonderful an alteration of life does most manifestly
declare the very presence of Christ him self? But I would feign learn this
of you, whether you alone in all England, do enjoy these so great benefits,
or whether they be common to al such, as have received the brightness of your
new gospel. If you alone have the fruitio^ of this light with so great fruict
of the heaue^l^ virtue: the glittering of this new gospel has brought no
great commodity to your cou^trei. for it should have furdered, not any one
particular man, but the whole common weal. Oh say you, every one. for as the
son rising drives away the darkness from the eyes of al men: even so the
brightness of this gospel puts away the myste that was cast over all men's
hearts. Al things are now laid open, al things are come to light. There are
no faults in the world, no wicked offenses, no heinouse crimes, no, none at
al. There is great good cause, if this tale be true, why we should forsake our
own countrei, and come to dwell in England, that we might be partakers of this
your felicity with you. For what could a man desire more of God, then always
to behold such a countrei, where, for the greater part, neither coueteousnes,
norsensualitie, nor hatred, nor pride, nor contention, nor rashness, nor any
other spot of unclean life may take place. But, Sir, I pray you: What was the
let, why you used no justice or godliness, before this new son beams shone
upon you? Horrible superstition, you say. for we believed, that through the
virtue of a piece of lead, and the mumbling of a few prayers, which we
understood not, al our offenses were forgeauen us, what soever we had done in
this world. What say you? is it to be thought you were al so mad, that you
would think a sin conceived in the heart to be forgeauen through the virtue
of a piece of lead, or by the pronouncing of prayers, the mind being otherwise
occupied? What a great dulnes of wit was that? what a strange folly? who had
put that error into your hearts? Were there no men amongst you learned in the
holy scriptures, to teach you, that all the hope of salvation consists in the
grace and mercy of Christ? Truly I hold up my hands most humbly unto the
immortal God (as you pretend to do) yielding him most hearty thanks, that it
was my chance to be borne and brought up in Spaigne, where no man (if he be a
Christian) was ever so foolish as to think, that there is any other way to
pourge sin, but only by the grace and goodness of Christ. The which to
atteine, the necessary and only mean is according to the doctrine of Christ
him self, to detest and forsake vice, to confess our sins committed with
bashfulnes and sorrow, to withdraw our selves from sensuality to co^tinencie,
from vice to honesty, from malice to charity, to enter into a new trade of
life, and to exercise our selves in holy works. Now sir, of you trusted so
much to lead, that ye thought it of force to blot out sin: you were not well
in your wit. If you say that al England was in the like blindness, you bring a
great slander of madness upon your country, that has brought you up and
placed you in so great worship. No, say you, I say not so. But I mean by the
name of lead, in the which we saw the name and image of the bishop of Rome
engraued, the authority and jurisdiction of the Pope him self, the which
many hundred years ago, was holden and esteemed as a thing very holy, of
our Fathers and afterward of us. This authority, which we sometime reverenced,
being now instructed by the most clear doctrine of this gospel, I do
neglecte, despise, contemn, and think it to be esteemed as a thing of naught
of all wise men. Why then, M. Haddon, what needed you the name of lead to
signify this authority? Did you it, to make it more odiouse? Or rather
thought you by jesting at the word to get the greater applause of your
compagnions? For I know, that pleasant sporters, as you be, are much
delighted with jesting, and like to contend not so much with arguments and
sentences, as with sco^fing, and (as it seems to me) with an unsavory kind
of prattling. In such like scoffs and tauntes Martine Luther your youthlie
Patriarch and old wanton was a great doer. And I dowbt not but some of your
clawebackes, when he came to this place, took up a great laughter, and bound
it with an oath, that it was marvelous pleasauntly spoken, and excellently well
handled. For all things are so far out of course and dew order, that it is a
very easy matter for a saucy reprochful scoffer, to get the name of a merry
fellow and pleasant compagnion.

But as concerning this matter, although the Bishop of Angra has disputed
very learnedly of the authority of the Bishop of Rome: yet will I reason with
you (as with a seculare man and ciuilian) of the said matter in few words.
First of al let this be a The Monarchy of the Church.
ground work or foundation. The Church of Christ is one and not many. Then
let this be agreed upon. It is not enough for a Prince, which makes laws to
establish a common weal, to set them out, except he also appoint governors
and inferior magistrates. Let this also be the third ground. (for so much as
you like well mine opinion as touching the order of a Monarchy) that it is most
expedient for a common Weal well appointed with customs and laws, to be
under the rule of one Prince. For many do tear and dismembre a common weal,
but one by supreme authority unites and as it were with glue, ioineth
together the hearts of the people. It was therefore most agreeable to the best
manner of government, when the Prince of al Princes (under whose everlasting
Empire are subjected both heaven and earth) intended to set up a heavenly
common weal in earth: that he should first make Laws, and then creat Princes
and Magistrates, which might according to the prescribed order of Laws and
equity, rule this common weal. Such were the Apostles and the rest of the
Disciples of Christ. Last of al, lest the band of this society might be
dissolved, and the peace of the City distourbed: he appointed a Monarchy, and
gave the supreme government thereof unto Peter. Are not these things commonly
known of all men? Ymagine you to obscure and darken things most clearly
spoken? Trust you so much to your malice, that you think your self able to
wrest the words of the Gospel from the true meaning, to serve the filthy
appetite and lust of you and your companions? I pray you what can be spoken
more plainly and cleerelie then Mat. 16. c.
those words? Thou art Peter, says Christ, and upon this rock I will build
my Church. And what so ever thou shall bind upon the earth, it shall be bound
Luc. 22. d.
in heaven. And again. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not, and
thou being turned, confirm thy brethren. And many other places of like effect,
which do manifestly prove, that Peter had a Prerogative above the rest of the
Apostles. But you will say for all this, that these testimonies of the holy
scriptures, which we have alleged, are expounded far otherwise of the new
Apostles. I will set against the authority of your Apostles, the authority of
S. Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Basile and all other holy men, that have with
their writings given light to the Church of Christ. But now your Doctors will
answer, that although it be true that the supreme authority was granted to
Peter, yet follows it not, that it was given to his successors also. Why then
I ask you an other question. Did Christ set up a Church to continue but for
one man's life? Or else minded he to establish it for ever? If he appointed, that
his Church should stand so little time, he did not so great a thing, as was
to be looked for of his infinite bounty and wisdom: for so much as he
bestowed so much labor and diligence, yea and shed so much blood about a
common weal, whose continuance was limited within the bounds of so short time.
If he minded that his church should continue for ever: then doubtless he set
it in such order, as should in all chaunges and alterations of times be
maintained and kept. If it be then evident (as it is most evident and plain)
that Peter had a Superiority over the rest of the Apostles: it must needs
follow, that the same preeminence or principality, of right apperteineth to al
such as have succeeded in Peter's room and charge. Or else, in the Church of
Christ, which is one, it might seem there was ordained not the order of the
heavenly Monarchy, but the government of many. And then what knot or band of
concord were there in the Church? By whose authority should the tempests
risen in it be assuaged? By whom should seditious opinions and sects be rooted
out? By whom should pride and stubbornes be restreined and kept under: if there
had been no man appointed in the Church from the beginning, by whose authority
all men should be kept in order? No we for so much as the church of Christ is
simple and one: and one it can not be, unless there be in it one only Prince:
furthermore being euidente and plain, that Christ ordained one only ruler in
his Church, whom al men should acknowledge and obeie: finally being out of al
doubt, that this preeminence apperteineth to the Successors of Peter, and that
none of all the ancient Fathers endewed with the spirit and grace of God ever
doubted, but that the bishops of Rome were the successors of Peter (as both
their writings, and the common agreement of the universal Church declares):
with what sprite were your new Apostles moved to bring in this new Gospellish
doctrine, to distourbe the order appointed by Christ, to break the band of
unity and concord, to shake the very Rock and stay of the Church. But lest
some man should think, that these things were wrought of them without any
cause in the world, I will briefly declare, what their devise, or rather what
the fetch of Satan was in this enterprise. It was impossible that ever the
pestilent sects should gather any strength, except the authority of the Bishop
of Rome had been first weakened. For how could the mischievous weed have grown
any long time, whereas it was a very easy matter with the authority of the
Bishop of Rome* forthwith to cut it down, so soon as it appeared above the
ground. Take us (says the spouse of Caut, 2. d.
Christ) the little foxes, that destroy the Vineyardes. This request of the
spouse who shall be able to fulfill, if noman have authority to suppress the
malice and lewdnes of heretics, before it wax great? For it is manifest that
by the foxes are understood heretics. And therefore S. Paul in his second
epistle to the 2. Thessal. 2. b.
Thessalonia^s says, that Antichrist shall not come before: he great reuolti^g
or departure from the catholic Church of Christ. It is therefore necessari for
these young Antichrists, which (as S. Iohnsaieth) do in figure and signification
represent the great Antichriste to come, before they can bring their purpo^ed
mischief to pass, not only to depart them selves from the Church, and from the
supreme ruler of it, but also to solicit and procure to the like departure all
such as they mind to carry away, and make their disciples: and this is the
cause that al heretics, whose chief endeavor and principal intent is to
overthrow the catholic Church, do first of al assail this fortress, do here
plant their ordinance, do here make their battery, do here undermine to
ouerrhrow the forte. For they see, that if this fortress were once overthrown
and won, they may freely sow the seades of al naughtines, and to the ruin and
decaie of many, flee up and down through the world, whether so ever they
list, without any co^trol or check. And to pass over the old Heretics, this
was the cause why Hus^e endeavored to overthrow the authority of the Bishop of
Rome This was also the meaning of Hierome of Prage, when he went about to
weaken the authority of the said bishop This was the way, by the which
FrierLuther thought utterly to destroy the Catholic church. This was the
train, by the which in England a gap was unadvisedly opened to al such
errors, as sense that time have followed. Now the railes and bars being
after this manner broken down, and the gates laid wide open, it was a very
casie matter for all vile and desperate fellows to rush in, to mangle and tear
in peeoes the unity of the Church, to bring in so many wicked errors, such
horrible sects, such a rabble of pestilent opinions, one directly against an
other* The Zwinglians fight against the Luthera^s. The Anabaptists keep
continual war with the Zwinglians. What should I here rehearse the heretics
called heavenly Prophets, the Interimnists, and such other names of sectaries?
What should I say of the hatred, malice brawling, and discord within them
selves? What should I speak of their variety and inco^stancy in opinions? Yea
and such as are of one sect, are not al, nor always of one opinion. Many
points of their Doctrine they correct, they alter and change, the^ turn in
and out, they blot out the old, they make new, now they pull down, and now
they set up, they can not well agree neither with other men, nor yet with them
selves. What say you to this Sir? Are not these things true? Can you say,
that al such as are spro^g of Martine Luther, are thoroughly agreed? that there
is emo^gest them no debate, no discord, no diversity of opinions, but
contrarily most perfect agreement in matters of faith and religion? O M.
Haddon how much better had it benne to reverence that piece of lead, which
you so much scorn at* then to open a way to so many, yea and those so
pestilent errors? But let us return to your Oration. These are your words.

But the authority of the holy Scriptures has thundered in our ears, and has
made us so afraid, that casting away the devises of men, we run only to
the free mercy of God. What is this? Do you so requite Luther, to whom you
are bound for this singular benefit? For it was he that drove all fear out of
your hearts. What terror is this that you speak of? What fear? What
carfulness of mind? Such is the faith, that Luther devised, as being once
well planted in your heart, no fear in the world shall ever be able to shake
the quietness and security of your conscience. And, me thinks, that it is not
to be borne, that you say, you do despise the devises of men. For you are not
so far forewarde in the way of heavenly life, but that you make good
account of some men. For the diuises of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Calvin, and
such other as were the founders of this your new common weal, you have learned
them, you have greedily snatched them up, yea you have with heart and mind
embraced them, striuinge within your selves, who should be foremoste in them,
finally you have decreed to frame the order of your life after their
direction. Whereby we gather, you look not so steddilie to heauenwarde, but
that sometimes you look down upon men. And well done too surely. For
right and reason requires, that you should always have both in your eyes
and hearts such men as they were, so chaste, so holy, and so religious. But
yeat this much I tell you by the way, your mind was not so fervently inflamed
with the love of heavenly things, but that you did highly esteem some men
withal. Admit that Friar Luther had been a holy man (even as holy as you
list to make him) that Melanchon had been void of al earthly affection: that
Zuinglius for the meruelouse report of sincere and chaste life had been
admitted to be one of Gods own privy counsel: that Bucer had excelled al men
in clean, honest, and chaste conversation: that Calvin had passed in virtue
and holiness Bernarde, Anselme, Augustine, Jerome, Basile, and al other holy
men, that have lead an angelike life here upon the earth: yea add unto these
(if it please you) even your own Martyr, whose rare virtue you commend so
highly: Admit I say, that these men had been most excellently furnished with all the highest virtues, yea and most chaste withal: yet were they men, and it
is not impossible, but that they might have been in some errors. And yet do
you esteem their laws, decrees, and ordinances, as a discipline of most high
wisdom, and as a most holy rule of man's life. With what face then say you,
that you despised, and rejected the devises of men, whereas you do ascribe
unto those men that I have here named, almost a divine perfection? But now
let us consider the end of your oration. Soon after you bring in this clause.
Having in like manner regard unto the saying of the Prophet, where he
commands us, that we should confourme the innocence of our life unto
holiness and justice. In this place I merueiled excedingly, not at you, M.
Haddon (for it is not credible, that so grave a man as you be, should lie so
impudently) but at the slau^derous report of men, which with feined tales, and
forged co^plaintes (abusing us being strangers, and ignorant (as you say) of
your affairs have made us believe that you conform you selves, not unto
holiness of life by the law of God, but unto licentious lewdnes through
unbridled lust and bold presumption. And the doctrine of that mad fellow
Martine Luther made it seem the more probable, the which co^demning wickedly
al good works, and burning at a sermon the Canons and holy ordinances of the
Church, and teaching for a sownd doctrine this presumptuous affiaunce, unto the
which alone he ascribes salvation, calling it rashly and impudently by the
name of faith, and putting quitte out of men's hearts al fear of laws both
of God and man, sets out sensuality in her full strength and force, geaueth
fleshly lust free scope and liberty, pretends hoope of impunitie, boldeneth
men to al sin and wickedness. Wherefore I thought it impossible, that a man
observing his precepts, should withal give his mind to justice, virtue and
religion, or take great care how to keep him self chaste and honest. For it is
the part of a wise man, when he sees the cause to doubt nothing of the event.
And it is commonly seen, that naughty begynninges have the like ending. What
should I then do? Seeing just cause of infamy, hearing it most commonly, yea
and sadly reported, that you are in far worse case, then you pretend to be:
weying withal the constant fame, which is, that such as follow this new
religion, are not only subject to fleshly and unclean living, but also much
increased in all wicked and heinouse vices: should I not believe it? Should I
stand against most credible persons reporting it? Should I without any
ground, without witnesses, vainly contend, seeing the common agreement of al
men confirming this opinion? I could not do it. Wherefore if that be false,
which was constantly and not without inward sorrow of al good men reported, you
must pardon me, and lay the fault unto the lightness and impude^cie of certain
men bearing you no good will, which were the deuisers of this false report. But
if it be true that is reported, then are you a very mad man, if you think by
lying and facing to wash out the spot of true infamy.

Here you muse again what I mea^t to advertise your Queen, to beware of such
as are infected with these heresies. And here I tell you again, that, when I
come to that place, I will do my endeavor so to handle it, that you shall no
more muse at it.

You declare unto me the felicity of your Queen, that she abounds in riches,
that she lives in prosperity, that she fears no treason, neither of her
own subjects, neither of forenners. I am right glad of it, and I pray God
grant her always a good, prosperous and flourishing reign. Yet is it the
part of a wise Prince, in calm weather to think of a storm, and to consider
long time before, not when the mariners them selves begin to tremble and
quake* how to save her self: and seeing with what tempests the majesty of
other Princes has been ruffled in diverse and sundry realms, to mistrust, that
her majesty also may experience the like fortune. Of the tempest in France,
the which you say is assuaged, I say nothing else, but that you bear
witness against your own self. For, I pray you Sir, who stirred up that
tempest? Who armed the French m^n against the King of The rebellion in France.
France? What discipline or instruction had they, which contrary to their oath
taken in the face of the world, conttarie to they* allegiaunce toward their
Prince, finally contrary to the majesty and reverence of kingly name, set
them selves in armor against the Kings own person, not only traitorously and
villanously to dispatch the King out of his life, but also to abolish the name
of a King utterly out of the common weal? And you say, the tempest is
assuaged. As though I had said that, what so ever such traitors had most
wickedly and rebelliusly devised, must needs have a prosperous success. No,
no. Their wicked attempt was repressed by policy and force, and especially by
the great grace and benefit of God: it is nothing long of the^, that (like
rebels) made war against their prince. For to have brought their purpose to
a mischievous end, there lacked not in them any good will, but strength and
power.

My discourse of the contempt of wordly things and desire of heavenly things
you mislike not: but you ar mad angry with me, because I call such men enemies
of Religion, as you say were the servants of God, and sent from heaven for
the salvation of the world* and it greaueth you, that I should laugh at their
vain and folish atte^pts. Tell me I pray you Sir, what take those fellows upon
them, which were sent, as you say from heaven? Doubtless, to deliver Christian
men from error, thoroughly to purge the Church, to restore the doctrine and
rule of the Apostles life, to set the truth at liberty, which was, as you
say, oppressed with coueteousnes and ambition, to pull dreams and superstition
out of men's hearts. I said this was a great vau^t. But Sir, this kingdom of God
which they took upon the^ to maintein* this glory of God, for the which they
have entered into so great a conflict, does it consist in words only, or in the
worki^g of virtue? Surely if we believe S. Paul, it stands in the strength and
constant working of virtue: wherefore if they mind to prove themselves honest
me^, let them restore the old modesty, humility, patience, meekenes,
obedience, chastity, purity, innnocentie, the chastising of the body, the
continual war both against the tyranny of the flesh, as also against al
other vices: let them restore that earnest love and seruent charity, that
continual meditation of heavenly things, that godly exercise of prayer unto
God both day and night for the prosperous estate and salvation of al men: Let
them take up the cross on their shoulders, and crucify al uncleanness of
sins: let them forsake al pleasures of the world: let them pull up by the
root the very stringes of carnalitie* finally let them mortify all the
unbridled passions of their wills: that nothing live in them, but the power
and will of Christ, and then will we believe, that they have fulfilled their
promise, and quitte them selves like true men of their word. But if they have
done no such thing, but rather by their examples of life and doctrine have
brought to pass, that men live more freely in all kind of vice, that they are
the readier to commit sacrilege, that they are the bolder to venture upon any
vile, and heinouse offense, that they are the fierser and creweller (yea more
desperate then any man's heart can think) to do villainy and violence to their
Princes, for whose safety they ought to hazard their own lives: if they
forgetting Religion bend them selves wholly against religion: is it not plain,
that they are not only to be scorned and laughed at, but also to be abhorred,
and detested as the most horrible and crewel pestilence of a common weal?

Well well, say you, I perceive at the length, what this your new sect is,
against the which you have so sharply whetted your eloquence. Oh what a
pleasure youhaue to speak doubtfully and obscurely? What say you M. Haddon?
Say you that you do at length understand, what my new sect is? Say you that I
do maintein any newfangled sect? that I do allow their wicked acts, which I
accurse and detest? That I am fallen from the faith and Religion of the holy
Catholic Church? And then how stand these things together, that I should whet
my eloquence against that sect, which (as you sai) I follow my self? Moreover,
by what argument ca^ you prove it? You have peradventure heard say, that I was
a voluptuous man, given to pleasure and uncleanness of life, desirous of
novelties, hasty and headlong to make sedition, debate and discord emo^gest
men. And therefore you think peradventure* that I am enta^gled with the like
detestable vices, as your Masters are. But consider, I pray you, how these
things, that follow, may stand together with this your most impudent suspicion.
At the length, say you, I see the adversaries, whom you would have to be cut of
from the Queen's majesty, and driven out as the corrupters of the whole realm.
Why then, if you see, that I am earnestly bent against all such as are the
brochers of new fangled sects: if you say plainly, that I would, they should
be driven far from the presence and familiarity of the Queen, that they
should be ba^nished out of the bounds of England: doubtless, neither do these
innouations like me, neither do I allow their wicked doings. But how do you
defend them your self? I am, say you, of a contrary opinion. These professors
of the Gospel are the servants of God, sent us from heaven, to awake our
sleapines in these dangerous times of the world growing now to old age, and
to stir up our slownes. These are wonderful matters that you say, if slepines
may be awaked, or slownes stirred up. So may fear bear it self hardily, and
the pleasure of the body restreine vice and uncleanness of life, and mad rashness
well and wisely govern a common weal* Then it follows. They were sent from
heaven to confute error, to reprove impiety: and therefore they are to be
sought out of the Queen's Majesty, and to be much made of in all the common
weal. When ye spoke these words, you thought to reprove me of lightness, for
believing otherwise, of presumption, for writing unto the Queen. You say
furthermore, that it is not necessary to discuss particularly every point
of my accusation, but only to gather them, as it were into certain heads, and
so briefly to run them over. Then you add these words. I will, if I can, put
back the very horns of your accusation. I would feign see with what manhood
and strength you will begin the matter. It follows. First of al, you say we
must consider the persons, because they promise nobly, and we must weie,
whether they be of ability to perform it, whether they have so much virtue
and holiness as they pretend. This would I feign see. But for so much as, this
holiness, which you speak of, must be declared in works, not craked of in
words (for so does Christ teach us to discern the true Math. 7. ^.
prophets from the false by the iru^cte of works, not by the brag or vaunt
of words) I look you should she we me the miracles that these holy men have
wrought: the which being declared, you shall be the better able to put back
the horns of my disputation. For of the words I am nothing afraid, the
which in appearance are merueilous goodly and gate. And this, I warrant you, is
the first lewd point in all Heretics, to cloak their wily trappes with most
holy words. For The vvi^ lines of heretics
by what other means might they allure the minds of the simple people, but
only by a feined show of holiness and innocence? For virtue naturally
inuiteth and draws al men unto her. The which thing these subtle and
crafty fellows knowing well enough, they do on the habit of virtue, the sooner
thereby to creep into the bosoms and hearts of unlearned folks. For as the
fowlers deceive the birds: either with some bait, or else with instruments
resembling the voice and tune of the birds: eue^ so do your doctors by setting
out the gase of cou^ter feit holiness, they bring unto their snares the simple
people, where unawares and suspecting no deceit, they are taken. For open
dishonesty could do little harm, (being of her self very foul and deformed to
behold) except she did bear the cou^tena^ce or face of honesty and innocency.
But feel pray you, what policy these plausible and good fellows have found out
to stir up the common people. We were al sorry to see the manners of me^
corrupted, the streightnes of old discipline rele^ted, the Priests wallowing in
unclean life, and abusing their dignity immoderatly to gain and luker. Now,
as it happened sometimes in the City of Rome, the furious Tribunes of the
people, when the like occasion was offered the^, to stir up the commons against
the nobility, did not let it pass, but the envy which was already to much
kendled, they made to burn, putting underneath, the fierbra^ds of their
troblesom and seditious oratio^s: in like manner these most holy persons, whom
you commend so highly, when they saw into how great hatred the church men were
come: they thought to use al means possible in the world to bring them into
farther hatred and displesure. And so, what by finding fault with the^, and what
by putting the people in hope of a better world, they showed themselves as
ringleaders in this sedition and falli^g from the church. And the better to
bring their purpose to pass, they used many goodly and holy words, bearing men
in hand, that they would express the holy life, not of the Saints that came
near after the Apostles rule (for of the^ they made none account) but of the
Apostles them selves. And so they had always in their mowthes, Christian
piety, the purity of the Gospel, the holiness of most chaste Religion, a
heavenly discipline, the which to disteine with any devises or superstitions
(as they term it) of man, they took it to be a most heinouse offense. After
that they brought all men into great hope and expectation, that the very
perfection of the Primitive Church should by their diligence be restored, and
that the wonderful gifts of the holy Ghost* which now were thought to be stark
dead, should be revived (...). This goodly beginning how plausible it was to
the world, every man may judge. But naughtines can never stay long in one
degree: but when it has once begone to slide, it russheth forewarde, and
falls down headlong. To get therefore the greater favor amongst the
people, what so ever seemed to them any thing rough or unpleasant, they took
it quite away. To confess their sins, was very troblesome: to punish their
body with fasting, was painful: to be tied with the band of Excommunication,
was a vexation of mind: to be shaken with the threatninges of Gods judgment,
was bitter. They did therefore most earnestly endeavor themselves, to take al
such cares out of men's hearts. Wherefore it is no wonder, if the simple people,
being partly offended with the misliuing of the Church men (which all the
world talked of) and partly brought into great hope of a golden world and
most pleasant liberty, did willingly apply them selves to the fantasy of
those men, by whom they surely trusted to be delivered* from al evils, and to
have the fruition of all felicity and pleasure. But when the fury of the
common people was now armed with this cou^terfeit show of Religion (good
Christ) how garishly these your holy men ran to the spoil of the Churches?
What great slaughters of men they made? What a great alteration of things
followed by and by, with the decaie of al* Godliness? And yet you M^ Haddon make
them equal with Ath^nasius, Basile, Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine. If they are
to be tried by their works, as Christ teaches, who are rruly sent from God,
and on the other side, who are pricked foreward of the devil to do mischief:
if I can see no holy works that your prophets have done: if you your self
can not declare any excellent virtues in them: if you can bring no holy
works for proof of their heavenly virtue: what comes into your mind, to
compare men for chastity of life most clean, for godly religion most holy,
for authority of sentences most grave, with them, whom all the world knows
to be, for filthiness of life infamous, for their ungodly atte^ptes
Churchrobbers, for their indiscreet laws and ordinances, fra^ tik and mad me^.
But it is worth while to consider how you prove it: thus you sai. Neither show
you any thing, why they may not be equal with the ancient Fathers. Yes surely,
I will show something, and show withal, how shameless you are, which compare
unbridled fleshlinesse, with cleanesse of life, impiety with godlynes, raiging
madness with godly wisdom. Then you say.

But I will bring you away from these odious comparisons, for this is no place
to reason these matters. Yes M. Haddon, I will be so bold as to reason with you.
If this be true, that in geui^g of counsel the manners and behavior of the
geuer, is to be weied, and that nothing induces us more to credit the counsel
given, then the tried honesty of the person: I say plai^ly, that it is a
question worthy to be asked, of what manners and co^uersatio^ they are, that
give us counsel to follow their opinion. You say afterward. I will uphold that
our Doctors do agree with the reverend Fathers, that they take the very
same way that they did, that they teach in effect the self same religion. I
would you were able to defend, that the ancient fathers and your doctors
were well agreed. Then it follows. The which if it be true, it booteth not to
make comparison between such as are alone. If it be not so, tell us wherein they
disagree. You say well, if it be so. But before I begin to declare, how much
the ancient Fathers dissented from your new masters, I will tarry a little to
see how you can prove this goodly agreement. S. Augustine, say you,
co^platneth in his time, that flouddes of ceremonies ouerflowed the Church, in
so much that the Christians were almost in worse case, then ever were the
Jews. You never read that in S. Augustine* that the Ceremonies, which we now
use, are like to the Jewish ceremonies, and therefore to be rejected: but your
masters have brought you like an ignorant fellow to believe it. S. Hierome,
say you, wissheth that the holy scriptures, which your Church hides from al
men, might be learned without the book, even of children and women. S. Jerome
writing to Paulinus, disputes to the contrary, where he complains of the
rashness and boldhardines of men, which took upon them without any good wit
or virtue to handle the Scriptures with to much liberty: and of the indiscreet
chatting of foolish women, which taking upon them to expound Scriptures,
defined many things very unadvisedly. It follows. Basile employed his
vacant time in the most godly exercise of reading and teaching divinity. It
was well don truly. for Basil was none of them that take upon them arrogantly to
teach doctrine that they never learned. Then you add these words.

If Monks had leued according to the rules of Basile, no man would ever have
touched them with so much as his finger. As though your quarrel had been against
men, and not against chastity it self. But admit that their manners were
loose, their behavior dissolute, their life wanton. What then? was there none
emo^gest them al, that kept their chastity? There were without doubt. And that
the love of clean, and chaste life was not utterly decayed em ngest monks, the
end of the holy fathers the Carthusians declared full well, who, if they would
have yielded their consent to the wicked decrees, neded never to have suffered
other punishment but only to be married. It was not therefore the misliking of
filthy pleasure, that stirred you to such barbarous cruelty, but the hatred
of chastity and virginity. And I know well, that not only they were chaste and
perfect men, but also many other that are now bannished among us: the which
whersoeuer they set their foot, they leave behind them most manifest
footsteppes of bashfulnes and honesty. But admit that the greater part of them
had been drowned in vice: was it therefore good reason by and by, to overthrow
the whole order? How much had it ben more for your honesty, to have don as the
most puissaunt King Fernandus did sometime in Spaigne and Elizabeth his wife, a
Princess consecrated to everlasting fame? as the most honorable king and
renoumed Prince Emanuel: as John the third his son, a King for his religion
and godliness worthy of most high commendation: as Charles the fifth an emperor
born to immortal glory: as Euricus the Cardinal son of king Emanuel, in whom
shines a wonderful light of al virtue and holiness: finally as all other most
religious Princes did: who seeing the manners of monks to tend toward a
niceness, sent for certain perfect religious men, by whose diligence their
unbridled affection and licentiousnes was tied up, their loose manners by
streighter discipline restreined, and their sleapie minds styrred up to the
most fervent love of godliness. And so there are now amongst us most holy and
religious Monks, which follow Basile, Benet, and Bernarde, and Dominique, and
Frauncis, in the purity of most chaste religion, in most earnest and zealous
love of God, in most notable examples of al virtue. Why then would you rather
cut of that, that might have been healed? Because, as I said a little before, it
was not any displeasure toward filthy lust or life, but the hatred of
perpetual chastity, that stvrred you to Heretics enemies to chastity.
deface and vtte^lie to overthrow the name of Mounkes. For (as S. Hierome ^aith)
all Heretics have a natural hatred and grudge against chastity. Wherefore
there is no doubt, but that, if your Mounkes had lived according to the rules
of S. Basile: the greater their perfection had been, the more displeasure and
hatred you would have born them. Afterward you bring in these words.

We reverence the Creed of Athanasius as it ought to be, neither is there any
controversy between them and us. What great discord there is between your
men and Athanasius, I have partly declared in that my letter, which you so
much revile. Neither skilleth it much, whether you be agreed in some points
yea or no. For I never said, that your Championsdissented from the opinion of
the holy Fathers in all matters. But to what end tends all this talk? what
would you prove? For sooth, that Luther, Bucer, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius,
Calvin and other the Ministers of this your gospel, are in virtue, holiness,
chastity, and religion, nothing inferior to S. Augustine, Hierome, Basile,
and Athanasius and other holy Fathers, whose writings seem to send forth the
very sweet savor of the holy ghost. But how do you prove it? S Augustine you
say, co^plaineth, that whole flouddes of ceremonies ouerflowed the Church: S.
Jerome thought it expedient, that women and children should learn the
scriptures without the book: If Monks lived according to the rule of S.
Basile, no man would once lay his singer on them: and we reverence the Creed
of Athanasius. What then? Can you prove by these propositions, that Luther and
Bucer, and the rest of your Worthies are to be compared with S. Augustine,
Jerome, Basile, Athanasius in virtue, constancy, chastity, cleanes of life,
religion and wisdom? A goodly pregna^t wit of a young Logician: he shakes out
his arguments so fearsly, that he makes them fit to conclude, what so ever
him li^teth to prove. Let this form of reasoning be once received, and what
thing is there in the world so much contrary to al reason, that may not
easily be proved* As if we should say for example: Mahumete says, that God
created the world. S. Basile holds the same. Basile therefore and Mahumete
are most like in godly life. Arius confessed, that Christ shed his blood for
the redemption of mankind. Athanasius affirms the same. Ergo, Arius shined
in virtuous conversation no less then Athanasius. Luther disputes that all
good things are to be referred to the grace of Christ: the very same does S*
Augustine declare most wisely. It follows therefore, that Luther has
deserved no less commendation of holiness, then S. Augustine. See you not,
understand you not, consider you not, how childishly you have concluded, how
weakelie you have defended your new Masters? Are you wont in skirmish so to
put back the horns of your ennemies? This was the principal and chiefest
point of al, in the which you should have showed all the force and strength of
your wit, to have brought all the world in admiration of you.

You say afterward that I do taunt and revile the soul of Luther. As though
the mind of Luther did not yet live in all such as follow his doctrine. You
call the same Luther the man of God. I know not what you are M. Haddon. But if
it were lawful to esteem by conjecture, what manner of man you are, I see no
cause why I should greatly commend either your wit, or your life* for he that
geaueth the testimony of divine virtue or heavenly conversation to a most
filthy and infamous person, we may worthily suspecte, that he is him self
subject unto the like vices. Your words are these. This man of God, whom
you reprochefully call a mad man, in open assemble before Charles the fifte,
gave a sobre and sownd account of his faith. That is false. You might better
say, that in the presence of the Emperor him self, he most impudently
betrayed his own madness. And, that he was not punished for so doing, it was,
because he had received before hand the Emperors safe conduicte for his
indemnitie, in case he spoke any thing not agreeable to holy religion. You
say. This mad man stood fast and in safety thirty years, in spite of all
the politic and wise patrones of your Church, were they never so madly bent to
make him out of the way. In these words you do not defend Luther, but you
reioise and triu^ph at the ruin of the Church. I know that the outrage of
Luther has been fortified and maintained by the aid of Princes, and by the
fury of the common people: and I confess that it has so come to pass for
our sins. For as God in the old time to punish the sins of his people,
styrred up ennemies against them, minding by punishment and plagues to bring
them back to honest civility and godly religion: even so in ou^ time has he
suffered Luther, and permitted his madness to be bolstered and borne out by the
help of many men, meaning by plagues of his wisdom appointed, to call us
home again to the fervent love and following of true godliness. But whereas you
say, that Luther stood fast and in safety: surely you know not wherein
safety stands, if you be of that mind, that it is rather a misery to be
pounished for sin, then to live in sin. Furthermore the patrones of the
Church (as it likes you to call them) perced him thorough with their
writings, and set out his name to all the posterity, dishonested with the
foul spots of his most heinouse and filthy life. As for the thirty years,
in the which you boast he stood so fast, you need brag no more. For the
name of Mahumete, which has co^tinnued above nine hundred years, remains
yet in very great honor and estimation amongst such men, as do follow
that wicked and detestable sect. But Erasmus, say you, geaueth unto this
mad man a singular good testimony of innocence by these words. The
doctrine of Luther many men mislike, but his life they do with one voice
allow. I do not so much esteem Erasmus, that I think my self bound to set
my hand to his testimonial in all matters. And yet I know, that Erasmus wrote
against Luther, (how beit not so earnestly as the cause required). For he
feared the furious and reproachful talk of the fellow.

You accuse me for saing, that Luther was Popular, and withal you demand of
me, what I mean by the word Popular. I will do so much for you, that you may
understand, how fitly the word may be applied to Luther. Popular what it is.
They were sometimes called Popular, which sought the common profitte of the
people, and endeavored them selves by strength and diligence to rescue the
impotent and poor men, when wrong was offered them by such as were of greater
force and power. This name therefore was in those days much esteemed and highly
commended Now whereas it is the property of flattery to counterfaicte virtue,
and under the pretensed color of honesty and gentleness privily to creep
into the hearts of the simple people: the crafty and malitiouse fellows, whose
only bent was to attein to honor, perceiving that such as were Popular, were
in greatest estimation amongst the people, and by common agreement promoted to
the highest romes of honor: endeavored them selves to seem Popular. And these
men considered very curiously, not what was in deed good and profitable for
the people, but what they liked and longed most after as profitable unto them.
And as it fares now a Clavv^ backs of the court.
days with many seruitours in court that hunte after the favor of Kings,
they spy out diligently, not what stands most with the kings profit and
honor, but what they most covet, what they love, and what they would fainest
bring to pass, serving only their unlawful pleasure and unruled affection:
even so amongst free peoples did those men, whom we call popular, the Grecians
called them (...), that is to wit, leaders of the people: they applied them
selves, not to the profitte, but to the pleasure of the people. For the
profitte of the people consists in a good and discrete moderation of things:
but through inordinate greedines of the thing that they lust after, and through
the name of liberty, it is brought to naught. The common people envied such as
were men of power. These Populares made laws, by the which they were either
deprived of their goods, or bannished out of their country, or put to death.
The people could not away with severity of laws. The laws therefore, that
seemed any thing straight, in restreining the unbridled affections of the
people, the Populares took quite away. The people hated virtue, because they
saw, it stood directely against their untamed outrages: the Populares with
their decrees and ordinances dispatched all virtue out of their commonweals,
and so by the means of these Populares, the people might without co^trol or
check do what them listed. But to conclude, such as came to honor by this
means, served the filthy lust, the vicious desire, the unclean affection,
and the furiouse rage of the base people: and did so bear them selves in
every office, that it might full well appear, that they were no free men, but
the very bondslaues of the indiscreet and mad people. And the better to bring
this matter to pass they marked very diligently, not only what the people
longed for, but also whom they envied at for wealth and richesse: and so
brought al men of power and richesse to be envied, styrred up the most earnest
hatred of the commons against their Princes, set fire unto the hot rage of the
multitude, therewith to consume and wast al such as were in high authority and
honor in their commonweals. But how did they profit the people? Full well I
warrant you. For even those things, that the people most thirstily gaped after,
were vtterli ouerthowe^. For whereas the nature of the people is such, that they
ca^ not bear to much wealth and prosperity: having once atteined the liberty:
which they so much wished for, they fall together by the ears within
themselves, they rage and ruffle, they toss and turmoile, and in the end they
wrecke their anger and malice even upon them, that were the procurers of this
liberty. And so, (whereas nothing can long continue, where discord and madness
reigns) it comes to pass, that they leese not only the liberty and
impunitie by the diligence and flattery of these Populars procured, but also
their honest and lawful liberty, which they might otherwise have kept long
time. These are they, that are wont to be called Populars.

Now it remains, that we declare, whether friar Luther were Popular after
this manner. Is there any doubt in the wordle of the matter? What other thing,
I pray you, intended Luther, but only to flatter the people? Al such things
as the people hated and lothed, did he not take them quite away? The
authority of the Bishop of Rome, did he not utterly deface it? The holy
Canons, did he not abrogate and disannull them? Did he not stir up hatred and
envy against the Princes of the Church? did he not quench in men's hearts al
fear of laws both of God and man? did he not make a faith, which assured men
of salvation, were they never so wicked, yea and obstinately bent to co^tinew
in naughtines? did he not show to all the wordle a great hope of licentiousnes?
did he not with his doctrine make those men disobedient and rebellious, which
he him self had begoten, fostred and brought up? Is it not well known, that
such as had given them selves wholly to his doctrine, proved so desperate and
headlong, that he him self could not rule them? But how worthily you defend
him M. Haddon? If he be popular, say you, that regards the health of the
people, there is no man more popular then he: but if you mean, by popular,
such a one as stirs the people to civil discord, read his book, in the
which he inueieth against the tumultes of the common people in Germany, and
slander him no more. Oh what a wise man is this? How wittily he quiteth the
Prince of his religion? I call him Popular, whose scholars by hearing his
doctrine become seditious. You answer me, that Luther complained of the
tumultes in Germany, which his scholars and folowers stirred up. And you are
so blockishe, that you perceue not that you speak for me against your self.
Luther, say you, speaks earnestly against the tumultes in Germany. Why then
he confesses, that the self same religion, which he had taken upon him to
govern, which he had instructed with divine ordinances, which he had brought
back: to the old purity of the gofpel, is stirring and seditious. Then did
Luther bring marvelous goodly fruits to his cou^tre^ me^* for he made them not
modest, but reprochful: not gentle, but impatie^t: not quiet, but seditious:
yea so much, that he him self was forced to set out books, and to reprehe^d
their desperate madness. O what a wholesome gospelis^^ doctrine was this? what a
wonderful light cast this divine man into the wordle? what a sovereign salve
laid he to the wounded consciences? Is this, to pourge the Church thoroughly of
vices? to restore again the old purity of the gospel? to proppe up the
doctrine of the Apostles* beginning to fall? to cause by his doctrine such men,
as were of nature quiet, to become so proud and insole^t, such brawlers and
quarellers, that their captain, yea their own dear father could not hold
them back? For how many thousand men were slain by civil wars in
Switzerland styrred Heresse cause of civil vvarre^ and bloud^ shead.
up by Zwinglius and Oecolampadius? What a company of husband men in Sueuia
following their captain Muncer were cut of by the nobility? What place was
there in all Germany free from this contagious and pestilent discord? The
begynners and ringleaders thereof what were they, out of what fountain sprang
they? Doubtless out of the rage, madness, and presumption, of Luther, out of
the shop where the most infamous Lutheranisme was wrought and co^triued. But
some of the forenamed persons fell out afterward with Luther. Yea and no
marvel. For it was impossible, that such naughty fellows being al agreed in
mischief, should long agree within them selves: where every one of them
sought to be the Captain. What did Luther him self? did he not make seditious
sermons? did he not stir up the commo^s against their Princes? did he not use
very reprochful and villainous talk against most honorable personages? did he
not most spitefully revile The Emperor him self, He^rie king of England,
George Duke of Saxony, and many other noble Princes? Is it not well known,
that al his sermons te^ded to the stirring up of discord and sedition? What is
then more plain and evident then that the sect of Luther is altogether
Populare, seditious and troublesome? And how dangerous it is to Princes, it
needs no declaration. For what so ever is, after this sort, populare, is, (as
I declared in my letters) very much contrary, not only to the good estate of
the common weal, but also to the majesty of Princes. If you be not of such
convenient wit, that you are able to foresee by the causes going before, what
event is like to follow: you will never fully understand it, though I should
declare it with infinite examples. Is it unknown, think you Heresy over*
throvve of Kings and king domes.
that through the naughtines and outrage of Luther, Ludouicus King of hu^garie
was flaine in the field with a great multitude of Christian men? For when
Solimanus Emperor of the Turks brought against the King a great huge army,
and great danger was bent against al Germany: yet the cities of Germani, being
partly enta^gled with civil wars within themselves (the which Luthers sect had
caused) and partly imbrued with the doctrine of Luther (who maintained in
disputation, that it was not lauful to withstand the force of the Turks)
either could not, or would not aid Ludouicus. If therefore this victory of the
Turks has brought such great dishonor to the name of Christians: if by it
there is laid open a gap into Christendom, to the utter decaie and ruin of
Austria and to the great danger of all Germany: if the noble kingdom of
Hungary (for the greater part of it) be brought under the rule and government
of a most barbarous and crewell ennemie: for all this we may thank the
naughtines and owtrage of Martine Luther. But peradventure you never heard of
this gear, and therefore you will bide by it, that your new gospel is no
hindera^ce to Princes. What? ca^ you beignorant of that also, how Edward your
own king was in his childhood most traitorously made away with poison? know
not you* by whom Charles the Emperor a most worthy Prince was both betrayed
and assaulted? heard you never say, with how crewel treason queen Marie a
woman most excelle^tly furnished with princely virtues, was first assaulted
with poison and afterward besieged of her own subjects* Is it possible that you
should know no thing of the co^spiracy, in the which was contrived by a
company of most filthy traitors the murder both of the queen and of Cardinal
Poole a most noble, godly, and wisema^? what need I to rehearse unto you the
rebellion of the french me^, the disloialty, the cruelty, the wast and spoil
of churches and holy things in France? what should I say of the king of
Scotland, who was by most cruel vil lanie murdered and slain? Now they that
have stirred up such great broi^es and tumultes, they that have committed such
barbarous and horrible acts, from whens have they their original or
beginning? Is it not evident to the wordle, that the very fountain and spring
of al these mischiefs was in Luther? And yet it likes you to call him the man
of God, one sent from heaven for the salvation of mankind. Tell me, I pray you,
what virtues appeared in him so great, that you should conceive such opinion of
him as you do? what continency of life? what gravity of ma^ners? What
severity? what gentleness? what contempt of wordlie things? what
contemplation of heavenly things? what time spent in co^tinnual prayers? what
days and nights passed over in weeping and tears for the health of the
people? What fasting? what groni^g and sighing? Finally what deeds of most
fervent charity has commended this man unto you so much, that you dare say
of him, that he may well be compared for his excellency in virtue and
godliness, with Basile, and Athanasius, and al other holy men?

First of all, he was, as his own paiges do confess, of nature crewel, in his
talk rough, wrathful, haughty and proud, yea so much, that he esteemed not
Melanchton to be a man. Then his vow solempnely made unto Christ he brake it,
and like a most filthy ribaude coupled him self with a woman, which had in
like manner vowed perpetual chastity unto Christ in a monastery of Vrgines:
and by this example showed him self to be a captain and ringleader to al
such, as would do the like. To be short, he was infamous for many other most
heinouse vices and detestable crimes. But least his commendable qualities might
seem to be utterly defaced with the blemish of many vices: I confess, he
could with a goodly show of humanity sometimes hide his rough and boisteous mad
nature, and so set forth himself to the simple people. For he was a pleasant
co^pagnio^, and at a ba^ket a iolie prater in all kind of mirth very fine, if
reprochful tau^ting may be called civil finenes. He pleasured much in scoffing
and tau^ting, in reuiling the Princes and gouerners of the Church, in mocki^g
and scorni^g of honest plain folks, Prou. 3. d.
such as were true Christian me^* But our lord, says Salomo^, abhors
scorners, and co^municateth the secrets of his counsel with the simple. Whereby
it may be gathered that Luther was not replenished with the light of heaven.
And yet you think hi^ worthy to be compared with the most holy fathers. Of
fellow ship tell me, which of all the ancient fathers disteined himself with
ribaudrie and incest? Which of them brought the common people in hope of
lice^tious living? Which of them stirred up with his sermons sedition and hurly
burly in diverse and sundry places? which of them taught me^ to put the hope of
their salvation in faith, that is to say, in a only rash and folish
presumption? Which of them tied up the will of man, which god would have to be
free, with I ca^ not tell what ba^des of destenie? which of them durst ever
affirm, that God was the author or chief cause of al sin? which of the^ ever
held that al good works wrought and done of holy me^ by the grace and instinct
of the holy ghost were unclean and spotted with sin? which of them ever took
away the true justice, which by the grace and goodness of Christ i^ ascribed
unto faithful me^, and consists in clean life, innocent conversation, and
exercise of holy works: and in steed of it substituted a newly devised
justice such as was never heard of before? For when Luther denied, that syn was
quite blotted out in holy me^ by the grace of Christ, he affirmed, that there
was none other justice, but only the singular justice of Christ, applied to
every particular man by faith, were he never so synnefull and wicked: the
which being but one in all men, it was impossible, that there should be any
difference in the world between the justice of any common man, and the
justice of Paul or Peter, yea or of the most holy Virgin mother of God. And
you demand of me what those monsters of religion are. Al these things, which
I have here most briefly comprised, I say, are the most horrible monsters of
religion: and the father of them is not villainous, but villainy it self: not
frantike and mad, but very frantikenes and madness it self. What show of
bashfulnes, honesty or modesty could you see in this man being the
ouerthrower of all honesty, continency, and modesty? What glimse of virtue
could he so dasel your eyes withal, that you would suffer your self. to be so
daungerously deceived in him? And yet will you continewe in your error as you
have begone. And yet will you acquit such a pestilent sect as blameless and
without fault? And yet will you liken the good holy Fathers to Luther a most
vile and infamous caitiue.

But you triumph excedingly, that he stood so stiff thirty years together,
and was never punished for his naughtines and owtrage. Can you imagine any
greater punishment in the world, then the remembrance of a synneful and
filthy life? The remorse of his heinouse offenses made him terribly afraied.
The feendes of hell tormenters of damned sowles vexed his mind. The ennemie the
devil shook him up, and would not suffer him once to breath or rest him self.
Truth it is, he would banquet and make good cheer with his friends, and
therewith somewhat relent his intensif^ cares. But neither chambering, nor
ba^ketting is of that force, that it is able to raise up a man's heart weied
down with the peise of sin. But what Luthers death.
kind of death died this noble holy Father? Being at supper with his frinds
over night he quaffed somewhat freely, and the next morning was found dead.

You say afterward, that there were brought into England by the goodness of God
a golden couple of old men, Martin Bucere, and Peter Martyr, whose virtues you
commend above the skies. Of them I have nothing else to say, but that I think
them to be very lewd and naughty fellows, if for nothing else, yet for this
cause only, that you so highly commend them. for he that commends Luther, it
is not possible, that he should commend any thing that is godly, honest, or
holy.

Whereas you put me in mind that I should somewhat temper my style, and not call
such men arroga^t and proud, as you esteem for gentle and modest, signifying
withal after a sort the danger that by them might ensewe toward me: I would
ye would advisedly consider, how illfauouredly your words hang together. For
if they be very gentle (as you say they are) then although I shall revile
them, they will never be moued*withall, but will meruelously well keep their
patience and constancy. But if they will fearcely set upon me with villainous
and reproachful language: then are they not so gentle, as you make them to be.
I know very well, that under the covert of a sheep skin Mat. 7. 6
(as Christ says) lies hidden the r^ugh and crewell nature of wolves. It is
also by experience well tried, that there is nothing in the world more
shameless, then these fellows are. For when any reason is brought against
them, they endeavor the^ selves to answer^ it, not by reason, but by
multiplying of words. And therefore, when they are pr^ssed with arguments,
then begin they to chafe and sweat, to fear and fainte, to rail and rave,
and in the end fall to plain scolding, until they have found for their
impudent assertion some shameless shifte. But believe me I fear no man's
slanderous tongue. For I have committed mine honesty and estimation to the
keeping of Jesus Christ, and therefore no man shall ever be able to thrust me
out of my place by the violence of his tongue. And as for your reprochful
words, they move me no more then the rauing of one that were frantike or out
of his wit. Were it not that the love of godliness had moved me, had I ever
written so much as one letter against you? No, not one. I took upon me this
charge of writing, not minding thereby to maintain my^^ own good fame or
^stimation, but to ^onfute your wicked and ungodly talk. Wherefore be bold
and spare not, to taunt me at your pleasure, to perce my good name with fowl
words, to tourmoile it with villainy, to rent and tear it with all
dishonestie: and I give good leave and license not only to you, but also to
all your Bucers and Martyrs, most gentle and soft creatures (as you call them)
to bend them selves as fiercely against me as they can devise. Wherefore there
is no cause why you should go about to make me affraied of them: for so much
as, unto their tauntes, for the which I care not, I will never answer: and
their reasons are very peuish, and alreadi confuted by the books of many
learned men: and I my self am at this point, that I fear nothing in the world
but only Christ.

As touching their persons, if there be any sense of humanity in you, you see
how il you have defended the^. You say aferwarde, that it is nothing true, that
you should stand to the holy Scriptures only: for so much as you do receive
many sentences of the holy Fathers withal. What a doubling and inco^stancie is
this? Now you reject many things, for this reason only, because they are (as
you say) the devises of men* and by and by, you receive what you list, and say,
that you have not rejected all the traditions of men. You are so doubteful, so
diverse, and so slipperie, that you can not well tell your selves, what you
think, and what you mind to stand to. And yet when you spoke those words, you
commended them that acknowledge nothing else but the holy Scriptures, and
refuse al holy traditions and ordinances. These are your words. Truly if it
were so, then followed they the example of our Lord Jesus Christ, then followed
they the custom of the Apostles, and of the ancient Fathers in the primitive
Church. How many things you lay out at a venture? It is like forsooth that
Christ the mind and wisdom of God the Father, by whose power and dispe^sation
the law it self was made, by whom the Prophets declared things to come, of
whom al holy men of old time received their light, was content to abide that
law him self, that he would not be so hardy, as to speak one word, which
he found not registered in the holy Scriptures. I beseech you Sir, where read he
in the Scriptures, that a man Vnvvrite^ truths.
for being angry only, although he uttered not one reprochful word, should incur
the danger of Gods judgment? where found he it written, that a man for casting
his eye alitle aside wa^tonly, should Mat. 5. d
be accounted as an adulterer? By what words in the Law was a man forbidden to
give a bil of divorce to his wife? In what place was it ever written, that a man
minding the perfect observation of the Law, should sell all his goods, and
bestow the money made thereof to the use of the poor, reserving to him self
nothing? Have you ever read, either in the law, or in the Psalms, or in the
Prophets, that the way to salvation is a narrow way, or that you ought, when
a man has stricken one cheek, to hold him up the other, or that you ought
to pray unto God for their life, that speak il of you, and work your
destruction? But now to come to other points, of the birth and proceeding of
God: of the regeneration of men in heavenly life, the which Nicodemus 10. 3. a
a man exactlie seen in the doctrine of the law understood not: of the time,
in the which God would 10. 4. c.
be woorshipped neither at Jerusalem, nor in the mountain of Samaria: of the
bread of heaven, which is the food and sustenaunce of our life: of al these
things what word have you expressly written in any place of the old
Testamente? But when Christ spoke these words, there was no Gospel yet
written, neither did any written monumente confirm the sayings of Christ, but
look what he ordained by words, was afterward put in writing, to the end
that men should not forgette it. I do here let pass many things (minding not
to prosecute all that might be said, for so much as I have already spoken
sufficiently) to the intent you might understand how unadvisedly you have
said, that our Lord Jesus Christ did also observe such a rule in his doings.
What shall I say of the Apostles? Where had S. Paul read, that such as Galat.
5. a
kept the circumcision of the Law, were to be separated from the communion of
Christ? In which of all the holy Writers found he, that it is unseemly for
a woman to worship God bare headed, or for a man to cover 1. Cor. 11. ^
his head, when he prays to God? What should I rehearse unto you; how he
commends such men as were mindful of his Doctrine, delivered unto them
either by writing, or by word? What should I speak of that, Act. 15. e.
that the Apostles say in their Council? It has seemed good to the holy Ghost
and us? They say not. It is written in the holy Scripture: but, It has seemed
good to the holy Ghost and us. Now as touching the holy Fathers, which
peradventure you never read, how durst you affirm of them, that they never
brought in any thing for the government of the Church, but what they had
found written in the holy Scriptures? How many things reherseth S. Basile, and
disputes that they were delivered from the Apostles unto the Church, only by
word of mouth? How many such things are recited of Cyprian, Chrysostom,
Augustine, and the rest of the holy Fathers? How much do they reverence al
such holy ordinances, as were decreed in general Councils? I do here omit an
infinite number oftestimonies, which do plainly convince this madness of you, or
rather of your Masters, for so much as not only the greatest learned men of
our age, but also the most holy Fathers of other ages, have in these points
very learnedly disputed against your opinion. For in times past, al heretics
in a manner held this opinion, that nothing ought to be received, unless it
were written in the holy Scriptures, minding withal to wrest and corrupt the
holy Scriptures with their own interpretation. But the holy Fathers most
earnestly defended the contrary, alleging Arguments and Examples brought even
from the Apostles time, and by the decrees of Councils directed they al their
doings. Wherefore such things as you report of Christ, of his Disciples, and
of the holy Fathers, are al most evidently false. You say, it is not true,
that your Doctors should take any thing upon them, above the common sort of
men. Can you ymagine any greater arrogancy in the world, the^ to presume to
reform the church, being somewhat impaired, with new Jaws and statutes,
which neither Athanasius, nor Basile, nor Cyprian, nor any other of the holy
Fathers ever thought upon: and to set such words, and countenance upon the
doctrine of their new Gospel as though they had done althinges by order and
appointment of Christ him self?

You say that I am not able to show any fault or dishonestie in the world in
their life. That is true, if we must needs stand to your opinion: For so much
as amongst you neither filthy pleasure of the body, nor rebellion, nor any
other disordre or outrage are accounted as faults.

You find fault with me, for that I cease not to trifle daungerously, and to
hinder the estimation of most grave personages, by whose diligence your Church
has been set in a marvelous goodly order. You could say no less, for such as
you do commend (being your self both for virtue and authority a very grave
sire) must needs be very grave men. Then you say.

You lay to our charge that the companies of virgins and monks, which were
sometimes enclosed in Monasteries to keep the Divine service of God, and to
maintain the chastity os their bodies, were by our men let out to the
unclean pleasure of the flesh, and al other licentious living: that their
howses were laid wide open for gain, that laws were made, that no religion
should hinder the pleasure of the body. What you mean by their gain, I
understand not. For I never suspected, that they did for their gain commit any
vile or filthy act. But you do in this as you do commonly. You can not well
tell, neither what you do say, nor what you would say. Then how impudently is
that spoken that follows? O^t upon this over malepart and licentiouse desire,
which you have to pervert all things. We confess, yea and with all our
hearts confess, that, through the most holy advertisement of our men,
those downgeous of all wickedness are fallen down, into the which the tender
young maidens, and the seely boys were violently thrust in, to their so great
hinderaunce in good manners, as I can not for bashfulnesse well declare. Oh
what a shamefaste and may denlie fellow is this? What is that, I pray you,
that you would not for shamefastnes express? Nothing in the wordle. for
immediately after you bring in these words. Those same shoppes of lewdnes had
little other thing in them, but only a certain pharisaical continuance of
prayers in an unknown tongue. Their other more secret exercises might well be
likened to the old reuelles of Bacchus in Rome. Tell me I pray you (most
presumptuous and impudent railer) could you hane uttered any more spiteful
reproach against the poor monasteries of holy virgins, if your goodly
maidenlines and modesty had not stayed you? Compare you the green arbor of
Christ, the house of chastity, the representation of heavenly life, with the
most horrible and filthy revels of Bachus, which were sometime most sharply
pounished by the laws of the Romans? And yet you say forsooth, that your may
denlie modesty will not suffer you to express their secret vices. Pleasure
you so much in your stinking eloquence? Like you so well to taunt and revile
chastity, to join the defense of your most barbarus and vile act, with the
reproach of Christ? As though the world knew not, that you overthrow those
holy Monasteries, not for any displeasure you bear to naughtines and vice, but
for the hatred you bear toward chastity. And of like the greadie desire you
had of the goods and possessions, with the which the Nonnes and Monks were
maintained, help the matter well foreward. If you had had no face at al, no
shame, no bashfulnes in the world, how could you with more vile and filthy
language have dishonested so holy a trade of life? The exercise of Religious
and chaste life you call the downgeon of wickedness* that is to say, a sincke of
al vice, a cannel of filthiness, a standing poole of unclean pleasures. Could
any thing be more impudently spoken? And yet you content not your self with all
this stinking stir of words, but you say moreover, that the tender young
maidens, and the seely boys were violently thrust into the said Monasteries,
to their great hinderance in good manners. What mean you by this? What would
you say? What geaue you the world to understand? Is there any vice so
heinouse, that it may not be well comprised in this your shameless talk? After
this there follows the most beastly word of all the rest, where you call the
holy discipline of clean life and continency, a shop of naughtines. As for
the Pharisaical continuance of prayer, which is but a trick proceeding of
Luthers railing sprit, I will let it pass. But whereto te^deth the comparison,
which you make with the most unclean and detestable rebels of Bacchus? Is man's
heart able to devise any thing so abominable, that you may not well co^prehende
it within the compass of this your most base and vile language? Why then what
is that, which you can not express for bashfulnes? Doutlesse nothing: whereof
it follows, that you are utterly void of al shame, bash fulness and honesty.
For I can not tell how it comes to pass, that the more a man uses the
company and familiarity of such men as you commend, the more shameless is
his behavior. But to the intent you may the better see, how heinouse and
wicked an offense you have committed against your own self: I think it good to
declare the original The original and institution of monks.
of the name and institution of Monks.

There are two kind of men within the fold of Christ's church. The one is of
them, which living a common life, content them selves with the commendable
exercise of mean virtue and godliness. The other is of such, as endeavor them
self to excel in the following of heavenly life and discipline. Now for so
much as the end, which every Christian man ought to set before his eyes, is
the likeness of the perfection and justice of God, the which they atteine much
sooner, which are pro^pter and redier to behold the beauty of the will of God:
the which beauty no man can well conceive in his heart, so long as he is as it
were tied down with the bands of straight frindship and familiarity of the
body: it came to pass, that such as had an earnst and fervent desire to
join them selves unto God, called away their minds (as much as was possible)
from the familiar acqueintance of the body, to the intent they might the
better fasten the eyes of their hearts in the cleerenes of God. These are they,
which (as our Lord says) have ghelded them selves for the love and earnest
desire of the kingdom of heaven. For the pleasure of the body weyeth down
the heart even to the earth, and with her importunity carries away the mind
from the conte^plation of the brightness of God. The which thing is so true,
H^b. 13. a.
that, although Marriage be honorable, and the bed undefiled, and he that
defraudeth his wise of the right of Marriage, commits no small sin, yet it
is sometimes necessary for such as do mind to receive this cleerenesse of
God within them selves to abstain from their own wives.

Exodus 19. c
For this cause Moses, before he received the law, gave commandment to al
men, to abstain from the company of their wives, until God had given out the
law. For this consideration S. Paul also, when he forbids the husbands to
forsake the company of 1. Cor. 7. a
their wives, adds this clause. except it be for a time to geaue your selves
wholly to prayer. In the which place the holy Apostle teaches plainly that
the very lawful and holy company of man and wife, does hinder the mind, that
it can not so freely and spedily pearce the heavens, and there talk familiarly
with God. And therefore says he in the same Epistle, he that ioineth his
virginity in marriage, does well: and he that joins not, does better. The
reason, which the Apostle gives, why it were better for a maid to contine we
unmarried, is this. Because that, such as are entangled with the cares of
marriage, are oftentimes carried a way from the remembrance of heavenly
things. But such as are free from marriage, are troubled with none other care,
but how to please God. And, the single woman, says S. Paul, thinks upon the
things that apperteine unto God: how she may be holly in body and in soul.
And a few lines after, he sets before our eyes, the goodli fruit of this
most holy freedom, which is, a liberty to pray unto God at all times without
any impediment or let. That this so great a gift, and benefitte ought to be
ascribed, not to the merit of man, but to the mercy of God, our Lord him
self declares, saying. Every man receives Mat. 19. b
not this word, but they only to whom it is geauen. Whereby it is manifest,
that, such as do so conquer the tyranny of fleshly pleasure, that they are
able to continue their life in chastity, they do it by a singular benefitte
of God, and for that cause are most worthy of honor and reverence.

But you will say peradventure, that I spend much talk in things too well
known, and not necessary. They are, I grant you, things very well known,
and thoroughly debated in the writings of holy men. But that they are
nothing necessary, then may you give judgment, when you shall perfectly
understand, that they are impertine^t to those matters, which I have taken
upon me to treat of.

Whereas therefore in the Primitive Church, the greatest part of men that
became Christians, lived uprightly and godly, but yet so, that they differred
little from the common life of men: there was no small number which were
inflamed with most ernest desire of the greater dignity and higher perfection.
Now these (being there unto moved by the spirit and grace of God) fearing lest
the lust of the body, and care thereof, might be some hindera^ce unto them,
and hoping withal that they should more manfully vanquish the sensuality of the
flesh, absteined the^ selves from marriage: to thentent that although their
bodies walked up and down in the earth, yet their minds and thoughts might be
co^uersant with God in heaven. The which thing that they might the more
co^modiously bring to pass, they separated themselves from the company and
conversation of men, and with one accord pitched in one place: that there might
be made of al their minds, one sure and perfect agreemente of heart and will.
And the order that was taken in the beginning at Jerusalem, that no man
should have any possession several to him, (which could not be long kept of
all, for the great multitude of men) was of these men restored and put in
ure again. Their life was nothing else, but only a perpetual war against
the bodily pleasures and sin; with an earnest and continual meditation of
heavenly things. Their body therefore they subdued with fasting, watching
and labor: but their minds they stirred up to behold the beauty and brightness
of God by prayers and spiritual songs, hymns and meditation of godly matters.
Hereof proceeded that most fervent flame of love: hereof came that earnest
desire to follow godliness and virtue: hereof arose the joining of man's will with
the will of God: hereof sprang a certain clear and bright sonneshine in the
soul of man: finally hereof issued that knot or conjunction with God, then the
which man's heart is able to y magin no thing streighter or faster.

These men were at the first called in greek Monks, that is to say, solitary
livers: not so much because they haunted desert places, as because they forsook
and despised al wordly things, and were knitte with a most straight band of
love unto God al only, according to the saying of David. It is good Psalm. 72. d
for me to cleave unto God. And S. Paul says in like manner. He that cle* 1.
Cor. 6. d
ueth unto God, is one spirit with God, These monks therefore, which I fpeak^ of,
that they might the better att^in^ unto a state, in the which no man might
disquiet or pull them away from this conjunction of the spirit of God: took
such order of life, as I have here declared. S. Diony sius of Areopagus whom I
esteem, after the Apostles, as prince of al Divines, does not only expound the
name of a Monk after this sort, but declares also* what ceremony the Bishops
used at the professing of monks. This name of a monk has been sometimes in
great reverence and estimation: and howses were builded for them to dwell in,
the which, as Philo writes, were at the first called Monasteries. There were
also many virgins inflamed with the love of God, the which subdewing the
sensual pleasure of the body, taming the affections of the mind, despising the
richesse of the world: gave themselves wholly to the service of Christ: and the
better to bring their purpose to good effect, they came together in one place,
where they lived always in the contemplation of God. S. Basile a very holy
and great learned man, after many years drew out a rule in writing for
Monks, to the end they should no more alter and change their discipline, but
be well settled and bound always to one uniform fasshion of religion. His
Epistles are yet extante, in the which he does most gravely confute the
slaunderouse talk of certain lewd fellows, the which misliked his doings
herein. For the world was never, nor is now, nor never shall be without some
feedmen and seruitors of Satan's retinew, which endeavor them selves to undo
the Decrees and ordinances of holy men. This life of Monks how highly does
Chrysostom comme^d it? With how great words does Augustine bring men in
admiration of it? How often, how gravely, how eloquently does S. Hierome set
out the excellency of it? Who did not only commend it in words, but also
followed him self that trade of life, and lived and died in the company of
Monks. And so did Gregory of Nazianzen, the most worthy pillar of Divinity,
the goodly pattern of virtue and eloquence. What should I here rehearse al other
men, that have excelled in learning and holiness? Was there ever any virtuous
and perfect man in the world, which gave not exceeding great commendation to the
rule and life of Monks? Truth it is, that the ernest love of this perfect
religion has been slaked and quenched (as it happens) diverse times: but there
never lacked holy men to stir it up and kendle it again. from thence came
that wonderful good Father Benet, from thence came Bernard and Brunus, and
after them Francis and Dominike, the which did not only set an order in the
life of Monks, but also with most earnest and fervent desire, labored to
reform the church of Priests which was very slack and negligent. How many
Martyrs came from thence? How many Writers? How many excellent men in all kind
of virtues? For if there was any thing in the Church in their time, that tended
either to example of excellent virtue, or to a rule of high wisdom, all that
may we thank the Monks of: or (to speak better) thank Christ him self,
which stirred the hearts and minds of Monks to follow such a goodly
discipline of virtue and wisdom.

But, to abridge this our discourse, being now made plain, that there were
even in the Primitive Church, two kind of Christians: the one which conte^ting
them selves with mean doings, lived a common life without crime: the other,
which tending to heaven ward with greater ferue^cie, withdrew their minds from
the familiariti of the body, and them selves from al resort of men, and
consecrated their whole life, to the service and love of Christ: being also
evidently proved, that this life of perfection far passes the other common
life: surely it is very manifest, how great honor and reverence men ought to
have borne to those houses of Virgins and Monks. For they were in this kind
of life, which is more noble and excellent, yea and comes far nearer to the
nature and likeness of Angels, as it were common Schools or working howses
of heavenly virtue, and clean lif^. This is that, that induced many
Christian Princes most virtuous and godly men, to build Monasteries, and to
endew them with possessions, by the which the Virgins and monks might live
and serve God continually. When this was done, those princes were for
victories most renowned, for chivalry and feats of arms most honorable, and
their countries excellently well governed. But now we see in many places where
men do basely swerve from the godliness of their auncetours, that it comes
far otherwise to pass. For with increasing of rentes and revenues
co^tendeth nedines: with the multitude of men, dishonesty: with pride, the
weakness of the whole common weal: finally with the show of holiness impudently
faced and borne out, sacrilege.

But you will say, that this kind of monks are al decayed and worn away. Not
among us, I assure you. For sense the Kings of Spaigne have bent them selves
earnestly toward the reformation of religion: there is found so great religion
and godliness in diverse Monasteries, that many young men of the nobility
brought up in great wealth, standing in good hope of much worship and honor in
the common weal, being inflamed with the love of such wonderful virtue as
they see with their eyes, do forsake richesse, despise honor, reiecte
pleasures, little regard the tears of their parents, and fly for succor into
some holy company of monks, as it were from the stormy tempest of filthy
vice, into the quiet haven of clean life. In like manner many virgins of
excellent beauty and comely behavior, being sewed unto for marriage of diverse
young men of the Nobility, have forsaken all the allurements of this life, that
they might in the company of holy virgins much more pleasantly solace them
selves in the spiritual and sweet familiarity of Christ.

But you will say peradventure, that these exaumples of great virtue, are
very few in comparison of them, that are thrust into Monasteries against
their will and repining at it. And no marvel. For why, in every kind, look
what is excellent, is also rare. Then whereas you talk of violence used in
putting the Virgins into Monasteries, it was never permitted by any Law, nor
yet allowed of wise men, and the holy Council of Trent has from hence forth
utterly forbid it, and therefore it is now no more used.

But what fruicte and commodity have these Virgins by this kind of life?
Doubtless such as can not in words be expressed. For many of them are so
inflamed in spirit, that they are sometimes taken quite away from their bodies,
and lifted up into heaven, where in the contemplation of the goodness of God
they rejoice excedingly, and beholding the beauty and brightness of God (so much
as they may) are astonished, yea so much that sometimes they are besides them
selves. I have good acquaintance my self with a Monk, a simple and plain
man, the which, so often as mention is made of the love of God, his senses
failing him, he falls upon the grownd, and yet in the mean time, his memory
is fresh, and is in co^templation of heavenly and godly things. It were an
infinite matter, if I would rehearse, how many holy men I have seen in those
companies which you laugh to scorn, and how many virgins I have talked
withal, which are wonderful for religion and holiness.

If these things be true (as they are most true) why have you taken away this
so excellent an example of religion? Why have you defaced so wonderful a rule
of chastity and clean life, in the which is contained that, that is in the
religion of Christ the highest perfection, and (as I said before) most of all
to be esteemed? why have you violently and furiously rushed into those holy
howses to abolish utterly out of the world the very remembrance of perpetual
chastity? Oh, say you, they lived not after the rule of S. Basil. I grant you,
for emo^gest us also sometime, the Nu^nes forgetting their duty, waxed somewhat
wanton, and some Monks also lived very disordredly: howbeit the most holy
order and discipline was not for that cause utterly taken away and overthrown.
Neither are the members of the body, which may be healed, so sone as they fall
into any disease, forth with to be cut of. What? Think you it well done, for a
small blemish or eyesore to grubbe up the whole order by the root? Were it not
better, wene you to bring the members, that are diseased, to their natural
strength again? If you had used the same medicine, as our Princes did: why
might not the commendable virtues of chastity and holiness have flourished
emo^gst you, as they do with us? But it was never no part of your thought.
Neither did reason move you to do well, but hatred and covetousness pricked you
forward to mischief.

Now as touching the Pharisaicall continuance of prayers (for so it likes you
to term the continual exercise in the Divine service of God) this much I
answer. If the defense of Religion do confist in unreasonable and reprochful
words, then are you to to much to good for us. For you have had in that
honest faculty, an excellent scholemaster called Luther, from whom proceeded al
these terms, Pharisee, hypocrit, Papist, and such other (which I do let pass
as words not meet to be spoken of any honest and bashful man) with the which
he reviled holy men. And yet you to maintain one mischief by an other, to
defend Sacrilege with a heap of slanders and false witness, you say, that
the disorder of Monks in their Celles, and of Nuns in their Cloisters was so
great, that they might well be compared with the reuelles of Bacchus. How then
have you left such heinous offenses unpunished? Wherefore did you not suppress
such foul and horrible vices with most extreme and sharp punishments?
Wherefore did you not proceed with all severity and rigor against such
detestable conueticles (for so you full irreverently call them) wherefore did you
not make them examples to the world, lest the liberty of unbridled and filthy
pleasure might ouerflow your cou^trei to the utter* undoing of your common
weal? Are you so rechlesse and negligent in the government of your realm,
that you thought it meet to appoint no punishment at al for that most
detestable shop (as you call it) of filthy vice? Will you in that Island, in the
which a Queen (whom the king loved very well for her beawtie, wit, and
courtelie behavior) for the only suspicion of a great deal lighter offense
then this is, was by the sentence of the judges, at the commandment of the
King him self her housbande, openly in the face of the world, by the hand of
a hangman executed and beheaded: will you, I say, in that Island suffer such
heinouse offenses, as are not to be named, to escape unpunished, yea and that
in a kind of men, which are not only contemptible and abiecte, but also odious
and hateful? It is not like.

Moreover, this feate of pulling down monasteries began not emo^gest you,
but you had it from other men. For Carolstadius and Luther and other the head
Sectaries attempted this goodly enterprise first of al: so that you may not
rob them of the honor thereof, and take it to your self. It was not
therefore the hatred of unclean pleasure, but the example of these noble
personages set out as a rule in this your new discipline and Religion, that
stirred your minds to the overthrow of perpetual chastity. Besides this, the
greauous displeasure you had conceived against the Bishop of Rome for
entermedling and geauing sentence against you: the casting of your eyes upon
the goods and possessions, with the which the Mounkes lived: the flattery of
certain naughty and desperate fellows: the fond pleasure and appetite to
make alterations and chaunges, helped the matter well forward. In old time
amongst the Romans (which were men utterly void of the light and knowledge
of God) the Virgins of Vesta were had in such estimation, that every man did
geaue them the way, the place, and seat, with very great reverence. And you
have disteined the Virgins of Christ with a notorious and perpetual infamy.
Those Virgins, because they maintained the fire of Vesta, the citezins did not
only honor and attend upon religiously, but also reverenced their
judgments: and you have not suffered the holy virgins of Christ to keep
their virginity solemly vowed, to maintain the everlasting fire of heavenly
love in their hearts enkendled. It was lawful for those Virgins to marry
after thirty years, and yet of their own accord they did abstain from
marriage: you have married the virgins of Christ, to whom it was in all ages
unlawful, to filthy ribaudes. Those virgins, if they were at any time by
intisement deflowred, they were buried alive and so ended their life with a
horrible kind of death: and you have taken them, which were dishonested (as
you say) with mosto vile brothelrie, and have for punishment of so great a
vice pleasauntly rewarded them with sporting and daliaunce. And yet you say.

Wherefore God has stirred the hearts of our men, that these so great ba^ds or
companies, which lay lurking in blind sti^king corners, were through their
godly exhortations called forth, from idleness to labor, from vice to virtue,
from wicked brothelrie to most honest marriage. You say, God has stirred the
hearts of our men. I would feign learn of you, what God that was. for there
are many, as S* Paul says, that are called Gods. For to some men the
belly is a God: to some other money is a God: yea and to some riot and
ruffling and hawtines is a God. I would therefore feign know, what God that
was, that put it into the hearts of your men, to abolishe and rake up in the
earth the love of most holy and perpetual chastity. Was it Bacchus, or
Cupide, or Mercury? For of Christ the son of God, who is very much delyted
in perpetual chastity and clean life, I am right well assured, that he never
moved you to any such heinouse act.

The idleness, which you speak of, was not a fruteles sitting still, void of al
holy works, but it was a continual exercise in the contemplation of godly
things.

As touching the most filthy brothelrie (as you call it) you are in one
sentence convinced both of a lie, and of impudency withal. For, if there had
benne any such offense committed of them, you would not have suffered it
vnpounished. And then how impudent and shameless you be, the forging of so
filthy a crime does plainly declare. It is not therefore true that you say,
that your doings stand well with the profitte of the common weal. But
contrariewise you have bv violence and authority drawn out those bands or
companies (as you call them) from holy quietness to a business defiled with
wicked sacrilege: from the exercise of godliness, to the liberty of vice: from
the discipline of perpetual continency to the bondage of most unclean
voluptuousness. How be it by this, I do not excuse your Religiouse men.
For it had been much better for them to suffer intolerable pains, yea and to
let their lives in torments, then to forsake their Faith, which they have
openly professed to Christ. For if they had withstood your warninges and
counsel, your threats and authority with good courage and constante hearts,
dowbtelesse they had died an honorable death for the glory of Christ. For
you are wont to punnish extremely the chaste and clean life: but filthy and
vile brothelrie, as you confess your self, you are wont mercifully to
pardonne. The Carthusians*, most chaste and holy Fathers, you put to death:
but those most wicked bands and companies, as you term them, you called
forth to be married, and to live in pleasure. Wherefore there is no dowbt, but
that, if your Mounkes had lived after S. Basiles rule, they had benne
dispatched amongst you every one. And yet you glory that by this your so
goodly an act you are restored again to liberty. As though you
understood, what thing true liberty were. But of that we shall see
hereafter. Now before I enter into that discourse, I will be so bold as to
demand of you one question.

This liberty of the gospel, which you have always in your mowth, does it
take place in all things, so, that it may be lawful for every man at al
times to do what him lists? Or else is it limited by some certain rule of
law and reason? As for example in Matrimony. Shall it be laweful for the
husband to put away his wife for every cause that him lysteth to allege? No
without doubt. For the everlasting law of the Gospel will not bear it. I^
then the band of Matrimony being once knitte by the mutual consent of man
and wife* can not be dissolved: by what means, I pray you, may that band,
with the which Virgins are willingly consecrated unto Christ with sol^mne
ceremonies, and faithful promise, be broken by the presumption of men,
without great 1. Tim. 3. b
and heinouse offense? S. Paul commanded Timothee to avoid young widows. For
when they have lived rioteouslie, says he, to the reproach of Christ, they
will marry. What then? Is it not lawefull for widows to marry? Doubtless it
is lawful.

For the same S. Paul says. If her 1. Cor. 7. g
husband be a sleep, she is free from the law of her husband. She may
marry to whom she will, only in our Lord.

If then it be lawful for Widows to marry without sin, what is the matter
that S. Paul finds fault with these widows, because they would marry? for
he adds, that they have their da^natio^. Why so I pray you? what have 1.
Tim. 5. b.
they done? what offense have they committed? Because they have, says he,
broken their first faith. what faith I beseke you? Expound the meaning of S.
Paul, if you can. What manner of promise was this, which the Widows have
broken with none other offense, but because they would have married. Is it the
promise, which they made to their housbandes, that they would never spot the
bed of wedlock with adultery? No. For of that promise they were quite
discharged by the death of their housbandes. Why then it follows, that this
promise was not made to any man, but to the son of God, that they should
keep the chastity both of body and mind perpetually to his glory. The
which promise when they had decreed to break, they did a grievous reproach,
not to men, but to Christ him self. And therefore it seemed to the Apostle,
that they had deserved, (as being condemned for the offense of a most wicked
adultery) not to be received into the company of chaste widows, but rather to
be forebidden to enter into the church. And that you may the more marvel at
it, note, that S. Paul said not, that those widows after the first marriage
had married to other me^ contrary to their promise made, but only that they
would have married: whereby it is geauen us to understand, that this religious
promise is most wickedly and heinously broken by the only will and desire to
be married again. It was therefore lawful for widows to marry, before they
had promised and consecrated their chastity unto Christ, but after the time
that the promise was past, it was no more lawful. Now then sir: Think you that
the offense of the Virgins is any thing less, which have not only a desire to
marry, but do marry in deed to the great reproach of Christ? Doubtless it
is far greater: by so much as, it is a more wicked offense for an undefiled
virgin to play the harlot to the dishonor of Christ, then not to keep the
chastity of a body, which is not vntowched. How long then lasts this
liberty? So long as it is in our free choice, to take what way we will. But
when we have once either yoked our selves in matrimony, or else offered up our
bodies by vow to serve God in religion: as it is not laeful to break the
promise of matrimony, so is it not lauful to violate the sacrament of perpetual
chastity. And who so ever presumes to do it, commits a most wicked crime,
that deserves the judgment and vengeance of God. He that has constantly 1.
Cor. 7. g.
determined in his heart, says S. Paul, having no co^streint, but having power
over his own will, and has advisedly determined in his heart to keep his
virgin, does well. He lays no necessity at al upon us: but by his authority
approves the will of that man, which weying and considering the matter well, and
taking withal the will of the virgin (for otherwise it may not be) dedicateth
the said virgin unto Christ, which he keeps under his rule and power. But
after the virgin has once bound her self with the vow of perpetual
chastity, S Paul says not, that she is at her choice to marry if she will.
For if he should so say, he should speak very much against him self. But al
these things are very easily confuted in the opinion of such as are addicted
to Luther. For it is not lawful, say they, for any man to bind him self by
vow to that religion, which he is not able to keep. And to resist the tyranny
of fleshly lust, they say, is granted to no man. This is the talk of a man
not only incontinent and dissolute, but also wickedly bent against God. For he
distrusteth the goodness and power of God, and measures the strength of virtue
and continency, not by the almightines and power of God, but by his own
weakness and filthy appetit. And this is the property of al naughty fellows,
by their own beastly life to judge the conversation of other men. Nero was
fully persuaded, that al men were as evil as him self, but that their
unbridled lust was restrained by the lack of things, that it could not break
out at al times into deeds. And this opinion causes, that when vicious men
hear tell of any man or woman that is very continent, they do not only not
believe it, but they will devise oftentimes some infamous crime to burden him
withal. I grant you thus much, that neither Luther, nor Bucer, nor Zwinglius,
nor Occolampadius, nor Calvin, nor your Martyr him self was able to sustain
the assault of the flesh. For the heavenly gift of perpetual chastity, is
justly denied to al such, as have most wickedly divided them selves from the
church. But unto such as are within the bounds of holy Church, and are
desirous to be joined with most fervent love to Christ the chief and principal
worker of honesty and holiness, for so much as they are fensed on every side
with the strong bulwark of God, it is very easy to put fleshly pleasure to
flight, to pull up the very strings and roots of al unclean vice. Otherwise
S. Paul had never geanen counsel to virgins to continue in the 1. Cor. 7. b
state of virginity: he had never said, that they were far happiest of al
other, that followed the cleanes of his life: he had never condemned widows,
only for that they had a will, to be married 1. Tim. 5. b ^. Cor. 7. g
contrary to their promise: he had never preferred the state of Virgins before
widowhod: no our Lord him self had never approved that kind of geldinges,
which have gelded them Math. 1^. b.
selves for the kingdom of heaven. And yet will you here lament (like a Popular
fellow, a restorer of liberty) the wretched bondage of those virgins that
desire to serve Christ more painfully and more chastely, then you do. You are
altogether ignorant, what liberty is, which do condemn the most excellent
kind of liberty, calling it bondage. For if it be true liberty to do, what
fleshly lust commands, what naughtines forces, what wrathfulnes moves,
what hatred persuades, what the mad rage of a wilful and headlong mind drives
a man to devise and do: then I grant you, that they are bondmen, which have
crucified their affections, and have fastened them selves with such straight
bands unto Christ, that they can not be tossed to and fro with the swaie
ofpestile^t and filthy lusts. But if liberty be a power of that True liberty*
part of the mind, which has the rule and government, and tends to come to
that end, to the which both the excellency of natural inclination, and also
the likeness of God in the mind calls it: I would learn of you, whom you
think to be more free: that woman, that being, as it were, pulled in sunder
with a thousand diverse business, serves always with great care her husband,
her children, and her family: or her, that being discharged of al these
troubles, casts her self down at the feet of Christ, and has no more but
one only care, how she may at al times singularly well please Christ her
heavenly spouse. That woman, whom the force of pleasure being by law
permitted, yea and of dewtie required, constreineth oftentimes to forget
heavenly things* or her, whom no force of pleasure is able (so long as she is
bound unto Christ) to hinder from the co^templation of God. Finally, that
woman, who is thorough the love of her husband drawn two ways, or her, which
has set her whole love upon the beawtie of Christ. Who can deny, but that
liberty is then given to the mind in deed, when reason bears rule in all the
state of the mind? Whereupon it follows, that where reason keeps down the
fleshly lusts most, there is the mind freest. Wherefore it must needs be, that
the fruitful liberty which you have unseasonably brought forth for holy
Virgins and Monks, against all right and reason, against the holy order of
Christian religion, is no liberty at al, but a detestable and pitiful bondage.
We have been somewhat long in the confirmation of this part, because I saw,
that upon this l^wd point was laid the very foundation and growndworke of al
Luthers most pestilent doctrine. For this holi^ chaplain of Venus (I mean not
Venus of Cyprus nor Paphos, nor Ericine, but Venus the Rege^t of hell) when he
had most filthylie spotted him self with leacherie and ribawdrie, he thought
that not vnough, but used violent persuasions with so many as were of his
re^^new, to do the like. And as we read in Euripedes, that Venus took great
displesure, because she was despis^d of Hippolitus, and therefore devised
craftily, to send certain monstrous seacalues out of the sea, to gallowe his
chariot horses by the which train Hippolitus was for the only love of
chastity, torn al in pieces and cruelly slain: even so has this hellish
Venus pricked foreward Luther and Carolstadius, and the rest of these horrible
monsters, not against any one chaste man, but against chastity it self,
meaning by them vtte^l^ to abolish out of the world that heavenly example of
chastity, of honesty, and of virginity.

Moreover there was a b^tter hatred conceived against the Bishop of Rome, whose
state Luther ymagined might by this goodly policy be very much weakened.

Last of al Luther, according to the devils physic (who uses to cure one euel
disease with an other worse) devised to heal the infamy of incontinencie
with impiety and misbeleefe: to the intent that, when he had persuaded al such
as followed him, that it was not only lawful and honest, but also that very
dewtie and godliness, ^ea and necessity it self required, that al Nuns and
Monks should be married, there should no man be able to blame him for his
incontinent and vicious living. The very same trade and way have you taken,
following the steps of your master, to abolish al good affection toward
perpetual chastity: and now, that, that was very ungodly and heinously done,
you defend it to be done, for godly and just causes. To slide and fall
proceeds of the weakness of man, and to continewe in any vice il begone, is
an argument of an unbridled mind and unruly affection: But to reioise and
glory in wickedness, and to give the name of honesty and godliness to most
filthy vices, is so presumptuous and horrible offense, that it ca^ not by
words be expressed. And yet because I did in my letters but only lament this
so great a ruin and decaie of religion, you lay out against me with open
mowth. And yet you make outcries, and in so doing you would be taken for an
ernest and vehement man. And yet you would bear men in hand, that the things
that you have done for hatred, malice and rashness, were done charitably,
prouidently, and advisedly. You say.

Out upon this over malepart and lice^tiouse desire, which you have to pervert
all things. I say on the other side. Out upon your barbarous and crewel
boldness. Out upon your intolerable impude^cie. Out upon your most wicked and
deuilish practices, devised and wronght by the labor, study, and diligence of
Satan. What rage has so driven you, what madness has so stirred you, that you
durst set upon so wicked an enterprise? For you have made open wars against
honesty and chastity: you have furiously broken into the holy Monasteries:
you have overthrown bashfulnes, honesty, and continency: you have chased
away that most excellent love of perpetual virginity: you have given the
goods of religions persons to whom you listed: and now, when you triumph at
the fall of chastity and Religion, you so vaun^ your selves in it, as though
you had by this noble victory, gotten everlasting fame and honor.

Image^.
Now follows the disputation of the pulling down of Images, which you like
very well, and are offended with me, because I should say, that when the
images are taken away, there is nothing left, whereby the mind might be stirred
up to think upon godly things. The which I never spoke. For there are
many other things, which you have overthrown together with the images, that
move our minds more vehemently then they do. But this much I said: For so
much as Images are very good and effectual to bring al men, especially* the
unlearned, to the remembrance of the wonderful virtue, which shone sometimes
in the holy Saints and it were expedient that the benefit of Christ should be
represented unto us by all signs, in all places: it was wickedly done of them;
that pulled down Crosses and Images. For we do neither pray, nor offer, nor
sacrifice unto them: but we are by them put in remembrance of those things
that are of dew to be worshipped. It is, say you, against the express
commaund^ment of God. I would your doctors would instruct you better in
Divinity, that you might no more babble out such childi^h toys. Tell me, I
pray you, have you never read, that there were in the tabernacle of God,
Images of Cherubines set before the Arc of promise? The vele, which ^xod. 25.
b.
divided the inner part from the rest of the tabernacle, was is not wrought
between, with many Images of Cherubines? Numer. 2^. b.
Was there not made the Image of a Serpent in brass by the commandment of God
in the wilderness, upon the which, such as were bitten of serpents, looked,
and were healed? What Images then has God forbidden to be made? Those Images
without dowbte, by the which men blinded with sin went abowte to express a
thing, that can neither be devised, nor painted, nor engraven, nor expressed
with words, nor conceived with the hear, that is, the infinite Majesty of
God. Besides this, there was great danger, lest the people being now
acqueinted with the manners of the Aegiptians, being also about to go into a
land, which was infected with the self same errors, might through
familiarity and neighborhood of these ungodly nations, fall into the like
error, and offer up sacrifice unto gods made of stocks and stones: or at
the least make the images of some naughty and vile men, and set them up in the
place of God. The fear of this danger caused many things to be taken quite
away, which had been otherwise lawful and tolerated. The image of the brazen
serpent was diligently kept, as a goodly monument of the benefit of God, and
singular sacrament of the salvation to come. But after many years, when the
people were come to such madness, that they thought there had benne some
divinity in the image, and therefore offered sacrifice unto it: it was by the
holy King Ezechias broken and made 4. Reg. 18. a.
into powder. Show you now, that we do go about to express the nature of God
by signs, or that we think that there is any godhead in dome images, and then
may you well convince us of blindness and folly. So long as you do not this,
there is no cause, why you should fear the dotage of idolatry (as you term
it) or lay blindness to our charge with such^ monstrous words. For we do
that, that is by right and reason ordained, by the holy Church approved, by
sentence of holy Fathers determined. The gospel, say you, commands us to
abstain from Images. That is true. But what must we understand to be ordained
by this commandment? For sooth this, that no man should offer up sacrifice to
Images, or for any pretense of religion, make as though he did follow the
error, that was in other men. For the faithful men were not then commanded to
overthrow and break their Images, but to forsake the detestable Sacrifices.
Moreover, what Images were those? Of Iuppiter, Apollo, Minerua, Mars, and
Mercury, and other the like Gods, which were thought of old time to be very
true gods in deed. But we do neither offer up sacrifice unto idols, neither
do we think the Images of unclean and vicious men to be worthy of any
reverence in the world. You say afterward.

But this fear being taken away, yet must the doctrine of Christ have full
authority ^mongest Christian men: in the which it is plainly said, that God
is a spirit, and that the true order of praying to God is, to worship him in
spirit and ^rewth. Of like we know not that, M. Haddon, and therefore do we
make God like a man both in body and ma^ners. Would God, you had learned, what
it is to worship God in spirit, and then had you never fallen into such
ungodly opinions. You say, that the true order of praying needs not these
helps of outward things. Although you and such as you are, having now waded
so far in the exercise of spiritual life, need not these outward helps,
but may without them press even to the throne of God: yet should you remember,
that there are many, that are not yet come to so high a degree of heavenly
perfection as you be, and therefore have need to be helped by all means
possible. Not so, say you, but raither while our owtwarde man is to much
occupied in these shadows of holy things, the feruencie of the mind waxes
cold within. Not so, M. Haddon, but rather while the mind waxes cold
within, it is, by these outward representations of holy things, to be
stirred up, to remember those things that were forgotten. for, as Dionysius
teaches us, so long as we are enclosed within the frame of this body, and can
not altogether withdraw our mind from the acqueintance of the body, we are
to be stirred up now and then by bodily Images to the remembrance of the
invisible God. This not withstanding you go fore ward, and say.

Let us put examples. The old Church of the Apostles and Martyrs had none of
all these monumentes, and yet was their spirit most earnestly inflamed with
the love of God. In the wane of ^ure Religion pictures crope in by little and
little, and so appalled in the hearts of men that former boiling heat of
Religion. Not so sir, but then were Images and pictures necessary, to stir
up again by almeanes the feruencie of religion, which was, as you say,
appalled. For so long as the Image of the Cross was printed and engraue^ in
the hearts of all men, this multitude of Images was not so necessari^. But you
do much like, as if a man should say, that the remedies of diseases were the
causes of diseases. for the picture did not cause men to forgette holy
things: but rather it was wisely devised, that men might not forgette them. If
the use of Images quenched, as you say, that ferue^cie of spirit, with the
which men were inflamed in the old time: then must it needs follow, that, when
Images were first overthrown of you, you were by and by very hot in spirit.
Tell me therefore, if it please you: When you first brake down the Images,
tables and other monumentes of Saints: when you defaced them, ma^gled them,
and dasshed them in a thousand pieces: when you burned the relikes of the most
holy Martyr S. Thomas: was there forth with enkendled in you so great a heat
as you speak of? were you by and by wholly inflamed with fire from heaven? I
believe there fell from above, not only fiery tongues, but also fiery
hearts and bowelles, the heat and flames whereof wrought with you so
extremely, that you are not able by any means to abide this strange force of
love, which burns within you. Neither do you now live upon the earth, but in
heart and mind you are in heaven. For even as upon the overthrow of the
authority of the bishop of Rome, there arose out of hand a new son emo^gest
you: so must it needs follow, that upon the pulling down of Images, upon the
breaking of the monumentes of Christ crucified, upon the digging up of the
grave of the holy Martyr, and burning of his bones: you conceived forth with
such a fire of heavenly love in your bowelles, that there is nothing in the
world to be seen in your hearts, but only that same hot and sierie love of
God. If it be so, I commend the vehemency of your spirit, I allow your
doing, I think, this worthy act of yours deserves immortal fame and
honor. for what so ever quenches the feruencie of the spirit, what so ever
does any thing break or weaken the force of love, it would be put back with
the whole bent of the heart. Neither ought we to bear any thing in the world,
that might cause a dulnes or slakenes in the mind. But if it be nothing so,
if, after the breaking down and defacing of the goodly monumentes of virtue,
you were not inflamed by and by with fire from heaven: then it is most evident,
that the Images and relics of holy men buried under the grownde, did nothing
hinder you from that fervent love of God. Why then, what (the devil) madness
came into your heads, that you should be so earnestly bent to make a waste and
spoil of things, whereof you could take no commodity in the world?

At the length, you speak very earnestly (as you do often) against the
divinity of the school doctors, wherein I can not much blame you: for you
have good cause to be offended with them, whose whole drifte both of minds and
disputation is altogether against you. For they have received a pure and true
Doctrine from holy men: you have taken a pudlie and stinking doctrine of most
wicked persons. They are bound to the very ancient Religion, that was
delivered from the Apostles: you falling from the ancient religion, are
wickedly flitted to this new fangled sect. They, for the most part of them,
do worship Christ with honest conversation and upright conscience: but you
have done and spoken many things very impudentlie and rashly, to the
reproach and dishonor of Christ. Now whereas you impute the cause of Images
to them, you show your self to be not only very shameless, but also very
witless. ^or you do not account amongst the school Doctors Cyrillus or
Athanasius, or Jerome, or Ambrose, or Augustine. Whom then? Dowbtlesse such as
followed Petrus Lombardus, and began many years after his time to expound
openly in schools his Sentences (as they call them) gathered out of the books
of the holy Fathers, and brought into one volume. Petrus Lo^bardus flourished
about the year of our Lord. 1141. And the second Council of Nice was kept in
the year. 781. Neither was it first decreed in that counsel, that Images
should be set up, but that they should not be pulled down. And the herefie of
such as would have them to be overthrown, was there condemned by the full
agreement of all the fathers. Of the which error, as it appeared by the
testimonials brought into the Council, the first brochers were certain
Manichees and Marcionistes. It was there declared at that time, by the
authority of Basile, Gregory of Nissa, Cyril, Ierom, Augustine, and by the
custom received in the Church even from the Apostles time: that the Images of
Christ, of his most blessed Mother, and of other holy men had been set up, upon
a great good consideration, to call the minds of men continually to remember
the goodness of God. In the self same Council also, was read an oration of
Athanasius, of a miracle, which was wrought at Berith a city of Syria, when
certain Jews pierced the Image of Christ with a spear. For out of the wound
flowed out blood, whereupon the Jews were turned unto Christ. And although in
the Apostles time, such signs were nothing necessary, and as then it was not
lawful through the tyranny of Princes to build Churches, and to bewtifie them
with comely ornaments: yet do the ancient monumentes declare, that even at
that time The Image of the Cross. ^
there was some use of Images. As for the Images of the Cross, there is no
doubt, for so much as the most ancient monumentes both of Aethiopia and India
make mention of them.

In that part of India, which is within the rivers Indus and Ganges toward
the east, there is a town called Mailapur, and belongs to the great kingdom
of Narsingua, where the body of S. Thomas was buried. There, not many years
ago, was dug out by the providence of God a great Cross made of stone:
whose top and both sides, an arc hewn out of the same stone covered: wherein
were engraven letters of very great antiquity, which no man could read but
such as were learned in the ancient letters of the Bracmans. The meaning of the
letters, as it was afterward found, was a story of the death of S. Thomas:
which declared, how a holy man named Thomas, in the time of King Sangam
ruler of those lands, was sent of the son of God to visit those countries,
and to bring the people unto the knowledge of God: and how the ennemies of
religion crucified him upon the same Cross* And the Cross even at this day
is smeared with spots of blood.

Eusebius also writes, that, in a city called Philips Cesarea, there was a
brazen Image of Christ set upon a foot, of a good heith, and before it an
other Image of a woman* the which being sometime sick of a bloody flux, was
cured by the benefit of our Lord. This Image was made in manner of a woman
suppliaunt and holding up her hands unto the Image of Christ. He declares
furthermore, that near unto the ^oote of the said Image there was wont to
grow a certain kind of herb, the which when it was growe^ so high, that it
touched the hemme of the garment of Christ, it conceived a great virtue, and
was very sovereign against diverse and sundry diseases. The self same
Eusebius reports, that he him self had seen the Images of the Apostles
excellently well painted, the which manner he commends highly.

It is also written that Constantine the Emperor saw in a vision Peter and
Paul, whose Images when he beheld afterward, being showed unto him by
Syluester the Pope, resembling in all points that, that he had seen, he was
excedingly astoined.

What say you M. Haddon? Are you not ashamed of your ignorance? It is evident,
that there were Images set up in places of common resort, eue^ in the times of
holy men (which you grant to be happy times) especially after it was lawful
to buyld great and sumptuous Churches: it is evident, that they were misliked
and resisted of very old heretics, and worthily maintained by most excellent
men both for holiness and learning: finally it is evident that the second
Council of Nice accursed and excommunicated al such as did condemn the Images
of holy men, and the monume^tes of Christ: and will you unadvisedly ascribe the
cause, and original of them unto the schooledoctours, which began to dispute
of divinity in schools many years, yea many hundred years after that time?
what dulnes is this? what negligence? what ignorance of antiquity? But to let
pass your ignorance in stories, what may be said of your indiscreet boldness
in these your doings? For whereas Images are so effectual in bringing us to
the remembrance of things, that eue^ they that read books continually, that
serve God with great feruencie, that may be brought to remember heavenly
things by many other monumentes, yet are they cheerfully preuoked to the love
of godliness, by looking upon the outward signs of heavenly things, and Images
of holy men: what came into your heads, to pull away from the vnlearued
people, which have not so many stays to lean unto, these healpes and succor
of memory, these monumentes of perfect religion? For (to pass over with
silence al other monumentes) where shall you find one amongst an hundred, that
is not moved by looking upon the Image of Christ nailed on the Cross? that is
not inwardly stirred to devotion by the remembrance of so great goodness and
mercy of God? that is not sometime wholly molten and resolved into tears?
Wherefore then will you take away from the unlearned and weak, this goodly
healpe, with the which, the learned them selves, yea and such as are well
hardened in the exercise of godliness, are oftentimes moved? Especially, for
so much as you are never the feruenter in faith and charity, after this your
so honorable an enterprise, for the which you take so much upon you.

But how wittily you conclude all this question with a twoforked argument,
saying, that our pictures, if the spirit be present, need not: if it be
absent, they boot not. Not so sir, but if the spirit be present, they do no
hurt, if it be absent, they may do much good. For what so ever renews in us
the remembrance of the goodness and mercy of God, profitteth us not a little,
and prepares the way very well to atteine to the grace of the spirit it
self.

THE SECOND BOOK.
IN good faith I am ashamed to use so many words in the confutation of that
your book, for the which you stood so much in your own conceit. But for so
much as you have hudled up together so many things in it, which I must needs
lay abroad each thing by it self, I could not comprise so many and so diverse
points of ungodliness and heresy in few words.

But to come unto other matters, you marvel, that I should lament in those my
letters, that all holy things, ceremonies, godly custumes, solemn feasts,
and Sacraments of Religion were utterly decayed. You say therefore. What do
I hear? Is it like that there should live any kind of professors of
Divinity in the Christian world, the which would utterly abolish holy things,
ceremonies, and all Sacraments of the Church? By these your words, M.
Haddon, a man may conjecture, that it were such a horrible act to do it,
that the very remembrance of it makes you to tremble and quake. For you
think it a thing impossible, that any man (which is called by the name of a
Christian) should be so wicked and barbarous, so far from true faith and
religion, so spitefully bent against al godliness, that he would go about to
dishonest, to deprave, to corrupt and deface the solemn custumes of the
Church, the religious usage of holy things, the inviolable reverence of
ceremonies. Look what you grant us we take it, and we think you to be
worthy of no mean commendation, because you think that their offense is not
mean, which do despise ancient ceremonies. Otherwise you would not have asked
with a certain admiration, whether there were any kind of professors of
Divinity in the Christian world, that would commit an offense so wicked and
barbarous. And although you used craft, whereas you said, that the ceremonies
were not al overthrown) as though it were no fault to take away some, and to
retain some): yet I doubt not, but when it shall appear evidently, that the
very principal sacraments have been quite overthrown by such as bear the
name of Christian men, it shall seem even to you a very horrible offense. You
meruel (and not without cause) at the gretnes of their heinouse act. But I
meruail excedingly, not at the wicked act of a sort of desperate fellows, but
at the folly of a grave and wise man. What say you? Are you only ignorant in all
Christendo^, what has been done? Are you only a stranger and vnacqueinted in
matters so notoriously well known? Heard you never say, how Luther a passing
holy man (as you think) has geauen a proud say to pluck away all the
sacraments of the church? Neither can it be said, that he keeps the
sacraments, the which wickedly and lewdly appaireth the virtue and strength of
them. If you never understood this, what say you to that? heard you never
tell, that Carolstadius, Zwinglius, Oecolampadius, and last of all your own
Martyr (to pass over a great nombre of others) did rent and tear the blessed
Sacrament of the altar with most vile and reprochful words? It is like you
never heard of it. For how had it ben possible, that M. Haddon a chaste and
upright man, a man most zealously bent toward religion, (if he had
understood, that Peter Martyr had been disteined with so foul a crime) could
have fownd in his heart, I say not to commend him, but only have any strength
or power toward salvation: it is not possible, that any thing should healpe
toward salvation, which is void of the grace and mercy of Christ. But
Luther denies, that the grace of Christ is procured by them. Whereupon it
follows, that there is contained in them no sownd fruicte of justification, but
only bare Images and tokens. And therefore it is to no purpose for you to keep
them, if you believe Luther. But because it were tedious to make a discourse
upon all the rest of the Sacraments I will speak only of two, which are of
great weight and importance toward salvation. The one is the confession of
sins, wherein is contained the sacrament of penance: (it may please your
fine and piked eloquence to bear with these terms of plain schoolmen) the
other is the Sacrament of the Altar.

Confession.
And to speak somewhat first of Confession, I say and affirm, that there is
no remedy appointed in the Church so effectual to put away the diseases of
the soul, and to recover the health thereof by the grace of Christ, as
confession is. The which we prove by reason, and try also by daile
experience. I say nothing here, how in the time of the old law, in the
sacrifices which were oftentimes offered up for the purgation of sins, there
was a certain confession of unclean Number. 5. a
life made unto the Priests. Neither do I think it needful to rehearse in
this place, how ernestly such ascame to the baptism of John, did first
confess Math. 3. b
their sins. Neither will I declare as now what is written in the Acts of the
Apostles as towching confession of Act. 19. d.
sins, which was made unto the disciples of Christ by such as became
Christians. That commandment also of S. James concerning confession I Jacob.
5. d
will pass over with silence. Neither will I here allege those place in the
which Christ has most vndowbtedly committed the rule and jurisdiction of
sowles unto the Priests, the which, as you know very well by the study of
the law, can not be executed, without The profit of confession.
the examination of the cause. This one thing will I say, that the profitte of
this wholesome confession is so great, that any wise man may easily
conjecture, without any testimonials, that it was ordained by the provident
will and bowntiful mercy of the holy Ghost. For first of al, how much the
knowledge of every man's own self avails to salvation, it can not well be
expressed with words. For even as self ignorance blinds the mind with
errors, and makes it proud and insolent: so does the remembrance of the
wekenes and misery of man bring men to the learning of wisdom. Furthermore,
for so much as no man can atteine the grace of God, except he do first lowly
abbase and pluck down his mind: there is nothing to be regarded with greater
care, study, and diligence of such as desire to get the grace of Christ, then
a most fervent love and earnest desire to come unto this virtue of humility,
in the Humility
which rests the very foundation of Christian piety. And this humility is
caused in us by setting before our eyes the deformity of our sins, by shame
which rises in us by beholding the ilfauourednes of then, by dew consideration
of the danger, into the which we ran headlong. But al these things are
contained in the confession of our wickedness and sins. For confession
contains in it self a discrete examination and acknowleging of our selves, a
learning of humility and modesty, a bashful rehearsal of the sin committed,
a fear of the danger hanging over our heads. By this confession, such as lie
down, are stirred up: such as be faint, are cheered foreward: such as be
proud, are pulled down: such as be unlearned, are instructed with wholesome
lessons. And this is well known, that when the time draws nere in the which
confession is to be made, men are more modest and co^tinent then at other
times. And the harder it is to bring many men unto it, the better it is seen,
that it was orderned by the providence of God. For whereas there is naturally
in all men a certain love of honesty, and a careful desire to conceal
dishonestie, no man could be brought to open the deformity of his sins unto
Priests, unless he were driven thereunto by order, disposition, power and will
of the holy Ghost. Moreover what stronger bridle can be devised to assuage and
repress the haughtiness of men of power, to restreigne and moderate their
rash and wilful presumpteousnes? For we see the highest Princes, when they
have cast them selves down at the feet of the Priests, to be sore afraied
of their rebukes, to be restreigned by their laws, to be instructed by their
aduertisementes, to be reclaimed by their commandments from unlawful lust
and liberty to good order and civility. This Sacrament causes The effects
of confession.
bashfulnes, it draws out tears, yt ends aduouteries, yt restores money
embeseled, it quenches hatred, yt makes peace, yt quieteth rage, it sets
in comely order the whole conversation of the inward man. But now, if a man
not contenting him self to be confessed once in the year, will oftentimes
confess all the uncleanness of his mind, will examine his conscience diligently,
to the end that he may confess with the greter fruict, will keep an earnest
battle against sin: he shall see a daily ame^deme^t in him self, with a
more clean, chaste and upright conversation. I take Jesus Christ my Lord and my
God to witness, that by the often coming to this most wholesome confession I
have risen and escaped from a marvelous nombre of sins. In so much that, if I
have at any time repressed the pleasure of the flesh, if I have despised
unclean lusts, if I have been earnestly bent toward the love of chaste life,
if I have been enke^dled with any sparcle of the love of God: I may thank
this Sacrament of it, by the which the holy Ghost has imparted unto me a
great deal of his mercy and goodness. Neither have I only received this so
great commodity of confession, but whom so ever I do see geauen to this most
holy exercise, (of the which there is a meruelouse number amongst us) I
perceive that they are delivered from al worldly pleasures, that they flourish
in all virtues, and that they become better and better daily, to the great
wonder of many men.

And this is that, that moves me to use most earnest persuasions with my
subjects, to induce them to resort oftentimes to confession: whereof I receive
no small profitte. For many of them have now withdrawn them selves from the
company of unchaste women, many have removed them selves from exactinge of
usury, many have reconciled them selves unto such, as they did bear mortal
hatred unto. And I know, that amongst us, many worthy Bishops both for
learning and virtue does the like. Neither are we such as can content our
selves with the confession of sins only, but we require also the fruictes of
penance, the which we are wont to call satisfactions, Satisfaction.
how so ever it plese your masters to scorn and scoff at that word. But
believe me, we are nothing troubled with the laughter of ungodly me^. We
harken to S. John, which commanded such as had already confessed their sins
to do the worthy fruictes of Math. 3. ^
penance. We willingly receive the self same words pronownced and repeted by
that most high master of justice, the redeemer of mankind. For while we obei
the commandments of Christ, we so little esteem the tauntes and scoffs of
lewd fellows, that we are not only not moved with their reprochful talk, but
also we reioise excedingly in it.

Now then, seeing that this sacrament is of so great importance to salvation,
seeing that we see so great fruicte to be gathered out of it, if we do
fervently desire the salvation of al men: can you blame me, if I sorrow and
lament, that this great gate of salvation is closed up to many Christians
through the lewdnes and misbelefe of a few men? I talk not with you now, for so
much as you keep, as you say your self, the sacraments of the Church. But
if some man of an other disposition shall be so crewell and ungodly, that he
will attempt to damme up this way to salvation, casting before it piles or
heaps of earth, will you suffer it? Will you, seeing such a detestable offense,
so refrain your self, that you will not cry out upon it? Blame not me then,
if I do, as you your self will do, if it be true, that you say, that you do
keep and observe diligently the sacraments of the church. But if you speak
otherwise then truth, I will not much marvel at it, for your doctors are
excellent framers, not only of impiety, but also of vanity.

But you will say peradventure, that much evil and myschiefe arises by the
occasion of this confession. If it be so, it is not much to be merueiled at.
For there is nothing in the world so holy, the which men agreed in
wickedness may not abuse to naughtines and mischief. But it follows not by
and by, that for the defaulte of a few lewd persons, things ordained of
God for the salvation of men should be utterly cast away. For so, there had been
no good thing left this day in the world. For all things, that are by nature
wholesome, are unto corrupt and vicious men hurtful and pestilent. And to let
pass all other things, how many men are wont to abuse the very mercy of
God, when he differreth to punish them for sin, to the increase of their
damnation? And yet is not God for all that removed from his good will and
purpose to deal mercifully with us.

But some will say: we confess unto God only. Yea, but God, for so much as he
can not be perfectely seen of us, has appointed his Deputies upon the earth,
to exercise his authority and jurisdiction, to threaten and fear, to geaue
gentle admonitions, to encourage, to raise up, to geaue sentence: in so much
that, who so so ever does despise them, are to be taken (and that for great
good cause) as though they did despise God him self, and refuse his order and
commandment. Furthermore it were dangerous to leave every man to his own
will in this case. For how many shall you find, that shall be able to search out
and consider their own sins? that will confess them with such shamefastnes
and contrition of heart, as David says is a most acceptable Sacrifice unto
God? that will geaue sentence lawfully upon them selves, for that they are in
their own causes very parciall judges? It remains therefore, that he, that
lives not under the obedience of the Church, and will not abide the judgment
of a Priest: neither would he at any time be confessed of his sins unto
God, as he ought to be* Dowbtlesse Basile the great saw full well, what profitte
arises by this confession, when in his Ethikes he ascribed unto it the very
beginning and foundation of justice. So thought Origin, when he willed us that
we should not delaie it from day to day: but so soon as we were fallen, we
should forthwith have recourse unto the Priest. Such was the judgment of all
holy men, the which exhort us so often to this godly exercise. Neither did the
bishop of Rome first ordeine this Sacrament: but being before ordained and
commonly received, he decreed very prouidently, that it should be put in ure
at the least once in the year, lest it might be neglected to the great decaie
of godliness.

But to conclude this matter, I would feign learn of you, how you think
Esai. 1^. b.
that place of Esaie to be understood, where he says, that it shall come to
pass after the birth of Christ, that a wained child shall thrust his hand into
the Cockatrise hole, and pull him out. If you will follow the Jews, you shall
understand it thus: that even as the Poets report, that Hercules being yet in
his cradle caught two great snakes that were sent unto him by Juno, and dashed
them together: so shall every sucking babe take venomous serpents in his hands
out of their holes and kill them. But if you will expound the place like a
Christian man, by the children you must understand those men, to whom
Christ has geauen power to tread upon serpents and scorpions, that is to
say, upon the beastlines of sins, upon the craft and creweltie of
Diuelles, that lie lurking in the secret couerte of sowles. And although they
be simple as children, yet are they endewed with such great power and
strength, that they can easily pull out those vipers out of the most privy
corners and innermost creekes of men's hearts and kill them, that they may
not infecte and poison such, as have joined them selves to Christ by earnest
and true faith. Now this thing as it may be done of the Priests of Christ
many ways, so there can no way be devised by any wise man more commodious
then that, which is by the wholesome confession of sins. for in confession
the Priests do thrust their hands into the innermost parts of men's hearts,
that they may draw out the serpents of sin, and dassh them against a stone,
and kill them.

The Sacrament of the Altar.
But now let us come to that wonderful Sacrament of the Altar. But before I
enter into this matter, it likes me to set here a goodly saying of Simias
written of Plato in his book entitled Pho^do. Plato brings in Simias
reasoning thus with Socrates. Me thinks, Socrates, as I judge you think also,
that it is impossible, or surely exceeding hard, for a man, so long as he is in
this life, to understand the truth cl^rely and perfectely. The which although
it be true, yet me thinks it were the part of a weak and faint hearted man,
not to discuss and examine by reasoning on both sides, what so ever is wont to
be disputed in these dark matters, until at the length, the matter being
diligently weyed and considered, we may be able either to learn the truth of
other, or else to find it our selves. If we can not atteine unto this, yet at
the lest wise, we must have great regard, amongst the reasons of diverse men to
take some one that seems better and surer: with the which as it were with a
boat we may govern our life in these waves with some danger, until we may
either find an other ship of more assurance and less danger, or else be
instructed by the words and advise of God him self, how to direct our course
without any error. Thus much said he. But to what purpose, say you, have you
alleged this place out of Plato? That you may understand, that men of
excellent wits did even in those days perceive, how little we ought to trust to
ma^s reason, and how earnestly we ought to pray, that our life might be
governed, not by the stay of our own wit, but by the rule of the word of
God. So we do, say you. Would God ye did. But it is not so. But rather when it
is lest convenient, you will weake^ reason and take it away quite, and run
like mad me^ into darkness: again when reason is to be bridled by the faith of
Christ, you yeald so much to reason, that what so ever reason is not able to
atteyne, you will forth with geaue it over. Now for so much as reason is driven
into a narrow and straight room, and the bounds of Christian faith are
passing great and endless: it is a token not only of a naughty and wicked man,
but also of a blunt and dull wit, to direct his life, not by faith, but by
reason. For what man a live is able to try out perfectly the causes of the
lest things in the world? to describe exactely the first spring, the
increase, the variety, the beawtie, the fruict, the profitte and use of trees
and pla^tes? to express in words the order and way, by the which each thing
in his kind is holde^ together and made to continue? what man in the world is
able to atteine by wit, to search out the secret force and cause, how a living
thing is made, nourished and knit together with bones and sinews? by what
cunning or subtilty the veins are spread through the whole body, how the
arteries are so wonderfully wouen one within an other, and how they do co^uey
the spirit of life to all the parts of the body, being so meruelously accorded
the one to serueth' other* and so finely co^pacted together within themselves.
Then to come to the nourishment, increase, moui^g, goi^g, diversity, and
multitude of living things, and the natural knowledge and policy that each
thing has to keep and defend it self: what man was ever able to find out by
undoubted reasons the very ground and perfect knowledge of these things?
Great learned men have disputed very much as touching the mind of man: of the
nature, disposition, wit, reason, invention, memory, and other powers of it:
but of all this disputation we receive none other commodity but this, that we
may well perceive by their long study and diligent search, how great darkness
and ignorance there is in man's reason. For we see in them a goodly endeavor
of mind to consider the nature of man's mind: but of the perfect knowledge of
the thing, which thev seek for, we are never the near. Whereupon it is
gathered, that no man is able to know him self perfectly.

And yet there are some men so hard that, if a thing be told them, which is
wont to grow or to be done in far Countries, they will not believe it: as
though the things which they see with their eyes, and yet are ignorant of the
causes, were less to be wo^dred at, then those things, which are reported to
be done in other places. But now to omit to speak of the firmnes of the earth,
the passing great widnes of the sea, the nature of the air that enuironeth us,
the burning of the sky, the due proportion and agreement of these bodies, the
change and alteration of one nature into an other as it were by course and
order of Law: What shall we say of the brightness, beauty, hugenes, and
compass of the heaven? You, if ye lean unto reason only, what would you
have done in this case? Ymagine you had been borne and bred in the dark
countries of Cimeria (as the Poets feine) and some man had told you, that
there were a huge great frame containing within his compass all the whole
world, meruelouslie decked and garnished with many fires, of such hugenes that
all the lands and seas in comparison of it, are but as a pinnes point, of such
swiftnes in mouinge, that within the space of four and twenty hours it
turns the whole body round about, of such force and violence, that seven
other huge bodies of the same nature, which are contained within his compass,
having a contrary course, it bears them al back with his only moving, if
a man should tell you this tale, would you believe him? No truly, if you
trust only to reason and senses.

For so would you persuade your selves, that the things, the causes whereof vou
are not able to conceive, were impossible, (before you see them with your eyes).

What if he should tell you of the son shine, a thing both healthful and
comfortable to al living creatures, and of the goodly order, which the son
keeps in goinge by little and little toward the North, and again how he
returns by the same way to the south, casting his bright beams upon al
things in the world? What if he should report how the moon with her increase
and decrease divides the times of the year and how she gives ripenes to al
things which the land and sea brings forth? What if he should declare, how
diversely the heavenly bodies above are moved and turned, and how
notwithstanding they are all reduced to a most perfect harmony and
agreemente? Would you believe it? No truly, if you can be persuaded in
nothing, except it may either be proved by reason, or perceived by sense.

It is surely a token of a base mind to esteem the knowledge of things, by the
narrow and straight measure of man's understanding, and not according to the
almighty power of him that made them. And out of this dulnes or weakness of
nature proceeds al such opinions, as are contrary to holy Religion. For all
heretics, either they esteem the almighty power of God by their own
weakness, or else they measure the infinite mercy of God by their own
naughtines. As though they were able to make any resemblance in the world of
the power of God, or understand how great the goodness is of that most
bountiful Father, which does with special regard, as it were, walk up and
down throughout al his creatures, and prouide^tly mainteineth each thing in
his kind and nature. And to pass over all other things, me thinks, that in
that last giving of shape and form to every living thing, I see a miracle,
which shows plainly the power and cunning of that most excellent workman, in
whose hands the living creature was made and fashioned. Neither does the
multitude of living things minish the estimation of Gods work, but rather
augment and increase it. For the benefits of almighty God, the more they are
in number, and the better they are known, the better is the greatness of his
power and mercy seen, although the reason of his works be not understood. What
shall I here speak of those things, that are for the excellency of their
nature far above the sense and understanding of man? Who will believe that
there is an infinite multitude of heavenly spirits, which being of
understanding most clear, of holiness most pure, of virtue and power very
excellent, of comelines and bewty most like unto God, are always occupied in
the Service of God? evermore singing and praising his Majesty, continually
burning with the flame of the love of God? What? Can you conceive by reason,
how the only son of God, the very express Image of the Father, the brightness
of ouerlasting light, being equal with the Father in nature, power, kingdom,
and majesty: took upon him the shape of man, suffered in his mortal body
labor, misery, punishment for us, redeemed with his blood our souls which were
foully spotted in sin? If these things are to be weyed by man's reason only,
they are nothing like to be true: but if we will consider them according to the
faith, which we have of the bowntiful goodness of God, there is nothing more
credible. For passing great benefits are to be required and looked for of
passing great bounty. He that spared not (says Romans 8. f.
S. Paul) his own son, but gave him up for us al: How gave he not unto us al
things with him? Wherefore to such as believe uprightly, I think there is nothing
else nedeful to be considered, but how the thing, that they are willed to
believe, stands with the bounty of God: the which doing, it is not possible
that any man should doubt of any mystery of our salvation.

These things being thus determined, I will now talk, not with you, M.
Haddon, of whom, as you say, the Sacraments of the Church are kept: butte
I will take soome one of them to talk withal, that rayleth with blasphemouse
mouth against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar.

And because I will seek no further, let it be your golden Martyr, whom you
commend so highly. Ymagine therefore, that I talk with him after this sort.

O most vile and naughty fellow, what came into thy mind to go about to
deface, to violate, and to deprave that most holy Mystery, the monumente of
the love of God toward us, the comfort of our bannishment, the stay of the
frailty of man, the bankette of heaven, ordained for us in that last Supper
by the hands of Our Lord him self? Was there none in so many hundred years
but thou and thy Masters, that durst attempt so heinouse, vile, and barbarouse
an act? Was there none that understood the sense of the holy Scripture, the
meaning of the Gospel, the order of the blessed Sacraments, but you? Were so
many holy Martyrs, so many Religious persons, so many great wise men (in whom
shone the beams of the brightness of God) ignorant in matters of so great
importance? It is like forsooth, that the light of the holy Ghost showed it
self first unto such saucie, desperate, rash and presumptuous varlettes, as
you are, and suffered so many thousands of holy and virtuous men to lie in
darkness and ignorance. Tell me, I pray thee, what great thing had Christ done
for us, if at what time he determined to leave to his Disciples a special
pleadge of his love toward the^, he had left them nothing else, but a bare
remembrance of his death in the consecration of that bread? It had been a sign
only, meet to be nu^bred em^gest those that you defaced and overthrew, and
nothing worthy to be celebrated with so great reverence of that most holy
and everlasting Priest. Moreover I would feign learn of thee, whether it be a
wicked offense to call to remembrance the death of Christ, so long as a man is
in sin? No truly, but contrariwise we can devise no better medicine, then
that is, to drive away sin, and to recover our health by the grace of Christ.
What moved S. Paul then, if there be nothing else in this sacrament, but only
a bare remembrance of that death that Christ suffered upon the Cross, to
threaten so grievous and horrible pains to such, as would receive this
heavenly bread unworthily? 1. Cor. 1^. 4.
Who so ever shall eat, says he, the bread, and drink the cup of our Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty. What? Is it such a greiuous offense, when I am
sick, to think upon the medicine, with the which only I may be healed? What
other thing did I, when I received that bread, (if there be nothing else in it,
but a remembrance of those wounds, by the which only my wounds may be healed)
but call to remembrance the only remedy of life? Will thou blame me, when I am
sick, because I seek the remedy of my disease, and humbly call for succor?
Thou can not do it. And yet* if I receive that, bread unworthily, that is to
say, as thou expoundest it, if I remember being in sin, that Christ suffered
death and crewel torments for me: S. Paul makes me terribly afraid, by
charging me with a crime. But with what a crime I pray thee? Some light or
common crime peradventure, the which offends not very much. No, such a crime
as is of al other most heinouse 1. Co. ^1. f.
and wicked. He shall be giltle, says he, of the body and blood of our Lord,
that is to say, he shall be gyltie of no less crime, then if he had crucified
Christ. For what cause? Because as the wicked soldiers, pricked forewarde with
unbelief, put to death the Lord and maker of al things: so do they, that
presume to touch with unclean minds that most excellent cleanes, seem to
bring upon them selves the self same plague for the likeness of their heinouse
offense. For both of them do alike despise Christ, and irreverently abuse his
holiness and majesty. For otherwise what harm were it to synful men to receive
that bread? None at al. The Apostle therefore, because he saw, how grieuouse a
fault it was, to touch the body of our Lord with an unclean soul, denou^ced
the punishment, to fray al men from doing such a pr^sumptuous act. And
therefore he says anon after: Let a man first try him self, and so eat of
that 1. Co. 11. g.
bread, and drink of that cup.

Mat. 26. e Mar. 14. c Luc. 22. b. ^. Co. 11. c.
And, what can be more plain then the words of our Lord? This is, says he,
my body: and do this in remembrance of me. How then? Will thou presume to
take the words of Christ, being nothing doubtful, but plain and evident, and
expound them maliciusly? Will thou set the meaning of S. Paul at naught, which
expounds the myste rye exceeding plainly and well? Will thou prefer this thy
unsettled fantasy and mad gare, before the most sincere meaning of the Apostle
of God? If he be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, which receives
this bread unworthily: He that slaundereth and depraueth it, he that reuileth
and (so much as in him lies) rendeth it in pieces, he that treads under his
foot^ the body and blood of Christ, he that goes about to take away and
utterly to abolishe the virtue of that so wonderful a Sacrament: how shall
he be punnished according to his wicked and horrible fact?

What is it so? If thou understand not, by what means the most holy body
of Christ is in this Sacrament, not placed or limited according to the measure
and proportion of the greatness thereof, but present in the eyes of a
faithful heart through the almighty power of the word of God: if thou see
not that merueilouse change of earthly bread into the nature of heavenly
bread: if thou perceive not, by what means the most excellent Majesty of
Christ, which fills al things, multiplieth the gifts of his whole body,
that he may therewirh feed and refresh the faithful souls, and glewe them
all together with charity within them selves, and tie them fast to him self
with the band of everlasting love: is it therefore reason, that thou should
slander and deprave this so wonderful a benefit of God? What thing do thou
understand? What thing do thou conceive by discourse and reason? What thing
is there in all the world, which thy mind is able to perceue exactly, and to
know perfectly? Why then do thou not order thy life, by clear faith, and
not by troubled reason? Tell me, I pray thee, do thou mistrust Gods power or
mercy, or else does the greatness of the benefit trouble thee? Neither can
the power of God be hindered by any let or stay, neither can his mercy be
limited with any bowndes: and the greatness of the benefit is a very good
proof of the truth thereof. For why, there is nothing more agreeable to the
great bountifulness of God, then the greatness of the thing, which he geaueth.

Then I ask thee an other question: What is the cause, think thou, why I
do believe, that the body and blood of Christ is after a wonderful manner
contained in this Sacrament, and thou beleeuest it not? It is not surely,
because I will suffer my self to be abused for lack of wit. For thou do
not pass me either in wit, or learning. But this is the cause. Thou
trustest thy senses, and I direct al my doings according to the faith of
holy Church. Thou do cast of the yoke, and spurn against it: but I do
of mine own accord put my head into the most sweet yoke of Christ. Thou
do refuse his benefits, but I do pray unto him to increase my faieth.

Moreover, we see this by daily experience. The more a man yeldeth to vice and
uncleanness of life: the feinter is his belief as touching this dreadful
Mystery. Whereupon it is concluded, that he, that geaueth him self wholly
over to the pleasure of the body, and therefore falls from the unity of the
Church, will believe nothing at all of it. But on the other side we see, that
the chaster and cleaner life any man leads, the more sure and constant is his
belefe in this point: in so much that he persuadeth him self, that he beholds
in this Sacrament, even Christ him self nailed upon the Cross.

Surely this agreement of the mind and will of man, is a thing to be woondered
at. The mind seeks the thing that is true: the will desires the thing that is
good: and the well governed will follows the judgment of the truly directed
mind. It follows therefore that they only see the truth perfectly, which are
well ordered in their life and conversation: for vicious and naughty men are
commonly turned away from the truth, because they have their mind disordered
with unruly desires.

Now therefore consider to whom it is better to geaue ear. To those holy men,
the which being of mind most pure, of life most chaste, in holy Scriptures most
excellently well learned, have from the time of the primitive Church followed
this faith: or else to these madbraines and frantik fellows, to these filthy
licentiouse ribawdes, to the new vpstart doctors, which have most wickedly
and heinously violated this faith? This Sacrament the holy Fathers, which
were taught of the Apostles, called Synaxim, that it to say, a bringing
together, because it Synaxis.
linked the minds of men together wi in themselves, and brought them to be
joined al in Christ. In like manner they Eucharistia.
called it Eucharistiam, that is, a thankesgeuing: because there is no benefit
of God in this life, for the which we are bound to yeald unto his Majesty
greater praise and hartier thanks. For The effects of the Sacrament of the
Altar.
it supporteth the state of the soul, it establishes the powers of the mind,
it clereth the understanding, it stre^gthneth faith, it stirs up hope, it
enkendleth charity, it inflameth hearts, it fills the godly and devout
minds with meruelouse great sweetenes and comfort. With this heavenly food,
S. Cyprian (so often as any tempest or persecution was toward) thought it good
to fortify them, that were appointed to suffer torments for the name of
Christ. And therefore did he the sooner admit into the Church again, such as
were yet penitentes, that is to wit, men separated from the Church for a
time, to do penance for some offense committed: to the intent that, being
strengthened by this communion of the body of Christ, they might stand valia^tly
to the end against all the power of Satan. For the holy man was of this mind,
that the food of this heavenly bread gave such strength and courage, as could
not be broken or weakened by any force of our enemy the devil. What should I
here rehearse other holy Martyrs without nu^bre, al holy writers, the faith
and agreement of the universal Church continued even from the Apostles time to
our days? And yet will thou keep open war, against the ordinance of Christ,
against the doctrine of S. Paul, against the inestimable greatness of the
fruictes in this mystery contained, against the experience of such wonderful
profit and sweetness, against the pure and sincere faith of the Catholic Church?
And yet will thou reprochfully revile the body and blood of Christ, and deprave
like a mad man the most excellent and highest benifit, that ever the goodness of
God bestowed upon man? And yet will thou rejoice in thy wickedness, and poison
many other men with the contagion of this thy most pestilent heresy?

These things, M. Haddon, think them not spoken to you, but to your Martyr.
And now let him stand a side, and I will thus reason with you. Could you, M.
Haddon, knowing, as you do very well, not only the virtue of this wonderful
Sacrament, which is of al other the greatest, but also the strength and
operation of al other Sacraments: being withal of that opinion, that to
despise the Sacraments, is a most heinouse trespass: when you understood,
that there was a man in the world so lewd and wicked, that he would go
about to take away and abolish this most worthy pleadge of the love of God,
this most sure stay of all Christian Religion, conteming in it all the graces
and benefittes of God: could you, I say, speak familiarly unto him? could you
salute him gentelly? could you show him any token of love? Have 2. Ioa^. 1. c.
you never read in S. John, that he that says, good morrow, to wicked men,
is become partaker of their wickedness? But you have not only spoken
familiarly to this Martyr, but also commended him above the skies: and you have
said, that that same golden couple of old men, were brought into your Island
by the providence of God, to shine over you (which had already the goodly
brightness of the new son risen amongst you) with a much cleeter light.

Are you so sottish, M Haddon, that you understand not, how much you have
disteined your estimation by that countenance and show of gentleness
toward him? For what can be more infamous, then to be familiare with a
fra^tike and naughty fellow? But if you like his Doctrine also, then is it
plain, that you keep not the Sacraments at al: for so much as you have upon
an unsettled pange, without al order, wisdom, or discretion, taken away the
greatest Sacrament, and that, that is of al other most wonderful. Why then
say you, that you wonder, if there be any kind of professors in divinity in
the world, that despises and sets at naught the Sacraments? But let us
now consider the description of your Church, the which you set before our eyes
to behold, that we may understand by it, that you have had none other master
in Religion, but only the holy Ghost. You say thus.

First of all, because faith is by hearing, we send down into all parts of
our realm teachers of the holy Scriptures, to instruct the people in all
points of godliness, and to infourme them in the true woorshipping of God. Out
of what fountain sprang these Doctors? If they came out of the school of
Luther, Bucer or Calvin: they can teach the people no godliness, being them
selves open enemies to all godliness. It were therefore much more tolerable,
to have no doctors at all, then to be infected with the most corrupt Doctrine
of wicked men. If they sprang out of any other head, then is it manifest,
that there is not amongst you any one and simple Doctrine, but diverse
opinions fondly iarring within them selves. It follows.

Then have we a common order of prayer out of the holy Scriptures, confirmed
by the authority of a Parliament, (for so do they term the consent of the
estates of our Realm) from the which we suffer no man to depart. By what
order, law, or authority is this done: that a Council, or as you call it, a
Parliament, should so impudently usurp the office of the Catholic Church, to
make orders for prayers, prescribe how religion ought to be used, and not
suffer any man to depart from the order which it has decreed? For in holy
things it is not lawful for these men to geaue laws, but to take laws.
For otherwise they shall disturb the common weal, if they will not content
them selves with their own vocation, but will thrust them selves into other
men's doings: and they shall mar Religion, if they will in matters
apperteyninge to them only, that sustain the person of the Church, take
upon them to meddle, and transpose the dignity of Priests to them selves.
You say afterward.

Providing both in the one and in the other, so much as we could, that the
commandment of the holy ghost be obeyed, the which, wills that such as
speak in the Church, should use the word of God: and that there should be one
common and agreeable Doctrine amongst them all. You do very well vndowbtedly.
But wherehence rises this so great debate and hourlie bourly for Religion in
your Churches? Wherefore are the confessions and Credes so often chopped and
changed in places, where Luther has had a great name?

And we provide, say you, that the Sacraments be ministered very near unto
the prescribed order of the holy scriptures, and according to the example of
the old Church, in the which our Lord Jesus Christ first ordained them
himself with his Apostles. O valiant men, worthy to be commended above the
heavens. O glorious attempt. O lively courage of lusty blouddes, the which
thought yt not enough to approach near unto the holiness of the old Church,
but they would press even at the very hard heales of them. It follows.

All these things are set out in our own mother tongue, because it is a great
madness for a man to babble out before God, he can not tell what: and it is
directely against the most wholesome doctrine of S. Paul, and all the
ancient examples of the Apostolic Churches. It is not you only, that teach
such as Prayer in the vulgar tongue.
understand not the Latin, to pray in their own tongue. For we also do not
suffer such, as are ignorant in the Latin speech, to serve God, but only in
their own mother tongue: and there are many books of prayers and holy
scriptures written, not by Parliament, as you call it, but by holy Priests: the
which (being first examined by the prelates of the church) are sent abroad
every where, and by them are children, women, and simple folkestrained in the
knowledge of their dewtie toward God. And the things that are thus written,
they are not taken out of every man's fantasy, but out of the holy
Scriptures, and out of the writings and examples of holy men. So that there
lacks not omongest us any discipline of manners, nor example of virtue, nor
good bringing up in true religion, to al such, as could not imploie them
selves to the study of learning. We have also many sermons, by the which men
are stirred up to the love of godliness and religion. But Discreti^ in preaching.
in preaching we use much discretion and warines, that none of those questions
be opened amongst women and ignorant folks, which are not very necessary
unto salvation, and yet may quickly entangle their minds with very
troublesome dowbtes and scruples. For as S. Gregory of Nazianzene says very
wisely: it is not convenient to reason and dispute of God, neither to al men,
neither in the presence of all men, neither at all times, neither of all
matters, neither without good discretion. For there is required to Things
requisite in a preacher.
the doing of this thing a meru^lous cleanes of sowl and body, a very calm and
well settled mind, good time, convenient opportunity, earnest zeal, much
fearfulnes and exceeding great moderarion. For there is no man so simple, that he
can not understand the difficulty of every question: but there are few so
witty, that they ca^rid the^ selves out of the briers, when they are once
fallen in. And this is the cause, why many men are confounded in questions,
but few escape out of their snares. Moreover such is the arrogancy and pride
of certain ignorant fellows, that they become intolerable, if they can atteine
never so little knowledge in any thing, which they knew not before, specially if
it be in expownding the holy scriptures. For they will judge so presumpteously
of the highest points of Divinity (the which they understand not) as though
they were called to be of Gods privy counsel: the which rashness has bred
many wicked and troublesome errors, and caused much dissension. But the end
of the law, says S. Paul, is not the vaunting of learning, ^. Tim. 1. b
but charity from a pure heart, and good conscience, and faith unfeigned. He
therefore that can bring to pass, that al men may be, linked the one to the
other in charity, fournished with virtues, established in true faith: although
he beat not into the heads of the unlearned people a hundred questions
towching predestination, yet shall he show him to be a very good preacher. Not
necessary t^ have the scripture^ in the vulgar tongue.
Therefore for so much as this ought to be our only intent, how to plant
charity, innocence, and faith in the hearts of men: and that may very well
be taught without this translation of the holy scriptures: what neded it, to
take the things that were contained in the latin tongue without peril, and
to translate them into the English tongue with great danger? Mary sir, say
you, it is against the most wholesome doctrine of S. Paul How so I pray you?
If you mark well the meaning of S. Paul, you shall see, that his words are
nothing contrary to our purpose.

But first of all it is to be known, that in S. Paul's time al Christian men
in a manner were endewed with such virtues and qualities, as few men in our
days can atteine unto by study and faith. Then it is also to be considered,
that there were in those days diverse gifts and graces of the holy ghost
geauen unto such men, as were inflamed with the love of Christ. Howbeit,
although they were taught and schooled of the holy Ghost, yea and well
instructed to be humble and modest: yet were they in no small danger of pride.
The which is not to be wondered at, for so much as S. Paul him self the
master of heaue^lie wisdom, the perfect example of humility and modesty
affirms, that the prick of ^. Cor. 12. b.
the flesh was a thing necessary for him, lest the knowledge of the secrets of
God might puff up his mind. Now as many were puffed up with those gifts, so
were such, as had the gift of tongues, somewhat more insolent then other men:
and they would praise God in diverse tongues, which other men understood not,
without any interpretour. There was also an other great inconvenience, which
was, that he, that spoke with unknown tongues, would not tarry till an other
man had made an end of speaking, but at one time a great many together would
praise God in strange tongues. And these three disco^modities were caused in
their assembles, for lack of discretion in those good men. The first was the
arrogant setting out of the gifts of God: the second was the disquieting of
such as would teach: the third was the breaking of order, which of all things
becomes the Church of Christ best.

But S. Paul very wisely remoueth al these things. For to place humility, he
puts al men in mind of that most wretched state in the which they had lived
before, when through the mocio^ of the ennemie the devil they went suppliantly
afterydols: that they might the more easily gather by that, that 1. Cor. 1^ a.
those gifts ought to be referred, not to their deserts, but to the infinite
mercy of God.

He teaches them also, that other me^ were not to be despised, the which,
although they had not received those gifts, yet were they not utterly void of
the gifts of God: for so much as no man can confess our Lord Jesus from his
heart but by the benefit of the 1. Cor. 12. a.
holy Ghost.

After that he declares how that the gift, which every man has received, he
has received it, not for him self only, but for all other: and that it ought
therefore to be employed to the profit of the universal Church.

Then he shows how amongst all the gifts of God, charity has the highest
room and dignity, that they might thereby understand, that it skilleth not
much, how many tongues a man knew, or else how great miracles he was able to
work, but with how great zeal and diligence he furthered the Church.

Last of al making a comparison between the gift of tongues and prophecy, he
despises not tongues, but perferreth prophesying far before the tongues. And
these are the places, by the which the Apostle brought the me^ of that time
from a certain kind of lightness, to the love of gravity and modesty.

But that disorder of talking together 1. Cor. 14. f.
and hindering one an other in such sort, that the profitte of teaching was
thereby lost, S. Paul took it a way, when he said. But if any man speak
with tongue, let it be done by two, or at the most by three, and let one
expound. For you may prophecy by one and one, and you may speak by one and
one. And lest any man might say, that he was violently moved by the spirit,
in such sort, that he could not refrain him self from speaking: the Apostle
says, that the spirit of prophets is subject unto the Proph^tes. Wherein he
teaches them, that it lay in them, which were moved by the holy Ghost, to
moderate the gift of the holy Ghost.

Finally he sets an order, (of the which he had said much before) by 1.
Cor. 14. f.
these words Endeavor your selves to prophecy, and forbid no man to speak with
tongues. But let al things be done honestly and orderly. The Apostle forbids
not to use strange tongues: but yet he prefers before tongues the gift of
prophecy, that is to say, the declaration of the will of God, and the edifying
of the Church: and he commands, that al things be done with very good
order.

Now there are two points to be considered in this place: the one is, that,
amongst many things, which may be done at one time at our pleasure
indifferently, look what things may be omitted without offense, are to be
omitted, when any danger that may thereupon ensewe, and the time so requires.
And therefore, although in S. Paul's time al mysteries might be communicated to
al men: it follows not, that they should, in our days (when there is no like
capacity in all me^ to conceive them) be committed to al men indifferently
without any respect of persons.

The other point is, that the meaning of S. Paul in all that disputation was, to
keep down pride, to set up charity, and to command, that order should be
kept. He therefore that gives occasion of pride, that slaketh love and charity,
that distourbeth good order, although he seem to follow the words of S.
Paul, yet goes he directely against the meaning of S. Paul.

These things being thus determined, I will ask you a question: what came into
your brains, to be so desirous to take all the volumes of the holy Scripture,
and without any necessity, ye with no small danger of the unlearned people, to
commit them to every iackestraw to expound? did you it, to restreyne the
pride of such as are base? No: you have rather puffed up their hearts
incredibly, causing them to conceive a false opinion of wisdom in them
selves. Was it done to cause a more fervent charity amongst them? No: you
have rather forced the weak minds to fall out within them selves, through
your diverse, yea and contrary expositions of the law of God. Was it done to set
all things in good order? No: you have rather overthrown all good and
ancient order. For now every man is a prophet, every man is a shepeheard,
every man is a doctor, every man will prate in every place very unseemly of
matters of divinity, every man will babble what him lists of the highest
Mysteries, the lowest point whereof is far above his capacity. This is by
like your providence, whereby you have taken quite away that silence which was
used of old time in the churches: that bashfulnes, which became honest
matroues meruelously well: that modesty, which kept the simple people very well
in their dewtie. And so it is come to pass, that whereas you pretend to follow
the words of S. Paul, you bend your selves ernestly against his meaning.

What lacked there, I pray you, in the old time, that was necessary to keep
honest hearts in a sobre discicipline? Were there not learned Priests, the
which were able to choose out of the holy mysteries so much as was needful to
salvation, and so much as they might declare unto the ignorant people without
da^nger? Were there none to supply the place of the unlearned man, and to
answer Amen? Was the sownd and words of the Latin tongue so strange, that
no man understood it in all your Churches? Needed there the authority of the
Apostle to break up that disordered confusion of many tongues together, when
there was heard, in the common prayers of the churches, but one kind of speech
only, and that by long custom very well known and commonly used?

If the use of one common tongue joins the minds of men in one, then was
there nothing more agreeable to the rule of Christ, then that the service of God
should be openly said in one only tongue, the which was in all churches of the
west part of the world learned in schools, and practiced in the daily
affairs: and nothing less convenient, then that the service is now said in
so many tongues as there are nations, amongst whom men without learning,
without wit, without religion take upon them the office of expounding the
holy Scriptures. Wherefore neither was our simplicity so unprofitable, as you
wise men thought it was: neither is your provident warines so wholesome, as
your masters imagined it would have been. For out of it are risen errors, and
disorders, and a false opiuio^ of wisdom (which is the greatest madness in
the world) with many other discommodities.

Then you go forewarde in the declaration of the doctrine of your Church,
saying. We use at the laying on of hands, the celebration of marriage, the
churching of women after child bearing, the visiting of the sick, and the
burying of the dead, solemn and public service set out according to the truth
of the gospel. All the rest you comprehend very briefly in one sentence,
persuading your self, that it is sufficiently declared, that you are not
destitute, neither of Sacraments, neither of any other things apperteyning
to religion.

You confess plainly after that, that you have shaken of from you, the yoke
of the high Bishop or Pope: because it was heavier, then that either you or
your fathers could bear it. Your fathers and auncetours I know, did bear it
very well and with great comme^dation: but you^ grant, were not able to bear
it. For how had it ben lawful for you, to break violently into the
monasteries, to disanull the rules of monks, to deflower the holy and chaste
Virgins, to deface like ungodly and furious men al orders of religion, to lay
your greedy and violent hands upon the Church goods appointed to holy uses,
to pull ^owne all monumentes of virtue and godliness, to overthrow the ancient
Church, and to botch up an other at your pleasure: if this yoke had not ben
first taken of from your necks? You bring in a little after.

Neither do we acknowledge any Bishop, but only our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom the holy scriptures appoint this peculiar honor. O worthy saying, full
of wonderful godliness, and containing in it a most evident proof of heavenly
life. What shall we do to these me^, which are so holy, so utterly void of al
care of this present life, that for the desire and love of the presence of
Christ him self, they can not abide to see any Vicare of Christ upon the
earth. But let us see a little. This name of Christ, does it import the
dignity and office of a bishop only, or else does it comprehend also the
authority and majesty of a King? Surely it can not be denied, that by the
word and meaning of Christ, in this name of Christ is contained the power both
of a bishop and of a King. Why then do you acknowledge any other king, beside
our Lord Jesus Christ? Why are you not so free and earnest, to shake of this
yoke that remains? Why suffer you this freedom of your gospel to be
hindered through the power and authority of a King? Why do you not (as it
has been already attempted in other places, which are infected with the self
same religion) bend your selves earnestly to make away the majesty of a King?
for as you acknwolege one only high bishop, so is it necessary to obei one
only King. If you think it mete to have an other king in the earth, as Vicare
of that high and almighty king: what is the c^use, why you would not have an
other bishop as Vicare of that most high and holy bishop? But you will say. We
have bishops, but we will have no high bishop: Why then, it is not the name of
a bishop, but of a high bishop, that offends you. Wherefore think you
then, that the authority of a Kings power (which dowbtles is the highest) is
to be borne in England? Are there not magistrates amongst you? Is there not a
public counsel? Have you not Princes and Lords? Then take away the
controversy of the name, and there are in England a great many, (as there are
also emo^gest us) the which have the authority of kings, although they be not
called by the name of Kings. Ymagin^ therefore, that they were certain little
kings. What needed it then, being so many kings amongst you, that there
should be any one high or supreme king, to restrain by his authority the other
inferior kings? For if you think that this word (high) may not be born in the
dignity of a bishop: why do you not in like manner detest the name of highness
in the Majesty of a king? No, say you, it was very wisely provided, that all the magistrates and Princes in England should have one supreme Prince, whom they
should al reverence, and by whose power and authority they should be al
restrained: for otherwise, it cannot be chosen, but that there would be stirred
up much trouble and discord, to the great peril of the whole realm. I think
you say truly. And therefore I affirm in like manner, that in the Church,
which ought to be always one, it is necessary, that there be one supreme
power of a high bishop, whose authority all other Bishops should reverence.
For otherwise it must needs be, that there arise much debate and many
pestilent sects, to the great ruin and decaie of the Church, and that the
Church be brought thereby into very great danger. For if within the space of
forty years, sense a great piece of Germany, and afterward England fell
from the Bishop of Rome, so many s^ditions have risen amongst the Princes of
your Religion, that they ca^ not possibly agree, neither with other me^,
neither yet within them selves: what end, think you, will ensew, in case al
Christendom (the which God forbid) being thereunto procured and moved by your
diligence and unreasonable means, should rebel with the like outrage and
madness? It remains therefore, that, as in England there is one supreme power,
which comprehend^th al other Princes underneath it: so there be also in the
Church one supreme authority, the which al other inferior powers must
willingly and diligently obeie. For otherwise it is not possible, that the
crewel tempests risen in the Church should ever be slaked, or the flames of
discord quenched, or the civil wars ended. Now, for so much as Christ is the
author of peace: Whosoever will say, that they will have but one only bishop
which is our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the religious pretense of this word,
will open a gap to so many opinions, and to so much pestilent dissensio^: they
are liars. No, they do rather fight against Christ, and worship Satan the
author of debate and discord. But contrary wise, such as honor and
reverence the bishop of Rome as the Vicare of Christ, for that respect only,
because he is the lieutenant of Christ in the earth: they do in deed
acknowledge only Christ to be the high Priest.

And yet you say, that, by this your rebellion and contempt, you do not cut
and ma^gle the coat of Christ, but only give a touch at the Bishop of Romes
cloak. And by and by after you bring in these words. Neither do we lay open
the way, as you say, to sedition, but we do da^me up the path, the* which
goes down, through his lic^ntious lead, to the great decaie of good manners.
Of this lead, and of your notable reproach I have spoken before, with as much
modesty, as the matter would suffer me. But of this your base, vile, and
shameless boldness, when you say, that you have not rent and torn the coat of
Christ, but rather, that you have, by this your most wicked rebellion, made a
goodly provision, that good manners should not decaie, I can not well tell what
to say to you. Dare you, seeing every where, as you do, that there are so many
divisions of pestilent sects, with so much debate and discord: that there is
no certain faith emo^gest you, no agreement in Religion: that your confessio^s
are changed almost every day, your beleefes and Creedes corrected: that the
old places of doctrine are disanulled, and new set up: that manifold sects
arises daily, and the old Church is divided in many parts: how dare you, I
say, report, that this your falling from the Church has not ma^gled the coat
of Christ? When you see with your eyes, that pride, arrogancy, disobedience,
stubbernes, saucie talk, slanderous report, fleshly pleasure, naughtines,
dishonesty, tumult and sedition goes up and down freely and vnco^trolled,
wheresouer your masters put their foot: with what face dare you say, that you
have after this rebellion set the manners of men in good and seemly order?
The thing it self speaks, daily examples declare, neither do the open
assizes, no neither secret parlars hold their peace.

But let us now see, how worshipfully you confute that my discourse as
touching the Monarchy of the holy Church. You say. In the best time of the
Church, there was one God and one faith. That is true. But now neither is there
one God, nor one faith amongst the ministers of your gospel. For one offers
up divine honor to pleasure, an other to madness: some to the bealie, and some
to railing. Luther has one faith, Bucer an other, Zwinglius has one, and
Calvin an other. And yet you say.

Peter had his Province, Paul had his, and James his, and other had other
Provinces. And yet did not this separation of their persons disioine the unity
of their says. What conclude you then? may it be gathered by these things,
that you say, that Peter, when he was resident in one Province, had no
preeminence over the rest of the Apostles? That is not well concluded of these
things, that you have spoken. For now every Bisshoppe has his Province, and
the Bishop of Rome has his. And yet are we all subject unto him by the law
of God. It follows.

In process of time, many of the Bishops of Rome, were Martyrs, and were
sacrificed unto God by profane and ungodly Princes: but Crowns had they
none, unless it were the Crowns of Martyrdom. This extraordinary
soueraintie of Popedom, they knew not. Yes M. Haddon, it is well known, that
the most blessed Princes and sovereigns of the Church of Rome them selves, to
wit, Clement, and Euaristus, and Lucius, and Marcellus, and Pius, the which
atteyned the Croune of Martyrdom with very great glory, whom neither ambition,
nor any other unlawful desire moved to seek for that supreme honor: do bear
witness against you. For their writings declare plainly, that their judgment
was, that the soueraintie of the universal Church, was ever in the Church of
Rome. What should I here rehearse Ireneus, Augustine, and al other holy Fathers?
What should I here unfold the memory of all the antiquity? Of the new
writers read, if it please you, Eckius, the B. of Rochester, Cocleus, Pighius,
and such other most excellent men both for virtue and learning, and you shall
see, how ignorant you are in this matter of the supremacy. They dispute and
contend, not with reprochful words, not with lies not with impude^cy: but with
testimonies of the holy Scriptures, but with the authorities of the holy
Fathers, but with examples of the unspotted antiquity: and they press their
adversaries, and prove them to be not only wicked fellows, but also very mad
and frantike me^. But how is it possible, that you should understand these
things? What time could you spend in the study of Divinity, being a man
always co^uersant in the law court, and hindered with many affairs? And so,
me thinks, that you are not so much to be blamed, as your masters, the
which have nouseled you in so mani errors. How be it you are also to be
blamed for two points. The first is lightness, for that you have so lightly
given credit to naughty me^. The other is impude^cy, for that you have so
rashly avouched things, that you never read. Tell me, I pray you, where have
you read, that Gregory did abandone this supreme dignity of the B. of Rome?
And yet you put it in your oration affirming it full stoutly, and are never a
whit ashamed of your lying. At the length you conclude thus. Wherefore if the
best state of the church, was without this Monarchy: may also lack it full well:
yea we ought to lack it, not only because it is expressly forbidden by the
Gospel, but also because it stands well with reason. What a rashness and
impudency is this in you, to conclude an Argument after this sort without al
reason? You must bring in your conclusion upon things, that are true, known,
and agreed upon, not upon things that are false and not granted. If you be
ignorant in this, you are a very dolt: if you know it, and yet will go about
to conclude your argument upon false propositio^s, without any proof going
before: you are to be taken as a very shameless sophister. For amongst the
guyles and subtilties, which the babbling sophisters are wont to use, this is
accounted for one of the first, to go about to conclude what them lists,
upon things, that are not true, neither granted, neither agreed upon. If
the best state of the Church, say you, was without this Monarchy, we may also
lack it full well. What, if the best state of the Church was never without
this Monarchy, may you then lack it? I think not. If it be then proved by
writings and records, yea and by the full agreement of all the holy Fathers,
that the best state of the Church was never without this Monarchy: if you are
able, neither to confute the authorities, neither to make any good proof for
your self, neither to bring any sure ground of antiquity, but only in bare
words to say, what ye list: do you not see, that all you^ talk is fainte
and weak, and that it is pitifully shaken and battred of it self without
gonneshotte? And yet, as though you had already contrived the whole matter
according to your hearts desire; you say moreover: Yea we ought to l^okd it.
How prove you, that it is of du^tie? What fruict can you show of this your
wicked rebellion? What light have you showed to the world by this your outrage
and madness so wonderful, that you may well say, that you have discharged your
duty and office commendably.

Now, whereas you say, that the Gospel forbids it expressly, you declare the
very true cause of all your doings. For it seems, that you are minded to
do that only, that the Gospel of Christ forbids you to do. How be it
you would not say so, but rather that you do by the warrant of the Gospel
refuse the authority of the B. of Rome. Such is your eloquence, that you are
not able marlie times, to utter your own meaning. But by what testimony of
the Gospel, by what authority have you proved it? Bring forth the place,
press us with the words, convince us with the commandment, show where the
Gospel has forbidden, not darkely, but by express and plain words, that we
should not acknowledge any one man as the high Vicare of Christ in the earth.

You say moreover, that it stands with reason: whereas you never showed
before, how reason and this your lewdnes may stand together. And yet, as
though you had most plainly and inuincibly proved the matter: you do not only
conclude very much besides the purpose, but also vau^t your self beyond al
modesty. Some il hap come to that fellow your Schoolemaister, that brought you
up so il. It is like, he took upon him to make you eloquent: and he made you
not only a babe, but also an untoward and a (...) Wherefore I would give you
(...) to take an action against him, to make him repaie his waiges, that he
took of you. For you bestowed your time very il with him, the which might have been better spent in drawing out writes and processes in the Law. But let us
see, what reason you bring. You say. Neither can the head so far from the
members disagree conveniently. What are you Conuenie^ter dis^idere. are M.
Haddons words in Latin.
yet to learn to speak Latin? What mean you by this? What is to disagree
conveniently? For the thing that is in it self convenient, is nothing
disagreeable. Whereas you say therefore, that a thing does disagree
conveniently, you speak not pure and clean Latin, but you use a monstruouse
kind of Latin speech. For this cause I am not ashamed to confess so often,
that I do not understand, what you say. I suspect, you would say in this
place, that it is not possible, that the head should (...) be joined unto the
members being so far a sunder. If you say so, you are much deceived, if you
believe that the conjunction of the church consists in the nighnes of places,
and not in the consent of faith, and agreement in one Religion. But if you do
comprise under this disordered kind of speech, some other more secret
mystery: When you have exponnded your self, then peradventure I will answer
you. You say afterward. Especially for so much as this Monarchy or only
soueraintie, for the which you labor so much, we have it at hand at home with
us in England, so that we need not to seek it abroad. It is not my part to
rehearse al your words after you, like a child. But I will ask you this one
thing, what only power or souerainty is that? We have, say you, the absolute
authority of a Kings Majesty, wherein is contained fully and wholly the
Princely estate of our common weal. What, would you also, that the supreme
authority of the Church should be subject unto this Kingly Majesty, as you
say? For no man ever said, that your common weal ought to be governed by the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, in matters concerning the state of your
civil affairs: but only, that the Church of England can not refuse by any
means without great offense the authority of the Bishop of Rome. For this do
we contend and, as you say, labor so earnestly. This is that, which you say
is nothing necessary: for so much as the Kings Majesty has an absolute
authority amongst you, and therefore you need not seek any other abroad.
You say therefore expressly, that your Queen does rightfully take upon her the
government of England in spiritual matters. And the more hardly to press
me therewithal, you reason with me after this forte. But surely this seems
unto you, a thing not to be borne. And in this place you are so chaused, that
you lay Sacrilege unto Princes charges, because they will rule the laws of the
Church* and irreverently handle holy things. Anon after, you counsel me like
a sage and grave man, that I should tempre my choler, saying unto me. O
Master Jerome be not over much disquieted. Such great choler and wrath is not
seemly in a Philosopher. In this place, M. Waulter, if you dally, you dally
very stalely. If you speak in earnest, it is nothing true that you say.
Neither was it anger (which is a sudden rage stirred through the opinion
conceived of dishonestie) that could have moved me to write those my letters,
for so much as I was never provoked to displeasure with so much as one rough
word of any English man: but it was the love of most holy Religion, and the
good will I bear toward the Queen, that moved me to send those letters, and to
advertise her to eschew the danger that hanged over her and her Realm. Neither
is there any token of anger to be seen in my talk, except you will call a
just and lamentable complaint of the state of our most unhappy time, anger.
But that that follows, how pretily it was spoken? Take breath a little. As
though you had with this your wonderful force of talk so disquieted me, that
I could not take my breath. Then that other saying of yours, what a pleasante
grace it has: Come to your self again. This is a foul rebuke. For it
seems to M. Haddon a wise man, whose judgment was always simple, pure, and
uncorrupted, that I am out of my wits. Or else he would never warn me, to
come to my self again. You say afterward. You shall see all shall be well.
That do I look for in ded^: how be it I am sore afraid, left you being an
eloquence man and wonderful in persuading* may force me to believe things,
that are not proved unto me. Yet I look for your reason, by the which you will
prove, that it is lawful for your Queen to meddle in Ecclesiastical matters,
and to lai^ such laws upon Churches, as her lists. What say you Sir? The
Kings Majesty, say you, maistereth al persons in England. What else? So does
the French King the French men, and the Scottish King the Scotts. I commend
your briefenes in reasoning. For you conclude al in one word, as often as you
list, and that meruelouse wittily. But yet you take such things, as are
neither true, neither of force to conclude those things, that you would prove.
For first of all, the government of a King is not violent, neither tyrannical:
and such as he has taken upon him to maintain* like a loving Father, he
does not master them like seruau^ts: neither does he imploye his regimente to
his own commodity, but to the safety of his subjects. It is therefore false,
that he does master them, except he would rather be accounted a tyranne, then a
King. Moreover, admit it were true, yet does it not follow, that he does govern
them in all matters. That therefore, that you should have proved, you lai^ for a
ground, as though it were already proved and granted: the which is one of the
gretest faults, that may be in a disputer. Last of al, neither does the french
King govern the french men in spiritual matters, neither the Scottish King the
Scotts: and if he do (the which is nothing true) then does he not his own
office, but usurps an other man's. Yet you say. But the Queen puts not her
hand unto holy things. Why so, I pray you, M, Haddon? Is it because she
thinks it not lawful? Or else because she will not? If she think, that it is
not lawful, then does she speak directely against you. If she be occupied
with other affairs, and therefore commits holy things to men of the basest
sort, she does otherwise then her estate requires. For she thinks, that
there is some other thing to be preferred before holy things. You say. The
civil affairs are committed to the civil magistrates, the Church matters to
the Bishops. What Bishops mean you? Are they those Bishops, that you have
violently thrust out of their Bishopriks, and cast into the iayles? or else are
they such as you have caught up in the streates, and from the alebe^ches,
and have placed the^ in the room of those most holibishops? O what an
honorable presence of Bishops is that, for all subjects to reverence, and al il
men to be afraid of? But I would feign learn of you, what goodly gloss of
virtue was that, that moved you to place those base fellows in this room and
dignity? Was it their meruelouse and chaste life, which you can not abide? Was
it the knowledge of holy Scriptures, the which they had learned in tauernes,
or in schools, where perhaps they had been Masters? Was it their wonderful
eloquence, where with they were able to withdraw the common people from
licentious living to continency, which they them selves abhor? For it is to
be thought, that they that deprived those godly and learned Bishops of al
their dignities, would not have done such wrong unto the virtuous men: unless
they had meant to set other in their places, that did very far excede them in
all godliness, learning and eloquence.

But I would demand one thing of you: if they be so holy, so learned, and so
eloque^t, wherefore did you not commit unto them above all other this care and
charge to write against me? Wherefore would you betray to the world your own
ignoaa^ce and babishn^sse? Was there such a scarcity of learned Bisshops, that
you must needs take upon you a charge that was none of yours, no nor seemly
for you to meddle in? For, to maintain Religion, apperteineth to a Bishop, not
to a man, that is to urmoiled in the suites and questions of the civil Law. If
they did not excel in such virtues and qualities as are to be required in
Bishops, what a froward malice was that to thrust out the good Bishops, and to
put such base fellows in their rooms and dignities? You politic wise man, do
you not see that that common weal is near to utter ruin and decaie, wherein
such honors as are dew to honesty and virtue are geauen to base varlettes?
But be it, that they had been promoted to this honor for their excellent
qualities (for I can not well guess the truth of the matter: and it may be that
they were, before they came to that dignity, put to school to Bucere or else
to your Martyr:) but sir, I demand of you, by what right or justice was it
done? Howbeit as touching justice you have already satisfied me, when you
affirmed, that within the compass of the Queens Majesty's authority is
contained, what so ever concerns God or man. But yet I pray you tell me, with
what ceremony, with what solemnity, with what Religion was it done? Who laid
hands on them? who consecrated them? I would know what holiness and purity you
used in the doing of it. For it is like, that such fine and deintie fellows as
you are, were offended with our ceremonies, (the which peradventure might seem
unto you very stale and old) and therefore you devised other much trimmer then
ours, the which you have brought not near, but, as you term it, exceeding
near to the very pattern of the gospel.

You say afterward, that the Church matters are ordered by the bishops: but
when there i^ ought to be decreed, the divines do determine it. It is evident,
that you call the^ divines, who were brought up under Bucer or Calvin. Why then
have you diminished the right of bisshops? for it pertains to the bishops to
determine: the divines have no more to do, but only to assist the bishops
with their advise. But you in geauing over the right of the bishops to the
divines, declare, that your bishops are no divines. Your bishops therefore are
(as the common report is) not only poor scrapers and base fellows, but also
utterly ignorant in the holy Scriptures. And men say, that the principal
cause why they are chosen, is, that they must content them selves with some
scantling of their revenues, and leave the rest to be rifled of you under
pretense of the Queens escheker. If this be not true, you must not blame me,
a man (as you say your self) vnacqueinted in the affairs of England: but the
false report of your il willers. Yet, this I warn you, that you and such as
you are, do sustain the great dint of this infamy. For when you choose such
Bishops, you make men suspecte, that you are greedy and coueteous.

You conclude at the length, that both the administration of the bishops, and
decrees of the divines are authorized by the confirmation of the Queen's
Majesty. Why then, if there shall be any thing done by the bishops, or else
determined by the divines, that is not for the Queens profitte, that shall not
be ratified.

Here you speak darkely, I can not tell what, of the Kings of Israel, as
though the Priests in old time had done al things, that concerned religion,
after the prescribed order of kings: the which is false. You say afterward.
Then the gospel succeding and dividing these powers, in the first place it
sets the authority of Kings, and under it other powers by the authority
of Peter and Paul, whose names you abuse to set up the kingdom of the sea of
Rome. Flattery.
O what a plague and destruction of commonweals, what a whirle wind and
tempest to your most flourishing Ila^d, what an utter ruin and decaie of al
kingdoms and peoples is this, that is comprised under the naughtines,
audacitie, cruelty, and coueteousnes of flatterers? What wild beast can any
man devise in the world more horrible and crewel, then it is? For what so ever
the pleasure of Kings stands unto, be it never so wicked, heinouse and
ungodly, be it not only hurtful to the common weal, but also contrary to al
good and godly order: it is made forthwith by those clawbackes, whom they call
to their counsel, to be dewtiful, just, comme^dable, religious, most wholesome
to the common weal, and most acceptable to God. The which thing is well known
to have chanced unto king Henry, who was until that time both for his virtue,
wit, and deeds a most noble and renowned Prince. For when as the king had
conceived an earnest love, and also an earnest displeasure, and was desirous
both to satisfy his love, and also to revenge the displeasure taken of the
Pope (who forbad the new marriage) he was brought, by the persuasion and
authority of a certain wicked man, to believe, that he was suprem head of all the Churches that are within the realm of England. This thing was the undoing
of the bishop of Rochester, and More, and of other holy me^, that abid extreme
punishments: if a most honorable death constantly suffered for the glory of
Christ and establishing of religion may be called an undoing. From hence as out
of a flou^dgate issued so many pestilent opinions, such a broile of sects and
heresies, such outrages of lewd fellows into the state of the Church of
England, to the great decay of the ancient custom.

But what was the place, the which that most vile corrupter would abuse to
prove it? Submit your selves, says S. 1. Pet. ^. c.
Peter, to every wordly wight for gods sake, whether it be to the King, as to
the more excellent personage, or else to the rulers, as sent from God, for the
punishment of malefactors, and commendation of good men* what other thing does
S. Peter in these words but only cut of al occasion of disordre and outrage?
for he would not, that, by the pretensed name of the liberty of the gospel,
the common weal should be disordered, or the society of men by civil policy
gathered together be dissolved. And therefore does he bind al Christian men to
the laws and ordinances of men, so that they be not against the law of
God. He commands servants to obey their masters, be they never so crewel:
women to obey their husbands: husbands to honor their wives: children to
obei their parents* parents to love their children, and to provide for their
bringing up and mayntenaunce. Finally the holy Apostle commands, that
order both in commanding and obeying be kept (whether it be public or private)
without any grudging or pretending of excessive liberty. The which order was
to be kept of Christian men with so much the more diligence, as it was
convenient, that their virtue should shine more then the virtue of other men.
To. 13. a.
The self same thing does S. Paul, when he warns us to submit our selves
to the magistrates, and to obey the lawful commandments of Princes. He
teaches masters and servants, parents and children, housbands and wives the
very same lessons.

I demand now of you, what goodly pregnant wit is this of yours, or rather of
them that brought you into so great an error: that they would pick such a
meaning, as you speak of, out of these words of S. Peter? Did this word, More
excellent, move you to do* it? Surely that were a manifest token of a very
great folly, and extreme madness. For so do we say in common sp^ach; that that
man does excel in nobility, or is More excellent, which is in deed very
noble, although he be not of all other most noble. So do we say also, that a
man excels, or is More excellent then other, in virtue, or learning or
authority, the which passes other in these qualities, although he pass not
all the world in them. The self same signification and meaning has the Greek
word (...) and such is the use of it. Moreover when we say, that an^^ man
excels in some one thing, we do not by and by in so saying yeald, that he
does excel in all things: but in that thing only, whereof we spoke. If mention
were made of the civil law, and we would say, that M. Waulter Haddon did
excel in the knowledge of the civil law* we did not in so saying geaue him
authority to expound the holy Scriptures, wherein he is altogether ignorant.

I would now demand of you, what matter was S. Peter about, when he said
that the king was the more excellent personage? Was he about the government of
Churches, or things apperteining to religion? No doubtless, but abowte civil
government, the which he would not have to be disordered by any sedition.

What goes S. Paul about, when he commands us to submit our selves to all
powers? The self same thing, Romans 13. a.
that S. Peter does. And to confirm that, he shows that all power is ordained
and appointed by God. And to teach us, that this is our bownden dewtie by the
law of God, he says: Geaue therefore to al men their dew. Tribute, to whom
you own tribute: custume, to whom you owe custume: fear, to whom fear is
dew: and honor, to whom honor apperteineth. It likes not the Apostles to
have any sedition or broile in the common weal; or any thing that may
distourbe the peace and good order. And therefore, although Princes were at that
time very ill affected toward the most holy ordinances of Christ: yet in
matters apperteining to the civil government, they command al Christian men,
not only to obey their Princes, but also to make their humble prayers unto God
1. Tim. 2. a
for their good estate. S. Peter therefore gave not unto the king, in calling him
more excellent, the supreme authority in the Church: (neither did any man
ever dream of* that besides you) but he granted unto him the supreme power in
the civil government.

Tell me, I pray you, who held the kingdom at that time, when S. Peter wrote
these things? either it was Caius, or Claudius, or Nero. For Tiberius (which
was also a naughty and unjust man, as we may conjecture) was dead before. Is
this your judgment then M. Haddon, that Peter and Paul did command, that the
President of the Church should do nothing, but by order of Caius, or
Claudius, or Nero: that he should retain such Priests only, as they wuld
have and put away the rest, if it liked the emperor: that he should, if there
chanced any difficulty or hard question in the Church, refer it to Caesar:
or that (to be short) he should minister all the ceremonies and sacraments of
our religion according to Nero his pleasure? If these things be voied of al
wit and reason, then is that your opinion, whereupon these things do
necessaliy follow, such, that if you would study for it, you can not devise
any thing more foolish and unreasonable.

But you will say, that this sentence of S. Peter pertains not to such
Princes as are enemies to the faith of Christ, but only to Christian Princes.
If you say so, then are you of this mind, that S. Peter gave this
commandment to the Christians, that, so long as such men reigned, as were not
well affected toward the name of Christ, they should not acknowledge their
authority, they should not regard their officers and magistrates, they should
despise their laws, they should like rebels disorder the peace and
tranquillity of the common weal. The which it were a very great madness to
speak. For then to what purpose should S. Peter bring in this sentence 1.
Pet. 2. c.
afterward. That you may, says he, by well doing* put the ignorance of
foolish men to silence. Doutlesse, if they had not obeyed ungodly Princes, no
man would have been put to silence by them: but every man would have set upon
them, (and that for their desert) as upon peace breakers and enemies to al good
order.

If then neither the signification of the word requires it, neither will reason
bear it, neither the comely division of the orders ecclesiastical and
temporal by any means in the world suffer it, that kings should bear any
swaie in the Church: what a strange kind of flattery was this in you, to yield
unto kings a full power and supreme authority in Churches? But what a
shameless part is that in you, to affirm by the authority of S. Peter and
Paul, that the authority of kings is above al other authorities? I grant
you, that kings are by the authority of S. Peter set over al rulers and
gouerners in the civil government: but not over things apperteining to
religion, not over the holy ordinances of the church, not over the sacraments
and service made to appease the wrath of God.

And whereas you say, that we do abuse the authority of S. Peter and Paul to
set up the kingdom of the sea of Rome, it is false. For we lean to the words
of Christ, when we defend the authority of the bishop of Rome: and who so ever
does violently wrest the most plain words of Christ, we judge him to be a
presumptuous fellow, we take him for an unreasonable, naughty and wicked
person. But before I proceed unto other matters, I think it expedient
briefly to signify these things unto you.

Lay men plagued of God for taking upon them the office of Priests. Number. 16. a
Dathan and Abiron, for using violence toward the Priests of God, were with
a terrible noise and sodeine earthquake deuowred with all the company of their
wicked accomplices. Core in like manner with the rest of his conspiracy, for
taking upon them impude^tly and wickedly the office of Priests, 2. Re. 6* a.
were consumed with sodeine fire. Oza, by cause he presumed a little to stay up
with his hand the Ark of promise being like to fall, was sodeinly stryken dead.
Ozias the king, by cause he would have 2. Paral* 26. d.

Daniel. 5* g.


usurped the office of a Priest, was dissigured with the lepry. Balsesar the
king of Babilo^, because he took the vessels that were appointed to holy
uses, and did use them to riot and ba^ket in, lost in one night his kingdom,
his riches, and his life. But you, neither do you fear the everlasting goulfe
of hell, neither do you tremble at the thunder and fire of Gods wrath, neither
are you afraied of any punishment dew unto your rash presumpteousnes, neither
do you regard the leprie of perpetual infamy, neither do you take any care,
lest ye be robbed and spoiled of the riches of the everlasting kingdom
together with the loss of your wordlie dignity, and temporal life.

But all these things not withstanding, you leave not to rail at the Popes
dignity. What (a mischief) hatred is this toward the Pope, so crewell and
so bitter, that you repete one thing so often? You say thus. But you contend
not only for the Popes sc^ptre, but also for his holy ordinances and Decrees*
(as you esteem them) by the decaie whereof you think that all fear is
vanished away out of men's hearts. This is true. For being once agreed that
the authority of the Pope is good and godly: it follows, that we must obey
his ordinances and laws. For as Kings, to whom God has committed the
civil government in the common weal, not contenting them selves with the
holy scriptures, such as concern the state of the common weal (for so much
as al things that may happen in diverse kinds of commonweals, could not be
comprised in them) have made other statutes and laws, the which all men are
bownd to obey by the law of God: so the Bishops of Rome, to whom is committed
the rule and government of the universal Church (although you swel and burst
at it) do make decrees, not only by word, but also in writing, as the times
require: the which all we, that bear the name of Christian men, are bownd to
observe and keep.

As for the fear, the which, I said, was taken quite away by you, I do
impute it, not only to the decaie of the Canon law, but much more to the
neclecting and despising of the law of God. For I say, that through the
decrees of Luther the fear of Gods judgment and everlasting damnation is
utterly quenched. I have heard, say you, that very many men have been by the
Canons excedingly enritched: but I have not heard, that many have been
instructed in the fear of God. What M. Haddon? Such as follow the study of the
civil law, are they al instructed in the fear of God? No truly. And yet you
would not have the whole civil law to be burned for that. For the
ordinances of Princes are not to be disanulled for the malice and craft of
the interpretours: but the lewdnes of such as turn all laws to their own
gain and advantage were most severely to be restreined. And yet you say, that
you do observe the decrees of Popes, because they are not a little profitable.
The which thing truly I marvel much at, for two cawses. First, because in
this point you dissent from the most holy father Luther, who, as you say,
was sent from heaven. For he burned all the Popes decrees in such sort, that
he left not one of them. Then, because all your trade so depends of heaven,
that you esteem all wordlie things no better worth, but to be cast away.

Whereas you say, that I do accuse your Doctors, because they have cawsed a
certain vnrestreined liberty in such as they teach: I grant I am yet of
that opinion, and how true it is, I will declare hereafter.

You complain afterward, that I mock those your holy men. Your words are
these. I would have you to remember, what your great Master of eloquence
wrote sometime very wisely: that it is an ungodly costume to daly against the
Gods, whether it be done in earnest or in sport. You are to superstitious, M.
Haddon, and I see now, that Luther is a holy God with you, and that you pray,
that Bucer will be merciful unto you, and that you think, that you must
appease with sacrifice the majesty of your Martyr also. For these men do you
esteem as Gods: and therefore I look when you will erecte aulters unto
them. For else, what other Gods did I ever jest at? Then by like these are the
Gods, of whose displeasure you warn me to beware. But whereas you say, that
I do use jesting words against Christ, in that point you follow your
masters, which are in the mystery of lying very handsome craftesmen.

You challenge me to dispute, a thing full unseemly for your person. For you
understand not the scriptures, no, Luther him self could not, (being, as he
was, altogether blinded in vice and wickedness) discern, what great light was
in them. And this is the cause why he is carried to and fro, so diversely, so
dowbtfully, and so vncertanly, that to this day no man in the world is able to
say for certain: this was his opinion. For at one time he affirms, that all
stands in only faith: and he brings me in such a faith, as, if it be once
receued, al good works are put to flight. At an other time being overcome by
the very force of truth it self, and advertised by his frindes to avoid the
envy of men, he seeks out the good works again. I would you would read over
my books of Justification: and I judge, you should not need to be to seek in
any point, concerning this matter, which you now speak of.

We believe, say you, the gospel. You do well. But the devils believe also and
quake for fear. But what says the gospel? That there is no danger, say you,
of damnation to them, that are grassed in Rom, 8. a.
Christ: that live not according to the flesh but according to the spirit. For
I will not go far from the very words of the holy scriptures, lest I may
seem in some point to deal not uprightly. That seems in deed, M. Haddon,
to be the property of a perfect lawier, to maintain the written word of the
law, and to go sometimes directely against the meaning of the law. But, I
pray you, what words are those, the which you To. 3. d
might in no wise leave out? S. Paul, say you, after a long and earnest
disputation concludes, that he thought, that we are justified by faith without
the works of the law. What S. Paul has concluded, I know very well: but what
you would conclude, I do not yet perfectely understand. We must needs yield,
say you: we are not able to discredit the gospel. But yet we must take that
withal out of the self same S. Paul: faith that works Galat. 5. a
by charity. If we do keep these things joined together: you may not
separate them, and so reason against an error, which has none other author
besides your own self. By these your words I do conjecture, M. Haddon, that
your opinion is, whereas S. Paul says, that no man is justified by works, and
again, that we must keep that faith that works by charity: (although these
things may seem to disagree the one with the other) yet that we may not in
any wise depart from the very words of the gospel. And how so ever the
joining together of these things may seem to be a hard matter: yet for so
much as S. Paul is the author of it, it were a presumpteous act to go about
to separate what S. Paul has joined.

But I am of a contrary opinion, that this only argument is sufficient to
prove, that S. Paul never spoke these things, because they ha^g not together.
For what thing stands better together and is more agreeable, then the
reasoning and doctrine of S. Paul? And nothing is less agreeable then this:
that justice is not geauen without that faith, that woorketh by charity: and,
that no man can Only faith justifies not.
be justified by works. Not the hearers of the law, says S. Paul, but the
doers Romans 2. b.
of the law, they shall be justified. They therefore that do the thing, that is
commanded in the law, by the authority of S. Paul are just before God. If
that be true, what is more contrary to the meaning of S. Paul, then to say,
that no man is made just by works? You therefore knit those things together,
that cannot be joined. But I would stand in it, and prove by this reason only,
if I had none other, that S. Paul would never speak it.

Whereas you say, that I do fight or contend against an error, it sounds
to my commendacion. For what goodlier thing can I do, them to pluck up
pestilent opinions by the root?

But when you bring in upon this, that of the self same error, which I
conte^d against, there is none other author bisides mine own self, we had
need of Oedipus to expound it. You have a marvelous liking in dark sayings.
Heard you it ever reported, that I should say, that the works of holy men
were defiled and spotted with sin, and that for this cause no man could
atteine justice by holy works? This is the error which I do stand against.
But you will not once say so, and yet you are so babish, that you can not utter,
what you think. But the fambling of your tongue we will let pass, and
consider how fowly you are ouerseene in weighty matters.

You say, that works are not available to justification, and yet, you say,
that works are not to be despised, for so much as we have both these opinions
grounded upon the authority of S. Paul. The principal deuisours and
Archbuylders of your new gospel, whom you worship as Gods, of whom you
learned these mysteries, went further then so, and said plainly, Luthers most
damnable doctrine touching Works.
that all the works, the which holy me^ do, are not only unprofitable, but also
unclean and spotted through the contagion of original sin. For they do not
believe, that original or engraffed sin, the which we took from the
spring, is quite blotted out in the baptism of life: but that it grows
still, and casts out such a deal of unclean vice, that all the doings of
holy men, although they be done by the mocion and instincte of the holy Ghost,
yea and referred to the glory of Christ, yet they are deadly sins, and
deserve of justice the punishment of everlasting damnation, without the great
goodness and mercy of Christ. If it be but little civility, as you say, (and
as yt pleases your great lawier to write also) to judge of a law, unless it
be thoroughly weighed and considered: read diligently the books of Luther,
Melanchthon, Calvin, and other your learned men, and you shall see, that this
was their opinion, or rather that the whole sum of the doctrine, which they
professed, stood upon this opinion, that they condemned al works as wicked
and sinful.

You see here an extreme desperation of atteining unto justice. For if no man
can be just, but he only that keeps the law, as S. Paul says: if not he
Romans 2. b. Mat. 7. 6.
that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, as our Lord him
self declares plainly, but he that does the will of the Father: if justice,
as the Prophets witness, is a shunning of all vices, and an earnest desire to
follow virtue and honesty: if justice consists in cleanes of life, in
innocencio, in good and seemly order of the mind, in holy conversation, in
newnes of heavenly life, and in the continual exercise of charity: and we be
able, neither to keep the commandments of God, neither to forsake vice,
neither to follow honesty, neither to do the works of charity, if it be
so, that, (will we, nil we) we must needs bear the yoke of sin: by what
means in the world shall we be able to assure our selves of the state of
justice, through the grace and mercy of Christ, if Christ has not yet
broken the force of sin in us by the merit of his blood, as your masters
say? You see here, after what sort that man, that was (as you say) sent from
heaven, has cut of by his devises all hope of atteining unto justice. But see
on the other side, how wittily he has devised a remedy, and how all the rest
have followed him.

He says, that no man has any particular justice through the grace of
Christ, but that the justice of Christ him self is applied to all believers
by faith, in such sort, that the justice of Christ is no less accounted and
esteemed in every faithful man (be he never so wicked) then if it were that
ma^s own justice, that staieth upon faith only. He says therefore, that it
comes to pass through this faith, by the which every Christian man assures
him self that he is in the favor of God, that the justice of Christ is
imputed to be the justice of that man, that believes. You have here the law of
Luther, so much as concerns this present place, thoroughly scanned, so that
you can not justly complain of any wrong done unto Luther.

Now consider you on the other side, what a meruelouse easy way he has
devised to atteyne unto justice. For to whom shall it not be a very easy
matter (if he will believe Luther) to say thus with him self? This gear goes
gaily well with me. I am in high favor with God for my faithes sake. It is so,
that the justice of Christ is become mine own justice. I am therefore as just
as Paul, as Peter, yea (...) the most blessed mother of God her self: for so
much as no man has the commendation of any particulare justice through the
grace of Christ: but there is one only justice applied indifferently to al such
as keep the faith: the which because it can not be higher or lower, greater or
lesser, it follows, that I am so just my self (although there remain sin
in me) as he that is most just.

You see now, how by the diligence of this excellent fellow, all fear is put to
flight, presumption set on tip toe, boldhardinesse confirmed in her full
strength and force. For so much as therefore a man can not be earnestly provoked
to do any virtuous act, being either in extreme despair or else in extreme
presumption: and Luther has in part cut of all hope of justice, and in
part has brought his disciples into a most presumpteous affiaunce of
atteyning unto it, by devising an other justice that was never heard of
before: is it not evident, although to eschew envy he spoke sometimes many
things concerning the works of justice, that he quenched all love and desire
of well doing? For, I pray you, by what means will you encourage a faint man
to do any honest thing, if he have learned before of some grave person, that
such as endeavor them selves to do any virtuous act, do but loose their
labor?

Again, how will you drive the fear of everlasting damnation into them, that
are altogether careless, and presume so much of their own justice, that they
believe, that no man does pass them in any excellency of justice? Wherefore
no man in the world will ever bend him self to do holy works (if he
hearken to the Doctrine of Luther) for so much as it is impossible, that any
man, being either in extreme despair of honesty, or else in extreme
presumption of salvation, should earnestly endeavor him self to follow godliness.

But, you will say, that it may be, that Luther did exhort his country men to
good works in his Books and sermons. I know that well. So did Epicure him
self, when he had with Decrees taken away al virtue, yet would he dispute now
and then of virtue very notably. I consider not, what the light fellow says
sometime, either through the inclination of nature, or else for fear of
envy: but I see, what is most agreeable to his decrees and doctrine. This is
most vndowbtedly true that, when things are either utterly despaired, or
certainly assured, there is no man, that will take any great pains in following
of virtue. Therefore, for so much as Luther has showed him self to be the
author both of this extreme desperation, as also of that, extreme presumption:
who does not see, that, by him, al good and godly works has been quite
overthrown? Wherefore this was in him a great fault, a cruel deed, a
shameless act, a wicked crime, an intolerable villainy: but yet was that
other much more heynouse and detestable, that he would wrest the godly and
wise saying of S. Paul after his own pleasure, and abuse the testimony of
the holy Apostle to confirm his shameless opinion and doctrine.

But let us now see, how you will make Luther the defacer of all virtue,
labor, diligence, and industry: to agree with S. Paul, the high
Schoolemaister of al holiness, religion and virtue? S. Paul, say you, says,
that there is nothing auailable to salvation, besides faith that works by
charity. The self same Paul says, that no man is justified by works. It is
therefore evident, say you, that these two points are joined together.

But I say on the other side, that, for so much as these things do disagree
excedingly the one from the other, it is impossible, that ever S. Paul should
join them together. But that it may be fene how il your masters understand S.
Paul: it is to be considered, what his meaning was, what he went about, what
intention and purpose he had, as in all his Epistles, so especially in this,
which he wrote to the Romans, out of the which you have taken these
testimonies corruptly understood.

A sound and catholic doctrine touching works.
What was then the purpose of S. Paul in this Epistle? Doubtless this, to
withdraw men from all affiaunce in worldly things to the faith of Christ.

He teaches therefore, that there was no sure stay of salvation, neither in
nature, neither in the ordinances of the old Law. For it was neither nature,
neither the law, that took away iniquity, and brought in justice, in the which
only stands our salvation and honor. For only justice procures the favor
of God toward mankind.

And first that nature of it self holp^ nothing toward justice, he proves by
this argument: because all men, which stayed upon nature only, although they
were endewed with excellent wit, yet they were spotted with iniquity; with
unclean lusts, malice, couerousnes, dishonestie of life, cruelty, and with
other vices unseemly to be named. As though he should say thus. If the
excellency of nature, if the sharpness of wit, if the force of the mind
and reason had holp^^ any thing toward justice: then had the Gentiles, which
excelled in nature, in wie, and in reason, ben well appointed and furnished for all helps and states of justice. But the brightness of justice shone not
amongst them: (for they were full of iniquity and vices without number)
wherefore the excellency of nature help them nothing to live justly.

Then turning him self to the Jews, he urges the self same argument, but
more earnestly and with greater force. For he had entered into a most ernest
conflict with the Jews, as touching the ceremonies of the old Law: the which
the Jews, thought necessary to keep still, believing that the souls were
purged by them. Against whom S. Paul disputes, declaring that all the
ordinances of the Law, which were but only shadows of Justice, vanished away
at the coming of the true and perfect justice: and that such as referred the
cause of justice unto those shadows, appaired the honor of Christ. For they
distrusted the power and merit of Christ. And therefore writing unto Gala. 5.
a.
the Galathians, he says. If you be circu^cided, Christ shall do you no good.
In like manner writing to the Hebrews, he says, that the Law^ Hebr. 7. c.
brought nothing to perfection, but that it stirred up men with shadows only
and Images to the hope of the salvation to come. And those ceremonies and
sacrifices ordained by the law, the which in this place and in the epistle to
the Galathians, he terms the works of the Law, writing to the Hebrews, he
calls them the justices of the flesh. S. Paul therefore speaks Hebr. 9. 6.
of this part of the Law, which consists in shadows of justice, which
contains the cleansing of the body, and reaches not unto the soul, when he
says, that no man is justified by the works of the Law. This was the
meaning of S. Paul, and the conclusion of that so long and earnest
disputation, which you speak of. As though he would say thus. If
Circumcision, if the sprinkeling of ashes, if the offering up of brute
beasts, if the other cleansinges of the Law did make men just, it should
follow, that all the Jews which observed and kept orderly the holy ceremonies
of the Law, attesned unto justice. But it is evident, that al such jews as
leaned and trusted unto the law only, were naughty men, unclean livers,
backbiters, murderers, and wicked persons. Wherefore they received not the
fruit of justice by the law. And so it remains, that no man is justified by
the works of the law.

If you have any wit at al, this reason concluding so aptely may teach you,
what works S. Paul meant, when he said, that no man is justified by the
works of the law. For otherwise what could any man have said more unaptly,
worse hanging together, and less to the purpose? If S. Paul had said, that
the Jews had excelled in clean liui^g, in godliness and innoce^tie, and yet
that such vertuos deeds had helped nothing toward justice: if he had upon
these things concluded, that they were not justified by the works of the law:
you might well have gessed, that by the works of the law, he had understood
the deeds of virtue and godliness. But S. Paul never spoke any such word. No,
he declares plainly by the testimony of the law it self, that such as
bestowed much diligence and labor about the ordinances of the law, were very
naugh ty and wicked men: whereupon he concludes, Works of the law do not
justify.
that the works of the law did not justify. What then? Think you that S. Paul
does conclude his argument upon things that are not proved and agreed upon, as
you do? If you presume to say so, then shall you falsely charge the wisdom of
the holy man with the crime of rashness and folly. The which thing how far it
is from S. Paul, is well known to al such as study his writings with a pure
inte^tion. For what can be devised more witty and better applied, fuller of
wisdom and more earnestly endited, then the reasoninge and style of S. Paul?
His Arguments are al so wellinked within them selves the one depends of an
other so aptly, they are knit together so finely, the second comes in upon
the first, the last answers unto the middelmost so necessarily, he chaineth
all the whole discourse in one, with such an excellent order and cunning, that
it is not possible to find any one point in all his talk, that agrees not
wonderfully well with his meaning expressed in any other place before. It is
therefore gathered by the reason it self of S. Paul, (which concludes very
aptly) what works of the Law those are, by the which, he says, no man is
made just. They are those works, the which S. Paul plucketh at evermore in
his disputation, against the which he contendeth most earnestly, from the
afsiance of the which he endeavors to withdraw the Jews: for the cause of
the which he was cruelly assaulted of the Jews, and oftentimes put in great
peril of his life.

Now if you desire to know, wherefore these sacrifices of the Law, are called
the works of the law: how those works also, which are done by the strength
of reason only, (unto the which men lean and trust to much, and therefore
require against al reason a reward for them, not according to grace, but of
duty) are to be accounted amongst the works of the Law: how the works of
godliness, charity, humanity and virtue are to be referred unto the power and
holiness of faith: in how great blindenes they are, the which not
understanding these places of S. Paul, and wresting them from their true
meaning, abuse them to prove, that the works of holy men are not only
unprofitable, but also wic ked: I have declared these things plainly enough
in my books written of justice, which are now abroad: and therefore I think it
not needful to repete them again in this place. I do not therefore pull in
sunder such things as are joined together by reason: but the things, that are
disagreable and contrary the one to the other, I can no^ ^bide to see them
hudled up together without reason. For, seeing that S. Paul does most earnestly
exhort us to the love of virtue, innocency and charity: saying, that every
man shall be rewarded according to his works: seeing that he affirms, that al
such as are joined un to Christ, are washed and cleansed of al uncleanness of syn,
and are become holy: yea and that they are for cleannes of life and brightness
of virtue comparable to the sterres: what thing in the world could have be^
spoken more contrary to this saying, so often and so constantly repeted, then
to affirm, that such, as the Apostle reports to be clean, holy, clear,
most excelle^tly beutified with the brightness of heavenly virtues, are spotted
with sins, and that their works are not only nothing auailable toward the
heap and perfection of justice, but also that they are unclean, sinful, and
disteined with the contagious infection of our corrupted nature?

Romans 8. a.
But let us co^fider the place of S. Paul it self, which you allege. S.
Paul, say you, wara^teth, that there is no danger of damnation in such as are
e^graffed in Christ. But we take that withal, that follows in the same place:
such as live not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit. You do
well to take in that withal. But let us see* what are they, that walk, as S.
Paul says, according to the flesh? Doutlesse they are those, which are, as S.
Paul Gal. 5. c.
writing to the Galathians says, corrupted and defiled with auoutrie, with the
filthy pleasure of the body, with uncleanness of life, with cursed
superstition, with hatred, with making debate and strife between men, with
stirring up troubles and discord, with pestilente sects, with envy, murder
and creweltie, with drunkenes, and glottonie, with these and other the like
vices, of the which says the Apostle, I tell you now, as I have also told you
before, that who soever does such things, shall never possess the inheritance
of God. He excepteth no man, he said not, unless they have faith: for it is
like that this light of the new Gospel had not yet shined in his eyes. And
what they are, that live according to the Spirit, the Apostle declarerh,
saying, that they are such, is enjoy the most sweet and plesaune fruit of
the Spirit. Now the fruit of the spirit, as he says, is charity, gladness,
peace, constancy in virtue, gentleness, bowntifulnes, faith (not meaning that
slack faith, but such a faith, as is joined with obedience) mekenes,
continency, and other the like commendable virtues, against the which no man
can proceed by law. And yet a man might do it, in case they were spotted and
defiled with any sin. S. Paul therefore does in no wise promise the
inheritance of the everlasting kingdom to them that lean to the only faith of
Luther: but to suches as do good works, and direct all the doings of their
life to the glory of Christ.

Here will you cry out again, and protest the faith of Gods and men, that this
is a notable slander, and not to be borne: and that you did not put such
affiaunce in only Faith, but that you determined withal, that good works were
also necessary unto salvation. I will not as now dispute, how far from al
reason it is, to put any hope or affiaunce of salvation in a thing, that is
unclean and wicked. And therefore, if al works, as Luther says, are defiled
with sin: then are they not to be wrought diligently, but to be neglected and
despised. But omitting this matter, we will consider, how these works, be they
never so evil, yet must they needs be had of you: (for this point have I
searched out with much diligence.) Because, say they, they follow faith of
necessity: not for that, that works do make the way unto salvation, (for as
of them selves they came not into judgment) but because there is in them a
certain fruit of Faith. For as a tree of it self brings forth fruit by the
strength of nature, so does faith of necessity bring forth works. These two
points of doctrine do your masters teach: butboth the one and the other is
false.

For first of al, the works themselves do deserve either salvation or
damnation: and the works shall be weied by them selves in the bala^ce of Gods
judgment. Psalm. 61. d.
Otherwise David would never have said, that God will ^e^der unto every man To.
2. b.
according to his works: S Paul would never have said, that God will reward
every man according to the quality of his work good or il: he would never
have stayed men with that threat, that 2. Cor. 5. b
we must all stand before the judgment seat of Christ* to make account every
To. 14. d.
man, of what so ever good or evil he has cmo^itted in this life: and that
every man's own works shall be most exactly tried: to make short (for so much as
the testimonies, that may be alleged, are infinite) the most holy judge
himself would never have said, that such as have done well, shall go into life
everlasting, Mat. 25. d
and such as have done evil, into everlasting fire.

Then that other point is also false, that good works do necessarily arise
out of Luthers faith. I grant you, that good works do follow my faith, but
not yours, M. Haddon, if you believe To. 10. c.
Luther. How so say you? Because faith comes by hearsay, and hearsay comes by
the word of Christ. For so much The faith of the chu^che is fru^ful.
therefore as my faith, that is to say, the faith of the holy Church is grounded
upon the words of Christ, and Christ him self says, that al such as do not
repent, shall be condemned: that says and credit, which I give to the words
of Christ, causes me to do penance. Io* 15. b.
Again when our Lord says: (...) shall be my friends, if you will do the
things, that I command you to do if I believe the words of Christ, and
desire earnestly to be received into his frindship: I will endeavor my self to
the uttermost of my power, to do such things as are by him commanded. And
whereas Christ tells us before, that not he that calls him Lord, Mat. 7. 6.
shall come to have the possession of the kingdom of heaven, but he that
orders al his works according to the will of the everlasting Father: If my
faith be not faint, if it be lively and strong and inflamed with the desire of
that kingdom: I am stirred up by this faith to direct al my doings according
to the will of God. See you not now, after what sort this faith contains holy
works within her womb, which are engendered of the fruictefulnes of her.?

Now let us see the faith of Luther, whether it be able to bring forth any
Luthers faith fruitles.
fruicte, that is quick. No without doubt. First of all, because al works as
he says, seem they never so holy, are disteined with sin. And no man
makes any account or estimation of a thing that is unclean and spotted with
sin. Moreover because (as he mainteineth) the force and strength of
inordinate lust is so great, that he thinks it impossible to withstand it by
any means in the world. Seeing then it is impossible for any man to endeavor
him self to do any good works, unless he do first destroy the kingdom
of sin: and the kingdom of sin can not possibly be destroyed, if it be
true that Luther says: it remains, that no man can possibly do any holy
works. For who is so mad, that he will bestow his labor in any thing in vain
and without fruicte? Last of al because Luther has determined such a kind of
justice, as needs not the healpe of any doing or work. For if I persuade my
self, that the justice of Christ is applied unto me by faith, no less then if
it were mine own justice: and that I have atteined unto that most high and
perfect justice of Christ, although I live and continue in syn: with what
desire, care, or hoofulnes should I be pricked forewarde to do any good work?
Forsomuche therefore as Luther both despises holy works, and cutteth of al
hope of honesty and holiness: and by this faith, which he has devised,
takes away al fear of punishment: is it not evident, that he is the
ouerthrower of holy works, the destroier of honesty and godliness? although he
pretended sometime to stir up his disciples to the love of virtue?
Wherefore it is manifestly seen, that this man of God, who^ you commend above
the heavens, what with bringing good works into contempt, and what with
causing men to despair of honesty, and by teaching a vain affiaunce in his
newly devised justice, has quite taken away al desire of doing and working.

Let us now come to your other co^plai^t, in the which you say, that I make no
end of babbling, while I lament the vnsensiblenes of Luther, which tied up the
will of man with necessity of destenie. Truly, say you, I am not wont to be
moved with anger, and yet now I can hold my self no longer. It is my great
fault, M. Haddon, that I have by this my babbling as you term it, caused you
(being so gentle and soft by nature as you are) to rage like a mad man. Well let
us then hear the talk of this fellow which is justly provoked to play the
bedlome. What say you sir?

This slander, say you, is not only blockish and ignorant, but also
blasphemou^: and such, as the very stoones them selves, which you speak of,
if they could speak, would not turn it against our men. I know, M. Haddon,
that that place of Rhetorik is well applied to this vehement kind of speech,
which you now use. And therefore I look, when you will bring in those stones,
and make them to speak. You say afterward.

But have you an eye unto the Scriptures a little while, and repent you. Truly I
have a diligent eye unto them: but I have not as yet gone to school with
doctor Walter. Now therefore I am atte^tiue, if I may, by your good
instructions come to a cleerer understanding of the secrets of God. I wuld ye
would utter unto us this wonderful stuff of your high wisdom. Well: what say
you then?

Predestination.
God the Father has chosen us in Christ, before the foundations of the world
were laid, to the end that we should be holy and unreprovable before him.
How know you, M. Walter, I pray you, that you are one of the chosen? Again
which be they, that are holy and unreprovable before God? Doubteles they are
such, as are void of al sin. But by Luthers doctrine, you can not be without
sin. For he says, that sin is not al put out, but that a certain steime of
vice breaks out of it, as it were out of a burning furnace, the which
deuoureth and consumes all things round about it: whereupon it follows, that
no man is unreprovable. But if you peradventure will say, that you speak not
of your self, but of al mankind: if no man in the world be delivered from al
sin (as Luther teaches) then does it follow, that no man can be
unreprovable.

You hear, say you, the election or choice of God out of the gospel, the
which you so much detest in your talk: and you hear the time also. Do I
detest the election of God? With what face dare you say so? In what place? in
what words? before whom? who is your witness? who was made privy? in which
of all my writings can you convince me to have spoken any such word? Have you
such a pleasure, to babble out, what so ever comes upon your tongues end?

Neither is this necessity of Gods election say you, an occasion why we
should yeald our selves wholly to fellow the pleasures of the body and
unclean vices (as it pleases you full ungodly to sport) but that we should be
holy and unreprovable before God through charity: as it is declared by the
express words of the gospel. Although I understand you not very well, yet
I think you make with me. For I say the very same thing, that we are not
compelled by any necessity to do evil: for so much as God has geauen us (as
it is manifestly proved by many places of the Free Will.
Scripture) a free choice of life and death. Wherefore we are free, and not tied
with any fatal necessity.

But here again forgetting what you said before, you allege certain places
out of S. Paul, by the which as I imagine, you intend to take from us our
freedom of will.

Phil. 2. b.
It is God, say you, that woorketh in us both to will and to do. S. Paul in
these words has tied up our will, and restreined our power. Neither did S.
Paul ever think it, neither did your masters understand the meaning of S.
Paul. Much less is it to be thought that you, being far inferior to them,
should be able to atteine to the Apostles meaning in this matter. We grant
this to be true, that our thoughts and works (such as are well begone and ended)
ought to be referred unto god, by whose power they are don. For except God had
called me back, when I ra^no into all mischief: except he had advertised me
by the instincte of his spirit, that I should not cast my self headlo^g into
everlasting thraldom: except he had with his wholesome grace and sure aid so
strengthened me, that I might be able to do the godly work which he
commanded me to do: I could neither have done, neither yet have thought any
good thing: but what so ever study or diligence I had employed either in
devising, or else in doing any good work, it had benne all in vain. Yet this
much we say, that we may, not yeald our assent to the inspiration of God, that
we may, not regard his liberality, that we may, refuse his gentle offer, yea
and leese, thorough sin and wi^kednesse, the Apo^. 3. d.
grace, that is already gotten. I, says our Lord, do stand at the door and
knock. He says not, I do break open the doors, or I do pull them out of
the hinges, or I do break in by violence: but only, I do knock* that is to
say, I do warn: I do declare the peril that may ensewe: I do show the hope
of salvation: I do promise healpe: and I do allure men unto me by benefits.
Yet you say.

What then? Is there no difference between us and a stone? He must needs be
more insensible then a stone, that would gather after that sort. As though I had
gathered this, M. Waulter, out of the sobre meaning of S. Paul, and not out of
the dronken dreming of Luther: as it shall appear hereafter.

The self same S. Paul, say you, calls us the coadiutours of God, and
commands us to work our salvation in fear and trembling. See you not
then, by the very words of S. Paul, that the freedom of will is builded
upon his authority, the which Luther goes about to overthrow? For wherefore
should he have said, that we are the coadiutours of God, if a man could do
nothing toward the work, that God woorketh in us? Wherefore should he have
warned us to work our salvation, if it were not in our power to do it? But
you, even as in that joining of faith that woorketh by charity, and of works
that are unprofitable, labored in vain to glue together by the testimony of
S. Paul such things, as can not possibly be joined: in like manner you would
bring to pass, by this your singular wit, the which we simple idiotes can not
reach unto, that freedom and bondage should be knit together with a most fast
knot of frindship, and that by the sayings and meaning of S. Paul. And therefore
at one time you allege certain places of S. Paul, that makes for freedom:
at an other time you bring other testimonies, the which, as you think,
confirms bondage. But I might prove by this argument alone, that you could
never so much as suspecte, what great wisdom was in S. Paul: (as in whose
heart rested the spirit of Christ) because you labor to prove, that he spoke
such things, as are very contrary.

And yet you say, that I do abhor the Gospel. In deed I do abhor Luthers
Gospel: and when I name Luther, I mean Melanchthon also, and Bucer and
Calvin, and the rest of your Bassaes. For although they be diverse channels of
waters, yet came they al out of one fountain. But whereas you abuse the
testimonies of S. Paul to auowch your ungodliness, me thinks it is a thing not
to be borne. You say afterward.

You shall know by three words of S. Paul. What shall I know? I am able to
Philip. 4. c
do al things in Christ, which strengthens me. And S. Augustine comprised
the self same sentence in other words very finely: God, says he, crowns
his own works in us. Very well. But to what purpose bring you these
things? Be we of them, think you, that take part with Pelagius? Did we ever
say, that we could do any good and commendable work by our own strength
and diligence? No truly. And yet you in this place, as though you had won the
field, begin to vaunt your self without all modesty, and say.

What is it? See you not how the providence of God is fortified by the
authority of the holy scriptures? And yet you understand, that it is not the
mother of sin, but the nourse of all virtue. O M. Haddon, what agew fit is
this that holds you? What damned sprites are these that vex you? What
plagues of sin are these that follow you up and down? Where have you heard or
read, that I do deny the providence of God, or that I do affirm, that out
of it there should arise any evil in the world? Is this no fury? Is this no
madness? Is this no impudency? You could never gather any such thing out of
my writings: unless you think perhaps, that the providence of God can not
stand by any means, except the freedom of man's will be taken quite away. If
you think so, you are worse then mad. If you think not so, and yet will charge
me falsely withal: you are past al shame. And yet you say.

But let us go unto the fountains them selves, out of the which although
there flow most sweet honey, yet has your most corrupted mind sucked out of
them very pestilent poison* O M. Waulter, how much it eases your stomach, to
vomit out this railing poison, with the which you are glotted? S. Paul
writing to the Galathians said: would Gala. 5. b.
God they might be cut of that trouble you. In like manner do I pray unto
Christ my God, the author and geauer of uncorrupted and upright life: that all
such as come to handle the holy scriptures, with an unclean mind, with foul
eyes, with an ungodly intent, may at the length repent them selves: or else,
if they will not, that they may be put to most sharp punishment and horrible
death, raither then to bring so much mischief into the common weal of the
Church.

In this place, (good Christ) what a stir you keep? how wonderfully you lay
about you? how you vaunt your self in words like a conqueror? You do, in
your own conceit, not only beat back the horns, as you said before, but
also overthrow and discomfite a whole army. You bring diverse places of S.
Paul, which are nothing necessary, to prove that there is a providence.
After that you lay out against me with open mowth, as though I should conclude
that by the providence of God, if there were any, a man were bereft of his
senses. The which is in deed a very shameless lie. For you never read any
such word in my oration. Neither does it follow, that a man should be like a
block, of gods providence, but of Luthers madness, by the which, contrary to
gods providence, he takes away the freedom of the will. But you peradventure
think, that the lewdnes of Luther is so joined with this providence, that who
so ever speaks ernestly against Luthers madness, he must needs appaire Gods
providence. But I am of a contrary mind, that who so ever follows the lewdnes
of Luther, does so much as in him lies, overthrow the providence of God.

But what means this? Wherefore declare you not in plain words, what you would
have? wherefore use you such dark parables? wherefore forsake you the name of
Babilonical bondage, and take up viole^tli the name of providence? Luther
said, that free will was either a thing of a title only, or else a title without
a thing. He says, that man does suffer, and not do: that he is drawn, and
does not deliberat: that he is only an instrument, the which God turns, as
him lists: that God drives him foreward and pulls him backward as his
pleasure is: and that he uses him as a saw or a hatchet: and that man has no
power or strength in the world to do either good or evil. But he corrects
him self afterward in this manner. I did il, says he, to say that free will
before grace is a thing of a title only: I ought rather to have said simply,
that free will is a feined devise in things, or else a title without a thing.
For so much as it is in no ma^s power once to think any good or evil (as it
is in the article of Wicleffe condemned at Consta^ce) but all things do come
to pass of a mere and absolute necessity. He amplifieth these things
afterward with many words, and streineth him self very sore, to prove
that the mind is always tied, the will bownd, the power to do taken away, yea
in such sort, that we can not possibly not only do, but also not so much as
think upon any thing good or bad. These things taught Melanchthon also, and
so did Calvin with great copy of words, and other, whom I here omit. To be
short, the sum of this doctrine was, that there is no difference between us
and any other woorking tool. These are the things, which your Doctors
teach openly.

But I faie, (and al good men, al holy men, all men endewed with godliness and
virtue auowch my saying to be true) that to teach this your doctrine is a
heinouse offense, a desperate boldness, a detestable owtrage, a coursed act. For
grant me this doctrine to be true, and I say, that laws are taken quite
away, counsels put to silence, honest crafts overthrown, learning defaced,
civil government disordered, the determination of right and wrong confounded.
I say moreover (for it follows of necessity) that man is bereft of his
senses, spoiled of counsel, deprived of reason, and brought to that pass, that
there is no difference between him and a stone cast out of the hand. I say
also, that the warninges of the law of God, the commandments, counsels,
exhortations, and thre^tninges, the rewards assigned unto virtue, and the
punishments appointed for sin and wickedness, were to no purpose enregestred
in the holy scriptures for the perpetual remembrance of them. All these
inconveniences follow upon the doctrine of Luther necessarily. There follows
also an other inconvenience, the which, (to conceive it only in heart) is the
most horrible blasphemy, that ever could be spoken or ymagined, that God the
most holy and upright judge, in whom no iniquity can possibly rest, does
vniusli punish that offense, of the which him self was (as Luther says) a
perswader, a forcible mouer, yea the doer. For eue^ as, when a murder is
committed, not the sweard, but he that committed the murder with the swerd is
arained: so, right and reason would, that not I, which was forced to do a
mischief by a certain fatal violence, the which I could not withstand, but he
that used such forcible means toward me, should bear the blame of it. I
say therefore, that this point, out of the which follows so many and such
horrible mo^sters, is so heinouse and wicked, that if all the rest were gathered
together, in comparison of this, they might seem to be very light. For it does
both overthrow quite the society and good order amongst men: and it does
falsely charge that our most holy Lord and bowntiful father with the crime of
injustice and creweltie. This therefore do I say, judge, define, determine,
taught by infinite testimonies of the holy scripture, moved theru^to by the
momuments of al holy me^ that ever wrote either of old time or in our days,
instructed by many disputatio^s of the most excellent philosophers, endewed
also with upright reason, the which was wont to be called the law of nature
and God: that this absolute or fatale necessity, with the which Luther tied up
all the doings and thoughts of men, without exception, can neither stand, nor
enter into the mind of any reasonable man: and that, who so ever devised it
first, was of al men, that ever lived upon the earth, most vile and wicked.

This is that, which I said. This I would have you to confute, and to declare,
either that Luther never spoke it, or else if he did, to prove that he did it
upon good consideration. The which thing of like you do not (peradventure for
fear of envy) and therefore you shifte your self into a disputation of Gods
election, and you go about to prove by the testimony of S. Paul, that there
is a providence: as though I had disputed against the providence of God, and
not against the madness of Luther. Can any man in the world devise a more fond
or foolish order of disputation and co^futation, then this is?

You are over bold and rash to abuse the epistle of S. Paul to the Romans,
being, as you are, altogether ignorant in it. And yet, as though you had with
this your leadden sweard killed God have mercy on his soul, when you had
brought in that example out of S. Paul of the children that were yet unborn,
you ran upon me like a mad man. This is the language, that you used.

What say you good sir? Behold the election once again, and that according to
the purpose of God. Behold the time of the election which was, before the
children were borne. What shall we then say? that there is any injustice in
God? S. Paul detesteth that saying, but Jerome Osorius dowbteth not to auowch
it. O M. Haddon, what madness is this that vexes you? What say you? What
think you? What a shameless lust of lying is this? When said I so? in what
words? Show the place: reprove me by witnesses: convince me by good proof.
Before you do this why rage you? Why take you on like a mad man? Think you,
that Luther, that mad fellow and filthy varlet, and the heavenly doctrine of
S. Paul are so near joined together, that who so ever is against Luther, must
needs be against the most holy ordinances of S. Paul also? Oh (say you) it
is the voice Romans 9. c.
of God to Moses. I will have mercy on whom so ever I have mercy, and I
will have compassion, on whom so ever I have compassion. S. Paul brings in
upon this: that it is not in him that will, neither in him that runs, but in
God that takes mercy. After this you recite the example of Pharao, but you
show not plainly, to what end you allege it. And then, as though you had
already declared by the testimony of S. Paul, that the freedom of man's will
was taken away, you conclude after this sort.

What says Jerome Osorius? For sooth he says: if manes reason be tied up,
if freedom of deliberation be taken away, if the will be settered with
everlasting bands: that it must needs follow, that man is altogether bereft
of his judgment and senses, that there is no difference between him and a
stone, yea that God is made to be the author of evil.

And that it stands not with reason, that we should be pounished, for that
offense, which we committed, not with our will. That is true, M. Haddon,
neither have you confuted my arguments, neither have you brought any
testimony of S. Paul, the which might cause me to change my mind. And yet
as though you had determined the matter all at pleasure, you rowse your self,
and entering into a more earnest vain of speech, you bring those words, that
follow, out of the innermost corner of your cunning. You say thus.

Do I make any thing of my self? do I alter or change any thing? do you
not acknowledge your own words, which are partly false, and partly wicked?
These things while you declaimed them like a fine Rethorician, and vaunted your
self somewhat insolently with a certain lusty kind of talk: you make that
same glistering gloss of words to shine a great deal the brighter by putting
in (as your manner is) a taunt or reproach. Your words are these.

Of like you are that proud reasoner, whose haughtines S. Paul rebukes very
sharply. Will you being an earthen vessel, made of dyrt and claie, demand of
the potter, to what use he has so made you? These and the like tauntes you
cast out against me, and you warn me withal, that I do not overthrow,
thorough this my intolerable pride, such as lean upon the providence of God.
These are the things, which you utter in exceeding great choler.

O goodly golden vessel, made by the excellent woorkemanship of Bucer, I pray
you disdain not the poor earthen vessels: for it is in them, to become golden
vessels. In a great house, says S. Paul, there are vessels, not only of gold
and silver, but also of wood 2. Tim. 2. c
and earth. And some are made for honor, and some for reproach. If any man
therefore will pourge him self from these, he shall be a vessel for honor, made
holy and meet for our Lord, and prepared to all good work. You see how S.
Paul declares, that it is a very easy matter for us, if we will, to be
changed out of wooden and earthen vessels, into vessels of gold and silver.
And by what means this thing may be brought to pass, he declares plainly,
when he says: If he will pourge him self from these. From whom? From them
doubtless, which as he said a little before, had overthrown the faith of
certain men. But that you may understand, how ill your masters have
expounded those testimonies of S. Paul, which you have hudled up together,
I think it necessary to set out at large the meaning of S. Paul. The which
thing, that it may the better be done, it is to be considered, to what end S.
Paul brought al those arguments.

A learned exposition of S. Paul's Words.
When he had therefore described in most ample manner the blesfull state of
those men, the which despising the pride of man's nature, and forsaking the
ordinances of the law, which was now disanulled, betook them selves wholly
to the service of Christ: yea and so gave them selves thereunto, that they
walked, not according to the flesh, but according to the spirit: that is to
say: they put away all filthiness of unclean life and naughtiness, they
cut of the very stringes of carnalitie, and followed the works of virtue,
godliness, and justice with an earnest desire: when he recorded after this
sort in his mind the graces and gifts, with the which the minds of those
men were adourned and bewtified, that were received into the protection of
Christ, and ordered by the guydaunce of the holy ghost: he reioysed incredibly.
But the greater this joy was, the more grievously did he sorrow at the
remembrance of the most bitter chance and fall of his own country men,
which had for their crewel treachery and horrible blindness of heart lost such
great richesse. But for so much as many men took occasion by this fall of the
Jews, to appaire the estimation of Gods truth and faithfulness: saying, that it
could not stand with the constancy of Gods truth, that that nation, which was
fostered in great expectation of liberty and felicity, which was called by
Gods own promises to the hope of the heavenly and everlasting kingdom, shoule
be turned out of al good things, and left in most horrible darkness: and
that it might be gathered by this, that either the light was not yet brought
into the world by Christ, or that God was not sure of his promise: for so much
therefore as certain rash and indiscreet fellows using these arguments went
abowte thereby most unworthily and slanderously to disteine the glory of God:
S. Paul disputes earnestly for the glory of God, and proves by very good and
grounded reasons, that God was sure of his word, and that he had performed al
such things, as were promised, abundantly. And so much does he signify, when
he says. Not, that the word of God is fallen. Now the Romans 9. b*
prouse of this defense he takes out of sower places.

The first place is the description of a true Israelite, to the intent that,
when it was understood, that the Gentiles gathered together unto Christ were
nombred in the stock of Israel, it might appear, that God had in their
salvation and honor excedingly well fulfilled his promises.

The second place was that, in the which he declared, that maine, even of them
that came of the very stock of Israel, were saved. For in that great
shipwreck, certain remnantes escaped through faith, out of that most crewell
tempest and waves of infidelity.

In the third place he teaches, that there was no stay in god, but that all the
Jews might have come to salvation. For God had his treasures and richesse
always in readiness to bestow them, and allured them with often calling upon
them to repair toward him, and to receive the fruicte of his bountifulnes:
but they being through the assiau^ce of their law brought into a pride, and
through pride into very madness, with hearts unkind and obstinately bent to live
in sin, refused the liberality and gentle calling of God.

Romans 11. c.
Last of all he foretells, that the time shall come, when the full multitude of
the gentiles are come in, that al Israel shall be saved. And with these
arguments, (which he handles at large) the Apostle declares very plainly,
how fast and sure God has always continued in his faithful promise. Of the
which we will touch those points only, that apperteine to this present
disputation.

First therefore he joins the description of a true Israelite with the
declaration of equity and justice: and declares, that the nobility of a true
Israelit consists, not in the community of blood, but in the propagation of
faith: and that he is the true son of Abraham, that is borne according to the
promise of God, the which faith beholds: and not he that is borne according
to the flesh, in the which earthie men do glory. Not they, says S. Paul,
Romans 9. c*
that are the sons of the flesh, but they Genesis 18. b.
that are the sons of promise, are counted in the seed. And this is a word of
promise: I will come about this time, and Sara shall have a son.

But lest it might be said, that Isaac was therefore preferred before Ismael,
because he was begotten of a free mother, he brings in like manner an other
example of two twins. For Jacob and Esau were begotten and borne both of one
father, of one Mother, and in one hour: and yet was Jacob placed in the
inheritance of his Father, out of the which Esau was cast by the providence
(...) of God. If you will respect (...) of their birth, it (...) Esau should
have benn^ (...) because he came first into the ^orlde. If you consider the
merits of works, it was determined in Gods secret counsel, before they were
borne, and before they had done any thing good or evil, that Jacob should have
the preeminence. S. Paul setting this similitude before our eyes, confirms,
that this nobility of Israel is to be ascribed, neither to any stock of man,
neither to auncetrie, neither to any merit going before: but to the grace of
God, the which according to election goes before al merits of virtue and
godliness. For Jacob represented such, as stay them selves upon faith, and
look for the grace and mercy of God: but Esau resembled them, the which have
no respect unto the grace of God, but are puffed (...) with an affiaunce,
which they ^aue (...) works.

(...) lesson therefore we gather out ^sounde and Cath^ like conclusion.
(...) place of S. Paul: that it is not (...) stock on Petegree of man, nor
work* nor the Law, that makes ^ru^ Israelites, but the election, calling,
and grace of God.

But let us see. This so notable a mercy of God, which is bestowed upon us
without any desert or merit of ours, is it geauen without any choice? No t^uly.
For then were there chance and unadvisedness in the judgment of God, the
which no man can once think without great offense. S. Paul therefore to put
away that dam^able opinion, says. To the end that the det^rmination Romans 9. c.
of God might stand according to election: it was said not by ^orkes, but by
the caller, that the elder should serve the younger.

Election.
(...) word Election, (...) odds or difference (...) with (...) that there
was somewhat in the thing chosen, which was not in the thing refused. For the
purpose of God is a prevented judgment, in the which God according to election
and foreknowledge of things, which he sees shall come to pass, some he
apointeth mercifully unto glory, and other he adiudgeth to everlasting
damnation. Neither is the wisdom of God, which comprehe^deth in his endless
knowledge al things, that has been, that are now, or shall be hereafter,
compelled to look for the event of things, when he will give judgment.

What was that then, which God chose before? was it any work, or merit that
was worthy of the grace of God? No truly. For, if it were so, grace were no
grace. It is certain, that through the mere mercy of God al only, we were
diliuered from the darkness of syn, and set in the possession of justice. For
he was nothing in our debt. But rather for the hatred toward the law of God
engraffed in the nature of the body (which was after sin made subject unto
the tyranny of inordinate lust) we were al most worthy of everlasting
punishment.

Moreover although that most high and everlasting bounty would, as S. Paul
says, that al men should be saved: 1. Tim. 2. a
yet the order of justice will not bear, that such as unkindly refuse the
benefits of God, and continue in that wickedness to the end, should receive
them. They therefore are most justly excluded from the benefits of God, which
are at defiance with the bou^ty of God, and will not in any wise be received
into his favor. Now whereas God knew before the beginnings of the world, that
it should come thus to pass, of his mercy he chose them, which he saw would
not at the end stubbornly refuse his so great benefits. And thus it comes
to pass, that some are by his just judgment refused, and other are by his
great mercy called to enioy^ his everlasting riches.

But you will say peradventure: what Sir? Say you that any merit of man goes
before the grace of God? No forsooth. For the very yelding of my mind, by the
which I give my assent unto the warninges and inspirations of God, and do not
refuse his benefits, is to be referred to the grace and mercy of him, that
called me, and bowed my mind: and in the receiving of my salvation and dignity
there is no merit of mine. For if I be a poor needy man, and oppressed with
extreme necessity, what merit is mine, if I be sustained, and enriched by the
liberality of some bountiful Prince, which ought me nothing? What does the
Physician owe me* the which of his own accord has healed my wounds, because I
have suffered my self to be healed of him? Again what is he in my debt,
which seeing me beset on every side with thieves, delivered me from present
death? Nothing at al. So therefore it comes to pass, that such as be received
into the favor and grace of God, are saved by mercy: and such as be excluded
from the grace of God, are repelled by his most just judgment. Romans 9. c.


It follows in the text of S. Paul. What shall we then say? Is there any
unrighteousness in God? God forbid. For he says unto Moses. I will have mercy
on whom I have mercy: and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion. S.
Paul gives a reason, wherefore no man can possibly lay any injustice to God.
For the defense of Gods justice stands altogether in his mercy. For that
often repetition of Gods mercy signifies his great consta^cie in geauing
mercy. And the mercy of God quiteth his justice of al slau^den. As though our
Lord him self should say: I am by nature so merciful, that I pleasure in no
thing more, then in pardoning of syns, and in keeping a most constant and
everlasting mercy to maintain them, whom I have received into my protection.
It may therefore be seen very well, when I do punnish syn* that such as are
condemned, do perish through their own default. For if they would come to good
order, they might obtein the like mercy and be saved. But for so much as of their
own accord, they esteemed more darkness then light, bondage then freedom*
poverty then riches, death then life: it was just, that they should be
thrown down headlo^g into bitter pain and torment. And so by this place
which S. Paul allegeth after a heue^li sort, of the assured nes of Gods mercy,
we see his justice utterly discharged of al slander. Wherefore in the calamity
of the Jews no man could find any lack of truth in God, but he might well
blame the unfaithfulness and wicked stubbornes of them, that would not be saved
by the mercy of God Then to confirm this saying, and to teach us that al hope
of salvation is to be referred to the merci of God, which is so freely offered
to al me^: he says. It is Romans 9. c.
not therefore in hi that wills, neither in him that runs, but in God that
takes mercy. Will imports a desire: running signifies an earnest endeavor to
honesty: the which both are comprehended in the benefit of God. For it is he
the which with often calling upon me causes me to will: it is he also, the
which gives a cheerefulnes unto my will. Howbeit, neither my desire, neither my
cherfulnes, shall have any good success, unless he of his mercy shall bring
both my will and my earnest endeavor to perfection. For our strength is
appaired, our hopes vanish al to nothing, so often as the mercy of God for our
unkindness of heart, departs from us. When I therefore do any good work, it
is to be ascribed neither to man's will as being naturally inclined to honesty,
neither to my earnest endeavor: but only to the mercy of God. But that it might
appear yet more plainly, that the Jews fell not through the injustice of
God, as ungodly men reported, but through their own unfaithfulness and
wilful sin, he reherseth the like example of naughtines and lack of
belief. For God used the like means in calling Pharao to honesty, and
fraying him from unbelief. But he of a pride and stubbornes, which was in him,
would abuse the mercy of God, to his far greater punishmente and damnation.
Upon this, S. Paul brings in these Exodus 9. d.
words. For the Scripture says unto Pharao: for this have I stirred thee up,
that I may show my power in thee, and that my name may be declared in all the
earth. In the which place, two things are to be noted.

The first is, that Pharao was not driven to such outrage by any violence o^
force of Gods behalf, as S. Paul declares him self unon after. The other
point is, that the wickedness of Pharao was therefore tolerated a great while of
God, the most wise and bountiful Lord of al things, (which out of evil things
draws evermore some good, and brings things disordered into good order)
that by showing one example of ^^ueritie, he might keep a great many men in well
doing. And this may appear much better, if we will try the words at the
Hebrew fountain, for this sentence might very well be translated after this
sort. For this cause have I suffered thee to stand, that I may sh^we my power
to theo, and that my name may be honored in all the earth. He says not, I
have taken away thy wits from thee, and I have caused thee to be mad, that
thou should continually rebel against me: but, I have suffered thee a
great while, and have differred thy due punnishmente, that I might reserve it
to the greater setting out of my glory, and the salvation of many men.

He called Pharao both to faith and also to honesty. But for so much as Pharao
regarded not the goodness of God, but ran on like a wild colt upon an
unbridled affection: it stood very well, not only with Gods justice, but
also with his mercy, that many men should by the most just example of Pharao
be put in fear, and so brought to good order. For as the governors of commonweals do use to out of with constant severity, such as they can not redress
by lighter punishments, to the end that they may by the terror of that
punishment keep the rest of the citizins in order: even so does that most high
governor show sometimes an example of severity upon them, that will not be
reformed, but will upon sin wickedly committed heap a shameless defense:
that he may by the death of those lewd persons benefit the whole, and that
he may, in punishing the wicked, show many points of his high mercy.

What is the cause then, that we see that word so often repeted: And God
hardened the heart of Pharao. To harde^ is, to g^ue unto wicked men, which do
abuse good things unto malice, some matter with the which they may encreace
their syn and stubbornes. Know thou not, says S. Paul, that the goodness of
God moves the to penance? But thou, according to thy hardness and unrepentant
heart, do treasure up to thy self displeasure. In like manner therefore God
caused not that hardness in Pharao: but Pharao refused the mercy of God, and of
a certain hardness and frowardnes, that was rooted in him, abused the cleme^cy
of God unto greater syn, and so increased the heap of Gods wrath toward him
every day more and more.

Now mark how wonderfully the Apostle linketh together his arguments* First of
al he declares, that to be a true Israelite comes not of man's nature, but of
the grace of God. Then he confirms the justice of God, by the greatness of his
grace, which is offered freely to al men, that will use it. For by that mercy it
is evidently seen, that such as perished, perished through their own default:
and this does he declare more plainly by the example of Pharao, the which
refused the mercy of God, and was willingly forlorn: that it might be
gathered by this, that the Jews fell in like manner through their own wilful
blindness, because their heart was to obstinatly bent and har^lened in
wickedness: and that their damnation is not to be imputed unto God, which called
them to salvation* but unto their own naughtines and stubbornes, which
refused the goodness of God. Upon this the Apostle brings in these words.
Wherefore he takes Romans 9. ^.
mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will. The which is not so to be
taken, as though the thing that God wills, he wills it without great good
reason. For the will of his everlasting wisdom can not be sundered from
understanding, reason, and aduisement. And his will is to reward the faith of
the chosen, not as of dewtie, but according to grace. His will is also to
withdraw his help and aid, from such, as refuse it, and to suffer them to be
of a corrupt judgment. Hereuppon S. Paul says: Then you will say Ibidem.
unto me: Wherefore does he yet complain? For who shall withstand his will? In
these words S. Paul brings in the person of a presumpteous man, the which
judged rashly of the counsel of God, and understands this sentence of the
scripture naughtily: and he makes him to speak very ungodly, that he may the
better stop the mowth of ungodliness it self. If this be true, says every
wicked person, that God takes mercy on whom he will, and who^ him lists, he
refuses him, and hardneth his heart, and no man can resist his will: then he
that synneth, sins of necessity. If he do syn of necessity, wherefore does
God so often complain of the hardenes and cruelty of wicked men?

This synful and presumpteous talk S. Paul co^futeth two ways. First of al,
he shows, that it is a presumpteous act, to judge of the judgment of god. For
even for this cause only, that a thing is don by god, although we understand
not the reason of it, yet must we assuredly think, that it was done, not
without great reason. Then he declares the counsel of God, by the which he
hardneth, that is to say, bears long time with the wicked, and at the length
leaves them destitute of his aid and healpe, that he may suffer them to
perish Romans 9. d.
to the profit of manier. O man, says the Apostle, who art thou, that
reasonest with God? Does the thing, which is fourmed, say unto him that
fourmed it, why have thou made me so? May not the potter make of one lump of
claie one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor? In which place you may
consider by the name of a pot, that it is not a work which is determined
without reason, but such a thing, as is done by workema^ship. Wherein he gives
you to understand this much. If the potter, as a potter, does what so ever he
does, by art: much more does God al things, by art, reason, and counsel. S. Paul
therefore speaks after this sort. O man will thou not look circu^spectly about
thee? will thou not acknowledge the frailty of thy nature? will thou not
consider the wisdom and power of god? Will thou not dread his Majesty? If
there were any sense in earthen vessels: surely such vessels were not to be
borne withal, as would dispute with the potter, which made them, of the
workmanship wherewith they were made. Much less is the presumpteousnes of a
seely man to be borne* the which improueth the judgment of that most
excellent governor, and in an endless and incomprehensible wisdom finds
lack of cunning and skill. Art thou at that point in deed? The thing, the
cause and reason whereof thou art not able to atteine unto by wit, will thou by
and by stand unto it, that it is void of al reason? The potter makes by art
one vessel for honor, an other for dishonor: and look what is made by art,
no man may well find fault withal. And will thou say, that the thing, which is
made of that most high and perfect wisdom, (in the which neither rashness,
neither injustice may rest) is made indiscreetly and unjustly? By these words
S. Paul intend^th only to put us to understand, that it is a very grieuouse
offense, to try the judgments of God by the balance of man's reason, and to
doubt of his justice. He does therefore only keep down unreasonable
presumpteousnes, and fraieth rash and proud 'menne, by denouncing unto them
the judgment of god.

After that he declares, what is to be holden as touching this question. These
are his words. If so be, that God Romans 9. ^.
willing to show his wtath, and to make his power known, has suffered the
vessels of wrath with much patience, which were shaped to destruction, that he
might show the riches of his glory toward the vessels of mercy, the which
he has prepared to glory. It is an imperfect speech, the which manner of
speaking S. Paul uses often times. There lacks either this, or some other
thing like to this. And yet will thou reprove the wise and just counsel of god?

Now in these words, first of al it is to be noted, that God framed not the
vessels of wrath. Truth it is, that God made nature unto the vessels, but not
sin, not ungodliness, not the rest of vices, which deserves to be punished
most sharply by the severity of Gods judgment, (which the holy Scripture
calls wrath). For it comes to pass by the will of every wicked man, that he
is made the vessel of wrath, which would not be made the vessel of mercy. The
which thing S. Paul meani^g to set forth more plainly, says: He suffered.
And being not satisfied with that word he says moreover: He suffered in much
patience the vessels of wrath. What is this? What grief is that so great? What
torment is that so crewel, that, to the bearing of it, God neded patience, yea
and that no mea^^, but exceeding great patience? Doubtless it is that, which is
(if God were subject to any grief) of al griefs, that may be devised, the
greatest: to wit, it is vicious living, wickedness, and an obstinate will to
continue in sin. For there is nothing else, that disagreeth with his virtue,
goodness, and wisdom: there is nothing else, that is directely against his most
holy ordinances and laws: to be short, there is nothing else, that God does
most extremely hate and derest. So that, it is no wonder, if a very great
patience were (to speak of God as of a man) needful, to bear such a bitter
torment. God therefore caused not this hardness of heart in Pharao, but he
suffered with a certain great patience the wilful stubbornes of that most
wicked man, which grieved his heart. The which thing to express the beter, S.
Paul says: Vessels made to destruction. He says not: The vessels which God
him self has made to destruction: as he says a little after of the vessels
of mercy, the which God him self has prepared to glory: that you may
understand, that Godly men are appointed unto glory by the will and mercy
of God, and that wicked men are thrust out violently into everlasting
torments, through every man's own Esai. 50. d
wilful sin: as Esaie says. Go into the fire, which you have kendled for
your own selves. But to what end, I pray you, did that most high Lord suffer
so long time and with such great patience the vessels of reproach? To show,
says the Apostle, his wrath: that is to say, to show the severity of his
most holy judgment, and the power of his majesty. Again, I ask you: to
what purpose was it, to desire Romans 9. c.
to declare that unto men? To show, says he, the riches of his glory
toward the vessels of mercy, the which he has prepared to glory. For he
does al things for the chosens sake.

Now it remains, that we do consider, what fruict do the chosen take by
setting the judgment of god, before their eyes? Very great without doubt. For
first of al, while the chosen see the wicked punished according to their
deserts, it puts a certain fear of Gods justice into their hearts, which
causes them to abstain from evil doings. For the foundation of Prou. 1. a.
true wisedo^^^ is laid upon the fear of God. Moreover the virtue of the good
being assaulted both by the privy awaites, as also by the forcible atte^ptes of
wicked persons shines a great deal the brighter. For virtue makes a great
show of her self, when it is neither corrupted by the example of vicious
men, neither turned away from the exercise of godliness through naughty
counsel, neither drawn from the love of most holy Religion by threatninges
or torments. Again when they consider by the fall of the wicked, out of how
great thraldom they are delivered by the mercy of God, they embrace their
parent and redeemer with a much more fervent desire and earnest love. Last of
all the very holiness it self of the everlasting law, and the order of Gods
justice being set before the eyes and sight of good men, brings them to a
cleerer understanding of God, and causes the mercy of God used toward holy
men to be the better known: and so increases their joy. To the intent
therefore that the good might take so great and so manifold fruicts by the
damnation of the wicked: god would not use any such violence toward the
wicked, that they should commit sin as being driven unto it of necessity:
but he suffered most patiently their wilful frowardnes and stubborn obstinacy,
that he might in the end turn altogether to the glory of his chosen.

If you have not utterly lost al sense of a sobre man, you may see plainly,
that free will is not by the saying of S. Paul taken away, but rather very
surely established. These things the Apostle prosecuteth afterward more at
large, and declares at the length, how the Jews fell from God thorough their
pride, arrogancy, unfaithfulness, and obstinacy. For they were so puffed up
with a vain affiaunce of a shadowed justice, which stood upon the works of
the law, that they despised very stubbornly and wickedlye the true justice,
which consists in cleannes of life, in holiness, in charity, in peace, in
joy, and in other the like fourniture of heavenly virtues which by the holy
ghost are planted in the minds of godly men.

Now for so much as this is the saying and meaning of S. Paul, what rage was
that, that came into that mad ma^s brain, the which went about by the authority
of S. Paul to persuade such an opinion, as both overthrew good order amongst
men, and falsely charged God with injustice? For what right is it, that wicked
men should be punished for a wicked act, which they committed, not willingly,
but being violently driven unto it by an everlasting and external power.

Luther say you, set out a Book, in the which he spoke earnestly against the
hurly burlies in Germany. What if some one of them, whom he rebuked, should
have said unto him eue^ then: o Luther, why do thou blame us innocent men?
why keep thou such a stir? why plaiest thou the mad man? we have
learned of the, that it is not in us to do any thing good or evil: in so much
that we are not free, so much as to think such things, as we would. For God
works al things in us, as you say: and we are only certain working tools,
the which god thrusts out with his hand, whether so ever him lists, and
wre^cheth us foreward and backward at his pleasure. These tourmoiles therefore
a^dseditio^, for the which you blame us, God al only, as you teach, has
stirred up. For so much as therefore, that most mighty Lord, whose power can
not be hindered by any strength of man, is the mouer, the deviser, yea the doer
of this stir, why blame you us for it? Why revile you us? Why labor you
vainly to withdraw us from this sedition? If any man, I say, of that
multitude, which Luther took up with such sharp words, had said thus
much unto him: I pray you, what answer would he have made? With what honest
shifte would he both maintain his doctrine, and defend the justice of God?

But to let Luther pass: what say you sir Luthers advocate, which say, that
he was sent from God: how may you (if you approve his doctrine and rules)
punish male factours? If there be no freedom, if man's will be tied, if al
power be taken away, if the very thoughts be fettered, if al things, both
greatest, and least, and middlemost, be bownd with an euerlast necessity, if
God be the author and doer of all things both good an evil: vndowbtedly those
seely wretches, which you (as I take it) command to be had away to
execution, have done nothing. By what right do you punish the innocent men?
What reason have you to put gyltlesse persons to death? who made this law,
that the doers of felony should be acquitted, and the tools or instruments of
fellons condemned? with what kind of speech, are you able (if you mind to
maintain this doctrine) to rid that most high Judge of the infamy of
injustice. Is this no villainy? Is this no madness? Is this no presumpteous part
of a rash and an unbridled mind? And yet whereas Luther does at one time both
distourbe the order of man's life, and lay unto gods charg, (like a most
shameless varlet) the crime of injustice: he is not afraied to say, that he
stands in defense of Gods glory, which he goes about to deface and
overthrow.

You say, that I do condemn the first fownders of this doctrine, as no less
wicked and ungodly, then if they Protag. and Diag. thought there was no God.
were like unto Protagoras or Diagoras. I am not so blunt, that I would say
so. I think them not only comparable with Diagoras in wickedness, but also
inco^parably worse then ever he was. For I take it to be more tolerable, to
think that there is no God, then to think that God is a malefactor and
unjust.

Now as towching providence (that I may once conclude this matter) I say no
more but this. If the providence of Providence
God be a counsel determined by the foreknowledge of things, if the word of
election, if the purpose of God, that is to say, the prevented judgment and
everlasting decree do import a reason and meaning: then does he confess the
providence of God, which bele^ueth, that there was nothing appointed and
ordained of God from before the beginning of the world without very great
counsel, justice and reason. And contrary wise, they that say, that God has
sorted out of the common lump of mankind such as he would direct unto
everlasting glory, and Protestants deny Gods providence.
such as he would apoint unto everlasting damnation, upon none other reason or
consideration, but because him listed so to do: how so ever they maintain the
providence of God in word, they deny it in deed. For he that takes away the
meaning and reason, takes away providence.

But will you see, how like a babbler you prosecut the rest of your matters?
Your words are these. At the length when you have scholded your fill, you
begin to conclude somewhat, making a total sum of all such things, as
you complain have been overthrown by our men: and you ask what thing has
succeeded in their room. O M. Haddon I have just cause to complain. For I see
none other thing set up in the steed of them, but only that woorshipfull act
of yours, in the which you glory so much, and therefore you repete it very
often. For the superstitious ydle^es of lurking hypocrites, say you, we have
set up the necessary business of Christian profession: for wandering pleasures,
most honorable marriage: for the dreams of men's inventions, the holy
Scriptures of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. The wast and
hauoke of holy things I see: but what you have restored in their room I see
nothing, as I told you before, except it be, for most godly quietness, most
wicked stirring: for the love of chaste life, filthy and incesteouse ribaudrie:
for the purity of most holy doctrine, most pestilent errors of desperate
fellows.

Would God, say you, ye had here broken of your most reprochful epistle: Of
like you are not ashamed of your tauntes, which you have gathered together
without any cawse in the world. I assure you, I am weary of the rehearsal of
them. To what purpose is it, to repeat so often, without argument, without
comely grace, without any likely hod of truth, those your so shameless and
unreasonable errors, in the ears of the Queen's majesty, yea in the ears of
al Christ endume? How stands this gear together, M. Haddon? Said you not
before, that I was an excellent framer of words and sentences? Confessed you
not, that you liked well my kind of vtteraunce? Have you not called me often
times in this your book Cicero his scholar? Wherefore then say you now, that
my epistle was written without any argument (as for the comely and pleasant
grace I will say nothing?) By like, when you commended mine eloquence, you
spoke not in earnest and as you thought. You dalied with me, Sir pleasaunce,
you dalied: and the lady Venus, in the honor of whom you have profaned and
unhallowed the temples of chastity, has besprinkled you with her comely and
pleasant graces. Howbeit I think this very much to be misliked in this your
pleasauntnes, that it can not be well perceived, when you speak in earnest,
and when you sport. But peradventure you think it a commendation of a sharp
wit, to speak darkly, and therefore you use it in disputation also. But how
often you cast me in the teeth with the name of Cicero? As though I should be
ashamed of him, or else thought my self hable to express in my writings any
part of his wit, vehemency, and copy: as though I had studied Cicero only,
and had not spent very much time in other* the highest points of learning.
But you like a foxie lawier and wily proctour, have made a very good prouiso,
that no man may well lay the name of Cicero to your charge. For you speak
nothing in clean speech, nothing plainly, nothing distinctely, nothing
orderly, nothing gravely, nothing eloquently. What so ever likes you, you put
it in: and then you prove it, not by argument and reason, but by railing and
shameless talk. At the length as though you had won the field, you prick me
with the bristles of your reprocheful tongue, you press me with a number of
apish questions* you triumph like a noddie before the victory. Whereupon you
say thus?

What say you good sir? And then? S. Paul detesteth it: Jerome Osorius is not
afraied to avouch it. As though I affirmed that thing, which you there denied,
or else meaned to dispute with S. Paul, and not with Luther. And again. What
says, Jerome Osorius? And again. Do I make any thing? Do I change any
thing? And with these words for sooth, you would have seemed to be a vehement
speaker (...) this of the, M. Haddon, if you can (because your (...) luck was
to chance upon such a master, which brought you up so foolishly and so
ignora^tly) that these questions are then both gra^e and vehement in deed,
when the adversary i^ co^uinced by some firm and sure argument. For otherwise
they are very ^olish and to be laughed at: for so much is they have no
veheme^cie or strength in the world, but only a declaration of a certain
pitiful pang or heat of the stomach. So God healpe me, as I could not sometime
(although your talk seemed unto me very much to be pitied) hold my self from
laughing. And so I am fully discharged of my promise, which I made you, that,
in case you could drive me either by grownded reasons, or else by true examples
to geaue my assent unto you, I would not refuse it. For neither have you
brought any argument, neither alleged any example, that was to the purpose:
and yet, as though you had borne your self like a pretty man, you rage and
revel in words, and keep a meru^lous pitiful and frantique stir. I can not
devise, what wicked sprite it should be, that put you in mind to take this
charge of writing upon you. Yet I mean not, but that you may do, as you
think good: neither will I limite you in such sort, that you may not in
writing show your self to be as foolish, as you list. And to put you in good
comfort, take this of my word, that no man, which is of any judgment, will
find fault with you, for being to much a Ciceronian.

THE THIRD BOOK.
IT follows now, that we make answer unto your other complaint, in the which
you seem to take that part of mine epistle very grievously, wherein I reckened
up the impudency, the robberies, poysoninges, conspiracies and other
detestable vices, so many, that my master Cicero, as you faie, never heaped
up more against Verres, with the which I should say, that England was
atteinted. Wherein you show very plainly, that you read those my letters with
little heed. For it was never my meaning, to condemn all England of such
vices. For I know, there are in that Island very many godly and religious
men, which never fell from the holy church, but would gladly yeald their lives
for the glory of Christ, if need so required. Yea many have already by
their most honorable death set out their faith excedingly: many have abiden
imprisonement, reprochful words, with diverse other inco^modities: many being
loath to see such a decaie of religion, wander from place to place of their
own accord like banished men and outcastes, and have liefer to keep a
continual combat with misery and needines, then to behold with their eyes so
heavy a sight. The which thing very many other men would do also, if you
would suffer them. Moreover and this I hear that there are certain places
within that Ila^d, unto the which the infectio^ of this morreine is not yet
come: and it is reported that there are many noble men also, which are
vntowched. A frind of mine, an honest and credible person, which has some
doings in England, told me this for certain, that there are more in the
realm, that continue in their faith still, then there are of such as have
forsaken it: howbeit they dare not profess it openly, for fear of them, that
are in authority. For it is lawful for them, so long as they are not required
to profess their faith openly, to keep it to them selves, until such time,
as, they must either maintain their religion by suffering death, (if they be
put unto it) or else reserve them selves to a better world, to the end that
all good men decaie not at once. And as for them, whose hearts are not blinded
with pride, which are carried away, not so much of malice and naughtines, as of
simplicity of mind (of the which there are very many) may very easily be
brought home again. Wherefore I said not, that all the Island was given to
such vices, neither have I laid down al hope of the recovery of the whole:
no, I trust to see within these few days such an alteration of things, that
the very remembrance of this most pestilent plague shall be utterly abolished.

Furthermore I meant not in those my letters (as I told you before) to make
any enditement or accusation, but to advertise your Prince, that she should
not suffer her self to be infected with the pestilent sects of desperate
fellows: the which thing that I might do it the better, I declared certain
tokens, by the which true religion might be discerned from false religion, and
true Prophets from false Prophets. In the doing whereof if I lacked
discretion, we shall see anon. Thus much have I spoken concerning my letters,
the which you say were written without good argument, and without any comely
grace. Wherein I find a great lack of gravity in you: for it is not the part
of a grave man, to be moved with a talk, which is void of all good argument.
And yet you (as a man may well conjecture by your writings) after you had read
my letters, fell into such a pelting chafe, such a rage and madness, that you
betrayed your grief by reproachful and railing talk: yea you went so far in
it, that you were not ashamed to bewraie to the world the very stammering and
stuttering of your tongue.

You confess also, that my letters were carried up and down throughout al
Christendom, the which should not have been done, if they had been written
without any good grownd.

But let us see, how you, which say that I had no argument to stay upon, will
answer that mine argument, by the which I proved, that the purity of the
Gospel was not restored by your masters, for so much as amongst the disciples
of your Gospel there reigns a number of most detestable vices. Tushe, say
you, it is all false, that you report of the dishonestie of the men of our
side. Such is your impude^cy, M. Haddon, that you will deny the thing, which
is known and commonly bruted, yea which is sealed and confirmed by the
testimonial of the whole world. Do you not confess the broiles and tumultes
of Germany? See you not with your eyes, how volupteousnes flies to and fro
auancing her self? how licentious living gets up and down vnco^trolled? how
the churches of religious men are profaned with bloudshead? how al places of
devotion are rifled and robbed how treason and wily practices are wrought
against Princes by your sectaries? how al places, where so ever your masters
set up school, are distourbed with hurly burlies? How then dare you say, that
that thing was never done, which you not only hear of other men, but also see
it done daily with your own eyes?

Admit, say you, that this were true: yet could it never com of this cause
which you gather. I would feign learn of you, how it should not come of this
cause. There was always, say you, darnel somen amongst the good corn. There
was always seeds of diverse kinds, of the which some were choked in the
thorns, and some were dried up by the heat of the son. The false Prophettes
did always bend them selves against the true Prophets: our Lord Jesus Christ
fownde Caiphasses; the Apostles found Nerons: the Martyrs, that followed them,
found Decies. But to omit these things as over stale, I will bring you home to
your own doors. In your Church is there not sin committed openly? Do not
men offend in the sight of the world? You deny it not. Well then, throw away
your argument, the which either it is of no force, or else, if it be, it is
against your own self first, and against your Church.

By this talk you think, that you have turned the eadge of our dagger. But
you see not, how many faults there are in it. First of all I deny not, that
it was ever so (as I said plainly in my letters) that there were many vices
in every common weal, and that the seades of naughtines were sown amongst
the good corn. But I required (and that insta^tly) to understand, how these
men of god had discharged their duty, which took upon them to purge the
corn, and to pluck up al such weeds are were noisome to the corn. The
which thing when I saw they performed not, yea, when I saw that through their
diligence vice came up a great deal ranker then it did before, I gathered by
that, that their doctrine was nothing wholesome. That the true Prophets
sustained the enmity of false Prophets, Christ of Caiphas, the Apostles of
Nerons, the Martyrs of Decies, I grant you: but that makes much more for the
confirmation of mine argument. For virtue was ever envied of the wicked,
hatesull to viciouse, assaulted by the unfaithful. Virtue ever assaulted, and
yet prevails.
And yet was it always of such puyssaunce, that it prevailed against al craft
and policy, against all subtle practices and privy awaites, against the
force of wickedness and vice, and brought to the world a goodly and wholesome
order. For they that gave ear to the Prophets, that followed Christ, that kept
the faith of the Apostles, that reverenced the constancy of the Martyrs, were
not presumpteouse, wicked, disordered, and vicious: but they were wise, modest,
gentle, courteous, decked and beutified with diverse and sundry virtues. For
the virtue of holy me^, the more it was assaulted, the greater and goodlier
increase it yealded of godly fruict. But your doctors which were sent, as
you say, from heaven into the world, having the aid of great Princes, being
guarded by the common people, yealded no fruicte of honesty, chastity, or
meekness to such as followed them.

I speak not of your adversaries, by whom you will complanie peradventure, that
your brethren have benne wrongfully withstoode, even as the Martyrs were some
time by the Decies: but I speak even of them, that love Luther, Bucer,
Zwinglius, and your Martyr, that praise and reuer^ce them, yea that esteem
them as gods: I say, that they them selves, which procured to have these wise
men to be their schoolemaisters, proved never a whit the better: whereby it is
concluded, that their doctrine was nothing wholesome, even to such as did not
only not disalowe it, but also esteemed it very highly.

Now whereas you demand of me of our Church (for so you speak) whether it be
void of al sin: I have already lamented the synful life of our men very
often. There reigns, I grant you even at this day amongst us both
coueteousnes and ambition in many: neither is volupteousnes grubbed up by the
roots.

Why then, say you, the argument, which I used, may easily be turned against
our own selves. How so I pray you? If there should arise some great prophet
emo^gst us, which would take so great a charge upon him, as to purge and fine
the gospel to restore the ancient discipline, to proppe up the Church, which
tends to ruin, with heavenly doctrine, to bring his disciples to live like
Apostles: if we should follow hi and yet that notwithstanding live in vice as we
did before, then were this a good argument, both against our prophet, as also
against our own selves. But the brightness of this so clear light has not
yet shined upon us: wherefore it is no wonder, if we continue still in our
accustomed sins. But to you, whom the sprite has replenished with a
certain new light, which might very easily have been instructed in heavenly
things, by such men, as were sent from heaven for your salvation, which are
by the goodness of God already delivered from superstition and hypocrisy which
despise al wordly things, and will suffer nothing to be mingled with the
purity of your Doctrine, unless it be drawn out of heaven: to you, I say, it
were nothing seemly to have any daungerouse disease or crack of unclean
vice. For, if you have: your doctors, whom you commend above the skies, you
shame them for ever, and their Doctrine you declare by your doings to be not
only unprofitable, but also hurtful and pestilent. But for so much as you
desire to understand the state of our Church, I will declare it unto to you,
so briefly as is possible.

The state and belefe of the Catholic Church.
First of all, we do most constantly hold and mainteyne the Gospol, not of
Luther, Melanchthon, Carolostadius, Zwinglius, Calvin or Bucer, but of
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John: and we keep one faith, not this newly devised
faith, which is joined with a rash and vain presumption: but that faith,
which was taught by the Apostles, and is not corrupted through the naughtines
of outrageous and mad men.

In like manner we are enclosed within one Church, which was sownded by
Christ, instructed by the Apostles, fortified by the aid of the Martyrs, set
out by the Doctrine of holy men, defended and kept always invincible by
the power of the holy Ghost in spite of the maliciouse and violent attemptes
of all Hore^iques: and without this Church, we believe assuredly^, that there
is no hope of salvation.

This Church we acknwolege to be so linked in one meaning, in one spirit, in
the agreeable confession of one faith, yea to be fast glewed together with such
agreement in religion, that no man can possibly by devising new opinions (such
as may concern the principal points of religion) rend and tear it into a
number of sects iarring and squaring the one with the other without al reason
and order.

And because we know by the gospel, by the testimony of Martyrs, by the
faithful and agreeable report of holy men, by reason and common experience of
things, that it is not possible, that the Church should be one, except it
have one supreme Governor the Vicar of Christ* which may by his inu^olable
authority join together things separated, knitte vppo things loose^, and
keep all me^ne in one faith and vnifourme order: we do most willingly obeie
the Bishop of Rome, which as Christ's deputy exercises this so great office in
the earth, and what so ever is commanded us by him, we do it without any
refusal. And the very experience of things makes us to do it the more
willingly, because we see, that, where so ever this authority is taken away,
there breaks out by and by many pestilent and troublesome sects. That this
power is builded not upon any decree of man, but upon the ordinance of
Christ him self, it is most evidently proved, not only by the authority of
the holy Scripture, but also by the testimony of all the antiquity, (wherein
we are not ignorant).

We refuse not the authority of any lawful power. For we believe, as S. Romans
13. a
Paul teaches us, that al lawful power is ondeined by God: so that, who so ever
resists a lawful power, is to be taken as though he did resist^ not men,
but God him self. For this cause we believe, that not only the decrees of
Popes, but also the ordinances of Kings (such as are not contrary to the law of
God) are most diligently to be observed and kept. Amongst the ordinances of
me^ this choice we make. Al such as cause a slackenes in the keeping of the law
of God, we reject, as the devises of men: but al such as provoke us to be more
earnest in the observation thereof, we judge to have been ordained, not without
the instinct of the holy Mar. 9. f.
Ghost. For Christ said: He that is not against you, is for you. For this
cause, we think that the rules of Basile the great, of Benet, Bernard, Brunus,
Frauncis, Dominike, and other the like singular good and holy men, such as
tend to the perfection of a Christian life, are not to be set at naught.
For they are all written to this end, that such as bind them selves unto
them, may the more willingly keep the chastity of body, and cleanes of heart*
the which two things are contained in the counselles of the Gospel) and may
with a great deal more freedom and cheerelinesse sing and praise God day and
night, and so with the more facility follow the life of Angels here in earth.

If we see any decaie in their manners through loosenes or negligence, we
think it expedient to provide out of hand, that it may be straightly bound up
by the rigor of the old discipline, and not to overthrow the place, where men
may live so godly and so wonderful a life. And because we can not be weaned
from the acqueintaunce of the body so much as it were to be wisshed we could:
because we understand, that the beginning of man's misery proceeds of
negligence and forgetfulness, what so ever thing may bring us to remember the
bowntifulnes and mercy of God, we use it very diligently.

Therefore even as we make the sign Crosses.
of the Cross upon our forehead (the which manner S. Basile refers to a
tradition of the Apostles) so do we set up Crosses not only in Churches, but
also in our howses and highwaies, to the end, that the remembrance of so great
a benefit should never depart out of our mind. For if God, when he delivered
the people of Israel by the diligence of Moses out of the weak dominion of
Pharao, gave order unto them, that they should always have, before their
eyes, in their hands, and in such places of their howses as were in sight,
some monument of that benefit: how much more diligently ought we to do it,
which are redeemed, not by the mean of Moses, but hy the benefit of that
most bountiful Lord, which was offered up for us, from everlasting darkness and
damnation, into everlasting light, liberty, and glory?

For the same cause were the Images of holy men set up of old time (as Images
o^ Saints.
it is declared before) that men beholding them, should be moved the oftener to
bend their minds to think upon those men, which walked more fervently in
the steps of Christ, and to dispose them selves the sooner to follow their
godliness and virtue. For in holy men, we do not so much reverence the men
them selves, as the majesty of Christ, which dwells in their hearts. For
they are the sons of God, the brothers of Christ, the heirs of the
everlasting and heavenly kingdom: the which state all such have atteined by
the benefit of Christ, as have so nailed their senses upon the Cross, that
there lives none other thing in them, but only the spirit, will, and pleasure
of Christ: as S. Paul said: Gal. 2. d.
I live, now not I, but Christ lives in me. And so we honor in holy men a most
excellent gift of God, a very express Image of God, yea (after a manner of
spech) certain Gods, in the brightness of whom we extol and praise for evermore
the most high and everlasting benefit of God.

The Catho like faith.
Now the faith, in the which we live, is such, that it does neither minish our
hope in attempting any good work, neither wipe away quite all fear or doubt
of salvation: but it brings the well disposed minds in hope of godliness and
virtue, and it drives withal now and then a certain fear into all such, as
think upon the rigor of Gods judgments. For Christ, which by his blood has
drowned sin (as it is written) into the deapth, and has furnished all such,
as are come unto him with a lively and true faith, with the gifts of holiness,
purity and justice, has appointed everlasting damnation to them, that refuse
to obeie his commandment. For he was made the Heb. 5. c.
cause of everlasting salvation, not to every man, that boasts of faith, but
to such as obeie him (as Saint Paul^ says).

Works.
Wherefore we believe, that the works of holy men are not disteyned with
any uncleanness of sin (for that were a derogation and dishonor to Christ,
for so much as they are done by his grace and power) and we know for
certain, that such as think not, that the life of man is to be spente in
doing holy works, (if they continue in that lewd opinion) shall be tormented
in hell for evermore.

We confess, that men being destitute of the aid and grace of Christ, can
neither do, nor endeavor, no nor think any thing, that is available to
everlasting salvation: and therefore we believe, that all hope of salvation, all
the mean to atteine unto true honor, all the stay of life everlasting
rests in the mercy of God. And Free will.
yet we believe this assuredly, that it lies in us, either to refuse, or else
to accept thankefully this benefit, when it is offered unto us. And as we do
not deface, neither the signs of the holy Cross, neither the Images of
Christ, neither the monumentes of holy men: so do we think, that the reverent
order Ceremonies.
of al ceremonies, and the religious usage of holy Sacraments (I mean not any
newefourmed order, devised and trimmed by the wit of fine M. Haddon, but that
most old and ancient usage, which was approved by the full agreement of the
holy Fathers, as it may easily appear by their writings) is most reverently
and inuiolably to be observed and kept.

Penance.
When we fall, we think it expedient forth with to have recourse to the
Church, and to the judgment of the Confession.
Priest. There is made a due examination of the sin, and it is seen how
great the deformity of it was: whereupon the mind, which is now ashamed of such
uncleanness, does the more earnestly hate and detest the offense committed, and
a^ keth pardon humbly, and is absolved by the sentence of the Priest, which
represents the person of Christ: but yet so, that he must discretly submit
him self to such order as the Mat. 10. d.
Priest will inioyne him. He that hears Luc. 10. c.
you says our Savior Christ, hears Io. 13. c.
me, and he that despises you, despises me.

Our Lords Supper.
After this we come with fear and trembling, and with a good affiance of the
mercy of God, unto that most holy and dreadful Sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ, in the which banquet we are so refreshed and strengthened, that we
do withstand the tyranny of bodily lusts with a greater force and courage.
And because it were a daungerouse matter to leave all this to the will and
discretion of every man (for there are many sick men, which will not be
healed: and the life of the common sort is not so well governed by will, as by
law and discipline) it has been ordained upon great considerations, that all
Christian men should be constreined to lay this so sovereign a salve to their
wounds at the least once every year. There are many, which come unto this
Sacrament oftentimes: but yet so, that they examine them selves before
diligently, as Saint Paul teaches, and endeavor them selves to wassh out
all the spots of sin by the merit of Christ, which they may most easily
obtain, if they will confess and forsake their foremer life. It is a wonder
to see, what a multitude of men is fed enerie Sonnedaie and Holy day in
the year, with this Divine and heavenly food, and how by the help of it
they are stirred more earnestly to seek after heavenly richesse. For we see
in them, that are oftentimes refreshed with the most holy body of Christ,
that the darkness of sin is driven away, the light of heaven rises, virtue
and godliness are planted in them, the most goodly fruictes of justice are
powered upon them abundantly.

The office of bishops
Bishops, such as are able to preach, (the which has been little regarded of
some to the great hinderaunce of the Church) do preach oftentimes. Such as are
not able to discharge it themselves, appoint certain religious and wise
persons, men well learned, not in the rules of Bucer or your Martyr, but in the
holy scripture, and in the books of the holy Fathers, to instruct the people
with chaste, pure, and religious doctrine. And as we see it come to pass,
especially in such as are bleare eyed, that, if they be either put into an
extreme dark place, or else look over steddily upon the son beams, they leese
their sight: even so, if me^ either be altogether turned away from the light of
God, or else will look to intentiuely upon it, before the blearednes of their
mind be healed, they are stricken stone blind. Wherefore it is very wisely and
warily provided of us, that we neither suffer the common people to lack the
light of Gods word any time, neither do we dasel their eyes so much with the
brightness thereof (which they are not able to abide) that they may be
therewithal miserably blinded. We bring therefore none other thing in our
sermons, but that, which we judge effectual to bring men to the love of
godliness and following of charity, to the hatred of sin and forsaking of
uncleanness of life. And for this cause do we set before their eyes oftentimes,
the crown of everlasting glory, and the pain of the everlasting torment.
But the dangerous questions of dark and secret matters we do for good
consideration leave vntowched in such sermons as are made unto the people. The
authority of Bishops is great: in so much that, it is not very hard for them
to restreine the unbridled lust of disordered persons, and to remove them,
that be obstinate in sin, from the Communion of the Church. Neither are such
men chosen to be Bishops, as may be either for baseness despised, or for
folishnes set at naught, or for notoriouse vices reprehended, and so do much
hurt by their example.

The times of the year
The times of the year are so consecrated and divided with ordinary and
solemn ceremonies, that at all times there is somewhat done in the Church,
which may renew in us the remembrance of Gods graces and benefits.

Aduent.
And, to begin at the Month of Decembre, we are then styrred up to remember
that time, in the which the holy Fathers of the old time looked for the coming
of the Son of God into the earth, and besought him with continual prayers to
hasten it, and had a most earnest desire to see it: that we might the better
understand, how much we are bound and endebted to God, which has granted
us the joyful fruition of that most excellent fruit, which the old Fathers,
very holy men, and of God intierly beloved, so griedily lusted and longed after.

Christmas
When the day of Christ's birth is come, we keep watches, and singe hymns
and Psalms by note: our organs also and others instruments sound every where
to the honor and praise of God: every thing does then stir us up to behold
the Son of almighty God, the most excellent Lord and maker of all the world,
lying naked and crying in a mangier in the weak form of a sucking babe. We
hear then with the ears of our hearts the voices of Angels bringers of that
glad tydinges: and we endeavor by faith to do our homage with the sheape^erdes
unto the King that is borne unto us: and fixing our selves in the conte^plation
of him, we receive the fruicte of incredible joy.

Nevvyeres day.
The first day of January, the Church puts us in mind, to behold the
wound, which our Savior received that day, and the Mystery of circumcision,
and the most dreadefull name of Ihesus, which is the pleadge of our salvation,
and the lesson, which was then given us, of that most perfect obedience: and so
by the strength and signification of this most holy name, we labor much
more cheerfully to atteine to the salvation, which is promised us.

Tvvelse day.
What should I here say of the most bright star, which appeared to the
Gentiles in the furthermost parts of the East?

C^delmas
How might I express the incredible joy and pleasure of the holy man Simeon,
when he bare the child in his arms? What should I here rehearse the exceeding
gladness and cumfort, the which Anna the widow conceived, or else the godli
prophecies which she pronounced, when she behold the Child? All these
things has the Church set before our eyes with solemn pomp, and
procession, and candels burning, to the intent, they should sincke the deeper
into our hearts.

Now when the time of fasting draws Lent.
nero, we behold how Christ was baptized by John in the flood Iordane: we here
the voice of the Father: we consider the fast, wherewith the son of God
punished his own body: we record the tentations and wily practices of Satan
against him: we endeavor our selves, as much as we can, to set out the
victory of Christ: we call to mind the homage of Angels, which brought him
meat and served him. By this example of Christ we are taught, that we ought to
keep ftil that purity and cleanes, which we received in the holy fount of
Baptism: that we should receive the voice of the father commanding us to
obey him, with heart and mind: that we should subdewe the body with fasting,
and encounter with our old enemy the dinel: to the end that* at the length,
the battle being fought, and the victory by the mighty protection of God
achieved, we might be refreshed with heavenly food and comforted by the
ministry of Angels. The holy Week.


When the time approaches, in the which we mind to celebrate the supper of our
Lord* to do so holy a work with the greater devotion, we prepare our selves
much more diligently then at other times: and we do it with gladness and fear
together. Then do we consecrate the holy Oiles, by the which are fignified
diverse gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, according as S. Denyse and other
holy Father write: and we minister the body of our Lord to al such as are
ready to receive it: and we wash the feet of poor men, not only with water,
but also with many tears sometimes: and by this example we cause such, as
look on, to power out tears abondantly. But when we behold attentively Christ
hanging on the Cross: when we consider, how he was scorned, reviled, tormented
and put to death: when we pray for the salvation of all menns: when we come
barefooted to worship Christ in his Image: when we bring in God him self
complaining of our misliuing: when we crave pardon for our sins in most
humble and lowly wise: what man, think you, is then in the Church, which is
not forth with stirred up to forsake sin, and to follow a better order of
life?

But when Easter day is come, we use such honor and pomp, we sing Easter.
such Hymns and Psalms, to advance the victory and triumph of Christ raised
from death, to set out the sack and spoil of his enemies, to magnify his
everlasting kingdom and empire, that we may seem for very joy and gladness
to be besides our selves.

Ascension
His ascension also we record in such sort, that we think it our part, to
bend our selves, as much as we can, to clymme up together with Christ into
those goodly dwelling places of heaven.

Witsontide.
What may be said of that inestimable benefit, wherein the holy ghost enkendled
the Disciples of Christ with the love of God, and enflamed them with fyerie
tongues, to the end that they should go throughout all the world, and wrap up
that heavenly fire in the bowels of faithful men? With how great joy and
gladness is that feast also observed and kept in all the Church? The feasts of
Saints


Moreover when we keep the memory of holy men, in whose hearts the majesty
of Christ dwelled, with dew reverence: (for it is not lawful to separate them
from the company of Christ, whom he him self takes unto him as fellows and
comparteners of al his goods) we are stirred up to a hope of a certain
divinity, when we cast with our selves, how they, that are of the self same
nature that we be of, for the likeness which they had with God in virtue, have
most happily atteyned the state even of Gods.

The feasts of our Lady.
And as we do most highly praise the holiness of other (as it becomes us to
do) so do we especially honor, reverence, and worship that singular pattern of
cleanes, virginity, and godliness, that heavenly and marvelous temple of the
holy ghost, that most holy and immortal tabernacle of the everlasting promise,
out of the which rises the son of justice, to put away with the brightness of
his beams the darkness of the whole world: and we do with right good
affiaunce call for the help of the said most blessed Virgin in our distress
and necessity, and we find, that her prayers do us much good often times
before her Son.

The service of the Church is so ordered, that, the year tourning about, there
is no benefit of God, the remembrance whereof the holy Church will suffer to
be forgotten. And the Church does represent the memory of al these benefits
in such sort, that it seems, that they are not so much declared in words, as
expressed in doings. For as the excellent Poet says: The things we hear,
do not so soon provoke the mind to rise,
As do the things, that vewed are, with true and faithful eyes.


Al these things, which I have here declared, with many other of like sort,
which I have omitted (for I think it not necessary, to rehearse particularly
every point) are not (I grant you) matters of perfection. They are certain
introductions and necessary helps for us, which have some what to do as
yeat with this mortal condition, as we feel by experience. For so often as
these ordinances of the Church are little Regarded, the mind waxes dull,
diligence faints, the love of religion slaketh, and so by little there
creapeth into our hearts a certain forgetfulness of virtue and godliness.
Again, when we bend our minds earnestly to set up again those godly
ordres, we feel, that the love of religion and godliness is stirred and
enkendled in us. And no marvel. For why, the brightness of that light, which
has so wonderfully lightened your minds, is not yet risen unto us: neither
are we so weaned from the acqueintaunce of the body, that we may be without all
these outward signs of heavenly things any time without great danger. This
is the order of the Church, which is holy, simple, and one: this is the rule
and Discipline, by the which all we, which have not yet atteyned unto the
highest degree of wisdom, are instructed.

Now I have declared these things, it remains, that I turn my talk unto
those your heavenly fellows, and men of God, the which being not contented with
this beaten and common discipline, have taught their disciples a new trade and
doctrine which is more wonderful then this. Give me leave therefore to talk
with them after this sort.

It is a great matter (right wonderful Sirs) and a hard enterprise, which
you have taken in hand: a thing of so great importance in deed, as none of
al those holy Fathers, whose virtue and wit we esteem very much did ever
attempt the like in all their life: to cure an old forgrowen disease with a new
kind of medicine. When you saw that the old discipline was fallen, that
manners were decayed* that unlawful lust ra^ged up and down without restraint,
that the Church tended to ruin: you did, (as it became holy men sent from
heaven) take it very heavily. Wherein I can not blame you. For it was a matter
worthy of many tears and much bitter weeping. But you rested not so: because
it were a token of a feint heart and weak stomach, to pity the fall and ruin,
and not to procure any other remedy for such a mischief, but only a few
tears. You did not therefore, as we are wont to do, sorrow and lament so
great a mishap, and power out tears unto God for it: but you thought it good
to provide by your labor, study, and wakefull diligence, that the Church
should not be quite overthrown. And who can deny, but that this is a token of
an honorable heart and a valiant cowrage. But let us see, after what sort you
have performed this so great, so weighty, and so worthy an enterprise.

I must therefore repete a sentence, which I used in my letters, for the which
M. Haddon, a man brought up in your rules and doctrine, quarelled with me very
sharply. What: have you thought it expedient to heal the wounds, which the
Christian common weal has taken, by such means, as the most holy Fathers
used of old time in propping up the Church, when it was like to decaie? No,
say you: for they were the devises of men: and so great a mischief could not
be remedied by man's healpe, but only by the stay and mighty power of God. And
therefore you determined to forsake all wordlie healpes, and to stick only to
the word of God. Very well. For that is it in deed, which heals the mind,
fortifieth the strength, geaueth light to the soul, and brings it to
everlasting glory. Wherefore I long to see some work of this your word of god
(wherein you glory so much) which may be so notable and so undoubtedly wrought
by God, that it may appear to the world by it, that you did not without good
cause set all other remedies at naught, and lay all the hope of your salvation
upon the only stay of this your gospel. But for so much as the kingdom of god
that is to say, the gospel and power of the word of God consists, not in the
vaunt of words, but in a marvelous virtue: and this virtue stands, not in
indiscreet and saucy talk, not in filthy and licentious living, not in bitter
hatred and flamboldnes, but in modesty, co^tinencie, and charity, in the
works of justice, and love of godliness: my desire is to surueie narrowely this
your wonderful gentleness; courtesy, softnes, patience, continency, charity,
holiness of life, and other the like virtues, which may witness, that the
Church has been preserved by you. But this can not be, say you, before all
such things, as hinder this our great and godly purpose, be taken quite
away. For it is the office and dewtie of the word of God, to pull down the
old house, before the fowndacions of the new house be laid. I take this also
to be very well and wisely spoken. For even as a medicine pourgeth oholer or
other noisome humors, which do molest the body, before it does repair nature
being feeble and brought low: so was it expedient for you, to expel pride,
coueteousnes, leacherie, and other disseases of the soul, before the Church
could receive the comfortable nourishment of virtue and godliness. This devise
of yours I like very well. But now I desire to know, how these hurtful and
pestilent humors have been pourged by you. Oh, say you, there was nothing in
the world so much against godliness, as superstition: wherefore our principal
care was, to take away al superstition. You are not to be blamed for that: for
in deed there is nothing so much contrary to true virtue, as is false and
counterfeicte virtue. Well now, I will not demand of you, how you have taken
away superstition: for that is very evident. You have defaced the authority
of the Bishop of Rome: you have overthrown the howses of Monks and Nuns:
you have laid hand on such goods, as were appointed to holy uses: you have
rifled churches: you have bestowed the goods of them upon whom you listed: you
have minished the reverence of the ancient ceremonies: you have defiled the
religious usage of Sacraments: you have thrown down Images, monume^tes,
Crosses, and aulters: you have condemned the devout tears and good works of
holy men as naught and ungodly: you have disanulled the holy decrees, laws,
and ordinances of the Church: you have cut of all hope of true virtue and
honesty, by a certain tyrannical estate or invincible kingdom of sin,
which you have full clerkely by your doctrine set up. Neither were you contented
with this wast and spoil of things, but you have also taken quite away the
freedom of man's will: and contrary to nature and reason, contrary to the
equity and justice of gods law, you have tied up all the doings and thoughts
of men, good and bad, wholesome and unwholesome with a certain fatal
necessity. These are the things (with many other of like sort) which, I
see, are by you, as the lettes and stays of wholesome doctrine, pulled down,
defaced, destroyed, mangled and minced in pieces.

I do not now bewail the decaie and wast of holy things. For if the health
of the church could not otherwise be recovered, if the Gospel could not
otherwise be brought to his old brightness and dignity, I could easily bear
this loss, and it would not grieve me to see those things, that stand
whole, the which you have not yet destroyed, to be utterly rased withal.

Wherefore if you have left any thing vntowched, set upon it also, if it
like you, shake it, pull it, hourle it down upon the grownde, so that you
restore us that ancient feruencie of godliness, that love of justice and
equity, that amplenesse of charity, that contempt of wordlie things, that
earnest desire of heavenly life, with the which the Church was inflamed of
old time in the Apostles days. This is the purity of the Gospel, this is the
excellent work of the word of God, in this stands the whole perfourmaunce
of your promise. You can not discharge your dewtie and band with any mean
virtue. For when I see the sack and spoil, which you have made, to be so
great, how might I think it to stand with right or reason, that you should
recompense it with any mean commodity? Wherefore I will ask you once again,
although M. Haddon be offended withal, I will earnestly demand, yea I will
most instantly require of you, what thing is restored by you in the steed of
all those things, which you have pulled down? I will repete the self same
words, that I used in those my letters, which M. Haddon so much reviled.

What is overthrown I see, but what is set up, I see not: what is grubbed up
by the root I perceive, but what is planted I perceive not. Tell me, I pray
you, what it is, to repair the doctrine of the Gospel when it tends to
decaie? What it is, to bring al things very near, as M. Haddon your disciple
says, to the rules of Christian godliness unto the most holy doctrine of the
Apostles? what it is, to drive away with a new light and brightness the
darkness of errors, and mist of sin, in the which men lived? I think it be,
to bring to pass, that men may have no will to look down unto the earth, that
they may be desirous to look up to heauenward, to become modeste and humble,
to be inflamed with the love of holiness and chastity, to be decked and
beawtified with the commendable virtues of meekenes, patience, gravity, and
constancy, to be very obedient to the Rulers of the Church, to yeald very
great honor and love to the governors in the common weal, to emploie their
whole life, devises and practices to a common profitte, to be zelously bent to
wards godliness and Religion, finally to make and prepare the way to heaven by
godly virtues.

I demand of you therefore, whether there be any one man amongst al those,
that so much esteem and reverence you, yea that set you up as Gods,
endewed with such a seruent love of heavenly things, with such chastity and
cleannes of life, that he will not suffer him self to be disteined with any
spot of dishonestie: with such patience and gentleness, that, although he be
provoked with railing and dispiteful language, he will not only not offend in
word, such as wronged him, but also wish them al good things and prosperity:
with such louingnes and charity, that he will bestow all his substance to the
common profitte; with such gravity and constancy, that he will never be
disordered: witn such a burning love of everlasting life and glory, that he
will forsake all the light and vain pleasures of the world, that he will pitch
down his Cross, and dash against it all his unlawful lusts: that he will
think upon Christ only, and sit down at his feet: that he will love God
ernestly, and be, as it were, violently carried up to heaven in mind and
thought. With all these virtues did the Church sometimes flourish: with these
fire bra^des of godly love were men of old time inflamed: from this most
seruent love of godliness could they not possibly be brought by any terror or
torments. And this took you upon you, to pourge the gospel thoroughly, to
put to flight superstition utterly, and to enkendle again the light of the
ancient Church, which was put out.

Be therefore as good as your word, perform your promise, discharge your debt,
into the which you are incurred. Restore that purity of mind, restore that
chastity of body, restore that feruencie of godliness, restore that
continency, and gentleness, that peace and concord, that band of charity and
frindship, bring your countreimen again to that state, from the which we are
al fallen: that you may by such a wonderful alteration of things, and
heavenly example of virtue put us to silence, to whom this newfanglednes is
both suspected and hateful. As for us, it is no marvel, if we have not as yet
atteined this great and high perfection in virtue. For you have not yet set out
this goodly light to us. I ask this question therefore of such only, as take
your part, how holily, how uprightly, how religiously they live. For reason
would, as I said before, that we should look for no mean matters at your
hands. For you have taken upon you a charge of so great honor, magnificencie,
and profit to the world, as possibly there can not be devised a greater.
Wherefore unless your adherentes and disciples do so much excel in virtue
and honesty al other men, that are virtuous and godly, (and yet be not of
your school) that they may dymme the light of their virtue, and put them out
of conceit: you have not fulfilled your promise. For if the self same degree
of honesty might have been kept and maintained by us, without the loss and
ruin of those things, upon the which you have laid your violent and griedie
hands: if the virtue of your brethren do not very much pass the virtue of
our men: shall it not appear to the world, that you wise men have taken a
great deal of pains in defacing of those things, which you have overthrown,
to no purpose or profit? Shall it not be seen, that those things were not
the lettes or stays unto you, for the which could not exercise justice and
godliness?

What if your Disciples are not only never the better by defacing those
things, but rather much more disodered and outrageous, much more wicked and
vicious? What, if licentious living be now less punished, if mischievous
hardines be now greater, if more debate and greater broils have been stirred
up, sense you have set your selves to be teachers of men? What, if more
robberies and shamefuller acts are now committed amongst you in every part
of the realm (if it be true, that is reported)? What, if there be wrought more
traitorous practices against the majesty of Princes, even by such as have
geauen them selves fully and wholly to your doctrine?

But I will let your masters go, and will urge you, M. Haddo^, once again?
What can you allege? What example can you bring of that ancient virtue? How
can you maintain and defend this newfanglednes? And yet you will auowch, that
your Church differs nothing at al from the order and discipline of the
Apostles. You say many things in deed: but no man, which is in his right
wit, will ever believe you. It is not enough to a^firme, what so ever you list,
in words. I look for the examples of this heavenly virtue, and not for vain
words. If you see unlawful lust set at liberty, disorder flinging up and
down without check, the high ways beset with thieves and murderers,
tumultes stirred up, co^spiracies wrought, and dangerous practices devised
against commonweals every where: if all these mischiefs be not only not
taken away after the time that the doctrine of these fellows, whom you so highly
commend, took place, but rather much more increased: with what face dare you
say, that this your new doctrine differreth nothing from the doctrine of the
Apostles?

You say, that I require a perfection which can not be had in this life. It is
like enough sir, that I do speak of light offenses, such as continent and
honest men may fall into every hour, and not of most vile, filthy, and
infamous crimes, such as have cawsed all holy things to be wasted, spoiled,
and consumed with fire, without any fruict of godliness and Religion, the which
things these fellows promised to restore.

You require of me, that our church as you call it, and yours may be set
together and compared, that it may appear at the length, whether of them both
is more established by the authority and doctrine of the Apostles. Your
request is not reasonable. For I say not, that there is no spot of uncleanness
at all amongst us. But I say and affirm, that it is very ill done of you,
that those spots are not taken away amongst you by the diligence of your
Apostles. We have promised nothing, we have not pleadged our faith and truth,
that all things should be brought again to the old perfection by our
diligence: no man can call us into the court, and charge us, that we have not
stood to our promise. But these men, who, as you say, were sent from heaven,
have taken this much upon them: to restore the purity of the Gospel, to bring
again charity, holiness, co^tinencie, with that most earnest longyng after the
everlasting glory, to bring al other such virtues, as ar contained in the word
ofgod, to light, which were before buried in darkness, and to set up once
again a heavenly common weal upon the earth.

But that you may see, what courtesy and favor I will show you in this
conflicte, I will not require of you to examine and try your manners by the
straight discipline of the Apostles, and by that exact rule of most holy and
perfect religion: but to compare the state of this your Church with the
gravity, virtue, religion, and worshipful behavior of your auncetours: the
which thing if I can entreat you to do, you shall understand that there is so
great odds between your gospellishe doctrine, and the honorable religion of
old England, as can not be expressed in words. Why then sir, what a thing is
this? If you were never able, after the time that you gave your selves to these
new and ungodly opinions, to reach to any part of the honor of your
auncetours: by what means, I pray you, shall you be able to atteyne to that
ancient perfection of the Church, which flourished in the Apostles days to
the great wonder of the world? Are you so void of all wit and reason, that
you think it enough to say, that your Church differreth nothing from the
Apostles doctrine, as though me^ were bound by and by to believe you? No sir,
that must be showed and proved, not by braggyng and light behavior, not by
boasting and reproachful words, but by wonderful examples of justice,
innocence, chastity, cleanes, religion, and charity, by a most holy life, a
most virtuous conversation, and a most fervent love of godliness. Yea, M.
Haddon, I tell you once again, that it is not sufficient for them, that have
promised to bring the loose manners of our time to that most flourishing state
of the primitive Church, to be meanly virtuous: they must excel, they must be
wonderful. The which thing because they do it not, but rather, whersoeuer
they put their foot, they leave the grownde embrewed with much naughtiness
and vice: it is very evident and plain, that they could not perform so much,
as they had promised. For they have brought into the common weal, for the
cleannes of the Gospel, foul vices: for peace and love, debate: for modesty,
pride: for religion, wickedness: for liberty, bondage: for good order,
licentious living: for pleasant calmenes, a most crewel storm. And yet you
like a godly man lay before me the judgment of God, to make me afraied: in the
which you say, that I poor wretch (for so it pleases you to term me) shall
yeald an account of this so heinouse and wicked offense before the judgment
seat of Christ, because I have presumed to rebuke those holy, continent and
religious persons.

In deed there is good cause, why I should fear. For M. Haddon a wise man,
and such a one as has familiar conference with God at al times, would never
have said it, unless it had be^ declared unto him before, by some heavenly
revelation. Reason would therefore, that I should tremble and quake for fear of
that judgment, the which you your self fear never a deal, and yet you
threaten me very severely withal.

You say, that I do not only laugh at your Gospel, and deface your Doctors,
(which are very heavenly men) but also violently wrest Hieremie. The which
thing how false it is, I will declare hereafter.

You say afterward, that all that testimony of Hieremie concerning false
Prophets perteyneth unto us. How so sir? Heard you ever say, that there was
any new Prophet amongst us, that went about to turn us away from the
ancient Religion? That warranted us of peace and ioylitie, as though he had
had commission from Christ so to do? That taught the people, that sin
should escape unpunished? You return once again to speak your pleasure by
the holy Church, the order whereof I have already declared: in the which
although there be some diseases, yet they are such as may be cured. For we
refuse not the medicine, the which without the Church can not be found else
where.

After that you commend your own Church highly. The public fermons, say you,
you commit to certain seely friars: and they declaime after their own
fasshion, in other matters they are dome. As touching preaching, I have said
already, that this charge is in no wise to be neglected of the Bishops:
neither does the holy Church bear with such negligence: but rather exhorts
and charge al Bishops most straightly, to follow the office of preaching and
teaching with all diligence. And it is no reason, that the negligence of a few
men should be imputed to the whole Church, the which is so careful to take good
and wholesome order with every particular man, that he should do his dewtie.
Moreover, there are, as I said before, many Bisshops amongst us, the which
preach oftentimes, and stir up their subjects to the love of godliness. But
admit it were always so, that the sermons were made by Monks: doubtless it
is more tolerable, that godly and religious persons should be appointed by the
Bishops to do that office, then that base fellows, and such as are poisoned
with most pestilent and erroneous doctrine, should be made rulers over Churches.

Whereas you say, that at our sermons the audience is brought a sleep, I
grant it must needs happen so sometimes, when he, that preaches, can not be
so eloquent and fine, as you are. What then? Because some man nappeth a little
sometime, therefore shall not the rest awake them selves, and geaue diligent
ear to the sermon? shall no preacher be able to move and exhort his hearers to
serve God with greater love and feruency?

In the ministering of Sacraments, say you, the Priests only are doers, the
rest are but lookers on. Of like you are not pleased with that. You have no
liking in modest and seemly order. You would peradventure, that there should
be made a disordre and confusion of offices, and that al men should take upon
them the office of priesthood. But we think, that that comely order was
ordained by God, that Priests only should minister the Sacraments, and that
the rest should take the profit of them with silence, and not meddle them selves
with the divine service.

As concerning the unknown tongue, in the which the service is said, I ^^ue
spoken sufficiently already: wherefore, because I will not repete one thing often
times, I refer you to those things, that are said before.

Let us now enter, say you, into the masses, in the which you would have the
very marow of religion to be powered out. That is very true. For they contain
in them a most seruent lifting up of the heart unto God, most holy and
devout prayers, the monumentes and remembraunces of Christ, which represent
unto us his life, his passion, his death, and merits, the order and woorking
of our salvation, and the appeasing of the displeasure of God. And (that I may
say nothing else) in them is offered up the most holy body of Christ, the
self same Sacrifice, that takes away the unclean spots of sins, that
yealdeth up thanks to our most mighty Lord and bountiful parent, that
enkendleth godly minds, and inflameth devout hearts with the love of
everlasting life and glory.

You say moreover, that no man entermedleth with the Gospel amongst us. You
say well in that. For we can not abide, that every man should be a Reader, every
man a Doctor, every man a Prophet. But we think it expedient to provide,
that al things may be done honestly and orderly.

Where you say, that all exhortations out of the Gospel are whisshed omongest
us: that is false. For we have continual preaching, and there is expounded,
what so ever concerns salualtion, (not unlearnedly, nor yet vnsauerly, as you
imagine:) and the hearers keep silence after a very modest and comely sort.

You come, say you, to the Lords Table once per adventure every year, and
that more for a solemn ceremony, then for a contrite heart. This guess of
yours is very vain also. Truth it is, that al men are bownde by law and
order to come unto our Lords Table once in the year: but such as do it but
once in the year, are not wont to be commended. And amongst us there are of
such as feast them selves at this heavenly banquet very often, an exceeding
great number. Whereas you say, that it is done for a solemn ceremony only,
and not for a contrite heart, you do but guess as your manner it. And for so
much as your guess proves false, it seems, that you may woorthilie be
numbered amongst the false Prophets. When you say, that in this supper the
supper of our Lord is not remembered of us, you speak with out the book, even
as you did before. How be it, as touching the Supper of our Lord, I can not
well tell, what to say to you. For as yet I am not perfectly infourmed,
whether you follow the wicked opinion of your Martyr, or no. If you do follow
him, with what reverence or trembling can you come to the Sacrament of the
Altar, seeing that you believe, that there is none other thing in it, but only
a naked and bare remembrance of the death, which Christ suffered upon the
Cross for us? If you follow him not, wherefore do you not abhor and detest
the naughty and wicked fellow?

You find fault with us also, because we have no public or open confession of
our sins amongst us. I would feign learn of you, how that sin, which is
committed secretly, is to be confessed in the face of the world.

I have, say you, declared your usage. You blamed me, because being
unacquainted with the affairs of England, I declared such things, as are
notoriouselie known and carried by letters, by talk, by most constante
report of all men, into all Countries and Coasts, even to the furthermost
parts of the world, to the great grief of all such as hear them: and yet you
speak rashly of our matters, which you have neither seen, nor understood,
(and therefore you use this word, peradventure) and as though you knew very
exactly, al those things, which you have spoken, you say boldly, that you
have declared our usage, and that very plainly.

After that you turn again to the commendation of your Church. You speak
much of your continual preaching, of the despising of man's traditions, of your
Psalms, and Hymns, and Lawdes, with the which you honor the Lord. Anon after
you say thus. Then follows the holy table of the Lord, which is occupied
every holy day. The minister of God calls up all such as have prepared them
selves to that so heavenly a banquet. Do you call that a heavenly ba^ket, the
which your Martyr, whom you set out with heavenly praises, went about to
bereafe of al heauenlinesse? Furthermore you tell us not, how sober they are,
when they come to this supper, how well they are clad with their marriage
garment, with what examination with what feruencie and wakeful diligence they
prepare them selves unto it. And of your Minister you say never a word, by
what means, with what ceremouie, after what order of Religion, by whom he
came to that dignity.

You talk much of the purity of your sermons, whereas in deed there can not
possibly be any purity in such a corrupt and pestilent doctrine.

Last of al you declare not, what ^ite this your religion brings. For you
show us not your wonderful cha^itie, your purity and holiness of life, your
marvelous works of godliness and charity. And yet you say thus.

I might in this place make an opposition ^ comparison, lest I lacked words,
wherewith I might, if I would, trim it and ^t it out. I would be glad to see
you do it, M. Haddon. How great a praise had that been unto you, if you had
laid together diverse examples of hothe sides, and showed, how this church
which you set forth so solemly, is most like unto that ancient and primitive
Church, which was dedicated by the blood of Christ, and instructed in the
doctrine of the Apostles, in upright and heavenly conversation, in innocentie,
virtue, constancy lowliness, patience, chastity, in modest and seemly
behavior. If you had don this, you had dispatched the whole matter. Wherefore
did you not bravely set out that opposition or comparison, which you speak of?
Wherefore did you not set out to the world the worthy acts and holy works
of your masters? Wherefore did you not cler^ that point, in the which consisted
the very ground and pith of the whole matter? I assure you, you had had the day
of us, if you had declared, how much these new Prophettes do pass in
heavenly virtues, and had showed withal that there is no difference between
them and the old Disciples of Christ. What, could a man of such a wonderful
wit and singular eloquence, as you are of, lack words, in the defense of so
true and so honest a cause as this is?

But that conclusion of yours likes me meruelously well. You say thus. A man
may see more sorowing and sighinge in one holy Supper of the Lord, which our
men do resort unto, then in six hundred of your solemn Masses. First of al
if you think, that al Sacraments are to be ministered with tears and sighs,
you are fowly ouerseene. For there is a time of sorrow, and a time of gladness,
as Solomon says. Then it comes to pass oftentimes that we may think of
heavenly things more earnestly and more atte^tiueli without sorrow then with
sorrow. Last of all I would feign learn of you, what these your sighs do
mean. Do they signify a desire and longing after the old Religion again?
Or else serve they for a cloak to cover your new disguised Religion? Or else is
there no such matter at all? For Erasmus and certain other learned men, have
given this mark unto your Religion, that none of you al will once sigh, no not
upon such days as are to be kept with tears and sorrow. And Luther him self,
the foreman of all this rabble, he never wept nor sorowed, at the remembrance of
the bitter pains and torments, which Christ suffered for us upon the
Cross. For he was a man fortified with incredible hardness, and a deadly enemy
to weeping and tears.

As for the diverse expositions of our Doctors, which you speak of, they are
altogether impertinent to our matter. For there is no disagreeing omongest us
in such matters as concern the grownde of our faith and Religion. But to what
end tend al these things, M. Waulter, to what purpose do you bring them? Be
it, that these your solemnities be kept of you with so great pomp and
ceremony, as you will your selves: yet can I not see hitherto, that you have by
these your solemn sacraments newly devised by the goodly wit of you and
your companions, by this Religion set up with such diligence and provident
carefulnes, by these daily sermons, by this sighing and sorowing, brought the
Church to such a state, as your Masters promised you to do. Wherefore you
must pardon me, if I require one thing of you many times, if I be to
importunate in asking it. Restore, I say once again, restore unto us the
purity of the Gospel, lai^ abroad those goodly wares of heavenly virtues, set
out to the world the notable lessons of this worthy Religion, that, when we see
by your wonderful works and honorable deeds, that the mighty power of the
holy Ghost is within you, we may be astonished seeing your miracles, and
confess, that those Prophets, which taught you, were sent from God.

Mark diligently, I pray you, what our Lord has said as concerning a Deuteronomy.
18. d.
false Prophet. The Prophet, says God, the which being seduced with pride,
shall presume to speak in my name, the thing which I commanded him not to
speak, or else shall speak in the name of other Gods, shall be put to
death. If so be, that thou shall think in thy heart, how may I understand
the word which A mark to discern a false Prophet by.
our Lord has spoken? Thou shalt^ have this token. The thing, which that
Prophet foretold in the name of our Lord, if it come not so to pass, our
Lord spoke it not: but the Prophet devised it of a pride of his own heart, and
therefore thou shall not fear him.

What thing can be more evident and plain, then this sign? What more
prouidently spoken for our salvation? Being now warned and instructed by God, I
give no ear to words, but I turn mine eye to works: I look to see, how
faithfully these Ptophetes have fulfilled their promise. It remains
therefore, that we consider, what Luther, Melanchthon, Bucere, Calvin and the
rest of your Champions have promised and taken upon them, what hope they have
brought their adherentes into by their goodly words. Doubtless they caused
men to conceive this hope, that they would bring the doctrine of the Gospel
to the old perfection, that they would set Religion up again, as it was at
the first, that they would stai^ up the Church, which tended to decaie.

Now this purity of the Gospel, this holiness of Religion, this sure stay of
the Church, by what power and strength is it maintained? By faith, gentleness,
chastity, peace, concord, lowliness, obedience, charity, godliness, and the
great love of God. But they have brought into the world, for faith and
religion, Church robbing: for gentleness, cruelty: for chastity, loose living:
for peace, whourlibourlie: for concord, civil discord: for lowlines, pride:
for obedience, contempt of lawful autho^itie: for charity, bitter hatred
toward all good men: for godliness, wicked impiety: for godly love, the
utter decaie of all such holy things as stirred us up to the love of God.
They are therefore so much short of the perfourmaunce of those things, which
they have in large and ample manner promised, that they have rather by their
labor and diligence so woorshipfullye employed, left all things, which
they took upon them to refourme and bring to the old perfection, in much
worse case, yea much more depraved and disordered, then ever they were before.
Wherefore these men were not sent from God. And so it is concluded by the Law
of God him self, that they deserve no such commendations, as you geaue them,
but rather everlasting damnation.

I demand of you once again.

The virtue and purity of the Gospel, does it consist in good works think
you, or else in words? Doubtless if we believe our Lord him self, we must
say, that it stands rather in works, then in a goodly show of words.
For so much therefore as these your Masters have confirmed this new Gospel,
not by good works, not by woorking of miracles, not by continency of life,
not by vprighte conversation, not by feruencie of mind, not by burninge desire,
and longinge after heavenly things, but by boasting and bragging words: is
it not manifest, that they are not partakers of the kingdom of heaven? Is it
not clear, that they were not sent from God? Is it not very evident, that
they were false Prophets?

But let us return unto Jeremy. And first of all, where you say, that I
would, for a certain pride, which is in me intolerable, be esteemed as one of
Gods privy counsel, I would feign learn of you, whereof you gather that.
Heard you ever say, that I preached any new Gospel? that I professed any
new doctrine, the which in the old time was never heard of? that I withdrew
the people from the old faith and ancient order with goodly promises? that I
maintained any opinion devised by mine own self so constantly, as though it
had proceeded from God him self? No truly. What reason moves you then to
say, that I take this so great a name upon me, whereas in deed you see no
token of such intolerable pride in me? You say afterward.

You molest Jeremy again, and will not suffer the reverend Prophet to take
his breath. If I have molested the holy Prophet, I have committed no small
offense against my self. But let us see, how you will prove it. You proceed
thus. You allege these words of the Prophet. If they had stood in my
cownsell, and had openly declared my words unto the people, truly they had
turned them from their evil way, and from their naughty devises. The words
of the Prophet are very clear. I can not tell therefore how you go about by
your words to make them dark. It follows.

Let us take our beginning out of Jeremy, which was a worthy Prophet. You
can say none other. If you could M. Haddon, I doubt you would do it. You go
forewarde.

Did he fraie all the Jews from vice? Did he bend them al to virtue? Mark well
the whole order and process of his prophecy, considre the watling that he
makes, which is in deed very lamentable. Hitherto you reason, not against me,
but against the most godly Prophet, to prove him a vain man: for you make
him to speak contrarieties. He had said before, that the word of God was of
such force, that it brought men from vice to virtue. He lamenteth afterward,
that, although he were stirred up by the might and power of the word of God,
yet he could not possibly bring the people from their wickedness. Wherefore he
speaks contrarieties, and disagreeth exceedingly with him self. As you did
therefore in S. Paul, even so do you now. You improve not my saying, but you
make the man of God to speak contrary to him self. But I say on the other
side: that it may most easily be proved by this reason only, that you could
not understand the meaning of the Prophet, because you think, that he
dissenteth from him self. For it is not possible, that there should be any
disagreement in the word of God, of the which Jeremy was a minister. And yet
you, to impugn more openly the meaning of the Prophet, you earnestly allege
the example of S. Peter, yea and of Christ him self, by whose preaching, say
you, not al such, as heard them, were fraied from their sin, vice, and
wickedness.

And at the length you go so far, that you affirm, that whereas one man
yealdeth to the warning of God, an other does not, it is not in the free will of
every man, but that it was so ordained before the beginning of the world: and
so you confirm again that fatal violence or necessity. And whereas you hear
the complaint of our Lord him self, which is very lamentable, wherein he
bewaileth the infidelity of the Jews, which would not be received under his
wings, being thereunto very mercifully moved: yet do you impute their
damnation, not to the wickedness of the naughty men, but unto God as the author
thereof. The which impiety of yours is already sufficiently confuted, (so much
as the place required.) But neither you neither your masters do understand
the Prophets: and therefore they imagine, that the Prophets should speak
contrarieties.

Think you, that God by Jeremy gave that token to discern a true Prophet
from a false: that al such, as were present at the sermons of a true Prophet,
should forthwith be withdrawn from wickedness, the which thing the false
Prophets could not do? If you imagine, that the Prophet spoke so, you are
much deceived. For our Lord him self, by whose spirit all the holy Prophets
were enkendled and stirred foreward, speaking unto those men, that were
obstinately bent in sin, that shut their eyes, and stopped their ears
wilfully, that the light of heaven might not shine upon them, or the Word of
God move their hearts, made them not to forsake their wickedness. And
therefore he complayneth of the Capharnaites, and such other as withstoode his
Doctrine very obstinately.

What is that then, that Hieremie said? Dowbtles this. That such as believed
the Prophets, such as had them in good estimation, such as took their
sayings to be the very answers of God, (if those Prophets were sent from
God) there is no doubt, but that they were easily brought from unbelief to
faith, and from vice to an honest order of life. The which thing when it
followed not, it was a most sure argument, that they were not sent from God.
For example.

Phasur the Priest was in high reputation. Ier. 20. a.
He bent him self earnestly against Hieremie. Hananias desired to be called and
esteemed as a Prophet. He was in like manner an enemy to Hieremie. Hieremie
in those days threatened the people, that there hanged a great plague over them:
but the other signified unto the people with many circumstances of words, that
al should be well. Many men followed them, but very few followed Hieremie. Now
sir, when there was such a great dissension between these two factions, by
what token might a man discern, whether of them was sent from God? By the
virtues and vices of such as followed either part. Therefore if it had been
diligently marked at that time, that such as followed Phasur and Ananias, or
other the like falfe and deceitful Prophets, proved never the better, but
rather walowed still most filthily in the self same vice, as they did before:
might it not have been easily perceived, that those Prophets, unto whom they
had addicted them selves, were not sent from God? And contrary wise if it had been noted, that those few which followed Jeremy, which resorted unto him,
which gave diligent ear unto his doctrine, did forsake sin, embrace
godliness, and fear the judgments of God: they might have judged very well,
that he was sent from God, and that the thing which he spoke came not from him
self, but that he uttered such things only, as he had learned of God.

Whereas therefore there were at that ^yme many men, whieh took upon them the
name of Prophets, and said: thus says our Lord: when in deed they had never
heard the voice of our Lord: and clawed the common people and brought them in
hope of a merry world, and said peace, peace, when no peace, that is to say,
no great quietness, and abundaunce of things, but an extreme calamity hanged
over the state of the Jews, and the common people, whose eyes were wholly bent
upon them, who esteemed them as men of God, were nothing the better for
them, but continued still in as much wickedness, as they did before: doubtless
it was evident, that those men were false Prophets and crafty crowders, and
that they did poison such, as they took upon them to instruct, with pestilent
errors.

The like might be said of the time of Christ and his Apostles. There were
Priests, and Pharisees, and Saducees, and Herodians, all contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ. Such, as followed Christ, and applied them selves with all
diligence to learn his doctrine, withstood sin, and were inflamed with the
desire of godliness and virtue: but such as followed the Priests of that
time, and the Pharisees, were disteined with many foul vices. By this token
therefore it might be perceived, that Christ wrought by the holy ghost, and
spoke the word of God: and that the Priests and Pharisees took a pride upon
their own conceit which proceeded of an unsettled and indiscreet mind.

We may say the like of the Apostles, who had much a do with false Priests and
Philosophers, which were frowardly bent against the truth. For such as
herkened unto the Apostles, were beautifully fournished with the ornaments of
true virtue: but such as went unto the contrary part, were clogged with most
hei^ouses vices. Any man therefore, that was in his right wits, might well
perceive by the restimonie of Hieremie, that the Apostles were sent from God:
and that their adversaries were moved and stirred forward by the enemy the
devil.

That this is the meaning of the Prophet, al men, which are not obstinatly set
in their own mad and frantike opinion, may see very plainly. For otherwise
the wisdom of God, which spoke in the holy Prophet, should speak against it
self: the which thing if a man should but once conceive it in his heart, it
were a most^ wicked sin, and horrible offense. We may now apply it unto
these new Prophets.

There was a certain woorshipfull Prophet, whom you think vndowbtedly to
have been sent from heaven. Many men went after him, and commended him highly,
and guarded him both with their bodies and arms, and fournished him with their
gooddes. I will therefore demand not of al, but of such only, as did not
only love Luther as a bowntifull and helping man, but also esteemed and
reverenced him as a Prophet sent from heaven, and received his doctrine most
willingly both with ears and hearts: whether they were forthwith changed in
heart, and whether they became any thing the better for it. No, they were rather
made by the heari^g of him much more presumpteous and proud, much more
incontin^nt and seditious, much more dispiteful and outrageous, yea so far
forth, that Luther him self, which had schooled them, was not able to keep
them in order. That therefore might have been a full proof, that Luther stood
never in the counsel of God. For if he had stood in the counsel of our Lord,
and had declared the very words of God unto such as followed him and were
named after him, dowbtles there should have been seen some wonderful
alteration of life in them.

The like may be said of Melanchthon, Zwinglius, Bucer, and Calvin, and
other the like Prophets. For these men were none such, as might by good example
of their co^tinent and honest conversation assuage the heat of inco^tinency in
those that followed them: but rather out of their schools proceeded very often
vicious and incontinent men: yea and not only incontinent, but also violent
churchrobbers, destroiers of good laws, wily practisers of treason against
princes, fellows mischieuously bent to deface al places of holiness and devotion
by manslaughter, bloudshead and fire. Wherefore the teachers of this doctrine
were not sent from God: for if they had been sent from God, doubtless they had
turned those men, that honored them as gods, from their wicked life.

Moreover, for so much as there is no disagreement in the spirit of God, if
they had been sent from God, there must needs have been a most perfect consent
and agreement emo^gest them. But the world knows, that there is a most bitter
dissension amongst them: wherefore it follows necessarily, that they were not
moved by the instincte and inspiration of the holy ghost, but driven with
burning fire brandes of the finds of hell, and that they applied them selves,
not to instruct men, but to overthrow them.

You say, that there is a marvelous goodly agreement amongst you. I speak
not of you as now. For it may be, that you may by fear of pounishmente
stay for a little time the fury of raging fellows, (the which remedy, when
the mind is not well settled, can not endure long.) But of others, see you
not, how great dissension there is amongst them, that sprange of Luther? See
you not, how they fall out about words? How they alter and change their
opinions? How confusely, doubtfully, and intricately they speak? With what
fond reasons they labor in vain to prove that thing, which they are bent to
maintain: in so much that they can neither agree with other men, neither yet
within them selves? They choppe and change their Creedes, they affirm now one
thing and now an other, they are established in no one opinion. They can never
agree within them selves, to whom they may refer the determination of
dowbtes.

You refer the matter to your parliament (as you term it): or else to your
babbling Bucerans, as the Bishop of Angra not vnsittely terms them. Diverse
men refer the decision of questions in religion to diverse Confessions of the
faith, which are wont now and then to be altered and changed. Think you, M*
Haddon, if, as I do now reason with you in writing, so I might be present
with you, and press you with words, and wind you to and fro by the force of
arguments, that you were able to stand to your tackelinges? No without dowbt.
But you would devise a hundred diverse shifts of descant to face out the
matter, and seek out all the starting holes and blind corners in the world: in
such sort, that it might easily appear, that neither your tongue, neither yet
your wit were in perfect good plight. Howbeit one poor shifte you would
find, (which is a singular good help to you in all your distresses) that is,
to brawle, chide, schold and revile. You say afterward.

That you may acknowledge the authority of this Church, if you dowbt of it,
I refer you to the Apology. I know you have written an Apology, wherewith you
labor to set out your Church meruelously. If you have written it more wittyly
and finely, then this book, which you set out against me, surely you have done
me great wrong. For you made light of me, and therefore did not vouchesafe to
put out the uttermost strength of your eloquence, when you encountered with me.
If you use the like style and the like arguments, that is to say, if you
contend with the like arrogancy and reprochful language: I have not so much
time to spare, that I will desire to take it once in my hands. For you define
nothing, you speake*nothing sincerely, you conclude nothing by good argument.
You say at the length.

Confute it if you can. But you can not. That was very arrogantly spoken. Who
has made you so lofty and high sprited? Your eloquence? Or else the love of
the truth? If you trust to your eloquence, you are a very babe. If you bear
your self upon the truth, you imagine many things to be true, that are not.

You say, that one has barked against your Apology. I have not read it,
and yet I know, that your Apology, which, you say, can not possibly be
confuted, is already excellently well confuted, by a man of much gravity,
godliness, and learning. which thing you deny.

But this lesson have you learned of your masters: who being openly
convinced, fall a crying, being set a gogge, keep a raging stir: and when
they are able to say nothing to the grownde of the matter, they heap together
many words without order and besides the purpose, and yet they vaunte them
selves amongst their adherentes beyond all measure and modesty. But I regard
not your bravery and Iustines, I esteem not your haughty and proud vauntes:
I weye the truth, reason and arguments. And such is the noblenes of this
your Ila^d, the glory and renoum^ of your kingdom so bright, that neither can
any vice lie hidden in it, neither yet any virtue unknown.

Wherefore you labor but in vain to conceal that thing, which is every
where constantly reported. What you say touching the immortality of souls, I
wot not. I never said, that your masters denied the immortality of sowles.
Howbeit I am not ignorant, by what degrees or steps men are wont to clymme up
unto the highest point of that most detestable opinion.

Whereas you say, that there has been many men amongst you, which have
confirmed the truth of the gospel by banishment, nakedness, hungre, yea by
sheading their blood and yealding their lives: I grant it. For so did the
Bishop of Rochester, so did Moore, so did the holy Carthusians (to pass over a
number of others) these men died a most honorable death for the glory of
Christ. So do your holy Bishops, who^ you have defeated of their goods
deprived of their dignities, and cast into prisons. So do we see many others,
Bishops, Priests and Monks, very godly and Religiouse persons, driven out of
England and Ireland, living like banished men and outcastes: the which, if they
had not ben able to escape out of your clammes, had peradventure ben put to a
most orewel death, by the ministers of this your Gospel.

If you mean any other of your men, hear what S. Cyprian says: that, such as
being without the bowndes of the Church, do suffer death for the glory of
Christ, they do not receive the Croune of Martyrdom, but bear the
punishment for their unbelief. If they therefore, that break up the enclosure
of the Church, and separate them selves from it, although they yield their
blood and lives for the Religion of Christ, which the Church holds, are not
to be accounted as Martyrs, but as naughty packes and Church robbers: what is
to be thought of such, as being without the Church, are not ashamed to spil
their blood and lives in the main tenance of rebellion and ungodliness?

I am now come to that place, which is by you, (who are a man naturally
abhorring the sleightie occupation of flattery and lying) very clerkely
handled. Your words are these.

You confess that you have gone further in the matter, then you had thought to
do. Truth it is, that you have gone a great deal further, then it became you
to do: especially in the most learned and prudent ears of the Queen's
Majesty, whose sharp wit and judgment you would have been afraid of, if
you had well weighed with your self, how much pitthinesse there is in her. O
right excellent Sir Waulter, you appear now in your own likeness. Tell me, I
pray you, do you not see, that excessive praysing^ does not advance the
dignity of Princes, but rather utterly peruerte their mind and judgment
oftentimes? Do you not know, that the most fine and sharp wit, loves truth,
and abhors excedingly all lying and flattery? For what other thing is it to
praise Princes excessiuely, but to set them out to the world as mocking stocks?
Truly if your Queen be so witty, as I may well think she is, not by your talk,
but by the report of other men, she will turn you out of her court and
company as an open and detected flatterer, and will not suffer her self to be
most impudently mocked of you.

If you set out her wit, if you commend her knowledge in the Latin and Greek
tongue, if you praise her courtly grace and comlines of speech, i^ is well
done. But when you make her no mean Divine, when you advance her wit so
much, as though I ought to be terriblie afraid of it, you assault her Majesty
by very wily and crafty means. Is this your loialtie? Is this the part of a
kind heart, mindful of the benefits bestowed upon you? Is this well done,
that a most noble Queen, a Princess endued with most excellent wit and
singular qualities, should be gibed and scorned of you, M. Haddon, who have, as
you say your self, ben fostred and brought up by her Majesty? Did you so
little esteem her judgment, that you thought her meet to make your laughing
stock? To pull her down from the settled stay of her mind by your clawing
and flattery? To deceive her for your gain and lukers sake?

If, when you set for this booty, you had made your entry more couertlye,
your foul flattery needed not to have benne repelled with so great
inforcemente. For a man might have thought, that you had misdowbted the
sharpness of the Queens wit, and therefore had devised to undermine
secretelie, that you might the better have scaled the forte, which you have
desired to take.

But now, whereas you mock so openly, ascribi^g unto her majesty, such common
dable qualities, as can not possibly stand, neither with her age, neither with
her nature, as being a woman, neither with her tender and delicate body,
neither yet with her estate, (which is otherwise employed to weighty and
careful affairs): is it not manifest, that you make light of her wit? Do
you so recompense the benefits which you have received of her bowntifulnesse?
If she be so wise as you make her to be, if she have so many excellent
virtues, as I desire her Majesty to be always decked and bewtified withal:
the moderate praises, which I geaue her, she will accept with good heart;
but that immoderate flattery of yours she will refuse and reiecte: neither
will she suffer her self to be mocked of such presumptuouse fellows to the
great abatemente of her estimation and honor.

As towchinge the quietness of things, which you talk of at large, I say
this much. It is the part of a mad man, yea of one, that is ignoraunte of
the common frailty of man, to trust to much in prosperity, and not to cast
long time before by causes passed, such adversities, as peraduentur^ hang over
his head. Moreover, there can be no quietnosse, where the faith of the
holy Church is shut out. For the mind is troubled, yea and oftentimes shaken
quite out of the hengies, by the remorse of sin, the which the most
presumptuous and bold fellows in the world are not able to suppress,
(although many are able to dissemble it).

As for the comparison of your Church with the Primitive Church, which you
say may be confirmed by the Histories, I say that, either you have not read
the Histories, or else you are past all shame. You should have brought some
example or testimony out of the Histories, with the which you might
ouercharge us. But you can never do it, for so much as all the antiquity makes
against you.

Whereas you say, that your nobility is very well agreed, would God it were
so: but it is otherwise reported commonly. I pass over many things of
purpose, partly because they are nothing to the purpose, and partly because
they are already confuted before. But whereas you say these words: Ah be not
disquieted gentle Sir: I acknowledge your pleasant manner of speech. As for
your heavenly kindred, of the which you say, you are very desirouse: you do
well in it. But I would you had some other men of this stock and kindred,
more skilful interpretours of the law of God. Then how wittily was that spoken
of you?

Wherefore say you, that men have benne carried away by us from that most
aunciente and holy Religion, which was grownded upon the blood of Jesus
Christ, and has continewed always one even until our days, and that they
have benne trained in an other Religion, which is most cursed and detestable?

Then you add, Do you believe these things, as you have spoken them? No
trnely do you not. These things were very merrily spoken of you, M. Haddon.
Doubtless your pleasant gyrdes proceed of ameruelous wit: especially when yon
think your self to be cock sure. For then, as though your discourse had
escaped the rocks, you pleasure very much to sport and dalie.

But whereas you say, that I do not believe those things which I have
said, you are fowly deceived. For I do both believe and confess them,
neither shall the outrage and unbridled wilfulness of a sort of rascal
varlets ever bring me from the constant confession of my faith. What arguments
of yours think you, to be of such force, that they might cause a man, which is
in his right wits, not to believe that, that is confirmed by the testimony of
holy Scriptures, by authority of the holy Fathers, by the records of all the
antiquity? You say, afterward.

For in the old and best time of the Church, neither was their any Popedom,
neither leaden redemption for sin, neither the mart of Purgatory, neither
woorsshippinge of Images, neither runninge up and down to visit Saints,
neither offering in the Masses for the live and for the dead, with other like.
These shameful points, which do disshonest Relligion, at what times they
crope in, and by whom they were devised, you are not ignoraunie. But you
dissemble it, to serve the ears of your company.

Belke out M. Haddon, streine your self, as much as you can, rid your
stomach of this surfeicte, of most barbarouse fury and rage: cast up your
poison, spewe out your venime: and then shall you openly triumph amongst your
compagnions with this peevish and vain talk. When you have said nothing,
proved nothing, alleged no true testimony of the antiquiquitie: when you
have brought nothing else but railinge for argument, madness for reason,
impudency for true exaumples: you keep such a raginge stir, as though you
had alreadi^ won the field with great honor.

But we on the other side are wont to declare, by authority of the holy
Scriptures, by testimonies of the holy Fathers, by fetching the Monumentes and
Records of all the Antiquity, finally by reason, by use, by experience, by a
number of examples, that this kind of government has allwaies been in the
Church: and that, who so ever goes about to appaire it, is a breaker of
peace, an ouerthrower of Religion, a woorker of sedition, a puller down of the
Church, which is one, and a fettor up of diverse and sundry churches,
diversely sundered and divided within them selves, a bringer in of infinite most
filthy vices, and trowblesome errors.

As for the mart of Purgatory, which you speak of, we answer you, that there
is no such thing. If at any time in so many hundred years there has been any
bying and selling of holy things used, the holy Church allows it not, but
banisheth it out of the bounds of the Christian common weal, as a most
pestilent and pernicious abuse.

Likewise of Images, we say, that al we, that live in the holy catholic faith,
are able to prove both by reasons, arguments, and examples, that even from
the primitive church, (especially after it might be done for tyrannes) there
has been Images set up in churches, to the everlasting remembrance of virtue,
to move men to godliness and religion, to the glory and honor of Christ, the
which is seen in the wonderful virtue of holy men. We say moreover that
the error of those men, that threw down Images, was condemned by many
authorities of the holy Fathers, by diverse decrees of general councels: the
which thing your masters, be they never so shameless, can not deny, unless
they will first burn all the writings of holy fathers, al histories and
records, all the decrees of general Councels.

What should I here reason of the reverence and honor, which was of old time
geauen unto saints? Could you never spare a little time from the fine works
of Accursius, to bestow in the reading of Gregory Nazianzene, Basile the
Great, Hierome and Ambrose? If you could do it, you should see it in their
books, how many times godly persons came together in the old time, what
resortes and assemblies there were made, what eloquent Orations were pronounced
in the commendation of Saints, how great multitude of the common people
pressed thither to hear them. But now, if I would show you, with what
feruente zeal and devotion very many men were wont to continue all night at
the Tombs of Martyrs, it were a hard matter to express it.

None of all the holy Bishops in those days, did once put back the common
people from hearing the commendation of Martyrs: no man dissuaded them from
that most earnest devotion toward the Saints: no, they did rather exhort al
such as were present, to visit their Monumentes, to praise and honor them, to
observe and keep such woorshippe, as was dew unto them. For they saw in those
assemblies, when the name of Martyrs was set out with heavenly praises, that
not the nature of the body, but the grace of God, and the almighty power of
Christ him self was dewlie honored in them. For if the Christian men in
those days kept the signs of the holy Cross, and the Images of Saints,
which were of devotion set up in Churches, with such reverence: if they
were oftentimes put in mind by those signs to pluck up their hearts, and
to remember the virtue which those domme Images did represente: was it not
much more convenient, that the lively Images of Christ should be honored
with greater feruencie, and that all such as served God truly and heartily,
(to do this honor the better) should visit the Tombs of Martyrs, and
Churches builded in the honor of them? And is it not evidently seen, that the
Saints are by the operation of the holy Ghost shapen to the likeness of God
and that they bear a very true and express Image of Christ?

Purgatory proved by Luther.
As touching your pastime that you make with Purgatory (for you must needs
have a snatche at every thing) can there be brought any grauer testimony
against you, then that, which the manne, that was sent (as you say) from
heaven, has given openly? Who is that say you? It is that Luther, whom you
honor and reverence, whom you make a God, whom you affirm to have been
borne for your salvation. He said more then once or twice, and abidde by it,
that there was a Purgatory, and that he did not ween, think, or believe it,
but certainly know it to be so. For proof whereof, he constantly alleged
that place of S. Matthew, Matt. 12. c.
where Christ said, that the sin of such, as did wilfully resist the
testimony of the holy Ghost, should never be forgeauen, neither in this
world, neither yet in the world to come: by the which words it is signified,
that some hope of forgeuenes is mercifully showed by God unto many men even in
the world to come.

^. Macab. ^2. g.
He alleged also that place out of the Machabees, where Judas made oblations
for the sins of such as were departed. With these and other the like
arguments and allegatio^s he was earnest to prove that there was a Purgatory.

How then? If Luther said there was a Purgatory, and you will warrant it,
that Luther was sent from God: and, if he were sent from God, so long as he was
in that embassage, he could not lie: it is manifestly proved by his
authority, (the which you may not gainsaie) that there is a purgatory. If
there be no purgatory, Luther lied. If Luther lied, he was not sent from God,
but from him, that is the father of lying. Choose therefore whether you like
better. For either the authority of Luther shall confirm, that there is a
purgatory, or else the feined tale of purgatory, (as you term it) shall
convince Luther of vanity and madness.

But he afterward denied purgatory. That is no wonder. For not only he, but
all his offspring say now one thing, and now an other: they correct and alter
many things, neither can they stay them selves in any one degree, but
rather when they have once begone an error, they heap and increase it with a
number of other errors.

But I would feign learn of you M. Haddon: whether of these two opinions,
which are maintained both by Luther, think you to be the truer? The later,
say you. Well then the former he received not of God. Then was he not as yet
sent from God. But after he had disteined him self with incestuous wedlock,
after he had allured his contrei men to rebellion, after he had defied
chastity and all holiness, after he had stirred up such broile and sedition in
the common weal, that he could not appeace it him self afterward, when he
had railed against the state of the church with most reproachful and shameful
language, when he had uttered most horrible and devilish blasphemy, when he
had wasted, spoiled, and burned all holy things, when he had committed all
these outrages and villainies: then was he thought a meet man to be taken into
gods pricuie counsel, and a person worthy, to whom God, besides all other
secrets, should mercifully reuele that mystery also of the devising of
purgatory. Then did this great wise man understand at the length, that S.
Augustine, which held that we should pray unto God in our Sacrifices for the
dead: that S. Cyprian, which laid this most grievous punishment upon such, as
appointed Priests in their testament to be tutours or governors to their
children, that there should no sacrifice be offered up for them in the churches:
that S. Chrysostom, which referred this ordinance to the tradition of the
Apostles: that S. Denise (to pass over a number of others) which wrote very
diligently of the care, that is to be had for the departed in the faith, and of
prayers, that are to be made unto God for their deliverance: Luther, I say,
understood, from heaven that al these men had been in great error and folly.

Truly the captain of this your faction had a great commodity of his
naughtines and folly, if, after the reising of such broiles and troubles in the
world, he was delivered by the benefit of God from that error, in the which
those holy Fathers, most Godly and wise men, excellently well learned in the
Scriptures, linked unto Christ with a most straight band of heavenly love
were quite drowned.

If no man can thus persuade him self, unless he be peevish, frantike and
stark mad, void not only of al godly religion, but also of common sense: who
does not see that this opinion of Luther is wicked and detestable, taught and
set out by none other, then by the enemy the devil.

But this, say you, is not witten in the scripture. What then? The thing,
which the Apostles taught by word of mowth, which their scholars delivered to
the posterity, which has been most constantly holden and believed from the
primitive Church till our times, which has been approved by the belief and
full agreement of the whole Church for so many hnndred years, shall Luther a
seditious mad selowe, after so many ages garishly auowch it to be a feined
matter? Shall men, which take upon them to be both Godly and religious, follow
him as a God of heaven, that attempteth most desperately to assault heaven? For
he makes war against heaven, which takes up armor against the faith of the
Church.

No, no, say you, you would not think, what manner of man he was. For he, I
tell you, would allow nothing, unless he fownde it written in the holy
scriptures. Well sir, I will not now handle that matter, which is by the holy
Fathers discussed long a go: how the gospel consists not only in things
written, but also in customs and ordinances received without any writing,
delivered unto the Church by word of mowth and order of the Apostles: how
much the sure and grounded 1. Tim. 3. c.
authority of the Church, which is the pillar and stay of truth, is to be
esteemed: of how great value and importance the agreement of all holy men in
one mind without any variety ought to be: all these things I will now
omit, and ask you one question, how Luther, when he said there was a
purgatory, to prove it, alleged the testimonies of the holy scripture, if
there were no testimony in the scripture, that proved that there was a
purgatory?

Then again when he said, that there was no Purgatory, by what testimony of
the Scripture thought he, that Purgatory might be utterly disprooued? Brought
he any one place, by the which he might convince that there is no Purgatory?
Dowbtlesse not one. Such therefore was his presumption, that, what so ever came
into his head, that would he constantly affirm: and again, the self same
thing, if it misliked him, would he utterly deny.

And yet his disciples for sooth find no fault at all, neither with his
inconstancy, neither yet with his lewd fasshions: but what so ever the drowsy
blowbol draueled out over his pottes, that took they up so griedily, as though
it had been good gospel.

Purgatory.
But lest you should say, that it can not be showed by the testimony of the
scripture, that there is a purgatory, although it be not necessary, yet,
besides those places, which are wont to be alleged for the proof thereof, I
think it good to bring a few: of the which that is one of S. Mark: where
our Lord, when he had said, that hell (into the which al such shall be thrown
down, as esteem more their bodily pleasure, then their dewtie toward God)
should have this property, that the worm of them, that shall be tombled down
headlong into it, should never die, and their fire never be quenched: he
brought in Marc. 9* g
forthwith these words: for every man shall be seasoned in fire, and every
sacrifice shall be seasoned in salt. In this place there are two things to be
noted. One is, that there is a worm, that is to say, a vexation or torment of
conscience gnawing and molesting the mind, the which shall have an end: and
that there is a torment of fire also, the which in like manner shall have and
end in some men. For otherwise our Lord would never have Esaie. 66. a
brought that place out of Esaie: their worm dies not, and their fire is not
quenched. By the which place we are taught, that there is one torment
everlasting, and an other that lasts but for a time. For so much therefore
as this worm and fire is a torment or vexation of mind, and of torments
there is one, which is appointed by the judgment of God to last but a time,
and the other to continue for evermore: is it not evidently proved, that there
is a purgatory? (for so is the place of punishment called, in the which by
the sentence of God the sowles are purged within a certain time of such
spots of venial offenses, as they had gathered in this life.)

An other thing worthy to be noted is this, that no sin shall escape
unpunished. For even as in the old law it was not lawful to offer up any
Sacrifice without salt, so is it not lawful for our souls to approach unto the
throne of Gods majesty, unless their uncleanness be before cleansed by salt and
fire, that is to say, by the rigor of Gods judgment, and by dew
punishment: that, when all the spots of unclean affection be put out and
quite consumed, the faithful sowles may come to have such a purity and
cleerenes, that they may be able to receive the brightness of God in them
selves, and be likened and confourmed to the glory of God. For although by the
mercy of God sin is taken quite away in such as stay them selves upon a
lively says, yet are they for the most part so bound with some knot of the
law, that they must needs satisfy the justice of God. For almighty God is
merciful, but so^, that he is not unmindful of his justice: he is also just,
but in such sort, that in the ministering of his severe judgment he shows
many points of great mercy.

Moreover this purity or cleannes, which is gotten by the grace and benefit
of Christ, has certain degrees, so, that he that is clean, may be yet
cleaner, and come unto a cleerer knowledge of the nature of God. And the
increase of this cleannes consists in salt and fire, that is to say, in such
pounishment, as is appointed to pourge the remnantes of sin: that the
Sacrifice may be purer and holier and more acceptable to God. Wherefore it is
necessary, that the Sacrifice, which is to be offered up unto God with
such rites and orders, as are appointed by Christ our high Priest, be first
cleansed, yea and perfectely well pourged, by laying on some pounishment upon
sin, either in this life, or else in the life to come. For even as God, when
he pardoned David, quited him not of all 2. Reg. 12. d.
punishment, (for he lost afterward his son, and was chased out of his
kingdom by the heynouse treason of his son Absolon, and his house was
dishonored in the face of the world) in like sort, although God forgeaueth
sins, yet, that notwithstanding, he will require some penance, that there
may be made a satisfaction or amends for the offense committed. The which
satisfaction rests not in the weight or estimation of it self, but in the
infinite merit of Christ. For otherwise there should be no end of punishment,
for so much as the offense was endless: in so much as the majesty of God was
offended, (which is endless.)

Unto this penance, which is to be abiden of al such, as have not thorughly
pourged the uncleanness of their 1. Pet. 4. d
sins in this life by dew labors, looked S. Peter, when he said, that the
just should hardly be saved, wherefore the wicked were sarre from that, that
they could assure them selves of salvation. That there is a most certain hope
of salvation offered unto the just, he denies not: but that it is given,
unless they take great pains and travail before, that he denies utterly.

S. Peter again in the self same epistle, to teach us, that the entrance
unto salvation is not shut up to the 1. Pet. 3. d
dead, says, that Christ preached the gospel to those sowles, that were in
custody or ward. He says not, that Christ going down to hell declared that
joyful and glad tydinges to the holy Fathers only, but also to men which
were committed to ward, that is to say, to men which were shut up in prison for
offenses committed. And left it might be thought, that those me^, whom Christ
at that time instructed with a more clear and exact knowledge, had been before
utterly void of ^aith, he added: Such as had been some Ibide^*
time unbelieving. And again lest some man might suspect, that that sentence
had been spoken by them, the which, although they had sometime committed some
offenses, yet had spent the greatest part of their life in faith and religion,
he says: that the gospel, that is to say, the tidings of everlasting salvation
was brought to them, which in the days of Noe made light of the counsel and
advertisement of the holy man: the which notwithstanding, (before they were
consumed in the flud) were better advised, and gat pardon of their sins and
offenses: but yet so, that for their long offense, they suffered in hell a long
penance. Out of the which place it is gathered by the authority of S. Peter,
that such, as repent them selves in like manner of their unclean and synful
living in the end of their life, and depart out of this body with a burning
faith, shall after the same fasshion be kept in prison, until they have suffered
such punishment as God has appointed, and until being more clearly
instructed in the things apperteyning to God, (in the which instruction and
receiving of the light stands, as S. Denyse says, the sum of the
purgation) they may be carried up into those joyful dwelling places of heaven.

S. Paul also writing to the Corinthians, says. What shall they do, which 1.
Cor. 15. d.
are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Wherefore are they
baptized for them? To be baptized in in this place, is to offer up him self
as a satisfactorie or pourging Sacrifice to wasshe and cleanse the spots of
sowles. Whereupon our Lord him Luc. 22. ^
self showed, that he was very sore pained with the earnest desire that he had
of baptism, that is to say, of that most wholesome wasshing, wherein he should
offer up him self a Sacrifice upon the Altar of the Cross for Mat. 2^. ^
the sins of mankind. And of the two brethren, which sought to have the
highest room with him in his kingdom, he demau^deth, whether they be ^eady to
bear him company in the same baptism. To be baptized therefore for the dead
is nothing else, but to honor God with some pourging Sacrifice or offering for
the salvation of the dead, and to offer up with good heart even the Sacrifice
of our body for their salvation.

The which thing S. Paul did, as it appears, not only for the dead, but 1.
Cor. 15. d.
also for the living. For immediately after he says thus. Wherefore do we also
put our selves in ieoperdie every day? I do die daily for your glory, which
I have in our Lord Jesus Christ. By the which place it may be gathered, that
S. Paul, so often as he adventured his life for the state of the holy Church,
so often did he administer the Sacrament and Sacrifice of this baptism: the
which thing he did then 2. Tim. 4. ^.
most worthily, when he died a most honorable death for the glory of Christ and
salvation of al men. For he said, that he was to be offered up as a Sacrifice,
at that time especially, when death, by the which he should be delivered out of
the prison of his body, approached near. By the which place it is evidently
proved, that many other also have offered up most holy Sacrifices for the dead,
that is to say, for the salvation of the dead. The which thing if it were
always done in vain, then might it be concluded, that such, ^s are dead,
should never return again to live.

But now, for so much as it was not done in vain, (for otherwise S. Paul
would never have borne withal) it follows necessarily, that prayers made for
the salvation of the dead are not superfluous, and that the sowles of such, as
are departed this life, are helped by the prayers, vows, and Sacrifices of the
living. The which sowles so departed, for so much as they ^re neither buried
in everlasting darkness (for then could they not get out by any man's prayers)
neither yet placed in heaven (for there should they not need any man's prayers)
it follows, that they be in some other place, which we are wont to call
purgatory.

Many other things might be spoken to this purpose. Many things have been very
well alleged of diverse godly and holy men to confirm this matter: but if
there had been no such thing, yet the faith of the holy Church, which has
always continewed undefiled even from the Apostles time till our days, might
have suffised us abundantly. But you, when you see most evident testimonies,
when you are not able to shift our arguments, when you are convinced by the
authority of the holy Fathers, when you may see the agreement of the whole
Church, yet will you of an incredible stubbornness continewe in the wicked
opinion, which you have once taken.

What shall I here say of prayers and vows made in Sacrifice for the live and
the dead? Is there any time, in the which it is not lawful for Christian men to
use charity, the perfection of whose Religion rests in charity? Can there
be devised any greater deed of charity then that, wherein we pray unto God
most seruently for the salvation of our brethern? Is there any time more meet
and convenient to do this holy work, then that is, when we go about to
appeace the majesty of God, not with the Sacrifice of brute beasts, but with
the body and blood of Christ? Is there any thing more agreeable to the order
of our Religion, which do believe, that such as depart out of this mortal
body with true faith, do not die, but live, then to join them with such, as
remain in this life: and to pray unto Christ, which was offered up for
us, both for the living, as also for them, that are departed out of this life?

Call you this godly point of Religion, this holy work of most fervent
charity, this wholesome Sacrifice offered up not only for us, but also for
our brethern, unto whom we are knit with an everlasting band of love, call
you this, I say, the dishonestie of Religion? Is this no outrage? Is this no
madness? Is this no impudency?

To refuse lawefull authority, to break the ancient order of the Church, to
deflowre holy virgins, to rob good matrones of their chastity, to cancel
the very remembrance of of virtue, Religion, and justice, to quench the love
of honesty and gentleness, to profane and rob Churches, to take holy men,
and some to murder, some to spoil and put to all the villainy in the world,
some others to bannishe out of their country, to awrecke the malice your bear
toward godliness upon the relikes of Saints, to vaunt your selves like
helhoundes in the waste and sack of holy things, shall this be accounted as
honest and gloriouse, shall this be esteemed as a matter worthy of immortal
commendation and praise? And to be bound to obeie authority grounded upon the
commandment and ordinance of Christ, to conserve the band of peace and
concord, to honor and reverence the justice and mercy of God joined together
in one, to call to remembrance the goodly monumentes of holiness, to offer up
that most holy and noble Sacrifice (the virtue whereof we ca^ neither express
with words, neither yet conceive in heart) for the living and the dead, and
for the good estate of the whole Christian common weal: shall this be such a
dishonestie as may not be borne? And yet you are not afraied to call al these
things the dishonor of Religion, and to say, that I am not ignorant, by whom
these things are cropen in, but that I dissemble it to serve the ears of my
compagnions.

Of like, Sir, all these things, which you mislike, and call the dishonestie
of Religion, were devised and brought in, by brothels and bawdes, or else by
such fellows, as serve the belly, lust, or unsteadfastness of the people for
their commodities sake, and not by the spirit of Christ, and by most
continent and holy men, in whom was the spirit of Christ. But you are
never able to prove that you say. For both reason and the testimony of all
antiquity, as also the authority of holy Fathers do urge and press you, yea
and convince you of impudency: but we have put back the violent pusshe of
this your ungodliness and malice, with arguments most sure, with testimonies
most grave, with examples most true.

Whereas you say, that I speak otherwise then I think, to serve the ears of
my compagnions, I see well, you are well acqueinted with my behavior. I am like
to be such a man, as would spend my time with all diligence to learn to
flatter, and to write, not what I think, but what I imagine may be best liked
of my compagnions. I beseech Christ the judge of the living and of the dead, if
I write not, in matters concerning Religion, those things which I think,
which I judge to be true, which I believe assuredly, that he suffer me not to
enter into that most gloriouse and everlasting City of heaven, and that he let
me not to have the joyful fruition of his own light and brightness for
evermore.

For what is the Popedom else, but a ministration of an authority, which is
lawefull and ordained by God? What is our belief of Purgatory, but a
declaration of Gods justice and mercy together? What is the honor given unto
Saints, but a reverent consideration of the work of God, in the which
appears the almighty power and bountifulnes of God much more, then in the
making of heaven, yea or in all the works of nature. What are the prayers made
in our Sacrifice for the living and the dead, but a work of most perfect
holiness, of most excellent Religion, of most seruent charity?

These be dishonest points, which you have taken a way. There is good cause,
why you should glory in it, and have your name recorded with honor to all the
posterity. for you have brought in, for obeying of holy and lawful authority,
rebellion: for the fear of purgatory, a rash a^fiaunce of licentiousness
vnpounished: for dew woorshipping of Saints, the contempt of holiness and
justice: for the religious observation of the most holy sacrifice, and
charitable behavior of men, a despising of religion and forgetting of
charity: yea moreover and this, you have brought in a scornful laughter
exceeding al modesty, together with a saucy talk passing all civility. Are
these things comely, M. Haddon? Are these things honorable? Are these
things to be commended? Are these things to mabe a show of?

But you say, that the Bishops of Rome keep wars, that in Rome is kept a
market of purgatory, that holy things are there set out to sale, that many
men are to much incombred with superstition in the woorshipping of Saints,
that Priests live not very continently, and that they abuse their sacrifices
now and then to their luker and gain.

First of all as towching wars you must think, that we can not of reason and
equity condemn all wars. For they are some times begone for the defense of
Religion, and maintenance of a just cause.

As for the buying and selling of holy things, if in so many hundred years
some such matter have been used, it is no wonder. For (as you say your self)
it can not be chosen, but that sometimes in the good corn there will grow
some weeds. And if any such abuse have been, it is now taken quite away.

If superstition trouble men's minds now and then, it is very easily taken
away by the labor and diligence of Bishops. The vicious and unclean life of
Priests is very severely punished. And there are at this time amongst us a
great many more of them, that live very continently, then of such, as will
disteine them selves with vicious and unclean living.

Last of all, to pass over all other, the virtuous, godly, and religiouse
example of this most holy Pope Pius the fifth, (whom neither ambition,
neither coueteousnes, neither the favor of the people, neither yet the rashness
of men, but the holy Ghost has placed in this room of high honor and
dignity) brings to pass, that all things wax better and better every
day, and that very many are stirred to the love of true godliness.

But admit there were no such matter at this time, as I talk of: admit that
al went to naught, and that there were no man to refourme the church where it
is decayed: should it be well done by and by to euerthrow all such things, as
have been wisely ordained, so soon as men do abuse them to naughtines? No
truly: but rather to provide, as near as we may, that holy things may no
more be abused. For otherwise all would decaie, and there would follow a
marvelous disorder and confusion of things in the Church.

If you, as you have for the misbehauiour of a few monks (as you say) taken
quite away the whole order, and for the lewdnes of certain Pristes overthrown
the dignity of Priesthood, and authority of Bishopps: so you would proceed,
(for it stands with as good reason as the other does) and for the default of
a Magistrate, or Prince, or King, which has not done his dewtie, take away
the orderly government of the common weal, together with the Kingly honor
and authority: the world should come again to that confusion, which (as the
Poets report) was, before that nature was disposed and set in comely order.
For what thing is so holy, the which men may not abuse sometimes to do much
harm and mischief? For, that we may go no further, wedlock it self,
(which you prefer before perpetual virginity) is it always kept in such
chaste, godly, and religious order, as it ought to be? Do the housba^des never
look besides their wives? Do the wives never beguyle their housbandes? Are
there no aduowtries committed now and then among? Yeas questionles are there:
and many foul and shameful acts are done of married men oftentimes, with
great rashness and impudency. Shall we therefore, for the lewd demeanor of some
married persons, break the band of man and wife, and take away the holy
state of lawful wedlock? No truly. For then would men and women run unto
it without order, and there would be no difference between them and brute
beasts. Wherefore although all our doings were void of al good order,
honesty, and religion: yet are not such things, as have been for a most godly
purpose devised and ordained, forthwith to be disannulled, but rather order
would be taken, that things, which are amiss, might be amended. Neither are
such things, as may be cured, to be cut of: neither yet, if the festered and
corrupt parts of the body must needs be pared of, is it necessary for that
to destroy the whole body, which may be recovered: neither is the state of
a common weal to be altered, so soon as any disorder happens in it, but
rather reason would, that al such matters, as are decayed, should be brought
again to that comely order, in the which they were at the beginning.

Aristotel tells, that there was a certain man called Hippodamus of
Milesium, which wrote of a common weal. Amongst other matters he recites a
law of his, by the which he decreed, that a great reward should be geauen
out of the common treasure to him, that could devise any law profitable for
the common weal. This decree Aristotel misliketh. For he thinks, that there
would be an end in making of laws, because the often Often changing of
laws dangerous.
changing of them is wont by little and little to bring them into contempt: and
the laws being once despised, the good estate of a common weal can not long
continewe. Wherefore that excellent learned man counsels al such, as make
laws, to foresee, that there be not more evil in the often altering of the
laws, then there is in that disorder, which they go about to refourme by the
new law. For he thinks it more safety to keep indifferent good laws, then
to make others not much better. Wherein he has good reason. For why, that
constant and perpetual reverence toward the laws causes a certain fear
and bashfulnes, and linketh men together within them selves with a sure and
inviolable band of equity. But this fond appetite that men have to alter and
change the law (without fom weighty cawse) engenders a presumpteouse boldness,
and makes a way by subtle and wily means to take the law quite away, and
to bring in tyranny. And although there came none other inconvenience of it,
yet at the least it disordereth the common weal.

Now this, which is to be feared about the innovation of laws, is to be
determined about religion so much the more constantly, the greater the peril
is to offend in religion, then in any other thing. This thing considered the
fownders of commonweals of old time, punished such, as brought in any new
trick of religion out of other places, with death or banishment, and decreed,
that the rites or fashions of the country should be most constantly retained.
Wherein, although they had shaped them selves a religion after a very bad sort,
and lived in great errors, yet was this their ordinance not altogether void
of good reason and consideration. For if it were possible, that some one
religion might be more commendable then some other, he, that should take away
an old religion, which were not ungodly, to set ^p an other religion, that
were but a little better, should do a shrewd turn to the common weal.

Why so, say you? Because he should bring in a custom to alter Religion,
and, by consequent, to bring Religion into contempt. And so it might come to
pass, that diverse and sundry religions coming in one after an other, being
either devised by crafty wits, or else taken out of other countries, might
move great debate about the establishing of religion: and while every religion
should disprooue one an other, the matter might by little and little so fall out
at the length, that all religion hold come to naught.

The which thing being true, (that we may return to our disputation again)
how is this to be taken, that a religion, which, is most true, holy, and
ancient, approved and confirmed by the testimony of God, by the blood of
Christ, by the faith of holy men, should be discredited by reason of a new
gospel devised by the wit of a sort of filthy varlets? Is it not a consequent
(as we now see it fall out every where) that there arise a number of religions
of diuersse ^ortes, all ungodly and naught, yea and iarring within them
selves? That they arise one against an other? That every one of them disprooue
the folly of others? That never a one of them being able to maintain it self
by grownded reason, and strong argument, they come all at the length to be
despised and set at naught?

By these steps or degrees are me^ come to that point at the length, that
many a one raises up the damned sprites of Arius, Sabellius, and other most
detestable heretics from holl* and renews their errors, which were before
buried: some others think, that there is no Religion true it all, and persuade
them selves, that the world is not governed by God. This fruicte have the
brochers of your newly devised and fresh tapped gospel brought into commonweals, that ^uerie man may profess him self* to ^e a setter up of a new
Religion, and ^ake up the sweard against all other, that are deuisers of the
like pestilent ^ectes: whereby it is like at the length, that al order of
Religion may be taken quite away. O what bountiful and ^rofitable fellows
are these, which ^aue so woorthely prepared a way to ^l mischief and
ungodliness?

And yet you asked me, what came ^to my head, to affirm, that these ^ectes are
dangerous and hurtful unto Princes. Tell me sir, I pray you, such as ^aue
presumed to do so great villa^i^, as to overthrow the wonderful example of
chaste and clean life, to deface al monumentes of religion and holiness, to
burn the holy Canons or rules of the Church openly at a sermon, to raze the
state of the church with their weapons (where they might be suffered to do it)
to bring the people to hate the law, and so to play outrageous and mad
parts, to despise all lawful authority, to set God and al godly order at
naught, to fill the Churches and chapples of religious men with blood, to egg
and allure the simple people through the hope of to much liberty to take up
armor: think you not, that these fellows (when so ever they shall find
occasion) will turn the self same fury and rage vp^n the Princes them
selves? Is it not well known (as it is sa^ed before) what they have wrought and
practiced against the emperor in Germany, against the estate and life of King
Henry in France, against Edward, whom they made away with poison, and
afterward against Queen Marie in England? Is it not known, how traitorously
and furiously they bent them selves against the majesty of these Princes? What
shall I here say of the King of Scotland, whom the world knows to have been
most crewelly murdered? What? Have they not wrought the like treason against
many other Princes also?

I leave out a number of examples of this barbarous villainy, which I could
here recite. And, although there were none such, yet would I not dowbt to
say so much, as I have said. For it is not the part of a wise man* when he
sees the cawse, to dowbt of the event, which follows necessarily of the
cawse. For when I see the common people void of fear, unruly and fearce
through a pretensed name of liberty, outragiousely following their own
unbridled will and pleasure, haughtely flingyng up and down, bearing them selves
upon a false opinion of Religion: may I dowbte, but that they are most
spitefully bent against al authorititie, whereby they think, that their
liberty, (which they so griedely long after) may be hindered?

These are the things, M. Haddon, these are the things, that do dishonest
Religion, and not those matters, which you speak of. For what is more comely
and honest, then to obey such authority, as is ordained by God? To dread and
fear the judgment of God? Reverently to consider the mercy of God, in them,
whom he first tries by dew punishment, and so admits them into life
everlasting? To call to mind the monumentes of justice, godliness and holiness?
To yield up humble prayers unto God in the most holy sacrifices, for the good
estate of the living, and for the salvation of the dead? But in the mean time,
while you dowbte not to say* that these most godly orders are the things,
that do dishonest religion, you mark not how great the dishonestie of your
religion is.

For, that I may say nothing ^ls, can there be any greater dishonestie of
religion, then that all Sacraments and ceremonies, al decrees and ordinances
of the Church, al priesthood and holy orders should be under the rule and
government of a woman? I mean not hereby to disgrace your Queen, whom I
desire to see so beawtified and fournished with most excellent virtues, that
her name may remain as a thing of holy remembrance unto all the posterity.
Neither do I so much blame her, as you, which have by your flattery brought
her to this inconvenience, that she takes her self to be gouernesse of the
Church. Tell me sir, if it like you, where have you readde, that ever any
Prince took upon him the office or charge of the high Bishop? No rather, all
such Princes as loved godliness and justice, whose name is for their noble
acts set out to the posterity for ever, did reverence the judgment of
Priests, refused not to be obedient unto Bishops, and thought like very
wise men, that it would turn to their everlasting commendation, if they were
governed by them. So did your great Constantine, the most worthy orname^t and
beawty of your Ila^d: so did our Theodosius, so did Lewis King of France, so
did a number of others, which with most noble victories enlarged their Empiere
very far: when they had subdewed al countries with armor, they did so obey
the decrees and ordinances of Bishops, that they seemed to glory not so much
in their Empire, as in that obedience. But you have brought al holy things
not only under a king, which (as I showed before) were to be esteemed as a most
heinous offense, but also under a queen, against all right and reason, against
the inviolable reverence of most pure religion, against the ordinances of
almighty God: you have taken away the most holy dignity of the high
bisshoprike from the lawful bishops, and have transposed it to be administered
by a woman. The which, I say, was a most wicked deed, a most barbarouse act,
a most detestable and cursed offense. Whereby it may be gathered, that man's
heart can imagine no mischief so horrible and devilish, that these flatterers
will not take upon them to practice it, with desperate boldness and impudency.

Here do I pass over many things, and unto the railing words, which you heap
together against me, I answer you nothing, for in deed I regard them not.
Neither is it my meaning to confute your railing words, but to take upon me
the defense of most holy Religion, for the which it were a goodly matter for
me to die. Al other things therefore I let pass, that I may come to that
place, in the which you draw blood of your own body, yea and geaue your self
a deadly wound with your own hands. Your words are these.

What then? This holy doctrine of the gospel, in the which we have continued
more then thirtye years together (the most troublesome space of six years
excepted) in the which the Queens majesty has passed over all her life, in
the which she has found God so merciful unto ber, in the which the states of
the realm are fully agreed, in the which many noble statutes and laws have
ensewed: this true and sincere worshipping of almighty God, which is so
diligently environed and fortified on every side by the Queen's majesty, shall
the voice of a seely fellow of Portugal break it down? What a deal of matter
you heap up together, M. Haddo^, how unadvisedly you speak (that I may not
say, how rashly and madly). for first of al, this, which you call the holy
doctrine of the gospel, is the doctrine of Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, Calvin,
and other the like brainsicke fellows, which have, not only by their most
pestilent decrees and ordinances, but also by the example of their filthy and
vicious living, quite overthrown al chastity, holiness, modesty, meekness,
and obedience: which have broken and cast away true faith, and in steed of it
have set up a rash and presumpteouse boldness: which have taken away
liberty (although in their talk they pretend otherwise) and for that have
rewarded their adherentes with a license to live in naughtiness uncontrolled*
which have taken away the gift of justice (which is the greatest and largest
grace that man may receive of God) and for true justice have brought in a
fevned and counterfeyte iustice^ which, of a mad and ungodly mind, have not
ben ashamed to impute the cause of al sin and wickedness to God that most
perfect goodness, from whom no evil can proceed: which, (whereas they took
upon them to scour or purge the gospel thoroughly, and to repair the Church
again, which tends to ruin) have not only not performed so much, as they
prowdly and rashly promised to do, but have moreover beraied the Church (the
uncleanness whereof religious men could not bear before) with much filthiness
of vice and naughtines, and have brought it to be rent and riuen in peaces.

What should we think to be the cause, wherefore, when any man infected with
the contagion of this doctrine is taken amongst us (which is counted here a
very strange matter) although he set never so sad or grave countenance upon
it to make a color and show of holiness, yet will the concealed tricks of a
disordered and carnal mind show them selves, and many foul vices, which
were before hidden under the covert of hypocrisy, will forth with appear. For
the more a man gives him self to this doctrine, the more is he contrary to
bashfulnes and continency.

I omit to speak of your earnest talk, wherein you say, that this new
broched Church, which is disteined with innumerable vices, may be compared with
the Church of the Apostles, which was most flourishing with heavenly gifts,
with religion and holiness.

As for that comparison of mine, wherein I showed, what great difference there
was between the two Churches, I would not have you vainly and without any
fruicte to find fault withal. For as yet you have not confuted it, neither shall
you ever be able to do it. And who so ever shall attempt to do it, shall do
nothing else, but only set out to the world his own madness and impudency
together, and cause al men to laugh at his folly, and abhor his malice.

That I may therefore omit that foolish and shameless talk of yours, I would
you would compare this your Church, but only with the Church of your
auncetours: the which thing if you do, you shall find, that there is brought
in for the religious conversation of your forefathers, a presumptuouse boldness:
for their gravity and constancy, a light and unsettled harishnesse: for their
continency, sensuality: for their manhood niceness. And will you call this
the holy Doctrine of the gospel, which has overthrown and defaced so many
holy things, and in steed of them has brought in such a deal of naughtines
and disordre?

The first founding of the protestants Church.
Call to remembrance I pray you the first founding of this your Church. For
you may not well dissemble such things, as are commonly talked of all men,
and in writing commended to the everlasting remembrance of all the posterity.
Wantonness and love were the first setters up of it: the breach of law and
order, and a hatred toward the Pope for geauing sentence against the offender
enlarged it: the flattery of lewd fellows with the healp of lying walled it:
inordinate desire and coueteousnesse fensed it: the punishinge of holy and
innocent persons hallowed it: the putting of al men in fear confirmed it:
finallye the Doctrine of such men, as were sent into those coasts not from
Godde, but from Satan, infected it with most pestilent and seditious er^ours.
Dare you call this a religious, ^odly, and holy doctrine, whose beginning,
proceeding, increase, and end you see (unless you be in extreme and miserable
blindness) to have been set upon, followed, and finished with naughtiness,
incontinencie, hatred, coueteousnes, creweltie, outrage and madness?

Then, what a fopperie is that, to say, that you have continewed in this
doctrine, more then thirty years together? O reverent horeheaded gospel. O
ancient heavenly doctrine. O old unspotted religion. But you think, that you
being a witty and wily interpretour of the law forsooth, need not recke much
for the antiquity of your doctrine. For you seem to plead prescription, and
therefore you content your self with the space of thirty years, within the
which time you think, that the order of your religion may be lawfully
possessed. Howbeit if you take away from thyrtie years the space of six
years, which you call a troublesome time) it is evident, that this your holy
Gospel is not yet fully thirty years old.

But admit that the thirty years were fully expired, if this title of
prescription be good, then may the Arabians much better maintain their sect,
then you can yours. For you defend your heresy by the prescriptio^ of thirty
years: but they will uphold the wicked superstition of Mahumet by the possession
of more then nine hundred years.

You say moreover, that the Queen's Majesty (for such a pleasure have you ^o
flatter, that you never call her the Queen, as though in the name of a Queen,
there were little dignity, or ^ls ^er Majesty should decaie by and by, ^f you
should call her Queen). You sai^ ^herfore, that the Queen's Majesty has ^assed
over al her life in this doctrine. That this is true, I have none other warrant
but your word. But if it b^ so* ^he fault is not so much in her, her^^^ in h^^
teachers, who had the bringing up of her, when she was of age tender and
weak, and therefore the more meet to be abused by such subtle and crafty
fellows.

Last of all, it is not as yet evidently seen, so long as she is not free
from your tyranny, which under her name, as men say, do possess the
kingdom, what way she would take in all these matters. Of this I am right
well assured, that her singular wit is not by nature so obstinately bente to
maintain an opinion once conceived, or so much geauen to naughty and false
doctrine, that it is not very flexible to yealde unto good reason, and very
willing to forsake false doctrine, and to follow that which is true and
incorrupted. Wherefore I doubt not, if she be so witty, as you say she is,
but that she will (so soon as ever she may do it for your importunity)
turn from this your wicked doctrine, to the honest, godly, and profitable
doctrine of the Church.

And whereas you add these words: In the which she has found God so merciful
unto her: Me thinks, you understand not in what thing the testimony or
proof of Gods mercy stands* For it stands not so much in the glory of the
people, or in the prosperouse success of worldli matters, as in the peace ^d
quietness of conscience, in a mind beutifully decked with the gifts and graces
of God, in faith and upright co^uer^atio^, in true and uncorrupted doctrine, ^n
that state of life, which is abundantly ^^rnished with heavenly virtues.
Fur^hermore, if she have had God very ^erciful unto her, and have not tried ^r
fealt as yet his judgment, she ought ^o be so much the more careful, that ^e
do not offend him, and that she do ^ot abuse his mercy and clemency to ^e
contempt of his most pure and holy ^eligion. And to make so much of five years
prosperity, it argues a'^^erueilouse great rashness in you. When Solon warned
Cresus, that he should not trust to much to prosperouse fortune: he taught
him, that the prosperity not of five years, but of many years, is to be
feared: and he showed withal, that no man is to be accounted happy, so long as
he lives. This Cresus being afterward overcome by Cyrus and set upon a pile
of wood to be burned, called with a loud voice upon Solon, by whom he had been
warned before of the condition of man's frailty, and of the sudden alteration
of worldly felicity. Cyrus hearing the name of Solon, demanded of Cresus
what that Solon had been. To whom Cresus answered that he had been the wisest
man in all Greece, of whom he had learned this lesson, that it is the greatest
madness in the world to be lifted up to much with prosperity. Cyrus
forthwith, caused Cresus to be taken down from the pile, and used him very
honorably, and him self in all his prosperity held a goodly mean.

These and the like examples are so well known, and daily experience gives us
such occasion to know the uncertainty of this our condition, that there can
not be any greater token of madness or folly, then to wax proud, when the
world serves us at will. For who so ever is puffed up with the prosperouse
success of things, neither does he understand, how suddenly all the wealth of
the world vanishes away, and from how high a griese or step many of the
greatest Princes have sallen, to the great wonder of al men: neither does he
consider, what a violent kind of severity that supreme Judge uses, when he
minds to shake as it were with a whirle wind, and throw down the estate of
such as trust to much to them selves. Who is able to say, that al things shall
prosper with him, even until his dying day? Who is able to assure him self of
one day, yea of one hour void of all calamity or mishappe? For as darkness
enseweth upon light, as the tempest is wont to come upon the watermen and
mariners unawares: even so does heavy chances oftetimes mar the flourishing
state of fortunate men, and ouerwhelme them in the waves of al adversity, and
drive them against the rocks of everlasting thraldom and misery. And the
more careless men are, the more grievously are they pained, when any such
calamity falls upon them.

Wherefore it is the part af a wise man, to consider long time before all
such mischaunces, as may happen every day and hour, yea every minute of an
hour: but it is a token of a foolish and mad fellow, in prosperity to
forget the weakness of man: especially whereas we see oftentimes, that
almighty God now and then suffers such, as he is most offended withal, to
have the longer enjoying of their apparente felicity, that he may of a
sudden strike them, that will not repent, and give them the deeper wound.
And therefore our Lord warns us, that we be Genesis 7. ^.
not like unto them, which in the days of Noe lived a rechelesse life, and so
continued eue^ unto the time, in the which they were oppressed suddenly with
the flood, which they could not possibly avoid. He teaches us also by the
sudden Genesis 19. ^.
fiering of those Cities, that his judgment catches improuide^t men, as it
were with secret grynnes or snares, in such sort, that they can not escape
from everlasting pounishment and torments.

If these things be true, what a madness was that in you, for five years
prosperity, to vaunt your self so arrogantly and vainly? To triumph so
insolently? to build so great an argument of Gods favor toward you upon so
slender a ground? See you not how many nations there are in the world
utterly void of the faith of Christ, whose estate is a great deal more
flourishing then yours is? If this argument were any thing worth, see how
easily the Turks shall be able to auouche their pestilent sect, wherein they
are drowned. You maintain your cause with five years felicity: but they will
prove their Religion to be true by their great victories, and by the very
prosperouse success, which they have had in all their affairs for the space
of many years.

Last of al, are you well ascerteined, what alteration one day, or rather one
hour, may bring unto your state? Wherefore are you then so brag? Wherefore
do you vaunt your self so far beyond all modesty, as though you were free
and past al danger, yea as though you were altogether exempted from the bonds
of the condition of man in such sort, that you could not possibly be
overtaken with any sudden mishap?

As for the agreement of your council in bringing the ancient Religion to be
set at naught and forgotten, (if it be so as you say) and in making the
Queen's Majesty Superintendent in all spiritual matters, I have already
declared, that neither of them both could be done without incurringe the
grieuouse displeasure of God. If you think, that you shall escape unpunished,
because it is delaied, take heed, if you repent not, while you have time, lest
you do increase through this your presumption, the plague, that hangs over
you.

As for the hope, which I conceived (as you say) of your Queen, and therefore
wrote those my letters unto her, it repents me not, as yet of my doings. If
I have done any good, it will appear at the length. If I have done none,
yet the signification of my good heart toward her, can not be but well taken
of her, if she will continue in her accustomed courtesy and gentleness.

You say, I shall not bring her to be of mine opinion, no, although I should
write six hundred millions of Philippicall Orations. I would feign know, how
you are able to auouche that. Think you, that she is of nature so barbarous
and savage, that although I do detecte the crafty dealinge and privy
practices of naughty fellows, and prove them unto her by Arguments
invincible, by reasons more clear then the sonneshine at noonetide, if I set
before her eyes the filthiness and lewdnes of this counterfeict religion, which
they have most wickedlie and heinously devised, if I declare unto her in plain
words, how childish your reasons are, wherewith you go abou^^ to maintain
their cause, and how il fauoredly they hang together: think you, I sai, that
she will, notwithstanding althis rather embrace your most detestable opinion to
her certain and utter undoing, then call to mind again the true Religion,
which has been forgotten for a time through the default and naughtines of such
as should have put her in remembrance of it, to her most assured salvation and
glory everlasting? If reason shall overcome he^ if the authority of holy
Fathers shall cause her to yealde, if the Law of God shall put it into her
heart, that she will desire to forsake and detest this your sect: yet have you
so good affiaunce in your own force, and so little estimation of the
sharpness of her wit and judgment, that you dare warrant, that unless
you geaue her leave, she shall never return (do what she can) unto that
godly order of Religion, which her most noble Progenitors observed and kept
very honorably, to their great profit and immortal glory? Shall you Sir, have
her at your commandment and beck: shall you take order with her: shall you
prescribe her what she shall believe, in such sort, that for fear of falling
into your displeasure, she shall not regard her own life and dignity: but shall
rather suffer her self to be carried away into everlasting torments and
damnation, then to gainsaie your opinion, be it never so ungodly, heinouse,
and wicked, yea and maintained with never so fond and peevish kind of talk?

But be it. Admit she be so much an underling unto you, that she dare not
for her life once dissente from you in any thing. What if she shall be moved by
the instinct of the holy Ghost? What if Christ him self shall stir her heart
to consider and enjoy his graciouse gifts? What if God will set up such a
light before her heart, that she may see how certain wicked persons work
privy treason against herlyfe and person? And, that I may say nothing else,
what if she shall receive but only such a small quantity of the light of God,
that she may see, that Luther with his disciples and folowers, were never
moved by the holy Ghost, but pricked foreward by the fendes of hell, and that
they came not to instruct men with wholesome doctrine, but to infecte them with
most pestilente errors? What? Will you this notwithstanding, hold her back,
will you shackle her in such sort, that she shall not possibly give ear to
the holy warninges and counsels of God? To continue in a wicked opinion being
once convinced as erroneouse, is the part of a dull and blunt wit: to be afraid
of the unjust displeasure of her own subjects, is a token of a base and
cowardly heart: but to refuse the gift of Gods mercy, to reject his gracious
aid, when it is offered, is an argumte^ of an ungodly and naughty mid. So shall
it com to pass, that you, while you desire to put the world to understand
what a perilous fellow you are, shall falsely charge that Princess, whom you
report to be most excellently fournished with all virtues, passingly well
adourned with many singular qualities, with dulnes of wit, with feintnes of
heart, and with the crime of impiety.

Truly M. Haddon she is very much beholdinge unto you for your goodly service,
if you have by your diligence, so besette her on every side, that, although she
see her self tombled down headlong into everlasting death and damnation, yet
she may not be so hardy in her heart (if you say nay to it) as once to which or
step aside, to avoid the danger, that hangs over her, lest in so doing,
she might trouble your patience (more grieuouslie perhaps then a man would
think). And yet am I moved to refreine to write unto her, any more of the same
matter for very just and good causes. For I think I have very well discharged
my duty, both in my letters which I sent unto her, as also in this answer,
which I write against your book, if it hap to come to her hands. Either
therefore the things that I have already written shall have sufficient force
and strength to make her heart to yield, or else I shall not be able to do it,
although I write again. And in deed, I have not so much vacant time, that I
may spend it without any fruict or profit.

Let us now come to your good counsel, wherein you advertise me, that I should
not once handle the holy scriptures. you commend my wit, and my eloquence you
do not mislike. But you say, that I am to be reckoned amongst the Orators and
Philosophers, and not amongst the Divines, My books of nobility (for it is
like you never read any other books of mine) you sale you like very well. I am
right glad, that my wr^tinges are commended by a man so finely learned, and
so trymly nourtered: and your friendly counsel I take it in good worth. And
therefore it likes me to speak unto you (Sir new Divine) Damasip(...)us had
no (...)hing of a (...) but (...)ely a (...)ard: The (...)ber (...)erfore
(...)ing (...)rd, (...) avvai (...) Philophie.
with the self same verses, as Horatius feineth him self to have used to
Damasippus a new Stoike.

Sir Waulter for your counsel true, a barber may you have:
Sent from the Gods and Goddess eke, your worthy heard to shave.
But how came you to be so well acquainted with me? Who told you, that I have
not bestowed a great deal more study in Divinity then in Cicero,
Demosthenes, Aristotle and Plato. You commend my wit. what then? think you that
the study of Divinity is mete for dull heads only and drawlatohes* You like my
eloquence: (...) you therefore that the holy Scriptures would be handled of
rudesbies only and homly fellows? Whereas you give authority to women, to
tinkers and tapsters, to the rifferaffe of al occupations, to iangle and prate
at rouers in Scripture matters: will you forbid me, being not only a bishop
and Priest, and long time exercised in the holy Scriptures with some profitte,
but also a man (as you report your self) both witty and eloquent, to follow
this most godly trade of learning? Then by what equity, by what power, by
what authority do you this? shall it be lawful for you being a man of law, to
geaue over the statutes made for walls, lights, and eues gutters: to despise
and cast a side your obligations, bargains, and couenantes: to lay away the
drawing of writes and suites in law: and to take upon you in Divinity as
bold as blind baiard* and to me, to whom it a^perteyneth by office to instruct
the Church committed unto me in the holy Scriptures, will you not give leave, to
bestome much time and diligence in the study of them? You are injurious two
ways. For you do both violently intrude your self into other men's
possessions, and wrongfully thrust me out of mine own by your unjust
injunctions.

Now those threats of yours, how weighty and grave are they? What a great
terror do they put into me? You say thus. If so be that you mind to vaunt
your self to certain men, and so to assault us any more, I warn you now
before, that you come with far better furniture, then you have done at this
time.

You tell me moreover, that, in case you be dead before, yet there shall not
lack such, as shall break the dint of my stroke, Whereby I see, that you could
never so much as guess, what my meaning is. I know, that there are in that
Island many excellent men both, for wit, learning, and godliness, which will never
molest me, for so much as they agree with me in religion meruelously well:
(although you think it a matter not to be borne.) Then if any man do write
against me, in case he will contend with reason, arguments and examples, I will
not refuse to dispute with him. But if he fall to railing and reproachful
words, I can not possibly be persuaded to make him answer. For neither am I
moved with any reproach, neither can I look, that that victory should turn
me to honesty, where the manner of fight is so dishonest. If I shall see, that
there is any hope to win you and such as you are to God, I will not doubt to
try both by letters and prayers, what good I am able to do. Otherwise I will
not suffer my time, whereof I have little to spare, to be so^l bestowed. Tit. 3.
c.
For so does S Paul teach us, that after one or two warnings we should shonne
the company of such men as are obstinatly bent in erroneouse and wicked
opinions, for so much as they are condemned by their own judgment. Wherefore
I geaue you leave, to bend your self most fiercely against me with tau^tes
and reproaches. Rore as much as you list, cry out as loud as you can. For
neither is it convenient for my person, neither yet comely for the office I
bear, to be moved with railing words, or else to make answer to every
slander. I never reviled you, whom I knew not.

As for my epistle, which you rend and tear with spiteful languague, it has
not one reprochful word in it, unless perhaps you will call the most just
bewailing and most true declaration of errors and wicked vices a reproach. And
yet like a wild bore thrust thorough with a venomous dart, you ra^ne upon me,
as though you had been wood. But I was not only nothing disquieted with your
reproachful words, but also moved to laugh at your fond talk. I take my God to
witness, that, if the love, which I bear to true Religion and godliness, had
not earnestly moved me, I had never put pen to the paper to write against your
book. But if you knew, how much I pity your case, and what a hearty desire I
have of your salvation, (for I would with all my heart, as the dewty of a
Christian man requires, yeald my self to die for the salvation of you and
your countrei men) you would surely be at one with me. For I was not moved by
any evil will I bear you, but it was very charity, that provoked me
instantly to write. I pray Christ our most bowntifull and almighty Lord, I
humbly beseech him, by his precious blood shead for the salvation of al men, by
his wounds and most bitter passion, by his death, by the which he overcame
death, by his victory which he achieved over the kingdom of Satan, to
deliver that kingdom, in the which has been sometime a dwelling place of
virtue, religion, gravity and justice, and is now disordered thorough the
lewdnes of desperate fellows, from errors and heresy: to make the brightness
of his light to shine over them: to bring them again to the faith and unity
of most true Religion: to carry them back unto the fold of the catholic
Church: to govern and maintain them by the assistance of his holy spirit:
that al we, which are now sundered in opinions, may at length agree in the
unity of faith, and love of true Religion, and so come to that everlasting
glory, to the great rejoicing of all the holy company in heaven.

Liber iste lectus est and approbatus a viris sacrae Theologiae et Anglicani
idiomatis peritissimis, quibus tuto credendum esse existimo: maxim cum tantum
translatus sit ex Latino legitime approbato.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor Sancti
Petri Louanis. 3. september. Anno. 1568.

