A Treatise divided into three parts, touching the inconveniences, that the
Importation of Tobacco out of Spain, has brought into this Land. viz.
1 In the first is showed how treasure was usually brought into this Land. 2 In
the second, what has and does hinder the bringing of it, with other
incoueniences. 3 In the third, how to remedy the one, and the other.
THe chief Spring from whence the main Current of Treasure flowing into all
Christendom, has his original, is in the Indies, and by the Spanish
government is forced to set first into Spain, and thence is divided into all
other Countries, according to the quantity of goods, which out of their
abundance they furnish to supply their wants: hence it follows that the
Commodities of this Land, are the Mines from whench Treasure is drawn into
this Kingdom. And the means from whench we usually draw it from Spain are
these. First, (our goods being converted into Money) We provided, so many
necessary Commodities of that Land, as were sufficient to supply the wants of
this Kingdom, and all the rest we brought home in Bullion, Witness the Ship
taken at Cales. Anno 1615. in which was supposed to be 15000 pounds in Money.
It should therefore ensue that almost twenty years of peaceable commerce,
which we have had since his Majesty's Reign, should have replenished this
Land abundantly with Silver, had there not been some especial cause to have
hindered it, but what has stopped the entrance of it, I Will discover.

The maine decay of Trade, and the chief cause that hinders the importation
of Bullion out of Spain is Tobacco, for there is consumed by all computation,
yearly in this Land, three hundred thousand weight, and I divide all the
Tabaccoes we buy for this Kingdom, into three sorts and values. The best at
vi. shillings the pound, the second at iii.s.vi.d. the third at ii.s.vi.d. for
near about these prizes they cost, and almost xii. pence the pound for the
custom there, which is v. shillings per pound, but to speak with the least
I Will say iiii. shillings per pound, so then it does cost there, first penny
Sxtie thousand pound, and the disorderly sail of our goods to buy it, has
abased the price of our commodities through all Spain, Bisky, and Portingale,
20. per Cent. so what it does cost, and what is lost yearly, amounts to a
hundred thousand Pounds, all which would be brought into this Kingdom if that
were not.

But who will hazard to send home Silver now when he may put it of by
exchange, thereto the Tobacconists at as much profit as it is worth here at
the Mynt, for so I have done this year.

Now if this Weed were prohibbited, all men would stand upon the orderly sail
of their goods, and not sell under 10 or 12. Per Cent. outward, as formerly
they have done, when little Tobacco came out of Spain, and the most part of
our returns would be in Bullion, for on that we get 12. Per Cent. and on no
other Commodity, ( Tobacco accepted) is any man certain to get so much. Then
who would not rather bring home ready money then goods, for which he is
uncertain when to have Money. This is the use of the French and Dutchmen,
which makes their Countries so abundant in Silver, for no Country is so
smoakt as ours. In so much, that both Spainiards and al other Nations say
tauntingly to us, when they see al our goods landed (to use their own words)
Que todo esso se pagtaa con humo; that all that will be paid in smoke; Now our
gracious Sovereign, knowing it to be a vicious and most pernicious weed laid
great impositions on it, thereby to hinder the importation; But that brings the
more damage to this State, for (except it be prohibited) our people will buy it
what soever it cost, and the more it does cost the more is our loss; for no
sooner did his Majesty lay an imposition on it here, but the King of Spain
laid two there, the one upon his own Subjects, the other on us; But we pay
all, for they must raise it on us; And no sooner had his Highness granted a
Patent for it here, but forthwith the King of Spain, made it his own
Comoditie there, to no other end but to keep up and raise the price of it
still more and more, for if they get all our goods for smoke, we need no more
misery as I think. To conclude this then, say our Kings Majesty receives
Sixteen thousand pounds per annum. for the Patent of it (I do not say he gets
it) but receaues it, and of his own goods already in the Land, and not of any
thing brought in by the Patentees. But I say the K. of Spain gets a hundred
thousand pounds per an. thereby, for the goods he has from us for Tobacco
would cost him yearly so much if that were not. All which would be brought
into this Kingdom. And now having thus plainly showed how it hinders yearly
the importation of a hundred thousand pounds, it of force follows that it
has kept back near twelve hundred thousand pounds, or at least a Million
since his Majesty's reign, which were it in the Land, what inestimable
benefit would it bring yearly to his Majesty, and the whole Kingdom by
increase of trade, who can rightly imagine, for money is the soul and sinews
of trade, and a well governed trade, the true fountain of treasure. But this
is not all the good it has done to Spain, nor the prejudice it has brought
to England, which remains to be spoken of in the next point.

The good then that we have done to Spain by buying our Tobacco from them,
has caused them since the year 98. to inhabit the teritories of Caracoes
Cumana Cumanagotta Trinidado Oronoque and now at least all Maracaibo, for in
those days (I was an eye witness to it) their people went thither more
unwilling then ours now go to Virginia and the Summer Islands, (yet the King
gave them leave to carry and recarry all things Custome-free:) but now the Case
is altered, for if they would give leave to as many to go as would, they would
soon leave few enough in Spain. But whosoever goes now, attaines unto it by
great suit and especial license, which will cost at least fifty pounds for
each person ere he obtain it. So sudden did the gain by bringing Tobacco
draw so many thither. And although that were the chief hopes, that drew them
thither, yet now they bring not Tobacco only but many other beneficial and
necessary Commodities, as Ginger, Hides, Sugar, Sarsaparilla, Balsam, Peeta
Caraua, Gum, Allome and Wo^d. Insomuch that the King reapeth already yearly
benefit by it at least 50000. li. and yearly it increases.

Now the hurt it has done to this Land more then formerly mentioned is, that
it has altogether hindered that Plantation in Virginia, which in short time
might yield his Majesty as much or more profit, then the before said places do
to the King of Spain besides the general good it would bring to all this
Common wealth, cannot be imagined, for if his Magestie grant this one
Privilege to them, the lucre of gain by Tobacco, will draw thither more
inhabitants in one year then the Company have done with all their care and
charge ever since the plantation; and let them once be drawn thither, they
will quickly find better Commodies then Tobacco, as the Spaniards have done
in the foresaid places, so that the only means were to cause importation of a
hundred thousand pounds per annum of Treasure, and suddenly to inhabit
Virginia, and to draw from thence great benefit into this Land, is nothing but
prohibiting the bringing in of Spanish Tobacco; and suffer it only to be
brought from Virginia and Summer-Islands, which I presume our Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty may as lawfully do as the King of Spain may forbid us the
importation of Pepper and silk into his Kingdom, which he has done under
penalty, of loss of life and goods. Again, Tobacco is no commodity of the
grows of Spain, but of the Indies, with whom we have no commerce.

If any allege that those Countries yeeldes not so good Tobacco as the Spa:
Indies, I answer, there is some as good Tobacco brought from Virginia and the
Summer Islands, as the first Tobaccos were that we had out of Spain. And no
doubt, but as they discovering further into the Land, found better grounds for
Tobacco: So will our people do also as they go further. But say they do not
altogether find so good grounds as the Spa: Indies are for that purpose: must
we of force therefore have Spanish Tobacco, to our so great prejudice. We see
their Spanish Wines are better then English Beer, shall we utterly forsake
that, and use the other. Also we see Gascoine wines are better then Rochell
wines, yet the government of Rochell will not suffer their people to spend any
but the grouth of their own Vines, and the labors of their own people. And
these Countries of Spain that have Wines of their own growing, will not
suffer any other to come in, be theirs never so bad and the other never so
good, till their own provision be spent: and be they so careful for their
own Conservation, and shall we be so careless of ours: Nay, God forbid, I
hope better Order will be taken by his Majesty, and this most Honorable
assembly. It may be some man seeing this, will think, I am interressed in the
Virginia Company: But the Worshipful of the Company know the contrary. Its the
zeal I bear to the good of the State in general that makes me speak. If so
what I point at take effect, I shall be most glad, although to my own prejudice,
for till it be forbidden I will trade in it, and make no question but to get by
it as well as any other man, But I defy the particular gains that brings a
general hurt. And thus I have showed what hinders the importation of Treasure.
To conclude this point, Shut the gates of entrance of Tobacco, and you open the
gate for the entry of Treasure: but open the gate for the entry of Tobacco, and
you shut the gate of the entrance of Treasure.

Ed: Bennett.

