ANDREAS ORNITHOPARCVS HIS MICROLOGVS, OR INTRODVCTION: Containing the Art of
Singing.

Digested into Four Books.

NOT ONLY PROFITABLE, BUT also necessary for all that are studious of Music.

ALSO THE DIMENSION AND PERfect Use of the MONOCHORD, according to Guido
Aretinus.

BY JOHN DOVLAND LVTENIST, Lute-player, and Bachelor of Music in both the
Uniuersities.

1609

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Adams, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign
of the white Lion.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT EARL OF Salisbury, Viscount Cranborne, Baron of
Essingdon, Lord High Treasurer of England, Principal Secretary to the Kings
most excellent Majesty, Master of the Courts of Wards and Liueries,
Chancellor of the most famous University of Cambridge, Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Priuic
Counsel.
YOur high Place, your princely Honors and Virtues, the hereditary vigilance
and wisdom, wherewith Hercules- like, you assist the protection of the whole
State: Though these (most honored Lord) are powerful encitements to draw all
sorts to the desire of your most Noble protection. Yet besides all these (in
more particular by your Lordships special Favors and Graces) am I emboldened
to present this Father of Music Ornithoparchus to your worthyest Patronage,
whose approved Works in my travails (for the common good of our Musicians) I
have reduced into our English Language. Beseeching your Lordship (as a chief
Author of all our good) graciously to receive this poor presentment, whereby
your Lordship shall encourage me to a future task, more new in subject, and as
memorable in worth. Every Plant brings forth his like, and of Musicians,
Music is the fruit. Moreover such is your divine Disposition that both you
excellently understand, and royally entertain the Exercise of Music, which
mind-tempering Art, the grave Luther was not afraid to place in the next seat
to Divinity. My daily prayers (which are a poor man's best wealth) shall humbly
solicit the Author of all Harmony for a continual increase of your Honors
present happiness with long life, and a successiue blessing to your generous
posterity.

Your Lordships humbly devoted

John Douland.

To the Reader.
EXcellent men have at all times in all Arts delivered to Posterity their
observations, thereby bringing Arts to a certainty and perfection. Among which
there is no Writer more worthy in the Art of Music, than this Author
Ornithoparcus, whose Work, as I have made it familiar to all that speak our
Language, so I could wish that the rest in this kind were by the like means
drawn into our knowledge, since (I am assured) that there is nothing can more
advance the apprehension of Music, than the reading of such Writers as have
both skilfully and diligently set down the precepts thereof. My industry and
onset herein if you friendly accept (being now returned home to remain) shall
encourage me shortly to diuulge a more peculiar work of mine own: namely, My
Observations and Directions concerning the Art of Lute-playing: which
Instrument as of all that are portable, is, and ever has been most in request,
so is it the hardest to manage with cunning and order, with the true nature of
fingering; which skill has as yet by no Writer been rightly expressed: what by
my endeavors may therein be attained, I leave to your future Judgment, when
time shall produce that which is already almost ready for the Harvest. Vale,
From my house in Fetter-lane this tenth of April. 1609.

Your Friend,

John Douland.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WORTHY, AND WISE GOVERNOVRS OF THE STATE OF LVNENBVRG,
ANDREAS ORNITHOP ARCHVS OF MEYNING, MASTER OF THE LIBERAL SCIENCES.
WE read, that Socrates (he that was by Apollos Oracle famoused for the wisest
man in the world) was wont to say, That it had been fit men's hearts, should
have windows, that so the thoghts might be discerned. This power if we now
had, honorable Lords, believe it, you should discern my love toward you and
yours. But because speech is the minds interpretour, and you cannot know men,
and their thoughts, but by their words or writing, I am to entreat that you
would take in as good part these words, which in my absence I utter, as if I
had in presence delivered them.

It is not out of any humor of arrogance or vain ostentation that I do this:
but that upright, gentle, and religious fashion of yours, wherein you excel
more than any Easterlings that border these Baltic coasts, these make me assay
the art of Harmony, which the Grecians call Music; Music the nurse of
Christian Religion, and mother of good fashions, of honesty, of Commonwealths,
if in any thing we may give credit to the ancients.

These made me commit my sails to the furious winds; these made me give
Zoiles and Thersites power to rage over me; these made me travel many
Countries not without endamaging my estate, to search out the Art; these made
me many a time to sustain weariness, when I might have been at rest; grief,
when I might have solaced my self; disgrace, when I might have lived in good
reputation; poverty, when I might have lived in plenty. But also these things
(right Worthies) seemed to me not worthy the regarding, when I sought how I
might whilst others slept, whom your state does nourish (before all others)
profit your youth, and so consequently the youth of all Germany, drawing them
to good fashions, recalling them by the honest delights of Music from
unlawful attempts, and so by little and little stir them up to virtuous
actions. For Socrates, and Plato, and all the Pythagoreans did generally enact,
that young men and maids should be trained up in Music, not to the end their
minds might be incited to wantonness by those bawbles, which make Art to be
so vilely reputed of: but that the motions of the mind might be ruled and
governed by law and reason. For seeing the nature of young men is unquiet, and
in all things desiring delights, and therefore refuses seuerer arts, it is by
the honest delights of Music brought to those recreations, which may also
solace honest old age.

Among those things wherewith the mind of man is wont to be delighted, I can
find nothing that is more great, more healthful, more honest, than Music:
The power whereof is so great, that it refuses neither any sex, nor any age,
and (as Macrobius a man of most hidden and profound learning says) there is no
breast so savage and cruel, which is not moved with the touch of this delight.
For it does drive away cares, persuade men to gentleness, represseth and
stirs anger, nourishes arts, increases concord, inflameth heroical minds
to gallant attempts, curbeth vice, breeds virtues, and nurseth them when they
are borne, composeth men to good fashion. For among all those things which do
admit sense, that only works upon the manners of men, which touches his
ears, as Aristotle in his musical problemes does more at large discourse.
Hence was it that Agamemnon being to go General for the Trojan wars, as
Philelphus reports, left a Musician at his house, who by singing the praises of
women's virtues might incite Clytemnestra to a chaste and honest life, wherein
he did so far prevail, that they say she could not be overcome by Egistus
his unchaste attempts, till the ungodly wretch had made away the Musician, who
only hindered him from his wicked purpose. Besides Lycurgus, though otherwise
he enacted most severe laws for the Lacedaemonians his contrymen; yet did
he very much embrace Music, as Quintilian writes. I omit those ancient
Philosophers, (for so they rather chose to be called, than to be named wise
men) who did repose the sum of their studies in this art as in a certain
Treasure-house. I omit those princes who for the admirable sweetness of this
art spend many talents. Lastly, I omit the most religious of al men, who though
they estrange themselves from al worldly pleasure, yet dwell upon this delight,
as if it were the only heavenly one. Since therefore this Art is both holy, and
sweet, and heavenly, participating of a divine, fair, and blessed nature, I
thought good to dedicate this book, wherein all the knots of practicke Music
are untied, to the gentle youth of your City, after it had been first brought
forth at Rostoch, that famous University of the Baltic coast, and since
amended by the censure of the Elders, and publicly read in three famous
Universities of Germany, the University of Tubyng, Heydelberg, and Maguntium.
That by their deserts the after ages being helped, might pay the tribute of
thanks not to me, but to them, as to the first moving causes.

Wherefore wise Fathers, I beseech your wisdoms to deigne this book your
gentle favor and acceptance, not contemning the base style or little volume of
that, which is rather holy than pleasant, and set out not upon any rash humor,
but upon a true devotion. For it is written for them that fast, not for them
that are filled with delicacies, though even they may find here that which will
fit their stomachs. And since great things fit great men, small things small
men, I acknowledge my self small; and therefore give small gifts, yet promise
greater whenever I shall grow greater. Farewell most happy, most worthy, most
wise.

The Preface upon the Division of the Work.
SEeing it is fitter, as an Emperor said, to cast out a few fit things, then
to be burdened with many unnecessary superfluities, which precept Horace put
him in mind of, saying: Quicquid precipies esto breuis, vt cito dicta,
Per cipiant animi dolices, teneantque fideles.
What ere thou teach, be short: the learners brain Brief sawes will quicker
take, and best retain.

Hence it is, that we have resolved to collect into certain most short rules,
the precepts of Active Music, if not all, yet the especial, out of diverse
Authors. For to know all things and fail in nothing, is a mark rather of
divine then of humane nature. Now those, whom I herein followed as my leaders,
and acknowledge as my special Patrons, are these: For Theoricks Boethius
Romanus. For Practicks Guido Aretinus. Plutarchus Cheronaeus. Ioannes pontifex
To. Saint Augustine. Saint Bernard. Franchinus Gafforus. Saint Gregory. Valla
Placentinus. Berno the Abbot. Faber Stapulensis. Ioannes Tinctoris.

Wherefore omitting all needless circumlocutions, and affecting shortness,
the mother of truth, we purpose to open all Practick Music in four Books,
for of so many parts it does consist. The first whereof, shall show the
principles of plain Song: The next Measurall Song: The third the Accent: The
fourth and last the Counterpoint, as it were the governor and mother of the
rest. The head of each Book, shall in their places be mentioned, as occasion
shall serve.

THE FIRST BOOK OF ORNITHOPARCHUS HIS Music, declaring the Principals of
plain Song.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of the Definition, Division, Profit, and Inuentors of Music.
BEing to deliver the Art of singing, than which in the world there is nothing
sweeter, lest out of a small error a great may arise, let us begin with the
definition, by which the nature of all things is known: that is with the
easiest things first, that so the Art may be more fitly delivered. And then,
having unfolded the nature thereof in general, we will proceed to the
perticulars, first making the general division, and afterward handling each
part severally.

The general Description of Music.
Music (as Franchinus Gafforus in the third Chapter of the first book of
Theorie writes) is a knowledge of Tuning, which consists in sound and Song. In
sound (I say) because of the music which the motion of the celestial Orbs
does make. In Song, least that melody which our selves practice, should be
secluded out of our definition.

The Division of Music.
Boethius (to whom among the Latin writers of Music, the praise is to be
given) does show in the second Chapter of his first book of Music, that
Music is threefold. The Worlds Music: Humane Music: and Isntrumental
Music.

Of the Music of the World.
When God (whom Plutarch proves to have made all things to a certain
harmony) had devised to make this world moveable, it was necessary, that he
should govern it by some active and moving power; for no bodies but those
which have a soul, can move themselves, as Franchinus in the first Chapter of
his first book of Theoric says. Now that motion (because it is the swiftest
of all other, and most regular) is not without sound: for it must needs be that
a sound be made of the very wheeling of the Orbs, as Macrobius in Somnium
Scip. lib. 2. writes. The like said Boethius, how can this quick-mouing frame
of the world whirle about with a dumb and silent motion? From this turning of
the heaven, there cannot be removed a certain order of Harmony. And nature
will (says that prince of Roman eloquence Cicero, in his sixth book de
Reipub.) that extremities must needs sound deep on the one side, and sharp on
the other. So then, the worlds Music is an Harmony, caused by the motion of
the stars, and violence of the Spheres. Lodouicus Coelius Rodiginus;
lectionum antiquarum lib. 5. cap. 25. writes, That this Harmony has been
observed out of the consent of the heavens, the knitting together of the
elements, and the variety of times. Wherefore well said Dorilaus the
Philosopher, That the World is Gods Organe. Now the cause we cannot hear this
sound according to Pliny is, because the greatness of the sound does exceed
the sense of our ears. But whether we admit this Harmonicall sound of the
Heavens, or no, it skils not much; since certain it is, that the grand
Work-maister of this Mundane Fabric, made all things in number, weight, and
measure, wherein principally, Mundane Music does consist.

Of Humane Music.
HVmane Music, is the Concordance of diverse elements in one compound, by which
the spiritual nature is joined with the body, and the reasonable part is
coupled in concord with the unreasonable, which proceeds from the uniting of
the body and the soul. For that amity, by which the body is joined unto the
soul, is not tied with bodily bands, but vertuall, caused by the proportion of
humors. For what (says Coelius) makes the powers of the soul so sundry and
disagreeing to conspire oftentimes each with other? who reconciles the Elements
of the body? what other power does soder and glue that spiritual strength,
which is endued with an intellect to a mortal and earthly frame, than that
Music which every man that descends into himself finds in himself? For
every like is preserved by his like, and by his dislike is disturbed. Hence is
it, that we loath and abhor discords, and are delighted when we hear
harmonicall concords, because we know there is in our selves the like concord.

Of Isntrumental Music.
Isntrumental Music, is an Harmony which is made by help of Instruments.
And because Instruments are either artificial, or natural, there is one sort
of Music, which is made with artificial Instruments; another, which is made
with natural instruments. The Philosophers call the one Harmonicall; the other
Organicall.

Of Organicall Music.
ORganicall Music (as Coelius writes) is that which belongs to artificial
Instruments: or it is a skill of making an Harmony with beating, with fingring,
with blowing: with beating, as Drums, Tabors, and the like: with blowing, as
Organs, Trumpets, Fluits, Cornets: with fingring, as those Instruments which
are commanded, either with the touching of the fingers, or articulating of the
Keys. Yet such Instruments as are too voluptuous, are by Coelius Rodiginus
rejected.

Of Harmonicall Music.
HArmonicall Music, is a faculty weighing the differences of high and low
sounds by sense and reason, Boethius: Or, it is a cunning, bringing forth the
sounds with Humane voice, by the help of natural Instruments, and judging all
the Sounds which are so brought forth. This as Placentinus writes in the third
Chapter of the second book of his Music: is twofold, Inspectiue and Active.

Of Inspectiue Music.
INspectiue Music, is a knowledge censuring and pondering the Sounds formed
with natural instruments, not by the ears, whose judgment is dull, but by
wit and reason.

Of Active Music.
Active Music, which also they call Practick, is (as Saint Austine in the
first book of his Music writes) the knowledge of singing well: or according
to Guido in the beginning of his Doctrinall, it is a liberal Science,
dispensing the principles of singing truly. Franchinus (in the third Chapter
of his first Book of his Theorick) does so define it: It is a knowledge of
perfect singing, consisting of sounds, words, and numbers; which is in like
sort twofold, Mensurall, and Plain.

Of Mensurall Music.
MEnsurall Music, is the diverse quantity of Notes, and the inequality of
figures. Because they are augmented or diminished according as the mood, time,
and prolation does require: of this we will speak at large in the second
Book.

Of Plain Music.
Plain Music, (as Saint Bernard an excellent searcher into regular and true
Concinence) does write in the beginning of his Music, saying: It is a rule
determining the nature and form of regular Songs. Their nature consists in the
disposition, their form in the progression and composition. Or plain Music
is a simple and uniform prolation of Notes, which can neither be augmented nor
diminished.

Of the Profitablenesse of this Art.
THe Profit of this Art is so great, (as writes Pope John the 22. of that
name, in the second Chapter of his Music) that whosoever gives himself to it,
shall judge of the quality of any Song, whether it be triuiall, or curious, or
false: He knows both how to correct that which is faulty, and how to compose a
new one. It is therefore (says he) no small praise, no little profit, no such
labor as to be esteemed of slightly, which makes the Artist both a Judge of
those Songs which be composed, and a Corrector of those which be false, and an
Inuentor of new.

Of the difference betwixt a Musician, and a Singer.
OF them that profess the Art of Harmony, there be three kinds; (says
Franchinus in the first Book the 4. chap. of his Theoric) one is that which
deals with Instruments; the other makes Verses; the third does judge the
works both of the instruments, and of the verses. Now the first, which deals
with Instruments, does herein spend all his work; as Harpers, and Organists,
and all others which approve their skill by Instruments. For they are removed
from the intellectual part of Music, being but as servants, and using no
reason: void of all speculation, and following their sense only. Now though
they seem to do many things learnedly and skilfully, yet is it plain that
they have not knowledge, because they comprehend not the thing they profess,
in the pureness of their understanding; and therefore do we deny them to have
Music, which is the Science of making melody. Fot there is knowledge without
practice, and most an end greater, than in them that are excellent
Practitioners. For we attribute the nimblenesse of fingring not to Science,
which is only residing in the soul, but to practice, for if it were otherwise,
every man the more skillful he were in the Art, the more swift he would be in
his fingring. Yet do we not deny the knowledge of Music to all that play on
Instruments; for the Organist, and he that sings to the Harp, may have the
knowledge of Music, which if it be, we account such the best Artists.

The second kind is of Poets, who are led to the making of a verse, rather by a
natural instinct, than by speculation. These Boethius secludes from the
speculation of Music, but Austin does not.

The third kind of Musicians, be they which do assume unto them the cunning to
judge and discern good Airs from bad: which kind, (since it is wholly placed in
speculation and reason) it does properly belong to the Art of Music.

Who is truly to be called a Musician.
THerefore he is truly to be called a Musician, who has the faculty of
speculation and reason, not he that has only a practick fashion of singing:
for so says Boethius lib. 1. cap. 35. He is called a Musician, which takes
upon him the knowledge of Singing by weighing it with reason, not with the
servile exercise of practice, but the commanding power of speculation, and
wants neither speculation nor practice. Wherefore that practice is fit for a
learned man: Plutarch in his Music sets down (being forced unto it by Homers
authority) and proves it thus: Speculation breeds only knowledge, but
practice brings the same to work.

Who be called Singers.
THe Practitioner of this faculty is called a Cantor, who does pronounce and
sing those things, which the Musician by a rule of reason does set down. So
that the Harmony is nothing worth, if the Cantor seek to utter it without the
Rules of reason, and unless he comprehend that which he pronounces in the
purity of his understanding. Therefore well says Joan. Papa 22. cap. 2. To
whom shall I compare a Cantor better than to a Drunkard (which indeed goes
home,) but by which path he cannot tell. A Musician to a Cantor, is as a
Praetor to a Crier: which is proved by this sentence of Guido:

Musicorum, ac Cantorum, magna est distantia,
Isti sciunt, illi dicunt, quae componit Musica,
Nam qui facit, quod non sapit, diffinitur bestia
Verum si tonantis vocis laudent acumina,
Superabit Philomela, vel vocalis Asina.
Twixt Musicians, and Practitians, odds is great:
They do know, these but show, what Art does treat.
Who does ought, yet knows naught, is brute by kind:
If voices shrill, void of skill, may honor find?
Then Philomel, must bear the bell,
And Balaams Ass, Musician was.
Therefore a Speculatiue Musician, excels the Practick: for it is much better
to know what a man does, than to do that which another man does. Hence is it,
that buildings and triumphs are attributed to them, who had the command and
rule; not to them by whose work and labor they were performed. Therefore
there is great difference in calling one a Musician, or a Cantor. For
Quintilian says, That Musicians were so honored amongst men famous for
wisdom, that the same men were accounted Musicians and Prophets, and wise
men. But Guido compares those Cantors, (which have made courtesy a far off
to Music) to brute Beasts.

Of the Inuentors of Music.
THe best writers witness, That Music is most ancient: For Orpheus and Linus
(both borne of Gods) were famous in it. The invention of it is attributed to
diverse men, both because the great antiquity of it, makes the Author
incertaine; and also because the dignity of the thing is such, and makes so
many great men in love with it, that every one (if it were possible) would be
accounted the Authors of it. Wherefore some think Linus the Thebane; some,
that Orpheus the Thracian; some, that Amphion the Dircean; some, that
Pythagoras the Samian found out this Art. Eusebius attributes it to Dionysius,
Diodorus, to Mercury, Polybius, to the Elders of Arcadia, with whom there was
such estimation of Music, that it was the greatest disgrace that could be in
that place to confess the ignorance of Music. Neither did they this, says
Coelius lib. 5. antiquarum lection. for wantonness or delicateness, but that
they might mollify and temper their daily labors, and besides their
austeritie and severe fashions; which befell them by a certain sad temperature
of the clyme with this sweetness and gentleness. Yet if we give any credit to
Josephus, and the holy Writ, Tubal the Son of Lamech was the chief and most
ancient Inuentor of it, and left it written in two tables, one of Slate;
another of Marble before the flood for the posterity. The Marble one (some
say) is yet in Syria. But least some error arise out of the multitude of these
Inuentors, it is clear that Tubal before the flood, that Moses among the
Hebrews, that Orpheus, Amphion, and such like among the Gentiles, that
Pythagoras among the Graecians, that Boethius among the Latins, was first
famous for Music.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Of Voices.
COncord, (which rules all the Harmony of Music) cannot be without a Voice,
nor a Voice without a Sound, says Boethius, lib. 1. cap. 3. Wherefore in
seeking out the description of a Voice, we thought fit to search out this
point, what Sounds are properly called Voices. Note therefore, that the sound
of a sensible creature is properly called a Voice, for things without sense
have no Voice, as Coelius writes, antiquar. lect. lib. 10. cap. 53. When we
call pipes Vocal, it is a translated word, and a Catachresis. Neither have
alsensible cretures a Voice: for those which want blood, utter no Voice.
Neither do fishes utter any Voice, because a Voice is the motion of the air,
but they receive no air. Wherefore only a sensible creature does utter a
Voice, yet not all sensible creatures, nor with every part of their bodies (for
the hands being stricken together make a clapping, not a Voice.) A Voice
therefore is a sound uttered from the mouth of a perfect creature, either by
advise, or signification. By advise, (I say) because of the coffe, which is no
Voice: By signification, because of the grinding of the teeth. But because this
description of a Voice, does agree only to a lively Voice, and not to a deaf
musical Voice, which especially, being a sole syllable is deaf, unless it be
actually expressed, we must find out another description more agreeable to it.
Therefore a musical Voice, is a certain syllable expressing a tenor of the
Notes. Now Notes is that by which the highness, or lownes of a Song is expressed.

Who first found out the Musical Voices.
BEing that al Harmony is perfected by Voices, and Voices cannot be written,
but remembered: (as Gafforus lib. 5. Theor. cap. 6. and 1. Pract. cap. 2. says;
that they might therefore be kept the better in memory, Guido Aretinus a Monk,
led by a divine inspiration, devoutly examining the Hymn of Saint John
Baptist, marked, that the six capital syllables of the Verses, viz, Vt, Re,
Mi, Fa, Sol, La, did agree with musical Concords. Wherefore he applied them in
the chords of his introductory: which devise Ioannes the 22. Bishop of Rome
allowed.

Of the Division of Voices.
IN the Fourth part of this Work, I will handle that Division, by which Voices
are divided into Vnisones, aequisones, Consones, Eumeles, etc. Here I will
only touch that which will serve our turn; Therefore of Voices, Some are
called b Mols Viz. Vt Fa because they make a Flat sound. Naturals Re Sol Mean
Sharps Mi La Sharp

Besides of Voices some be Superiors: viz. Fa, Sol, La. Others be Inferiors:
as Vt, Re, Mi.

Rules for the Voices.
FIrst, Vt, (in Harmonicall Songs) is the head and beginning of the other
Voices.

The second, The Superior Voices are fitly pronounced in Descending, and the
Inferior in Ascending. Yet to this Rule there be Four places contrary.

The first is this. In F faut you never sing vt, unless you must sing fa, in b
fa mi.

The second, In b fa mi, you must always sing that Voice which the Scale
requires.

The third, The same Voice may not be repeated in seconds, though in fourths,
fifths, and eights it may very fitly.

The fourth, Neither must the superior Notes be sung in the descending, nor
the inferior Notes in the ascending, because they make a needless change. ^ A
Progression of the Six Musical Voices, according to the Rule of Arsim and
Thesim.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Of the Keys.
THe Wisdom of the Latin Musicians, imitating the diligence of the Graecians
(whereas before the Singers did mark their Chords with most hard signs) did
first note a musical Introduction with Letters. To this Guido Aretinus joined
those Voices he found out, and did first order the Musical Keys by lines and
spaces, as appears in his Introductory. Therefore a Key is a thing compacted
of a Letter and a Voice. For the beginning of every Key is a Letter, and the
end a Syllable: Of a Voice (I say) not of Voices, both because all the Keys
have not many Voices, and also because the names of Generalities, of
Specialties* and of Differences, of which a definition does consist, cannot be
expressed in the plural number. For Animal is the genus, not Animalia; a Man
is the species, not men: rationale is the difference, not rationabilia: Or more
formally* A Key is the opening of a Song, because like as a Key opens a door,
so does it the Song.

Of the Number and Difference of Keys.
Keys, (as Franchinus lib. 1. pract* cap* 1. does write) are 22. in number.
Though Pope John, and Guido (whom he in his Fifth Chapter says to have been
the most excellent Musicians after Boethius) only make 20. These Two and
Twenty Keys are comprehended in a threefold order. The first is of Capital
Letters; the Second of small; the Third of double Letters. And all these Keys
differ one from the other in sight, writing, and naming: because one is
otherwise placed, written, or named than the other. Of the Capital there be
eight, viz. G. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. Of the small also Eight, a. b. c. d. e. f.
g. for b fa mi. is not one Key only, but two: which is proved by mutations,
voices, and instruments. The same you must account of the upper bb fa mi his
Eight: of the double ones there be Six, viz. aa. bb. cc. dd. and ee. The order
of all these is expressed in Ten lines and spaces in the Table following.

Here follows the Introductorie of Guido Aretinus a Benedictine Monk, a most
witty Musician, who only (after Boethius did give light to Music) found out
the voices, ordered the keys, and by a certain divine industry, invented a
most easy way of practice, as here follows to be seen.

Of the Keys which are to be marked.
OF Keys some are to be marked, or (as others call them) marked Keys, others
are called unmarked Keys. Of the marked, there are five principal, viz. G vt,
F faut, C solfaut, G solreut, and Dd la sol: which the Ambrosians (as Franch.
lib. 1. pract. cap. 3. reports) did mark with colors. F faut, with red, C
solfaut with blew, double bb with skie-colour. But the Gregorians (whom the
Church of Rome does imitate) marking all the lines with one color, to describe
each of the marked Keys by his first Letter, or some other sign, as in the
Scale was mentioned.

Those Keys which are less principal, are two, b round, and square: The
firstshews that the Voice is to be sung fa, the second that it is to be sung mi
in the place wherein it is found. And unless one do heedily discern b from,
he does confound the Song (as Berno says) even as wine and water being mingled
together, one can discern neither.

To the Readers.
SEeing it is a fault to deliver that in many words, which may be delivered in
few (gentle Readers) leaving the hand, by which the wits of young beginners are
hindered, dulled, and distracted, learn you this fore-written Scale by
numbering it: for this being known, you shall most easily, and at first sight
know the voices, Keys, and all the Mutations.

Rules for the Keys.
FIrst, Of the marked Keys one differs from the other a Fifth, except G vt,
which is removed from F faut a Seventh.

2. The Keys of an odd number are contained in line, the Keys of an even
number in space.

3. All the signed keys, from which the Judgment of other Keys is fetched,
are set in line.

4. The Greek Letter is placed in the baser part of the Introductory, in
honor of the Greeks, from whom Music came to us: For Berno the Abbot (in
his first Book of Music) says, The Latins chose rather to put the Greek
letters than the Latin, that the Greeks may be noted hereby to be the Authors
of this Art.

5. All Keys beginning with one Letter, do differ an Eight, says Guido cap.
5. of his Microl.

6. Of Eights there is the same judgment.

7. It is not lawful for plaine-Song to go under, G vt, nor above Eela.
Hereupon it is, that the Three highest Keys have no inferior Voices, because
beyond them there is no rising: Neither have the three lowermost superior
voices, because there is no descending under them.

8. As often as in a broken Song, you go beyond the extreme Keys (as you do
often) take your voices from Eights.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
Of Tones in General.
A Tone (as Guido says) is a rule judging the Song in the end, or it is a
knowledge of the beginning, middle, and end of every Song, showing the rising
and falling of it.

Of the number of Tones.
BY the authority of the Graecians, we should only observe 4. Tones, (says
Guido Microl. II. I. Proton. 2. Deuteton, 3. Triton, 4. Tetarton. But the
Latins considering the rising and falling, and dividing each of the Greek
Tones into authenticke and plagall: to conclude every thing that is sung within
Eight Tones, agreeable to the eight parts of Speech. For it is not amiss,
(says Joan Pont. cap. 10.) that every thing which is sung, may be comprehended
within Eight Tones, as every thing which is spoken, is confined within Eight
parts of Speech.

Now these Eight Tones (as Franch. lib. 5. Theor. and last Chapter, and lib. 1.
pract. 7. cap. says) are by the Authors thus named, The first Dorian; the
second, Hypodorion; the third, Phrygian; (which Porphyrio calls barbarous; the
fourth, Hypophrygian; the fifth, Lydian; the sixth, Hypolydian; the seventh,
Myxolydian; the eight, some call Hypermyxolydian; others say it has no proper
name.

Of the Finals belonging to the Tones.
FInals, (as Saint Bernard in his Music says, both truly and briefly) are
the Letters which end the Songs. For in these must be ended every Song which is
regular, and not transposed, and are in number Four, as Guido writes in the
Dialogue of his Doctrinall: To wit, D solre In which every Song ends First and
Second regular Tones E lami Third Fourth F faut Fifth Sixth G solrevt Seventh
Eight

Of the Compasses of the Tones.
THe Compass is nothing else, but a circuit or space allowed by the
authority of the Musicians to the Tones for their rising and falling.

Now to every Tone there are granted but Ten Notes or Voices, wherein he may
have his course, (as Saint Bernard says in the Prologue of his Music. Hereof
he assigns Three reasons: to wit, The authority of the Decachorde of the
Psalter: the worthiness of equality: and the necessity of setting the Notes
down. Although at this time the licentious ranging of our modern Musicians,
does add an Eleventh to each, as in the figure following appears.

Of the Repercussions of Tones.
Whereupon the Repercussion, which by Guido is also called a Trope, and the
proper and fit melody of each Tone. Or it is the proper interuall of each
Tone, as in the Examples following appears. ^ Re la gives the first, Re fa
gives the second, ^ Mi mi gives the Third, Mi la gives the Fourth, Vt sol gives
the Fifth, ^ The Sixth gives Fa la, Vt sol uneven Tetartos, vt fa does give the
last.

Rules for the Tones.
FIrst, All the odd Tones are Authentical, all the even Plagall: these are so
called because they descend more under the final Key: these, because they do
more ascend above the final Key.

The second, Every Song in the beginning, rising straight beyond the final
Note to a Fifth, is Authentical: but that which falls straight way to a Third,
or a Fourth, under the final Key, is Plagall.

The third, A Song not rising in the middle beyond the final Note to an Eight,
although it have a Fifth in the beginning, is Plagall: unless the Repercussion
of an Authentical being there found, preserve it: as an Antiphone is newly
found, which is judged to be of the Eight Tone, because it has not the rising
of an Authent in the middle. But the Repercussion of a seventh, appearing
straight in the beginning, does preserve it, and make it remain Authentical.
See Pontifex cap. 12.

By how many ways we may know the Tones.
WE may know the Tones by three means: by the beginning: the middle: and the
end. By the beginning; for a Song rising in the beginning straight ways above
the final Key to a Fifth, is Authentical, as before was said in the second
Rule. By the middle, and first, by the rising; For the Song which touches an
Eight in the middle, is Authentical: that Song which does not, is Plagall:
secondly by the Repercussion, which is proper to every Tone, as before was
said; by which at first hearing you may judge of what kind a Song is. By the
end, as before we spoke of the final Notes.

Besides there be certain Songs, which do ascend as an Authentical, and descend
as a Plagall, and those are called Neutrall, or mixed Songs, though indeed
Saint Bernard does not allow of them: for he says, what execrable
licentiousness is this, to join together those things, which are contrary one
to the other, transgressing the bonds of Nature? surely as it does make a
discontinuance in conioyning, so does it open wrong to Nature. Therefore they
are stark mad, which presume so far as to rise a Plagall, and descend an
Authentical.

Yet are these Songs (in my judgment) to be very diligently marked in the end,
to which Tone they incline most. For whilst they descend from a Fifth to the
final Note, they are Authentickes; but whilst they rise from a Third or a
Fourth to a final, they are Plagals: See Pontifex in his 12. and 16. chap.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
Of Solfaing.
Whereupon, Solfaing is the orderly singing of every Song by Musical Voices,
according as Mi and Fa shall require. For to Sol fa (as Gafforus witnesses) is
to express the Syllables, and the names of the Voices.

Of three manners of Singing.
EVery Song may be sung three manner of ways: that is, by Solfaing, which is
for Nouices, that learn to sing: By sounding the soundsonly, which belongs to
Instrumentists, that they may affect the minds of them that hear or conceive
them with care or solace: Thirdly, by applying, which is the work of the
Cantor, that so he may express Gods praise.

Of Scales.
BEcause the diversity of Tones causes a diversity in the Solfaing,
especially about mi and fa, in b fa mi, which before we concluded was not one
only Key, but two: therefore the industrious Musicians have devised Two
Scales, in which every Song does run, and is governed: and has ordained,
that the first should be called durall of the; the second, b moll of b Flat.

The general description of the Scale.
THerefore generally a Scale is nothing else, but the knowledge of mi and fa,
in b fa mi, and in his Eights.

What the Scale Durall is.
THe Scale Durall is a Progression of Musical Voices, rising from A to
sharply, that is, by the Voice Mi.

What the Scale b Moll is.
But the Scale b Moll is a Progression of Musical Voices, rising from A to b
flatly, that is by the Voice fa: therefore a b Moll Scale does always require
fa in b fa mi, and a sharp Scale, mi: as in the draft following you may see.

Rules of Solfaing.
THe First, He that will Solfa any Song, must above all things have an eye to
the Tone. For the knowledge of the Tone is the invention of the Scale, under
which it runs.

The Second, All the Tones run under the Scale of Dure, excepting the fifth
and the sixth.

The Third, To have a Song run under Dure, is nothing else, but to sing Mi in
b fa mi, and fa in a flat Scale.

The Fourth, When a Song runs under a Scale Dure, the lowermost Notes of that
kind are to be sung; but under a Scale b Moll, the uppermost Notes.

The Fifth, Every Solfaer must needs look, whether the Song be regular, or no;
for the transposition of a Song is often times an occasion of changing the Scale.

The Sixth, Every Song ending in the Finals, is regular, and not transposed,
says Saint Bernard in his Dialogue.

The Seventh, Whenever a Song ascends from D sol re to A la mi re by a fifth,
mediately or immediately, and further only to a second, you must sing fa in b
fa mi in every Tone, till the song do again touch D sol re, whether it be
marked or no. But this Rule fails, when a song does not straightwayes fall to
F faut, as in the Hymn, Aue maris stella, you may see.

The Eight, In b fa mi, and his eights, you may not sing mi for fa, nor
contrariwise; because they are discording and repugnant voices, says
Franchinus lib. 1. pract. cap. 4.

The Ninth, b in places, where he is marked contrary to his nature, does note
Mutation.

The Tenth, The Scale being varied, the Mutations are also with it varied, both
in the whole and in part. In the whole, as in transposed Songs; in part, as in
conjoined Songs.

The eleventh, As often as fa or mi is marked contrary to their nature, the
Solfaer must follow the mark so long as it lasts.

The twelfe, Seeing there is one and the selfsame judgment of eights, the
same Solfaing of Voices must be.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
Of Mutations.
WHereupon Mutation (as Georg. Valla lib. 3. cap. 4. of his Music proves) is
the putting of one Voice for another. But this definition, because it is
general, does not properly agree to a Musician: therefore Mutation is (to apply
it to our purpose) the putting of one concord for another in the same Key. And
because all- Voices are not concords, al do not receive Mutation. Therefore it
is necessary to consider, to which Voices Mutation does agree, and to which
not; for dures are not changed into b mols, nor co^trarily: as you may see in
the example following.

Rules for Mutations.
FIrst, As often as the Progression of six Musical Voices wants, there must
necessarily be Mutation.

2 No Mutation can be in a Key which has but one Voice, because there one
Voice is not changed into it self, although it may well be repeated.

3 In Keys which have two Voices, there be two Mutations, the first is from
the lower to the upper; the second contrarily. From this Rule are excepted
Keys which have Voices of one kind, as cc solfa, and dd la sol.

4 A Key having three Voices, admits six Mutations, although therein you
must needs vary the Scale.

5 Let there be no Mutation, unless necessity force you to it.

6 The b moll Voices cannot be changed into square, nor contrarily: because
they are discords.

7 Natural Voices are changed both into Dures, and into b mols, because they
are doubtful: excepting mi and sol, re and fa, which are not changed one into
another; because they are never found dwelling in one Key.

8 In the falling of a Song, let the lower be changed into the higher, in the
rising contrarily.

9 In a Key which has one Voice, there may be so many Mutations, as there may
be in his eight, because of them there is the same judgment.

10 You must make a mental, not a vocal Mutation, unless two or three Notes
be put in the same place that receives Mutation.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
Of Moodes, or Interuals.
AN Interuall (as Boethius, whose conceit for Music, no man ever attained lib.
1. cap. 8. writes) is the distance of a base and high sound. Or (as
Placentinus lib. 2. cap. 8. says) it is the way from lowness to height, and
contrarily. Or it is the distance of one Voice from another, considered by
rising and falling. Whence it is manifest, that an Unison is not a Mood,
although it be the beginning of Moodes, as unity is of numbers. For Boethius
says, As unity is the beginning of plurality, and number, so is aequalitie
of proportions. Now an Unison is, (according to George Valla lib. 2. cap. 2.) a
Voice so qualified, that it neither tends to depth nor to height. Or it is a
conioyning of two or three Notes in the same place, as appears in exercise.

Of the number of the Moodes.
NOw the usual Interuals are in number 9, viz. a Semitone, and that is a
rising from one Voice to another, (by an imperfect second) sounding flatly: and
it is only betwixt the Voices Mi, fa. It is called a Semitone, not because it
is half a Tone, (for a Tone cannot be divided into two equal parts) but
because it is an imperfect Tone, for Semum is called that which is imperfect,
as says Boethius lib. 1. cap. 16. Of how many sorts a Semitone is, I shall
hereafter in my Theoricks discuss.

A Tone (as Faber Stapulensis writes) is the beginning of Consonances: or it
is a Consonance caused by the number of eight. For Macrobius says, that the
eight, is an number, by which Symphonie is bred; which Symphonie the Graecians
call a Tone. Or it is the distance of one Voice from another by a perfect
second, sounding strongly, so called a Tonando, that is, Thundering. For Tonare,
(as Ioannes Pontifex 12. cap. 8. says) signifies to thunder powerfully. Now a
Tone is made betwixt all Voices excepting mi and fa, consisting of two smaller
Semitones, and one Comma.

A Semiditone.
WHich Faber Stapulensis calls Sesquitonium, is an Interuall of one Voice
from another by an imperfect third: consisting of a Tone, and a semitone
according to Placentinus. It has two kinds, as Pontifex in the eight Chapter
says; the first is from re to fa; the second from mi to sol, as in exercise
will appear.

A Ditone.
IS a perfect third: so called, because it contains in it two Tones, as
Placentine and Pontifex witness. It has likewise two kinds, the first is
from vt to mi; the second from fa to la.

Diatessaron.
IN Boethius lib. 1. cap. 17. It is a Consonance of 4. Voices, and 3. Interuals.
Or it is the leaping from one Voice to another by a Fourth, consisting of two
Tones, and a lesser semitone. It has three kinds in Boethius lib. 4. cap. 13.
and in Pontifex cap. 8. the first is from vt to fa, the second from re to sol,
the third from mi to fa.

Diapente.
IS a Consonance of five Voices, and 4. Interuals, as says Boethius lib. 1.
cap. 18. Or it is the leaping of one Voice to another by a fifth, consisting of
three Tones, and a semitone. It has four kinds in Boethius lib. 4. cap. 13.
Therefore Pontifex calls it the Quadri-moode Interuall. The first, is from vt to
sol; the second, from re to la; the third, from mi to mi; the fourth, from fa
to fa.

Semitone Diapente.
IS an Interuall of one Voice from another by an imperfect sixth, according to
Georgius Valla lib. 3. cap. 21. consisting of three Tones, and two Semitones.

Tonus Diapente.
IS the distance of one Voice from another by a perfect sixth. Which Stapulensis
affirms to consist of four Tones, and a lesser semitone.

Diapason.
WHich only is called a perfect Consonance by Guido in the 9. Chapter of his
Microl. according to the same Author in the 5. Chapter is an Interuall: wherein
a Diatessaron and Diapente are conjoined. Or (as Franchinus lib. 1. pract. c.
7. writes) is a Consonance of eight sounds, and seven Interuals. Or (as
Plutarch says, it is a Consonance weighed by a duple reason. Now for example
sake 6. and 12. will make a duple reason. But they to whom these descriptions,
shall seem obscure, let them take this. It is a distance of one Voice from
another by an eight, consisting of five Tones, and two lesser semitones. It
has seven kinds, according to Boethius and Guido the most famous Musicians.
For from every Letter to his like is a Diapason. Besides every Mood has so
many kinds excepting one, as it has Voices.

Here follows a Direction for the Moodes.
^ Ter tri ni sunt mo di qui bus omnis cantile na contexitur, scilicet,
Unisonus, Se mitonium, ^ To nus, Semidito nus, Di to nus, Di a tes se ron, Di a
pente, ^ Semitoniu^ cu^ diapente, To nus cum diapente, adhuc modus di a pason,
Si que^ delectat ^ eius hu^c modu^ ee^ cognoscat cu^que ta^ paucus mo dulis to
ta harmonia formetur, ^ vtilissimum est eam altae memoriae co^mendare, nec ab
homini studio re quiesce re, Donec ^ vocu^ interuallum cog ni tu^ Harmo^tae
totius facilime queat co^prehe^dere noticiam.

Of the forbidden Interuals.
THere be some other Interuals, very rare, and forbidden to young beginners. For
as the learned license of Orators and Poets, does grant certain things to
those which are as it were passed the age of warfare, but does deny the same to
fresh water soldiers; so is it amongst Musicians. The names of those are these.

Tritonus.
ANd it is a leaping from one Voice to another by a sharp Fourth, comprehending
three whole Tones without the semitone. Wherefore it is greater than
Diatessaron; Stapulensis says thus, A Tritone does exceed the Consonance of a
Diatessaron. And this Mood is used in the answer, Isti sunt dies, Dominica
Iudica: and in the answer, Vox Tonitrui, in the saying, Euangelista, as thus:
^ Io an nes est Euange li sta.

Semidiapente.
IS an Interuall by an imperfect fifth, comprehending two Tones, with two
semitones, which though it be not found in plaine-song, yet does the knowledge
thereof much profit composers, who are held to avoid it.

Semiditonus Diapente.
IS an Interuall by an imperfect seventh. This according to Placentinus lib. 3.
cap. 24. comprehends four Tones, and two semitones. the example of this is in
an Antiphone called, Dum inducerent puerum Ihesum, in the speech, Accepit ^
Parents e ius ac ce pit.

Ditonus Diapente.
IS the distance of one Voice from another by a perfect seventh: consisting of
five Tones, and one semitone, according to Georg. Valla lib. 3. cap. 26. It is
found in the Responsorie, sancta legio de sancto Mauritio, in the word,
Aganensium. ^ sancta le gio Aganensium

Semidiapason.
IS an imperfect eight, consisting of four Tones, and three Semitones, not to
be used in any plain Song, yet worthy to be known by componists.

Semitonium Diapason.
IS a leaping by an imperfect Ninth, consisting of five Tones, and three
semitones. Now a Tone with a Diapason is a perfect Ninth, consisting of six
Tones, and two semitones.

Semiditonus Diapason.
IS an Interuall by an imperfect Tenth, as witnesses Valla the 31. Chapter,
consisting of six Tones, and three semitones. A Ditone with a true Diapason is
a perfect Tenth, consisting of seven Tones, and two semitones.

Diapason Diapente.
IS a consonance of twelve sounds, and eleven Interuals, consisting of eight
Tones, and three semitones. The examples of these Moodes are very rarely seen
in plain Song; in mensurall often.

Disdiapason.
IS an Interuall by a Fifteenth, occasioned (as says Macrobius) by a quadruple
proportion. Wherein antiquity said we should rest, and go no further, as
Ambrosius Nolanus does prove in the proverb Disdiapason, which is in Erasmus
that other light of Germany. Both because this is the natural compass of man's
voice, which going above this, is rather a squeaking; and going under, is
rather a humming than a Voice: And also because Aristotle does deny Music to
be merely Mathematical. For Music must be so tempered, that neither sense be
against reason, nor reason against sense.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER.
Of the Dimension of the Monochord.
A Monochord, that is, an Instrument of one string, is thus truly made. Take a
piece of wood of a yard long, or what length you please, of two fingers breadth,
and so thick, make it hollow in the middle, leaving the ends of it vnhollowed.
Let it be covered with a belly piece well smoothed, that has holes in it, like
the belly of a Lute: through the middle of this, let there be secretly drawn
one line, and in the beginning of it, let one prick be marked with the letter
F. for that shall be the first Magade of the Instrument: then divide the whole
line from the prick F. into nine equal parts, and in the first prick of the
divisions place vt, in the second nothing, in the third Cfaut, in the fourth
nothing, in the fifth Gsolreut, in the sixth Csolfaut, in the seventh Gsolreut
small, in the eight nothing, in the last o Cifer, which shall possess the
place of the second Magade. This done, again divide the space; which is from
vt to the second Magade, into nine parts.

In the first part set A Base; in the third Dsolre; in the fifth Alamire; in the
sixth D lasolre; in the seventh aalamire. Then from Are to the second Magade
again make nine parts; in the first set mi Base; in the third Elami; in the
fifth mi in the small letters; in the sixth Elami; in the seventh mi double.

This done, divide all this space from the first to the second Magade into
four parts: in the first put Bfa Base; in the second Ffaut final; in the
third Ffaut sharp. Then begin in Bfa Base, and divide the whole line toward
the Cone into 4. parts; in the first, b the Semitone betwixt D and E capitals;
in the second, bfa; in the third, bbfa. This done, begin in the semitone, which
is betwixt D and E, and divide the whole line into 4. equal parts. In the
first, place b the Semitone, betwixt G capital and small; in the second, b
Semitone, betwixt D and E; in the third, bfa, betwixt dd and ee: and if you
further divide the third into two equal parts, you shall have a semitone
betwixt g and aa. Then place the foot of your compass in Csolfaut, and divide
the space toward the second Magade into two parts; in the middle whereof place
cc solfa. In like manner divide the space from dlasolre toward the Cone into
two equal parts; and in the middle place ddlasol. Lastly, divide the space
from e toward the second Magade; and in the middle you shall have ee la, with
the true Dimension of the Monochord. This done, in the extreme points of the
Magades, set little props to hold the string, least the sound of the string be
dulled with touching the wood. This readied, set to one string of wyre, strong,
big and stretched enough, that it may give a sound which may be easily heard,
and you shall have your Monochord perfect. The form of it is this.

THE NINTH CHAPTER.
Of the Definition, Profit, and use of the Monochord.
A Monochord (as Guido proves in the beginning of his Doctrinall) is a long
square piece of wood hollow within, with a string drawn over it; by the sound
whereof, we apprehend the varieties of sounds. Or it is a rude and unskillful
Master, which makes learned Scholars. For it shows to others that which it
self conceiues not, it tells truth, it cannot tell how to lie, it instructs
diligently, and reprehendeth no man's slow conceit. Now it is called a
Monochord, because it has but one string, as a Tetrachord is called that which
has four. And a Decachord which has ten, says Joan. Pont. 22. cap. 7. of
his Music.

Of the profit of the Monochord.
THe Monochord was chiefly invented for this purpose, to be judge of Musical
voices and interuals: as also to try whether the song be true or false
furthermore, to show haire-braind false Musicians their errors, and the way of
attaining the truth. Lastly, that children which desire to learn Music, may
have an easy means to it, that it may entice beginners, direct those that be
forward, and so make of unlearned learned.

Of the use of the Monochord.
THe use of the Monochord (says Berno Cluniacensis lib. 2. of his Music) is,
that we may know how much each voice is higher or lower than other. When
therefore thou will learn a Song, even the deepest, of thy self by the help
of thy Monochord, set thy Monochord before thee on the table, and mark in what
Key the first Note of that Song is, which thou desire to know. This being
found, touch the same in the Monochord with a quill, and the sound it gives, is
that thou desire. Thus run over each Note of the Song, and so may thou
by thy self learn any Song though never so weighty.

THE TENTH CHAPTER.
Of Musica Ficta.
FAined Music is that, which the Greeks call Synemenon, a Song made beyond
the regular compass of the Scales. Or it is a Song, which is full of
Conjunctions.

Of Conjunctions.
THe Coniunct sounds were called by the ancients Dijuncts because it is added
to songs besides their nature, either to make them more sweet, or to make the
Moodes more perfect: for thus says Saint Bernard: In every kind, where it is
meet a flatter sound should be, let there be put a flat in stead of a sharp;
yet covertly, least the Song seem to take upon it the likeness of another
Tone. Now a Coniunct is this, to sing a Voice in a Key which is not in it. Or
it is the sudden changing of a Tone into a Semitone, or a semitone into a Tone.

Of the Division and number of Coniuncts.
COniuncts are twofold: that is, Tolerable ones, when a Voice is sung in a
Key, wherein it is not, yet is found in his eight: as to sing Mi in A re, La in
Dsolre. Intolerable ones, when a Voice is sung in a Key which is not in it, nor
in his eight, as to sing Fa in Elami, Mi in Ffaut. Of these Coniuncts there be
two signs, viz. b round and. The first shows that the Coniunct is in dure
places; the second, that it is in b flat places.

There be 8. Coniuncts most usual: although there may be more. The first in a
Base, is marked with round b. The second in E final, is marked with the same
sign. The third is in Ffaut, and is marked with. The fourth in a small, is
known by b flat. The fifth, in c affinall by dure. The sixth, in e by b round.
The seventh, in f by. The eight in aa by b. There be examples enough to to be
found of these both in plain and mensurall Songs.

Here follows the feigned Scale.
THe fained Scale exceedes the others both in height and depth. For it adds a
Ditone under Vt base, because it sings fa in A, and it rises above eela by two
degrees, for in it it sounds fa. Wherefore for the expressing of it, there are
necessarily required twelve lines, as appears in the figure following. The
Scale of ficts or Synemenon, and how the Mutations are made.


Rules for Fict a Music.
FIrst, It is better, and sweeter to sing by tolerable Coniuncts, than by the
proper Voices of Keys.

2 The tolerable Coniuncts do not spoil the Song, but the intolerable ones.

3 Music may Fict in any Voice and Key, for Consonance sake.

4 Marking fa in b fa mi, or in any other place, if the Song from that shall
make an immediate rising to a Fourth, a Fifth, or an Eight, even there fa must
necessarily be marked, to eschew a Tritone, a Semidiapente, or a Semidiapason,
and inusuall, and forbidden Moodes: as appears in the example underwritten.

An Exercise of Ficta Music.
^

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
Of Song and Transposition.
Wherefore a Song is a melody formed of a Sound, Mood, and Tone, by a lively
Voice. I say by a sound, because of the writing of the Notes, which improperly
we call a Song: By the mood, I understand rising and falling, because of the
prayers which are read in an Unison. By the Tone, because of the chirping of
birds, which is comprehended within no Tone. For within a Syllogism is mood
and figure, that in a Song is the Tone and Scale. I say a lively Voice, because
of Musical Instruments. Or otherwise: A Song is the fitting of a lively Voice
according to rising, and falling, Or (as Gafforus writes in his Theoricks lib.
5. cap. 6.) it is the deduction of many Voices from the same beginning. And
this description does properly agree to this progression of syllables, because
it is not a Song.

Of the number of Deductions.
THere are therefore three Deductions of this kind: the first is called
durall, to be sung sharply, because it requires mi in b fa mi, and in his
Eights.

The second is b flat, which runs with a sweet and flattering Harmony, and
requires fa in b fa mi.

The third is neutrall, and is called natural. For it receives in b fa mi,
neither mi, nor fa: because it comes not to such places.

Rules for Deductions.
FIrst, Wheresoever Vt is put in the Scale, there is the beginning of some
Deduction: where fa is put, there the middle: where la, there the end: as
appears in the figure following. In C Natural, F b Moll b and dure the
beginning, F b c middle, d d e end.

The second Rule. Of which Deductions this or that rule is, you shall thus
easily know. Consider the voice that is there to be sung, with which it
descends to his foundation, I say to Vt: and where you find any such, see what
Deduction begins so: for it will be of that Note which you seek.

Of Transposition.
WHereupon Transposition is the removing of a Song, or a Key from his proper
place. For to transpose is to remove a song, or a Key from the proper place.
And Transposition is twofold, viz. Of the Song and of the Key.

Of Transposition of a Song.
IT is the avoiding of Coniuncts, for whilst we strive to avoid Coniuncts,
(because they mar the Song) we do eleuate the Song from the proper place of
his end, above to a Fifth, as directly appears in the Responsorie, Ite in
Orbem. ^ I te in Orbem I te in or bem

Of the Affinall Keys of Tones.
THe Keys (which we call Affinall) be the Letters, which end irregular Songs:
whereof according to Guido, Berno, and Saint Gregory, there be three: Although
the Ambrosians make more. Viz. alamire wherein ends First and Second transposed
Tone. b fa mi every Song Third Fourth c solfaut of the Fifth Sixth

Now this irregularnesse of Songs (as writes Pontifex 14. chapter of his
Music) comes sometime by license, sometime by the negligence of the Cantors,
sometimes by reason of ancientnesse, which cannot be gainesaid, sometimes
because of the Counterpoint, that the Base may have place to descend.

Of the Transposition of a Rule.
FIrst, A Song of the seventh and eight Tones is not transposed. Not upward to
Dlasolre, as the Ambrosians are of opinion, because an Authentic Tone has no
place of rising to the tenth, neither down to Cfaut, because a Plagall has no
place of falling to a fifth: neither must you clime above eela, nor descend
under G vt, as before has been declared. Wherefore (says Joan. Pontif.) It is
fit, that he which cannot have a Vicar, do administer his business himself.

2 A Song ending in Dlasolre, or in Cfaut, is either an Ambrosian Song, or
corrupted with the ignorance of Cantors, as Pontifex says; Whenever in a
Song of the fourth Tone, there falls any missing, let us say, that it proceeds
from the unskillfulness of the Cantors, and is to be corrected with the cunning
of the Musicians. But the authority of the Gregorians admits no such Song.

3 The placing of one strange Voice in any Key, is a cause, why the whole Song
is transposed.

4 Transposition is an help and excuse of the Coniuncts.

5 Let every transposition be from a Final, to a fifth the proper Affinall:
unless necessity compel, that it be to be made to a fourth. For then are we
forced to transpose it to a fourth, when after the Transposition to a fifth more
Coniuncts rise than were before: as in the answer, Quae est ista, under the
third Tone may appear. ^ Quae est ista regulariter. Transpositio quintaria non
valens. Transpositio quartariae been valens.

6 The same Voices after Transposition are to be sung, which were sung before.

7 In irregular Songs transposed to a fifth, you must sing Mi in b fa G mi in
every Tone, unless it bespecially marked with fa.

8 In Songs transposed to a fourth, fa is always sounded in b fa G mi: unless
Mi bespecially noted.

9 Transposition to a fourth is known, when a Song is ended by a voice which
agrees not to his Scale. Or when in the beginning of a transposed Song, fa is
found. To which transposition Saint Bernard seems to be opposite, in saying
this: It is fit that they which propound to themselves an orderly course of
life, have also the Art of Singing; and restrain from the liberty Note.
of those men, which regarding rather likeness than nature in Songs, disioyne
those things which are joined together, and join together those things which
are disioyned, begin and end, make low and high, order and compose a Song, not
as they should, but as they list: for by the foolish transposition that such
men use, there is grown such confusion in Songs, that most are thought to be
of a contrary fashion.

10 A Song ending in Gsolreut, marking fa in b fa G mi is of the first or
second Tone transposed to the fourth. And that which is in alamire, is of the
third or fourth, as Quae est ista, and so of others.

Of the Transposition of Keys.
THe Transposition of a Key is the raising or low carrying of a marked Key for
want of lines, of which there are these Rules given.

1 The transposition of Keys does not make the Song irregular, because it
varies not the regular end.

2 By how much a transposed Key does descend from the former going before; so
much does the following Note ascend above that transposed Key: and contrarily;
as in the examples following is manifest. ^ Haec sunt co^uiuia qua^tibi place^t
o patris sa pi en tia

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.
Of the Tones in special.
BEing that to proceed from generaltie to specialty is more natural to us, as
Aristotle the Prince of all Philosophers, and light of natural knowledge, in
the first Book of his Phisickes shows. Therefore in a fit order after the
general delivery of the Tones, let us go to the special, discussing more
largely and plainly of the nature of each. And first, of the first.

Of the first Tone.
THe first Tone (as S. Bernard says) is a Rule determining the authentic of
the first kind. Or it is the authentical progression of the first. Now an
authentical progression, is the ascending beyond the Final Key to an eight,
and a tenth. And the progression of the first is formed by that kind of
Diapente, which is from d to a: and of that kind of Diatessaron, which is from
a to d, says Franchinus lib. 1. pract. cap. 8. It has his Final regular
place in Dsolre, or his vnregular in alamire. The beginnings of it according to
Guido are C. D. E. F. G. and a, whose capital form is this: ^ Capita. primi
toni. Sacerdos in aeternum. Gaudeamus omnes in do.

Of the differences of Tones.
DIfferences of the Essences of Tones there be none, but for the unlearned
there are some framed, that they may the easilier begin in the diverse
beginnings of Tones: says Pontif. 23. chapter of his Music. Therefore I find
no cause of this, but only use: neither have I found it written by any
Musician. Neither does Saint Bernard much like it. For the differences give
occasion of many confusions and errors. Wherefore seeing our obsequiousness,
which we perform to God, must be reasonable, leaving the differences, which
are by no reason approved, let the Readers only be careful of the Capital
tenours of Tones, least they wind themselves in unprofitable and superfluous
precepts, put on the darkness of the night, and make an easy thing most hard
and difficult. For God delights not in unreasonable turnings, but in Songs well
fashioned and regular, being he himself has made all things in a most regular
and orderly fashion. Wherefore the Psalmist says, Praise the Lord in
well-sounding Cymbals: for he would not have said well sounding, if he would
have had God praised with every bellowing, screaming, or noise.

Of the Divisions of the Psalms.
I Find there are two sorts of Psalms, which we use in praising God, the
greater and the lesser: all Psalms are called lesser, except those two, viz.
Of the blessed Virgin, and of Zacharias. Also the Song of Symeon, in some
Diocese is accounted for a greater Psalm, in some for a lesser; as I in going
over the world have found.

Of the true manner of Singing Psalms.
THe authority both of Coelius Rhodiginus, and of all the Divines does
testify, That the Prophet had a great mystery in the Harmony of the Psalms:
wherefore I thought good to interlace some within this book of the true manner
of singing. Whence to sing psalms, is to sing the praises of almighty God with
a certain joy. In which matter there is such diversity, (the more is the
grief) that every one seems to have a several fashion of Singing. Neither do
they observe the Statutes, and precepts of their forefathers, but every one
sings Psalms, and other things even as they list. Whereupon there is such
discention grown in the Church, such discord, such confusion, that scarce two
sing after one manner. This does Pontifex in the 22. chapter of his Music,
very much reprehend, and surely with good reason, saying: Seeing that one God
is delighted with one baptism, one faith, and the unity of manners, who may
think but that he is grievously offended with this multiplicity of Songs?
Wherefore I had delivered certain Rules of the true order of singing, unless I
had found them both copiously and learnedly written by master Michael
Galliculo de Muris, a most learned man. Wherefore I send all that are desirous
to be instructed in this point to him, only meddling with those things which
belong to the tuning of psalms.

Rules for the tuning of Psalms.
FIrst, All the greater Psalms are to be tuned with a rising, the lesser
without a rising.

2 The indeclinable words, the Hebrew, and Barbarous, are to be pronounced in
the middle accent high.

3 The tuning of the lesser Psalms of the first Tone is thus out of alamire,
and out of Ffaut, the tuning of the greater thus: ^ Laudate pueri do laudate
nomen domini: memento do. Da. Magnificat anima mea dominum.

The melody of verses in Responsories, is framed by later Musicians at their
pleasure: but of entrances the manner is as yet inuiolably kept, according to
the decrees of the Ancients, in this manner. ^ The Melody of the Verses in the
answers of the first Tone. ^ The Melody in the beginnings of the Verses of the
first Tone.

Of the second Tone.
THe second Tone, (as Saint Bernard says) is a Rule determining the Plagall of
the first fashion. Or it is a plagall Progression of the first. Now a plagall
Progression is a descending beyond the Final to a Fifth, or at least a fourth.
His beginnings (according to Guido) are A. C. D. F. and G. and does rightly
possess the extremes of the eight Authenticke, because the soldier by law of
Arms, does dwell in the Tents of his captain. The manner of the second Tone,
is thus: ^ Cap. fecu^di toni. Miserator do mi nus. Hunc mundu^ spernes.

The tuning of the smaller Psalms is thus out of Ffaut; the tuning of the
greater out of Cfaut, thus: ^ Laudate pueri do. laudate nome^ do. Memento do.
da. Magnificat anima mea dominum. ^ The Melody of the Uerses in the answers
of the second Tone. ^ The Melody in the beginnings of the Verses of the second
Tone.

Of the third Tone.
THe third tone, is a Rule determining the Authentical of the second manner. Or
it is the authentical progressio^ of the second, having the final place ^
regular in Elami: His beginnings (according to Guido) are E. F. G. etc. The
chief form whereof, is this: ^ Capitale tertij. O gloriosum. Fauus distillans.

The tuning of the lesser Psalms out of Csolfaut, and of the greater out of
Gsolreut, is this: ^ Laudate pueri do laudate nomen do. Memento do Da.
Magnificat anima mea. ^ The Melody of the Uerses in the answers of the third
Tone. ^ The Melody in the beginnings of the Verses of the third Tone.

Of the Fourth Tone.
THe Fourth Tone (as witnesses Bernard) is a Rule determining the plagall of
the second manner. Or it is a Progression of the second plagall, holding the
same end that his Authenticke does. It has six beginnings, C. D. E. F. G. and
a, whose principal tenor is this, as it follows: ^ Capitale quarti Tota
pulchra es Haec est dies.

The tuning of the smaller Psalms out of alamire, and the greater out of
Elami, is thus: ^ Laudate pueri dominu^, laudate nome^ domini. Memento do. Da
Magnificat anima mea dominu^. ^ The Melody of the Verses in the answers of
the fourth Tone. ^ The Melody in the Divine Offices of the Verses of the
Fourth Tone.

Of the fifth Tone.
THe fifth Tone is a Rule, determining the Authenticke of the third manner, or
it is an Authentical Progression of the third. Whose regular end is in Ffaut;
and irregular end in Csolfaut. The beginnings of it (as Franchinus witnesses)
are Four, F. G. a, and c. whose chief form is this: ^ Capitale quinti. Gaude
Dei genitrix. Gau di a.

The tuning of the smaller Psalms out of Csolfaut, and of the greater out of
Ffaut, is in this sort. ^ Laudate pueri dominum. Memento do. Da. Mag. anima mea
dominum. ^ The Melody of the Verses in the answers of the Fifth Tone. ^ The
manner in the beginnings of the Verses of the Fifth Tone.

Of the Sixth Tone.
THe Sixth Tone is a Rule, determining a plagall of the third sort. Or it is the
plagall Progression of the third, participating justly with his Authentical in
the final Notes. To whom there befall four beginnings, viz. C. D. F. and a,
says Franchinus in the 13. chapter of his Practick; and Guido in his
doctrinall Dialogue. The chief form of it is this: ^ Capitale Sexti. Veni
electa* mea. Diligebat. eam.

The tuning of the lesser Psalms out of alamire, and greater out of Ffaut, is
this: ^ Laudate pueri dom. laudate nomen do. Me. dom. Da. Magnificat anima mea
dom. ^ The Melody of the Verses in the answers of the Sixth Tone. ^ The Melody
in the beginnings of the Verses of the Sixth Tone.

Of the Seventh Tone.
THe Seventh Tone is a Rule determining the Authenticke of the fourth sort. Or
it is the authentical Progression of the Fourth. It has his end in Gsolreut
regular only. To this belongs five beginnings, viz. G. a.. c. and d. The chief
form of it, is this: ^ Capitale septimi. Exortum est. Clamauerunt.

The tuning of the lesser Psalms out of Dlasolre, and of the greater out of b
fa mi, is thus: ^ Laudate pueri dom. laudate nomen dom. Memento do. Da.
Magnificat anima mea dom. ^ The Melody of the Verses in the answers of the
Seventh Tone. ^ The Melody in the beginnings of the Verses of the Seventh Tone.

Of the Eight Tone.
THe Eight Tone is a Rule determining the plagall of the fourth sort. Or it is
the plagall Progression of the fourth, possessing the same end that his
Authenticke does. The beginnings of it are D. F. G. a. and c. The chief form
of it, is this following: ^ Capitale octaui. Dum ortus. Iusti confitebuntur.

The tuning of the lesser Psalms out of Csolfaut, and of the greater out of
Gsolreut, is thus: ^ Laudate pueri dominu^, laudate nome do. Memento do. Da.
Magnificat anima mea dom. ^ The Melody of the verses in the answers of the
Eight Tone. ^ The Melody in the beginnings of the verses of the Eight Tone.

Of the strange Tone.
THere is another Tone, which many call the Peregrine, or strange Tone, not
that it is of strange Notes, but that it is very seldom used in our Harmony.
For his Tenor is not sung to any but to one Antiphone, Nos qui viuimus, etc.
and to two Psalms, In exitu etc. and Benedicite. His end is in the final Note
of the Seventh Tone, as Franchinus demonstrates it. The Tenor of it follows:
^ Peregrinus tonus. In exitu Israel de Aegy. domus Jacob de pop. barbaro.

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.
That diverse men are delighted with diverse Moodes.
EVery man's palate is not delighted with the same meat (as Pon. writes in the
16. chapter of his Music.) but some delight in sharp, some in sweet meats:
neither are all men's ears delighted with the same sounds: for some are
delighted with the crabbed and courtly wandering of the first Tone. Others do
affect the hoarse gravity of the second: others take pleasure in the severe,
and as it were disdainful stalking of the third: others are drawn with the
flatring sound of the fourth: others are moved with the modest wantonness of the
fifth: others are led with the lamenting voice of the sixth: others do willingly
hear the warlike leapings of the seventh: others do love the decent, and as it
were, matronall carriage of the eight. Neither is it marvel (says Guido in
the 13. cha. of his Mic.) if the hearing be delighted with the variety of
sounds, seeing that the sight, is pleased with the variety of colors, the
smelling power, with the variety of odours; and the taste, with diversity of
meats. Wherefore let a Musician diligently observe that he dispose his song in
that Tone, wherein he knows his auditors are most delighted. As if he will
compose a song at the request of young men, let it be youthful and frolic; If
at the request of old men, let it be testy, and full of seuerenes. For as a
writer of Comedies, if he give the part of a young man unto an old man, or the
part of of a wanton fellow to a covetous person, is laughed to scorn: so is a
singer if he bring in a dancing merry mood, when occasion requires sadness, or
a sad one, when it requires mirth. Now by what means that may be performed, the
property of the Moodes declares. Because (as Cassiodorus writes in an Epistle
to Boethius, and Coelius repeats it in antiq. lect. lib. 5. cap. 22.) The Darian
Mood is the bestower of wisdom, and causer of chastity. The Phrygian causes
wars, and enflameth fury. The Eolian does appease the tempests of the mind,
and when it has appeased them, luls them asleep. The Lydian does sharpen the
wit of the dull, and does make them that are burdened with earthly desires, to
desire heavenly things, an excellent worker of good things. Yet does Plato lib.
3. de Rep. much reprehend the Lydian, both because it is mournful, and also
because it is womanish. But he allows of the Dorian, both because it is
manly, and also does delight valiant men, and is a discouerer of warlike
matters. But our men of a more refined time do use sometime the Dorian; sometime
the Phrygian; sometime the Lydian; sometime other Moodes. because they judge,
that according to diverse occasions they are to choose diverse Moodes. And that
not without cause: for every habit of the mind is governed by songs, (as
Macrob. writes) for songs make men sleepy, and wakefull, careful, and merry,
angry, and merciful, songs do heal diseases, and produce diverse wonderful
effects (as says Fran. Petrac.) moving some to vain mirth, some to a devout
and holy joy, yea ofttimes to godly tears. Of al which I had rather be silent,
than to determine any thing rashly: least I do burden the wits of children
with unprofitable and unnecessary precepts. Because who so in expounding any
thing does pour on more than is needful, increases the darkness, and makes
not the mist thinner, as Macrobius says in the second book upon the dream of
Scipio. Therefore let learners study those few precepts, because they are
necessary for the understanding of that which follows.

Here ends the first Book.
TO THE WORTHY HIS kind friend George Brachius, a most skillful Musician, and
chief Doctor of the Duke of Wittenberg his Chapel: Andraeas Ornithoparchus
of Meyning, wishes health.
WHen I had thoroughly ruminated of that saying of Plato, That we were not made
for our selves, but to do good to our Country, and friends, I was even out of
heart) my most respected friend) even as if my powers had failed me, and as one
stricken with amazement. And as that first Monarch of the Roman Empire, when he
first saw Alexanders statue at Gades, lamented for that he himself had done
nothing worthy the remembrance: even so I, because I have done no such thing,
did even lament; considering that beauty, pleasures, age, health, and
delicacies do fade away, Sed famam extendere factis, hoc virtutis opus.
Wherefore after many hearty sighs, taking heart again (though I were tossed
with many floods of Cares, many gusts of adversities, and many storms of
diverse perturbations) yet began I to think what I should leave to posterity
for witness that I had lived. Now my mind being turned hither and thither, in
the end I chose the learning of Harmony; both because it is fit for moral
education, and also because it is the servant of Gods praise. For amongst all
Scholler-like Arts, (which they commonly call Liberal) none is more moral,
more pleasant, more divine, than Music. Whereof although there be many
Professors, yet be there very few writers (I know not whether it grow out of
hatred to the Art, or their own slothfulness) that have delivered the Art in
a good form. Hence is it, that excepting those which are, or have been in the
Chapels of Princes, there are none, or very very few true Musicians. Whereupon
the Art it self does grow into contempt, being hidden like a Candle under a
bushel, the praising of the almighty Creator of all things decreaseth, and the
number of those which seek the overthrow of this Art, does daily increase
throughout all Germany. By this occasion stirred up, and further relying upon
your kindness, most worthy Sir, (a great testimony whereof you gave me, when I
came from the University of Tubyng, and turned in at your pleasant (indeed most
pleasant house) which you have of your Princes gift) I turned my pen to the
writing of Mensural Music, having before written of Plain-Song. And what
flowers soever other men's volumes had in them, like a Be I sucked them out,
and mad: this second Book the hiue to lay them up in. Now as I have dedicated
it in your name, so do I subject it to your censure, that you may both mend
those faults you find in it, and detect it from the barking of those who do
commonly defame all good men. For having a fit judge of these things which I
write, I do fitly submit my self to his Censure; even his whom already both
my own experience has found, and all Sueuia does acknowledge, and all high
Germany does honor, for a godly, upright, and learned man. Farewell, (most
learned friend) and defend thy Andraeas from the tooth of Envy.

THE SECOND BOOK of Ornithoparchus his Music: wherein are contained the
Rudiments of Mensurall Song.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of the Profit and Praise of this Art.
Boethius that Roman, (whose wit in Music no man ever mended; nay, never
attained to, in the first Chapter of his Music) writes, That there is such
efficacy in Harmonicall Consents, as a man though he would, cannot want them.
For Music drives away those cares which drive away sleep, stilleth crying
children, mitigateth the pain of those which labor, refreshes wearied
bodies, reformeth appassionate minds. And every living soul is so overcome
with Musical sounds; that not only they which are of the gallanter sort (as
says Macrobius) but even all barbarous Nations doevse Songs, either such as
stir them up to an ardent embracing of virtue; or do melt them in unworthy
pleasures: and so are they possessed with the sweetness of Harmony, that by
Music the Alarm to war is given, by Music the Retraite is sounded, as if
the Note did both stir up, and after allay that virtue of fortitude. Now of
the two, that Music which we call Mensurall, does specially perform these
effects. For this (as Isidorus says) stirs up not only men, but also
beasts, serpents, birds, and Dolphins with the sweetness of the harmony. By
this did Arion preserve himself in the middle of the sea; by this did Amphion
the Dircaean gather together stones for building the Theban walls. By this did
Timotheus the Phrygian so inflame Alexander Magnus, the Conqueror of the whole
world, that he rise from the table where he sat, and called for his arms; and
afterward changing his Mood on the Instrument, did cause him to put off his
armor, and sit down again to banquet. By this did David the princely Singer,
help Saul the King of Israel, when he was vexed with an unclean Spirit; by
this, not only the great God, the maker of all things, but also the furies of
the Stygian God are delighted, appeased, and mitigated. For this is the Lady
and Mistress of all other Arts; which can delight both those that be in
Plutoes jurisdiction, and those that abode in Neptunes fields; and those that
live in Jupiters eternally-lightsome Mansions. This Art only, leaving the
earth, flies up before the tribunal seat of the highest Judge; where together
with the Instruments of the Saints it sounds, where the Angels and Archangels
do incessantly sing Hymns to God, where the Cherubins, and Seraphins, cry
with a continual voice, Holy, holy, holy. Besides, no Art without Music can
be perfect: wherefore Pythagoras appointed his Scholars they should both when
they went to rest, and when they awaked use Melodies. Besides, Music does
govern and sharpen the manners and fashions of men. For even Nero whilst he
gave himself to Music, was most gentle, as Seneca witnesses: but when he
leaving of Music, and set his mind on the Diabolical Art of Nicromancie,
then first began that fierce cruelty of his; then was he changed from a Lamb
to a Wolf, and out of a most mild prince transformed into a most savage
beast. But least I digress too far, and least we proceed from unknown
beginnings, I will briefly set down what this Music is. Therefore Mensurall
Music is a knowledge of making Songs by figures, which are in form
differing, and having the quantity of Mood, time, and Prolation: Or it is an
Art, whose Harmony is effected by the variety of figures and voices.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Of the Figures.
WHerefore a Figure is a certain sign which represents a voice, and silence.
A Voice, (I say) because of the kinds of Notes which are used: Silence,
because of the Rests which are of equal value with the Notes, and are measured
with Artificial Silence.

Of the number of the Figures.
THe Ancients observed only five Figures, as principal Figures, and such as
receive the quantity of the three Degrees of Music: Out of which after ages
have drawn out others for quickness sake, according to that saying of Ovid:
Ex alijs alias reparat natura figuras.


The bodies of the Figures are of the form following.

A Large is a figure, whose length is thrice as much as his breadth, having on
the part toward your right hand a small tail, bending upward, or downward.

A Long is a Figure, whose length is twice as much as his breadth, having such
a tail as the Large has.

A Brief is a Figure, which has a body foure-square, and wants a tail.

A Sembreefe is a Figure, which is round in form of an egg, or (as Franchinus
says) Triangular.

A Minime is a Figure like a Sembreefe, having a tail, ascending or descending.

A Crochet, is a Figure like a Minime in color varying.

A Quauer is a figure like a Crochet, having a dash to the right hand-ward.

A Semiquauer is a figure like a Quauer which has two dashes, and thereby is
distinguished from it, as thus:

The Eight Figurall bodies. Large. Long. Brief. Semibreefe Minime. Crochet.
Quauer. Semiquauer.

There is a certain Figure, in shape like a Minime, but joined with the number
of Three, which is called Sesquialterata, because three are sung for two.

Besides, a Figure which has two tails, is as if it had none; because one
does hinder another.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Of Ligatures.
WHerefore a Ligature (as Gaff. writes in the fifth chap. of his second Book)
is the conioyning of simple Figures by fit strokes. Or (according to the
strokes upward or downward) it is the dependence of the principal figures in
straightness, or crookedness.

General Rules for the Ligatures.
FIrst, There are four ligable Notes, that is a Large, a Long, a Brief, and a
Semibreefe.

2 Every ligable Note, except a Large, may be figured with a twofold body, a
square body, and a crooked.

3 Every ligable Note is to be judged according to the ascension and
descension, either of it self, or of the Note following.

4 Every ligable Note is either beginning, middle, or final.

5 The Accidents of simple Notes, say for example, alteration, imperfection,
and the like (as Franchinus witnesses) are also the Accidents of the bounden
Notes.

Rules for the beginning Notes.
FIrst, Every Beginning (whether straight, or crooked) wanting a tail, when
the second Note descends, is a Long.

2 Every Beginning Note without a tail, if the second Note ascend, is a Brief.

3 Every Beginning Note having a tail downe-ward on the left side of it, is a
Brief.

4 Every Initiall, howsoever fashioned, having a tail on the left side
vp-ward, is a Semibreefe, together with the Note next following; so that you
need not care whether it ascend, or descend.

Rules for the middle Ligatures.
FIrst, Every Note betwixt the first and the last, is called middle.

2 Every middle Note howsoever shaped, or placed, is a Brief.

3 A Long may begin and end a Ligature, but can never be in the middle of it.

4 A Brief may be in the beginning, middle, and end of a Ligature very fitly.

5 A Semibreefe may be in the beginning, middle, and end of a Ligature: so that
it have a tail in the left part upward.

Rules for the final Ligatures.
FIrst, Every last Note that is straight, and descends, is a Long.

2 Every Final Note that is straight, and ascending, is a Brief.

3 Every crooked Final whether it ascend or descend, is a Brief.

4 A Large wheresoever it is set, is always a Large.

The Examples of these Rules are in the following Tenor set out. ^ Tenor
Exercise of Ligatures. ^ Base Exercise. ^ Of Ligatures.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
Of Mood, Time, and Prolation.
THe degrees of Music, by which we know the value of the principal figures,
are three: to wit, Mood, Time, and Prolation. Neither does any of them deal
upon all Notes, but each only with certain Notes that belong to each. As
Mood deals with Largs, and Longs; Time, with Breefes; Prolation, with
Semibreefes.

A Mood (as Franchinus says in the second Book, cap. 7. of his Pract:) is
the measure of Longs in Largs, or of Breefes in Longs. Or it is the beginning
of the quantity of Largs and Longs, measuring them either by the number of two
or the number of three. For every Figure is measured by a double value. To wit,
by the number of Two, and so is called Perfect, because we make 3. perfect, and
limit the imperfect by 2. Three, Imperfect,

Of the Division of Mood.
Mood (as it is here taken) is twofold; to wit, The greater, which is in the
Largs and Longs, and the lesser, which is in the Longs and Breefes. And each of
these is divided into the perfect and imperfect.

Of the greater Mood.
THe greater perfect Mood is, when a Larg contains in it three Longs: or it
is the measuring of three Longs in one Larg. The sign hereof is a perfect
circle accompanied with the number of three, thus; O3. The greater imperfect is
a Larg, comprehending in it two Longs: which is known by an imperfect circle,
joined to the number of three, thus; C3.

Of the lesser Mood.
THe lesser perfect Mood is a Long having in it three Breefes. Or it is the
measuring of three Breefes in one Long, whose sign is a perfect Circle,
accompanied with the number of 2, thus; O2. But the lesser imperfect, is a Long
which is to be measured only with two Breefes. The sign of this is the
absence of the number of 2. Or a Semicircle joined to a number of 2. thus; C2.
O. C. as follows:

Of Time.
TIme is a Brief which contains in it two or three Semibreefes. Or it is the
measuring of two or three Semibreefes in one Brief. And it is twofold, to
wit, perfect: and this is a Brief measured with three Semibreefes. Whose sign
is the number of three joined with a Circle or a Semicircle, or a perfect
Circle set without a number, thus; O3. C3. O. The imperfect is, wherein a
Brief is measured only by two Semibreefes. Which is known by the number of
two joined with a perfect Circle, or a Semicircle, or a Semicircle without a
number, thus; O2. C2.

Of Prolation.
WHerefore Prolation is the essential quantity of Semibreefes: or it is the
setting of two or three Minims against one Semibreefe. And it is twofold, to
wit the greater, (which is a Semibreefe measured by three Minims, or the
comprehending of three Minims in one Semibreefe, whose sign is a point
enclosed in a sign thus, ^) The lesser Prolation is a Semibreefe measured with
two Minims only, whose sign is the absence of a prick. For Franchinus says,
They carry with them the imperfecting of the figure, when the signs are
wanting, thus: ^ Time perfect. Imperf. time. Greater Prol. Less Prolation.

There was one well seen in this Art, that made this underwritten Example of
these three degrees, reasonable learnedly and compendiously for the help of
young beginners: which (by his favor) we will not think unworthy to set down
here. ^ The Tenor, in the lesser Mood perfect. The Descant, in the greater
Prolation. ^ The Base, in time perfect.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
Of the Signs.
THough there be such dissension betwixt Musicians about the Signs, such
confusion of rules and examples, that even to a perfect Musician they seem to
breed doubts: so that Plutarch (a man furnished with all learning) says in
that Book, which he wrote of Music: In our time, the form of difference
has so much increased, and so far varied from the Custom of our Ancestors,
that there is no mention, no precept, no certainty of Art left. And also
though we be not to make a definitive sentence in doubtful matters, but
rather to hold question: yet that young beginners, which are desirous to learn
this Art, may not be either discouraged from proceeding, or misled, leaving
those things which more unusual, we will briefly show those things which are
in use amongst those Musicians, who now are in credit: by seeking out that
doubt of the circle and number, which was among the Theoricks. Therefore a
sign is, a certain figure set before a Song, which shows the Mood, Time,
and Prolation.

Of the Divisions of Signs.
OF Signs some be principal, and some less principal: The principal are
those, which are fit for the understanding of Mood, Time, and Prolation. And
they are twofold, to wit, Extrinsecall, and Intrinsecall: Extrinsecall are
those called, which do outwardly present themselves, and show the degrees of
Music, as Number, a Circle and a Point.

Rules for the Extrinsecall Signs.
FIrst, A Circle set alone by itself shows time: if it be perfect it shows
perfect time, if imperfect, imperfect time. When it is joined to a number, it
signifies the Mood.

2 A Circle accompanied with the number of 3. does represent the greater Mood,
but joined with a number of 2. the lesser.

3 Wheresoever is the greater Mood, there is the less, but not contrarily.

4 The number of three joined to a Circle, is a sign of the perfect time: but
the number of two, of the imperfect.

5 A point enclosed in a sign of time notes the greater Prolation, thus: Of
Signs, some be O3 of the greater Mood Perfect of the perfect time. C3
Imperfect O2 of the lesser Mood Perfect the time imperfect. C2 Imperfect ^ the
greater Prolation Perfect Time. ^ Imperfect O Time Perfect in the lesser
Prolation. C Imperfect



But when out of the mingling of three principal Signs, to wit; of the
number, circle, and point, there be diverse signs made, that you may the
easilier have the knowledge of them, and every figure may have his value, I
thought good in this form following to set down a Table, by which you might
at first sight judge of the value of any figure, though placed in any sign.

A Resolutorie Table, showing the value of the Signs, by the beholding of
every figure.


Of the Intrinsecall Signs.
THe Intrinsecall signs are those, by which the perfection of Musical degrees
in the figures is showed, without the adjoining of any of the Extrinsecall
Signs. Of these there are three, to wit;

1 The invention of a rest of three times. For when in a Song, there is found a
Rest which touches three spaces, it signifies the less perfect Mood. If it
touch two, it shows the greater perfect. For says Franchinus; It is not
unfit, that two Rests of three Times be adjoined to the greater Mood, if one
be adjoined to the lesser.

2 The blacking of the Notes. For as often as you find three Longs colored, the
lesser perfect Mood is signified. When three Breefes, the perfect time. When
three colored Semibreefes, the greater Prolation.

3 The doubling of certain Rests. For as often as two Semibreefe Rests are
placed with a Semibreefe, the perfect Time is signified. So by two Minims with
a Minime Note, the greater Prolation, thus; ^ The greater Mood. The lesser
Mood. Time perfect. The greater Prolation.

Of the less principal Signs.
THe Signs less principal are those, which are not necessary for the
knowledge of Mood, Time, and Prolation. And these are diverse, as you may
plainly see in the quadrate following. ^ Repetition. Conuenience. Concordance
Aspiration. b Moll. Dealbation. Cardinalis.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
Of Tact.
WHerefore Tact is a successiue motion in singing, directing the equality of
the measure: Or it is a certain motion, made by the hand of the chief singer,
according to the nature of the marks, which directs a Song according to Measure.

Of the Division of Tact.
TAct is threefold, the greater, the lesser, and the proportionate. The
greater is a Measure made by a slow, and as it were reciprocal motion. The
writers call this Tact the whole, or total Tact. And, because it is the true
Tact of all Songs, it comprehends in his motion a Semibreefe not diminished: or
a Brief diminished in a duple.

The lesser Tact, is the half of the greater, which they call a Semitact.
Because it measures by it motion a Semibreefe, diminished in a duple: this is
allowed of only by the unlearned.

The Proportionate is that, whereby three Semibreefes are uttered against one,
(as in a Triple) or against two, as in a Sesquialtera. Of this we shall speak
more at large in the Chapter of proportions.

A Rule for Tact.
A Semibreefe in all Signs (excepting the Signs of Diminution, augmentation,
and proportions) is measured by a whole Tact, as in the example following
appears: The Table of Tact resolved.


THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
Of Augmentation.
BEcause in the Chapter before going, we have made mention of Augmentation and
Diminution, therefore least we proceed from unknown things, we will show what
each is.

Therefore Augmentation is the making of more Notes in a Song: or it is the
excrement of some Note. For in it is put a Minime for a Semibreefe; a
Semibreefe for a Brief; a Brief for a Long.

By what signs you shall know Augmentation.
OF Augmentation therebe 3. Signs. The first is, the fewnes of the Notes in
one part of the Song.

The second is, the adjoining of the Canon, by saying, Let a Brief be a Large,
let a Semibreefe be a Long, let a Minime be a Brief. Or let it increase in
Duplo, Triplo, vel hexagio, etc.

The third is, a point in the Sign of time, found only about one part of the
Song: One I say, for if it be found about all, it is not a sign of
Augmentation, but of the greater Prolation.

Rules of the Augmention.
FIrst, Augmentation is the contradiction of Diminution.

2 In Augmentation the Minime figure is measured with an whole Tact.

3 Betwixt Prolation and Augmentation, there is this difference, Augmention
sounds one Minime to a Tact; Prolation sounds three, that is a perfect
semibreefe: which then is measured with a proportionate Tact.

4 The Rests are diminished and augmented, as well as the Notes.

5 Augmentation must seldom be, but in the Tenor.

6 A Large is not augmented, because it has none greater than it self, whose
value it may assume. Therefore they are in an error, which say there are 81.
Tacts in a Large which is set under such a sign 3: because a Large neither
grows to above 27. Tacts, nor admits any thing greater than it self,
because it is the greatest, than which there is nothing greater. Besides as in
nature, so in Art it is in vain to place a nothing: therefore should a Large
be in vain augmented, because no Song was ever found of so long time, that 81.
Tacts might be Sung in an Unison.

7 Augmentation comprehends under it self all the kinds of Notes excepting a
Large, for which point mark the example following: ^ Augmentation. The greater
The Bariton or Base, Prolation. ^ under the sign of Semiditie. The greater
Prolation.

What a Canon is.
BEing we have made mention of a Canon, least I hold the learner in a
mammering, I will show what a Canon is.

A Canon therefore is an imaginary rule, drawing that part of the Song which
is not set down out of that part; which is set down. Or it is a Rule, which
does wittily discover the secrets of a Song. Now we use Canons, either to show
Art, or to make shorter work, or to try others cunning, thus;

THE EIGHT CHAPTER.
Of Diminution.
DIminution, which is more truly called syncopation, is the varying of Notes
of the first quantity, as writes Fran. li. 2. Pr. 14. Or it is a certain
cutting off of the measure. For as in Grammar we say saecla for saecula, so in
Music we do curtall the natural and essential measure of the Notes by this
syncopation. Therefore generally it shall be called syncopation, not
Diminution, because it is a kind of syncopation.

Of the kinds of Syncopations.
OF this there be two kinds; Semiditie, and Diminution. Semiditie is the
middle of the chief measure of Notes, which can be placed only in an
imperfect time, which has these Signs, O2. C2. ^. ^. ^.

For in all these, the half of the measure is put off by the dash properly,
and by the number, for so much as it has of Duple proportion. Therefore
Erasmus Lapicida does well in placing one number under another in all these
signs, thus; O2/1. C2/1.

For proportion is the relation of two quantities, not of one, as elsewhere we
will more largely show.

Of Diminution.
DIminution (as the Ancients thought) is the taking away of the third part from
the measure. But the opinion of the Modernes, is more true and laudable, which
make no difference betwixt Diminution and Semiditie, as Joan: Tinctoris, of all
that ever excelled in Music the most excellent writer, and Franchinus
Gafforus lib. 2. cap. 14, have positiuely set down.

Therefore Diminution is the cutting off of the half part in the measure,
nothing differing from semiditie, but that it is found in perfect Signs, and
in figures which are to be measured by the number of 3. Wherefore I cannot but
scorn certain Componists (for so they will be called) though indeed they be
the Monsters of Music) who though they know not so much as the first Elements
of the Art, yet proclaim themselves, The Musicians or Musicians, being
ignorant in all things, yet bragging of all things, and do (by their foolish
toys which contrary to the majesty of the Art, they have gotten an habit
of, rather by use, than wit) disgrace, corrupt, and debase this Art, which was
in many ages before honored, and used by many most learned, (and to use
Quintitians words) most wise men: using any Signs at their pleasure, neither
reckoning of value, nor measure, seeking rather to please the ears of the
foolish with the sweetness of the Ditty, than to satisfy the judgment of the
learned with the majesty of the Art. Such a one know I, that is now hired to
be Organist in the Castle at Prage, who though he know not (that I may conceal
his greater faults) how to distinguish a perfect time from an imperfect, yet
gives out publicly, that he is writing the very depth of Music: and is not
ashamed to say, that Franchinus (a most famous writer, one whom he never so
much as tasted of) is not worth the reading, but fit to bescoffed at, and
scorned by him. Foolish bragging, ridiculous rashness, gross madness, which
therefore only does snarle at the learned, because it knows not the means how to
emulate it. I pray God, the Wolf may fall into the Toiles, and hereafter commit
no more such outrage; nor like the Crow brag of borrowed feathers. For he must
needs be counted a Dotard, that prescribes that to others, the Elements whereof
himself never yet saw. As Phormio the Greek Orator (in Tullies second Book
de Orat.) who having before Antiochus the King of Asia, (in the presence of
Haniball) made a long Oration of the duty of a General, when as he himself
had never seen Camp, not arms, and had made all the rest to admire him, in
the end Haniball being asked, what his judgment was of this Philosopher, his
answer was, That he had seen many doting old men, but never any man that
doted more, than Phormio. Now come I to the matter, and leave these unlearned
ridiculous Phormio's, many whereof (the more is the shame) have violently
invaded the art of Music, as those which are not compounders of Harmonies, but
rather corruptors, children of the furies, rather than of the Muses, not worthy
of the least grace I may do them. For their Songs are ridiculous, not grounded
on the Principles of the Art, though perhaps true enough. For the Artist does
not grace the Art, but the Art graceth the Artist. Therefore a Componist does
not grace Music, but contrarily: for there be that can make true Songs not by
Art, but by Custom, as having happily lived amongst singers all their
lifetime: yet do they not understand what they have made, knowing that such a
thing is, but not what it is. To whom the word our Savior used on the Cross,
may be well used; Father pardon them, they know not what they do. Wherefore
allow of no Componists, but those, who are by Art worthy to be allowed of: now
such are Joan. Okeken, Joan: Tinctoris, Loyset, Verbonet, Alex: Agricola,
Iacobus Obrecht, Iosquin, Petrus de Larue, Hen: Isaac, Hen: Finck, Ant:
Brummel, Mat: Pipilare, Geor: Brack, Erasmus Lapicida, Caspar Czeys, Conradus
Reyn, and the like: whose Compositions one may see do flow from the very
fountain of Art. But least by laughing at these fellows we grow angry, and by
being angry grow to hate them, let us even let them alone, and return to
Diminution.

Whereof we will resolve with Franchinus and Tinctor, that it takes not away a
third part, as the Ancients thought, (for it is hard finding out that) but one
part: for as this sign ^. is the Duple of this sign C. so is this ^ of this
O. Wherefore even approved Componists do err, because they mark not that there
is a double Progression of measure in a perfect Circle divided with a dash,
besides the Ternarie number of the figures, because they are of a perfect time:
singing one Semibreefe to a Tact, when they should sing 2. For in that sign
the Song is so to be placed, that keeping the perfection of the Ternarie, it
may receive the Closes, and end in a Binarie measure. For in this Sign ^. the
Notes keep the same value, which they have in this O, but the measure only,
is to be measured by the Binarie number, thus: A Table for the Tact of
Diminution.


By what signs Diminution is marked.
NOw Diminution is marked by three ways, to wit: By a Canon, by a Number, and
by a Dash. By a Canon, saying; It decreaseth in Duplo, Triplo, and Quadruple,
and such like.

By a Number, for every number adjoined to a Circle, or a Semicircle, besides
that which essentially it betokens, does also diminish according to the naming
of his figure. As the number of 2, being placed with a whole Circle besides the
time, which it betokens to be imperfect, does also signify a duple Diminution,
the number of three a Triple, the number of four a Quadruple, and so forth.

By a Dash, to wit, when by a Dash, the sign of Time is divided, thus; ^. ^.
^. ^.

Rules of Syncopation.
FIrst, Syncopation belongs to the measure of Time, not to the figures
themselves.

2 Syncopation does respect both the Notes, and the Rests.

3 Syncopation does not take away the value, but the measure of the Notes.

4 The number does not diminish Prolation, because it cannot work upon the
prick, whilst a Circle does keep it.

5 Betwixt Diminution and Semiditie, there is no difference of Tact, or
Measure, but only of nature.

6 Diminution is the contradiction of Augmentation.

7 It is not inconvenient, that to the same Sign there may belong a double
Diminution, to wit; virgular and numerall, thus; ^2.

8 Virgular Syncopation is much used, Numerall seldom, Canonical most
seldom: the Example therefore following is of the first, and the second. ^ The
Rule of Semiditie in Diminution. ^ Syncopation by number.

THE NINTH CHAPTER.
Of Rests.
ARest (as Tinctoris writes) is the Sign of Silence. Or (as Gafforus says)
it is a figure which shows the Artificial leaving off from singing: Or it is
a stroke drawn in line and space, which betokens silence. Now Rests are placed
in songs after three manners, to wit; Essentially, Iudicially, and both ways.
Essentially, when they betoken silence. Iudicially, when they betoken not
silence but the perfect Mood: and then their place is before the sign of
Time. Both ways, when they represent both.

Rules for the Rests.
FIrst, There be as many kinds of Rests, as of Notes.

2 The Rest, which touches all the spaces, is general, where all the voices
cease together, and is only to be placed in the end.

3 The rest which takes up three spaces, is called of the Mood, which it
betokens, and is to be placed only in a perfect Mood.

4 A Rest, which does conclude two spaces, is called an imperfect Long.

5 A Rest, which takes up but one space, is a Brief betokening one Time*
whether perfect or imperfect.

6 A Rest, descending from the line to the middle of the space, is called a
Semibreefe.

7 A Rest, ascending from the line to the middle of the space, betokens a
Minime, or a sigh.

8 A Rest, like a sigh, being forked to the right hand-ward, betokens a Crochet.

9 The Rests of the two last figures, because of their too much swiftness, are
not in use among Musicians. ^ Rests general. Larg. Long. Brief. Semibreefe.
Minim. Crochet.

THE TENTH CHAPTER.
Of Pricks.
WHerefore a Prick is a certain indivisible quantity, added to the Notes,
either for Division, or for Augmentation, or for Certainty sake. Or it is a
certain Sign lesser than any other accidentally set either before, or after,
or between Notes.

Of the Division of a Prick.
OVt of this Definition, there are collected three kinds of Pricks, to wit:
That of Addition, and that is the Augmentation of the figures. Or it is the
perfection of imperfect Notes. This is set in the middle on the right side, and
is found only in imperfect Signs, and does augment the Notes to which it is
added, the half of his own value, as in the Example following appears. ^
Tenor point of Addition. The Base is the same.

Of the Prick of Division.
THe Prick of Division is the disioyning of two Notes, neither taking away nor
adding any thing, but distinguishing two Notes by reckoning the first with the
former, and the second with the following Notes, to the end that the Ternarie
perfection in Notes may be had. Here the Prick in perfect degrees, is joined
not to perfect figures, but to their near parts, neither is adjoined to the
middle of the side, as that of Addition, but a little higher, or lower about
the middle of the Notes, which it diuides, thus: ^ The Prick of Division in
the Tenor. Also in the Base.

Of the Prick of Alteration.
THe Prick of Alteration, was observed more by the Ancients, than the later
Musicians. Yet least it may breed some doubt to the Singer, that shall light on
it by chance, it is not amiss to speak somewhat of it. Therefore the Prick of
alteration is the repeating of Notes, which does accidentally befall them, not
as they are perfect, but as their parts neighboring the perfect. Now is it set
neither on the one side, nor upward, nor downe-ward, but directly over the
Note, which it alters, as in this Example appears. ^ The Prick of Alteration
in the Tenor. Also in the Base.

There are besides these, two other kinds of Pricks; to wit, of perfection.
And this is a Prick set after a perfect Note; neither increasing not
diminishing it, but only preserving it from being imperfected by the following
Note. It is set as the Prick of Addition, but differs from it, because it is
always, and only placed about perfect Notes.

There is another Prick of Transportation, adjoined to Notes, which it does
translate to be reckoned with figures removed further off: and this does
direct his force not upon the precedent Notes, but only upon the following
ones, thus; ^ The Prick of perfection or Transportation in the Tenor. ^ Also
in the Base.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.
Of Imperfection.
WHerefore Imperfection is the degrading of perfect Notes. For to imperfect is
to make a perfect Note imperfect. Or it is this, to bring itfrom his value.

Of twofold Imperfection.
IMperfection is twofold: to wit, Total, when precisely the third part of the
value is taken from the Notes: as when in perfect time a Brief is imperfected
by a Semibreefe. Or partial, when not precisely the third part, but a less
than that, say a sixth part, or so, is taken from the Notes: as when a long of
the imperfect Mood, but in the perfect time, where it is valued at two
Breefes, is imperfected by a Semibreefe, in regard of the Brief in it
contained: and as a Brief by a Minime in the greater Prolation.

By what Signs Imperfection is known.
OF Imperfection there be three Signs, (as writes Franchinus li. 2. Pract.
cap. 11.) to wit, numerall Imperfection, punctual Division, and fullness of
the Notes.

Rules of Imperfection.
FIrst, There is four Notes which may be imperfected, to wit, a Larg, a Long,
a Brief, a Semibreefe.

2 Every figure, which may be imperfected, is always to be considered in the
number of his perfect quantity.

3 That which is once imperfect, cannot be more imperfected.

4 Every figure that may be imperfected, is greater than the imperfecting
figure.

5 Imperfection is made not only by the near parts of the Notes, but also by
the removed parts. As a perfect Brief can be imperfected, not only by a
Semibreefe, which is the near part, but also of two Minims, which are remote
parts of it.

6 Two neighboring parts of one perfect figure do not imperfect it, but only
one: although two removed ones may do the same. Wherefore if you find two
Semibreefe Rests after a perfect Brief, it shall remain perfect, unless
punctual Division come between.

7 Every less figure being superfluous does imperfect the greater going
before, not the following one: unless it happen by reason of the Prick of
Division, Perfection, or Transportation.

8 A Note of one sort coming before his like is not imperfected, whereby every
figure that is to be imperfected, must be put before a figure that is greater,
or less than it self.

9 The greater Note does not imperfect the less, nor an equal Note an other
equal Note.

10 The figure which does imperfect another figure, takes so much from it, as
it self is valued at.

11 A Rest is not imperfected, but does imperfect.

12 A Ligature does never imperfect, but is imperfected.

13 A Larg does nothing, but suffers only in Imperfection.

14 A Minime does, and never suffers in Imperfection.

15 A Long, Brief, and Semibreefe do imperfect, and are imperfected.

16 Every Imperfection is either before or behind: Before, as when the
imperfecting Note does go before the Note that is imperfected: Behind, as when
it follows. There be that think it is caused both ways in partial
Imperfection.

17 That Imperfection, which is caused before and behind, is caused not by the
neighboring, but by the remote parts.

18 All Imperfection is caused either by the Note, the Rest, or the color. By
the Note, to wit, when a figure of a lesser kind is placed before or after a
perfect Note, and so imperfects it, thus: ^ Tenor. Base.

By a Rest, to wit, when a Rest of a less kind is found before or after a
perfect Note: but the Rest cannot be imperfected, as thus: ^ Tenor. ^ Base.

By Color: when in the perfect figures you find Color, the Notes are
Imperfect; because their third part is taken away, thus: ^ Tenor. ^ Bassus and
his Position.

Of Color.
Wherefore Color in this place is nothing, but the fulness of the Notes: Or, it
is the blacking of the principal figures: the force whereof is such, that it
takes away the third part of the value from figures placed in their perfect
quantity: and from imperfects sometime it takes away the fourth part,
sometimes it makes them of the Hemiola proportion. Wherefore I thought good to
place here a Table of the perfect figures colored. Wherein note this, that the
void spaces do show that that figure, over which they are placed, is not to
be colored in that sign. But the Sphaerical figure (which the learned call
the figure of nothing) declares that the figures may be colored, yet that they
have not the value of one Tact.

Color being in other figures essential, induce no accidental quantity into
Notes.

Color is oftentimes found among most of the learned, neither to take away
nor to add any thing: but specially, when to remove Alteration; it is placed
in the neighboring parts of perfect figures, thus: ^ Tenor. Base.

Most commonly the Color does cause a Duple proportion in the imperfect
figures, (as Franchinus says. lib. 2. cap. 11.) which Henry Isaac in a
certain Alleluia of the Apostles, did thus both wittily, and truly dispose. ^
Tenor. Base.

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.
Of Alteration.
ALteration according to Ioannes de Muris, is the doubling of a lesser Note in
respect of a greater, or (as Tinctor says) it is the doubling of the proper
value. Or it is the repetition of one, and the selfsame Note. And it is
called Alteration, Quasi alter a actio, it is another action, to wit: A
secundary singing of a Note, for the perfecting of the number of three.

Rules of Alteration.
FIrst, There be four Notes, which may be altered, (says Franchinus lib. 2.
cap. 13.) a Long, a Brief, a Semibreefe, and a Minime.

2 Alteration does exclude the Larg, and is limited by a Minime, because a
Larg has not a greater than it self, whose neighboring part it may be: and
the less figures are not to be reckoned after the number of three.

3 Alteration happens in numbers which be not perfect, but are parts
neighboring to perfect Notes, because a perfect Note in as much as it is a
perfect Note is not liable to Alteration.

4 Only the Notes are altered, not the Rests.

5 Alteration falls upon the second Note, not upon the first.

6 Every altered Note contains it self twice.

7 A like Note is not altered before a like Note.

8 Alteration only falls out in perfect degrees.

9 Alteration comes for want of one Note, when you have reckoned after the
Ternary numbering.

10 As often as two alterable Notes are placed betwixt two imperfectible Notes
without a Prick of Division: the second is always altered, as the Example
following does show. ^ Altera. Tenor. Altera. ^ Base.

11 If a Rest together with the figure, to which it is of equal value, be
enclosed betwixt 2. perfect notes; the^ either the rest goes before the figure,
or followesit; if the Rest go before, the figure is altered: if otherwise,
there is no place for Alteration, because the notes only are altered, and not
the Rests. Beside Alteration falls always upon the second, and not upon the
first, thus: ^ Tenor. ^ Base.

12 Alteration is taken away by the fullness of the notes; and by the Prick of
Division. In Ligatures also Alteration is kept, as in the following Example is
clear. ^ Tenor. ^ Base.

13 As often as three alterable Notes are shut within two imperfectible Notes,
both the imperfectible shall remain perfect, and none of the alterable Notes is
altered: because the Ternarie number is every where perfect.

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.
Of Proportion.
WHerefore Proportion is the nature of two compared together in one univocal
thing. Univocal I say, because in aequiuocals there is no comparison: for a
still and a loud voice are not compared. Whence is it, that proportion is
properly called, when it is found in those things, which are equal and
unequal, like and unlike. Or according to Euclide; it is a certain
disposition of two quantities how big soever, (being of the same next Genus)
one to the other. Hence is it that things continuate and discreate, although
they be contained under the same Genus of quantity, yet are not compared,
because they are remote, not near.

Of the Division of Proportion.
PRoportions are some of equality, some of inequality. That of equality is
the Relation of two equal quantities. For that is equal, which is neither
greater, nor less than his equal. That of inequality, is the disposition of
two unequal quantities. For that is called inequall, which being in Relation
with another is either greater or lesser than it.

What Proportions is fit for Musicians.
BEcause the dissimilitude, and not the similitude of voice does breed
Harmony: therefore the Art of Music does only consider of the Proportion of
inequality. This is twofold; to wit, the Proportion of the greater or of the
less inequality. The Proportion of the greater inequality, is the relation
of the greater number to the less, as 4. to 2. 6. to 3. The Proportion of the
lesser inequality is contrarily the comparison of a less number to greater,
as of 2. to 4. of 3. to 6.

Of the 5. kinds of Proportions.
OF the Proportions of the greater inequality, there be 5. Kinds, to wit;
Multiplex, Super particular, Super partiens, and those be simple: the
compounded are the Multiplex Super particular, and the Multiplex Super partiens.

To these are opposed 5. other kinds of the lesser Inequality (says
Franchinus) and having the same names with the Preposition Sub, only set
before them: as Submultiplex, etc.

But seeing that Multiplex Proportio has chief force in Musical Consonances,
and next to that the Super particular, and the Super partiens with the two
following none, we do therefore abandon the Super partient with the rest
following, as unworthy of the Harmonicall Consort, and do receive the two
foremost only.

Of the Multiplex kind.
THe Multiplex Proportio, is both more excellent, and more ancient than the
rest, as when a greater number being in Relation with a less, does precisely
comprehend the whole lesser number more than once, as say, twice, or thrice.
The kinds of this will be infinite, if you compare each number with an unity,
as in the following quadrate you may see. ^ Dupla. Trip. Quadru. Quintu. Sexiu.
Septu. Octup. Nonu. Decu.

To this foresaid kind is opposed the first kind of the lesser Inequality,
called Submultiplex. The one of these destroys the other; and this kind,
making the same Relation of an unity to other numbers, does produce out of it
self the same Species which a Multiplex does, and Species of the same names,
by adding the Preposition Sub, and is produced in this manner. ^ Sub Sub Sub
Sub Sub Sub Sub Sub Sub ^ dup. trip. quadr. quintu. sextu. septu. octu. nonu.
decu.

Of the Superparticular Kind.
SVperparticular, the second kind of Proportions is, when the greater number
being compared with the less, does comprehend it in it self once, and besides
some such part of it. Some such part (I say) which being often taken does make
precisely the whole greater number. Of this kind the sorts are innumerable, if
you reckon each of the numbers, taking away an unity, with the next lesser, in
manner following. ^ Sesqui Sesqui Sesqui Sesqui Sesqui Sesqui Sesqui Sesqui ^
altera. tertia. quarta. quinta. sexta. septima. octa. nona.

The opposite to this, is Sub superparticular, the second kind of the less
Inequality: which does produce the same Species, which the former does, with
the same names, the Preposition (Sub) being adjoined: if you will compare each
of the lesser numbers (an Unity I always except) with the greater
neighboring, as here follows the manner. ^ Subsesquialtera. subsesquiterta.
subsesquiquarta. subsesquiquinta. subsesquisexta. subsesquiseptima.
subsesquiocta. subsesquinona.

By what means Proportion is made of aequalitie, and consequently one
Proportion out of another.
WHen you will make a Proportion out of Equality, and one proportion out of
another, you shall thus truly work it by this Rule of Boethius, Disposing
three equal numbers, say unities, or any other, let three other be placed
under them, so that the first may be even with the first; the second with the
first, and the second; the third, with the first; the two seconds, and the
third, and you shall find it a Duple, thus: ^ Duplae. Duplae. Duplae.

Now if you will make Triples, placing the Duplaes, which you have made in the
higher rank, let three numbers be placed underneath, according to the Tenor of
the foresaid Rule, and you have your desire; thus: ^ Triplae. Triplae. Triplae.

Now if we place these Triples, which we have thus found in the upper rank, we
shall produce Quadruples, by the concordant, and regular opposition of the
numbers unwritten, of Quadruplaes, Quintuplaes; and also out of Quintuplaes,
Sextuplaes, and so forward infinitely. ^ Quadruplae. Quintuplae. Sextuplae.

And if out of Duplaes, you will create Sesquialteraes, inuerting the numbers
of the Duplaes, so that the greater may be first, and the lesser succeed in a
natural order: let there be under placed three other numbers, as often as the
said Rule requires, and you have that, as follows. ^ Sesquialterae.
Sesquialterae. Sesquialterae.

Now as of Duples you make Sesquialteraes, so of Triples you may make
sesquitertiaes, and of Quadruplaes sesquiquartaes, by converting the numbers,
as was said of sesquialteraes, and so you may go infinitely, in manner
following. ^ Sesquitertiae. sesquiquartae. sesquiquintae.

Out of what Proportions Musical Concords are made.
THe Proportions, which make Musical Consonances, are six, (as Boethius and
Macrobius witness) three in the Multiplex Kind, to wit, the Dupla, Tripla,
Quadrupla: 3 in the super particular, to wit; sesquialtera, sesquitertia, and
sesquioctaua. Of which specially the allowed Interuals of Music are
compounded (as says Plutarch.) Where relinquishing others, we thought fit to
make plain by short precepts and examples these only, which consist and are
described in Notes. So keeping the natural order, we will begin with the
Dupla, because it is both worthyer and better known, than the rest.

Of the Duple Proportion.
DVpia Proportio, the first kind of the Multiplex, is when the greater number
being in relation with the less, does comprehend it in it self twice: as 4.
to 2: 8. to 4. But Musically, when two Notes are uttered against one, which is
like them both in nature and kind. The sign of this some say is the number of
2: others (because Proportion is a Relation not of one thing, but of 2) affirm
that one number ^ is to be set under another, thus; And make no doubt but in
all the rest this order is to be kept. ^ Tenor Duplae. ^ Bassus duplae.

I would not have you ignorant, that the duple Proportion, and all the other of
the Multiplex kind, are marked by certain Canons, saying thus, Decrescit in
duplo, in triplo, and so forth. Which thing because it is done either to
increase men's diligence, or to try their cunning, we mislike not. There be
that consider the whole Proportion in figures, which are turned to the left
hand-ward with signs, and crookes, saying, that this C. is the duple of this
^. and this ^ of ^ and in Rests that this ^ is the duple of this ^ I think
only upon this reason, that Franchinus pract. lib. 2. cap. 4. faith that the
right side is greater and perfecter than the left: and the left weaker than the
right. Against which opinion neither my self am. For in Valerius Probus a most
learned Gramarian in his interpretation of the Roman letters says, that the
letter C. which has the form of a Semicircle signifies Caius the man, and
being turned, signifies Caia the woman. And Fabius Quintilianus in approouing
of Probus his opinion says; for Caius is showed by the letter C. which being
turned signifies a woman: and being that men are more perfect than women, the
perfection of the one, is declared by turning the Semicircle to the right hand,
and the weakness of the other by turning it to the left. By this occasion the
Musicians thought fit to take away the half left side from the right, thus; ^

Rules of Proportions.
FIrst, Every Proportion is either taken away by the coming of his contrary
proportion, or is broken by the interposition of a sign. As by the coming of
a subduple, a dupla is taken away, and so of others.

2 Every Proportion respects both Rests and Notes.

3 Every Proportion of the great Inequality does diminish the Notes and Rests
with his natural power: but the Proportion of the less Inequality does
increase them.

4 Alteration and Imperfection are only in those Proportions, which are in
perfect degrees, neither are they in all figures, but in those only, which
those degrees do respect with their perfection, or to which these accidents
besides the Proportion do belong.

5 The sesquialtera Proportion does exclude the Ternarie perfection of figures,
unless they have it from a sign. Wherefore when the sign denies it; they
receive neither Alteration, nor Imperfection.

Of the Triple.
THe Triple Proportion, the second kind of the Multiplex is, when the greater
number, being in Relation with the less, does comprehend it in it self 3.
times, as 6. to 2: 9. to 3. But Musically, when three Notes are uttered against
one such, which is equal to it in kind. The sign of this is the number of
three set over an Unity, thus; ^ Tenor Triplae. ^ Bassus Triplae.

Of the Quadrupla.
THe Quadrupla is the third kind of the Multiplex, and is, when a greater
number does comprehend a less in it self four times, as 8. to 2* 12 to 3.
But Musically, when 4. Notes are sounded to one: the signs of it are these ^
as thus: ^ Tenor Quadrupla. ^ Bassus Quadruplae.

Of the Sesquialtera.
THe Sesquialtera is the first sort of the Super particular, and is, when a
great number does comprehend a less once, and some other part of it: as 6. to
4: 9. to 6. But Musically, when three Notes are sounded against two of the same
kind: the ^ as in the Example following. signs of it are these; ^ Tenor
Sesquialterae. ^ Bassus sesquialterae.

There be, which add the color to the figures which are made sesquialterate
by the Caracters of the numbers: and contrarily sesquialterating the
sesquialteraes. And these men (as Franchinus witnesses) have this fault, that
they make of two sesquialteraes, not a duple sesquialtera, (as they think) but
a duple sesquiquarta. Some put Imperfection and Alteration in the
sesquialterates of the imperfect time, mesuring a Brief Rest with one Tact:
although in the Notes they set 3 semibreefes in one Tact. But upon what ground
they do it, excepting of an Asse-headed ignorance, I know none. For
Imperfection admits not the Imperfection and Alteration of signs, neither does
Proportion exclude Rests.

Of the Sesquitertia.
THe Sesquitertia Proportion, which they call Epitrite, because it is made by an
Epitrite, Macr. says, it is when the greater number of Notes, does contain
the lesser in it self, and besides his third part: as 4. to 3: 8 to 6: 12. to
9. But Musically, when 4. Notes are sounded against 3. which are like
themselves. The signs of it are these, ^ There be that ascribe an inuerted
semicircle to this Proportion, but Tinctor seems to be against that. ^ Tenor
sesquitertiae. ^ Bassus sesquitertiae.

Of the sesquioctaua.
THe sesquioctaua Proportion is, when a greater number being compared with a
less, does comprehend it once, and with it his 8 part, as 9. to 8: 18 to 16.
But Musically, when 9. Notes are sung to 8, which are like themselves. The
sign of it is the number of 9. set over 8, thus; ^ ^ Tenor sesquioctauae. ^
Bassus sesquioctauae.

There are besides, who (because the value is diminished by adjoining the
colors) do consider the Sesquialtera by the fulness of the Notes; which also
they call Hemiola. For Hemiola is that, which Sesquialtera is, says Aulus
Gellius lib. 19. cap. 14. Yet this blacking of the Notes, is accidental to it
never, but under the imperfect quantity, as Franchinus writes. ^ Tenor
Hemiolae. ^ Bassus Hemiolae.

Though there be many other kinds of Proportions, which the Musicians do
observe in Harmonicall Concent, yet have I omitted all these for briefenesie
sake, least children (for whom this Book is made) should have their wits
rather clogged than helped hereby. Therefore the learned may pardon me, because
this is written for them that are hungry, not for those that have a delicate
mawe. Yet (by the grace of God) all that now for brevity sake, or upon other
occasions I now omit, shall be painefully set down in a greater volume with
more diligence and care. Mean while, I entreat young men to exercise themselves
with these small precepts, that when they are to go to higher matters they may
be fit.

The end of the second Book.
TO PHILIP SVRVS OF MILTENBVRGH A SHARP-WITTED MAN, MASTER OF Art, and a most
cunning Musician, Chappel-Master to the Count Palatine the Duke of Bauaria:
Andraeas Ornithoparchus of Meyning, sends greeting.
MOst dear Philip, in that a man is the most worthy of all Creatures, a
creature made like to God, by nature mild, of stature upright, provident,
wise; of memory, witty; by reason, susceptible of Laws and learning; by his
Creatours great gift, far preferred before all unreasonable Creatures in all
things, but specially in two, to wit, Speech and Reason; it follows that
Ignorance in him is so much the fowler fault, by how much he is more worthy
than other Creatures. Now this as it is a foul shame for all men, so for
Scholars it is the fowlest disgrace: the course of whose life is ordained for
this, that by living well they may show others an example of good fashions,
learning and honesty, increasing fervent Faith in the people, and (which is
their chiefest Office, by praising God in Hymns and songs, stirring up
devotion in the hearts of the faithful.

By observation whereof (most kind friend) I was stirred up to help learners
in that kind also, and after the handling of Concent, which in the former
books we have delivered, to deliver the Ecclesiastical Accent. A matter
surely hard, because it requires both a Grammarian and a Musician, and also
because it is to be had rather by use than by writing: and further because
either none or very few men have handled this point: by this difficulty the
work was a while hindered from seeing the light; now being set out and
perfected, I commit it to your tuition, and subject it to your censure,
beseeching you both to mend the errors you find in it, and to defend it from
the invasion of envious men: because thou art able, learned, godly, and besides
other gifts of nature, have an elegant style, a sweet vain, and in singing a
graceful cunningnesse, wherein thou do exceed thy fellow-Musitians, in
entertaining strangers (as I to your cost found) a liberal humor. Whence it
is come to pass, that all the Masters of the Budorine university, which they
call Heydelberg, do singularly love, honor, and respect you. Farewell, (worthy
Sir) and defend thy Andreas from the envious backebiter.

THE THIRD BOOK OF ORNITOPARCHVS HIS MUSIC, TOUCHING THE ECCLESIASTICAL
ACCENT.
The Argument of Master Choterus upon the Third Book.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
In Praise of Accent.
ACcent has great affinity with Concent, for they be brothers: because Sonus,
or Sound, (the King of Ecclesiastical Harmony) is Father to them both, and
begat the one upon Grammar; the other upon Music, whom after the Father had
seen to be of excellent gifts both of body and wit, and the one not to yield
to the other in any kind of knowledge, and further that himself (now growing
in years) could not live long, he began to think, which he should leave his
kingdom unto; beholding sometime the one, sometime the other, and the fashions
of both. The Accent was elder by years, grave, eloquent, but severe: therefore
to the people less pleasing. The Concent was merry, frollicke, lively,
acceptable to all, desiring more to be loved, than to be feared: by which he
easily won unto him all men's minds. Which the Father noting, was daily more
and more troubled, in making his choice. For the Accent was more frugall, the
other more pleasing to the people. Appointing therefore a certain day, and
calling together the Peers of his Realm, to wit, Singers, Poets, Orators,
moral Philosophers, besides Ecclesiastical Governors, which in that Function
held place next to the King, before these King Sonus is said to have made this
Oration: My noble Peers, which have undergone many dangers of war, by land
and sea, and yet by my conduct have carried the Prize throughout the whole
world; behold, the whole world is under our Rule, we have no enemy, all things
may go prosperously with you; only upon me death increases, and life fades,
my body is weakened with labor, my soul consumed with Care, I can expect
nothing sooner than death. Wherefore I purpose to appoint one of my Sons Lord
over you, him (I say) whom you shall by your common voices choose, that he may
defend this Kingdom, which has been purchased with your blood, from the wrong
and invasion of our enemies.

When he had thus said, the Nobles began to consult, and by companies to handle
concerning the point of the common safety; yet to disagree, and some to choose
the one, some the other. For the Orators and Poets would have the Accents, the
Musicians, and the Moralists chose the Concent. But the Papale Prelates, who
had the Royalties in their hands, looking more deeply into the matter, enacted
that neither of them should be refused, but that the kingdom should be divided
betwixt them, whose opinion the King allowed, and so divided the Kingdom, that
Concentus might be chief Ruler over all things that are to be sung (as Hymns,
Sequences, Antiphones, Responsories, Introitus, Tropes, and the like: and
Accent over all things, which are read; as Gospels, Lectures, Epistles,
Orations, Prophecies. For the Functions of the Papale kingdom are not duly
performed without Concent. So these matters being settled each part departed
with their King, concluding that both Concent and Accent should be specially
honored by those Ecclesiastical persons. Which thing Leo the Tenth, and
Maximilian the most famous Roman Emperor, both chief lights of good Arts,
(and specially of Music) did by general consent of the Fathers and Princes
approve, endow with privileges, and condemned all gaine-sayers, as guilty of
high Treason; the one for their bodily; the other for their spiritual life.
Hence was it, that I marking how many of those Priests, (which by the leave of
the learned I will say) do read those things they have to read so wildly, so
monstrously, so faultily, that they do not only hinder the devotion of the
faithful, but also even provoke them to laughter, and scorning with their ill
reading) resolved after the doctrine of Concent to explain the Rules of
Accent, in as much as it belongs to a Musician, that together with Concent,
Accent might also as true heir in this Ecclesiastical kingdom be
established. Desiring that the praise of the highest King, to whom all honor
and reverence is due, might duly be performed.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Of the Definition, and Division of Accent.
WHerefore Accent (as Isidorus lib. 1. eth. cap. 17. writes) is a certain
law, or rule, for the raising, or low carrying of sillables of each word Or, it
is the Rule of speaking. For that speaking is absurd, which is not by Accent
graced. And it is called accent, because it is ad Cantu^, that is, close by the
song, according to Isidore: for as an aduerbe does determine a Verb, so does
accent determine Concent. But because these descriptions do rather agree with
the Grammatical accent, than with the Musical, I hold it necessary to search
out by what means the Ecclesiastical accent may rightly be described.
Therefore accent (as it belongs to Churchmen) is a melody, pronouncing
regularly the syllables of any words, according as the natural accent of them
requires.

Of the Division of accent.
NOw it is threefold, as Priscian and Isidore witness, the Grave, the Acute,
and the Circumflex. The Grave is that, by which a syllable is carried low: but
to speak musically, it is the regular falling with final words, according to
the custom of the Church. Of which there be two sorts. One which does fall the
final word, or any syllable of it by a fifth: and this is properly called
Grave. Another which does fall the final word, or any syllable of it only by
a third, which by the Musicians is called the middle Accent. Neither have the
Grammarians cause to be angry, if they find any thing here contrary to their
laws. For we go not about to handle the Grammatical Accent, which Priscian,
and others have thoroughly taught, but the Ecclesiastical, as here follows: ^
Medius. Grauis. Parce mihi domi ne, ni hill enim sunt di es me i.

An acute Accent grammatically, is that, by which the syllable is raised. But
musically, it is the regular elevation of the final words or syllables
according to the custom of the Church. Whereof there are likewise two kinds:
one which reduces the final syllable or word to the place of his descent,
keeping the name of Acute. The other, which does raise the second syllable not
to the former place of his descent, but into the next below. Which is also
called Moderate, because it does moderately carry a syllable on high, as
appears in the example following: ^ Moderatus. Acutus. Il lu mi nare Hie ru
sa lem qui a glo ri a do mi ni super te or ta est.

The Circumflex is that, by which a syllable first raised is carried low. For
it is, as Isidore witnesses, contrary to the acute, for it begins with the
acute, and ends with the grave, unknown to Churchmen. Yet the Monks, and
especially those of the Cistertian order, have the Circumflex accent, as at the
old Cell a Monastery of the same order my self have tried, and I my self have
seen many of their books in the same place.

Now farewell they that forbid Churchmen to use Music; what solace (setting
singing aside) can they have either more healthful, or more honest? For whilst
we recreate our selves with singing, all evil thoughts, and speech, all
backe-biting, all gluttony and drunkenness, are avoided. Wherefore
Song-Musicke both plain and Mensurall, becomes the most religious, that they
may both singpraises to God, and make themselves merry at fit times of
recreation. But leaving this discourse, let us return thither whence we
digressed, and send those which would busily enquire the nature of the
Circumflex accent, to Mich. Galliculus, who has set out the matter so briefly,
that it need no other explayning.

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Of the general Rules of Accent.
BEcause to proceed from casie things to harder, is the natural method, we
thought fit first to explain the general Rules of accent, and secondly the
special.

1 Every word of one syllable, or indeclinable, or barbarous, requires an acute
accent: as Astarot, Senacherib, me, te, sum.

2 Greek and Hebrew words in Latin terminations retain the Latin accent, as
Parthenopolis, Nazarenus, Hierosolima.

3 Greek and Hebrew words having not the Latin Declension, are acuted, as
Chryson, Argyrion, Ephraim, Jerusalem.

4 A grave accent is made in the end of a complete sentence, an acute likewise,
the Moderate and Mean only in the end of an imperfectsentence.

5 A grave accent must not be repeated, if no other come betwixt, unless the
speech be so short, that another cannot come betwixt, as thus: ^ Factum est ves
pe re and mane dies secundus dixit quoque Deus.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
Of the special Rules of Accent.
FIrst, A word that is of one syllable, indeclinable, barbarous, or Hebrew,
which we said must have an acute accent, either is in the end of a complete
sentence, and is thus acuated; or in the end of a sentence nor complete, and is
thus. From this Rule are excepted Encletical Conjunctions, which are marked
with a grave Accent, thus: ^ Do mi nus locutus est cla ma te ad me and e go ex
au diam vos Deus dominusque.

2 The first syllable of a word which has two sillables, does always receive
the accent, whether it be short or long, thus: ^ Et fugit velist vmbra. Et in a
ma ri tu di ni bus mo ra by tur o culus meus.

3 A word of many sillables put in the end of a speech, either has the last
save one Long or Short: if Long, the accent falls upon it, if short, then the
last save two receives the accent. ^ Lignum si praecisum fu e rit rursum vi re
scit. Et rami e ius pu lu lant.

4 A speech with an interrogation, whether it have in the end a word of one
syllable, or of two sillables, or more, the Accent still falls upon his last
fillable, and that must be acuated. Now the signs of such a speech are, who,
which, what, and those which are thence derived, why, wherefore, when, how, in
what sort, whether, and such like. ^ Vnde es tu Quid est homo? Quantas ha be o
in i qui tates and pecca ta?

To these are joined Verbes of asking as I ask, I seek, I require, I search,
I hear, I see, and the like.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
Of the Points.
BEcause the Ecclesiastical accent is commonly known by Points, it is
necessary to deliver the nature of certain Points fitting this purpose.

1 The Point, which they call a Dash, if it be placed betwixt more words of one
part of a sentence, it shows they are to be read distinctly.

2 Two Pricks, or one Prick set directly on the middle of the right side, is a
mark of the middle accent, which discends by a third.

3 A Prick in the end of any sentence raised a little above the middle, does
represent either the acute, or moderate accent, according as the sentence gives
it.

4 A Prick a little below the middle of the word, is a mark of the Grave
accent.

5 A Point of Interrogation, which is made thus (?) being found in some place,
does show that the last syllable of the word, (to which it is joined) is to be
pronounced with an acute accent. The evidence whereof follows in the example
following. ^ Hesterna luce cum aequitassem in campu^ virentem, herbosum,
floridum, spaciaturus in ^ eo? occurrit mi hi le pus cu lus cum ge ni to re
suo. Insequens eum ca tell lis meis ^ sex. Apprehendi duntaxat pusillum in valle
montis Oreb. De li be rans autem a mi co rum ^ Le po ri as istas carnes essem
con do na tu rus? inte rogans comitem meum quid esset ^ sua surus? Sano mi hi
con si li o di xit. Hortor eum fi du ci a e as do no da ri ^ con su li de
Brunswick. Tu aute^ domine, mi se re re nobis.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
Of Accent in the Epistles.
THe total Accent of Epistles is diverse, (according to the diversity of
Diocese and Religions) yet the partial is the same withal, because it
proceeds from the quantity of Sillables, as by the underwritten rules is
clear.

1 Every accent of Epistles and Gospels are taken out of the sillables of the
final sentences, and their number?

2 When in the end of a sentence is placed a word of one syllable, the accent
is varied according to the variety of the words going before.

3 If a word of one syllable go before the like final word, and before it a
third of the same sort, the first is to be raised, thus: ^ Sic in fla ti sunt
quidam tanquam non ven tu rus sit ad nos.

Now by what means (according to the Monks) that accent is distinguished,
Friar Michael de Muris Galliculis in his Treatise, which he wrote both truly
and learnedly, has worthily showed.

4 If a word of two sillables come before a word of one syllable final, then
the first syllable of it must be raised, whether it be long: or short, thus: ^
Om ni a e nim vestra sunt si quis di li git de um ex e o est.

5 If a word of three sillables come before a word of one syllable final, then
is it to be raised, if it have the last save one Long: if short, then the
accent is to be translated to the last save two. ^ In pace Deus vo ca uit vos.
Dispen sa ti o mi hi credita est.

6 If a word of two sillables be placed in the end of a speech, then the last
syllable save one of the word going before must be raised, if it belong: If it
be short, the last saving two, thus: ^ Et dix it mi hi. Et in ple ni tu di ne
Sanctoru^ de ten ti o me a.

7 If a word of three syllables be placed in the end of a speech, and a word of
one syllable go before it, then this is to be raised but if a word of two
syllables, then let the first syllable of it be raised, whether it be long, or
short. If a word of three syllables go before a word of three syllables, it
raises the last save one, if it be long: If it be short, the last save two,
thus: ^ Tu scis om ni a nonne dix it do mi nus cantantes De o glory am. ^ Ac il
li dix e runt do mi no nouit om ni a domi nus.

8 If in the end of a speech be placed a word of more syllables than three,
then the first syllable of it must be raised, if it be long: if it be short,
the accent falls upon the word going before, thus: ^ Dix it domi nus om nipotens
in templo So lo mo nis sunt au rei pa ri e tes.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
Of the Accent of Gospels.
THe total accent of Gospels, is differing in diverse Diocese and Religions.
But the partial, which is the same every where, is comprehended in the Rules
following.

1 If the speech end with a word of one syllable, and another go before it,
and a third before that, the accent is taken from the first, thus:

2 If a word of two syllables go before a word of one final, the first
syllable of it receives the accent, whether it be long or short, thus. ^
Surrexit non est hic. Om ni a verba haec. Do mi nus dedit hoc.

3 If a word of many syllables go before a word of one syllable final, the
accent falls upon his last syllable save one, if it be long; if it be short,
upon the last save two. ^ Dolentes que re ba mus te nonne dix it om ni a haec.

4 If the speech end with a word of two sillables, the last syllable save one
of the word going before must be raised, if it be long; if short, the last save
two, thus. ^ Vt de scri be retur v ni uersis Or bis Abraham au tem ge nu it
Jacob.

5 If the speech end with a word of three syllables, having the last save one
Long, then the accent falls upon the last syllable of the word going before. But
if it be short, then the last syllable save one of it shall receive the accent,
thus: ^ Ex e a quae fu it V ri ae. Et clausa est ia mi a.

6 If the final word of a speech be of more syllables than three, the Accent
falls upon the first syllable of it, if it be long: if it be short, the last
syllable of the word going before is raised. ^ In trans migratione Ba by lo
nis. Et fi li us al it is si mi vo ca by tur.

Of the Accents of Prophecies.
THere is 2. ways for accenting Prophesies. For some are read after the manner
of Epistles, as on the Feast days of our Lady, the Epiphany, Christmas, and
the like, and those keep the accent of Epistles: some are sung according to the
manner of Morning Lessons, as in Christ's night, and in the Ember Fasts: and
these keep the accent of those Lessons. But I would not have you ignorant, that
in accenting oftentimes the manner and custom of the Country and place is kept;
as in the great Church of Magdeburgh, Tu aute^ Domine, is read with the middle
syllable long, by reason of the Custom of that Church, whereas other Nations
do make it short, according to the Rule. Therefore let the Reader pardon me,
if our writings do sometime contrary the Diocese, wherein they live. Which
though it be in some few things, yet in the most they agree. For I was drawn
by my own experience, not by any precepts to write this book. And (if I may
speak without vainglory) for that cause have I seen many parts of the world,
and in them diverse Churches both Metropolitan and Cathedral, not without
great impeachment of my state, that thereby I might profit those that shall
live after me. In which travel of mine I have seen the five Kingdoms of
Pannonia, Sarmatia, Boemia, Denmark, and of both the Germanies 63. Diocesses,
Cities 340. infinite fashions of diverse people, besides sailed over the two
seas, to wit, the Balticke, and the great Ocean, not to heap riches, but
increase my knowledge. All which I would have thus taken, that the Readers may
know this book is more out of my experience, than any precepts.

The end of the Third Book.
TO THE WORTHY AND INDVSTRIOVS, MASTER Arnold Schlick, a most exquisit
Musician, Organist to the Count Palatine, Andraeas Ornithoparchus of Meyning,
sends health.
Dear Arnold, whereas man's intellect in it beginning is naked and without
form, and has nothing in it, but a possibility to receive forms, many have
doubted why the high Creator did not give knowledge naturally to man as well
as to other sensible creatures. For some have naturally the art of spinning;
some of making honey; some of weauing; some of doing other things: but man is
borne naked, unarmed, without any Art, crying the first day of his birth, and
never laughing til he be 40. days old (as Pliny writes in the Prologue of the
7 book of his Not. Hist.) Is man therefore inferior to beasts? in no sort, for
that nakedness of man does not argue his unworthiness, but his nobleness. For
that which is within, hinders not that which would be without. Hence is it, (we
see) that those animals, which have arts naturally, can do nothing but that
natural Art. But man wants all Arts, that he may be fit for all: which is
proved by the natural desire he has to knowledge. For Arts are desired by
all, though they be not bought by all; and are praised by all, though they be
not searched after by all. The hindrance is sloth, pleasure, unorderly
teaching, and poverty. And though we have naturally the desire of all Arts, yet
above all we do desire and love the Art of Singing. For that does entise all
living things with the sweetness; draw them with the profit; and overcome them
with the necessity of it: whose parts (though they be al both sacred and divine)
yet that which we call the Counter-point, is more sweet, worthy, and noble, than
all the rest. For this is the dwelling place of all the other, not that it
co^tains in it all the difficulties of Music; but because to make it, it
requires a learned and perfect Musician. Wherefore having discussed of the rest,
least our Office be failing in this last point, I thought good to handle the
Counter-point, placing it in the last place (as it were a treasury) wherein all the secrets of Music are laid up: not that hereby all men, to whom nature is
not serviceable, should fall to composition, but that all men may judge whether
those things which be composed by others, be good or bad. Yet who so can, let
them compose by our writings: they which cannot, let them proceed, as far as
they can.

But not to digress too wide, (worthy Sir) I have in this last book,
collected the Rules of the Counter-point, out of diverse places, for the common
good of learners; which I bring to you to be weighed, that after your censure,
it may be subjected to the carps of the malicious. For from your sentence no
man will ever appeal; because there is no man either learneder, or subtiler in
this Art, than your self, who besides the practice, have wisdom, eloquence,
gentleness, quickness of wit, and in all kinds of Music a divine industry,
and further the knowledge of many other sciences. Thou want the bodily lamp,
but in thy mind shines that golden light: thou see nothing without thee,
within thee thou see al things. Thou want the cleerenesse of the eyes,
thou have the admirable quicknes of wit: thy sight is weak, thy understanding
strong; Wherefore not only by thy princes, who are to thee most gracious, but
even of all men (like Orpheus and Amphion) art thou loved. Farewell, the honor
and delight of Music, and protect thy Andraeas from Zoilisses and
Thersitisses.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF ORNITHO PARCHUS HIS Music, declaring the Principles of
the Counter-point.
The Argument of Master Cotherus.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Of the Definition, Division, and difference of the names of the Counterpoint.
NIcomachus the Musician says, That the Art of Music was at first so simple,
that it consisted of a Tetrachord. And was made with the voice Assa, that is,
one Voice alone (for Assa the Ancients called alone, whereof it is called Vox
assa, when it is uttered with the mouth, not adding to it other Musical
Concents, wherein the praises of the Ancients was sung, as Phil. Beroaldus
writes in the Tenth book of his Commentary upon Apuleius. Yet by the means
of diverse authors, the Tetrachord from four Cords grew to fifteen. To which
the after-ages have added five and six Voices, and more. So that a Song in our
times has not one voice alone, but five, six, eight, and sometimes more. For
it is evident, that Ioannes Okeken did compose a Mottet of 36. Voices. Now that
part of Music which effects this, is called of the Musicians, the
Counterpoint. For a Counterpoint generally, is nothing else than the knowledge
of finding out of a Song of many parts. Or it is the mother of Modulation, or
(as Franchinus lib. 3. cap. 1. writes) it is the Art of bending founds that may
be sung, by proportionable Dimension, and measure of time. For, as the clay is
in the hands of the Potter; so is the making of a Song in the hands of the
Musician. Wherefore most men call this Art not the Counter-point, but
Composition. Assigning this difference of names, and saying, that Composition
is the collection of diverse parts of Harmony by diverse Concords. For to compose
is to gather together the diverse parts of Harmony by diverse Concords. But the
Counter-point is the sudden, and unexpected ordering of a plain Song by
diverse Melodies by chance. Whence Sortisare signifies to order a plain Song by
certain Concords on the sudden. Now it is called Counterpoint (as Bacchus
says) as it were a concordant Concent of Voices set one against another,
examined by Art.

Of the Division of the Counter-point.
THe Counter-point is twofold: Simple and Colored. The Simple Counter-point
is the concordant ordering of a Song of diverse parts by Notes of the same kind.
As when a plain Note is set against a plain Note, a Brief against a Brief,
thus: ^ Discantus. Tenor. Altus. Bassus.

The Colored Counter-point is the constitution of a Song of diverse parts by
diverse figures, and differing Concords, thus: ^ Cantus. Tenor. Altus. Bassus.

THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Of Concords and Discords.
BEing that Concordance (as says Boethius) is the due mingling of two or more
voices, and neither can be made without a Sound, nor a Sound without beating,
nor beating without Motion, it is necessary motion be divided. Of motions
therefore some be equal, some unequal. Now it is plain, that out of the
equality of Motions do proceed equal sounds, and out of the inequality of it,
unequal sounds: and out of the mean inequality do proceed consonant Sounds,
out of the greater inequality, Discords. Hence is it, that the Pythagoreans
concluded, that no Concord could be beyond the Disdiapason (as before appeared
lib. 1. cap. 5.) because of the too great distance of the extremes. By how
much therefore Sounds are nearer one another, they are so much the sweeter? and
the further they are distant one from another, the less they agree. Which I
do chiefly prove to come by the inequall falling of such sounds into the
ears, because a Consonance is a mixture of two Sounds, falling into the ears
uniformly. For high Sounds are heard sooner, than base Sounds. As a sharp
Sword pierces quicker, whereas a blunt one does not so, but enters slowly:
even so when we hear an high forced Voice, it strikes into one: but a base
voice does dully, as it were thrust at one, says Coelius lib. 10. cap. 53.

Of Voices.
BEcause the likeness of Voices, does not breed Concord, but the unlikeness.
Therefore Voices are called some Unisons; some not Unisons. Unisons are those,
whose Sound is one. Not Unisons are those, whereof one is deeper, another
higher. Of not Unisons, some are aequisons; some Consones; some Emmeles; some
Dissonant. Aequisons are those, which being stroke together, make one sound of
2. as Diapason and Disdiapason. Consones are those, which yield a compound or
mingled Sound, Diapente and Diapason diapente. Emmeles are they, which being
not Consones, yet are next to Consones: as those which sound thirds, sixts, or
other imperfect Concords. Discords are they whose Sounds mingled together, do
strike the sense vnpleasingly.

What Concord is.
BY that which has been said appears, that Consonance (which otherwise we
call Concordance) is the agreeing of two unlike Voices placed together. Or is
(as Tinctor writes) the mixture of diverse Sounds, sweetly pleasing the ears.
Or according to Stapulensis lib. 3. It is the mixture of an high, and low
sound, coming to the ears sweetly, and uniformly. Of which (among the
Practickes) there are two used, although some by repeating the former, have
more. Viz. Unison, 8 15 Vnisonum and eundem causant sonum, quia fiunt in
octauis. Third, 10 17 Fifth, 12 19 Sixth, 13 20

Of Discords.
A Discord (as says Boethius) is the hard and rough thwarting of two sounds,
not mingled with themselves. Or, (as Tinctor says) it is the mixture of diverse
sounds, naturally offending the ears, whereof there be Nine: Viz. Second, 9 16
Vnum and eundem causant sonum, quia fiunt in octauis. Fourth, 11 18 Seventh, 14
21

THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Of the Division of Concords.
OF Concordances some be simple or primarie, as an Unison, a third a fifth, and
a sixth. Others are repeated or secundary; which are also aequisons to them that
go before, proceeding of a duple dimension. For an eight does agree in sound
with an unison; a tenth with a third; a twelfth with a fifth; and a thirteenth
with a sixth. Others are tripled, to wit, a fifteenth; which is equal to the
sound of an Unison, and an Eight. A seventeenth, which is equal to a third,
and a tenth; a nineteenth which is equal to a fifth, and a twelfth; a twentieth,
which is equal to a sixth and a thirteenth, and so forth. Of Concords also some
be perfect; some imperfect. The perfect are those, which being grounded upon
certain Proportions, are to be proved by the help of numbers. The imperfect,
as not being probable, yet placed among the perfects, make an Unison sound;
whose names are these: The Perfects are Unison, and 12 Imperfects are 13 Fifth,
15 17 Eight, 19 20

Each whereof simply carried, does receive only two Voices, although by
corruption it receive more.

Rules of Concords.
FIrst, Two perfect Concords of the same kind, are not suffered to follow
themselves, but Cords of diverse kinds may well. Yet an Eight, so that they
proceed by different and contrary Motions, says Franchinus lib. 3. cap. 3.
thus: ^ Discantus. Tenor.

2 Two imperfect Concords or more, are allowed to follow themselves together,
ascending or descending.

3 Let always the next perfect follow the imperfect Concords, as an Unison
after an imperfect third; a fifth after a perfect; a fifth after an imperfect
sixth; an eight after a perfect, as Gafforus lib. 3. cap. 3. declares.

4 Many perfect concords of the same kind immouable are allowed to follow one
another, but the moveable not.

5 A Minime, or his pause is not sufficient to come betwixt perfect Concords of
the same kind, because of the little, and as it were insensible sound it has,
although by most the contrary be observed.

6 It may fall out so, that a Minime or a Crochet, may be a concord in parts
contrarily proceeding, for such a discord is hidden, nothing at all offending
the ears. Yet must you take heed, least two or more be joined together.

7 A Brief or a Semibreefe discording, is banished from the Counter-point. Yet
be there, that admit a Brief discordant diminished in a Quadruple, and a
Semibreefe diminished in a Duple.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
Of the general Rules of the Counter-point.
FIrst, If you desire to compose any thing, first make the Tenor, or some other
Voice; according as the Tone by which it is ruled does require.

2 The unusual Moodes are by all means to be avoided: for they all are
Discords, except the tenth.

3 In perfect Concordances never set a sharp Voice against a flat, nor
contrarily, but set a Sharp against a Sharp; a Flat against a Flat, or at
least against a natural. For the Naturals are doubtful, and will agree with
Dures, and b Mols, thus? ^ Tenor. Base not good. Base is good.

4 If the Tenor in the plain Song go too deep, transpose it to a fifth, or to
a fourth if need be, as you may see in the Hymn, Quem terra.

5 All the parts of the Song in the beginning and end were by the ancients made
of perfect Cords: which Rule with us is arbitrarie.

6 When one Voice goes upward or downward, you need not vary the rest: because
to an immouable voice, many mouable voices may be fitted.

7 In every Song seek for the nearest Concords: for they which are too far
distant, do taste of Discord, say the Pythagoreans.

8 Let the Tenor together with the rest have sweet Melody, in wandering
Collations.

9 If the Tenor touch the Means and Trebles, the Mean may descend to the
place of the Tenor.

10 If the Tenor fall to touch the Base, let the Base go up into the place of
the Tenor, according as the Concords shall require.

11 Every Song, must be often adorned with formal Closes.

12 If the Tenor shall have the Close of the Mean; the Mean on the other side
shall have the Close of the Tenor, by ending either from a tenth in an eight,
or from a third in an Unison, thus: ^ Discantus. Tenor.

13 If the Base take the Close of the Tenor, the Tenor shall take the Close of
the Mean; Or if the Base take the Close of the Mean, the Tenor shall take his
Close, as in the Rule going before is showed, thus: ^ Tenor. Base.

14 The Mean does seldom take a fifth above the Tenor: but the imfect
Concordance often times.

15 The Base must seldom or never be placed in a sixth under the Tenor, unless
an Eight straight follow, but in the perfect Concords it may often.

16 If the Base have a fifth under the Tenor, let the Mean be set in a fifth
above the Tenor, by ending in a third, thus: ^ Discantus. Tenor. Bassus.

17 Let the Mean seldom leap by a fifth upwards, but by a sixth and an eight
it may often: to which also an eight downward is forbidden, though all the other
Interuals be granted.

18 A Base may not leap a sixth, it has all the other Moodes common.

19 In Fourths Mi does not agree with Fa, because it makes a Tritone.

20 A Fourth though being simply taken it is a Discord; yet being joined to a
Concord, and mingled therewith, it makes a Concordant midling with the
extremes, says Franchinus.

21 A Fourth is admitted only in two places in the Counter-point: first when
being shut betwixt two Eights, it has a fifth below. Because if the fifth be
above, the Concord is of no force: by that reason of Aristotle's (whom Plato
calls Anagnostes, that is an unwearied Reader of Books) whereby in his
Problemes he shows, that the deeper Discordant sounds are more perceived than
the higher. Secondly, when the Tenor and Mean, do go by one or more sixts,
then that Voice which is midling, shall always keep a Fourth under the
Cantus, and a third above the Tenor. ^ The higher Voice. ^ The middle Voice. ^
The lowest Voice.

21 The most famous manner of the Counter-point, as (says Franchinus) is, if
the Base go together with the Mean, or any other Voice, being also distant by
a tenth, whilst the Tenor does go in Concord to both, thus: ^ Tenor huius. ^
The Treble out of the Base in the Tenth.

23 If you join not the same Concord, you shall make two parts Concords in
Tenths.

24 It is necessary for young beginners to make a Scale of ten lines, then to
distinguish it by bounds, so that they may write each time within each bound,
by keys truly marked, least the confused mingling together of the Notes hinder
them; yet is it better to compose without a Scale, but because it is hard, let
young men begin with a Scale, thus:

Neither must young learners think it a matter of no weight, how the signs
are set together, for by the unorderly referring of them, so many errors have
sprung in Music, that it is hard to be known, in what path a man may go
safe. Wherefore if a man will compare one sign with another, let him carefully
mark the nature of the Diminution and Proportions, least referring this to
that, the measure of the one be too great, or too little.

THE FIFTH CHAPTFR.
Of the Parts and Closes of a Song.
THe Ancient simpleness of Music, knew not the diverse parts of a Song, which
the subtilenesse of our age requires. For the whole being increased, all the
parts are increased. Now the parts which Musicians at this time use, are many,
to wit; the Treble, Tenor, high Tenor, Melody, Concordant, Vagrant,
Contratenor, Base; yea, and more than these. But because they be not all
commonly used, we will speak somewhat of those which are most commonly used; of
the rest nothing.

Of the Discantus.
THe Discantus (as Tinctor says) is a Song made of diverse voices. For it is
called Discantus, Quasi diuersus Cantus, that is, as it were another Song. By
which name the ancients did call every Mensurall Song. But we, because
Discantus is a part of a song severed from the rest, will describe it thus.
Discantus is the uppermost part of each Song. Or it is an Harmony to be song
with a Child's Voice.

Of the Tenor.
A Tenor is the middle voice of each Song, or (as Gafforus writes lib. 3. cap.
5.) it is the foundation to the Relation of every Song: so called a Tenendo, of
holding, because it does hold the Consonance of all the parts in it self, in
some respect.

Of the Baritone.
THe Bassus, (or rather Basis) is the lowest part of each Song. Or it is an
Harmony to be sung with a deep voice, which is called Baritonus, a Vari, which
is low, by changing V into B, because it holds the lower part of the Song.

Of the higher Tenor.
THe high Tenor, is the uppermost part, save one of a Song: or it is the grace
of the Base: for most commonly it graceth the Base, making a double Concord
with it. The other parts every Student may describe by himself.

Of the formal Closes.
BEing that every Song is graced with formal Closes, we will tell what a Close
is. Wherefore a Close is (as Tinctor writes) a little part of a Song, in whose
end is found either rest or perfection. Or it is the conjunction of voices
(going diversely) in perfect Concords.

Rules for Closes.
FIrst, Every Close consists of three Notes, the last, the last save one, and
the last save two.

2 The Close of the Discantus made with three Notes, shall always have the
last upward.

3 The Close of the Tenor, does also consist of three Notes, the last always
descending.

4 The Close of the base requires the last Note sometime above, and sometime
beneath the Tenor. Yet commonly it thrusts it an eight below, and sometimes
raises it a fifth above.

5 The Close of a high Tenor, does sometime rise, sometime fall with the last
Note; sometime makes it an Unison with others. Which being it proceeds by
diverse motions, the sorting of it is at the pleasure of the Composers.

6 The Close of the Discantus, does require the last Note save one above the
Tenor in a sixth: or in a fifth, if the Base hold a sixth below.

7 The last Note save one of a Tenor, is flatly placed a fifth above the Base
and a sixth also, if the Base take the Close of the Tenor, and the Tenor the
Close of the Discantus.

8 If the Close of the Tenor end in Mi, as it is in the Deutero, or otherwise
the last Note but one of the base being placed not in the fifth. But in the
third beneath the Tenor, may fall upon the fifth Final without any hazard of
Descant, as is declared in the underwritten Concent. ^ Tenor. Baritonus.

9 If the Close of the Tenor end in Re, as commonly it does in the first Tone,
the Base shall very finely end from a fifth to a third upward, not varying the
Discantus, although it may also fall into an eight. ^ Tenor. Bassus.

10 Every Song is so much the sweeter, by how much the fuller it is of formal
Closes. For such force there is in Closes, that it makes Discords become
Concords for perfection sake. Therefore let Students labor to fill their Songs
with formal Closes. Now that they may the more easily do this, we thought fit
here to set down an Exercise or Storehouse of Closes, that such as Students
sing here, they may know they are in their own Songs to make.

Here follows the Exercise and form of Closes.
^ Discantus. ^ Tenor. ^ Bassus. ^

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
Of the special precepts of the Counter-point.
Having delivered those things which we think necessary for the Art of
setting, now will we in most short Rules open essentially the matter it self,
as it is.

1 The Cantus being ordered with a Tenor in an Unison, the Base requires a
third below, and the Altus the same above. Or the Base a fifth below, and the
Altus a fourth above. But if the Base hold an eight below, the Altus shall
agree most fitly in a third above, or in a fourth below. But if the Base hold a
tenth below, the Altus requires a third above, or the same, or a sixth below, as
you may see in the figure following.

2 As often as the Discantus is placed 23. above the Tenor, let the Base be
placed a third below, and the Altus a sixth above, or in an Unison. But if the
Base have an eight below, for a fifth it cannot have, the Altus shall hold a
fourth below. But if the Base hold a tenth below, the Altus requires a third,
or a sixth below. Which a Student may prove by such a Scale as goes before.

3 If the Discantus hold place in a fifth above the Tenor, which it seldom
does, the Base shall be in a sixth below, and the Altus in a third above, or in
a fourth below. But if the Base be in an eight below, the Altus requires a
third above, or a fourth, or a sixth below.

4 If the Discantus be in a sixth above the Tenor, the Base shall be in a fifth
below, and the Altus in a third below, or a fourth above. Or if the Base be in
an eight below, the Altus shall only agree in a third above; but when the Base
is in a tenth below, the Altus shall be in a third above, or in the same below.
It might also be in an eight below, and sound a thirteenth with the Discantus.

5 If the Discantus be placed in an eight above the Tenor, the Base will agree
well in a third below, and the Altus in a third or sixth above, or in a fifth
below. But when a Base be in the same below, the Altus shall be in a fourth or
sixth above, or in a third below. If the Base be in an eight below, the Altus
shall sweetly agree in a fifth or third above. But if the Base fall to a tenth
below, the Altus shall hold a third or sixth above, or the same below.

6 As often as the Discantus does rest in a tenth above the Tenor: the Base shall
be in a third below, and the Altus in a third, sixth, or eight above. But if the
Base be found in a third above, the Altus shall be in a third below, or in a fifth
or eight above. But if the Base be in a fifth above the Tenor, (for below it
cannot) the Altus shall be in a third above, or an eight below. But if the Base
fall to an eight below, the Altus may be in a fourth below, or in a third or
fifth above.

7 When the Discantus is in a twelfe above the Tenor, the Base must be in an
eight below, and the Altus in a third, fifth, or eight above. But when the Base
is in a third above, the Altus shall be in a fifth, eight, or tenth concordantly.

8 If the Discantus be in a fourth above the Tenor, the Base requires a a fifth
below, and the Altus a third or sixth above. Contrarily (if you make your Base
first) you shall make it with the Discantus. But if a man will make more than
4. parts, let him take the Concords above or below, as other parts shall
require, observing those things which are to be observed, which we refer to
the Setters judgment.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
Wherefore Rests are put in the Counter-point.
THe placing of Rests in a Counterpoint, is for many causes tolerated.

1 To avoid difficulty. For whilst two parts of a song or more are so fitted
together that it is hard to fit the other parts, we set Rests for so long, till
that difficulty cease.

2 To avoid Fict Voices, and the forbidden Interuals.

3 To distinguish two perfect Concords which cannot mutually follow one
another, unless a Note or pause come betwixt.

4 For the making of Signs. Now a sign is the successiue distribution of one
and the same Close, in the beginning or any other place, by diverse parts of a
Song. Or it is the repetition of the same Close in diverse parts of the song
thus: ^ Discantus Tenor. Bassus.

5 Rests are admitted for taking breath, least by the swiftness of the Song,
either the Singer might be out of breath, or breed confusion by taking his
breath at unfit times.

6 That the Intrinsecall signs and marks of Musical degrees, consisting in
their perfection, may be perceived. For a perfect Mood is inwardly noted by a
rest of 3. times. A perfect time by 2. Semibreefe Rests, placed with a
Semibreefe, as before is said in the fifth Chapter of the second book.

7 Because of the many parts of a song. For when a song goes with more parts
than four, it is necessary that some Rest, whilst others sing: least the
sweetness be dulled either by the too much prolonging of the Voices, or by the
vnelegant commixtion of Concords, and so the Consort seem rather to make a
noise, then a Concordant sound.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER.
Of the diverse fashions of singing, and of the Ten Precepts for Singing.
EVery man lives after his own humor; neither are all men governed by the
same laws, and diverse Nations have diverse fashions, and differ in habit,
diet, studies, speech, and song. Hence is it, that the English do carroll; the
French sing; the Spaniards weep; the Italians, which dwell about the Coasts of
Ianua caper with their Voices; the other bark: but the Germans (which I am
ashamed to utter) do howl like Wolves. Now because it is better to break
friendship, than to determine any thing against truth, I am forced by truth to
say that which the love of my Country forbids me to publish. Germany
nourishes many Cantors, but few Musicians. For very few, excepting those which
are or have been in the Chapels of Princes, do truly know the Art of
Singing. For those Magistrates to whom this charge is given, do appoint for
the government of the Service youth Cantors, whom they choose by the shrilnesse
of their Voice, not for their cunning in the Art; thinking that God is pleased
with bellowing and braying, of whom we read in the Scripture, that he rejoices
more in sweetness than in noise, more in the affection, than in the Voice. For
when Solomon in the Canticles writes, that the voice of the church does sound
in the ears of Christ, he does presently adioyne the cause, because it is
sweet. Therefore well did Baptista Mantuan (that modern Virgil) inueigh every
puffed up, ignorant, bellowing Cantor, saying; Cur tantis delubra Boum
mugitibus imples,
Tu ne Deum tali credis placare tumultu.


Whom the Prophet ordained should be praised in Cymbals, not simply, but well
sounding.

Of the Ten Precepts necessary for every Singer.
BEing that diverse men do diversely abuse themselves in Gods praise; some by
moving their body indecently; some by gaping unseemly; some by changing the
vowels, I thought good to teach all Cantors certain Precepts, by which they
may err less.

1 When you desire to sing any thing, above all things mark the Tone, and his
Repercussion. For he that sings a Song without knowing the Tone, does like him
that makes a syllogism without Mood and Figure.

2 Let him diligently mark the Scale, under which the Song runs, least he
make a Flat of a Sharp or a Sharp of a Flat.

3 Let every Singer conform his voice to the words, that as much as he can he
make the Concent sad when the words are sad; and merry, when they are merry
Wherein I cannot but wonder at the Saxons (the most galiant people of all
Germany, by whose furtherance I was both brought up, and drawn to write of
Music) in that they use in their funerals, an high, merry and ioconde
Concent, for no other cause (I think) than that either they hold death to be
the greatest good that can befall a man (as Valerius in his fifth Book writes
of Cleabis and Biton two brothers) or in that they believe that the souls (as
it is in Macrobius his second Book De somnio Scip.) after this body do
return to the original sweetness of Music, that is to heaven. Which if it be
the cause, we may judge them to be valiant in contemning death, and worthy
desirers of the glory to come.

4 Above all things keep the equality of measure. For to sing without law and
measure, is an offense to God himself, who has made all things well, in
number, weight, and measure. Wherefore I would have the Fasterly Franci (my
contrymen) to follow the best manner, and not as before they have done;
sometime long; sometime to male short the Notes in Plain-song, but take example
of the noble Church of Herbipolis, their head, wherein they sing excellently.
Which would also much profit, and honor the Church of Prage, because in it
also they make the Notes sometimes longer, sometime shorter, than they should
Neither must this be omitted, which that love which we owe to the dead, does
require. Whose Vigils (for so are they commonly called) are performed with such
confusion, have, and mockery, (I know not what fury possesses the minds of
those, to whom this charge is put over) that neither one Voice can be
distinguished from another, nor one syllable from another, nor one verse
sometimes throughout a whole Psalm from another. An impious fashion to be
punished with the seuerest correction. Think you that God is pleased with such
howling such noise, such mumbling, in which is no devotion, no expressing of
words, no articulating of syllables?

5 The Songs of Authentical Tones must be timed deep, of the subiugall Tones
high, of the neutrall, meanly. For these go deep, those high, the other both
high and low.

6 The changing of Vowels is a sign of an unlearned Singer. Now, (though
diverse people do diversely offend in this kind) yet does not the multitude of
offenders take away the fault. Here I would have the Francks to take heed they
pronounce not u for o, as they are wont, saying nuster for noster. The country
Churchmen are also to be censured for pronouncing, Aremus in stead of Oremus.
In like sort, do all the Renenses from Spyre to Confluentia change the Vowel i
into the dipthong ci, saying Mareia for Maria. The Westphalians for the vowel a
pronounce a and e together, to wit, Aebs te for Abste. The lower Saxons, and all the Sueuians, for the Vowel e, read e and i, saying, Deius for Deus. They of
lower Germany do all express u and e, in stead of the Vowel u. Which errors,
though the Germane speech do often require, yet does the Latin tongue, which
has the affinity with ours, exceedingly abhor them.

7 Let a Singer take heed, least he begin too loud braying like an Ass, or
when he has begun with an uneven height, disgrace the Song. For God is not
pleased with loud cries, but with lovely sounds: it is not (says our Erasmus)
the noise of the lips, but the ardent desire of the Art, which like the lowdest
voice does pierce Gods ears. Moses spoke not, yet heard these words, Why do
thou cry unto me? But why the Saxons, and those that dwell upon the Balticke
coast, should so delight in such clamouring, there is no reason, but either
because they have a deaf God, or because they think he is gone to the
South Side of heaven, and therefore cannot so easily hear both the
Easterlings, and the Southerlings.

8 Let every Singer discern the difference of one holiday from another, least
on a slight Holiday, he either make too solemn service, or too slight on a
great.

9 The uncomely gaping of the mouth, and vngracefull motion of the body, is a
sign of a mad Singer.

10 Above all things, let the Singer study to please God, and not men; (says
Guido) there are foolish Singers, who contemn the devotion they should seek
after? and affect the wantonness which they should shun: because they intend
their singing to men, not to God: seeking for a little worldly fame, that so
they may loose the eternal glory: pleasing men that thereby they may displease
God: imparting to other that devotion, which themselves want: seeking the
favor of the creature, contemning the love of the Creator: to whom is due all
honor, and reverence, and service. To whom I do deuote myself, and all that
is mine, to him will I sing as long as I have being: for he has raised me
(poor Wretch) from the earth, and from the meanest baseness. Therefore
blessed be his Name world without end, Amen.

The end of the Work.
The Epilogue and Conclusion of the Book.
I Am to entreat the courteous Reader favorably to view this Work of Musical
Theorems, which I have before this some years past searched out, and now at
last put into the form of a book and printed, not out of any arrogant humor,
as some envious persons will report, but out of a desire to profit the Youth of
Germany, whilst others are drousie. If the baseness of the style, or simplenes
of the words offend any man, I entreat him to attribute that to the matter
which we handle, and the persons for whom it is written, namely, Children. I
doubt not but there will be some, that will be soon ready to snarle at it, and
to backbite it, contemning it before they read it, and disgracing it before
they understand it. Who had rather seem than be Musicians, not obeying
Authors, or Precepts, or Reasons: but whatsoever comes into their hairebraind
Cockscombe, accounting that only lawful, artificial, and Musical. To whom I
entreat you (gentle Readers) to lend no ear. For it is a thing praiseworthy
to displease the evil. Yea, (to use the sentence of Antisthenes the
Philosopher) to be backbited is a sign of greatness; to backebite, a token of
meanness. And because the praise of one wise man is better than the
commendation of Ten fools; I pray consider not the number, but the quality of
those detractors: and think what an easy matter it is to silence those Pyes,
and to crush such Fleas even betwixt two nails. Neither hearken ye to those
that hate the Art: for they dissuade others from that which their dullness will
not suffer them to attain to, for in vain it is to harp before an Ass. But
account that this I speak to you as a Master, because I have passed the
Ferrular. For the cunning men in each Art must be believed, as the Emperors
Majesty says. Wherefore let those courteous Readers (that be delighted with
Ornithoparchus his pains taken) be contented with these few things, for as
soon as I can but take breath, they shall see matters of greater worth.

A TABLE OF ALL THAT IS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST BOOK.
OF the Definition, Division, Profit, and Inuentors of Music, Chap. 1 Of
Uoyces* chap. 2 Of the Keys, chap. 3 Of Tones, chap. 4 Of Solfization, chap. 5
Of Mutations, chap. 6 Of Moodes, chap. 7 Of the Dimension of the Monochord,
chap. 8 Of the Definition, Division, and Profit of the Monochord, chap. 9 Of
Musica Ficta, chap. 10 Of Song and Transposition, chap. 11 Of the Tones in
special, chap. 12 That diverse men are delighted with diverse Moodes, chap. 13
The Table of all that is contained in the second Book.
OF the Profit and Praise of this Art, Chap. 1 Of the Figures, chap. 2 Of
Ligatures, chap. 3 Of Mood, Time, and Prolation, chap. 4 Of the Signs, chap.
5 Of Tact, chap. 6 Of Augmentation, chap. 7 Of Diminution, chap. 8 Of the
Rests, chap. 9 Of Pricks, chap. 10 Of Imperfection, chap. 11 Of Alteration,
chap. 12 Of Proportion. chap. 13
The Table of all that is contained in the Third Book.
IN the Praise of Accent, chap. 1 Of the Definition and division of Accent,
chap. 2 Of the general Rules of Accent, chap. 3 Of the special Rules of
Accent, chap. 4 Of the Points of Accent, chap. 5 Of the Accent of Epistles,
chap. 6 Of the Accent of Gospels, and Prophesies. chap. 7
The Table of all that is contained in the Fourth Book.
OF the Definition, division, and Difference of the names of the Counterpoint,
Chap. 1 Of Concords and Discords, chap. 2 Of the Division of Concords, chap. 3
Of the general Rules of the Counterpoint, chap. 4 Of the Parts aad Closes of a
Song, chap. 5 Of the special Precepts of the Counterpoint, chap. 6 Wherefore
Rests are put in the Counterpoint, chap. 7 Of the diverse fashions for Singing.
chap. 8
FINIS.

