A notable and comfortable exposition, upon the FOVRTH OF MATTHEW* CONCERning
the ^e^^ations of Christ, Preac^^^ in S. Peter's Church, in Oxenford*

By Thomas Ben^, (...) of Ma^d^^n College and (...) and COVENTRIE.

depiction of swan GOD IS MY DEFENDER


AT LONDON* Printed by Robert (...), dwelling in Foster-Lane, ou^^ ^st
Goldsmiths Hall.

Math. 4. 1. 2. 3. 4* 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Then Jesus was lead a way of the
Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. etc.
THe misery of man (dearly bel^ued in our Savior Jesus Christ) may the ^ore
plainly and ^anifestly appear onto us, if we diligently consider, in what
state, dignity, and honor man was, before the old malicious, and wicked
Serpent, with his subtle suggestions and deceit, had tempted, persuaded, and
ouercommed him. And again, if after his overthrow we consider, in what
miserable calamity, captivity, slavery, and servile bondage, not only Adam
him self, but also all his posterity, is enthralled and imprisoned with him.
And again if we mark, how weak, feeble, and impotent, since that time, man
is in all knowledge, godliness, and obedience: and how strong, saucie,
malapert, and ready the adversary is, to detain and continue him in
ignorance, idolatry, disobedience, and rebellion against God, and his holy
word. Which unsupportable miseries, if they be deeply considered, and duly
weighed in the balance of our consciences, with a conference of the former
state, which was happy, blessed, and immortal, with the present state, which
is sinful, accursed, and damnable: may easily make us to perceive, that there
is some great cause, why our felicity, is changed into misery, our
blessedness, into cursednesse, our obedience, into rebellion, immortallitie
into corruption: and to be short, life, into death: and not this only, but
also that the enemy has been strong and able enough to keep and hold man
without hope of recovery, in these foresaid distresses The cause whereof, the
ignorant and blind worldlings, impute and asscribe to the inconstancy of
fortune, and as they term them, unfortunate and unlucky chances, where as the
holy word of God declares unto us, that all these miseries and calamities, are
the fearful punishments and horrible plagues of God against sin, as a just
reward and stipend of the same. Wherefore the godly, perceiving thorough these
continual and daily plagues, which we suffer, yt great displeasure and
indignation of God to be so sore stirred and encensed against man for his sin,
and that they are not able to stand in his presence, with lamentation and
gronings, seek for that help, aid, and succor, against all stormy
Tempests, which they know to be set forth and appointed in Gods holy word:
trusting either by those means to come into Gods favor again or else by no
other means possible. And these means as they are set forth in diverse and
sundry places of scripture: so are they in no place more to our comfort and
consolation, then in this present gospel, red in the holy Church as this day.
Wherein is contained, a mighty, triumphant, and glorious victory of our savior
Jesus Christ, gotten to all Christian and faithful believers over that
troublesome, ancient, and expert tempter satan, the original and cursed
cause, of all these wretched intolerable miseries. Who, at the beginning, gave
man such an overthrow, that from thence to this conslict, there was never more
manifest hope of rising, nor a more evident sign of victory. For here is
declared unto us. that the wicked and malicious worker of darkness, which has
so long pinched at our heel and bitten us by the feet, according to Gods
promise, has now such a soil, that he is not only trodden Genesis 3. 15.
underfoot, but is in his head so wounded, bruised and crushed in pieces, by
that most blessed seed of the woman, between whom there has been so long
continual enimity, that there is on his part no hope of help, no recovery of
health, be he never so strong and stout, be he never so crafty and deceitful.
If we, especially that mean to be true soldiers to our captain, will take
upon us the armor of God, that S. Paul wills us to put Ephesians. 6. 11.
on, we may now (God be thanked) not only withstand him, and bouldly fight
with him, but also even vanquish him, and trample him under our feet. For he,
which did overthrow now is overthrown, the deceiuer is caught in his own
snare. the Captain is become captive, the ruler of the world. the Prince of
darkness, the father of all lying, whom man could not withstand, nor the
world subdue, he being Lord thereof, with a word rebuked and rejected, is
utterly subdued, and clean put to flight. We need not therefore be afraid to
fight, seeing our captain is a conqueror, and our adversary conquered, our
captain strong, our enemy weak, our Captain to stand, our enemy to flee,
our Captain to have praise and glory, our enemy shame and reproach: but the
victory of Christ may be an encouraging of us to fight, and his valiant
conquest an example for us to stand stoutly against our enemy. And is not here
(dearly beloved) great comfort and consolation for all them, that are afraid
of the devil? Therefore I note it the more diligently, because that when we are
tempted* as our savior Christ was, we give not place dastardly to our
adversary who^ God suffers to tempt, partly, ye we may learn to know y^
virtue of our armor which we have put on: partly also, that we may learn to
fight and be warriors when we shall be tried. By temptation a man is tried,
as gould is tried in a furnace: and by that means a man shall not wax proud,
having his enemy always ready to abate his courage, and to try his manhood.
It is no small comfort to have this victory set before our eyes, as it is most
plainly written in this present Gospel, by the Evangelist. But least I
should confound the victory, I will orderly speak of every part by it self,
if time will suffer me, and the spirit of God give me vtterrance. Let us pray
etc.

Math. 4. 1. Text.
Then Jesus was lead away of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of
the Devil. etc.
THe first word in this gospel, moves us to pe^ose a part of the Chapter
going before: because it is a conseqent following former act^ and deeds. In
which Chapter, the evangelist S Matthew, has set down the office and
ministerye of S. John the baptist, how he testified of Christ, and prepared the
way for the people Israel, so much as was necessary for his purpose, that
intended to write and set forth Christ his acts, life, and conversation.
Because therefore that now the order of the history, and course of things do so
require, he begins to write what Christ did after his baptism, and most
heavenly commenceme^t which was immediately going before in ye latter end of the
third chapter* For whereas Christ always before his baptism, was obedient
unto Joseph and Mary, occupied and exercised continually in their labors and
businesses: yet now by baptism altered, as it were, into a new man, and
consecrated unto God his Father, whose will he came to fulfill, returned not
thither whence he came, to become such an one as he was before, as in other
solemn Feasts and times at I^rusalem he was wont, but [ ^mmediately] after
his Baptism* as S. Mark terms that, which this Evangelist calls [ then,]
he was led of the holy ghost into the desert to be void of company and
conversation of men, and to live with beasts, where was sca^sity and lack of
things necessary for the sustentation of man's life, that the Devil might the
rather take occasion to tempt him, being in a place where he wanted relief,
then where he had plentye of all things, For if Christ had been in the City
Jerusalem, or in other villages, where victuals might have been come by
conveniently and in time, the devil would not then so boldly have enterprised
to bring him stones to make bread: which had been folly and in vain, when
bread had been at hand. But because there was nothing in the desert for man
to eat, there the tempter took occasion to tempt and to try Christ. Here, in
that the Evangelist says, Then was Jesus lead of the spirit, that is,
immediately after his baptism, I note as a fruitful lesson, that they which
are appointed of God to any high office or ministry* are, or ought to be clean
altered and changed from that they have been before, as was here our Savior
Christ. Who, before his baptism, lived and labored ordinarily, as the common
sort of men did, but after he was baptized, as he altered his living, so did he
his labor, which before was bodilye exercise, but now was all spiritual and
heavenly, in praying, fasting, and preaching S. Paul teaches us the like
lesson, that after we be baptized, we are no more as we were. He says: Romans 6.
3.
Remember ye not, that we all which are baptized in the name of Jesus Christ,
are baptized with him to dye? We are buried with him by baptism for to dye,
that like as Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the father: even
so we also should walk in a new life. He says we should now, after our
baptism walk in a new life, not in that life we were in before. For now being
baptized in Gal. 3.
Christ, we have put on Christ, as he writes to the Galatians: and all they
which are called to the state of grace, by baptism, put of the old man, and
put on the new, and that is the true altering and changing of our life. Yet,
there is an other altering and chaun^e of life, in all them that are called to
any high office. As, Mos^s being called of God to deliver his people from the
tyranny of Pharaoh, Exodus 3. and. 4.
and receiving his office with signs and miracles from God: neither returned
to his Father in laws sheep, which he was keeping when he was called, nor
lived as he was wont, but in the name of the Lord took upon him to deliver
his people, and safely conduct them thorough the Red sea, and was their pastor
and governor, after that in the Wilderness, Forty years. King David also the
youngest 1. Sam. 16.
son of his Father Isay, called from his fathers flock, and anointed king by
Samuel, yet left his flock, and followed his vocation. These and such like
examples do well declare, that men called to an high office or ministry,
must be altered from that they were, and be conformed in life and conversation
to their ministry. Which thing, I beseech you all to do, whenever God, of
his infinite goodness and mercy, calls you to any high state or condition
of office or ministry. For you ought of very duty and conscience to alter
your life and conversation, that it may be agreing and answearable to your
office, that your office may be furnished and honored, rather with a Godly
life, then defaced and stained with a corrupt conversation. But especially you
my brethren which are called of God to the dignity of Priesthood, to be
ministers of his secrets, Stewards of his hoshold, Preachers of his most holy
word, Teachers of his people that live in blindness and ignorance, Pastors of
his sheep, watchmen over his flock, bought with Christ his precious blood. I
beseech and exhort you in the tender mercy of God, to consider your condition,
to look to your office and duty, to remember your vocation, to have an eye to
your conscience, to which I speak, not to your ears. Now, you are not of ye
world, wherefore your conversation must be heavenly: you are consecrated to
God, your living must be godly. Note well what S. Paul writes to Timothy: No
man that warr^th, entangleth him self with worldly business, and that because
he would please him, that has chosen him to be a soul^ier. God has chosen
you for his chief soldiers, seek therefore to please him, and entangle not
your selves with worldly cares and business. But alas what should I exhort,
where exhortation will take no place, or desire, where entreaty will not
serve? The ministerye is come to this point almost generally, that if you
will examine any ones living, you shall find more, that are worthy to be
reproved, then rewarded, and more to be lamented, then well liked, such is our
imperfection. We are called to an high office, an office of great dignity. We
are God his ministers, and nothing appears lesie in us then Godliness. M^ses
called to bring Gods people from the tyranny of Pharaoh left keeping his
sh^epe, and followed his vocation, we are called to guide Gods people from
darkness of ignorance, to the light of knowledge, from the bondage of sin, to
the liberty of grace, and yet we stand in our old state, we forsake not the
world, we change not our course, we alter not our life, we should be light,
and we are darkness, we should be ministers, and we are become Lords, we
should feed our flocks, and we famish them Finally, we should be preachers,
and we are dumb dogs, and tongue tied. God, I beseech him, loase them, that
we may worthily set forth his praise, which now with silence we obscure, that
our light of preaching may so shine before men, that they see our good works,
with the change and renewing of our lives, and so they may glorify our father
which is in heaven. We have here also another lesson, both notable and very
fruitful: that al they, which are so called of God, are most object to all
kinds of temptation, and they especially, which are most in savor with God.
For our Savior Christ before his baptism, was not so tempted of the Devil,
as he was after, when he was separated from the world, and consecrated wholly
to the ministry of God, and erecution of his office, then the subtle
Sophister, and crafty tempter, began to stir the coals. He perceived Christ
went about to set forth the glory of his Father, which he most spitefully
envied from the begin^ing, and so diligently sought ways and means, as he
could most peruersly to let and hinder him. Neither did the malicious Serpent
at the beginning tempt any creature, but that which was made after the likeness
and similitude of God. hoping to deface Gods glory, if he^ might or could
deforme that creature, which was of all Creatures under Heaven, most like unto
GOD. Even so here, when he perceived that Christ was by the mouth of God
declared to be his only beloved son, in whom his anger against sin, and
indignation against sinners, was fully quieted and appeased: and yt Christ now
should take upon him to work the will of his father, so as should be for his
fathers glory, like as he did before with our first parents, so he does now:
that is, he labors first to bring Christ to that point, that he should not
believe the voice of God, which had said: This is my beloved son:
Secondarily, from the true understanding of Gods word, and to bring him to
manifest idolatry at the length, contrary to Gods word. In like danger of
temptation are all they, which be either in high authority, as was David,
Zedechias, Moses, when the people grudged, or else that be greatly in Gods
favor, as the good man Job, and Tobias, which was made blind by the Devil,
and the children of Israel in the desert, which were stirred of the Devil to
murmr against Moses and God, and diverse other which have been suddenly
tempted. The Devil is crafty, and tempts not all men one way, because all
men are not in love with one thing, and because he will not seem to be as he
is, He changes himself into an Angel 2. Cor. 11.
of light, as S. Paul says to the intent he may deceive. Therefore he
tempted Eve one way, and the just and righteous man Job an other. He tempts
Christ here one way, and afterward his Apostles an other. As Christ himself
bears witness, saying: Simon the Devil has desired you, to sift you as
Luke 22.
it were wheat, but I have praiell for thee, that thy faith fail not. And as
we see by experience, Cities, Towns, or Castles, set on high hills or
mountains, are most object to all stormy tempests, and violence of weather:
In the very like manner are they which are called to high dignity, great
authority, and worthy offices, most in danger of temptation and the assaults
of the Devil. The golden writer Chrysostom, in his fourth Homely Chrisoft.
hom. 4 in Esaias. 6.
upon these words of the Prophet I say, vidi dominum. etc. has a pretty
similitude to confirm this to be true. As the manner is in ships, they which
have an empty ship fear not Pirates of the sea, which seek not to bruise or
break an empty or void ship: but they which have their ships full fraughted
with wares and treasures of merchandises stand in fear of robbers, which seek
thither where gould, silver, and precious stones are to be had: Even so the
devil does not easily pursue a sinner, but rather a good and godly man, who
has much riches. Let that man therefore, ye all men take heed, which either
are placed in high authority, or have received gifts and Talents at God his
hand, of the wicked tempter, that goes about to rob and spoil man, of such
heavenly treasures as God bestows upon him. And here also, they that have
grace may learn, that the life of a Christian man, is neither play, nor
pastime, neither daunsing nor daliance, neither fleshly, nor licentious
liberty: but a laborious and dangerous warfare, a charie and circumspect
keeping of a Godly and innocent life. Let carnal Gospellers persuade
themselves they have God by the toe, or in their boseme never so much: if they
be not in a ward of this warfare to fight against the Devil, the victory of
Christ shall not avail them, but overthrow them with their captain, whose
lusts and desires they follow. For all they, which will live godly 2. Tim. 3.
in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, which is not without great
temptation. Wherefore Bainabas and Paul after they had preached at Derbe,
returned to Lystra, leone, and Antioch, making strong the Disciples, and
comforting them, with exhortations to continue in the faith, because that Act.
14.
through many tribulations, we must ^nter into the kingdom of God. Many
examples might be brought to prove, that they are most in danger of
temptation, which are most in authority: But because the time will not suffer
me to be long, I will come to the Evangelist, which says: Christ was led into
the desert to be tempted of the Deui^. As these words declare the fact to be
of God his providence, and no fortunate or unlucky chance or happening unto
Christ: so it is an admonition for us all, to enterprise and take nothing in
hand, that is of great weight and importance, unless we be led there unto
by God his holy spirit, or commanded by his word to do the same. For Christ
him self was led of the spirit to be tempted of the Devil, in the desert. Not
to fast, but to be tempted, and although he fasted, it was but an
accidentarie or incident thing, besides the principal matter, which was, to be
tempted. This example would be diligently noted for two causes. One is, that it
is a particular example, but once done of our Savior Christ in all his life:
The other is. that the holy Ghost led him to work the same miracle. And
therefore it ought not to be an example of imitation unto us, as many men
would have it, but a wounderfull miracle once wrought of one man, and no more.
Here I may note by the way, rather then speak of by leisure, how small
consideration men have used heretofore, which have enjoined all them, that
would take upon them to be ministers of Gods word, a single life without
marriage, no respect of circumstances had, either of him that takes the yoke
and bond upon him, or of God, in whose power it is, to give the gift of
chastity as it pleases him. For consider these two things, fasting, and
chastity, what affinity they have, and whether they be of like force or
difficulty to be observed of man, or no. As God has made man to live: so he
has appointed him an ordinary way to live, unless he have a special
prerogative and miraculous help of God, as had Moses and Elias by the space of
forty days. And so in like case, God has made man to multiply and increase
the world, to which ordinance with observation of circumstaunces necessary to
the same, every man is bonden, save they which have a special prerogative of
God, to live in flesh without flesh, which is an Angels nature, and not man's,
as S. Hierome says. They may be ashamed therefore, that thus wryth and wrest
the scriptures, to satisfy their licentious affections and wicked humors, to
condemn that in their decrees, which in God his word, is both lawful and
laudable. Little they regard the leading of the holy Ghost, without whose
motion they should enterprise nothing, seeing our Savior Christ, was led of
the holy Ghost into the desert, to be tempted of the Devil.

The Tex^
And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was hungry.
O^r (...)ius supposes forty nights to be added of the E^angefist, for a
difference between the Jews fastes, and his. For the manner of the (...) was,
to fast all the day, and to eat at ntght: But Christ did not so, for the space
of forty days, and forty nights, in all which time he hungered not. Two such
examples of admiration rather then imitation, we have in the old Testament:
the one is of the holy Prophet or God Moses, who being Exodus 24.
commanded of God to ascend and come up, into the mount Sinai, to fetch the
tables of the commandments which he should afterward deliver to his people,
fasted all the time that he continued in the Mount, which was forty days, and
forty nights, and all that space neither eat nor darcke, as is written in the
book of Exodus. The other is, of the Prophet Elias, who fleeing from the
wicked Queen Iezabell 3. King. 19.
Achabs wife, and resting himself under a juniper tree being weary of his
life and wishing to die, was sed by an Angel sent to him from God, with a cake
baken on the co^ses and a cup of water. After which refe^ion or nourishment, he
walked forty days and forty nights a (...) strength thereof, unto Horeb. the
mount of God. Our savior Christ therefore, whom these two Prophets did
prefigure, when he should begin to publish and preach the Gospel, departed
from the company and society of man into the desert, where he fasted forty
days, and forty nights, not exceeding the measure which Moses; and Elias had
before observed, least he might seem to pass the bounds of man's nature, and
by a miracle make it seem incredible that he was true man, whom afterward
the experience of hunger did testify to be s^. So much then as Christ is better
then Moses, so much is grace better then the law, because that as Saint John
faith* The law was given by Moses, but John. 1.
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. For notwithstanding the law was written
with God his own hand, and pronounced with his mouth, yet as S Heb. 20.
Paul says: i^ ^ad but a shadow of good things to come, and not the things to
their own fashion. Wherefore if Moses fasted forty days twice, before he
received and ministered the law, it was no derogation to Christ his dignity, to
fast forty days, before he began to preach the Gospel, which is the truth
of the shadows that went before. And in like sort, Elias as it follows in the
3 of Kings the 19. Chapter: when he went a far journey, and should bring a
great matter to pass, that is, anoint, or as we in England term it, Crown
two Kings, and consecrate one Prophet, fasted forty days, and forty nights.
Which undoubtedly was a great Miracle in him, both to labor a long journey,
and also to fast all the iourneys space. Christ therefore to show himself
nothing inferior to either of them, fasted forty days and forty nights.
Upon which fast, and the fastes of Moses and Elias, because the Church has of
long time, taken occasion to ground and institute this fast of Lent, which at
this present we observe: I entend by Gods grace and your Christian patience, by
just occasion of this text, and by opportunitye of the time and place, to
speak something of this our Lent Fast.

to turns them away, that they regard no Psalm. 119.
vanities, as David says, or else to pluck Math. 5.
them out (as Christ bids) when they offend us. And likewise in all other
parts and senses of man's body. Howbeit this is more spiritual then the
other, that I have recited. For in the other are included three kinds of fast.
kind of fast, is a general Fast of all men, and women. Which the Jews often
used, especially in the time of great plagues, wars and such extremities,
absteining from meat and drink in ashes and sackcloth all the day long,
thereby to humble themselves before God. Yet none of these Fasts are like that
heavenly fast of Christ, Moses, and Elias. For their fasts were above these
fastes in all points. Wherefore touching the first part of fast, which we
observe all this Lent, it is most true that I said before: It could not be
grounded on the old Testament. For notwithstanding that Moses fasted forty
days twice, and Elias once, yet because their fastes were miraculous, we
neither ought nor can sincerely follow them. And besides, we may by as good
reason follow Moses in all other miracles that he wrought, as in this: And so
likewise Elias. For if they had been works as well of imitation, as
admiration, no doubt the Jews which were so studious to invent new traditions,
would have made this one of their chiefest. But they knew very well that as
these fastes were miracles: so they were in no case of man to be imitated But
in examine it more nearely. Moses fasted forty days before Exodus 24.
he received the commandments of almighty God, contained in the two Tables:
which when he had thrown down and broken, as he came from the hill, for the
displeasure he conceived against Aaron, and the people: he was commanded to
ascend Exodus 34.
the second time to receive the law at Gods hand, and to bring and teach it the
people. And so he did. Whereupon the Jews in remembrance of the law given them
by Moses, keep a solemn feast every year, in the sixth day of ye ninth month:
that is, as they count their month on the sixth day of May. It is one of their
solemn feasts called Penticost, their Whitsonday, which was the fiftieth day
after they were come forth of Egypt. They observe a solemn Feast, but no
fasting for it. In the tenth month the seventh day: they observe and keep one
Fasting day for a remembrance of the tables which Moses brake, when Exodus 32.
he heard that the people committed Idolatry. Seeing therefore the Jews
yearly celebrate a memory of the law given, and also fast one day in
remembrance of breaking the tables: It is not to be thought contrary, but they
would willingly have observed Lent as we do, if it had bin but man's exercise,
and no miracle. They observed diverse days for fast and abstinence, as the
third day of the first month, which is September, which is talled the fast of
Gedalia. In the fourth month they fast in remembrance of the siege that
Nabuchodon^zer laid against the city Jerusalem. In the sixth month on the
thirtenth day they kept the fast of Ester and Mardocheus. And although that
Ester commanded all Hest. 4.
the Jews to fast three days and three nights to obtain Gods favor, that
they might find favor and grace before the king Assuerus, and so escape the
bloody hands of Haman, which intended their deaths all in one day: yet in
remembrance of the same, the Jews observed but one day yearly, and that was
the thirteenth day of the sixth month. And this fast was one of the longest
fastes that I have obseruod in the old Testament: except we should take it,
that the Ninevites. fasted all the time that was granted them for repentance,
which was forty days. But that they fasted so Jonas. 3.
long, it is incredible, because man, beast, and all kind of cattle fasted, or
else surely the popish church would not have failed to draw that into example,
when Moses and Elias would not serve their purpose. Here I have rehearsed the
greatest part of the Jews fasting days, which were ordinarily and yearly
used of them, either in remembrance of present delivery from their enmies, or
some great calamity that befell them upon such days as they kept fasted. But
our Lent fast can be grounded on none of all these, because that in the fore
said months there was but one day fasted. And as for their extraordinaries,
which they kept by occasion of plague, Battle, Famine, and such like great
calamities, as they were not certainly observed upon any day: So we can not
stablish our Lent after them, because their days and months are variable.
And if we should so do, yet our fast agrees not with theirs, in so much as
they put no such difference between fish and flesh, as we do, although
indeed they had certain kinds of flesh prohibited in their law. And as for
the fast which the Sect of the Pharisees in Christ's time observed twice a
week, it were foolish to object it for any confirmation of our Lent. For why
should we approve yt which the Pharisees did, who (as both Josephus and
Epiphanius witness) were an heretical sect? And as they supersticiously
inverted and commanded it. so they most wickedly abuse it: As we may learn by
the words of our Savior, when he warns his disciples to take heed of their
fastings, prayers, and alms deeds. Here then is no authority in the old
Testament to uphold our old accustomed Lent.

Now to come to the new Testament, we shall find neither reason nor authority
there, which can make for the observation of the same, unless we ground it
upon this fast of Christ. And that cannot be: For Christ his fast as it was
much beyond man's nature, so naturally it ought not to be practiced or atempted
of any man, being not an example imitatiue, but miraculous. But the Papists
which would gladly bear out the matter with the authority of this place,
allege a saying of S. Gregory, That every action of Christ is our
instruction. The saying of it self is most true: but their conclusion
gathered of it is most false: that we must do al things that he did, because
they are our instruction. For this is as good a reason as theirs is: every
action of Christ is our i^struction, but to heal the lame, to make the blind
see, the dumb speak: the deaf hear, are actions of Christ. Therefore we must
make the blind, see, the dumb, speak etc. Who is so ignorantly blind, that
cannot see the the absurdity and foolishness of this reason: And what
prerogative or preeminence should Christ have, I pray you, if either we ought
or could do the like? To presume to do them were great derogation to his
glory, and undoubtedly comes of the pride of the Devil, that would seem to
be like God. I marvel much that they can spy that in Scripture which men of
profound knowledge could not see. In Mat. ho^ 47.
For Chrysostom plainlye affirms, ye our savior Christ says not his fast
is to be imitated, whereas he might propose his Fast of Forty days, but he
says, Learn of me, for I am me^ke and humble in heart. In ye new testament we
have plentifully declared unto us both in y^ Evangelists and in the Epistles of
the apostles, wherein we ought to follow Christ, and yet we are in no place
willed to follow his forty days fast. Truth it is, that the gospel both
exhorts and commands us to fast but it appoints us no certain day as:
thou shall fast every Friday and Saturday, but not ye Sunday, neither does it
appoint us to fast more from flesh then fish, God his word, makes no
difference between the one kind, and the other. For our savior Christ when
he wills us to fast, says on this wise: when thou fastest, anoint thy Mat.
6.
head, and wash thy face. By which words he would we should avoid hypocrisy,
and not appear superstitious unto the world, but that we should so fast, that
our Father which sees in secret, may reward us openly. He makes no mention
here at all, either of his fourtye days, or of any kind of meat which we
should abstain from: Yea, we may see by his communication with the Scribes
and Pharisees, what his will was concerning eating of meats. For he says, That
which goes into the mouth of man Mat. 15.
defiles not the man, but that which comes from the heart, that defiles
the man: as evil thoughts, murder, adultrie, fornication, theft, false
witness, and slanders. Wherefore Cyrill upon these words of Christ, in S. John
his Gospel, Cyrill upon John. 13.
By this all men shall know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one an
other, For as much as the perfection of all virtue consists in love, let no
man think he can attain to any great thing by abstinence or fasting, or by
lying on the ground, or by any virtuous exercises else, unless he love his
brother: for he is not carried to the mark, but an other way. Such is Christ
his commandment concerning fast, not that he requires no abstinence from
meats at all. For as S. Luke testifteth he gives this warning to his
disciples, and it may well serve as a caveat for us: Take heed to Luke. 21.
your selves, least at any time your hearts be ouercharged with surfeting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least that day come on you suddenly,
which shall catch as in a snare, al them that dwell upon the earth, watch
therefore and pray alwais, that ye may avoid all these euilles. If Lent had
been so necessary for man's salvation, as the Bishops decrees make it, which
say it is a deadly and damnable sin to break it, certainly yt evangelists
would not have omitted it, no more then they did other things which they have
left us in their writings to follow. Christ in no place of ye the new testament
says, he yt will follow me, let him fast once in the year forty dais, but he
says: He that will follow Luke 9.
me, let him deny him self, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. If
any man will object that a Christian man his fast, is a part of his cross: then
I will answer, that his cross must be daily taken, and so by ye means a fast
of forty days will not serve, but he must fast every day, all the days of
his life. If any of you require a further or playner view of the matter, look
upon our Savior his sermons made to his Disciples in the mount. Wherein he
shows the happy and blessed state of all Christian and faith full believers,
and yet makes no mention of such happiness or beatitude, as is pretended our
Lent or our abstinence from flesh brings with it. Blessed are the poor in
Spirit, (says Mat. 5.
Christ) they that mourn, the meek, they that hunger and thirst for
righteousness, the merciful, the poor in heart, the peacemakers, they that
suffer persecution for righteousness sake. etc. In all which he says not, they
are blessed that fast forty days in Lent and abstain from flesh: nay, there
is not one word that can bring a man to any thought or imagination of it,
except he surmise that S. Luke make for him, because he says simply, Blessed
are they that hunger, Luke 6.
for they shall be satisfied. And so make this reason: fast makes a man hungry:
but the hungry are blessed. Therefore they that fast are more blessed, For full
resolution of which argument, let S. Luke be conferred with S. Matthew and S,
Luke his meaning will easily appear. For S. Matthew his place is a perfect
exposition of it, and yt which S. Luke touches briefly, S. Matthew entreats
more at large. The one says: Blessed are they that hunger now. The other
says: Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall
be satisfied, And this blessing only appertains to the elect of God, not to
every Turk, or Jew, or wicked person when he is hungry. But do you think that
the Apostles were either so ignorant, or so negligent, that neither in their
acts nor in their Epistles they would make mention of it? if it had been so
necessary to salvation, as many make it. The apostles, at what time certain
falls brethren went from Iewrie to Antioch, persuading ye Gentiles ye were
converted to ye faith, to be circumcised and live after Moses law, assembled
them selves together to consult what was best to be done in the matter. In
which consultation they decreed to send Paul and Barnabas, with other of the
brethren to Antioch with letters concerning their mind, which was not to
burden them with the importable yoke of Moses law, but to Act. 15.
will them to abstain from things offered up to images, and blood, and that that
is strangled, and from fornication. Now if our fast from flesh had been
necessary for the Christians, it had been an easy matter for the Apostles to
have set it down in their Epistles or letters, that as they should at all
times forbear the eating of those meats that were offered to Idols, from
blood. etc. So they should once in a year fast forty days from flesh
together, as in time of Lent. But the Apostles never dreamed of any such
superstition in fasting, much less intended to write of it. For they knew
miracles were not to be followed. And although they prescribe fasting, yet no
such fasting: but as from flesh, so from all kind of meats, as by their own
fast does appear. For S. Paul Act. 27.
himself with many that were in ship with him, fasted not one day or two, but
many, even fourteen without meat or drink: and he writes of his fasting to
the Corinthians, but of any such fast as this is, he speaks in no place.
Wherefore it can not be approved by the evangelists. For if we will ground it
upon Christ his fast, then must ours necessarily agree with Christ's in some
point, which in no point agree any more then an Egg and an Dister, neither in
time, place, nor in any other circumstance. As by collation of the one with the
other, will appear manifestly. For Christ was baptized the sixth of January,
and in the seventh day (as some me^ write) he was led of the holy Ghost into
the desert, (or as the Evangelist says) by and by, or immediately after his
baptism: and then he began his fast, which he continued for the space of forty
days and forty nights, unto the fifteenth or sixtenth day of February. About
what time for the most part our Lent begins, sometime before, and sometime
after: As this year it begins just about the time that Christ his fast
ended. Christ fasted immediately after his Baptism, when he was thirty years
old: we fast after our baptism indeed, but not before we be ten years old.
Christ fasted but once forty dais in thirty three years: But we presume to
Fast forty days every year, taking more upon us in one year, then we are
scarce able to perform in all our life. Christ fasted forty days from all
meats: and we abstain from no meats in the forty days, but only from flesh,
and think we follow Christ well to. Christ in forty days was not an hungered:
And ere we have fasted forty hours, our gorge gapeth for meat, and our
bellies think our throats be cut. In what point then does our fast agree with
Christ his fast? do you perceue any one thing agreeing? Yet this is man's
presumption to take that most upon him, that he is least able to do. What
reasons are in scripture in the old or new Testamentes, you may by these few
perceive. For I have alleged the most manifest places that make for the fast
of forty days, as Moses, Elias, and our Savior Christ. Now therefore seeing
it can not be grounded on scripture, I will come to the next part before
proposed: and that is how it was used of the fathers in the Primitive Church,
and how ours agrees with the same.

Concerning this part, to speak the truethe: the observation of Lent is no new
thing, not a yesterdayes bird, or invented of late years: but it has been
used even from the beginning of the Primative Church, not then commanded under
any pain to be observed of all men, but of man's voluntary accord without
precept. And yet they that first observed it, pretended not to follow Christ
his fast, neither was every man's devotion alike. For it was with them, as it
is in every congregation: some are more fervent in Prayer then other some, some
are more ready to fast then other, some more charitable toward the poor, and
more ready to releive their brethren, then other. All which and such like
exercises were not then, nor are not now to be enjoined upon penalties, but are
freely to be left to man's conscience to do them as his ability will suffer
him. For as a man is not commanded by God his word to give this day more then
that: So he is not commanded to fast one day more then an other, but to do
both a like, as occasion shall serve, and he shall be able to perform them.
And because some be poor, and have more need to receive then bestow, more
need to take alms then give alms, and some be troubled with infirmities and
diseases, and have more need of meat to strengthen them, then of abstinence to
humble them therefore ye holy ghost in the scripture provides well for them, and
exhort^th them to pray, not prescribing them any certain special time, but
at all times, and in all places. Whereby we may gather, how al these are
commanded, or not commanded but left to the conscience of Hist. trip. lib. 9
cap. 38.
the doers. Thus at the beginning, some men better disposed then others, to
show forth a good example of their religion and mortification, began to fast
fourtye days once in a year. Whose example moved many, that longed to have
the report of religious and godly men, on the same fashion, though not with
like devotion, to fast forty days also. For hipocrites can show as faier a
face sometimes as the godly in deed, and to the world they seem more glorious
oftentimes, that counterfeit the works of good men, then the saints of God
themselves. Well, at length the matter grew to this issu, and the number of
them that used this Fast did so multiply, that al they which either were not
able to do the like, or not so disposed, were accounted skant good Christians,
because they followed not the common example, and so to anoyd the slanderous
note of undevout persons, rather then of a ready and willing mind, gave their
privy consentes to confirm this example. All men thus consenting, some for
religion and Godliness sake, some of hypocrisy, some to avoid slander, there
lacked nothing but laws to ratefie and establish this common consent. And
those, the indiscreet and ungodly Bishops not long after constituted, rather to
get goods, then to promote godliness, and set forth the glory of God. For
without regard or respect of persons, they clogged and fettered men with their
leaden sawes, whose consciences they ought rather to have disburthened by Gods
word, and to have left it at liberty, as it was before. We read in Eusebius
that the Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
observation of Lent was left free for every man to fast, or not to fast, and
that it was not generally exercised of all men after one sort. For he
alleges Ireneus his words to confirm his mind. And the words be these.
There is a disputation touching the manner or kind of fasting. Some men
suppose that the Fast of Lent should be observed but for one day, other some
two days, Some more days, and many forty days accoumpting all the hours
both of day and night for a day, which variety of the o^seruation of Lent,
had not it beginning now first in our time, but long before us, of them (I
think) which did not simply observe at the beginning what was commanded them,
but fell either by negligence or by foolish ignorance, into an other custom.
And notwithstanding all these, though they vary among themselves in the
observation of Lent, yet they have been always at quietness, and now are at
peace with us, neither does the diversity of their fast break the agreement
of our faith. Whereby you may understand, that at the beginning there was no
commandment given to bind men to forty days fast, seeing some fasted but one
day, some two days, some more, and some forty, and yet (says he) they were
all quiet and at peace, in this variety of fast. I fear me, if we should vary
and differ so much in the observation of our Lent, (such an opinion of it is
fixed in the hearts of the ignorant) it would breed such discention, that we
should rather fall by the ears about it, then keep peace and charity. But the
use was godly, where no man was compelled to abstain from flesh, which loved
not fish. This testimony writes Ireneus unto Victorius the bishop of Rome.
You may read also in the tripartite history, that in the fasting days one man
observed one thing, an other, an other thing, For the Romans fast three weeks
before Easter, besides the sabbath day, and the Sunday. The Illyrians, and all
Greece, and Alexandria, fast six weeks, which time they call Lent. Some
begin their fast seven weeks before Easter, and some fast but only three
weeks. Which variety declares, that at the beginning men were not compelled,
but left to their own choice, either to fast or no. For until Gregorius time,
the people were not commanded this exercise of fasting, but were only
persuaded by the exhortations of the Bishops. And Eusebius affirms, that
Apollonius an Eusebius. lib 5. cap. 18.
ecclesiastical writer, reproved Montanus an heretic amongst other things,
for making laws for fasting. And in the decrees the fourth distinction, we
read that Telesphorus a Bishop of Rome, made laws concerning the Lent, and
put a difference between the fast of the Clergy, and of the Laity. For he
commanded that the Clergy should fast from Quinquagesima until Easter, which
is seven weeks, and that the Laity should fast but six weeks. Which thing
to be so, Ambrose in his book of sermons confirms, saying as it is in the
same distinction: Quadragesima has six weeks, to which Telesphorus the
Bishop added the seventh, and all this time they call Lent. Thus by these
writers you have heard, how Lent was used in the Primative Church. Now it
follows, that I declare, how it came unto us as it is, and how we agree with
the first use of it.

Before Gregorius Magnus came to the Popedom, there were no strait laws made
to bind man to ye supersticious observation of Lent. But in his days and
since, the most part of gross supersticio^ has crept into the church: and he
for his part, as he was very serious and diligent to invent and set up new
ceremonies, so he was very busy also in making laws for their continuance.
Amongst which, he made a law for the establishing of our fast of forty
days. And because manifest Scripture would not sit his mouth, nor serve his
purpose directly; he went wickedly about to prove it by probability,
alleging this place of scripture, Thou shall lay out the ^ith Deuteronomy. 14.
of all manner of fruits, that come forth of thy field year by year. Out of
which words, he has violently wrested and wrong this invention: That because
forty days he the tenth part of a year, and we be commanded to lay out the
tithes or tenthes of our yearly fruits, therefore we ought diligently to fast
them, and in no case, (except infirmities hinder us) to break them, but only
on sundays. For says he, from the first sunday of Lent until Easter, there
be six weeks which contain forty two days. From which if you take six
sundays then there are thirty six days remaining, which are the tenth part
of three hundred three score and five days, which make the whole year. Now
because that thirty six days do not fully answer to Christ his fast, they
devised amongst them to add the four days going before, to make up the just
number of forty. Wherein they put a monstrous great mystery, and say they
fast forty days for diverse causes. One cause is, that they might repent and
be sorry, for all that they have transgressed in the four Evangelists, and in the
ten commandments. For ten and four multiplied one with the other, makes
forty. Which reason, what force it has to persuade men to bind them selves to
fast forty days. I trust you perceive well enough, and I know the meanest
and simplest of you is able to answer it, otherwise I would labor more in
opening the subtletie of it. The second cause is, that they ought to conform
them selves to their head Christ, which fasted forty days. Unto this reason
I have answered sufficiently before, and I hope you are both satisfied and
confirmed therein. For this number which they say, has a mystery Genesis 7.
Deuteronomy. 8.
in it. They allege many places of scripture: as in Noah his time, all flesh
without the Arc was consumed in forty days: and God fed the children of
Israel in the desert with Man, forty years: and was in his mothers womb
forty weeks: He preached forty months: he lay in his grave forty hours,
and such like. What hidden mysteries these numbers carry in them, and how much
and how aptly they make for this purpose, I leave to your own judgments. The
drift of this my talk is, to prove unto you, that the fast of Lent is not,
nor has not been so free since Gregory's time, as it was before. For he made
it so straightly observed, that not only flesh, Eggs, and such meats were
forbidden, but also all manner of delicates, as may be seen by many places of
the decrees. Distin. 5. de con.
Now that their fast might seem like the fast that the Primitive Church
observed: for a while they eat nothing before night. But when such belly God
Papists, that could not fast as others had done before them, bare rule, they
invented a pretty policy if God would have permitted it, and suffered them to
have brought it to pass: But because they could not do what they would, they
did what they could: I mean when they could not remove night, they altered
the ^onted time of Euerning prayer, and said it before noone, that then they
might more lawfully cramme their paunches, and not prolong their fast unto the
Evening, as was accustomed: Or else without all doubt, the same fast should have
continued unto our time. Such were their delusions to make men think and
believe that their fast was grounded upon Gods word in Scripture. And thus
have they beguiled the simple in weightier matters, and which touch more
neerlie the foundation of our faith. Now that you perceive my meaning in these
aforesaid cases: that is, that our fast of Lent is neither grounded on the old
nor new Testamentes, and that we differ from the Primitive Church, making
necessity of it, whereas they made liberty: It shall not be needful for me to
travail any further in the matter. Yet because I have said many things,
which utterly deny our Lent fast to be grounded on God his word, and all that
have heard me be not like affectioned, amongst whom perchance some will rather
speak the worst, then the best of those things that they fancy not. I must
needs speak something in mine own defense, against evil and flaunderous
reports, which else would be bruited of this my sermon. I mean not (beloved) to
revoke any thing hitherto spoken. For all that I have said is so true, that I
durst be bold to publishe it, to the view of the world, and to maintain it
against all them that be adversaries unto it. If ye will not credit me in these
things, read the ancient and learned Doctor saint Augustine in his Epistles:
Where he says, The examples of saints (meaning Epist. 86. ad Casul. con. vrb.
Moses and Elias) are not of force to persuade the fast of any one day, much
less the fast of the Sabbath day. For of that days fast, he writes
purposedly against one Vrbicus. And concerning the new Testament, he says: I
perusing or calling to mind, that which is in the writings of the
Evangelists, or Apostles, yea and in the whole instrument. which we call the
new Testament, I see or perceive that fast is commanded: But upon what days
we ought to fast, and upon what we ought not to fast, I find it not decided,
either by any commandment of the Lord, or of the Apostles. This writes the
holy Doctor in that place. What shall we say then for the use or continuance
of it? Verily I will say for my discharge, as the said Doctor says in the
latter end of that Epistle, That if we will neither slander nor be slaundered,
let us follow the custom of the Church where we are. If it be not contrary to
Gods word, and yet the thing used be commendable. For although in his Epistle
to Ianuarius Epist. ad Iannati. 119.
he say, that Lent has his authority of Moses, Elias, and Christ: Yet might
he better have aunsweared by a rule that he gives after in the same Epistle:
That those things which are not against our faith, nor godly and good manners,
and have something to the exhortation of a godlyer life: wheresoever we see them
instituted, or know them to be iustituted, we should not only not improve, but
with praise and imitation follow them, if the infirmity of some do not so
hinder, that greater harm follow. In like manner say I, touching this fast of
Lent, that because it being used as the Fathers have used it, is not contrary
to any Article of our faith, nor godly conversation, notwithstanding it have no
express ground in scripture, may be well and commendable used, so long as the
King and the Counsel for the profit and commodity of this Realm,
pretending no holiness or religion in it, think it expedient. And in this
respect, where you fast forty days, for my part I would rather wish you to
fast forty days more then one less, it being so necessary sor our common
wealth, as it is. And therefore have I thus much spoken, to make it known unto
you, that it is not any commandment of God, but a politic and civil law
made for the wealth of the Realm: and is with like reverence and obedience to
be observed, as other laws made for our maintenance and preservation. Of
which obedience to the King and his laws, I would gladly entreat if time would
suffer me. But because it passes very fast away, I will return to my text.

It follows, That when Christ had fasted forty days and forty nights, he
was afterward hungry. As it is an evident token, that by his fast of forty
days and forty nights, and not to hunger, there is in him a power far
above the nature of man: So in that he hungered, it can not be denied but he was
man. And this is a meet place to prove the humanity of our Savior Christ,
against all those heretics that denied him to be man. For in that he hungered
afterward, he declared himself to be man.

Then came the tempter to him and said, if thou be the Son of God, make these
Stones bread.
THE subtle craft of the Devil, is plainly described in this, that the
Evangelist calls him the tempter. For so long as forty days did continue,
and Christ was not hungry, the Devil would not adventure to tempt him: But
when ye forty days were expired, and Christ waxed hungry, he took the
occasion and began to flatter. And whereas before he doubted to preuail, hearing
God call Christ his dearly beloved son: Yet now perceiving Christ to be
hungry, he began to be somewhat more confident, and yet doubted too. For these
two points seemed very absurd to him, that he should both be the son of
God, and be hungry. And therefore here he begins to be busy, and by reason
of his hunger to tempt and seduce him. Beginning with our savior, as he had
don with Eve, when he Gen 3.
perceived she was desirous of the apple forbidden. For when he perceived her
appetite provoked, he persuaded her to distrust and disobey Gods word which
threatened they should die the death, whenever they eat of the apple
forbidden. These subtle ways he uses with all afflicted consciences and
troubled minds, when they once begin to faint or doubt of God his promises. In
the desert when the children of Israel began to lack such sustenance, as they
had in Egypt, he moved them to grudge and murmr both against Moses and God.
In time of dearth and famine, which is a scourge of God, he endeavors to
make man think and believe that God has forgotten him, or else that God does
not regard him: otherwise, he bears them in hand, that God according to his
promise would bless all them which keep his will and commandments, with
corn, cattle, and all other things most plentifully: and not suffer them to
lack in time of need. And where he sees the good afflicted with ye bad, he
causes them to grudge and murmr against God in such time of visitation. But
if ye require examples of Satan's suggestions, you may easily remember, how of
late days, in this realm he procured us to murmr, grudge, and with open
mouth to blaspheme God in the time of our scarscitie and poverty, sent amongst
us for the trial of our faith, and perfection. And because we have not such
abundance of victuals and other things wherewith this realm has heretofore
been most plentifully blessed: the devil moves us not to impute it unto ye
true cause, which is, our abominable living: but unto a false fained cause,
which is, the extirpation of hypocrisy and superstition, the rooting out of
all Idolatry, I mean, to speak plainly, the suppression and overthrow of
abbeys, Monasteries, and all other false religious and rebellious houses. For
thus says the ungodly: we had never good world, since the abbeys, and such
other houses were pulled down, with such blasphemous words against God, as it
grieves me to repeat. The devil perceiving us more bent to serve our belly
then God, and that we lack part of those things which we inioyed abundantly
before, so tempts our gready guts, impatient of any lack, that he makes us
to blaspheme God, and to slander his word. He moves us not to consider how
much better it is to serve the living Lord in the desert with a little, then
to be captive under the proud hand of Pharaoh, and to continue in bondage and
slavery by the flesh pots of Egypt, But if we know how much liberty from
sin, is to be preferred before the tyranny of Pharaoh, or the devil, we
would not grudge, but be thankful for our deliverance. When Abbeis stood,
and Monasteries, or houses of religion, or misrule rather, flourished, we were
under Pharaoh, the prince of darkness, we were Captives to the servitude of
sin, and bondslaues to ignorance: with all the wealth that we had: and now
being set free and at liberty from the same, shall we grudge at our God,
because Satan tempts us? He takes an occasion of us, or else he would not be
so busy. He tempted Eve, when he saw her delighted Ciril. lib. 9. cap. 16. in
Ioh.
with the apple: And amongst us he sees necessity, and that we are not
content with it, and therefore would have us murmr and grudge. In like sort
dealt he with Christ, taking occasion of his hunger, saying: If thou be the
Son of God, etc. As though he would have said to Christ: Perchance thou
think thy self to be the Son of God, because that when thou wast
Baptized of Ihon, thou heardst a voice say: This is my dearly beloved son,
in whom I am well pleased. Yet thou may be deceived: For who can think or
believe that God will suffer his son so to be destitute of all comfort, to
live in the desert, to be in company with beasts, and to lack man's help and
succor in time of need? Now thou art hungry, what will thou eat? Here is no
bread: go to, if thou be Gods son as thou persuadest thy self, by the voice
which thou heardest, linger no longer in hope, provide for thy self seeing God
does not. Here is nothing to eat, and thou art fair from the City: here be
stones, change them into bread, it is an easy thing for thee to do, being Gods
son. Think thou God loves thee, that lets thee hunger so long? Thou
might quickly perceive, that thou art deceived being so sore hungry: and
yet God sends thee nothing to satisfy thy desire. Thus the deuell labored not
so much to tempt Christ by bidding him satisfy his hunger, as to make him
discredit God his word and that he was not Gods beloved, as before he had
hard. Likewise persuaded he our forefather not to believe Gods word, which was
a far greater matter then the eating of the forbidden fruit. He knows
right well, that the promises of God are set forth for the salvation of man,
and that our health depends only thereupon. And therefore he studieth to
make us let slip our hold, and the hope that we have therein. Let us then
watch and be diligent, least our faith grounded on the infallible truth of
Gods word, by his craft be weakened and perverted. For if he prevail so much
with us, as to seduce us from the verity of Gods holy word, and to yield our
selves over as slaves to his wicked temptations: Lord what shall become of us?
will not horror be besore our eyes continually to trouble and terrify us?
Shall we not live in darkness and in the shadow of death, and stand even at
the brim of the pit of desperation? O then (dearly beloved) what need had we
to be circumspect, and to take heed of satan's suggestions. For he goes about
continually either by him self or his ministers, even like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist in faith, as S. Peter bids you. Pet.
5.
For though he pretend never so fair a countenance, and seem to give you
never so good council, though he counterfeit the similitude of an Angel of
light, yet he will be satan and a lier still, and will seek your confusion.
Resist him therefore steadfast in faith. The wicked members of Satan tempted
our savior Christ, when he hanged on the cross for man's rebe^ption, and
reviled the mighty God with contumelious words: If he be the Son of God, let
him come down, and we will believe him: And if God will have him, let him save
him, with many like words of detestable wickedness, and horrible blasphemy.
And thus he daily tempts the Godly, to bring them to infidelity. Against the
which I beseech you mark Christ his answer, it will be much to our
consolation and comfort. It is written: Man lives not by bread only, but by
every ward that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Which testimony or
answer is taken out of the old Testament, where Moses spoke unto Israel on
this wise. Thou shall remember all the Deuteronomy. 8.
way, which the Lord thy God has br^ght thee, this forty years in the
des^rt, that he might chasten thee and prove thee, to know what was in thine
heart, whether thou would keep his commandments or no. Therefore he
humbled thee and made thee hungry, and fed thee with Man, which neither thou
nor thy fathers knew of, to make thee know that man must not live by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord must a
man live. The evangelist following the seventy interpreters adds, every
word (which is not in the Ebrew text) to signify the virtue and power of God
his word, to be of as great efficacy and strength to nourish man, as other
creatures appointed for the same. For as by his word all creatures and things
were made and created: so, by and from the same word have all creatures their
virtue and strength for man's food and nourishment. And therefore our savior
Christ brings scripture to confirm, that albeit customably and ordinarily
man lives by his meat and drink, yet God both has, and can show his power
other ways. He fed the children of Israel in the desert, not with accustomed
meats as at other times, but with a strange manner of bread, and such as none
of them knew. Seeing then, God so maruailously fedd his people in time past in
the desert, and that not for forty days, but for forty years space,
should he not be thought able to feed his dearly beloved son in the desert
now also, unless he transubstantiat stones into bread? If ^e be able to feed
man forty years without bread, is he not able to feed his dearly beloved
son forty days without bread? Nay (bearly beloved) God is not bound to
means, but sometimes he deal^th with means, sometimes without, and sometimes
against all means, and as it pleases the Lord so come all things to pass.
For the Lord God is omnipotent. What needs bread then, when God can send him
heavenly food from above? Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord must man live. Our savior thus
with scripture confounds the temptation of the devil, that thereby we may
learn to do the same, without the consent either of custom or council. For
this was the Devil his intent, to make Christ think that because man lives
commonly by bread and drink, therefore Christ could not possibly live any
other ways. But he was far deceived: for Christ easily convinced him. I
could wish that all they, which either are tempted, or asked a question,
would use to answer by scripture yea or no, and not be so much addicted and
sworn to customs and councels. For they consider not what injury they do to
the majesty of God, that prefer man's doctrine before the holy scripture.
Christ might have answered otherwise if it had pleased him, but he aunsweared
by scripture, to teach us to adhere and stick to scripture, as to a sure
ancker in all questions proposed. For he might have said, why temptest thou
me? As though I could not live without bread. Can not I that give life to
others, and am life it self, live without bread, and provide sufficiently for
my self without thy council? Thou have no charge over me, and therefore care
not for me: for I can care for my self? Thus might our savior have cut him
off, if he had thought it convenient, and have rebuked him sharp lie: but he
replied with the scripture, and that with such gentleness, that the devil was
more ready and more bold to tempt him now, then before. For it follows.

Then the Devil took him up into the h^ly City, and set him on a pinnacle of
the Temple* etc.
THE devil perceiving that his former temptation prevailed not, inuenteth an
other. For when he could not bring Christ to infidelity before, now he
trveth him with vain glory. It is wonderful to see the fetches and shyfts
that satan uses, and yet never any without some probalitie. For it may seem
that he grounds his devises upon the practices of such m^n, as thinking they
be in Gods favor, to win praise and commendation, dare run headlong into
dangers on their own accord without any necessity at all. This consideration
he may seem to have had, when he take^h and sets our Savior on the pinnacle
of the temple at Jerusalem, reasoning with him self (as it were) on this
manner: For as much as my first purpose is frustrate, I will attempt the matter
an other way. I will try whether vain glory will allure him to show some
miracle at Jerusalem, where the multitude that look and behold him, may
magnify and speak gloriously of him. There is no man in this desert to look
upon him, but at Ierusa^em there is great prease of people, and therefore I
will lead him thither, and set him on ye pinnacle, and will him, if he be
desirous of fame or glory, to throw him self down headlong in the sight of
all the people, that he may be had in reputation amongst them, and perchance
be made their king and chief governor. But to bring this poll^cie to some
effect, he repeateth the same words that he had used before: If thou be the
son of God. etc. Seeing thou stickest so much to the words that thou heardest
at thy baptism, and that thou trustest so surely in Gods providence, that thou will not seek for thy self in extreme poverty and hunger, caring for nothing
to refreshe thy feeble body withal: it were good for thee, if thou would be
accounted as thou take upon thee to be, to show some strange feat to the
people, to settle and persuade them in the truth of the matter. And therefore
if thou would follow mine advise, I would give thee council to go to
Jerusalem, that famous and populous City, where to confirm unto all the people
which shall behold thee with a miracle, that thou art Gods son, the savior of
the world, the Messiah that they have long looked for, thou shall cast down thy
self headlong from the pinnacle where I will set thee. Thou need not to
doubt or fear any danger, the peril is foreseen, and a remedy prepared. For
God, whose sonns thou think thou art, has given his Angels charge over
thee, They shall take thee in their hands, least at any time thou should
dash thy foot against a stone. Is not this a goodly pretensed council, to set
a man in the mast of vainglory with such colored words? What a strong
persuasion was this? Tell me beloved, what Orator or counsailor of them all,
can handle his matter more cunningly? Surely it is so baited with sweet and
entising words, that it is impossible for any, but the son and saints of
God, and such as God miraculously delivers, to avoid him, and escape his
temptation. For infinite no doubt is the number of them, that both in time
past, and at this present, Satan has enchaunted and enflamed with vaineglory:
and I beseech God there be none amongst us. Amen. Here you may note with me
the devil his expertnes in scripture, who disdaining to take so sudden a
repulse at Christ's hand, alleges one place of scripture for an other. The
place that he cites is in David's psalms, where the Prophet Psalm. 91.
setting forth the happy state and felicity of them, that are under Gods
protection and providence, among other comfortable verses, has these two,
which satan in this place infers against Christ, saying as it is written:
He shall give his angels charge over thee for to keep thee in all thy ways They
shall be are thee in their hands, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone.
Which words declare, in what assurance they live that put their whole trust in
Gods defense, and what fatherly care the lord has over his servant that
co^miteth them, as kings and great men do their heirs to faithful nourses,
unto the protection of his angels, that they fall not into danger. But the
devil both depraueth and abuses the true sense and meaning of this place. For
one part he omitteth which is in the Prophet, and all the rest he applies to
false promises, and wicked persuasions. For notwithstanding the faithful and
elect of God be kept of angels in all their ways, yet are they not beside or
against their ways. The ways of man you know are common and ordinary: and
therefore it were a madd point for a man, because angels are his overseers, to
take upon him to swim over the sea, when he may sail over by ship, or for
Christ to have cast him self headlong from the pinnacle, when he might come
down by some other ordinary way. For this had bin to tempt God his father, and
to suspect him as it were, that he would not be as good as his word. Take heed
therefore how ye trust Satan whosoever ye are, yea though he bring scripture
with him. For though he apply the scripture never so truly (which he seldom
does) yet al tends to your utter destruction. Hence learn likewise, to out
your whole affiaunce in the providence of God, and yet always use the ordinary
means that he has appointed you. For otherwise you show your selves not so
much to trust in him, as to tempt him, as the devil did our savior. To reason
here how the devil took Christ, whether bodily or by imagination, as some
have don, because it is a question more curious then fruitful, I think it
better to pass it over, then to search it out. Let us for our parts learn
herely that the devil is busy in tempting all them that be placed in
authority. For like as that city or castle that is set and builded on the top
of an hill, is most open and object to all stormy tempests and blasts of
weather: so they that be advanced and set (as it were) on the pinnacle or top of
office, honor, or dignity, are most egged on by the devil to cast down them
selves through ambition, vain glory, covetousness, and such like offenses. All
of us travail with too much love of our selves, and that y^ devil espies well
enough, or else he would not be so near our elbowes at all times as he is.
But we minister him matter to work on still, which until we cease to do, he
will never leave off his temptations. For Gods sake therefore remember your
selves betime, and reform these things presently, that God may have his glory,
Gods ministers joy, and the devil shame by your good conversation. Now let us
hear what answer Christ made to this scripture alleged of the devil.

Again it is written: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.
BEcause the devil alleged scripture our savior replieth with scripture
again: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. As though he should say: thou
perswadest me to cast my self down backward, and to have no care what I do,
Because God appoints his angels to keep me. I believe certainly that the
angels will bear me in their hands, that I hurt not my foot against a stone.
I know that God has deputed them to keep me, yet will I not follow thy
wicked council, for I have thy meaning at my fingers ends. Thou would have
me to tempt God my father as thou made the fathers in the desert, with
miracles notnecessary. But I know their reward, and how they sped, I will take
heed by their harms. I am a man, and I will follow man's ways, and not cast my
self headlong into danger where I need not. Here is a way to come up, I will
come down the same way. What need I to tempt my God, or try whether his angels
will preserve me, having y^ same way to descend, that I ascended? I am
forbidden to do it, and every man else, and therefore I will not. For it is
written: Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. These words of our savior
are written in ye fifth book of Moses* where, Deuteronomy. 6.
after that Moses had given out the ten commandments to the people, as it is
in the chapter next before, and had exhorted them to fear the true God of
Israel, by renewing his promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their
forefathers, he forbids them idolatry, and gives them this charge with
all: Ye shall not tempt the L^rde your God, as ye did tempt him in the place of
temptation. Which was, when they came from the desert of sin, and by the Lords
appointment camped at Rephidim: where finding no water to drink, they began to
chide with Moses, and asked him: Why have thou brought us out of Egypt, to kill
us, our children, and our cattle with thirst, And they tempted the Lord
saying, Is the lord among us, or no? As if they had said: thou have brought us
into this desert, where nothing ca^ be found for us to drink. We are very
thirsty, and more like to pine a way for lack of water, then to live, unless
we depart, and yet thou make us abide here still. Could not thou have
suffered us to tarry in Egypt, where we had plenty both of meat and drink: but
thou must lead us hither, where we want both? We can not think, ye God is
among us. For if he were, would he suffer us, (being his own people) to be
thus afflicted for lack of drink? Thus did they repine and gruge against
Moses: and therefore he called the p^ac^ Massa or Meruba, the place of
temptation or strife. And to this point the devil brings man in his
adversity and affliction to think that God is displeased and angry with him,
and that the promises of God appertain not unto him: by that means to make him
dis^aire of him self, and his own temptations may take place. As though God
could no^ be among them, whom he afflicts, nor favor them, whom he
visits. S. Po^le using the words of Solomon, bids the Prou. 3. Heb. 12.
H^brewes be of an other mind: Despise not the chastening of the Lord,
neither faint when thou art rebuked of ^im: For whom the lord lou^th, he
chastueth: and be scourges every son that he rece^u^t^. As God then might be
and was among them, though he punished the Israelites with lack of drink, so
that it was unnecessary to try it by any miracle: so it was vnneed^ull for
Christ to prove him self the son of God, or to try whether angels would
preserve him, to cast him self down headlong from the pinnacle. For that had
been a flat temptation. So ye you see how aptly Christ alleged this place.
Thou sh(...) not tempt the Lord thy God. Out of which words what l^sso^s may
profitably be gathered. Though I have partly showed you before: yet mark
again I beseech you, for a good thing can not be told too often. We learn how
dangerous a thing it is to tempt, and to try God, and to trust to extraordinary
helps, when ordinary means are appointed for us. This is a grievous temptation,
and yet used too commonly of very many in this our realm of England. For there
be some idle belly God persons, that because Christ bids us not to be
careful for our living, but to look on the byrds of the air, that live and
labor not, take occasion to loyter at our doors, and utterly neglect all honest
labor, whereby they might live like other men. But experience proves, and we
see it with our eyes, that such persons for the most part fall to robbing and
steling, and so being unworthy to live y^ will not labor for a due reward of
their life misled, are hanged to death. And there be some, that because the
letter kills, and knowledge makes proud, neglect ordinary study: And because
Christ when he sends his disciples to preach, promises to give them in the
same hour what they should speak, think it not needful to study the
scriptures. If we should look that the holy Ghost should only give us
knowledge by a miracle of inspiration, and co^temn the ^sual means, whereby all
men commonly attain to knowledge, both in Gods word, and in all other
sciences, were not this to tempt God as the devil tempted Christ? In vain then
were the tongues, books, interpreters, readers, and all the instruments that
God has appointed. For albeit the spirit of God opens every man's heart
before he can understand, yet he gives knowledge together with his means: As
the Eunuch Act. 8.
of Ethiopia, who understanding not what he read, before God used the ministry
of Philip to instruct him, does most plainly declare. And S. Augustine in his
fourth book de doctrina christiana Aug. de doct Chri. cap. 16
says: That if this reason were good, a man should not pray at al, because
God knows what we have need of before we pray. Neither Math. 6.
should the husband man till or sow his ground, because neither he that
planteth nor 1. Cor. 3.
he that waters is any thing, but God bat gives the increase. But thus you
may see how ready the wicked and ungodly always are to tempt God, as satan
did Christ. Again, in that Christ answeareth the devil his allegation of
scripture by the scripture, we may learn to interpret one place of scripture
by an other, when they seem to repugne. But surely if the deuil^ had been so
saucy with Christ, as many are in our day^s, which will admit no sense, but
such as pleases them: he might have replied against Christ, and said: It is no
temptation of God, to cast thy self down: for God has charged his angels to
keep thee in all thy ways. So that whether thou go down, or cast thy self
down, thou shall be safe. Thus might the devil have reasoned, following the
literal sense of the words But he was a more gentle disputer, and not so
impudent in sticking to the letter as the Papists of our days are. He knew by
Christ's answer that he had mistaken it, and therefore ceased to contend any
longer about that text, but tried him an other way, as ensues.

The D^uil took him up again unto an exceeding high mountain, and showed him
all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them. etc.
THis is the third temptation after this Evangelist, but after Luk^ it is Luke
4.
the second Whereby you may see they labored not so much of the order and
manner, as of the matter it self. They both agree of three temptations, though
they vary in the order of them. But the devil desirous to bring his purpose
about, I know not through what ho^chauing the ^oile before, is not ashamed to
assay the matter again: And therefore he uses a more easy way. He willed not
Christ here to deny God directly, nor to work any miracle, but he went about
to make him in love with yt world, with wealth and riches, whereby many men many
times decline from God unawares. Neither does the devil trifle in the matter,
but he offers even the largest and the welthiest kingdoms of the world, and
to inflame him, as he thought the more, he shows them, and all the glory of
the^ in a vision. Mark the subtletie of the ^ipter. He bids not Christ fall
down and worship him on ye plain ground in the desert, but he takes him up
into an exceedi^g high moun^aine, and shows him all the coasts and kingdoms
of the world, in the brauest and gloriest manner that he could, saying: Is not
this a pleasant kingdom? Is not this a welthy realm? Is not this a glorious
empire? O how happy and fortunate are those rulers, yt are in so high estate?
What a delicious life might he lead y^ were Lord over two or three of the^?
Might not y^ man triumph? Al these kingdoms which thou see are in my hand to
dispose and beslow where and how I list. This I give to this man, and that to
an other: but if thou will do as I would have thee, and be ruled by me, I will
set thee above them all. For it is meet y^ the son of God should have larger
and greater kingdoms, then any worldly prince And therefore I am contented to
give thee, not only al these kingdoms which thou see, but also the power and
glory of them. Thou shall not buy them: thou shall pay neither gold nor silver
for the^: I will ask but reason of thee, ye thou fall down before me, in token
of obedience and homage and worship me. I require but little: yet do this, and
I will perform^ my promise. The world would think this a maruailous temptation:
here are as sweet words as can be. For who is more bound to his lord, then he
that pays no rents for his lands? Our landlords will not let out their
grounds so good cheap. But th^se words as ye tempter uses the^, are most
false and full of blasphemous I dolatry. For though the devil, the ruler of
darkness, be called the prince of ye world, yet he is not so called, as though
he had kingdoms or empires at commandment, (for the land is the lords, and in
his hands are the ends of the world) but the devil is called the prince of the
world, because he rules and bears the chief struck over the children of
unbelief, which sometimes in scripture are called the world. So that he lied
falsely, in saying all the kingdoms of y^ world were his, and it was a
blasphemous pr^sumptio^ against God, to motion Christ Jesus to fall down and
worship him. Who as he has been a blasphemer of God and his works from the
beginning: so he continues in these our days, persuading the world no less
to fall down and worship him now, then he did heretofore. For I know not how
but sure it is so, and my conscience will not suffer me to conceal it, Satan
has taken many of our ministers, and carried the^ up to an exceeding high
mountain, and showed them all the spiritual liuinges almost in yt world,
Byshopricks, Deanries, Prehends, Personages, and vicarages, and has told them:
this is a welthy Byshoprick, this is a rich Deanrie, this is a fat benefice,
they are all in my gift, I am ye patron of them: fall down therefore before me
and worship me, and if one will not content you, I will give you pluralites. Let
n^ma^ think these things to be forged or sucked out of mine own fingers. For
writers make mention, yt the devil in deed gave the Bishopric of Rome once,
and since yt time it was never good. And is he not so able now, think you, to
give a poor benefice, as he was then to give the faitest bishopric in the
world? Let no man be offended with me for speaking yt, which al ye world by
experience sees to be true. For where these ministers should be preachers,
they are tongue tied: and that comes not without great temptation. For thus he
reasons with the^: speak no more of justification: meddle no more with
controversies: ru^ no man on the sore: let every man live as he list without
reprehensio^ or admonion and you shall lack no living. Do you think that satan
has not thus sworn many to silence? I have hard of diverse ye at the beginning
have been very godly preachers: but after they have bin once chooked up with
many liuinges, they have had such a bone in their throats, as the devil would
have it, ye they would seldem open their mouth to speak any more. I beseech God
give us grace to withstand and avoid this his flattring and sweet temptation
Once not long since I spoke aganst such in a place where I was, and after my
sermon was ended, it was told me, that some called me a young man, and said it
was but a pang of heat. and that I gaped for a living: which obtained I would
be as quiet as other men. I am a young man still, and I am not sorry for it, but
I thank my God for it, who I trust will, at his pleasure, turn both my youth
and mine old age to his glory For S. Paul has taught me not to contemn youth.
^ut where they said it was but a pang, ye was not true: for I was as
circumspect in it as I could, and I have now the same mind and judgment y^ I
had then, though a little more confirmed by the scriptures and ancient doctors:
and to say I gaped for a living, it is untrue. For I might have had since yt
time a rich and worshipful living, if I would have taken it: but if to take a
benefice should make me tongtied, I had rather have none whilst I lived. Yet
what I should do I cannot tell, I will not presume too much of mine own
strength, seeing more godly and better learned men seduced by the flattery of
y^ devil and the world. But as I am now minded, I had rather go on begging from
door to door, and live in extrem poverty then without diligent preaching to my
flock live never so magnifice^tly. I envy no ma^s living though it were three
times so much, but ye men take upon the^ more then either they are able or
willing to discharge, it is great sin, and seems to proceed from satan his
temptation. For undoubtedly men take not so many benefices now, because they
ca^ or mean to discharge them: but because one will not suffice to maintain
them lordly and wealthily, nor to get goods together for many years: The
gospel of long time through the tyranny of the Romish Antichrist, by whom
pluralities first came, has been made a cloak for covetousness. But I pray God
pull of the cloak, that every man may appear in his plain coat. Of these
wicked Mammonites, S. Amb. de dig. s. cer. cap. 5.
Ambrose in his book de dignitate sacerdot all says: Through money he has
g^tten honor not due unto him, and has lost God in his inward man: flesh has
taken the dignity, and the soul has lost her honesty. The flesh being maid,
is become mistres over the soul, and the soul which was miastres is made
servant to the flesh. Flesh has rule over the people, and the soul serves
the Devil: to his flesh he has gotten a benefice, and loss to his soul.
What avails it such a one to win all the worlds, and to endamage his own
soul? I appeal to your consciences, to which I speak rather then to your
ears: Do you think England is not combred with many such as S. Ambrose
speaks off? Let no man take my words so generally as though I secluded none
from this company. For I mean only these covetous dumb dogs, or shadows of
ministers: not the true ministers them selves, or the good pastors of their
flock. Of whom because the number is small, and the harvest very great, let us
desire the lord daily more and more to increase it, that his people be not
starued for lack of food, but strengthened in the faith to the glory of his
name. Thus have ye heard the third temptation of Satan, against Christ.

Then said Jesus unto him, Avoid satan: For it is written, Thou shall worship
the lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
BEfore, when the devil went about to make Christ discredit God in his
promises, Christ answered him mildly: but now when the devil will prefer
himself before God, our savior rebuk^th him sharply, and commands him to
avoid: but with authority of scripture, as he did before. To teach us, that
scripture should be our shield, our defense and comfort in all temptation. This
scripture is taken out of the fifth book of Moses called Deutronomie, where
Moses speaks to ye Deu. 6. and 10
Israelites, with like words to ye same effect: Thou shall fear the lord thy
G^d, and serve him. By this place our savior conuinceth the devil, and bids
him avoid. And here, if I had lesure, I might speak of the difference, which
the school men make between latria, which is the true and lively worship of
God, and dulia, which is honest obedience due to man, not forbidden by this
scripture Only it forbids, to give ye inward worship of the mind, yt
appertains only to the almighty God, unto any creature besides. So y^ these
words of God alleged by our savior, import thus much, that because God had don
such maruailous works, I wondrous miracles for the deliverance of his people
out of Egypt, to ye astonishment not only of ye Egyptians, but of al yt world,
nostrength nor power being able to stand or prevail against his might:
therefore they ought to fear the lord, and serve him. As though he should say:
seeing I have showed such power upon Pharaoh and his host in working wonders
for thy sake, O Israel, and have delivered thee so mercifully from all thy
miseries, me thinks I may by right claim thy service you shall fear me as a
lord of magnificent strength and power, as an omnipote^t God, y^ made all
things, you shall serve and worship me, as a merciful, long suffering God: thou
shall praise me, inu^^ate me, depend on me, as thy helper, thy governor thy
protector: and that only, thou shall seek for health, help, aid, succor and
all of me and besides me, of none. If God then be the maker of all things, the
giver of all things, the Lord of all things, ye made heaven, earth, ye sea and
all that is therein, if he be giver of life, liberty, health, wealth and
whatsoever, and have al things under his hand: did not ye devil lie falsely, in
saying all the kingdoms of y^ world were his, and at his disposition? did not yt
deu^l work high treason against Gods majesty, by tempting the Lord of life to
fall down before him and worship him, and so to have committed beastly and
blasphemous Idolatry? But auaunt Sa^an, says our savior, thy words preuail
not, and thy temptations can take no place: for it is written, Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God, but him only shall thou serve.

Whereby briefly you may understand, what the true worship of God is, and how
much against Gods glory is ye worshipping of saints: whereof, if I had not been
tedious to you already, I would have spoken more at large. But I will hasten
toward an end.

Then the devil left him.
HEre S. James his saying is proved true: resist the devil and be will flee
from Iam. 4.
you. By which example we may learn, ye though the godly be continually
tempted and assaulted, yet if they stand consta^tly, and shrink not, they may
be sure of the victory. For, God is faithful, which will not suffer them to be
tempted above their 1. Cor. 10.
strength as S. Paul says, and is able (as S. Pet^r writes) to deliver the
Godly from 2. Pet. 2.
temptation. ^o^ was tempted, but he over came: the Apostles were sundry and
many ways tempted, but they triumphed always, The patriarks and Prophets have
be^e many times tempted, but they never fainted. And here you see our savior
was tempted, but he overthrew ye devil and utterly confounded him, even with a
word of his mouth. This has our savior been content to do for us, submitting
himself to Satan's temptation, to declare unto us, y^ whilste we be in this
life we are in danger of temptation also but yet if we abide it steadfastly
without starting, we shall be sure to win the victory, as he has done before
us. Let no man therefore either think it strange or be dismayed if he be
tempted. For can y^ members speed better then the head? Or need the members
fear their trial, when the head has subdued the tempter? If the head had
failed, there had been some cause why the members might fear: but since it is
otherwise, who is so faint hearted that can doubt of the victory? Wherefore
(dearly beloved) since it is so, that Satan's temptations can not touch us,
if we persist in the faith, nor preuail against us, if like true servants and
followers of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ; we resist him by the
scriptures: Let us exercise our selves in the word of the Lord day and night,
and let us not yield either at the first, second, or third brunt, but let us
tarry the Lords leisure, and in the end we may be certain even to weary the
devil, and make him feign to forsake us.

And behold, the Angels came and ministered unto him.
AFter these forty days and forty nights were expired, and satan had left
him, our savior began to hun^er: and God sent his angels to minister such
things as he lacked, unto him. This is a i^ table pattern of cons^anc^e and
patience: He grudged at nothing, he ^^strusied not Gods providence, but took
all patiently that God sent: And therefore God sent his angels to comfort and
relieve him. And thus may the Children of God persuade themselves, that God
will provide for them in all their extreemeties, if they put their trust in
him. He fed the holy Prophet Elias by ravens, and also by ^. King. 17. and 19.
an angel. He fed Daniel in the Lions den. God never forgets nor
forsakes them that trust faithfully in him. For as David says: I have been
young, Psalm. 37.
and now am old: yet did I never s^e a just man forsaken, nor his seed seeking
h^s bread. But a^asse, our faith is so weak, and our charity so cold, our
patience so small, and our sturdy st^maches so big, that we will rather tempt
our God, spoil our neigbours, murmr and fight aganst God, if he once for our
trial se^m to lay his heavy hand on us, the (...)there to wait on his leisure,
or to (...) upon him, for his favor. But I bese^ ^ the O merciful father, so to
stre^gthe^ us against our enemy, that we may have a valiant conquest over the
devil, and all his socitie, and that we may have the ministry of the
Angelical company, as here had our Savior and redeemer Jesus Christ: to whom
with the father and the holy ghost be all honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.

