Ouidius Naso HIS REMEDY OF LOVE. Translated and Entitled to the Youth of
England.

Plautus in Trinummo. -- Mill modis Amor
Ignorandu'st, procul adhibendus est, atque abstinendus.
Nam qui in Amore precipitauit, peius perit, quam si saxe saliat.
VIR EST SIT VULNERE VERITAS



LONDON Printed by T. C. for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreet, at the sign of the Bible. 1600.

TO HIS SOMEtimes Tutor, at all times dearest friend, M. I. better reward for
his deserts. etc.
I Have lived to be the cause of thy wrong; I may live to do thee right; the
first by casualtie, contrary to my desire, the latter voluntarily, according to
thy desert. Accept therefore these few lines, whatsoever they are, and
howsoever attirde, yet as true witnesses of my everlasting love. If they seem
vnpollisht (as I fear) hide them, for thou gave them their beginning: If
possessing any thing of worth or pleasure, (as yet I hope) joy in it, and enjoy
it, for thou were the first moouer of my Muses circular conceits, which had
never beginning but by thee, and never shall end, but in thee: and whatsoever
they do, all shall be for thee. Farewell.

Times truest child. F. L.

The first book of Ouidius Naso, entitled The Remedy of Love.
1
WHen Love first read the title os this book,
Wars, wars, against me now are waged (que he)
O dayne thy Poet of a milder look,
Condemn him not, that from offense is free.
Who ever was Loves vowed Ancient,
Bearing his cullers with a true intent.
2
Not I Tydides, by whose cruel spear
Thy mother wounded, on Mars foming steeds
Fled into heaven, full of careful fear,
Others sometime, in bitter fancy bleeds.
But I still burn: If thou the question move
What now I do? I answer also Love.
3
Yea, I have taught how thou might be obtaind,
So learning reason, how to bridle force:
Yet not to thee, nor to mine Arts, containd
In papers, prove I foe without remorce.
Ne yet my Muse does labor to untwist,
Her old spun web, that does of Love consist.
4
He that has built his fancy to his mind,
He happy loves, and happy live he still;
Still fill thy sails with that thrice prosperous wind;
But if thou be subjected to the will
Of any tyrant, or unworthy maid,
Least that thou perish, search our Arts for aid.
5
Why, why should any basely hang and die?
To give an instance of their desperate love:
Or, why should any with such cruelty,
By selfe-inflicted wounds their souls remove?
So thou that only do in peace delight,
Shall gain suspicion of a murtherous wight.
6
If then he be, who least he scapes the snare;
And leaves to love, must also leave to live;
O let him in due time thereof beware,
O let him leave to love, and leave him give.
Thus love shall be esteemed lives dearest friend,
Not cursed author of a desperate end.
7
Thou art a child, nor ought childhood fits,
But games, sports, plays, then game, sport, play;
Such gentler rule, becomes such childish wits:
Thy childish wit, that no high things must way.
Thou in thy wars may naked arrows use,
Yet such as shall no deadly wounds infuse.
8.
Let old Stepfathers war with sword and spear,
And in a Sea of blood win victory:
Use thou thy mothers fight, that yields no fear,
Nor for the sons loss makes the parent cry.
Let doors be broken in thy nocturne Iarres,
And be adornd with garlands midst those wars.
9.
Let men and maidens take their sports by stealth,
Let maidens use their words with cunning art:
Now let them kindly send their Lovers health,
And suddenly with chiding wound their heart.
And barring fast the doors, shut out their love,
Where let them wail, and yet no pity move.
10.
These wars shall please thy gentle humor best,
In these tears shall thou sport, not causd by death;
Death shall not see thy Torches at her feast,
Nor morning funerals thy fires breath.
Thus having said, Love shook his golden wings,
And bid me end the work my pen begins.
11.
Come then sick youth unto my sacred skill,
Whose love has fallen cross unto your mind:
Learn how to remedy that pleasing ill,
Of him that taught you your own harms to find.
For in that selfsame hand your help is found,
Whence first ye did receive your careful wound.
12
So the earth which yields us herbs of souerain grace
Does nourish weeds, of virtue pestilent;
The burning nettle chooses often her place,
Next to the Rose, that yields so sweet a sent.
Achilles Spear, that wounded his stern foe,
Restord him health, and curde the grievous blow.
13.
Now what prescriptions we do give to men,
Maids think them spoken unto you likewise:
To both parts we give weapons, use them then
With secret Art, and with discretion wise.
Of which if ought you find that seems not fit,
Know in examples many things are writ.
14
And profitable is our Argument,
To quench that secret and consuming flame:
To free thy mind from sin and ill intent,
To loose those bands that drew thee into shame.
Phillis had lived had I her Tutor been,
That three times thice walked path she often had seen.
15.
Nor Dido dying from her stately Tower,
Should have beheld the Trojans thence to fly:
Sorrow should not have had so strong a power,
To cause the mother do her own to dye.
Tereus though Philomela might him please,
Should not through sin a graundsiers title seize.
16.
Give me Pasiphae, she shall cease to Love
The filthy shape of that strange monstrous beast,
Bring Phaedra forth, and I will soon remove
Her deep incestuous lust, that never ceast.
Liude Paris, Hellen he should not desire,
Nor should the Greeks waste Pergamus with fire.
17.
Had wicked Scylla read our argument,
Nisus should not have lost his fatal hair;
I Will teach you to assuage the greedy bent
Of burning lust, and make the weather fair:
I Will steare your Ship aright in seas of love,
And from each rock I will you safely move.
18.
Ovid was to be read with studious care,
When first your love began with fruit to grow,
Ovid is to be read, in your ill fare,
When first your love with deep disdain shall flow.
I do profess to gain your liberty,
Then follow me, revenge your misery.
19.
Be present o thou Prophet, Appollinem medecin and Poese^s Deus invocat.
Poets praise,
Phisicks first finder out, and nurse alone;
Crown me professing both, with lasting bays,
For both are under thy protection.
Rain silver shewers of skill into my breast,
That I may show each wretch the way to rest.
20.
Whiles well thou may, and ere that secret war
Be thoroughly kindled in thy troubled mind,
If thou repent, o run not on too far,
Retire, ere greater cause of grief thou find.
Tread down the starting seeds of springing woe,
And turn thy Steed, ere he untamed grow.
21.
Delay gives strength, time ripes the greenest grape,
And makes corn stiff, that was a weak spring-weed:
The greatest tree that farthest spreads his sape,
Was first a wand, or but a little seed.
Then might it be thrown down, drawn up, soon broke,
Now stands it stiff, and conquers every stroke.
22.
Consider first, where thou do thrall thy heart,
To whom thou vowest thy service and thy love,
And if the burden cause thine inward smart
From out the yoke with speed thy neck remove:
Stop the beginning, for Physic comes too late,
When time has drawn the wound to desperate state.
23.
Defer not therefore to the coming hour,
For he that at the present is unapt,
Shall find delay diminish still his power,
Until at length he wholly be intrapt.
Lovers excuses seek of long delay,
And ever fittest deemes the following day.
24.
But each small minute gives occasion
Of deeper thraldom, Fancy ties by slight:
See how by many streams collection,
There does arise a flood of wondrous might.
Drops multiplied do grow to running springs,
And springs united forth a River brings.
25.
If that thou had foreseen how great a sin,
Myrrha, thy wicked lust did power on thee,
Thou never should have hid thy shameful chin
Within the bark of that still weeping tree.
Often have I seen an easy soon curde ill
By times process, surpass the Leachmans skill.
26.
But for we still delight to taste the fruits
Of melting pleasure, and bewitching Love,
We woo our selves with long protracting suites,
And daily promise from it to remove:
Mean while the flame we feed within us still,
For deeper roots the weed and tree of ill.
27.
But if the time of this first cure be past,
And long-fed love does lode thy fainting heart,
A work of greater moment now is cast,
Upon my promise, and of deeper Art.
Yet will I not cast off the sick decaide,
Though late it be ere he implores my aid.
28.
Paeantius son should have redeemd his health,
By cutting off that first corrupted part,
Though after many years times gone by stealth,
He ending warfare was recurde by Art.
I that but now did lance the wound in haste,
Now wish thou slowly slying time to waste.
29.
Yet seek to quench those flames, that newly burn,
With those, whose fury past do now decline:
Give Raynes to running rage, and do not turn
Her race, and she will kill her self with time.
Each violence at first is wondrons strong,
And hardly yields passage unto wrong.
30.
He is a fool that may the River pass
By small declining unto either side:
And yet will strive against the stream, alas,
And ever be far from his purpose wide.
Me thinks I see a mind impatient,
That never subject was to Arts true bent.
31.
Contemn this Counsel as of slender skill,
And scorn the admonisher as fond and vain:
But then will I apply me to his will,
And undertake my promisde task again.
When as his wounds will bear a touch, a strain,
And eke himself beliue I do not feign.
32.
Who would forbid the mother for to weep
Upon the dead hearse of her dearest son:
This is no time that she should patience keep,
This is no place to say she must have done:
When with her tears her mind is satisfied,
By words her grief may best be mollified.
33.
By time must medicines be measured forth,
For in fit time wines profit and delight:
But out of season they are little worth,
And brings the body to eternal night.
Moreover, unto flax thou addest fire,
Forbidding vice, contraring his desire.
34.
In unfit times, by ill means, or strange place,
Nor ever shall thou so thy Patient cure:
When then thou see thy self in better case,
Able or hard prescriptions to endure,
See first thou fly from sloathful Idleness,
And still be doing somewhat more or less.
35.
Sloth draws thee on, and leads thee unto Love,
Sloth the chief cause, and food of pleasing ill:
Shake off but Sloth, and idle ease remove,
Blind Cupid shall his arrows vainly spill:
His bow shall break, and to the ground shall fall,
Yea and his fiery brands extinguish all.
36.
Even as the Palm Tree loves the Rivers sight,
And as the Alder joys the Waters side,
As Reeds in slymie Marshes delight,
So Love does evermore with sloth abide.
Love hates all busy brains as deadly ill:
If then thou will not love, be busy still.
37.
Languor, and Feebleness, and sloathful play,
Time drowned in Wine, and lost in drowsy sleep,
Steals from the mind her wonted strength and stay,
Whiles all her spirits dead, no watch do keep:
Then in slips Traitor Love her enemy,
And does deprive her of her liberty.
38.
Love evermore a shadow is to Sloth,
Attending on her always as her Page,
To be imployde with business its loath:
It hates all care, at trouble still does rage.
Add then unto thy mind some chief affair,
Still to preserve from Loves infectious air.
39.
There are the seats of Judgments Justice see:
There are the Laws go learn to plead for truth;
Thou have some friend in trouble, set him free:
Thus shall thou ever fly fond Fancies ruth.
Or clad thy self in steel and shining arms,
Pleasure shall fly, and never work thy harms.
40.
Behold the Parthian, who slying fights,
Now Captiuate the cause of our new joys,
Conquer thou Cupids sensual delights:
As then the Parthian have to his annoy;
So in thy double conquest may thou wear
Two Trophies, and unto thy Gods them bear.
41.
As soon as Venus from the Aeolian Spear
Receiude her wound, she left the bloody field,
She left the care of that unconstant fear
Unto her Lover, by his strength to wield:
Some ask why frail Aegistus burnd in sin?
The cause is plain, Sloth did his virtue win.
42.
Diverse were slack, and many proved slow,
Some came but late, before proud Troyes wall,
To which the youth of Greece did daily go,
Concluding their long toil with Illions fall.
Would he the exercise of rough wars daine,
His nature could not suffer any pain.
43.
Would he have spent his speech to plead for right,
Greece wanted matter for his vehement tongue,
All that he could, he did even to his might,
Least naught he should to Love he tuned his song:
So came that child to undertake some pain,
So still he does a childish boy remain.
44.
The Country also does delight the mind,
With pleasant studies of sweet husbandry:
This care the greeuoust cares and griefs does bind,
Quickly forgets and makes all sorrow fly.
Yoke then thy Oxen well taught to obey,
And furrow up the earth in good array.
45.
Bury therein thy quick and lively seed,
Which thy fat fields in time shall multiply
Yielding thee treble gains with happy speed,
Behold the Apple bough how it does ply.
And stoop with store of fruit that does abound,
Scarce able to sustain them from the ground.
46.
Mark well the gentle music of each spring,
Whiles through the Peebles it does make her way:
See how thy Lambs with tender teeth do wring,
And choysely crop the sweetest herbs away.
The gentle Lambs that always heard together,
Lovers of company, loving one another.
47.
Lo how the Goats unto the Rocks do speed,
Their empty dugs for their young kids to fill:
Attend the music of the Shepherds Reed,
How his true Curre awaites to do his will.
O how the woods resound on every part,
Of kyne that still bewail their Calves depart.
48.
How swarms of Bees from bitter smoke do fly,
Easing the crooked Pillars of their neast:
How Autumn yields fruits abundantly,
And Summer welcomes Ceres to his feast.
The Spring with flowers guilds the pleasant field,
And Winters Frost with fire we beguilde.
49.
The Husbandman in time convenient,
Gathers his Grape, and thence draws pleasant Wine.
The Gardner has his slips in order bent,
Refines the earth, and plots it with his line.
Even thou may plant, and graffe, and set, and sow,
Cause water many miles through pipes to flow,
50.
Is it fit time to graffe? make then one Tree,
Adopt an other, and preserve his life,
There let him stand still covered and still free,
From th'iniuries of time, and weathers strife:
Thy mind thus busied with this pleasant care,
Love disappointed from thee flies fair.
51.
Or give thy mind to Huntings sweet delight,
For stately Dian that pursues in chase,
And conquers each untamed beast in fight,
Gives Venus still foul over throws and base.
Follow the fearful heart with skillful hound,
Or with thy net encompasse him around.
52.
Add diverse terrors to the flying heart,
And with thy Spear transfixe the cruel Bore,
So thou all weary at the days depart,
Shall soundly sleep till Sun the day restore.
No idle thoughts shall rule thy fantasy,
Nor pleasing dream thy weaker sense shall try.
53.
More gentle is that pleasant exercise,
To foul with shaft, or closely hidden Net,
Nor do these sports of less reward despise,
For also they do Cupids treason let:
Or hide thy compast Hook with pleasing bait,
Deceiving Fish that do for food awaite.
54.
With these, and other such, still feed thy mind,
For by thy self thy self must be deceived,
Till thoughts of love quite vanquished thou find;
Thou only (let me herein be beliud)
Though dearest love implore thee still to stay,
Absent thy self by iorneyes every day.
55.
I know the sweet remembrance of thy love,
(Which newly thou forsak'st will cause thee weep,)
And stay thy foot that it no step remove,
Altring the purpose, which thou mindst to keep.
But by how much thou shall desire to stay,
So much the faster see thou spur away.
56.
Be patient, and learn by daily use,
To suffer these afflictions of sick minds.
Wish not for rain, fit matter of excuse,
Or Sabboths that from iorneyes do us bind,
Nor Allium, that most unlucky thing,
Which evermore with it mischance does bring.
57.
Think not how many thousands thou have past,
But look how many miles do yet remain:
Nor with delay study the time to waste,
To stay near home do no occasion find:
Number thou not the days, the weeks the hours,
Nor look thou back unto thine homebred bowers.
58.
But fly forth still and with the Parthian fight,
Who finds best safety in retyring still,
Some one will call my precepts hard, and right,
He says, yea I subscribe unto his will.
But for to keep our health in perfect state,
Much must we suffer of a desperate fate.
59.
Often have I tasted Sirups of sharp touch,
Against my will, to cure my malady:
But when my appetite desired much,
All sorts of meats they did to me deny.
To free thy body from disease and pain,
Both sword, and fire, and what not will thou daine?
60.
If that in greatest thirst and moistures lack,
Thou must not touch one drop of shewring rain,
Then to redeem thy mind from sorrows wrack:
Will thou refuse to suffer any pain?
Since it so far exceeds this humane mold
Of base borne flesh unto corruption sold.
61.
But yet the hardest entrance of our Art,
And greatest labor that furmounts the rest,
Is to endure, and bear the first times smart:
Behold how hard it is, to make th'young beast,
First brook the yoke, or back an untamed lade,
And yet in time they are most gentle made.
62.
But thou art loath to leave thy Countries bound,
Thy fathers cottage, and his dwelling place,
Yet shall thou go beyond thy native ground,
Though to return thou turnest still thy face:
Thou faignest fair excuse, not Countries lack,
But thy fair Mistress Love does call thee back.
63.
Well being past great comfort to thy mind,
Thy journey, fellows, and strange fields will bring,
Yet think not this sufficient, but beware,
Least thou return, ere Love has taken her wing,
Still absent be, and still unknown paths tread,
Till every spark of Love lie cold and dead.
64.
For if thou do return cured but in part,
Love will again renew his civil war,
And every day will still augment thy smart,
Since thou returnest to thy grief from far.
But let him eat the herbs of Thessalie,
That Magic thinks will cure his Malady.
65.
Yet ancient is that damned Socerie:
But wise Appollo, Poets chiefest guide,
Does point us out for better means to try:
And certain helps, on which we must abide.
Then by my will no Magic shall be used,
No charming verse which many have abusde.
66.
No ghost shall be commanded to arise
Out of the grave, where it should sleep in rest:
No witch, whose lims by age grown weatherwise,
Shall cause the earth rend open her wide breast.
Corn shall not shift from field to field at all,
Nor shall the Sun grow dim, or wax ^^d pall.
67.
As erst it did, shall Romes fair River pay,
He wonted tribute to the Midland Sea*
And still shall Phoebe course her wonted way,
Drawn by her milkwhite steeds, that swiftest be.
No Wisard reading backward shall vncharme,
Or living Sulphur drive away Loves harm.
68.
What remedy did Phasis flowers yield
Circe, when thou would not from Cholcos god*
What helped the weeds of all the Persian field
When as the winds Ulysses sails did blow.
Each guile thou did attempt to make him stay,
A blast of wind yet wasted him away.
69.
Yea thou did practice through thy deepest art,
To quench those flames that did molest thy mind,
Yet did they evermore procure thy smart,
And unto deeper sorrow did thee bind.
Thou that could change men into diverse kind
Could not reuerse the passions of thy mind.
70.
And when he would depart, thou thought to stay
Him with sweet words, with which thou fild'st his ear,
I cannot hope, thou said, but humbly pray,
To make me your sole spouse, which much I fear:
Yet am I worthy it, though that thou skorne,
Daughter to Phoebus of a goddess borne.
71.
O yet delay thy journey some small space,
Short stay for great requital I require,
With favor may I ask a smaller grace:
See how the Sea contraries thy desire,
With troubled Billows, which should cause thee fear:
Stay then for wind that will thee safely bear.
72.
What cause have thou to hasten thus thy flight?
Here stands no adverse Troy to trouble thee:
No foe to call thee forth to bloody fight,
But love and peace dwells here, from danger free.
Yet only I from them have taken this wound,
Which unto thee subjected has this ground.
73.
This and much more in vain her tongue did say,
But wise Ulysses always stopped his ear;
And hoysing his brave sails, fled fast away,
The wind her love, and words away does bear.
Yet still her torments did the more increase,
Yet still of cursed spells she seeks ease.
74.
But all her magic, and spright binding art,
Diminisht nothing of her furious love,
Ne ought did take from her consuming smart,
Ne ought her helish torments did remove;
Ye then that fondly love, and faigne would leave,
In magic spells do not at all believe.
75.
But if great cause of business thee retain
Within the City, where thy mistress dwells,
Follow my counsel freedom to regaine,
Which for the Cities presence I will tell.
He woonne his freedom and did quite him well,
That once escapte unworthy loves low Hell.
76.
This thou desire him, I wonder at,
And of my medicines he shall not need:
To thee alone my Rules I will relate,
Whose inward wounds do never cease to bleed,
Who love, and would faigne that knot unbind,
And know not how, and seekst the way to find.
77.
Recount unto thy self each subtle Art,
Each wicked Act of thine unworthy Love:
Unfold before thine eyes each loss, each smart,
Which by her means and for her thou do prove:
This has she stolen, and that thus must you say,
Yet this or that will not her stealing stay.
78.
But even household goods, and gods and all,
She quite has fold with covetous desire:
Lo thus protesting she does Record call
Her faith, ye falsifies it, O the stout liar,
How often has she shut me out her gate?
There suffering me my sorrows to relate.
79.
Yea she applies her self to strangers last,
And scorn my love, o most unhappy I,
Unto her base apprentise she does trust,
Those secrets which to me she does deny:
The often remembrance of such cruel wrong*
Will root thy fancy up though grounded strong.
80.
Present them often then to thy sick mind,
For hence the spring shall rise of happy hate,
O would thou could seem eloquent, to bind
More strong persuasions to thy sickly state.
81.
Lately I set my fancy on a maid,
That fully answered not to my desire,
And therefore strived my fancy to have staide,
A poor Physician to so great a fire:
Yet the remembrance of her vilder parts,
Releast the fury of tormenting smarts.
82.
How ill and excellent vnshapt her thigh,
Yet to confess the truth, it was not so:
How foul her arms, thus would I say and sigh,
Yet if they were not thus, I well did know:
How short of stature, yet her stature tall;
Thus envy loathsomeness to me did call.
83.
Good things do neighbor bad, and sit them by,
Often virtue thus of vice does bear that blame,
Faigne to thy self, and tell thy self a ly,
And cloth her virtues with foul vices shame.
Thus shall thou change thy mind with subtle art,
And wear away thy still encombring smart.
84.
If she be fat, that she is swollen say:
If brown, then tawny like the Affricke Moore:
If slender, lean, meger, and worn away,
If courtly, wanton, worst of worst before:
If modest, strange, as fitteth woman-head,
Say she is rusticke, clownish, and ill bred.
85.
Yea whatsoever gift, (for none has all)
Thy mistress wants, entreat her still to use:
If that her voice be ill, or cunning small,
Importune her to sing, never let her choose:
If that she cannot move her feet in measure,
To see her dance, still let it be thy pleasure.
86.
Is she of small discourse, and slender wit?
Converse with her, that she may wound thine ear,
To instruments has she not learned to fit
Her fingers? then desire a Lute to hear.
Has she an ill uncomely and strange gate?
Cause her to walk both early forth and late.
87.
Has she a swelling, and down hanging breast?
Desire thou still to see her fair white skin;
Are her teeth black or wants she of the best?
Relate some merry jest that she may grinne:
Is she compassionate? tell then some woeful case,
So shall she show thee Anticks in her face.
88.
Early desire to steal of her a sight,
Ere she has clothed her with her best attire:
We are seduced by vain errors might,
And gay apparel kindles our desire.
Then is she shrouded all in stone and gold,
And of her self, least part her self does hold.
89.
Often seek for whom thou love in company,
And great resort of other goodly dames:
By this device new loves beguiles thine eye,
And draws thy first desire to farther blame:
Come all unthought of sudden in the place,
So shall she be unarmed in weaker case.
90.
So shall thou disappoint her in her guile,
See her defects, and cool thy burning love;
Yet trust not to this rule, which other while
Fallacious and dangerous does prove:
For careless hauiour that does banish art,
Has mighty force, to hold a wounded heart.
91.
Yet whiles with curious skill she paintes her face,
Be not ashamed, but press thou to her sight:
Then shall thou find her boxes in the place,
Wherein her beauty lies, and borrowed light.
Then shall thou see her body all begreas'd
With ointments that has thee so greatly pleased.
92.
Of savor worse then Phineus tables were,
Whose filthiness a plague to him was sent,
With these my stomach could not often bear,
But evermore to ease it self was bent;
But now even what we use in midst of Love,
I will thee teach that passion to remove.
93.
For by all means we must this fire expel;
But I do shame even needful things to show:
Yet thou by those which I to thee shall tell,
May well conceive the rest, and easy know.
For some dispraise my rimes to envy bent,
And say my Muse is shameless impudent.
94.
Yet since I see so many that I please,
That all the world my sporting lines receive,
Let this, or that man envy at my ease,
Dispraise my pen, and me of praise bereave:
Detracting envy Homers writ has blamed
Who ere thou be, he Zoilus has named.
95.
Yea sacriligious tongues has torn thy verse,
By whose good guide the Troyans gaind this land:
The loftiest things Jove's thunderbolts do perse;
And winds encounter what does highest stand.
So envy ever aymeth at the best,
And will not give them any time to rest.
96
But thou, who ere thou be, that thus my Muse
So much offendes through looser liberty,
If in thy wrath discretion thou can use,
Then to each subject, his apt verse apply:
Stout wars deserve a Homer to display
Their battles, conflicts, and their good array.
97
What place may there be found for sweet delight,
For Revels, Triumphs, Loves and merriment;
Matters of State, Tragedians do report,
For lofty Styles becomes such drirement.
No humble muse must there sound his still horn,
There buskins, but no base shoes must be worn.
98
The Iambicke freely taunts his enemy,
Whether his last foot slow, or swift does prove,
The legicke sings of love, and archerie,
With shafts, such as from lovers eyes do roue,
And with her lover wantonly does play,
And sweetly speak, and plead, implore and pray.
99
Achilles honor shines not in the verse
Of Cyrens Muse, where sports do better prove,
And stately Homer, thou must not rehearse,
Cydippe, young Acontius dearest love:
Who can endure Andromache should play,
The sports of Thais, and her wanton lay?
100.
Who acts Thais, wrongs Andromache,
One person cannot fit him to both parts:
But I will play that part, and Thais be,
Our sports are libertines, free are our hearts:
Since then all shame we banish from our verse,
Thais is mine, I will her part rehearse.
101.
If then my lines do fit a wantons lay,
Gnawe thine own gall, fond envy hold thy peace,
For we have won the lasting crown of bay,
And cleerd the blame wherein we did displease:
Break envy, break in thine own foul despite,
For we have got renown, and glory bright.
102.
For still with honor, fames desire does grow;
But at the foot of this high climing hill,
My weary Steeds do pant and faintly go;
As much to us by their according will:
Our Elegies confess to us they owe,
As from his work to Virgill praise does flow.
FINIS.
An exposition of the Poetical examples, mentioned in this first Book of the
Remedy of Love.
TYDIDES, That is Diomedes, the son of Tydeus and Deiphiles, he was the most
strong and valiant of all the Greeks, except Achilles and Ajax: he wounded
Venus in the right hand; whiles she defended Aeneas, yea, and also Mars, the
God of war, her Paramour.

Achilles, in a conflict wounded Telephus king of Missia, who denied passage to
the Grecians through his kingdom, bound for the siege of Troy, of which when
no remedy could be found, he received from an Oracle, that he could not
otherwise be healed, but by the same Spear wherewith he was wounded: Afterward
therefore being reconciled to Achillis, he obtained that he might make an
emplaster of the rust thereof, and so was restored to his perfect health.

Phillis, Lycurgus daughter, who entertained Demophoon, returning from the
Trojan war, admitted him to her bed: with condition, that as soon as he had
ordered his home-affayres, he should return again and marry her. But he being
detained by urgent occasions, and staying longer then the appointed time, she
hanged her self, and gave an end to her love and life, in one instant.

Dido. How she after Aeneas departed from her, fayning a sacrifice, burned her
self, it is too vulgar to be repeated.

Trojans. A people of Asia.

Medea. The daughter of Aeta king of Cholcos, she entertained Jason in his
expeditio^ for the Golden fleece, which she taught him how to win, and after
sled away with him, married him, and bare unto him two sons. Afterward she
was forsaken by him, who took unto his second wife, Creusa the daughter of
Creon, King of Corinth, which Medea took so grievously, that artificially
enclosing fire in a Forcet, sent it unto her for a token: with which, she and
the Palace before day was burnt up. Herewith Jason being enflamed, ran forth
to be revenged on her, but she seeing him coming, took up her two sons
which he begat on her, and in their fathers sight murdered them, by cutting
their throats, and then through her witchcraft she was taken up into the
Clouds, and so went unto Athens.

Tereus. Philomela.
Tereus having ravished Philomela, (who went to see her sister Progne whom he
had married) that his sin might not be disclosed he cut off her tongue, and
imprisoned her, but being a cunning work woman, she wrote the whole process of
her injury in an handkercheffe, and sent it to her sister: who in revenge
thereof, killed her own son Itys, and gave his flesh boiled and roasted unto
her husband to eat: unto whom, after he had well fed thereon, she presented the
childs head: whereat he being angry, followed his wife to have slain her, but
she was turned into a Nightingale, and he into that bird which the Latins call
Vpupa, and some falsely translate, a Lapwing.

Pasiphae, The wife of Mirios, who being in love with a Bull, by the help of
Dedalus her Bawd, found out a way how she might lie with him: yea she
conceived and brought out a Minotaure, which was half a maa^ and half a Bull:
which being enclosed in the Labyrinth, was after slain by Theseus. Phaedra,
Wife to Theseus, who falsely accused Hippolitus his son of whoredom, because
he would not satisfy her lust, in lying with her, and so wrought his death.

He is not I think, that has not heard how Paris king Priamus his son of
Troy, stole Hellen from Greece, how the Graecians, which are a people of
Europe, in revenge, after 10. years siege, destroyed Troy, called also by the
name of Pergamus: wherefore we will ease our margeant of this tedious note.

Scylla, daughter to Nisus, who falling in love with Minos her fahers enemy,
cut off his golden hair, and presented him therewith, thinking by this great
argument of her love, to win his grace: but he, though by her means he
overcame her father, hated so much her impiety, that he utterly refused her,
and she, throwing her self into the sea, at his departure, to swim after
him, was turned into the bird Ciris, a Lark. Ovid.

Prophet, that is Apollo, whom Poets do make their God: hence are they crowned
with Laurel, which tree is consecrated to him: he also for his skill in the
natures of herbs, is recorded for the inuenter or finder out of that most
necessary Art of Physic.

Myrrha, the daughter of Cinarus king of Cyprus, who desiring her fathers
company, by the device of her Nurse, enjoyed her filthy lust: and was
delivered of Adonis: which when her father knew, he would have slain her, but
she flying from his fury, was turned into a tree of that name, which evermore
weepeth as it were, and lamenteth her impiety.

Paeantius son, that is Philoctetes, the companion of Hercules, who after his
death enjoyed his arrows, and being drawn to the Trojan war, by the fall of
one of them was wounded in his foot, which grew to be almost incureable: for
which cause he was left behind in the I Will of Lemnos, and after by Ulysses was
fetched unto Troy, which being sacked, he went into Calabria, where Machaon
restored him to health.

Cupid, the son of Venus, Loves archer. etc.

Parthian, a people of Asia, in ancient times the most earnest enemies of the
Romans, they excelled in shooting, which they so vesd in flight, that they more
endamaged their foes thereby, then by any handy conflict, and yet defended
themselves also. Of which Iustine lib. 41. Fugam sepe simulant, vt incautiores
aduersus vulnera insequentes habeant. and paulo post. Plerumque in ipso ardore
certamini praelia deserunt, and paulo post pugnam and fugam repetunt, and cum
maxim vicisse te putes tunc tibi discrimen subeundum est.

Aeolion spear, Diomedes spear, look this before.

Aegistus, the son of Thiestis by Pelopeia, he murdered Agamemnon, being
aided by his wicked wife Clytemnestia, whom he used in whoredom and beastly
lust, and was after slain himself by Orestes, Agamemnons son.

Ceres, the Inuentrix of plowing and tilling, sowing corn, and making bread.

Diana, daughter to Jupiter and Latona, and brother to Apollo by the same
birth, she, for the love of virginity, fled the company of men, and inhabited
the woods, dedelighting her self with hunting, whence she is named: The Lady
and goddess of Hunters.

Allium, by this herb which we call garlic, antiquity has noted
hieroglifically evil luck.

Thessalie, a country in Greece, first named Aemonia; whither Medea fled with
Jason, after that by her help he had overcome the Dragon: in it there were
great store of witches, and it abounds with herbs, which they think most
needful for their mischievous practices.

Romes fair river Tiber, so named from Tiberius, king of Albania, who was
drowned therein, as Liuie our Poet, fast. 2. records. These wonders which
Ovid here recites, are but the effects of coniuration, the sense of all is but
this: as if he had said: Seek not to expel love by spelles, coniuration or
witchcraft, because they have no force to remove it.

That part of the Ocean which enters at Hercules Pillars and Midland sea,
goes East to Tripolis, and then North to Constantinople. And the Ocean is all
that sea which compasses the now 4. and according to some, the 6. known
continents or parts of the earth.

Phoebe, the same whom they call Diana, Cynthia and Luna, of us, the Moon,
sister to Phoebus the Sun, from whom she has her name: some faigne that her
chariot is drawn with white horses, some with fishes.

Phasis, whiles Ulysses in his wanderings through the Midland seas eschewed the
rough waters Lestrigoniae, he was by tempest driven unto Colchos, where Circe
inhabited, a great and skillful Sorceresse, who being in love with him,
restored his companions into their former shapes of men, being now transformed
into Hogs. But when notwithstanding he would needs depart and leave her, she
did what she could by charms and incantations to stay him, but they proved all
vain, and she utterly forsaken. Phasis is a great river in that country and
Town also, situate on that river in Colchos a country of Asia, full of
herbs which they use in their witchcraftes: as Hor. Car. l. 2. od.
witnesses. Ille and venena Colchica and quicquid vsquam concipitur nefas
tractauit.

In this country, Circe and Medea two notable witches inhabited,

Daughter to Phoebus of a goddess borne. For Circe was daughter to the Son,
by the Nymph Perses.

Affricke, one of the 4. parts of the world. etc.

Phineus, the son of Agenor king of Arcadia, according to some, he married
Sthenobea, on whom he begat Orythrus and Crambus, whom by the persuasion of
their mother in Law Harpalicae his second wife, he caused to be made blind: for
which impiety, himself first lost his sight, then was vexed by the filthy
birds or monsters called Harpeiae: and lastly was slain by Hercules. After he
found his unfortunate sons wandering on the desolate mountains, and
understood their miseries.

Homer, whose divine poesy is admired of all men, but Zoilus a Sophister, who
lived in the time of Ptolomie, to whom he dedicated his work, wrote against
him, and expected some great reward for his labor. But in long and vain
expectation he grew very penurious, insomuch that he procured one to beg
somewhat of the king for his relief: to whom Ptol. answered, That he wondered,
that whereas Homer had sustained the lives of so many thousands, so long before
dead, he being more learned then Homer, should be so beggarly, as not able to
maintain himself. From him all other Detractors are commonly called Zoili.

Jove's thunderbolt, the lightning, etc.

Iambicke, a most railing and bitter kind of verse, etc.

Elegies, another sort of verse, and used in an other fashion, for being most
mild and pleasant, is used in the Cantoes, Sonnets, and complaints of lovers
and disports.

Cyrens muse, Chalimachus borne in Cyrene, the most excellent writer of Elegies
amongst the Grecians: he wrote a notable work of the beginnings and first
institution of sacrifices and holy days, not unlike unto our Poets books De
fastis, but he entitled his Aetia.

Acontius and Cydippe, a pleasant Comicke fiction. Acontius a young man of Coa,
who going unto Delos, to the sacrifice of Diana, fell in love with Cydippe, but
despayring thereof, because he neither equalled her in birth or riches, he
wrote on an apple, at the least to testify his love, these two verses.

Iuro tibi sacrae per mystica sacra Dianae

Me tibi venturum comitem, sponsumque futurum.

Which she finding and reading, unwitting who it was that wrote it, rashly
swore to marry him: And afterward as often as she should have bin married to
any other, she fell into some grievous sickness, so that the matter being
opened to her parents, they were contented in the end to make this marriage.

Andromache, the wife of Hector, whom after Pyrrhus carried into Greece, and
married to Hellen, another of Priams children.

Thais, a notable strumpet, borne in Alexandria, that to increase her gaynes,
went unto Athens, whose name the comicke Poet Maenander, celebrated in his
verse.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
I Thought it not amiss (courteous Reader) to adioyne unto this small labor
of mine, these two following Epistles, of which one is translated out of Ovid,
the other is an answer thereunto. Which chiefly I did, least the sweet
exercises of that honorable and thrice renowned Sapho of our times, should even
the least of them, be lost in the obscure night of sad silence, and Oblivion:
and then, especially the subject, and the matter so fitly agreeing and
participating with the former, I could not but couple them together in all
points else, a most unequal match. Wherein I hope the greatest fault that I
have committed, is, but that it has not the first place. Yet take this old
Proverb with a right application for my just excuse.

All is well that ends well. And so end I. Reader farewell.
Dido to Aeneas.
Aeneas would from Dido part,
But Dido not content,
She moved him first with words,
And then this Letter sent.
SO at Meanders streams,
when fates bids life be gone:
The snow white Swan on mossie grass,
outstretched tunes his moan.
Not hoping thee to move,
this suite I undertake,
The heavens at the motion fround
when first we did it make:
But fame of due desert,
my body and my mind
So lewdly lost; the loss is light,
to loose these words of wind.
Resolved thou art to go,
and woeful Dido leave:
Those winds shall blow thy faith away
that shall thy sails vpheaue.
Resolved thy ships at once,
and promise to untie,
To seek Italian Realms, which yet
thou know not where they lie.
Naught moved, with Carthage new,
nor walls that growing be,
Nor that there was committed all
the sovereignty to thee.
Thou leauest things full made,
thou seek new to make,
To search about for Lands unfound,
Land found thou do forsake.
But grant the land thou find,
to thee who will it give?
Why will the soil to strangers yield,
whereon themselves do live?
Thou must an other Love,
An other Dido find:
And which again thou may undo,
An other promise bind.
When will thou into form
a Town like Carthage bring:
And from thy Palace top behold,
thy subjects as their King?
If all things else succeed,
and nothing cross thy mind:
What place will ever yield to thee
a wife to thee so kind?
For I like waxen torch
in Sulphur rold do burn:
Each day, each night Aeneas makes
unto my thoughts return.
Unthankful he indeed,
And deaf to what I give:
And such, as were I not a fool,
I would without him live.
Yet though his thoughts be ill,
I hate him not therefore:
Complain I do of his vntroath,
complaining Love therefore.
Thy daughter Venus spare,
thy brother hard embrace:
O brother Love, within thy Camp,
point him a Soldiers place.
Or me, who first began,
for Love I not disdain,
Let him but only subject yield,
to this my careful pain.
But ah I am beguilde,
his bostes are bosted lies:
Of mothers line: from mothers kind,
in all his course he flies.
Thee some vnwieldie stone,
or Rockey Mountains bred:
Or oaks which on high rocks do grow,
or beasts by Raven fed.
Or Sea with winds turmoild,
as now thou see it sho:
Yet thitherward art ready bent,
in spite of waves to go.
What mean thou? winter lets,
let winters suite prevail:
See with what force the Eastern blasts
the rolling waves assail.
Since winds and waters do,
then thou more justice show,
Let me, what more to thee I would,
to wind and waters owe.
I am not so much worth,
which sure thou do not think.
That while on Seas from me thou flyest,
thy self in Seas should shrink.
Thou precious hatred bear,
and pearst exceeding hie:
If so thou may of me be rid,
thou count it cheap to die.
The winds their windy force
anon will lay aside:
And Triton will with Azure steeds
On leueld waters glide.
Now (would the gods) as they
so thou could changed be:
Thou will unless thy hardness do
far pass the hardest tree.
What if of furious Seas
the force thou did not know?
Which tried so often and found so ill,
yet still to sea wilt go.
And though they serve at will,
when thou do Anchors way:
Yet in so long a voyage, chance
no few mischaunces may.
And sure to cross the Seas,
small fruit faith-breakers gain:
That place on false deceivers does
inflict their falsehoods pain.
But most when Love is wronged,
for why? of Love the Dame,
First naked out of watrie waves,
about Cythera came.
Least hurt who hurts me
undone, undo I shall,
I fear, and least by wrack on seas,
In seas my foes shall fall.
Live: so I better shall
then thee by death destroy:
Thou of my death, not I of thine,
the Title shall enjoy.
Suppose a whirlwinde swift,
God make these words but wind
Catch thee unawares, what courage the^,
what thoughts will pass thy mind?
Lo, straight with falsehood fraught,
thy perjured tongue appears:
And Dido driven by Trojans guile,
of life to short her years.
Of thy betrayed wife,
will stand before thy sight:
The Image sad; disheneiled,
with bleeding wounds bedight.
Let come (then will thou say)
I have deserved this all:
And bent at thee thou will suppose,
what ever lightnings fall.
Both seas and thou do rage,,
let both and breathing take:
This small delay (no small reward)
thy Journey safe shall make.
For thee my care is least,
thy child let spared be:
Thou have the glory of my death,
sufficient that for thee.
What has thy little son?
what has thy gods deserved?
That them the waters swallow should
from fyers force preserved.
But false thou have no such,
as me thy brags have told,
Nor ever did on shoulders lift,
thy gods and father old.
Thou lie in this and all,
thy tongue his guilefull part
Begins not first on me to play,
nor I first feel the smart.
Ask where the mother is,
of fair Iulus gone:
Her stony husband her forsook,
and so she died alone.
It pitied me to hear,
which just recompense:
For me had been, but that such pain
is less then mine offense.
That thee thy gods condemn,
my heart does me assure:
Who seven years now on land on seas
such tossing do endure.
I thee by wrack vpthrow'n
in harbor sure did save,
And scarcely having heard thy name,
to thee my Kingdom gave.
O would with these good turns
I me content had found:
And that in famous fame of mine
were buried deep in ground.
That day my woe was wrought,
when under stooping bower
Of mossie den we met alone,
compeld by sudden shower.
Some howling sounds I heard,
the Nymphs I thought did so,
They Furyes were, who in that sort
foretold my fatal woe.
Chaste Law of shamefast Love,
revenge on me this blame:
Ill to Sicheus kept, to whom
aye me I go with shame.
Whose sacred Image I
in marble Chapel keep,
With leauie branches hid from sight,
and wool of whitest sheep.
Hence thrice I heard me called,
I knew his well known voice,
Himself thrice said: Come Dido, Come:
with softly wispring noise.
I come without delay,
which once was only thine,
Yet me the more to linger makes,
this shameful fact of mine.
But pardon thou my fault,
whose deed might well deceive,
To others he in mine offense,
the less offense does leave.
His mother heavens Impe,
his sire a godly lode,
Unto his son by reason bred
sure hope of his abode.
If needs I must have er'd
mine error had good ground,
Put faith in him, he no way else
unworthy shall be found.
My faults to end persist,
as they at first begun:
And their unlucky spindels still
in one like tenor run.
My husband fell to ground
before the Altars slain,
My brother of that wicked act
does reap the wicked gain.
My self exild, his grave
and country both forsake:
And forced am, by foe pursude
uneasy ways to take.
I land on land unknown
escapt from foe and wave:
And bought the shore which freely yet
to thee false wretch I gave.
A Town I built, whose walls
far out extended lie:
Provoking places near about
maligning to envy.
Wars grow, poor stranger I,
and woman vexed with wars:
Scarce know how armor to provide
and strength my gate with bars.
When thousands to me su'de:
now all against me come:
Grieved that before their beds, I have
preferred I know not whom.
Why stick'st to yield me bownd
into Hiarbas hands,
I will not stick to yield mine arms
to bide thy wicked bands.
A brother eke I have,
who wicked hands anew,
Imbrewed first in husbands blood,
would feign in mine imbrew.
Lay down thy sacred Gods,
whom touching do pollute,
Unseemly with ungodly hands
does godly worship suit.
If they from fire escapt,
that thou might them adore:
That ever they escapt from fire
thy Gods repent them sore.
And what, o wicked man,
with child if Dido be:
And of thy self some part of thee
there lies inclosde in me?
The Dame and ruthful babe
at once shall be forlorn:
And by thy means to death be brought
who yet was never borne.
So with his parent shall
Iulus brother die:
One death at once shall two dispatch,
whose lives in one does lie.
But God bids thee to go,
would God he had forbid
To come; that of thy Trojan troops
my Carthage had bin rid.
This God no doubt your guide,
does you those tempests raise:
And makes you on those flowing floods
so long to spend your days.
To Troy back to turn,
it scarce were worth thy pain:
If as whiles Hector lived it was,
so now it were again.
Not to Seamander you,
but Tibers streams do go,
Where grant ariu'd, what are you else,
but such as no man know?
But as that land is hid,
and from thy fleet does make,
It seems old age will sooner thee,
then thou it overtake.
Yet rather as my dower,
this Realm of mine receive,
With all Pigmalions wealth I brought,
and farther wandering leave.
And into Carthage Troy
with better hap translate,
Where thou shall sacred Scepter bear,
enthroned in royal state.
If thou do wars affect,
or if thy sons desire,
Of triumph matter to procure
by martial means aspire:
That naught may wanting be,
such foes we will him yield,
This place for laws of peace is apt,
apt is for spear and sheeld.
Now by thy mother thou
thy brother quiuer'd boy,
By the companions of thy ^light
thy gods, the gods of Troy.
So may thy remnant left,
in field all conquest win,
As Trojan war of all thy loss,
the final end have bin.
Ascanius live his years,
with all good fortune blessed:
And softly may the buried bones
of old Anchises rest.
Spare now, o spare thine house,
which gives it self to thee:
But that indeed I have thee loved,
what fault can find in me?
Of Pythia I am not,
nor great Mycenae borne,
My husband nor my father has
against thee armor worn.
Of wife if thou think skorne,
not wife, cut hostess call:
So thine she be, what Dido be,
she naught regards at all.
The seas to me are known,
on Affricke coast that lie:
At times they do free passage grant,
at times they do deny.
When weather will permit,
hoyse sail and set from land:
For now the lauuching of thy ships
the flowing weeds withstand.
Charge me to wait the time
thou shall go sure away:
Not then, no though thy self desire,
my self will let thee stay.
Thy mates some rest require,
thy Fleet sore rent with waves:
And scarsely yet half rigd anew,
for some small respite craves.
For what have I deserved?
what owe to thee I may
Henceforth, for all my marriage hopes,
I crave but small delay.
Whiles stormy seas grow calm,
while custom tempers love:
How patiently mishaps to bear,
I shall the practice prove.
If not, my life to spill
with full intent I mind:
Of cruelty thou can not long
in me a subject find.
Would God thou did but see
mine Image as I wright:
I wright, and full against my breast
thy naked sword is pight.
And down my cheeks along
the tears do trickling fall:
Which by and by in stead of tears,
ingrayne in blood I shall.
How well with this my fate,
these gifts of thine agree,
To furnish our my funeral,
the cost will slender be.
My breast shall not be now
first pierced with this blade,
For why? there is a former wound,
which cruel Love has made.
Anne sister, sister Anne,
ill privy to my falt,
Perform thy last obsequious love,
unto my bones thou shall.
When flames have me consumed,
write not on marble grave:
Here Dido lies, Sicheus wife.
but this verse let me have.
Aeneas, Dido gave
both cause and sword of death:
And Dido using her own hand,
deprived her self of breath.
Aeneas to Dido.
Aeneas read what Dido wrote,
And sent her this reply;
And sought to cure the curelesse wound,
Which Dido made to die.
WHen my dear Country once most stately Troy
Of Asie Queen of gods the handy work,
Mine eyes beheld the furious flames destroy,
Which hidden erst in wodden horse did lurk.
I deemd me drowned in deepest gulf of woe,
Deeper then which, no grief could make me go.
But when my fortune guided me to see
Poor old Prince Priam at the Altar slain,
More deep then deepest fell I one degree,
And felt increast my past increasing pain.
And cried enraged: Conspire now heavens all,
I am at worst, no worse can me befall.
Yet since Creusa my most loving wife,
Of noblest birth, and no less noble mind:
My dear Creusa loved more then life,
In hapless haste I flying left behind:
Where weary she, or missing of her way,
To bloody Greeks, a bloody death did pay.
And since my father comfort of my care,
I lost likewise, by death from me bereft,
My faithful friends by shipwreck swallowed are:
And is there yet some further sorrow left?
Some further wrack to make me more accursed?
Since fire, sword, seas, and death have done their worst?
In vain alas I doubt of what I know,
And seek at thee what in my self I find,
I muse: Live I and know this? thee forgo,
To whom so many, such deserts me bind.
What words can serve this anguish to display,
Where weight of woe, does reason ouerway?
Yet since thy self have made thy pen descry
Thy griefs to me, which I with grief have red:
Vouchsafe (sweet Queen) to lend these lines thine eye,
And daine to know what reasons have me led.
And as thou know them, take them to be true,
The truer they, the more their truth I rue.
And first (O Queen) I never will deny,
On me bestowed more favors can be told,
By any words; nor ever grieve shall I,
Elisas name in memory to hold:
Whiles of my self, my self shall mindful bide,
Whiles lively breath, these lims of mine shall gide.
But for the rest, in brief I never meant,
(Deem not amiss) by stealth my flight to take:
Nor never yet pretended such intent
To any wife, an husband me to make.
I sought it not, I came for no such band,
When tossed by seas, I lighted on this Land.
If friendly Fates such grace to me would yield,
As there to rest, where I to rest would choose:
Sweet Troy that now lie equal with the feeld,
Thou should at least, not all thy bewties loose.
In thee rebuilt again I would replace,
The vanquished remnant of the Trojan race.
But now Appollo bids to Italy,
To Italy the Lycian gods command:
Here must our home, our rest, our country be:
To this our Love, to this our life is paund.
If thou a stranger, countries strange might seek,
What in like case, lets us to do the leeke.
I never do recline my head to rest,
When night the Earth in moystie shade bewraps:
But fancy straight with fearful sights oppressed,
Presents my father in sleepe-waking naps.
This place with terror bidding me to leave,
And not my son of fatal Lands bereave.
And now of Gods the fatal Messenger
From Jove himself (they both my witness be)
Has message brought, I saw the god most clear:
I plainly heard what words he spoke to me.
Leave then with plaints to set us both on fire,
Constraind I go, not with wine own desire.
And what wight can necessity resist,
Whose Iron bands, both men and gods enchaine?
What she has spun, who strives to untwist,
Or senseless is, or pleasure takes in pain?
The sturdie tree holds not his foot so fast,
As lythie Reed, that bends to every blast.
Who ever saw those, which of Neptunes land
The waued soil with yoked Ores to plow:
With top and top against the storm to stand,
Which Aol's youth with blustering breath does blow
They rather yield unto his windy will,
Then choose their lives in bootlesse strife to spill.
And is it then my life I hold so dear,
That life to hold, I Dido would forgo?
Or is it death that I so much do fear,
That death to fly I would procure her woe?
Then Gods me grant a living death to lead
In grief, in shame, still dying never dead.
But care of my succeeding progeny,
To whom by fates forepointed is their place:
To whom by heavens of earthly Monarchy,
The crown to wear foregraunted is the grace:
This care I say* with care for to fulfill,
The gods behest reuersed has my will.
And honors self, (which long a sleep has lain,
Rockt in Loves cradle) now awaked new,
Cries on us both: and shall he cry in vain:
To leave him quite, or yield him service dew?
You hitherto have ever famous been,
Forget not now, what fame becomes a Queen.
And me whom men (perhaps unworthy) call,
The godly wight and second unto none:
In Piety, from piety to fall,
Were fouler blot, then any other one.
Admit (O Queen) that I by thee be staid,
By wandering Fame, what will of both be said.
Lo here the man that out of Troy burned,
Preserved his gods, now quite by him contemned:
Lo here whose chaste affection clean is turned
To lawless lust, late by her self condemned.
He leaud, she light, he wicked, she unwise,
This fame to earth, this earth will blaze to skies.
You know that Monsters many eyes and ears,
Listening and prying still to hear and see,
Her tongues and wings which infinite she bears,
As lying often, so flying always be.
Of Peers and Princes ever speaking worst,
It is her kind, she was by envy nursed.
You thoughtlesse sit within your Princely bower,
Or minding only love or lives delight:
Your fame meanetime, like tender springtide flower
The busy blasts of bitter tongues do bite.
Each deed, each word, yea countenance and thought
Of simplest sort, are under censure brought.
It is our fate, if not our fault it be,
Which highest mounted, set on Fortunes wheel,
With our own sense we neither hear nor see,
Which makes us pinched long before we feel.
For foes are pleased and would it not amend,
And friends are grieved, yet dare not us offend.
Go then Aeneas, honor bids thee go,
Honor unto whose yoke the freest necks are thrall:
For her sake fly, if wilt not for thine own:
Though what herein befalls, to both befall.
Protesting still that no mislike or hate,
Moved thee to go, but force of cruel fate.
For were but Dido half so finely formd,
Were Didos eyes but half so beamie Ieate:
Were Didos face, but such as might be scornd,
Her Country poor, her Town a simple seat,
Yet having there such loving kindness found,
What flinty breast to love would not be bound.
Much more in me, kind hearted Venus child:
Not by the lame Smith, but her lusty Love:
My blinded brother might his bower* build,
Where so great helps encourage him to prove.
Her form, her face, her eyes, her seat, her soil,
Disdaining match, so far from taking foil.
I both Oenone and the Spartan Queen*
I courtly Dames, and Nymphs of woods and wels:
I have Chryseis and Bryseis seen,
Yea, Venus self, in whom perfection dwells.
But if some god to choose would me assign,
I all would praise, but Dido should be mine.
But hard's my choice, when there the thundering
( Jove, destruction threatens if I disobay:
And here my friendly foe, heart-pursuing Love,
By all his powers, coniures my mind to stay.
Alas, ye gods* your discord lay aside,
I am but one, and cannot go and bide.
Or Jove frame thou my destinies anew,
Allot to others fertile (...),
Or rather Love at once bid both adieu,
And both restore to former liberty.
By reasons rule, the younger and the child,
Should to the elder and the father yield.
But thou mad dog, whose reason lies in rage:
Who no rule else, but retchlesnes does know,
Nor reverence bear to thy fathers age,
Nor from thy brother can abstain thy blow.
And least for that fault might with thee be found
By only us, thou did thy mother wound.
But not to love, nor any else that dwell
In starrie house, I for my self would speak,
Let gods, let men, let ghosts of ghastly hell,
Their wrath on me, with all their malice wreake:
Let me be tossed as erst, with wrack on seas,
With war on land, nor here nor there in ease.
Let all that else can mind or body grieve*
Grieve without mean, my body and my mind:
Only to thee, that only did relieve
My woes and wants, let me not prove unkind.
But thankful still, that fame may so relate
Me thankful still, but still ^fortunate.
For where the Seas before mine eyes thou set,
With other dangers likely to ensue:
And how I will an other Dido get,
Alas I mean no getting of a new.
My head is busied more a thousand fold,
How since I must, I may forgo the old.
And who has past as I, the storms of fire,
Which crazie towers threw topsie turuie down:
Will little care, though winters stormy Ire
With swelling face, makes Tethis face to frown.
In sum, I can all pain with patience take,
But not (o Queen) with patience thee forsake.
Not that I doubt least proud Hyarbas power,
Shall able be, to make my Dido thrall:
Carthage is strong with many a mighty tower,
With broad deep ditch, vauntgarding stately wall.
This may and will thee from the Tyrant rid,
Thee from thy self, o Gods the luck forbid.
Where Love with loss, Impatient meets with Ire,
Shame calls in sorrow, hatred brings disdain;
And all in one, do oftentimes conspire,
To kill the Patient, so to cure the pain.
Which done, for shame away each other slides,
But shame, as shameless evermore abides.
Far better read sometimes a Wizard old,
How of lost Love to ease the curelesse wound:
When Paris left her to honor told,
Wherein she said, she greatest comfort found.
Her herbs and charms eased not so her heart,
As these plain precepts of his homely Art.
He bad her banish both from sight and mind,
All Monuments, but chiefly from her sight:
Which he departing thence, did leave behind,
As pictures, garments, arms, and all that might
His absent person to remembrance bring:
For love of sight, sight does from object spring.
Refrain (quoth. he) from coming in the place,
Which has been privy to your sweetest joys:
Never record, or ever with disgrace
His words and deeds, but cause of your annoyes.
Deem him and them, and when you think him on,
Think what cause had the Traitor to be gone.
But yet at first in no sort seek to swage,
These eager torments of heartbreaking grief:
But whiles Rage runs, yield to running rage,
Till time takes truce, and respit brings relief.
For mighty beasts, and mighty passions both,
By following tamed, by stop are made more worth.
Observe thou must as diet to this cure,
That Idleness and loanlinesse thou fly:
That virtuous accounts still thou have in ure,
And sort your self with fitting company*
For Love erects in idle breasts his throne,
And like a Monach loves to sit alone.
Thus much and more the good old man did teach,
That Ida Nymph, in that forsaken state,
As he was hers, so let him be your leach,
Since unto me all prayers comes too late.
Religion, Honor, Destinies decree,
Three by poor one, how can resisted be?
Tout Seule.
FINIS.

