Loves School.

PVBLII OVIDII NASONIS DE ART AMANDI. Or The Art of Love.

Gedruckt tot Amsterdam by Nicolas Iansz. Visscher.



PVBLII OVIDII NASONIS DE ART AMANDI: OR, The Art of Love. The Proheme or
Introduction.
IF there be any in this multitude,
That in the art of Love is dull and rude,
Me let him read, and these my lines rehearse,
He shall be made a Doctor by my verse.
By art of sails and oars Seas are divided,
By art the Chariot runs, by art Love's guided:
By art are bridles rein'd in, or let slip:
Typhis by art did guide the Hemonian ship.
And me has Venus her Arts master made,
To ^each her Science, and set up her trade:
And time succeeding shall call me alone,
Love's expert Tiphis and Antomedon.
Love in himself is apish and untoward,
Yet being a child, I Will whip him when he is froward:
Achilles in his youth was taught to run
On the stringd Lute a sweet division.
Art on his rude and (...)
Instructing him in old (...)
He that so often his friends, (...)
Made quake and tremble when (...) disclose.
His furious rage was known to be a Suitor,
And with submission kneel unto his Tutor:
Aeneides by Chiron was instructed,
And by my art is Love himself conducted,
Both gods sons, Venus and Thetis joys,
Both shrewd, both waggish, and unhappy boys:
Yet the stiff Bulls neck by the yoke is worn,
The proud Steed chewes the bit which he does scorn
And though Loves darts my own heart cleaues asunder,
Yet by my art the wag shall be kept under,
And the more deep my flaming heart is found,
The more I will revenge me of my wound:
Sacred Apollo witness of my flame,
Behold, thy arts I do not falsely clame,
Of Clios sisters, lo I take no keep,
That in the vale of Ascafeede their sheep.
Proud sky I teach of what I have been taster,
Love bids me speak, I Will be your skillful master:
And what I speak is true, thus I begin,
Be present at my labors loves fair Queen.
Keep hence you modest maids and come not near,
That use to blush and shamefast garments wear,
That have scant ruffes and keep your hair unseen,
Whose feet with your white aprons covered been,
For Vertas virgins here no place is left,
My muse sings Venus spoils and Loves sweet theft,
What kind affections lovers thoughts do pierse,
And there shall be no fault in this my verse.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
FIrst thou that art a Freshman and art bent,
To bear Loves arms and follow Cupids tent,
Find whom to love, the next thing thou must do,
Learn how to speak her fair, to plead and woe:
Last having won thy Mistress to thy lure,
^e teach thee how to make that love endure,
This is my aim, I Will keep within this space,
And in this road my Chariot wheel shall trace.
Whilst thou live free and art a Batcheler,
The love of one above the rest prefer:
To whom thy soul says, you alone content me,
But such a one shall not from heaven be sent thee.
Such are not dropped down from the azure skies,
But thou must seek her out with busy eyes:
Well knows the Huntsman where his toil to set,
And in what done the Boar his teeth does whet:
Well knows the Fowler where to lay his gin,
The Fisher knows what poole most fish are in,
And thou that studiest to become a lover,
Learn in what place most Virgins to discover.
I do not bid thee sail the Seas to seek,
Or travel far to find one thou do like,
Like Perseus that among the Negroes sought,
And fair Andromade from Inde brought:
Or Paris who to steal that dainty piece,
Trauelld as far as betwixt Troy and Greece,
Behold the populous City in her pride,
Yields thee more choice then all the world beside.
More ears of ripe corn grows not in the fields,
Nor half so many boughs the Forest yields:
So many green leaves grows not in the vvoods,
Nor swim so many fish in the salt floods.
So many Stars in heaven you cannot see,
As here be pretty wenches, Rome, in thee.
Fair Venus in the City of her son,
Is honored with Aeneas first begun.
If in young Lasses thou delight, behold,
More Virgins thou may see then can be told:
If women of indifferent age will ease thee,
Amongst a thousand thou may choose to please the^
If ancient women, in the City be
Matrons admired for their gravity:
To find a Matron Widdovv or young Maid,
Walk but at such time under Pompeies shade,
When as the Sun mounts on the Lions back,
And store of all degrees thou shall not lack:
Or to that marble walk which was begun,
And ended by a Mother and her Son.
Abroad, at noone, betimes, or evening late,
That day which we to Luna consecrate,
Or to the fifty sisters Belus daughters,
That all save one made of their husbands slaughter^
Or that same holliday we yearly keep,
In which fair Venus does for Adon weep,
Or in the Seventh day sacred more then all,
Which the Jews nation do their Sabbath call:
Or to the Miemphian Church where many a ^ow,
Is made to the Egyptian Isis and her cow:
Or to the market place which way is short,
Women of all estates do there resort,
Repair else to the pulpets, even the same
In which our learned Orators declaime,
Here often is the pleaders tongue stroke dumb
By those attractiue eyes that thither come.
There he to whom another cause is known,
Speaking of that, wants words to plead his own,
Venus rejoicing smiles to see from far,
The Lawyer made a Client at the bar:
But most of all I would have thee stir,
At the play time unto the Theater,
Where thou shall find them thick in full great number,
The matted seats and the degrees to comber,
Amongst that goodly crew thou may behold,
Whom thou both love, suest to, and feign would hold,
^ooke as the laden Ants march to and fro,
and with their heavy burdens trooping go:
^r as the Be from flovver to flovver does fly,
^earing each one her honey in her thigh:
and round about the spacious fields do stray,
^o do the fairest women to a play:
that I have wondered how it could include,
^f beauties such a gallant multitude.
^here many a Captive look has conquered been*
^hither sole armed to see and to be seen.
^reat Romulus thou first these plays contriues,
^o get thy vviddowed soldiers Sabines vviues,
(...) those days from the marble house did vvaue,
^o sail, no silken flag, no ensign brave:
^^e tragic stage in that age was not red,
^here were no mixed colors tempered:
Then did the Seane want Art, the unready stage,
Was made of grass and earth in that rude age.
Round about which the boughs were thickly placed
The people did not think themselves disgraced:
Of tuffe and heathy Sods to have their seats,
Made in degree of sods and massy peates.
Thus placed in order, every Roman pride,
Into his Virgins eyes, and by her side
Sat him down close, and severally did move,
The innocent Sabine women to their love.
And whilst the Piper Theuscus rudely playde,
And by their stamping with his foot had made,
A sign unto the rest, there was a shout,
Whose shrill report peirst all the air about.
Now with a sign of rape given from the king,
Round through the house the lu^tie Romans fling:
Leaving no corner of the same unsought,
Till every one a frighted Virgin caught.
Look as the trembling Dove the Eagle flies,
Or a young Lamb when he a Woolfe espies:
So run these poor girls, filling the air with shreik
Emptying of all the color in their pale cheeks.
One fear possessed them all, but not one look,
This tears her hair, she has her wits forsook.
Some sadly sit, some on their mothers call,
Some chafe, some fly, some stage, but frighted all.
Thus were the ravished Sabines blushing led,
Becoming shame unto each Romans bed:
If any strived against it, strait her man,
Would take her on his knee, whom fear made wan.
And say, why weepest thou, sweet, what ailst my dea^
Dry up those drops, these clouds of sorrow clear.
I Will be to thee, if thou thy grief wilt smother,
Such as thy father was unto thy mother.
Full well would Romulus his soldiers please,
To give them such fair Mistresses as these.
If such rich wages thou will give to me,
Great Romulus thy soldier I will be.
From that first age the Theater has bin,
Even like a trap to take fair wenches in:
Frequent the Tiltyard, for there oft-times are,
Clusters of people thronging at the bar.
Thou shall not need, there with thy fingers becken,
Of vvincking signs, or close nods do not reckon:
But where thy Mistress sits, do thou abide,
Who shall forbid thee to attain her side.
As near as the place suffers, see thou get,
That none betwixt thee and her self be set.
If thou be mute and bashful I will teach,
How to begin, and break the ice of speech:
Ask whose that horse was, what he was did guide him,
Whence came he, if he well or ill did ride him.
Which in the course or barriers best did do,
And whom she likes, him do thou favor to.
When thou espiest where Romes best gallants sit,
Applaud fair Venus, with thy Mistress hand it:
If dust by chance upon her garments fall,
Look with thy ready hand thou brush it all.
And though none fall, yet look that without scoff
Thou with thy dutious hand beat that none off.
And let the least occasion show thy duty,
None can be too servile unto beauty.
^f her loose garments hang down that the skirt,
Lick up the dust, or fall into the dirt:
Officious be, to lift it up again,
And from the sluttish earth do bear her train.
Happly thy dutious guardian such may be,
That thou her foot or well shapt legmaist see.
Bevvare that none behind her rudely crush her,
Or with his hard knees or his elbowes brush her:
Small favors women's light thoughts captiuate,
And many in their loves make fortunate,
Beating the dust or fanning the fiesh air,
Or to her weary soote but add a staire.
Such diligence and duty often proves,
Great furtherance to many in their loves.
Within these lists has Cupid battle sounded:
And he that makes men wounds, himself bin vvounded*
As careless of himself he pries about,
To know which conquerors of the Champions stout,
He feels himself pierst with a flying dart,
And vvounded sore, complains him of his heart.
Oh what as^embly did there come to see,
Great Caesar stand in all his royalty:
Praising his prizes in their shouts and skips,
Took in the Persian and Athenian ships,
From both sides of the Seas young Gallants came,
And Virgins of all sorts to see the same:
Then was the City thronged, who could not find
In that fair crew a Saint to please his mind.
Oh gods! how many did kind fancy drive,
Strangers to us, us unto them to vviue:
Behold Great Caesar through the whole world famed
Will add unto the nations he has tamed.
The Eastern kingdoms here to ouerpast,
And they of all his Conquests shall be last.
See where a stout revenger comes in arms,
Whose haughty breast the flovver of honor warme^
That being but a child leads war in chains,
But more then children can, by war constraines.
Thy birthday shall by general accord,
With all the newest virtues be adored,
Thy wisdom which might well become the aged,
Shall in the self same rank be equipaged:
That all the world may vvonder one so young,
Has such a ripe wit, and so queint a tongue.
Thy gifts outstrip thy age, whose slow pace lingers.
Such was his instant strength, who twixt his fingers
Crushed two inuenom'd Snakes being in the cradle,
What would he do being mounted in the saddle,
As great as Bacchus when his years yet green,
Was in his power amongst the Indies seen:
Is Caesar Heir unto his fathers spirit,
That his forefathers veitues do inherit.
With their auspitious fortunes proudly dight,
Wars, and shall vanquish still where he does figh^:
Such be the fates, decree must be his fame
That shall wage battle under Caesar's name,
Live still thou, Youth, of whom thou now art king,
With milk white heads and beards thy praises sing,
Revenge thy vvronged brothers, thy dead father,
And to the wars millions of people gather.
Thy father, and thy Countries father too,
Case thee in arms against thy insulting foe.
Thou'bear'st religious arms; so does not he,
Wrong leads him forth, but Justice fightes for thee:
Behold the Parthians are already slain,
The East yields homage to the Latin train.
Caesar and Mars, both gods, his fathers both
Be powerful in his journey now he goes.
I Prophecy his conquest and his praise,
In a rich style unto the heavens I Will raise:
With my field words he shall his army cheer,
Which with their sweet sound shall inchant each ^are.
Whilst I the Parthians flight describe at large,
Who backwards shoot, as flying, their foes charge.
And of the Romans resolution write,
In vain poor Parthian soldiers thou do fight.
Mars the great god of arms, forsake thy droome,
In vain thou hop'^t by flight to overcome:
In what day shall thou, fairest of all things,
Bedeckt with gold, attended on by Kings.
And drawn along by four white snowie steeds,
To royalize thy acts and famous deeds.
The whilst thy troops of soldiers round inuirons,
The Captain of the enemy bound with irons:
Giving their legs to keep them from the flight,
Which they before did practice in their fight.
The joyful young men mingled with sweet lasses,
Will crowd and press to see him as he passes.
And now being met, no sweet occasion balke,
Make speech of any thing to enter talk:
Though ignorant in all things, all things know,
And take upon thee to explain each show.
As thus she Euphrates that first proceeds,
Having her head bound with a reath of reeds:
Call the next Tigris with her hair all blew,
Maids may be slattered, to think fained things true
Say this presents Armenia, Denae she,
In the next place let Achemonia be.
That man's a conqueror, captives they that tremble,
Speak truly, if thou can, if not dissemble.
Thence if you go to banckquet and sit down,
To taste sweet Viands or to drink around,
There may thy thoughts unto my art incline,
Observing love, more then the crimson wine.
Cupid himself alvvayes inured to rapes,
Has with his own white hand pressed Bacchus grapes.
Until his wings with sprinkled wine made wet,
He heavy sits and sleeps where he is set*
The dew from off his feathers soon he shakes,
Which from his drowned vvings the dry air takes.
But from his breast so soon he cannot drive,
Love sprinkled there, though nere so much he strive.
Wine does prepare the spirits, heates the brain hot,
Expels deep cares, makes sorrows quite forgot:
Moves mirth, breeds laughter, makes the poor man proud,
And not remembering need to laugh aloud:
Sets open the thoughts, does rudenes bannish,
Refineth arts, and at wine sight vvoes vanish.
In wine has many a young man's heart bin took,
And borne away in a fair wenches look.
In wine is lust and rancknes of desire,
Join wine and love, and you add fire to fire:
Choose not a face by torch-light, but by day,
Only gross faults such splendors can bewray.
Tivst no made lights, they will deceive thine eye,
Thou can not judge by torch-light, or in twie,
At the broad noonetide, when the Sun shined rarest,
Did Paris say to Hellen thou art fairest.
The night hides faults, the midnight hour is blind,
And no mishapt deformity can find.
Stones and dyed Scarlet by the day we choose,
The broad day and bright sun in beauty use:
Sometimes unto those places task thy feet,
Where the fair forest hantresses do meet.
In number more then sea sands, else prepare,
To the vvarme bathes, where many a female are:
There some or other hurt by Cupids stroke,
Where troubled waters with warm brimstone smoke
Mistakes the wounds, cause and exclaming raues,
Not blaming Love, but those unwholesome waves.
See where Dian^es grouie Temple stands,
Where kingdoms have bin won by slaughtring hands
Because ^he Cupid loathes, and lives chaste still.
Much people he has slain, and much shall kill:
Thus far my Muse has sung in diverse strains,
Where thou may find fit place to set thy trains,
My next endeavor is to lay the ground,
To atchieue and vvin the Mi^tris thou have found.
Be prompt and apt, you that shall read my lines,
And use attention to their disciplines,
The first strict precept I enjoin your sense,
Needful to be observed is conscience:
Be confident, thy suit being once begun,
And build on this, they all are to be vvonne.
First shall the birds that vvelcome in the spring,
All mute and dombe for ever cease to ^ing:
The summer Ants leave their industrious pains,
And from their full mouths cast their loaded gains.
The swift Menation hounds that chasing are
Shall frighted run back from the trembling hare,
Before a vvanton wench, once tempted by thee
Poor fool, shall have the hard heart to deny thee,
Stolen pleasure which to men is never hateful,
To women, is now and at all times ever grateful:
The difference is, a Maid her love will cover,
Men are more impudent and public lovers:
It Is meet we men should ask the question still,
Should women do it, it would become them ill.
The Heifers strength being once ripe and mellow,
After the Bull she through the fields will bellow.
The Mare neighes after the courageous Steed,
But humane lust does not so much exceed.
Our flame has lawful bonds, keep time and season,
Not bestiall made like theirs, but mixed with reason.
Should I of Biblis speak, whose hot desire
Does to the brothers lawless bed aspire:
And when the incestuous deed she well suspende^^,
With resolution her sweet life she ends:
Mirrha the love of her own father sought,
Affecting him, but not as daughters ought:
Her body in a tree rough rind appears,
And with her sweet and odorifrous tears,
Our bodies we perfume, these are the same,
Mirrh of their mistress Mirrha that bears the name
In Ida of tall tree and Cedars full,
There fed the glory of the heard, a Bull:
Snow white, save twixt his horns one spot ther^ grew,
Save that one stain he was of milkie hew,
This Bullock did the Heifers of the groves,
Desire to bear as Prince of all their droues,
But most Pasiphae with adulterous breath,
Enuies the lovely Heifers to the death:
I speak known truth, this cannot Creet deny,
With all her hundred Cities built on hie.
It Is said that for this Bull the doting Less,
Did use to top fresh boughs and mow young grass,
Nor was the amorous Cretan Queen afeard,
To grow a kind Companion to the heard:
Thus through the Campaigne she is madly borne,
And a vvilde Bull to Minos gives the horn.
It Is not for bravery he does love or loath thee,
Then why, Pasiphae, do thou so richly cloth thee*
Why do thou thus thy face and looks prepare,
What makst thou with thy glass ordring thy hair,
Unless thy glass could make thee seem a Cow,
And how can horns grow on that tender brow?
If Minos please thee, no adulterer seek thee,
Or if thy husband Minos do not like thee:
But thy lascivious thoughts are still increast,
Deceive him with a man, not with a beast.
Thus by the Queen the wild woods are frequented,
And leaving the Kings bed she is contented:
To use the groves borne by the rage of mind,
Even as a ship with a full Eastern vvind.
How often has she with an envious eye,
Looked on the Covv that by her Bull did lie:
Saying, oh wherefore did this Heifer move,
My hearts chief Lord, and urge him to her love.
Behold, how she before him joyful skips,
And proudly ietting on the green grass lips:
To please his amourous eye, then charged the Queen
See in these fields that cow no more be seen.
No sooner to her servants had she spoke,
But the poor beast was strait put to the yoke.
Some of these strumpet Heifers the Queen slew,
And their vvarme blood the alters did imbrevv.
Whilst by the sacrificing Priest she stands,
And gripes their trembling entrails in her hands.
Often praid she to the gods, but all in vain,
To appease their dieties with blood of beasts thus Slain,
And to their bowels spoke, go, go, be gone,
To please him whom I fondly doat upon.
Now does she vvish her self Europ^ then,
To be fair, so pasturing in the fenne,
(...) a beast in shape, hide, hoof, and horn,
Only Europa on a beast was borne.
At length the Captain of the Heard beguilde,
With a Cowes skin with curious art compilde.
The longing Queen obtained her full desire,
And in the child's birth did bewray the sire:
Had Cressa kept her from Thie^tes bed,
She had not with her child been banished.
Nor Phoebus stopped his Carr that so bright burned,
And his Steeds back unto the morning turned.
King Misus daughter that was held so fair,
Stole from her fathers head the purple hair:
And hanging at the ship was in her fall,
Changed to a bird in voice, in shape and all.
Another Silla was by Circes spells,
Made a Sea monster, and in the ocean dwells:
Beneath whose navell barketh many a hound,
Whose ravenous gulf like throats ship, and men drowned.
The wisest of great Alcides that by land,
Fled the great god of war and did vvithstand:
Neptune by Sea, behold alas she dies,
A woeful and lamented sacrifice:
Whose sorrows only not bright Crusaes flame,
Wishing their salt tears might have quenched the same.
Who could but weep to see young children slain,
Whilst their warm bloods their mothers garments stain,
Phanux Annutors daughters she laments,
The swift pact hurrying chariot tears and rents.
Chief mischiefs all by women's lusts engender,
Some of their hearts be tough, though most be tender.
Women's defires are burning, some contagious,
Men's are more temporate, far and less outrageous:
Then in my art proceed nor doubt to enjoy,
And win all women be they nere so coy.
Use them by my directions, being learned by thee,
Not one amongst a thousand will deny thee:
Yet love they to be urged by some constraint,
As well in things which they deny as grant:
But take thou no repulse, is it not a treasure,
To enjoy new delights and taste fresh pleasure.
Vari^tie of sweets are welcome still,
And acceptablest to a woman's will:
They think that corn best in another field,
Their neighbors goat the sweetest milk does yield.
But first ere siedge be to thy Mistress laid,
Practice to come acquainted with her maid:
She can prepare the way, seek thy redress,
And by her means thou may have sweet access.
To her familiar ear^ your counsels show,
And all your private pleasures let her know:
Bribe her with gifts, corrupt her with reward,
With her that is easy which to thee seems hard,
She can choose times, so times Phy^itions keep,
When in thy Mistress arms thou safe may sleep,
And that must be when she is apt to yield,
What time the ripe corn swells within the field,
When banished sorrows, from her heart remove
And gives mirth place, she lies broad wake to love.
Whilst Troy was pensive, 'twas well fenced and kept,
But then betrayed when they securely slept:
Yet sometimes prove her, when thou findst her sad,
Mourning her own vvrong with some usage bad.
Follow that humor with thy fluent tongue,
She Will grace thee to revenge her former vvrong:
Her may the industrious maid betimes prepare,
And softly whisper, yet that she may hear,
Such wrongs no woman that has sprit can bear:
So she proceeds to thee, lifts thy praiseshie,
Swear for her chaste love thou art bent to dye,
And there step in, and doubt not to prevail,
Yet ere her furious anger has struck sail^
Rage in that Sea: delay consumes and dies,
Like ice against the Sun; no grace despise
That from the hand-maide comes; with all thy power
Seek by convenient means her to deflower.
She is industrious and made apt for sport,
And by her office limits your resort,
^he, if her own counsel may be closly kept,
^er Ladies due would gladly intercept.
^ll is hap hazard, though it be with pain,
^y counsel is from these things to abstain^.
^vvill not headlong over mountains tread,
^or following me shall any be misled:
^ut of the maid by whom thou send'st thy letter,
^ith her care please thee well, with her face better
^egin not therefore with the Maid to toy,
^hy Mistress love and favor first enjoy.
^ne thing beware, if thou will credit Art,
^or let my words amongst the winds depart:
(...) thou have moved her once, take no de^yall,
^esolue to act, or never to make trial.
from fear and blame thou art secure and free,
^s soon as she pertakes the crime with thee.
^ou see the bird that to the morning sings,
cannot soar high, when she has lim'd her wings:
^or can the savage Boar with brisled back,
^reake through those toils which he before made slack.
^he fish that glides along the silver brook,
(...) quickly drawn, being wounded with the hook.
^o having once but tryde her, make her yield,
and never part, but conquer from the field:
^he fault being mutual, knowing how she fell,
^he bashful girl will be ashamed to tell.
^ut she can show thee in familiar phrase,
^oth what thy virtuous Mistress does and says.
^lwayes be secret, if your guilt appear,
^will in thy Lady breed perpetual fear.
^e is deceived, that thinks all times avail,
^or Swains to turn the earth, Seamen to sail:
^ll seasons are not kind when men should sow,
^imes must be picked, to have your grain well gro^.
Nor always is the surging ocean fit,
That the well fraughted ship may sail in it:
Nor is it always time fair girls to vvoe,
Sometimes abstain, so does thy Master do.
Omit her birthday, and those Calends miss,
When Mars and Venus both abstain to kiss:
At some forbidden seasons being decked,
With princely tire, use her with great respect:
In the breame vvinter when that Phades rain,
From the sweet work of Venus most abstain.
Forbear the like resort amongst thy wenches,
When that the tender kidd the ocean drenches:
Thou shall begin even in that very day,
When woeful and lamenting Allia,
Looks on the tragic earth, made crimson red,
With the wild Romans wounds, which that day ble^
Or in the seventh feast which is held divine,
And honored by the men of Palestine.
Thy Ladies birthday Ceremonies make,
And superstitiously all works forsake:
Above all days let that a black day be,
When thou give ought, or she does beg of thee.
You shall have some into your bosoms creep,
Who iestingly will snatch things they will keep.
And by some slight or pretty wanton suite,
To enrich themselves will leave thee destitute:
First shall the Linnendraper bring his wares,
And lay his pack wide open, as at Faires.
She will peruse them as thou standst her nigh,
The whilst the Draper asks what will you buy?
Strait will she crave thy judgment in the Lawn^
Thou by degrees to show thy skill art drawn:
Then will she kiss thee, pray thee she may try it,
Thus by her flattery thou art vvonne to buy it.
Can thou deny the wanton she will swear,
This gift shall serve her use for many a year:
It is now cheap, she has great need of this,
And every word she mingles with a kiss.
Have thou no coin about thee, thou shall send,
To entreat it by a letter from thy friend:
What? must I needs present her with this casket,
Because that on her birthday she does ask it?
Then every day she wants she will be sworn,
That as that very day she is bred and borne.
Or when I see her, how she sadly vveepes,
And fayning some false loss much seeking keep^s:
As if she had let fall some precious thing,
A Jewel from her ear, her hand a ring.
What Is that to me, or if I hear her pray,
To borrow this or that until some day:
What Is lent is lost, and to be found no more,
Women things borrowed never will restore.
Ten tongues, as many mouths cannot impart,
Half the sleights used in the strumpets art.
Make love with letters, and thy money save, Dato do^^ sicut dat mella genista.

And let them wax, and ink, and paper have.
Keep what thou have, for words good words surrender,
For flattery, like falsehood ever tender:
Fair words are cheap, what more thou give is lost,
Flatter, speak fair, it is done with little cost.
Old Priam by entreaty Hector vvonne,
Which bribed Achilles never would have done:
Force is but weak, entreaty has her odds,
So we entreat, but not enforce the gods:
A promise is a charm to make fools fat,
Be full of them, promise no matter what:
A promise is a mere enchanting witch,
By promises it is an easy matter to be rich.
The hope of gain will keep thy credit free,
Hope is a goddess false, yet true to thee.
Give her and say, you part on some disdain,
Thou by her loses, she by thee shall gain:
Be always giving, but your gift still keep,
And thy delays in words well harmed steep.
So has the barren field deceived the swain,
So does the Gamster loose in hope to gain:
Love that on even hands grows is most pure,
That which comes gratis longest does endure.
Write first, and let thy pleasant lines salute her,
A letter breaks the ice of any suitor:
A letter in an apple writ and sent,
Won fair Cidippe to her lovers bent.
You Roman Youths all other toys resign,
Leave the seven liberal Arts and Muses nine:
As when you hear an Orator declame,
The people judge, and Senate grace the same.
So when the fair maids thou shall come among*
Speak well, and they will all applaud thy tongue.
But speak not by the book, it breeds offense,
To Court in strange and ^ustian eloquence:
None but a gull such bastard words will praise,
Or in his speech use an enforced phrase.
Who but a mad man else with Orations,
Plead to his Love, and woe in declamations:
Use a smooth language and accusto^ed speech,
And with no straining discourse love beseech:
As if thou camst to speak a studied part,
But as immediately sent from the heart.
If she receive thy lines, and scorns to read them,
But casting them away, on the ground tread them:
Despair not though, but that she may in time,
And will with judging eyes peruse thy ^ime.
In time the ^tubborne Heifers draw the waine,
In time the wildest steeds do brook the rain:
Time frets hard iron, in time the plow shares worn
Yet the ground soft by which the steel is torn.
What Is harder then a stone, or what more soft
Then water is, and yet by dropping often
The gentle rain will eat into the flints,
And in thtir hard sides leaves impressiue dints.
Do but persist the suite thou have begone,
In time will chaste Penelope be won:
Long was it ere the City Troy was taine,
Yet was it burnt at length and Priam slain.
Has she perusde the scroule thou did indite,
And will she not as yet an answer write:
Enforce her not, it is enough to thee,
That she has read it, and thy love does see.
Fear not, if once she read what thou have writ,
She will vouchsafe in time to answer it.
At first perhaps her letter will be sour,
And on thy hopes her paper seem to lowr:
In which she will conjure thee to be mute,
and charge thee to forbear thy hated suite.
Tush, what she most forwarnes she most desires,
^n frosty vvoods are hid the hottest fires.
Only pursue to reap what thou have sown,
A million to a mite she is thy own.
^f thou by ch^nce have found her in some place,
^owne on her back and upwards with her face.
Occasion smiles upon thee, thank thy fate,
^^eale to her besides with a theeuish gate:
and having won, unto her vvisely bear thee,
^ith vvatchfull care that no Eauesdropper hear^ thee.
^r if she walk abroad without delay, W^^n th^^ meetest (...) abroad.

^e thou a quick spy to observe her way.
Keep in her eye, and cross her in the street,
Here overtake her, at that corner meet:
Then come behind her, then outstrip her pace,
And now before her, and now after trace.
Now fast, now slow, and ever move some stay,
That she may find thee still first in her way,
Nor be afraid if thou occasion spy,
To iog her elbow as thou passest by.
Or if thou happenest to behold from faree,
Thy Mistress crossing to the Theater: When thou find her in the Theater.

Hye to the place, being there look round about thee
And in no seat let her be found without thee.
No matter though the play thou do not mind,
Thou sights enough within her face shall find:
There stand at gaze, there wonder, ^here admire,
There speaking looks may whisper thy desire.
Applaud him whom she likes, if thou discover,
In any strain a true well acted lover.
Make him thy instance, court her by all skill,
If she rise, rise, if she sit, sit thee still:
Laugh thou but when she smiles, dye when she lowers
And in her looks and gestures loose thy hours.
Thy legs with eating pumice do not wear,
Use no hot irons to crispe and curle thy hair:
No spruce starch fashions should on lovers wait,
Men best become a mere neglected gate.
Blunt Theseus came with no perfumes to Creete,
And yet great Minos daughter thought him sweet.
Phoedra did love Hippolitus, yet he,
Had on his back no Courtly bravery.
Adonis like a vvoodman still was clad,
Yet Venus doated on the lovely lad:
Go neat and handsome, comeliness best pleases,
And the desire of women soonest ceases.
Use a meet^ gate, thy garments without stain,
Keep not thy face from vveather nor from rain:
Thy tongue have without roughnes, thy teeth clear
And white, and let no rust inhabit there.
Wear thy shoes close and fit, and not to vvide,
Cut thy hair compass, even on either side:
Let no disordered hairs here and there stand,
But have thy beard trimmed with a skillful hand.
Make blunt thy nails, pare them and keep them low
Let no stiff hairs within thy nostrils grow:
Keep thy breath sweet and fresh, lest rank it smell,
Such is the air where bearded gotes do dwell.
All other loose tricks and effeminate toys,
Leave thou to vvanton girls and iugling boys:
Behold young Bacchus me his Poet names,
He favors lovers, and those amourous flames,
In which he has been scorcht; it so fell out,
Mad Ariadne straid the I Will about: The tale of Theseus and Ariadne.

Being left alone within that Desert plain,
Where the brook Dia pores into the maine.
Who making from her rest, her veil unbound,
Her bare foot treading on the tender ground:
Her golden hair dissolved, aloud she raues,
Calling on Theseus to the defuged waves.
On Theseus, cruel Theseus, whom she seeks,
Whilst showers of tears makes furrows in her cheeks
She calls and weeps, and weeps and calls at once,
Which might to r^th move the senceles stones.
Yet both alike became her, they all graced her,
The whilst she strives to call him, or cry faster:
Then beats she her soft breast, and makes it groan:
And then she cries, what is false Theseus gone?
What shall I do? she cries, what shall I do?
And with that note she runs the Forest through.
When suddenly her ears might understand,
Cimballs and Timbrels touched with a loud hand:
To which the forest woods and caves resound,
And now amazed she senceles falls to ground.
Behold the Nymphs come with their scattered hair^
Falling behind, which they like garments wear.
And the light Satires, an untoward crew,
Nearer and nearer to the Virgin drew.
Then old Silenus on his lazy Ass,
Nods with his drunken pate about to pass.
Where the poor Lady, all in tears lies drowned
Scarce sits the drunkard, but he falls to ground*
Scarce holds the bridle fast, but staggering stoopes*
Following those giddy Bacchanalian troops.
Who dance the wild Laualto on the grass,
Whilst with a staff he lays upon his Ass.
At length when the young Satires least suspect,
He tumbling falls quite from his Asses neck:
But up they heave him, whilst each Satire cries,
Ri^e good old father good old father rise.
Now comes the god himself, next after him,
His vine like Chariot driven with Tigres grimme:
Coulou^ and voice, and Theseus she does lack,
There would she fly, and there fear pulled her back.
She trembles like a stalk the vvind does shake,
Or a vveake reed that grows besides the lake.
To whom the god spoke, Lady take good cheer,
See one more faithful then false Theseus here.
Thou shall be wife to Bacchus for a gift,
Receive high heavens, and to the spheres be lift.
Where thou shall shine a star to guide by night,
The wandering seaman in his course aright:
This said, lest that his Tigres should a^^ray,
The trembling maid, the god his coach does stay.
And leaping from his Chariot with his heels,
He prints the sand, with that the Nymph he feels:
And hugging her, in vain she does resist,
He bears her thence, gods can do what they li^^.
Some Hymen sing, and Io cry,
So Bacchus with the maid that night does lie:
Therefore when wine in plenteous cups do flow,
And thou that night unto thy love does owe:
Pray to the god of grapes that in thy bed,
The quaffing healths do not offend thy head.
In wine much hidden talk thou may invent, Love tricks ^sed in ^^ting and
drinking.

To give thy Lady note of thy intent:
To tell her thou art hers and she is thine,
Thus even at board make love tricks in the wine.
Nay, I can teach thee though thy tongue be mute,
How with thy speaking eye to move thy suite:
Good language may be made in looks and wincks*
Be first that takes the cup wherein she drinks.
And note the very place her lip did tuch,
Drink just at that, let thy regard be such.
Or when she carues, what part of all the meat*
She with her finger tuch, that cut and eat:
Or if thou carue to her, or she to thee,
Her hand in taking it touch cunningly.
Be with her friend familiar, and be sure,
It much auailes to make thy love endure:
When thou drink'st, drink to him above the (...),
Grace him, and make thy self a thankful gu^^^.
In every thing prefer him to his face,
Though in his function he be nere so base:
The course is safe, and does securenesse lend,
For who suspectlesse may not greet his friend.
Yet though the path thou tread'st seem strait and plain,
In some things it is full of ^ubs again^.
Drink sparingly, for my impose is such,
And in your singling him take not to much:
Carrouse not but with soft and moderate sup^, Carrouse (...) to much

Have a regard and measure in your cups.
Let both thy feet and thoughts their office know,
Chiefly beware of brawling, which may grow
By too much wine, from fighting most abstain,
In such a quarrel was Eurition slain:
Where swaggering leads the way mischief comes after,
Iunkets and wine were made for mirth and laughter,
Sing, Sing.
if thy voice be delicate and sweet,
If thou can dance Dance.
then nimbly shake thy feet.
If thou have in thee ought that is more then common,
Show it; such gifts as these most please a woman.
Though to be drunk indeed may hurt the brain,
Yet now and then I hold it good to feign.
Instruct thy lisping tongue sometimes to trip,
That if a word misplaced do pass thy lip:
At which the carping presence find some clause,
It may be judged that quaffing was the cause.
Then boldly say, how happy were that man,
That could enfould thee in his arms, and then
Wish to embrace her in her sweet hearts steed,
Whom in her ear thou rauest to see dead.
But when the table's drawn and she among,
The full crew rising thrust into the throng:
And tuch her softly as she forth does go,
And with thy foot tread gently on her toe.
Now is the time to speak, be not afraid,
Him that is bold both love and fortune aid.
Doubt not thy want of Rhetoric true love show,
Good words unawares upon thy tongue will flow:
Make as thy tongue could wound thy soul with grief
And use what Art thou can to win relief.
All women of themselves selfe-loued are,
The foulest in their own conceits are fair:
Praise them, they will believe thee I have known,
A mere dissembler a true lover grown.
Proving in earnest what he fayn'd in sport,
Then, oh you Maids, use men in gentle sort:
Be affable, and kind, and scorn eschew,
Love forged at first may at the last prove true.
Let fair words work into their hearts as brooks,
Into a hollow bank that ouerlooks:
The margent of the water praise her cheek,
The color of her hair commend and like.
Her slender finger and her pretty foot,
Her body and each part that longs vnto't*
And women as you hope my style shall raise you,
I charge you to believe men when they praise you.
For praises please the chastest maids delight,
To hear their Lovers in their praise to write.
Juno and Pallas hate the Phrigian soil,
Where Paris to their beauties gave the foil.
Even yet they envy Venus and still dare her,
To come to a new judgment which is fairer.
The Peacocke being praised spreads his train,
Be silent and he hides his wealth again:
Horses trapt richly praise them in their race,
They will curuet and proudly mend their pace.
Large promises in love I much allow,
Nay call the gods as witness to thy vow:
For Jove himself sits in the azure skies,
And laughes below at lovers periuries.
Commanding Eolus to disperse them quite,
Even Jove himself has falsely sworn some write:
By Stix to Juno, and since then does show,
Favors to us that falsely swear below.
Gods surely be gods, we must think they are,
To them burn incense, and due rights prepare:
Nor do they sleep as many think they do,
Lead harmless lives, pay debts and forfeits to.
Keep covenant with thy friend and banish fraud,
Kill not, and such a man the gods applaud.
Say women none deceive, the gods have spoken,
There is no pain imposed on faith so broken.
Deceive the sly deceiuer they find snares, Fallere fallentem non ^st fraus.

To catch poor harmless lovers vnawar^s.
Lay the like trains for them; nine years some feign
In Egypt there did fall no drop of rain.
When Thratius to the grimme Busiris goes, ^usiris killed Thratius because he was
a stranger.

And from the Oracle this answer shows:
That Jove must be appeasde with strangers blood*
They said Busiris killed him where he stood:
And said with all, thou stranger first art slain,
To appease the gods and bring great Egypt rain.
Phallaris bull, King Phallaris first said,
With the worke-master that the Engine made:
Both Kings were just, death deaths inuenters try,
And justly in their own inventions dye.
So should false oaths, by right false oaths beguile
And a deceitful girl be caught by wile:
Then teach thy eyes to weep, Weep to ^er.
tears persuade truth
And moves obdurate Adamant to ruth.
At such especial times that passing by,
She may perceive a tear stand in thy eye.
Or if tears fail, as still thou can not get them,
With thy moist fingers rub thy eyes and wet them.
Who but a fool that cannot judge of blisses, Kiss her.

But when he speaks will with his words mix kisse^.
Say she be coy, and will give none at all,
Take them vngiuen, perhaps at first she will brawle.
^triu^ and resist her all the ways she ^an,
And say vvithall away you naughty man.
Yet will she fight like one would loose the field,
and striving gladly be constrained to yield:
^e not so boisterous, do not speak to hie,
^est by rude hurting of her lips she cry.
He that gets kisses with his pleading tongue,
And gets not all things that to love belong:
^ count him for a Meacock and a sot,
Worthy to loose the kisses that he got.
What more then kissing wanted of the game,
Was thy mere dastardie, not bashful shame:
They term it force, such force comes welcome still,
What pleases them, they grant against their will.
Phoebe the fair was forced, so was her sister,
Yet Phoebe in her heart thanked him that kissed her:
There is a tale well known how Hecubs son,
To steal fair Hellen through the stream did run.
Venus who by his censure won in I Would,
Gave to him in requital this fair bride:
Now for another world does sail with joy,
A vvelcome daughter to the King of Troy.
The whilst the Grecians are already come,
Moved with this public wrong against Ilium:
Achilles in a smok his Sex does smother,
And lays the blame upon his careful mother.
What makes thou great Achilles tozing wool,
When Pallas in a caske should hide thy skull?
What does that palm with webs and thrids of gold*
Which are more fit a warlike shield to hold?
Why should that right hand rock and twig contai^^
By which the Troiane Hector must be slain.
Cast off these loose vailes and thy armor take,
And in thy hand the spear of Pelias shake.
Thus Lady-like he with a Lady lay,
Till what he was her belly did bewray:
Yet was she forced: so ought we to believe,
Not to be so inforst how would she grieve.
When he should rise from her still would she cry,
For he had armed him and his Rock laid by,
And with a soft voice spoke Achille stay,
It is to soon to rise, lie down I pray:
And then the man that forced her she would kiss,
What force Deidemeia call you this.
There is a kind of fear in the first proffer,
But having once begun she takes the offer:
Trust not to much young man to thy fair face,
Nor look a woman should entreat thy grace.
First let a man with sweet words smooth his way,
Be forward in her ear to sue and pray:
If thou will reap fruits of thy Loves effects,
Only begin it is all that she expects.
So in the ancient times Olimpian Jove,
Made to Heroes suite and vvonne their love:
But if thy words breed scorn, a while forbear,
For many what most flies them hold most dear:
And what they may have proffered fly and shun, ^e secret in l^ue.

By soft retreat great vantage may be vvonne.
In person of a vvoer come not still,
But sometimes as a friend in mere good will:
Thou camst her friend, but shall return her Love,
A white soft hew my judgment does disprove.
Give me a face whose color knows no Art,
Which the green sea has tan'd the Sun made swart:
Beauty is mere uncomely in a Clown, Beauty not approved in ^ man.

That under the hot Planets plough the ground.
And thou that Pallas garland would redeem,
To have a white face it would ill be seen.
Let him that loves look pale, for I protest, Look pale.

That color in a Lover still shows best:
Orion wandering in the woods looked sickly,
Daphne being once in love lost color quickly.
Thy leanness argues love, seem sparely fed, Lean.

And sometimes wear a nightcap on thy head:
For griefs and cares that in afflictions show, Sickly.

Weaken a Lovers spirits and bring him low.
Look miserably poor, it much behoues,
That all that see you, may say, yon man loves:
Shall I proceed or stay, move or dissuade?
Friendship and faith of no account are made.
Love mingles right with wrong, friendship despises,
And the world faith holds vain, and slightly prises.
Thy Ladies beauty do not thou commend, Suspect thy friend in ^^ue.

To thy companion or thy trusty friend:
Least of thy praise enamoured it may breed,
Like love in them with passions that exceed.
Yet was the nuptial bed of great Achilles,
Unstained by his dear friend Actorides:
The wife of Theseus though she went astray,
Was chaste as much as in Pirithous Iay.
Phoebus and Pallas, Hermoins, Phillades,
And the two twins we call Tindarides:
Tend to the like, but he that in these days,
For the like trust acquires the self same praise.
He may as well from weeds seek sweet rose buds,
Apples of thornetrees, honey from the floods.
Nothing is practiced now but what is ill,
Pleasure is each man's God, faith they excel:
And that stolen pleasure (...) respected chief,
Which falls to one man by another grief:
O mischief you young lovers, fear not those,
That are your open and professed foes.
Suspect thy friend, though else in all things just,
Yet in thy Love he will deceive thy trust.
Friends breed true fears, in love the presence hare,
Of thy near kindsman, brother and sworn mate:
I was about to end, but lo I see,
How many humorous thoughts in women be. Qu^t capi^a tot sensus

But thou that in my Art thy name wilt raise,
A thousand humors woe a thousand vvayes:
One plot of ground all simples cannot bring,
This is for vines, here corn, there olives spring.
More then be several shapes beneath the skies,
Have women's gestures, thoughts, and fantasies?
He that is apt will in himself devise,
Innumerable shapes of fit disguise.
To shift and change like Proteus whom we see,
A Lion first, a bore, and then a tree.
Some fishes strang^ly by a dart are took,
These by a net, and others by a hook:
All ages not alike intrapped are,
The crooked old wife sees the train from far.
Appear not learned unto one that is rude,
Nor loose to one with chastity indu'd:
Should you so do, alas the pretty elues,
Would in the want of Art distrust themselves.
Hence comes it, their best fortunes some refuse,
And the base bed of an inferior choose:
Part of my toils remains, and part is past,
Here does my shaken ship her ancker cast.
FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK.
SIng Io P^^an, twice twice Io say,
My toils (...) pitch^, and I have caught my pray*
Let the glad Lou^r crown my head with b^yes
And before old blind Hom^r O^id praise. Paris. P^lops.

So did King (...) son exult^ng skip,
With the fair ravished Hellen in his ship*
So did he sing, th^^ in his Chariot run*
And Vict^^ li^^ the bright Allanta (...).
(...)
Yet in the mid-sea far from any coa^^*
It Is not enough to (...) by my new Ar^,
To find a Lady that commands thy (...).
The reach of my (...) is much deeper,
By Art thou her shale win, by Art sh^l^ keep (...)
As difficult it is by Art to blind her*
To (...) de^^res, as a^ the fir^^ to find her*
In this consists the (...) of m^ skill*
Cupid and Venus both assist me still.
And gratio^s E^ato my style prepa^e,
T^o^ art the muse (...) have of Lovers care.
I promise wondrous things, I will explain,
How ^ickle thoughts in love may firm r^m^ine.
And how the Wag in fetters may be hurled,
(...) ^anders round about the world*
Ye^ is Love light, and has two vvings to fly,
(...) hard to o^^strip him mounting the sky. The tale of Dedalus and ^is
son Icarus.

What M^^os to his guest always denied,
(...)
(...)
In which to (...) ^he Queen Pasiph^es guilt.
Kneeling he say^^* just Minos end my mones,
And let my (...) country sh^o^d my bones.
Grant me great King, what yet the ^ates deny,
And where I have not lived, o let me die:
Or if dread Sovereign, I deserve no grace,
Look with a piteous eye on my childs face.
And grant him lea^e, from whence we are exild^,
Or pity me, if you deny my child*
This and much more he says* bu^ all in vain,
Both son and ^i^e still does the King detain.
Which he (...), said, now now it is fit,
To give the world cause to admire thy wit*
The La^^ an^ S^a ^re watched by day and night,
Nor Land no^ S^a lies open to our ^^ight.
Only the air (...) try,
To cut a (...) through the (...) fly:
Jove be auspitio^^ ^o my (...),
(...)
But make this refuge since I can p^epare,
No means to (...) Lord, but (...) the ay^^*
Make me (...), bring me to the brim,
Of the black Stygi^^ vva^^rs, (...)
Oh humane wit, thou can invent much ill,
Thou searchest strange a^^s, who would think by skill
A heavy man like a light bird should stray,
And through the empty heavens find a fi^ way.
He places in just order all his quills,
Whose bottoms with resolved vva^e he fills:
Then binds them with a line, and being f^st tide,
He places them like oars on either side.
The little Lad the downy feathers blew,
And what his father wrought he nothing knew:
The wax he softened, with the strings he played,
Not thinking for his shoulders they were made:
To whom his father spoke, and then looked pale,
With these swift ships we to our land must sail.
All passage now does cruel Minos stop,
Only the empty air he still leaves open:
That way must we, the land and the rough deep,
Does Minos bar the air, he cannot keep.
But in the way beware thou set no eye,
On the sign Virgo nor Boots hie:
Look not the black Orion in the face,
That bears a sword, but just with me keep place.
Thy vvings are now in fastening, follow me,
I will before thee fly, as thou shall see.
Thy father mount or stoop, so I arreed thee,
Take me thy guide, and safely I will lead thee.
If we should soar too near great Phoebus seat,
The melting wax will not endure the heat:
Or if we fly too near the humid Seas,
Our moistened wings we shall not shake with ease.
Fly between both, and with the gusts that rise,
(...) thy light body sail amidst the skies:
And ever as his little son he charms,
He fits the feathers to his tender arms.
And shows him how to move his body light,
As birds do teach their little young ones flight:
By this he calls a counsel of his wits,
And his own wings unto his shoulders ^its.
Being about to rise he fearful quakes,
And in his new way his ^aint body shakes:
Bu^ ere he ^ooke his flight he kissed his son,
Whilst floods of tears down by his cheeks did run.
There was a hillocke not so high and ^all,
As lo^tie mountains be, nor yet so small:
To be with vallyes even, and yet a hill,
From this they both attempt their uncouth skill:
The father moves his wings and with respect,
His eyes upon his wandering son reflect.
They bear a spacious course, and the apt boy,
Fearelesse of harms in his new tract does joy:
And flies more boldly, now upon them looks,
The fisher men that angle in the brooks.
And with their eyes cast upward frighted stand,
By this is Samos Isle on their left hand:
With Maxos, Paros, Delphos, and the rest,
F^^^elesse they take the course that likes them best.
Upon the right hand (...) they forsake,
Now Astpelea with the fishie lake:
Shadie Pac^inne full of woods and groves,
When the rash boy to bold in ventering roues:
Looses his guide, and takes his ^^igh^ so hie,
That the soft wax against the Sun does fry.
And the cords slip that made the feathers fast,
So that his arms have power upon no bl^st:
He fearfully from the high clouds looks down,
Upon the lower heavens whose curld waves ^rowne.
At his ambitious height, and from the skies,
He sees black night and death before his eyes:
Now mel^s the w^^e, his naked arms he shakes,
And seeking to catch hold, no hold he takes.
But now the naked Lad down headlong falls,
And by the way he father, father calls:
Help father, help he cries, and as he sp^akes,
A violent wave his course of language breaks.
The unhappy father, but no father now,
Cries out aloud, son Icarus where art thou:
Where art thou Icarus? where do thou fly?
Icarus where are? when strait he does epsy, Use i^ c^armes.

The feathers swim, thus loud he does exclame*
The e^rth his bones, the Sea still keeps his name.
Minos could not restrain a man from flight,
But wing^^ Cupid be he nere so light:
He gulls himself that seeks to witches craft, No Magic potions.

Or with a young colts forehead make a draft.
No power in wise Medeus potions dwells,
Nor drowned poisons mixed with magic spells:
The power of Love is not enforced by these,
For were it so, then had Aersonides,
Been stayed by Phasius, and Vlisse kept,
Who stole from Circe while the inchantresse slept.
These charmed drugs moves madness, hurts the brain
To gain pure love, pure love return again
Mischievous thoughts eschew to purchase grace,
Manners preuailes more then a beauteous face.
And yet the Nymphs the love of Nilus seek, Use manners.

And Homer doats on Nieureus the fai^e Greek.
But trust not thou thy beauty to keep kind,
Thy Mistress seeks the beauty of the mind:
All outward beauty fades as years increase,
Even so it wears away and waxes less.
Beauty in her own course is overtaken,
The Violet now fresh is, strait forsaken.
Nor always do the Lillies of the field,
The glorious beauties of their object yield:
The fragrant rose once plucked the briery thorn,
Shows rough and naked, on which the rose was born*
Oh thou most fair, white hairs come on apace,
And wrinkled furrows which will plough thy face:
Instruct thy soul, thy thoughts have perfect made,
These beauties last till death, all others fade.
To liberal Arts thy careful hours apply,
Learn many tongues with their true Euphony:
Ulysses was not fair but eloquent,
Yet to his Love the Sea Nymphs did consent.
How often did the Witch his stay implore,
Making the Seas unfit for sail or oar:
She praid him often, because he spoke so well,
Over and over Troyes sad fate to tell.
Whilst he with pithy words and fluent phrase,
Recites the self same story diverse ways:
Calipso as they on the Seabanke stood,
Casting their eyes upon the neighboring flood;
Desires the fall and blouddy acts to hear,
Wrought by the Ordrision Captains sword and spear
Then holding twixt his fingers a white wand,
Wha^ she requests he draws upon the sand.
Here Is Troy quoth he, and then the walls he paints,
Think Simois this, imagine these my tents:
There was a place in which Dolon was slain,
About the vigill watch, when with the rain,
The Hemonian horses play, and as he speaks,
To counterfeit that place the sand he breaks.
Here Scithian R^esus tents are pitched on hie,
This way his horsemen slain, returned I.
More did he draw, when on the sudden low,
A clyming wave the shore does overflow.
And as her drops amidst his works does fall,
It washed away his tents, his Troy and all:
To which the Goddess, dares Ulysses try,
These senseless violent waves that clime so hie.
And will thou with these waters be ^^noyed,
By which so great names are so soon destroyed.
Then trust no idle shape, it will decay,
Seek inward beauty, such as lasts for aye:
Sweet affability Be affable.
will enter far
Into a woman's breast, when scorn breeds war.
We hate the hawke and loath her flesh to eat,
Because by rapine she does get her meat.
The Woolfe we hunt, and envy all her stock,
Because the Lamb^ she kills, and spoils the flock:
But none the gentle Swallow lays to catch,
The loving stocks within our turrets hatch.
Away with quarrels, Shun strife.
bitter words, rough deeds,
Love with kind language and fair speeches speeds.
Strife makes the married couple often jar,
The man with wife, the wife with man to war:
Leave braules to wives, they are their marriage dower,
And with kind words salute thy Paramore.
When by appointment you shall meet in bed,
By the laws done, you are not thither led:
Strict statutes from such actions still withdraw,
Yet your abounding love supply the Law.
Bring loving Be loving.
spe^ches to inchant the ear,
And moving words, such as she joys to hear:
I am not Tutor unto him that is rich,
My precepts so are not to so high a pitch.
The Lover that is endowed with gold or ^ee,
And comes with gifts, he has no need of me.
He that at every word can take supply,
Has in that every word more wit then I:
We yield to him he that their laps can fill,
Teaches an Art that goes beyond my skill.
My Muse instructs poor Lovers vvanting pelf,
For when I loved I was but poor my self.
Still as my purse no store of crowns affords,
I in the stead of rich gifts give fair words:
Be fearful you poor Lovers to displease,
Be patient to endure, B^ patient.
things against your ^ase.
Things that the rich would scorn, it was my hap,
Once as my head lay in my Mistress lap:
To grow enraged, when strait I fell to beat her,
To touse her ordered locks and ill entreat her.
But what ensude oh God, much grief it cost me,
Many sweet days, many sweet nights it lost me.
Whether I touched her clothes I might deny,
She says I tore them, I some new must buy:
You Scholars by your Masters harms beware,
These ills by him already proved are.
Make against the Part^ians war, but to thy Love
Being concord peace, and all things that can move:
Though at the first you find him but untoward,
Bear it, and she in time will prove less froward.
The crooked arm that from the tree is cut,
By gentle usage is made strait, but put:
Such violence is it as thy strength delivers,
And thou will break the short wood into shiuers.
By industry thou may oreswimme a flood,
Whose raging current else is scarce withstood:
By industry the Tigers gently grow,
And the wild Lions may be tamed so.
The savage Bull whose fierce ire does provoke,
By industry is brought unto the yoke:
Arcadian Atalanta was most cruel,
At length came one whom she esteemed her Jewel.
Often wept Hippomanes at his mishap,
And her severity who sought to entrap
Her harmeles Lovers, often at her fierc^ beck,
He laid betwixt his shoulders and her neck.
The ioyles for savage beasts, and with his spear,
He pierst such untamed cattle as came near:
To such hard taskes I do not thee compel,
To arm thy body against Monsters fell.
In the wild wilderness to seek out broils,
Nor on thy neck to bear the guilefull toils.
My imposition is not so severe,
No such adventures are enjoined here.
This only means all dangers will disperse, Humo^ her.

Yield her her humor when she grows perverse:
What she in conference argues, argue thou,
What she approues, in self same words allow.
Say what the says, deny what she denies,
If she laugh, laugh, if she weep wet thine eyes.
And let thy countenance be to thine a law,
To keep thy actions and thy looks in awe:
Or if thou hand to hand shall play at dice, Loose to her at game.

At tables or at chests by some device,
Let her depart the Conqueror else 'twere sin,
What gladly thou would loose, that let her win.
Let thy officious hand then bear her fan, Bear her fan.

When thou shall chance her through the streets to man:
Make thy supporting arm to hers a stay,
Through throngs and pres^es usher her the way:
As she ascends her bed set her a staire,
By which to clime and every thing prepare:
That she may see them done without offense,
Reach thou her pantafles or take them thence.
And standing by to vvatch her while she rests,
Warm thy cold hands betwixt her panting breasts:
Nor think it base, 'tvvill please though it be base,
To hold the glas^e unto thy Mistress face.
He that deserved within those heavens to tarry, Hercules.

Which he before upon his back did carry.
Performing more then Juno could command him,
So strong, that no fierce mo^ster could withstand hi^
Even he Alcides Ioles grace to win,
Shapt like a woman did both card and spin.
Go thou, and in his seruill place proceed,
And gain as fair a Mistress for thy meed:
Art thou enioyn'd at such an hour to be,
In the great Forum where she vvai^es for thee.
Hasten thy weary steps and thank thy fate,
Come there betimes, depart not thence till late:
Bids she thee go, all busines^e lay apart,
Run, till with extreme heat thou melt thy heart.
Sups she abroad, and wants she one to attend her,
Back to her lodging, it will not offend her:
To wait her at the same place in the porch,
And light her home directly with a torch:
Is she in the Country, and commands thee come,
Have thou no coach, upon thy ten toes run.
Let neither vvinter blasts nor storms of hail,
Nor the hot thirsty dogstarre let thee-faile:
Shun neither heat nor cold, but see thou go,
Though every step, thou tread'st knee deep in snow
Love is a kind of war, all such depart,
As bear a timorous or a slothful heart.
Nights, winters, long ways, watching grief in millions,
Torments Loves soldiers in their soft pauillions:
On ^old ground thou must lie, bear many a shower,
When the heavens open, and the floudgates power.
So Phoebus when Admetus sheep he kept,
In a thatcht Cotrage on the cold flower slept.
What Phoebus did, who may it not beseem,
Better then Phoebus of himself esteem:
What mortal lover dare, then sloth despise,
You that confirmed and lasting love devise.
^f at the outward gate a vvatch stand centy, Hazard for her.

Or say the bolts or locks deny thee entry:
Search some strange passage, through a casement crall,
Or by a cord down from the chimney fall.
Thee in her loving arms she strait will take,
Rejoicing thou would hazard for her sake:
Every vain fear and danger thou do prove,
Is a sure pledge and token of thy love:
Often had L^ander without Hero slept,
To find his Love into the Sea he leapt.
Think it no shame the favor to deserve:
Of every Maid, that does thy Mistress serve: To use her Maids.

Salute them by their names in courteous sort,
For these are they that can prefer thy sport.
And more and more into their grace to grow,
Some trifling gifts on each of them bestow:
Especially regard her smiles or frowns,
Whose office is to brush her Mistress gowns.
To her make means, for she is groom porter,
Both to her bed, and such as do resort her:
Great and rich gifts I do not bid thee send her, What gifts to send her.

I mean thy Love, but knacks of value slender:
As when the orchard boughs are clag'd with fruit,
In some choice dish from thence commend thy suite.
And let the little Page that bears them say,
Though thou perhaps have bought them by the way:
These pares, or plums, or grapes which I present you
As his first fruits were by my Mistress sent you.
Or be they hazell nuts, or chestnuts great,
Even such as Amarillis loved to eat.
Or a young Turkey, these will show thy heart,
These gifts send freely, lay thy gold apart:
Such presents never bring men to despair,
To untimely age, or to tormenting care.
O let them amongst others rot and perish,
That hate men's persons, and their presence cheri^
What shall I bid thee send her, Send her verses.
meetred ^imes,
Alas, they find small honor in these times.
Verses they praise, but gould they most require,
If rich, though barbarous, he commands desire:
This is the golden age, not that of old,
Both life and honor are now bought with gold,
Though Homer bring the Muses in the train,
Yet without gold he may retire again:
Some girls there be, but they be passing few,
Worthy to rank amongst the learned crew.
Others unlearned there are, yet would be held,
As if in skill and judgment they excelled:
Both let thy verses praise, and in a style,
Of sweetest posie their worthes compile.
Perhaps thy labored lines they may esteem,
And like a slight gift thy sweet verses seem:
What thou intend'st to do by some fine feate, Note.

Cause of thy Lady may of thee entreat.
Art thou by covenant tide, and must it be,
That thou of force must set thy servant free:
Contriue it so, that it she dare protest,
Thou had not freed him but at her request.
Art thou for any rash offense asswag'd,
So make thy peace, that she may be engaged:
Do as thy profit leads thee, and yet so,
That she for every thing thou do may owe.
And thou that have attained by passions deep,
Thy Ladies grace, Praise her ^t^ire.
and would her favor keep:
Make her believe still when thou view'st her feature
Through all the world she is the fairest creature.
If cloth of Tire she wear, that habit laud,
Her Tirrian vesture with thy tongue applaud.
^^ilke which we from rich Arabi^ traffic,
^^eare such attire cannot be ^ound through Afric.

^cloth of gold she wear, tush gold is base,
^ou compare her habit to her face:
^n the cold she but a freeze gown wear,
^en her perfection makes that garment dear.
^he completely dressed, as rapt with joy?
^ry out aloud, my heart burns bright as Troy.
^oth she above her forehead part her hair?
that lovely seen does make her twice as fair:
(...) her curld locks in careless tresses dangled?
(...) these crispe knors thy heart must be entangled.
(...) she does dance, Her danting.
admire her active feet,
(...) sing, then vvonder at her voice so sweet.
^ut when she ceasseth, Her voice.
either then complain,
^treating her to try her skill again.
^o this, and were her heart as hard as brass,
^r more obdurate then Medus^es was.
^et she in time shall be compeld to yield,
and thou depart a Conqueror from the field:
^nely beware o^ too apparent flattery,
(...) will destroy the siedge and tedious battery.
^issembling with Art, tempered much imports,
^lse from all nature credit it dehorts:
(...) Autumn when the year is in his pride,
and the grape full with wine, red's on the side,
^hen the clear air keeps a divided sear,
^ffording sometimes cold, and sometimes heat.
^omen are prone to love healthful and quick,
^ut if by chance thy Lady be falne^^icke,
^ake both thy love, zeal, faith, and all things cheap,
^hen sow what with full sickle thou may reap.
^ast all about her longing thoughts to please,
^eeme not as if thou lothest her disease:
Employ thy hand in each thing done to her,
These offices even of themselves will vvoe her:
Let her behold thee weep as thou standst by,
That she may drink each tear falls from thy eye*
Vow many things, but all in public style,
Tell her thy pleasing dreams, so make her smile.
And let the trembling Nurse, thought fit to vvatch,
Bring in her shaking hand a kindled match*
Let her peruse the bed and make it soft,
Whilst with thy hand thou turnst and rearst her often.
These are the easy footsteps thou may ^read,
Which have made way to many a vvanton bed:
No such fair office can with hate be stained,
Rather by these affection is soon gained.
But minister no drugs of bitter juice,
Such let the rival temper to his use.
Now greater gusts must to my Bark give motion,
Being from the shore launcht forth into the ocean.
Young love at first is vveake, and craves forbearing*
But in continuance gathers strength by vvearing:
Yo^ moody Bull of whom thou art afraid,
Being but a Cal^e thou with his horns have played.
That tree beneath whose branches thou do stand,
To shield thee from a storm was once a wand:
A River at the first not once a stride,
Increases as he runs his waters vvide.
Receiving in fresh brooks in diverse ranks,
Till he in pride have over flowne his banks:
Use to converse with her, the speeder knows,
What strength from ou^^ome and acquaintance grows
Frequent her often, Frequen^ her.
be from her seld away.
Keep in her ear and eye both night and day:
And yet sometimes from these thou may desist,
It Is good one should be asked for being mist.
(...) absent from her some conuenlent season, Be absen^ from her.

and let her rest a while it is but reason.
^he field being span'd returns us treble gain,
^frer great drouth the earth carrouses rain:
^illis did love Demophoon, but not doat,
^ntill she saw his flying ship a floate.
^^nelope her absent Lord did mourn, Vlisset^^

(...) Laodemeia did till the return,
^f her dear spouse, but be not long away.
^ares perish, new love enters by delay.
^hen Menelaus from his house is gone,
^oore Hellen is afraid to lie alone:
and to allay these fears lodged in her breast,
(...) her warm bosom she receives her guest.
that madness was it, Menelaus say,
^hou art abroad whilst in thy house does stay,
under the selfsame roof thy guest and Love,
^adman unto the Hawke to turn the Dove.
and who but such a Gull would give to keep,
^^to the mountain wolf full folds of sheep,
^ellen is blameless, so is Paris too,
and did what^ thou or I my self would do.
^he fault is ^hine, I tell thee to thy face,
^y limiting these Lovers time and place:
from thee the ^eed of all thy wrongs are grown,
those counsel has, she followed but thy own.
^las, what should she do, abroad thou art,
^t home thou leau^st thy guest to play thy part:
(...) lie alone the poor Wench is afraid,
(...) the next room an amourous stranger laid,
^er arms are open to embrace him, he falls in,
and Paris I acquit thee of thy finne:
neither the brisled Boar in his fierce wrath, Woman^ rage.

^orne by the ravenous dogs more anger has:
Nor the she Lion hid within some ache,
Seeking her lost vvhelpes, hid within some ba^ke;
Nor the short Viper does more anger threaten,
Whom some vnvvary (...) has crushed and beaten.
Then a fierce woman shows her ^else in mind,
Her dearest in adult erous arms to find.
Oh then she (...) eye burns apace,
And you may see her thoughts (...) face.
Through swords, through flames she rushes, there is no ill,
So grievous, but she acts it with her will:
This breaks all (...) love, though well compounded,
This destroys all, though nere so firmly grounded.
Medea did her husbands guilt repair,
And with her bloody hand Absiretis slay.
Yo^ Swallow which thou ^eest was such another,
Before her transformation a fierce m other:
And that her deeds may yet be understood,
The feathers of her breast were (...) blood.
But for all this I task not thy affection,
Of one, and her alone to make election*
You Gods defend the (...) should prove so deep,
These married men (...).
Play you the wantons, but being done (...) it,
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
^hilst (...) lived with one contented,
^is Wife was chaste and never it repented:
^is secret blows her heart did so provoke,
^anting a sword she with the scabbard stroke.
^he hears of Chirses and the many iares,
about Liruesis to increase the wars:
and therefore mere revenge the Lady charms,
(...) take Thie^tes in her amourous arms.
^when thou have gone on thy nightly arrant,
^he act by circumstance pears too apparent:
^eny it steadfastly, what ere they know,
and bouldly face them that it was not so.
(...) not so sad or of too mirthfull cheer,
^est in thy countenance thy deeds appear:
(...) thy close meetings use thy nimble knee,
(...) may perhaps a bold intruder be.
and after so repulsed scale the fort,
^^t venture not too rashly on thy sport:
(...) any there be by whose vnkilfull motions,
^^u are prescribed strange drugs and diverse potions.
(...) make you lusty they are poisons all,
(...) infect the body and inflame the gall.
^pper with biting nettleseed they mix,
^f bastard pellitory some few sticks:
which beaten, and in old wine dr^nke up clear,
^akes spightfull men aloft their standards bear.
^he Goddess that beneath high Eripe reigns, Venus.

unto her pleasure no such blood constraines:
^hite skallions brought you from Megera eat,
^ith garden sage make sallets to thy meat.
^^ke new laid eggs, fresh honey from the Bees,
^ne apple nuts full ripe, eat such as these:
^his wholesome fare breeds naught, corrupt or tragic,
that has my Art to do with hellish Magic.
Thou that but now wast bid thy guilt to hide,
Turns from that course, boast and in it take prid^
Nor blame the lightness of thy Tutors mind,
You see we do not sail still with one wind.
Sometimes the East, and when his fury fails,
West North and South by turn does fill our sail^
The Chariot driuer sometimes slakes his raines,
Sometimes again his horses he restraines.
Many there be whom calmes much does blind,
And if they find a rival grow unkind:
Prosperity makes humane minds grow rank,
Themselves to know, or their great God to thank^
Nor is it held an easy task to find,
Men that all fortunes bear with equal mind.
As fire, his strength being wasted hides his head,
In the white ashes sleeping though not dead.
And when a sudden blast does come by chance,
Spark fire and light all wake as from a trance:
So when with sloth and rest the spirits grow blu^
Love must be quickened even as fire is wont.
Make her to fear, and to look pale sometime,
By showing her some instance of thy crime:
Which she suspected erst in some strange veins,
Must she abide whilst she thy guilt complains.
No sooner the report of this assailes her,
But coulor, voice, and every sense strait fails her
Then I am he whose face she madly tears,
Whom she desires to have strait by the ears.
(...) ate me she must, and yet good God she may not
Without me live she will (alas) but cannot.
Dwell not upon this passion, but at length,
Make peace, in little time rage gathers strength:
By this her white neck with thy arms embrace,
Drying the tears that trickle down her face.
(...) her yet weeping, her yet weeping show,
(...) the proud sweets the Queen of love does know:
^his makes true concord in her greatest rage,
^hese sports alone her passion can assuage.
^eace goes unarmed and knows no warlike fashions
^his happy peace is known amongst all Nations:
^oues by their nombring songs show their good wills
(...) now they fought, and now they join their bills.
^he first confused Mass no order knew,
^arth Sea and Heaven, had all one face, one hew:
^rait was the heavens the earths large covering made,
^he shore guirt in the Sea not to invade.
^^ther in others bounds then Chars ceast,
^^d each thing in their sever all parts in ^reast:
^he woods receive the beasts, air the birds take,
(...) the Sea choose, and the land forsake,
(...) wanders in the field and knows no art,
^eare strength his body rules, meare lust his heart,
^roues were his Cities, shadowy bows his dwelling
^ater his drink, all other drinks excelling.
^^d long it was ere man the woman knew,
^ll pleasure did their appetites pursue:
and then upon these unknown sweets she ventred,
^here many an vnsackt fort was scald and entered.
(...) they had none, no man then played the Suter,
(...) lay with her, they liked without a Tutor:
^en so one bird does with another toy,
^^d the male fish does with the female joy.
^^e Heart the Do does follow, serpents to
(...) with the serpents held their feat to do:
^word4 hounds in their adulterate parts are fast,
^^e joyful Ewe receives the Ram at last.
(...) Cow with lofty bellowing meets the Bull,
^^d the rank he Got finds the female trull.
The Mare to try the valiant Horses courage,
Swims over fords, and does large pastures forage:
To thy offended Love give this strong potion,
And perfect friendship strait succeeds the motion*
This medicine rightly took all hate expells,
As I was writing, lo the God of fire,
Appears, and with his thombe he strock his lire:
Appears, and with his thombe he stroke his lire.
In his right hand a branch of Laurel grew,
A Laurel chaplet I might likewise view:
Circle his brow, though all men do not know it,
This shows the Suns God Phoebus is a Poet.
Who after moving of his head thus spoke,
Mistress of (...), thy amorous Scholars take,
And lead them to my temple built on hie,
There is an old sun known in every sky.
Which by his Charects does plainly show,
That every man must learn himself to know:
Alone he vvisely loves that can do so.
He that is fair may show his amorous face,
Whose skin is white to do his color grace.
Lie naked with his neck and shoulders bare,
Let him shun silence, whose discourse is rare.
He that sings, sing by Art, that drinks drink to,
By Art, and without cunning nothing do.
Let not the learned in their words declame,
Nor the vain Poet prate of his own fame.
So Phoebus warnes, Phoebus himself has said it,
And his brave words are worthy to have credit.
To come more near the Lover that loves wisely,
If these my precepts he observe precisely:
Shall reach his wish, the earth brings not still increase
Ships when the winds keep* in their course do (...)
Few be our helps, but many be our troubles,
Small is our furtherance, which our let still doubles:
A Lover must endure much grief besides,
For every Hare in Aetheo that abides.
For every berry that the Olive yields,
For every spike of grass sprung in the fields:
For every shell strowed on the salt sea shore,
Love has one grief to taste, and ten griefs more.
Art told that she abroad, but now did wonder,
Yet in her window see her with her Pander.
Blame thou thine eyes, for it shall much avail thee,
Think not that news, but that thy eyesight fa^l'd thee:
Locks she the door she promised to Ieaue open,
O think not she deceitfully has spoken.
Take up thy lodging, make thy bed thy floor,
Thy pillow the cold threshold of the door:
Perhaps the Maid from high may cast a flout,
And ask what is he does keep the gates without.
Yet both the Maid and rude posts do thou flatter,
^prinkling the seats and portalls with rose water.
^f she call come, if bid thee go, then trudge,
Railes she upon thee, does she call thee drudge:
Nay does she knock thee, bear it, it is meet,
Nor scorn it though she bid thee kiss her feet.
^ dwell on trifles, greater matters hear,
^o which thou people lend a general ear:
On stricter impositions now we enter,
^ertue is still employed, no hard aduenter.
A rival brook, do this, and by Jove's power,
Thou art inthrong'd a Conqueror in his tower.
Oh think me not a man that thus does teach,
^ome rough hewed oak does this hard doctrine preach:
This is the hardest thing I can impose thee,
If she defy bear it, if she shows thee
Her hand; forbear to read it every day,
When she calls come, when she commands thee (...)
This even the married to lead peaceful lives,
Are o^t enforced to endure of their fair wives.
I am not perfect I must needs confess,
In this my Art, though I this art profess.
What shall I then, my word I cannot keep,
I have not power to swim a sea so deep:
Shall any kiss my Lady I being by,
And to his throat shall I not madly fly.
Shall any becken to her and I bear it,
Shall any court her and I stand to hear it:
I saw one kiss my Mistress I complained,
And anger all my vital spirits constrained.
My love alas with barbarism abound,
And does my wit and spirits whole confound:
That Wittoll is much better skilled then I,
Who sees such fights, and patiently stands by.
To keep the room where such things are in place,
Despoiles the front of shamefastnes and grace:
Then oh you young men though you come to view,
Your looks beguile you, do not think^ it true.
Against all censures I ever hold this plea, Surprise her not.

It is not good to take them Res in Re.
Where two are taken napping both alike,
Their mutual guilt makes them the oftener strike,
This tale through heaven is blazed how unawares,
Venus and Mars was taken in Vulcans snares. The tale of Venus and Mars.

The God of war does in his brow discover,
The perfect and true pattern of a Lover.
Nor could the Goddess Venus be so cruel,
To deny Mars, soft kindness is a Jewel.
^n any woman, and becomes her woll,
^n this the Queen of Love does most excel.
Oh God) how often have they mocked and flouted,
The Smiths polt foot, who nothing them misdoubted:.
Made jests by him and his begrimed trade,
And his smudg'd vissage black with coledust made.
Mars tickled with loud laughter whee he saw,
^enus like Vulcan limpe, and halt, and draw,
One foot behind another with a grace,
To counterfeit his odd and uneven pace.
Their meeting first they did conceal with fear,
From every searching eye and captives ^are.
The God of war and this lascivious Dame,
^n public view were full of bashful shame:
But the Sun spies how this sweet pair agree,
Oh what bright Phoebus can be hid from thee.
The Sun both sees and blabs the sight forthwith,
And in all post he speeds to tell the Smith:
Oh Sun what bad examples do thou show,
What thou in secret see must all men know.
For silence ask a bribe from her fair treasure,
She Will grant thee that shall make thee swel with pleasure,
The god whose face is smudgd with smok and fire,
Places about their bed a net of wire.
So queintly made that it deceiues the eye,
Strait as he faines to Lemnos he must hie:
The Lovers meet where he the train has set,
And both lie caught within the wiery net.
He calls the gods, the Lovers naked sprall,
And cannot rise, the Queen of Love shows all.
Mars chafes and Venus weeps, neither can flinch,
Grapled they lie, in vain they kick and winch:
Their legs are one within another tied,
Their hands so fast that they can nothing hide.
Among these high spectators one by chance,
That saw them naked in this pitfall dance:
Thus to himself said, if that it tedious be,
Good God of war bestow thy place on me.
Scarce at thy prayers god Neptune he unbound th^^
But would have left the^ as the gods there found the
The nets untied, Mars strait repaires to Creet,
Venus to Paptes, after that they meet.
What did this help thee Vulcan, shall I tell thee,
Unto more grief and rage it will compel thee:
The public meeting which at first shame couers,
Is now made free, who knows not they be lovers.
There is no hope they should be now reclam'd,
Worse then they have been, how should they (...) shamed
Of thy rash deed it often does repent thee,
Mad art thou in thy mind, yet must content thee:
This I forbid you, so does Venus too,
It harmed her, and she forwarnes it you.
Lay for thy rival then no secret snares,
Nor intercept his tokens unawares:
Let these close prancks by such just men be tried,
That are by fire and water purifide.
Behold once more I give you all to know,
Save vvanton loves my art does nothing show:
No governed Matron well and chastely guided,
I here protest is in my verse de^rided.
What profane man at Ceres kites dare smile,
Or blab her secrets kept in Samos I Will:
Silence is held a virtue, silence then,
T^ls tails and blabs, fie, Venus hates such men:
For blabbing Tantalus is placed in hell,
And there must ever and for ever dwell.
Hungry, whilst ripened fruit hangs by his lip,
Thirsty, vvhiles water by his chin does slip:
But Venus more desires then any other,
Her secret mysteries and rites to smother.
I charge you let no tell-tales hither come,
Such amongst many there must needs be some:
Hide her reports from every ear that lists,
And lock her secrets up in brason chests.
In their new births till pleasures buried lie,
Twixt us they grow, betwixt us let them die.
Her naked parts, if she to any shows,
Her readiest hand to shadow them she throws:
The shameless beasts in common pastures stray,
And act their generation at noonday.
Which Maids by chance espying, cry oh spite,
And through their fingers look to see the sight.
But when our Lover with his mistress meets,
Have beds and doors shut twixt them and the streets
With clothes and vailes their nakedness they shroud
Wishing the bright Sun hid behind some cloud.
Even in those days when men on Acorns fed,
And the green turfe was made the general bed:
When no thatcht cottage or poor house was builded,
By which from heat of cold they might be shielded.
Into the vvoods and caves the people went,
And their sweet pleasures there remotely spent.
In the Suns presence they showed nothing bare,
The rudest and most barbarous had this care:
As loath the day should view their public shames,
Now to their nightly actions they give names,
Bargains and price is made in all their doings,
And nothing costs us dearer then our vvoings.
Let not thy talk be when thou come in place, Noath.

To say she, this, or that vvench did me grace:
Or point them with thy finger, it may fall
Thus thou may loose her whom thou love and all:
Others there be from street to street do wander,
And innocent women in their shops do slander.
Forging of them they know not many a lie,
Which were they true they gladly would deny:
For who command not they, their spoil is such,
Whose breast they cannot fold their names they tuch
Go then thou odious Pander that keeps whores,
A thousand locks hang fast upon thy doors:
Part of her honest can thou keep within,
When her whole name abroad is full of ^^nne.
Do not their vvanton wishes make them naught,
When they desire to be as they are thought:
Sincearest Loves we sparingly do teach,
Yet like no public crast their names impeach. Necessary ^bseruati^^s in a
lo^er.

Dissemble every fault in their complections,
Hit not in vvomens teeth their imperfections.
I wish you rather smother them, then blame them,
They love if you praise them, hate if shame them:
Andromeda was belly sides and back,
To Perseus seen, he did not term her black.
Andromeda she was of to huge a stature,
One loving Hector praised her gifts of nature:
And liked her self, faults at the first despised,
Seem not so gross when men be well advised.
Continuance and acquaintance wears away,
Such spots as are apparent the first day:
A young plant clothed in a tender rind,
Cannot vvithstand the fury of the wind.
But when his bark is grown, he scorns each blast,
In spite of whom he grows and bears at last:
^uery succeeding week and following day,
Takes from acquainted looks a slain away.
And what to day a gross blot thou would guess,
To morrow in thy eye appears much less.
Young Heifors cannot be tickt to bear,
The rank and lusty Bull for the first year:
But their society acquaints the smell,
After continuance they can brook it well.
Then favor their disgraces and relieve them,
Blemishes help by the good names you give the^
To her whose skin as black as Ebon was,
I have said ere now, OF it is a good brown less,
Or if she look a squint, as I am true,
So Venus looks, if she be black of hew.
Pale for the world like Pallas, be she grown
Yellow, by heavens Minerua up and down:
If she be tall then for her height commend her,
She that is lean like Envy term her slender:
She that is dwarfish name her light and quick,
And call her well set that is grubbed thick,
She that is puffed like Boreus in the cheek,
Is but full fast, and Daphne she is like.
Thus quallifie their faults, not to disgrace them,
But in a higher rank of beauty place them:
Or happenest thou of one but dim of sight,
Wrinckled her brow her grisled hair turned white.
Her nose and chin half met she would take scorn,
To tell who Council was when she was borne.
Then if to such thy love thou vvilt engage,
Look that at no time thou do ask her age.
Though she wants teeth and have a flattering tongue
Yet she takes pleasure to be counted young:
This is the age young men that brings the gain,
And plenteous harvest of the springtides pain.
Employ your selves then in your youth and strength
Age with a soft pace steals on you at length.
Spend thou thy youth at Sea, or till the land,
Or take a warlike vveapon in thy hand:
Follow the wars, siege towns, or lie in trenches,
Or if not so, then learn to love fair wenches.
It is a warfare too, when men are trained,
And even by this employment wealth is gained:
Such discipline, such practice must be used
By us, as those who hostile arms have chused.
Some women by their industry and pains,
The loss of years recouers and regaines:
Times speedy course is by their art controld,
They can prefer themselves from seeming old.
Their amourous pastimes and lascivious plays,
They shape and fashion many thousand ways:
With sundry pleasures they their trade commixe,
And every several day devise new tricks.
They can provoke the appetite and please it,
Conjure the spirit up and strait appease it:
But these rich feasts of sweets which they prepare,
Women and men should both of even hands sha^e.
I hate the bed that yields not mutual joys,
And that is the cause I love not iugling boys:
I hate her denies that no spirit will use,
Yielding no more then what she cannot choose.
I like not pleasure though I like the beauty,
Lasses of Love perform not but of duty:
Duty away, I bannish thee the place,
Where mutual Lovers, mutual sweets embrace,
Let me the music of her soft voice hear,
Whispering her ravished pleasures in my ear.
To bid me on, then pause, proceed, then stay,
And tired with that, to toy some other way.
Let me behold her ^yes turn up the vvhites,
Now to be rapt, now languish in delights.
These prodigal pleasures nature has not given,
To the first age a little above seven.
The wine that from the unripe grape is pressed,
Is tart and sower, the mellow wine tastes best:
The palm tree till it has a well grown rind,
Cannot vvithstand the violence of the vvinde.
The mead new mowne does prick the feet that is bare,
I grant thee young Hermione was fair:
But to prefer the girl before the mother,
The beauteous Hellen neither one or other.
Can so blaspheme, here is Gorge some adore her,
But who praise her, before the Saint that bore her:
Now I suppose ripe fruits I most approve,
And in my thoughts I covet mellowed love.
Yon bed new tossed, behold where it discouers,
The curtains being drawn to vvanton lovers:
There stay my Muse, no further now proceed,
Without thy help they both can speak and speed.
Without thy help kind words will swiftly pass,
Betwixt the Lover and his amourous Lasle:
Without thy help their hands will nimbly creep,
And in each ticklish place their office keep.
Nay every finger will it self employ,
To add increase to thy imperfect joy:
Handling those parts where Love his darts does* hide,
This valiant Hector with his wife has tried.
Andromache to this of force must yield,
His valor was not only for the field:
This stout Achilles of his Love desired,
When with the slaughter of his enemies tired.
He daught his cushes, and unarmed his head,
To tumble with her on a soft down bed:
Thou did rejoice Driseis to embrace,
His bruised corpse, and kiss his bloud-staind face.
These warlike hands that did but late embrew,
Themselves in blood of Trojans whom they slew.
Were now employed to tickle tuch and feel,
And shake a lance that had no point of steel:
Believe me, for I speak as I have tasted,
The sports of Venus are not to be hasted.
They should be rather by degrees prolonged,
By too much speed much often the sport is wronged:
When thou by chance have hit upon the place,
Which being touched a girl still hides her face:
Forbear not though she blush and spring and kick,
And tumbling show thee many a gambale trick.
Thou shall behold her strait lie still amazed,
Her eyes with a lascivious tincture glazed:
Affording a strange kind of humid light,
As when the Moon in water shines by night.
Let neither amourous words cease their enchanting,
Murmr not whispering sounds of ^ioy be wanting:
Yea there let every sweet content resort,
Every word, deed and thought that furthers sport.
Let not thy Mistress use too swift a sail,
Nor let thy have beyond her speed prevail:
Both keep one course, your oars together strike,
Your iourneyes on then, make your pace alike.
Together strive at once win to the mark,
You may no question grope it in the dark:
Then is the fullness of all sweet content,
When both at once strive, both at once are spent.
Such course observe when as the time is free,
And that no jealous eyes attend on thee:
Being secure no future danger near,
Then thou may bouldly dally without fear.
But if thou be not safe, and have short leisure,
Doubtful to be disturbed amidst thy pleasure.
Make then what speed thou can, use all thy force,
And clap a sharp spur to a jade pack-horse:
My work is at an end the palm bring me,
And let the Myrtle garland be my fee.
How much renowned great Pollidorus was,
That all the Greeks in Physic did surpass,
As famous as great Nestor for his age,
Or strong Achilles for his warlike rage.
As much extold as Calchas for his charms,
Or Telemonius Ajax by his arms:
As for his Chariot skill Antomedon,
So great in Love shall I be censured on.
Cannonize me your Poet, give me praise,
And crown my Temples with fresh wreathes of bays:
Let this my laud in every mouth be song,
And my fames clauger through the whole earth rong
I give you armor, such god Vulcan framed,
So great Achilles he his enemies tamed.
And so do ye, but what so ere he be,
That by my arms subdues his enemy:
This Motto let him give, lo here is a Less,
By Ovid my arts Master conquered was:
Behold young Wenches likewise crave my skill,
They shall be next instructed by my quill.
FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Armed at all points, the Greek to field is gone,
To encounter with the naked Amazon:
Behold like weapons in my power remain,
For the Pe^thesilea and thy train.
Go armed alike, fight and they overcome,
Whom sacred Venus favors and her son:
It were not meet poor naked girls should stand,
To encounter men provided hand to hand.
To conquer at such odds 'twere shame for men,
Oh but some say, why Ovid should they pen:
Put poison into snakes, or give to keep,
Unto the ravenous Woolfe a ^ould of sheep.
Oh for some few offenders do not blame,
All of their Sex, let not a general shame:
For some few falters their whole brood inherit,
But every one be censured as they merit.
Although the two Atrides had their lives,
Endangered both by falsehood of their wives:
Though false Eriphile her husband sold,
To Polinyces for a chain of gould.
Yet did the fai^e Penelope live chaste,
While twice five years her royal Lord did wast:
^n blouddy battles and as many more,
Wandering through every sea and unknown shore:
So did the chaste Phillacides and she,
That partner of her husbands grief to be.
Went with him as his Page a tedious way,
And in the travel died before her day:
Oh happy Pheretides thy wife,
From death redeemed thee with her own life.
Receive me oh you flames did Iphias cry,
And with my buried husband let me dye:
And with that word she skips into the fire,
All fair endowments that we can desire.
Reign in a woman's breast no marvel then,
They with adorned virtues please us men:
But these chaste minds my Art enioyneth not,
A softer sail will serve to guide my boat:
Nothing but wanton love flows from my brains,
How pretty wenches may escape men's trains.
A woman neither flames nor swords will shun,
But through them both unto her sweet heart run:
So will not men, poor girls by them are scoft,
Many times men fail, maids sometimes, not often:
False Jason left Medea and her charms,
To claspe another Mistress in his arms.
As much as in thy power false Theseus lay,
So right Ariadin^ was a woeful pray:
To the Sea-fowles and Monsters left alone,
^n a remote place, friendlesse and unknown*
Many uncertain ways has Phillis gone,
Being forsaken of her Demophoon.
And though Aeneas had to surname good,
He left his sword to let out Didos blood:
But what destroy you Ladies, can you tell,
You know not how to love or fashion well.
Your thoughts to art, Love artles stands unsure,
Art with Love tempered is strong to endure:
Nor should you know it now, but that the Queen
Of sacred Love was in my vision seen:
And straightly charged me that I should impart,
To all the Sex the secret of my art.
For thus she spoke, how have poor maids misdone
That against armed men must naked run.
Two books have given men weapons in their hands,
The whilst our fearful Sex unarmed stands:
He that rebuked Therapnes lewd desire,
Since song her praises to a sweeter lire.
Thy self examine, can thou do them damage,
To whom in time thou may perform due homage
This having said she took from off her brow,
A myrtle wreath, for in a myrtle bow,
Her hair was twisted up and gave to me,
Of leaves and seeds a little quantity.
Strait in my brain I felt a power divine,
Whilst in the place a purer air did shine:
And all the cares that hung upon my heart,
Even at that instant I might feel depart.
My wits at ripest, are wenches come thick,
Receive my precepts whilst my wits are quick:
First think how old age hourly does attend, Womenloose no time.

To steal upon thee, so be sure to spend,
No season idly, art thou young then play,
Years like the running waters glide away.
Thou can not stay the floods it streams so fast,
Nor pull the hours back when they are past:
Make use of time for time is swift and fleet,
Nor can the following good be all so sweet.
As the first pleasure was, have I not seen,
This now a withered stalk, once fresh and green:
From that bare throne within these many hours,
I had a chaplet of sweet smelling flowers:
The time shall come when thou that do exclude,
Such lovers from thy doors as would intrude.
Shall on an empty pillow throw thy head,
Stretching thy stiff limbs on a frosty bed:
Nor in the night shall thou be raised up late,
By such as knock and thunder at thy gate.
Nor in the morning when the cock has crowed,
Find porch and threshold with fresh roses strowed:
Aim how soon does the clear color fade,
How quickly vvrinckles in thy skin are made.
Look on thy looks and thou vvilt sadly swear,
Age has too soon snowed on thy golden hair:
Snakes through their age of when they change their skin,
Hearts when they cast their heads fresh strength begin:
And's given to them, when that in age ye grow
Ye have no heads to cast no skins to throw.
Your good flies helples, therefore pluck the flower
Which being gathered withers in an hour:
In many childbirth age is quickly crept,
Fields soon grow lean, that are so often reapt.
You see Endinion by the Moon loved still,
Not does she blush thereat, and by thy will:
Aurora thou would ever have the name,
Of Cephalus thy dear, nor think it shame.
And to conceal thee Adonore whose hearse,
Venus her self hung many a tragic verse.
Tell us by whom you Queene-borne of the sea,
Had you Aeneas and Hermione.
Oh mortal generation follow these,
And practice after them being goddesses:
Do not deny your rauishing pleasures when,
They are besought you by desirous men.
Tell me what loose you by it, what thou have,
Thou art possessed of still, and feel'st no vvast:
Take thence a thousand sweets be not afraid,
Thou keep thy own, and nothing is decayed.
Stones are by use made soft, iron worn to dro^^e,
That never wears and therefore finds no loss:
Who will deny us at a torch being light,
To light a taper till it burn as bright.
Or who would strive in their own power to keep,
All the spare billows in the vasty deep:
Yet will a woman plead her love is rare,
And in her plenty she has naught to spare.
Oh tell me why so strange a doubt thou make,
Do thou but loose the water that thou take:
I speak not this to prostrate every one,
But lest you fear vain loss where loss is none.
Now greater gusts my swelling sail must strain,
Being from the shore new lancht into the maine:
First with their neatnes I begin, the vine Neatness required in a woman.

Well trimmed and prunde affords us choice of wine:
And in a field well tilled the corn grows tall,
Shape is the gift of God, none amongst you all
But in their shapes take pride, nay there be many
Proud of their favor when they scarce have any.
Proportion even the greatest number want,
But ^ar^supplies where nature has been scant:
Care makes the face, the face a while neglected,
Will grow to ruin, and be naught respected.
The Virgins of the old time had this care,
Their bodies and their beauties to repair:
Else had the men of former ages spent,
Their years without their wonted ornament.
If you behold Andr^mache go clad,
In manly roabes, no marvel, for she had
A soldier to her husband, if you see
The wife of Ajax iet it valiantly,
Nor marvel, for she was his wife that bare,
A shield of seven oxe-heads thick tan'd with hair.
The world was plain, simple, and rude of old,
But now abundant Rome does flow with gold:
And shines in glory with the bright reflection,
All the worlds wealth is under their subjection.
Behold the Capital and thou will say,
In these great Jove has choos'd to dwell for aye:
This gorgeous Court and Counsel house was framed
Out of mere stubble when King Latius reigned.
These gorgeous Palaces that against the Sun,
Did glitter and shine when they first begun:
A pasture for draught oxen, let them ease,
Their thoughts with ancient times whom old times please.
I thank the gods I in this age was borne,
These times my humor fits, old days I scorn.
Not because gold in the earths veins are sought,
Or shells, or stones, from sorraigne shores are brought:
Not because marble from the hills is dig'd,
Or voyage ships to unknown seas are rig'd,
But because rudeness to the gates is sent,
And this our age is full of ornament,
Hang in your ears bright stones, but not to dear,
Such Iudyes cast up and are sold you here.
Neatness we love, your hair in order tie,
To keep in within Law thy hands apply:
Thy hands mishape keep still, and by her care,
Thou may ore seem, deformed or wondrous fair.
Nor is there only one kind of attire,
The fashion that becomes thee best desire.
Prove every shape, but ere it curr^nt pass,
See thou before take counsel from thy Less:
A long and lean vissage best allows,
To have the hair part just above the brows:
So Laodem^ia surnamed the fair,
Used when she walked abroad to trusse her hair.
A round plumpe face must have her trammels tied
In a fast knot above her front to hide:
The vvier supporting it whilst either ear,
Bare, and in sight upon each side appear.
Yo^ Ladies locks about her shoulders fall,
And her loose vvare becomes her best of all:
So Phoebus looked when last he touched his Lute,
That other Lady does her habit suite,
With chaste Diana being trickt to go,
To strike the savage Bore or tamelesse Roe.
She when her hair hangs loose has greatest pride,
This best becomes her when her locks are tied:
Yon when her head-tire like a tortoise shell,
Is roost and vawted well beseemes it well:
More leaves the Forest yields not from the trees,
More beasts the Alps breed not, nor Hibla bees:
Then there be fashions of attire in view,
Every succeeding day adds something new.
Many become their tires best when they wear,
In stead of sprucenesse a neglected hair:
And being combed but now yet thou shall say,
Her hair has not been touched since yesterday.
Art does much change, so did Alcides see,
Io^attired, and said this vvench is for me.
So Inossis whom the god of grapes commended,
When by his shouting Satires being attended:
He found her placed locks by the cool wind shifted,
With scattered hair her to his coach he lifted:
How much oh nature are we bound to thee,
That find for every grief a remedy.
And as our shapes and color suffer cross, To help the defects of nature.

Yet thou have in thee to repair that loss.
Say that by age or some great sickness had,
Thy head with wonted hair be thinly clad:
Falling away like corn from ripened sheaues,
As thick as Boreas blows down Autum leaves.
By Germane yearbes thou may thy hair restore,
And hide the bare scalpe that was bald before,
Women have known this art, and of their crew,
Many false colors buy to hide the true.
And multitudes, yea more then can be told,
Walk in such hair as they have bought for gold:
Hair as good Merchandise and grown a trade,
Markets and public traffic thereof made,
Nor do they blush to cheapen it among,
The thickest number and the rudest throng.
Nay even before Alcides sacred flames,
And in the presence of the vestall Dames:
To leave their hair, and speak of their attire
I do not trayles or purfled guards desire.
Nor roabes of blush scarlet prized hie,
Whose wool is twice dipped in the Tirian dye:
Look but abroad and thou may in a trice,
Find lighter colors and of far less price.
Were it not madness thou in scorn of lack,
Should wear at once thy whole wealth on thy back
Behold the color of the azure air,
When in a cloudlesse day the sky is fair:
And the South wind bring on the earth no showers,
As once it did what time one flow deuoures.
Phrixus and Hellis, such a color choose,
It Is neat and cheap, but costly dies refuse:
That pretty color intimates the wa^es,
And from their sea-greene drops a name it craves*
In this the young Nymphs went apparelled most,
This saffron immitates of no great cost.
And yet she goes attired in saffron weeds,
That every morning decks bright Phoebus steeds:
Else such a dye as Paphian mirtles yield,
Or purple Amethistos or a field:
Where nothing save the milk white roses grow,
Or of that hew the Thratian Cranes do show.
Let not fair Amarilles wanting be,
Thy ackhornes or thy bloomes of Almond tree.
All these of several colors juice be full,
And with their several colors stain the wool:
So many sundry flowers as the fresh spring,
In spite of winters horrid rage does bring:
To deck the earth with full so many hues,
The thirsty earth does drink and none refuse,
Among which fair women out of your affections, To suite their attires to
their Co^plections.

Choose them that shall become best your complections:
She that is brown let her attire be white,
Briseus ware a roabe of color light.
When she was ravished, others that are fair,
Let their attires be black as Sables are:
Swarthy Andromed ware a milkewhite smock,
When she was tied half naked to the rock.
Lest you be seen so let no ranknes grow,
Betwixt your arms and shoulders let none show:
Of rough and ragged hairs there may appear,
Upon your legs and thighs but not to near:
I do not teach rude maids by Cauease bred,
Or such as drink of Risus but in steed
Of barbarous truls, to you brave girls of Rome,
Do I direct my phrase, and to your doom.
I now instruct you then your teeth to freet, To keep their teeth.

Lest in their use some furdnesse they do get:
To wrince your mouths in water you have wit,
To apprehend my words betimes to sit.
And in the morning take away the slime,
Which makes the white teeth subject to such crime:
Let such whose bloods are black and swart, Cheeks.

Whom nature reds not, make them red by art:
Art likewise fills the wrinkles in the brows,
A skin of dyed red leather art allows.
To rub your faces with, nor hold it shame,
To kindle in your eyes a spark of flame:
It may be done with saffron, which like corn,
Grows near bright Cydnas whereas thou were borne
I have a little book in substance small,
And yet a work of weight writ to you all.
The Treatise is unto your general graces,
How you by art may best preserve your faces:
You whose rare beauties have received a scar,
Seek thence your helps, receipts there written are
You may there find how to restore your bloods,
My art was never idle to your goods.
Beware lest that by chance your boxes lie,
Upon the table, and your Loves pass by:
Throw them aside, art spreads her safest net,
When she is with most cunning counterfeit.
Spill not thy drugs alike in every place,
They will offend such as behold thy face,
Corrupting the beholder with such motion,
As should he see thy garments stand with lotion:
How does the greasy franck woolls smell offend,
Though we for it as far as Athens send.
Yet is it good for use, not before men,
Use thou Deares marrow good for medicen:
Nor before men in presence rub thy teeth,
They both are good, yet harsh to him that sees.
Many things which in doing we detest,
Being once done, they often times please us best:
These stately pillars in iron carved and wrought,
Were a confused rock, this ring now brought,
To that good form, was once unfashioned ore,
The costly cloth thou wearest a rough sheep bore:
The curious picter of fair Venus was,
Before the cutting an unpolished mass.
Mind thou thy beauty when we think thee sleeping,
Thy hand, thy box, thy glass their office keeping:
Why should I know how thou art grown so fair,
Shut fast the forge where beauties joined are.
For many things there be men should not know,
The greatest part of them if you should show,
They should offend them much, spare not to shroud
The doing, though the thing done be allowed.
The golden ensigns yender spreading far,
Which vvasts them to the gorgeous Theater:
See what thin leaves of gold foil guilde the wood,
Making the collumes seem all massy good:
Yet are the audience of all fight debarred,
Until the shows and sights be full prepared.
So in thy preparation mark this note, Note.

Still make thee ready in a place remote:
Yet sometimes if thy head be vvondrous fair, Obse^^^t^is (...).

Even before men it is good to comb thy hair.
The hair a beauty has which much besots,
Being tied and wreathed in pleats and comely knots,
But be not tedious in thy art applying,
Be quick both in the fasting and untying:
Still when thou go to dress thy self be safe,
I hate those ^ullen pettish things that chafe
At every idle cross, who scratch and bite,
And with their nails and bodkins pinch and sight:
Wounding themselves in anger, rending, tearing,
The wires, the tires, the ruffes which they be wearing,
She that is badly haired, let her before
She dress her self, set watch still at the door.
Upon the sudden 'twas my chance one day,
To press into the place where my sweet heart lay:
When wondering she unawares was thrust upon,
Snatched up her hair and put the vvrong side on.
Like cause of shame let come unto my foe,
And such disgrace unto the Parthians go:
A sealded breast, fields that no grass will bear,
Trees without leaves, and heads that have no hair.
Are odious to the eye, none of you three,
Europa, Leda, or fair Senele.
Were subject to this want or me did need,
The help of Physic in this point to reed:
Nor Hellen thou whom with aduisement deep,
Menelaus asks; the Troiane still does keep.
The wanton wenches in full troops press hither,
Good, bad, fair, foul, of all sorts flock together:
And come to be instructed, amongst which
Often times the fair be poor, the foul be rich.
And yet the fairest have of me least need,
Their beauty is a dower that does exceed
My precepts far, the sea being calm and clear,
The secure Seaman all his sails may bear.
But when it swells and is disturbed apart,
The troubled Pilot must try all his art:
Of every little mole be thou not squeamish,
It Is hard to find a face that has no blemish.
Yet shall thou seek to hide the least disgrace,
Either in thy proportion or thy face:
If thou be short, A lesson for Dwarses.
thy stature hide by wir,
Still sit, lest standing thou be took to sit:
And stretch thy legs at length out in thy bed,
Lest that thy stature there be measured.
Love Dwarfes, observe my words I hold it meet,
To have some garment thrown upon thy feet:
She that is wea^ish and no clothes can fill, Remedy for them that be lean.

Her double plated gown must fit by skill.
To make her portly whilst a roabe unbound,
From her two shoulders falls unto the ground:
She that is pale, with purple stain her cheeks, Pale.

She that is black the fish of Pharoes seeks. Bla^ke.

A splay misshapen foot in white shoes hide, Splay foot.

And let dried legs wear a rich garter tide:
Let such whole shoulder blades stand much in sight
Wear boulster'd gowns to make them seem upright:
About a faint and slender body wear, To slender.

A flannell swathband or warm stomacher.
Such whose at hands are itchie in the joint, Scabbed ba^ds.

When they discourse let them not use to point.
You that have stinking breathes must not speak fasting
But help themselves by some good breakfast taking: Stinking breathes.

Else chew a cloue the strength of it to break,
Or keep some distance of still when you speak.
Or if thy teeth in vvide uneven ranks grow, Badtoothed

Or be they gagged, black, or too great in show:
Rot, lost, or that the fashion disagreeth,
Beware of laughing, laughing shows the teeth.
Who would believe this, vvonder yet it is true,
Maids may be taught to laugh and to eschew.
Uncomely mouths and harsh tricks of the face,
In laughing is much uncomeliness and grace:
Be moderate in thy flearing, there is a feate,
To be observed, in that make not to great.
The hallow pits mirth digs in every cheek,
To hide thy gummes let both thy red lips meet.
Nor do thou stretch thy entrails by constraining,
Thy self unto loud laughter, neither faining:
A more familiar gesture with voice flat,
Sound out a vvomaanish noise I know not what.
Look but on them that with loud yalling force,
Anticke and perverse faces, what she was worse:
And there is such a coile with wry mouths kept,
That when they laugh a man would swear they wept
Many with untuned clamor hoarce and shrill,
^all as the flow Ass bays out of the mill.
What cannot art; women are taught to weep, How to weep.

And in their looks a sober form to keep:
To shape their eyes according to their passion,
^oth at what time they please, and in what fashion.
^s there not grace in lisping to be found, How to lispe.

^o give true words a forged imperfect sound:
^obbing the tongue his office in some part,
^uen in deprauing words is sometimes art.
^any that by my words my meaning scan,
^re taught to speak less perfect then they can.
^eigh these my words according to their worth,
and these being cond take other lessons forth:
^ came how with womanish pace to use your gate, To go.

^ every step there is a kind of state.
^or is there ought that yet my art discouers,
which with more violence draws or drives back lovers.
(...) hold you Ladies gate the rest outstrips,
(...) with what cunning she does move her hips:
and in the pride of steps how the cold wind,
(...) her loose vailes before her and behind.
^his like the blushing wife of Vember pac^th,
^er full viewd legs at every stride she graceth:
Long measured steps do fit the state of some,
Others a moderate pace does best become:
As far as where the arms and shoulders parts, How far to appear bare.

Appear thou bare to wound the ambutous hearts,
Of vvanton youths, this fashion understand,
Longs to the fair, not such whose skins be tand.
Such sights ere now have made me I protest,
To kiss her neck, her shoulders and her breast.
The Sirens are Seamonsters, Sing.
whose sweet notes,
Draws to their tunes the wandering ships and bott^^
And if their ears with wax they do not stop,
They are charmed to leap from the hatches top.
Song is a fair endowment, a sweet thing,
A praisefull gift, then women learn to sing:
Hard fauord girls by songs have won such gr^ces,
Their sweet shrill tongs have proved bands to the^^ faces:
Sometimes rehearse a speech brought from the pl^^
Or else peruse some poem in thy way.
Of Music I would have thee know the skill,
With thy right hand to use a Rebecks quill.
Or with thy left a Harp, when Orpheus plaide,
The beasts, and trees, and stones to dance he mad^^
And in his way to hell no fiend durst stir,
Nor tartar power, nor tripple headed Curre.
Thou that so justly did thy mother punish,
Did by thy Musicks skill the wo^ld astonish:
In those sweet walks that were by Music reared,
By every tuch sweet harmony is heard:
The armed Dolphin is by nature mute,
Yet did he lift Arion to thy Lute.
Learn Music then and hope to play upon,
The double handed sweet Psalterion:
Read Pottrie, the works of Co^^s seek,
Or great Callimacchus that writ in Greek:
The labored lines of Bacchus Poet get,
Read what lascivious Saph^ else has writ.
For what more vvanton works then Sapho lives,
See what delight to the Proportuis gives:
Or if thy further leisure serve thee look,
In Gallus works, or in Tibullus book.
Or Varro, that of Phrixus and his niece,
The Legend writ, and of the golden fleece:
Or read AEneas banishment from Troy,
The Original of Rome, Rome does enjoy:
No books more famous, happly to my grace,
Some one may say thou Ovid have a place.
Amongst the rest thou and thy lines may sound,
To after times, not be in Sethe drowned.
Some one may say perchance our Master read,
The book he last drew with a double head.
Or those three books which he Amorum calls,
Entituling them of Love, which of them falls,
Into thy handling first, that do thou choose,
And lovingly my loving lines peruse.
Or with a composed voice my Cantons sing,
The use of these Loves mistress first did bring:
To other yet unknown oh Phoebus grant,
Grant this you gods whom sacred Poets haunt.
With their oblations, grant these powers divine,
Thou god of grapes, and you oh Muses mine:
Who doubts but I would have you learn to dance,
Measure and Galliards shall your names advance:
Command your arms and hands that they agree,
Unto the motion of the foot and knee.
In moving of the body hand and side,
The commicke Actor cannot take more pride.
Nor use more art the comeliness of either,
Concurres, and I compare them both together:
Learn triuall sports, To game.
but oh your Poet shames,
To bid you be experienced in some games.
Yet long they to my art, the^ be not nice,
To learn to play at cockall or at dice:
How to cast lots and chances which to gues^e,
To play at draughts at tables or at chesse.
To use a racket and to toss a ball,
At set game, or at that we bandy call:
To pass the night at balliards till eleauen,
At pickapandy, cards, or odd and even.
Play prepares love, your skill is not so needful,
As ought to be your looks and carriage heedfull:
Your greatest cunning is with art to frame,
The gesture and the countenance in your game:
Game makes us earnest if we play with care,
Then with our open thoughts our breasts lie bare.
And strait we braule and scold, a grievous stain,
Oh these be monstrous faults to chide and rail,
Or to blaspheme the gods when our lucks fail:
To vow, to swear, with protestations deep,
And in the heat of play to fret or weep.
Great Jove himself from you such crimes expel,
Who covet suitors, and to please them well:
Nature these triuall sports to woman lends,
A freer scope of pastime she extends.
By much unto us men, for so we may,
Scourge tops, fling darts, and at the football play:
Vault, ride, and teach the horse to trot the ring,
Frequent the Fenceschoole, practice arms, leap, spring:
Nor can you march or muster on the sea,
Or like the Merchant venturer go to sea:
Walk may you sometimes under Pompeus shade,
To Phoebus palace to the place was made:
For nouall triumph, to the Memphian fawn,
To the goatfield where chatiots are still drawn.
To the warm bleeding alter, some preferrs,
Before all these the thr^e brave Theaters:
Thus covet to be seen, unseen, vnptoud,
What is not viewd and known, cannot be loved,
What profit were it to have beauteous been,
If thy admired face were never seen:
Say you more stilde in shapes then Orpheus were,
Or Thamiras, such if men can not hear.
How should your music please; The dignity of Poets.
Apelles painted,
^enus in Cois, else her fame had fainted:
and dyed in Lethe, he redeemed her name,
that hunt the sacred Poets for but fame.
^nely for fame their laboring spirits they spend,
^f all the vows, fame is the scope and end.
(...) what alteration rude times brings,
^oets of old were the right hand of Kings:
^arge were their gifts, supreme was them regard,
their meeted fames with fear and reverence heard.
honor, and state, and sacred majesty,
^elong'd to such as studied poetry:
^^inus by Scipio that great man was sought,
and from the mountains of Calabria brought.
^^honoured now the Iuy garland lies,
^he ancient worship done to Poets dies:
^et we should strive our own fames to awake,
^^mer a living lasting work did make:
^s Iliads called, else who had Homer known,
and Danas in her tower an old wife grown.
^^d never unto public view resorted,
^ow had her beauty been so far reported.
You that applause would for your beauties vvin,
Be often abroad, and keep not too much in:
At the full folds the she Wolfes seeks her pray,
Though amongst all she steals but one away.
Jove's bird the Eagle when she soars most high,
To seize one foul does at a Couy fly.
Frequent you fair ones where men may you see,
Among many one best part will fancy thee:
In every place where thou shall hap to sit,
Loose none by frowns whom thou by smiles may get:
The bow of Cupid never stands unbent,
And oftentimes things fall by accident.
Be thou prepared, hang always out thy hook;
For in that stream where thou no fish would look
A fish by chance may bite, often have I seen,
The wandering hound range where no game has been,
And Hearts that scapes the chase when no man minds
them,
Fall in the toils and there the keeper finds them.
What hope had thou Andromeda being bound,
Unto a rock a lover to have found:
Being prepared for death beset with fears,
Blubbed thy cheeks, thy eyes quite drowned in tear*
At burial of one husband well I wot,
Another husband has been often times got.
Weeping for him that is lost, may hap to grace thee,
And in the bosom of a second place thee:
But in your choice especially beware,
Of such effeminate men as starch their hair.
Pranke up themselves, who lispe and cannot leave it,
Love complement and use to smell of Ciuit:
They have a thousand loves what they protest,
To thee they will do as unto all the rest.
Vnstay'd such be, and what will women say,
When in their thoughts men are more light the^ they*
S^ar^e will they credit me, and yet it is true,
Troy had yet stood, and Ilium been in view,
Had every thing been swaid as Priam spoke,
But good advise they leave, fond counsel take.
There are who under show of love do fame, Lovers disloyaltie-in many.

And by such passage seek dishonest gain:
Let no man's hair deceive with powders sweet,
Nor studded girls which are short and meet: Several passages.

Nor their fine woman's coats, a sightly thing,
Nor that each finger bears a golden ring.
Perhaps who in this kind most gallant goes,
Is a close thief, and loves naught but your clothes.
Some Maids thus roab'd, so loud cry for their own
That all the town and Country hears their moan.
Venus whose golden shines at Apian stand,
And Pallas laugh a good these strifes in hand:
There are some Maids to sure but of bad fame,
Who often deceived are thought to use the same.
Oh learn by others plaints to hear your own,
Open not your ears to men whose frauds are known.
Believe not Theseus Athens though he swear,
The gods can hear no more then they hear.
And thou Demophoon Theseus falsehood hair,
Phillis deceived nones trust by speeches fair,
If men make promises, then Maids make you,
If men perform, perform your vowed joys too.
Now I Will come nearer, Muse, take faster hold,
Nor loose thy seat the wheels though swiftly rold:
Men frame them, set maids vows, some else were writ
Let some maids take their course, for it were fit:
Look on them, read them, from the words then gather
Whether he faines or sues entirely rather:
After some while write back; ever delays,
Inflames a lover; so no tedious stays.
Show not the plyant, to the youth denies,
Nor yet deny him what by suite he plyes:
Let him both fear and hope by every letter,
Be his fear less, his hope comes sure and better.
Be your phrase pure, but common usual words,
In speech the playnest style best grace affords:
Full often ambiguous words love so misplace,
And a foul tongue has hurt a beauteous face.
But since although you yet not married be,
To go beyond us men that care take ye:
By maids or some known lad your letters send,
And to no strange young man tokens commend.
I have seen some maids so terrifide with this,
That ever after they were slaves I wi^^e:
Faithless he is who keeps such tokens back,
And burns like Aetna till he open the pack:
Trust me, we may with fraud quite fraud again,
From force to shield, from force the laws maintain
One maid must use her self to many hands,
Ill might he speed whose shifts this rule commands
Deface the old seal when you do reply,
And to one vvriting, but one hand apply.
Subscribe your letters thus, thine in all love,
Be his, as he was yours, this art approve:
If from small things we may to greater go,
And in our ship spread our full fail to show.
It longs to beauty to have manners mild, Impediments to bea^tie Anger.

Sweet pace fits women, fierce rage savage vvilde:
Rage swells the face, the veins makes black with blood
The eyes blase ghastly like fell Gorgons brood
Away quoth she I prize not feature so,
Pallas should view her face, where waters flow:
And should you look your anger in your glass,
You would scarce discern your vissage whose it was.
Nor do we less blame proud and lofty looks, Pride.

Gentle and humble eyes are Cupids hooks:
We men do hate this ouer-weening pride,
Show in the silent face, trust him has tried.
View him viewes you, if men, then women smile,
Signs made to you, make signs, 'twill men beguile:
Thus vvhiles he plays before with headles dart,
Cupid has after vvounded to the heart.
We hate men said Ajax, Tremessa take,
We merry Greeks blithe wenches sweet hearts make:
Andromache Tremessa all your state,
Could not move me to choose you for my mate.
Take gifts of rich men who do law profess,
Give him no fee, be his clyent, need the less:
We that make verse, let us send only verse,
Our hearts are pliant, whose love soon does pierce:
We spread abroad sweet beauties lasting praise,
We Nemesis, we Cintheas honor raise: Poets.

The East and West land knew loved Licoris,
And many ask who our Cormina is.
Besides, we Poets from all frauds are free,
And forward manners by our poetry:
Nor honor us, nor love of money please,
We slight our gains for priuacy and ease.
Soon are we cought, our loves burn fie^ce and bold
And where we love we know to well to hold:
So it is we soften nature by meek art,
And as our studies, so our loves take part.
A favor Maidens, a blessed Poets will,
Heavens power we have, the Muses own us still.
A God is in us, we commerce with Jove,
The spirit in us boue your bright stars does move:
To look for money from us what a crime,
And yet no Maids do fear it in our time.
At first be not too eager, feign beware,
A nouice lover ^lights an open snare:
Nor do we rule a horse new broke to back,
With the same raines as he that is skild to rack.
To catch one staid in years and a brisk swain,
Must not one way, may not one course be taine:
He Is rude and in loves tents nere scene before,
Who as a new pray touched thy chamber door.
Who knows no Maid but thee, none else would know
This corn would be high fenced that it may grow:
If one, he is thy own no riuells frown,
Two things admits no mate, Love and a Crown.
That ancient soldiers wife and softly love,
And much that younger scorns he meekly proves:
He Will break no posts nor burn with furious fire,
Nor scratch his Mistress soft cheeks in his ire.
He Will tear no clothes, his Loves nor his own,
Nor shall his torn hair give him cause of moan:
These things fits youths, whose love as age is hot,
This bears harsh wounds gently as they were not:
Old men burn softly like a torch that is dry,
As woods from heath cut down when first they lie
Old men's love fure, youth short, but fruitful made,
Maids pluck those fruits betimes, betimes which fade*
Nay yield up all, open the gates to our foe,
That faith from faithless treasure once may flow:
What Is easy granted, long love cannot feed,
Denial from your sports must often proceed:
Let them walk at the gate, cry cruel door,
Do humbly much, but in their threats much more*
We loath these sweets, bitter love makes them new,
That wind often drowned the ship by which it flew:
It Is this makes men their vviues to slight so still,
They are ready pressed when ere their husbands will*
Let the Ma^de run and cry we are undone,
And hide the sacred youth till fear be gone;
Yet sport him midst those fears lest he misprise,
Your night's not so much vvorth such fears should
I had like to pass by what art to deceive, To deceive the most watchful
keeper.

Your husband and slye keeper to bereave.
Wives fear your husbands, who must keep you in
It Is firm by law right modesty has bin.
Her to be kept whom late revenge has wrought,
Who can endure to avoid these means be sought:
As many keep thee as had Argoes eyes,
If thou vvilt out thou shall defeat with lies.
You Will say your keeper does withstand to write,
Take water for your self what time you might:
What can a keeper when the Cities fill,
Of plays and Maids see horses run that will,
When she will, a maid complainesher head,
And fayning sick, hides whom she will in bed:
When the false key tells plainly what is done,
Aed to her chamber are more ways then one.
Besides, a keeper may be foxt with wine,
Pressed from the grapes of Spain and so made thine:
And there be drugs which can cause a sound sleep,
And shut the eyes fast drencht in Lethe deep.
You know Maids to May quickly find some way,
By long made sports to hold him in delay:
But what need I for to go far about,
When one small gift may buy the keeper out.
Gifts trust me do appease both gods and men,
By gifts even Jove is pleased now and then:
What do the wise since fools in gifts delight,
Give, and the husband says naught, say he might:
Have bought thy keeper once he is thine for ever,
The help he once affords heel fail thee never.
I blamed companions, now it comes to mind,
The hurt by it not men alone do find:
Believe me, other Maids thy joys may taste,
And others with thee hunt the Hare as fast.
The vvench that sweepes the chamber makes the bed
With sports of love has more then once bin sped:
Let not your waiting Maids be over fair,
Their Mistress place by them supplied are.
Where run I Madman, naked against my foe,
And open those ports that may me overthrow:
The birds teach not the Fowler how to take them,
The Hearts teach not the dogs to run and shake them.
Look to it that need my task I Will do indeed,
Though it is to lend a sword to make me bleed:
It Is easy to make us think we are beloved,
Their faith which do desire is quickly moved:
Smile lovely on a youth, sigh from your heart,
Ask why he comes so late, a pretty art.
Shed some few tears, feign grief for some close love,
And tear your hair as does your passions move:
He is overcome strait, pity he will take,
And say this care is only for my sake.
If he be spruce, and look fair in a glass,
He Will think the gods love him, let not this pass:
Who ere thou art, be not thy worth to strong,
Nor rage not overmuch, has he done vvrong?
Trust not too soon what art is in this case,
Procris may be example have you grace. The history of Procris.

Near to Hymetus hill a holy well,
And a moist ground thick grast the ancients tell:
The vvood, but underwood about this land, The description of Hymetus.

The Crabtree, Rosemary, Bay, Myrtle stand.
The thick leau'd box, the Tamariske so small,
Low stirubs, near Pines, there do these trees grow all
The gentle West vvinde and the healthful air,
Blow all those leaves and grasblades which are there:
Cephaius loved rest, his hounds and men foregone,
Weary in youth this ground often sat upon.
And thus he sings, thou which do lay my heat,
Age, my breast come gentle air and beat:
One over dutious told his fearful wife,
These words she heard, and so began the strife,
Procris who for a strumpet took this care,
Fell down much moved with a sudden fear.
Look how the vine leaf which you latest gather,
She looked so pale, or far more paler rather:
And the ripe Quince tree which does bend his bows
Or dog-tree fruit, which none for meat allows.
Come to her self, her garments quite she tore,
From of her breast, and made her breast all gore.
And without stay in rage and have she goes,
Her hair about her neck like Bacchus froes:
Being near the place, her mate she leaves behind,
Steals slyly to the vvood, no fear in mind.
It Is thus thou think now, who this air should be
And her dishonest tricks thine eyes shall see:
Her coming shames her now, she would not take her
Yet now she is glad she is come, love doubtful makes
The name, the place, the sign, all these agree,
And what the mind fears, that it thinks to be.
Seeing the grass so by some body pressed,
Her trembling heart knocked at her tender breast:
Now the midday had made the shadows short,
The evening and the morn of equal port:
Young Cephalus returns unto the wood,
And cooles his face with water as he stood.
Procris stands close, on the grass he lays him fair,
And cries aloud, blow West wind, come sweet air.
So soon as she had heard the erroneous name,
Her mind and her true color to her came.
She rises, with her body the leaves shake,
In mind to Cephalus her way to take:
He thought it some wild beast, snatched up his bow,
His arrow in his right hand wont to show.
What do thou wretch, it is no beast, stay thy dart,
Alas, thy arrows pierce a woman's heart:
She cries out, thou have stroke thy loving breast,
Upon this place thy wounds have ever rest.
I dye before my time not wronged in love,
This earth made me suspect thee light to prove:
Air take my breath, thee 'twas I did mistrust,
I die, close thou my eyes, lay me in the dust.
She ended speech and life, and falling down,
Her husband takes her last breath from the ground.
He bears his dying love in woeful arms,
And wailes with tears so strange and deadly harms:
But let us back, I see I must be plain,
At the lost haven that our ship may again.
You look now to be brought unto a feast,
And that we teach you here as in the rest:
Come late, but comely brought in by night,
Thou shall be welcome, so delay has might.
Though thou be black thou shall seem fair to all
The night will hide thy faults both great and small
Eat neatly with your fingers art commands, How maids must behave themselves
at meat.

Wipe not thy whole face with thy di^ty hands.
Eat not to long, leave ere you would forbear,
More then thou well can do, this counsel hear:
Were Hellen greedy Paris would her hate,
And say my rape is foolish out of date,
To drink is comely, and more fit for you,
Bacchus does well wi^h Venus, this is true.
Drink, but yet not more then you well can bear,
And what is one let it not two appear:
A shameful thing to see a woman drunk,
Such a one is fit to be each base knaves punke.
Nor is it safe to sleep, the tables drawn,
Much shameful things have in your sleep bin sawne
It Is shame to teach you more, yet Dion says,
Shame is the chiefest subject of these lays.
Each know your selves as you your bodies see, Gestures in lying.

So frame your lying in form that it may be.
Whose face is beauteous, she must lie upright,
Whose back is best, that still must be in sight:
Atlantues thighs upon his shoulders wore,
Menation be these best, show these the more.
Low Maids must ride, Thebais was somewhat long,
Nere sat one Hectors horse her pride among.
Who has a long side, which she would have in eye,
Let her bend to her knees her neck awry:
Whose hidden parts have not a fault or spot,
Lie ^uer side long, pray forget it not.
Nor think it a disgrace your hair to loose,
And then thy neck cast backward still to choose.
Thou that art ragged close and covered lie,
And from men's sight like the swift Parthian fly:
^oue has a thousand ways most void of pride,
To lie half upright on the righter side.
Apollos, Tripos, nor horrid Ammon say,
Not things more true then what are in our lay:
If there be truth in art got by long use,
Believe and trust, you will find it in our muse.
Maids see you love us men, pluck from the root,
One thing may help you and steed to boot:
Rease not fair words, cease not close whispering sweet
And wa^ton words must with your sports often meet.
And thou who^ nature has bard loves quick sense,
Feign pleasant joys though the things be from thence:
Unhappy Maid to whom that place is dull,
Which with a man and woman should be full.
Yet when you feign, beware, let none else know it,
For fear thy gesture or thy eyes may show it:
What helps the speech and shows the breath is ill
That part has secrets, shame would hide it still.
Who seeks a man after enioyment strait,
Loving a gift would not her prayers had weight:
Open not your vvindowes wide to take in light,
Much in your bodies rather fits the night.
Our sport is done, Conclusion of the work.
it is time the Swains depart,
Which on their necks as yoakes have drawn our art
As Men before, say Maids when ye prevail,
Ovid our Master was, his art our sail.
FINIS.

