THE MONVMENT OF MATRONES: containing seven several Lamps of Virginity, or
distinct treatises; whereof the first five concern prayer and meditation: the
other two last, precepts and examples, as the worthy works partly of men,
partly of women; compiled for the necessary use of both sexes out of the
sacred Scriptures, and other approved authors, by THOMAS BENTLEY of Graies
Jnne Student.

Luke. 12, 35. Let your loins be girt about, and your lamps burn cleerelie.
2. Tim. 2, 19. Let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord depart
from iniquity. Printed by H. Denham.



A prayer upon the posie prefixed.
Almighty God and most merciful Father, who in mercy have ordained these
lamps for thy chosen virgins, and commanded that with our loins girt about,
and our lamps burning bright, we should take heed and be ready to execute the
charge, which is committed unto us, and watch full warily and continually in
our several callings by fervent and instant prayer for the coming of thy
son our spiritual Spouse, sovereign Lord, and sweet Savior JESUS: giving
us in the mean season diverse gifts and talents to occupy and imploie till he
come; and setting daily before our eyes the just judgment, that he shall
execute and give in that dreadful day of his sudden coming, both upon the
quick and dead; do thou vouchsafe even thine own self (we pray thee) to
gird and compass our Ioines about, that no iniquity have power over us, nor
we decline or bow to any sin. Oh suffer us not to take that contentation or
vain delight and pleasure of any thing in this wretched world, that may lull
or bring us fast asleep in the cursed cradle of senseless security: nor with
the foolish virgins to neglect the hour and day of our last visitation, or to
forget to wait and attend for thine appearing in the clouds. But so direct us
(we beseech thee) in this short race of our perilous pilgrimage by thy holy
spirit our heavenly loadesman, that in the lawful use of thy good gifts
whatsoever bestowed upon us, our cheifest care may always be to depart from
all iniquity, and how with them we may live soberlie to our selves, holilie
to thee, and vprightlie to the world, and thereby gain much profit and fruit
to the better increase of thy kingdom.

Moreover, make thou our lamps to burn clear and bright in the sight of men
and Angels; and keep thou them light and ever burning: that our love toward
thee wax never key cold, nor our charity toward our neighbor be quite
extinguished, nor yet our faith, devotion, zeal, and gifts of the spirit be
utterly quenched in us. But being evermore both within and without kindled,
enlightened, and inflamed by thee, which art a consuming fire, and a purifieng
flame of unspeakable fervent heat: let all our thoughts, words, and works be
always directed to do thy holy will and righteous judgments, that in all
our works begun, continued, and ended in thee, we may ever glorify thy holy
and reverent name.

Finally, make us very carefully to keep this castle of our souls and
temple of the holy Ghost (our bodies I mean) pure, holy, and undefiled: and
to watch continually in all manner of well doing unto the end: that when thy
Son our heavenly bridegroom shall come to judge the world, to condemn the
wicked, to reject the reprobate, to cast away the unprofitable, and to shut
the gates of heaven against all unbelievers and retchlesse virgins; he finding
us heedfull, watchful, praieng, well occupied and ready, as those that have
been very well content with our estates here for the time, and having our
lamps filled brim full of the oil of his righteousness, grace, mercy, and
merits, may (thereby only) escape the heavy judgment and direful doom of
the dreadful day: and not perish in that common destruction and general
desolation of the wicked worldlings, and unprofitable servants; but be received
to himself as those that are made worthy only by him, ioifullie to enter
with him and all the elect and chosen wise virgins, into the celestial wedding
chamber of thine eternal kingdom: there and then to possess that mansion
place, which before all worlds thou have prepared for thy chosen, and to
receive (of his gift) that which here now with deep sighs and groans we
greatly long for: that is, even the salvation of our souls, and the
coronation of thy gifts in us: that both with thee (o Father) and with him thy
Son, in the unity of the holy Ghost, we may live and reign in the full
perfection, holiness and purity of his everlasting virginity, to bless,
praise, and glorify thee, o glorious and blessed Trinity, with all virgins,
angels, and creatures, by all ages, throughout all eternity,

Amen: Amen, Amen.
To the most virtuous Lady and Christian Princess, Queen ELIZABETH, grace
and peace from God the Father through Christ Jesus our Savior.
THE King of eternal glory, who has thus loved England in setting your
Highness on the throne of his majesty to execute justice and judgment, to
instruct his people in Jacob, and to feed his inheritance in Israel, be blessed
and magnified therefore for ever and ever, Amen.

This long and blessed peace wherein we your loiall subjects do presently live
(most noble QVEENE) every man sitting under his vine and fig tree throughout
all your dominions, does give just occasion to the godly to be no less
thankful to God, and to your Majesty, than free hearted and studious to
benefit his church and their country, by offering in the temple, some gold,
some silver, some one thing, some another, according to the measure of those
graces, which God the giver of all good things has bestowed upon them, or by
his spirit has encouraged and made them willing to further the work of the
Lord. Which moved me also among the rest (although of all other the meanest,
and in every respect the vnwoorthiest) to offer some thing, wherein I might
bring profit to that mystical body, whereof I trust I am a member. And
persuading my self, I could not better employ my labor to the good of the
church, nor present your Highness the mighty defender thereof, with any
thing of greater price and estimation in this world, than (after a sort) with
that wherewith God the King of kings acknowledges himself to be so highly
pleased and glorified both of Prince and people (praise and invocation I mean)
whereby in this life we obtain at his hand all things needful for our bodies,
and in the life to come everlasting joy, rest, and comfort both of body and
soul: I have undertaken in the name and fear of God, love of his church,
obedience of your Majesty, and hearty good will of my country, out of the
admirable monuments of your own Honorable works, and some other noble
Queens, famous Ladies, and virtuous Gentlewomen of our time, and former ages,
to address and make ready these seven Lamps of your perpetual virginity, to
remain unto women as one entire and goodly monument of prayer, precepts, and
examples meet for meditation, instruction, and imitation to all posterity. And
now in most dutiful manner commending and appropriating so divine exercises of
the church, unto your Majesty the most natural mother and noble nursse
thereof; the cause of a virgin to a Virgin, the works of Queens to a Queen;
your own prayers to your self (to whom indeed the particular interest and due
praise and honor thereof justly belongs) I here prostrate on my knees, in
most humble manner meekelie beseech your excellent Majesty, graciously of your
woonted clemency, to pardon and forgive this my too rash and bold enterprise;
attempted both with bashfulnesse, fear, and trembling: and favorably (as in
like cases you are accustomed) to accept these your liege subject his great
labors and painful travels in good part, which he (not to instruct your
Highness (of whose notable learning I am not able to speak) but only for a
monument of the hearty love he bears both to the church his dear mother, and
to your Majesty his dread Sovereign) has in a godly zeal and conscience,
bestowed to the good and profit of his country. That (by your Graces good
liking and princely approbation) they may be both patronized against the
wicked, and practiced of the godly. And so many (by that means) with due
reverence and great honor to so honorable works, may receive these lamps as
from your bountiful hand to inlighten them by your good industry in all
virtue: and to prepare them by your holy example, like wise virgins to
perseverance in all good works of the spirit. And that therein many may often
look and labor mightily for your Highness as they are bound, in fervent
prayer; and many mo thanks, I say, be given of many faithful hearts on your
Majesty's behalf for the benefit of such and so many needful and ready
helps, ministered and afoorded by your painful hand and princely affability
to your everlasting comfort and renown, the praise of God, and glory of his
dearest son Jesus Christ your sweet spouse. Whom now for a conclusion as I
began, I most entirely beseech, that as of his own good will he first loved
his church my dear mother, and gave himself freely for her to sanctify and
cleanse her in the most holy fountain of water, through the word to make her
unto himself a beautiful virgin, and glorious spouse without spot or
wrinkle, that she should be holy, pure, perfect, and without blame before him:
so he will vouchsafe in like mercy, still both to cherish, defend, and
maintain the same in his continual grace, religion, and holiness, that she
may yet bring forth more fruit in her age, and members, to his glory: and
also as your spiritual spouse to set your Majesty (a most worthy and
mighty governor of the same) ever as a seal upon his heart, to tie you fast as
a signet or bracelet upon his arm, to bear you still in his own bosom, to
set his eye over you continually for your health, wealth, and prosperity, to
bend his desires always toward you, to do you good; that so your Highness
may be kept in his continual grace, peace, and favor long to reign over us:
and also defended and preserved evermore from all bodily and ghostly perils
and enemies, to your everlasting comfort, and the rejoice of all christian
hearts. Finally, the Lord bless your Majesty even out of Sion with all his
heavenly gifts and spiritual graces, that having the principal and heroical
spirit of your holy father good king David, doubled (yea trebled) in your
noble and princely heart, you may as in numbers of years beyond many ages, so
in singular piety and godliness far surmount and excel your most noble
progenitors: that the remembrance of you our good Josias, may to all
posterities be like the composition of the most precious perfume of the
Apothecarie, and as sweet as honey in all mouths, and as harmonicall music
at a banquet of wine; that in you our zealous Hezechias, I say, we may still
remain in happy peace, and have an hiding place from the wind, and a refuge
from storms and tempests, and rivers of waters to quench our thirst, and
temperate shadows to shroud us from parching heat in a dry land: so shall
the hearts of many thousand virgins in England and elsewhere, be ioifull and
thankful to God and your Majesty; so shall the daughters of Jerusalem sing
ioifullie the sweet songs of Sion in their own land, with great triumph to
their celestial King, reigning on high over all; yea so shall all your faithful
and loving subjects, I say, in all humble obedience and dutiful service both
toward God, your Majesty, and their country, resound by all possible means
to all posterities your most excellent and worthy praises, until the coming
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost be all empire, honor, dominion and praise, now and for ever,

Amen.
Your Majesty's humble, faithful, and obedient subject, THOMAS BENTLEY.

Lampas Virginitatis.
ECce tibi lucet, Princeps clarissima, lampas.
In tenebris gressus dirigat illa tuos.
Siquaeris librum cur lampada virginis istum
Inscribam: causas dico fuisse duas.
Vna est, quod talem praefert ecclesia lucem,
Expectans sponsum virgo pudica suum.
Altera, quod manibus virgo reginea librum
Sumit, cuiverae lampadis instar erit,
Dum Domino litat, and sacris indicit honorem,
Nuncupat and Christo vota secunda suo.
Anna sibi lucem, sibi Debora praetulit istam:
Inque suis Princeps ELIZABETHA malis.
Sic didicit lenire suas, sic fallere curas,
Praesentemque sui poscere regis opem;
Quem non plena sacris placant altaria donis,
Non oblatorum corpora caesaboum:
Ille Deus, Deus ille humili libamine vocum
Irae deponit iusta flagella suae.
Illecebras carnis vincunt mundique furores,
Et sathanae faciunt fulmen inane preces.
Afflictis illae praestant solatia rebus,
Illis caelestes effodiuntur opes.
Hoc oleo plenam Domino qui lampada praebet,
Ille sacrificio nobiliore litat.
To the Christian Reader, grace and truth in Christ.
Having my self taken no small comfort (good Christian Reader) by the reading
and pervsing of diverse very godly, learned, and duiine treatises, of
meditations and prayer, made by sundry right famous Queens, noble Ladies,
virtuous Virgins, and godly Gentlewomen of al ages (who to show themselves
worthy paternes of all piety, godliness, and religion to their sex, and for
the common benefit of their country, have not ceased, and that with all
careful industry and earnest endeavor, most painfully and diligently in
great feruencie of the spirit, and zeal of the truth, even from their tender
and maidenlie years, to spend their time, their wits, their substance, and
also their bodies, in the studies of noble and approved sciences, and in
compiling and translating of sundry most christian and godly books: a taste
whereof you have here in the second Lamp) as namely among the rest, the
godly and learned treatise called The lamentation of a sinner, written long
since by the virtuous Lady Queen Katherin, which for the excellency thereof
was first published in print by Sir William Cicill, now the right Honorable
Lord Treasurer of England, as by his very godly, learned, and eloquent
Epistle thereunto prefixed, and here also in this edition now inserted, to Gods
glory, and his high commendation does and may appear: but especially and
above all, the most divine, learned, and godly treatise entitled The Queens
meditation, written first in French by the virtuous Lady Margaret Queen of
Nauar, and after very exactlie and faithfully translated by our mostgratious
sovereign, and learned Lady Queen ELIZABETH, who among many Queens,
virgins, and women, through the fear of the Lord has done very virtuously,
and gotten thereby great renown. And thereupon considering with my self what
great profit, and singular pleasure might thereby come also to other of like
mind to my self, if the same their excellent and rare works (dispersed into
several pamphlets, and in part some thing obscured and worn clean out of
print, and so out of practice) were by some painful hand collected together,
and revived, or brought again to their former good and godly use in the
church: me thought I could not better spend my time, nor emploie my talent,
either for the renown of such heroical authors and worthy women, or for the
universal commodity of all good christians: than in, and by some apt treatise
or collection, to reduce these their manifold works into one entire volume, and
by that means, for to register their so rare and excellent monuments, of good
record, as perfect presidents of true piety and godliness in woman kind to
all posterity. Whereupon, God working in me both the will and consent, I
undertook the same in his fear: which when after a sort I had done, and
perceived that there wanted per many things to make the same an absolute and
perfect book for the simpler sort of women, according to my mind: to satisfy
my self further in this my purposed collection, I fell to the pervsing of the
holy Bible, and many other good books as well of prayer, as of other divine
matter, such as from time to tune have been penned by diverse godly learned
men: out of the which (that I might now particularly apply that unto them,
women I mean, which generalise hereto fore was written of them, or by some
other, for them, as also to the inter and that all godly and devout women
readers might have in some measure, wherewith to exercise their faith; to stir
up their devotion, and to satisfy their godly desires: and also very
readily find without tediousness, or distraction of the mind virtuously
inclined, whatsheuer they would either by prayer ask, by meditation ponder, by
precepts learn, or by examples imitate, or avoid to their comfort and
edification) I endeavored for their sakes, by all possible diligence, to cull
and bring out of the rich store and treasury of the approved works of many
learned men, things both old and new concerning the same, both for private and
public use, adding thereunto such plenty of heavenly and spiritual helps,
both for profit and pleasure, as the diversities of so divine matter, and
variety of so honorable inventions would afford. Besides, to avoid confusion
and disorder (a thing very prejudicial to so holy an exercise) I have
carefully digested the same into such a plain, easy, familiar, and certain
method, order, and direction, both for matter and manner, as I could possibly
devise. or was requisite for such a work, to make it profitable to the simple
and unlearned reader. Lastly, because the diversity of matter forced a
distinction of the treatises, I fitly, as I could, have divided and contrived
the whole book into seven several parts or Lamps: all which for diverse good
and approved considerations I term or entitle by this general name, THE
MONVMENT OF MATRONES. And now make bold, yet under the deliberate view, and
careful correction of many vevie grave, wise, learned, and godly Divines,
thereunto appointed by authority: as also with the approbation and allowance
of the right reverend father in God my Lord the bishop of London, to publish
the same abroad in print, as a book, in the judgment of them that are
learned, not unprofitable to the church: but very necessary, and in some
respect, more proper and peculiar for the private use of women, than hertofore
has been set out by any. Which I have done not for that there lacked prayer
books sufficient for women to read, but only to increase the plenty of
heavenly comforts, wherewith this our church and realm of England (thanks be
to God) flows: as also to make this treatise heretofore (in part) private to
my self, and a few of my friends, now public and common also to you good
christian readers. For behold (I protest) I have not labored for my self, but
for you, and all them that seek knowledge, fear God, be devout, and would
(not by fits and starts, as those that can find scarce any leisure to attend
upon the Lord and his service as they ought: but) day and night continually
and incessantly, either silentlie in heart with Hanna, or openly in mouth with
Marie, as they are bound, spend their whole life, and make it their whole work
to pray, meditate, and read Gods word with other such good books, or at the
least to allow to themselves some little portion or part of the day and night,
to prostrate themselves apart from all company in prayer and meditation before
the Lord of heaven and earth their creator, redeemer, and savior, and that in
all christian perfection, and humble obedience to his word and commandments.
So have you good reader, by the goodness of God, who works all our works for
us, here now at the length in this Monument or collection contained (if you
list so for distinction or names sake to call or entitle them) not only a
burning Lamp for virgins, but also a crystal Mirror for Matrones: as also a
delectable Dial for to direct you to true devotion, with a perfect President
or register of holy prayer for all women generally to have recourse unto, as
to their homely or domestical library.

First, a Lamp, ready replenished and prepared of the wise virgins, with that
fragrant oil, precious perfume, and odoriferous incense of holy invocation,
pure prayer, divine sacrifice, and heavenly worship, wherewith God is so
highly pleased and whereby at his holy hand the virgin or single woman,
through the intercession of Christ, obteineth the gift of purity, modesty,
shamefastness, and chastity: the deflowred woman finds grace to repent, and
to be restored to favor both with God and men: the natural or stepdaughter to
reverence and obeie her parents in all childlike duties: the wooed woman not to
be by any means cosined or abused in marriage: the young married wife to
consecrate her self to live holilie in that honorable estate: the elder
married woman, to live lovingly, faithfully, and quietly with her husband:
the woman with child, to escape the pit of so great perils, and to be thankful
for her mighty deliverance after childbirth: the midwife, and women
assistants, dutifullie and diligently to aid, comfort, and cherish the
traveling woman: the mother carefully to bring up her children: the daughter
naturally to cherish and obeie her mother: the mother in law, to live
charitablie and lovingly with the daughter in law: again, the daughter in
law to be have her self christianlie and courteously to the mother in law:
the dame or mistress, to entreat her handmaids well: the handmaids to show
all dutiful and faithful service to their mistress: the widow, to comfort
her self in all sorrows: the old woman to number her days, that she may
apply her heart unto wisdom: both young and old, one and other to consider
their creation, condition, vocation, and salvation, the better to live to
learn, to learn to live, and to live to die. To conclude, a Lamp (I say)
for all estates and degrees of women generally, to carry ever in their hands
and heart by the burning light and flaming fire of the reading whereof, their
faith, knowledge, zeal, devotion, perseverance in prayer, alms deeds,
fasting, with the love of God and their brethren, the desire of virtue, and all
manner of godliness shall be thoroughlie kindled and increased in them, so often
as they war cold, heavy, drowsy, slothful, dull, negligent, and remiss, by
too much bodily ease, worldly prosperity, vain pleasures, pomps, and
delights of this wretched life: and they at all times made ready, like wise
and prudent virgins, to meet the bridegroom whenever he comes, to be
received of him, and to enter with him ioifullie into the celestial wedding
chamber of his eternal happiness, there to glorify and praise him for ever
and ever.

Secondly, a Mirror for all sorts of wicked women, as in a clear glass with
Athalia, Iezabell, Herodias, and such like, perfectly to see their shameless
pride, cruelty, idolatry, and contempt of religion, with Putiphers wife, to
behold their incontinencie and infidelity toward their husbands: with Appam
their shameless impudency: with Cozbi, their manifest whoordome and
adultery: with the witch of Fndor, their abominable sorceries: with Queen
Dasthy their disobeence to their sovereign: with Bethshemah and Judith their
rebellious stubbornness to their loving parents in law: with Hagar their
contempt of their mistress: with Miviant their murmuring against their only
brother: with Heua their subtlety and covetousness to beguile their husbands:
with Zipporah, Michol, Jobs wife, old Anna, Tobit, etc. their unseemly
vpbraidings and bitter taunting, or chiding of their godly husbands, etc.
least that for their great impiety and ungodliness with Queen Maacha, they
be deposed from their seat of majesty: or with Baara, and Q. Dasthy, they be
divorced from their husbands: or with Athalia, they be slain without the
temple: or with Cozbi, be thrust through with a sword, or with Iezabel, in all
their bravery they be thrown headlong down into the street out of their own
window, and be eaten and devoured of dogs, and so want the honor of christian
burial: or with Saphyra be stricken with sudden death at the Apostles feet: or
with the Levites wife be shamefullie abused to death, and after chopped in
pieces: or with Samsons wife be burnt to ashes in the house where they dwell:
to conclude, least with the whore of Babel they be cast quick into the
bottomless pit of perdition: or with the flue foolish virgins they be shut
clean out of heaven, and go alive down into hell, there to be damned for
ever, if in time they call not for grace to beware and repent them of their
former wickedness. Again, a Mirror contrariwise for all godly and virtuous
women plainly to behold the faith, religion, modesty, sobriety, sincerity
of life and conversation of Sara, Ruth, Q. Candaces, Bernice, Susanna,
Elizabeth, the blessed virgin Marie, etc. The holiness, devotion, fear of
God, justice, uprightness, etc. of Hanna, Q. Hester, etc. The rare wisdom,
excellent knowledge, great learning, politic government, courage,
magnanimity, with the memorable virtues of Deborah, Abigael, Bethsheba,
Huldah, Iacl, the woman of Tekoah, Philips four daughters, the Lady commended
by saint John, etc. The famous cities, and stately territories and towers
built by Sherah that noble Gentlewoman to her perpetual renown. The
bountiful hospitality, great liberality, and often alms deeds of the
Shunamitesse that virtuous Gentlewoman, of Dorcas, Lydia, Ioanna, Judith, etc.
The constant and faithful love toward their husbands, of Sara, Michol,
Susanna, etc. The motherlie and careful affection toward their children, of
Sara, Hannah, Bethsheba, the blessed virgin Marie, the widow of Sarepta,
Samsons mother, etc. The dutiful obedience toward their parents, of Q.
Hester, Iepthas daughter, Orpha, Ruth, Sara, etc. The good entreaty and
christian behavior toward their handmaids of Sara, Lea, Judith, etc. The
fidelity and obedient service toward their mistress, of Hagar, Abia, Rhode,
etc. The great kindness and courtesy toward their friends, kindred, and
aliance of Bethsheba, Elizabeth, Q. Hester, Iehosheba, Rizpah, etc. The
womanly pity and tender hearted compassion and affection toward the distressed
and persecuted members of Christ, of Puah, Shiphrah, Rachel, Pharaos daughter,
Rizpah, O Hester, Iehosheba, Pilaces wife, Marie Magdalen, Martha, etc. The
sore labor and pains taking to get their own living, of Anna Tobit, Lydia,
Naomy, Ruth, Dorcas, etc. Finally the admirable humility, and invincible
patience and constancy in all adversities and persecution even to the death
and martyrdom, of Iepthas daughter, Susanna, the mother of the seven brethren,
and women of the Machabites, and many other: that looking in this glass of
the holy lives of their foremothers, they may christianlie conform and adorn
themselves after their good examples, and become for their rare virtues very
beautiful spouses in the fight of their spiritual bridegroom Jesus Christ:
to whom, as the kings daughters, they may appear all glorious within, and of
whom with the lambs wife they may be marked in the forehead with the
testimony of his name Jesus, to the end that being clothed with the sun of
righteousness, and crowned with the twelve stars of God and his word, and
treading the moon of this worldly affections under their feet, they may
evermore be delivered by him their valiant Michael, and his angels from the
power of the red dragon, which so greedily gapeth to devour them: and
possess their souls in patience, in the restfull place of the presence of
God, long since prepared for the elect where they shall be nourished and
preserved for time and times, and together with all holy virgins, matrones,
martyrs, and elect people of God, ioifullie triumph and be glad for the gift of
their everlasting happiness.

Thirdly, a Dial of devotion to direct you by the glorious globe and shine of
the bright sun of righteousness, which inlighteneth all things in the world,
very readily and plainly at all feasts and seasons of the year, and at all
hours and times of the day and night continually unto the holy mount of
heavenly contemplation and to the christian meditation and consideration of
everlasting felicity in celestial things, the better to contemn and forget
all terrene, base, vile, momentanie, and earthly vanities.

Fourthlie and lastly, a domestical library plentifully stored and
replenished both of the best approved presidents of christian prayers and
divine meditations, made from time to time by many right godly authors, men
and women of all ages: and also of the chosen sentences or perfect precepts of
holy scripture concerning the christian duties of all degrees and estates of
women in their several callings, together with the pleasant histories and
memorable acts, lives, and death of all manner of women good and bad, by name or
without name, mentioned in the old and new testaments of the bible, where
among, for the better understanding of the text, I have inserted some notes out
of the Geneua bible with some difference by parenthesis, very necessary for
the simple reader. All which treatises, though not so portable, yet so
delectable, profitable, and ready prepared to lie in your secret chamber or
oratorie to use: howsoever entitled or called, God grant they may as
diligently be read and fruitfullie practiced of you, good readers, as they and
every of them (I am sure) were painfully compiled and faithfully purposed of
the authors. And for these, and all other such good helps and furtherances to
faith, devotion, and godliness, God make both you and me alwaie thankful unto
his majesty, who by all means, at all times, and through all ages, most
graciously uses both the ministry of men and angels, to do us good
continually, that through our unthankfulness and wilful contempt of his good
gifts and graces daily offered by so many high, learned, and painful hands,
we may not loose the same and the profit thereof, by loathing that, which we
ought most to love and embrace, but rather in good time by our grateful
acceptance and approbation of that which deserves good liking, gain to
ourselves comfort and consolation, and encourage others (which as yet of any
singular affection for their private use conceal or deteine the woorks of any
godly authors men or women) to take good opportunity by this occasion offered
even for the common benefit of Christ's congregation, to publish the same
abroad, for the perfection of this good work, to the glory of God, and the
authors everlasting praise and commendation both with God and men: that full
deservedly it may be said of them, as most woorthilie it is of these my right
christian and heroical authors. Etsi mors indies accelerat,
Viuit tamen post funera virtus.
Thus being awaked up last of all as one that gathers after them in the
vintage, I have labored as you see (good reader) like a poor gleaner or grape
gatherer with restless Ruth to go after the maidens in the harvest, and to
gleane and gather for my mother Naomi certain handfuls of corn, after the
reapers and painful laborers among the sheaues, let fall of devotion in the
fruitful feelds of charitable Boaz: and have assailed, as you well perceive,
to replenish my wine press with the grapes of the Lords plentiful vintage,
and to fill my lamps brimfull with the oil of Gods good blessing and rich
store, left behind by the wise virgins in the holy vessels of his increase.
Here therefore if I might be so bold without offense, as in the name of the
foresaid blessed Boaz, I would gladly exhort and persuade Ruth, and in her all
other godly women of the simple sort, to follow this his good counsel (who
says: Hear me, my daughter, and go to none other feeld to gather, neither
depart from hence to gleane, but abide here by my maidens, let thine eyes be on
the feeld that they do reap in, and go thou after the maidens: and when thou
art athirst go also to the vessels, and drink of that which the servants and
handmaids have drawn, and when thou art hungry, come hither and eat of the
bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar, and sit by the reapers, and thou
shall be satisfied to the full.) So now least you should gather by any method,
order, division, title, direction, or application, that you shall find in this
book, or any part thereof, that I go about nicelie, curiously, or strictly
to inioine you to observe hours, days, feasts, times, or seasons, or to bind
you unlawfully to an impossibility, as of necessity to use all or every of
these prayers and meditations, in place, manner, and form as they are set down
(although it is to be wished that for the most part they might, if it were
possible, or the necessities of this turbulent life would permit) that you
should not mistake me, I say, and judge that my purpose is in any respect to
hinder common prayer, or interrupt the ministration of the word and sacraments
in the church, where and at what time I know we ought all to glorify God
together with one heart, spirit, and mouth, and to be no otherwise occupied,
either in reading or in praieng, than the public minister is, unless we would
be deemed mere superstitious, and under the pretense of several devotion to
commit manifest ungodliness: I think it very necessary for me to let you
understand (gentle reader) that my meaning herby was and is, simply first to
play the part of a faithful collector, by following my copies truly, and
placing their works and prayers together as I found them referred by the
authors for private or public use: secondly, for order and memory sake,
after the good example of the learned fathers of our time, to entitle, reduce,
and apply those other godly meditations and prayers, which for the matter I
found worthy the more often use in the church, or elsewhere, unto some more
special place, apt time, and peculiar purpose, than heretofore (to my
knowledge) by any others have been entitled, referred, or applied. But
thirdly and principally by the means of some plain form and easy method
of prayer and meditation, to prepare for the unlearned at all times, and in all
places such and so many sorts, as to avoid ignorance and tediousness might
conveniently serve to further their godly desires, to the glory of God, the
confusion of satan, and their own eternal comfort in Christ Jesus: referring
them notwithstanding, which you shall find proper for the church to be used
there only at convenient times by the ordinances of the church lawfully
permitted: the rest which are more private to be used elsewhere at your
discretions, when and so often as opportunity shall serve, and Gods spirit by
his heavenly motion give you any occasion. For as I would not have you think
hereby, that I my self do in all respects observe this order here prescribed
(although I assure you I strive to do it either within book or without: and
repent from the bottom of my heart the often omission of it in times past) so I
wish you good readers, which christianlie have consecrated and vowed to give
your selves to this holy exercise (as the Lord, I say, in mercy shall give
you grace, leisure, time, and occasion, and not suffer you to be tired with
any worldly necessity) in the name and fear of God, to observe this or that
order, method, form, or direction, which he in his word does allow of, or you
know best will keep you in the continual faith, fear, and favor of God.

For trust me, if you will but a little together with me call these ten
memorable things to your christian remembrance in this so holy an exercise.
First, the great misery and necessity, and common lack of the christian
congregation, has willed us to call upon him, saying: Pray always with all
manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all
perseverance. Secondly, his most sweet and Ask, and ye shall have; seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: for every one that
calls upon the name of the Lord, and departs from iniquity, shall be
saved, etc. Thirdly, our great and manifold sins, whereof we are guilty,
which will not suffer us to sit still without care, but briueth us of
necessity to beg

Yea I doubt not, but you will willingly confess with me, I say, that all
sorts of devout women have great cause, and that continually, to take these
lamps into their hands, thereby either with vanished Hagar to acknowledge Gods
graces toward them: or with desolate Naomi to pray that God would bless
their children to be stays and staves of their age to their comfort: or with
heuie Hanna to power out their hearts before the Lord in tears for a son, and
for his mercy and favor toward them: or with wise Abigael, by prayer to
prevent the mischeefes that hang as well over their heads, as their families:
yea or with her often on their knees to pray for the good prosperity and
preservation of their gracious governor Queen ELIZABETH: or with the church
and faithful soul of all christians, to long for the kisses of the peace of
Christ their spiritual spouse, and never to cease day nor night to seek him,
whom their soul loves, till by prayer and meditation they have found him: or
with the woeful daughter of Sion, to lament and mourn pitiouslie for their
sins, till their miseries be mitigated, and they comforted: or with
sorrowful Sara Tobit in fasting, and tears to be delivered from daily
reproaches and slanderous roongs: or which virtuous Judith in sack cloth and
ashes to obtain strength and courage mightily to destroy and overcome proud
Olophernes, with all the huge host of his bloody ruffians: or with noble
Queen Hester to proclaim a fast, and call their virgins, families, and people
together, to pray day and night to the hazarding of their own lives also, if
need so require for their own further preservation, and their peoples and
subjects safety and deliverance out of the hands of cruel Haman, and all his
seditious conspirators: or with chaste and innocent Susanna to appeal to God
the high judge of judges, to be acquitted from a violeut death by false
accusation, and more unjust condeinuation: or with the afflicted church in
exile, to acknowledge their sins, and call for mercy to be delivered from
distress: or with the woman of Canaan to fly unto Christ in all necessities,
to be relieved both bodily and ghostly: or with our most gracious Sovereign
Lady Queen ELIZABETH, to muse diuinelie of the inward love of the soul
toward Christ their spouse, their Lord and father, mother and brother: or with
the virtuous Lady Queen KATHERINE, to vewaile the ignorance of their blind
life led in superstition: and with her also in all their troubles to stir up
their godly minds patiently to suffer all afflictions for the love of
everlasting felicity: or with the right godly Lady Jane Dudley to endure the
cross to death most patiently: or with good Lady Tirwit to exercise them
selves morning and evening in fruitful and godly prayers, psalms* hymns,
and meditations: or with the honorable Lady Aburgauennie by the like, to
tread the path to paradise for the health of their soul: or with holy Agnus
and Eulalia the martyrs, to triumph in the victory of Christ's death: or with
Anne Askew the marryr to pray heartily for their enemies: or with master
Bradfords mother to be petitioners unto God for the constancy in faith to
death of their children: or with mistress Dorcas Alarten carefully to
instruct their whole family in the principal points of christian religion: or
with other grave and godly matrones unknown, to exhort others to
mortification and holiness of life, and to fly unto God in all troubles for
relief as he has commanded.

That so with the five foolish virgins it be never too late for them to cry,
Lord, Lord, open to us: but that to their comforts and the praise of God, with
Miriam they may evermore upon their timbrels sing the song of Moses, for their
mighty and miraculous delinerance from satan their spiritual Pharao: and
with Debora give great thanks for the victory got by our Iahel against Sicera:
and with holy Hannah reioise from the heart, and praise God in the temple for
the birth of their children, and safe deliverance: and with the women of Israel
triumph upon timbrels for the famous victories of David's daughter our noble
Queen ELIZABETH had against all her enemies: and with the spiritual spouse at
the marriage day sing the sweet song of songs to the glory of the bridegroom
Christ Jesus: and with Sara Tobit bless the name of God for their deliverance
from slanderous reproaches, and the einil spirit Asmodens, that enemy of holy
matrimony: and with holy Judith highly praise God for her and her peoples
mighty preservation out of the hands of their cruel enemies: and with the
blessed virgin Marie continually magnify the Lord their Savior, for their
high exaltation and favor with God, with men, and with angels: and with our
most gracious Queen ELIZABETH, incessantly to yield all possible praise and
hearty thanks for their so often, mighty, and marvelous preservation and
deliverance from so many kinds of dangers, yea deaths and destruction
pretended by satan and his bloody ministers daily against them.

Finally, that all godly women (taking hereby good occasion with these their
holy foremothers continually to make their petitions for the preventing of
evils: their supplications, for the obteining of all things needful for soul
and body: their intercessions as well for others, as for themselves: and their
thanksgiuings for corporal and spiritual benefits received) may show
themselves daughters worthy such mothers: virgins worthy such lamps of
perpetual virginity: and women worthy such ghostly weapons of their right
christian ministration to help their weakness (prayers, precepts, and
meditations I mean) by following their virtues wisely in the perfect fear of
God: by bearing the same in the hand of their hearts carefully in the due
obedience of their prince: and by fighting therewith in Golgatha the field of
this spiritual warfare, the good fight of faith courageously in the pure love
of their country, and christian charirie toward their neighbors: and at the
last in the world to come to the glory of God, and their everlasting comfort
together with the wise virgins, and all the elect people of God, ioifullie
triumph over all weakness, infirmity, and corruption: yea over sin, death,
hell, and damnation, and say: Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh hell, where is
thy victory?

But now if in wading so far in this argument of prayer, and in making this
bolume so big, ante shall think or saic, that I, by mine idleness and time
thus spent, am very chargeable unto them: and considering the plenty of
prater books more portable already extant, shall judge me to have taken a
very needless or bootlesse travel, or to have labored in vain, and spent
my strength for nothing, as he that would addestars to the sky, or light a
lamp at noone day, and therefore shall deem me worthy in their opinions to
loose both Oleum and operam. Oh forgive me this wrong I pray you: and
considering that I could not otherwise either satisfy my self to go forward
in my determined purpose, according to the prescript order of this collection,
or pleasure the simple reader with such plenty and variety of profitable
matter, especially in so good paper and fair usual letter, a thing to the
aged and feeble sighted reader very grateful and much desired. Let me
entreat you whosoever you be, to measure the same rather by the goodness of
the contents, of the which the godly can never have enough: than by the
bigness or deerenesse of the volume, which to the willing and desirous mind
are ever best cheap. So no doubt shall the pleasure and profit of the one at
the least counteruaile, if not far surmount, the pain and charges of the other.

As for my self (good reader) who have rudely as you see undertaken this
great labor, I protest, I have done it neither of presumption, as he that
would usurp the office of a Divine, and intrude himself into the studies of
other professions: nor of arrogancy, as he that would boast and make great
brags of other men's labors: nor of envy, as he that went about to make
frustrate and insufficient the painful and godly works of better learned:
neither yet of ambition or vaineglorie, as he that gaped after the praise and
commendation of any, or that would feign seem to be approved and registered
of any Chronicler for an author, or one that knows somewhat, who in deed
knows nothing, much less for all this deserves to be thought of above that,
which any either of their own knowledge, or by true report do, or shall see
in me, know me to be, or hear of me. Therefore I say (good reader) my
judgment, howsoever it please others to judge of me, and of mine intent
herein, is, I know with the Lord that formed me from the womb, to be his
servant: for he is the eye witness of mine integrity and simple meaning
herein, I say, in whom my life is hid, and to whom I am made manifest, do
line, and must die.

As for my work (so honorable for the very authors, so godly for the
matter, so necessary for the time, so profitable for the persons, so excellent
for the use, and so convenient to increase piety and christianity in the
simpler sort, howsoever otherwise with some carping heads, and evil disposed
readers, with Aesops dog in the manger never given either to do well
themselves, or to judge rightly and speak truth of others) it is I am right
well assured with my God, who first put me in mind to take it in hand, and in,
by, and through whom only I confess with humble and hearty thanksgiving
after many a years fore travel, in study much sweet, long watching, and
great expenses, I have now at the length finished the same I trust to his
glory, your profit, and mine own comfort.

Therefore leaving to all and every of the worthy works of other godly men
or women howsoever here or elsewhere extant, their particular use in the church
of God, as they were published: and to the honorable authors themselves their
due deserved praise and perpetual commendation to all posterity, with
exhortation to all godly christians reverently, willingly, and thankfully
to read, receive, and embrace the same, as wherein to the better fulfilling of
so heavenly an exercise of our faith most agreeable to Gods good will and word
is perfectly supplied and accomplished, by the rare gifts, ornaments, and
graces of the holy Ghost in the compilers, whatsoever otherwise through
ignorance, wants both in me, and perhaps in you also (good readers) if you be
unlearned. (Give them therefore, O give them, I say, and that woorthilie of
the fruit of their own hands, and let their own works praise them in all the
world.) I to conclude humbly submit my self unto the grave judgments of the
godly learned, and mine heroical authors living, of whom I meeklie crave
pardon for this my bold enterprise attempted both with bashfulnesse,
doubtfulnesse, and fear to become a writer in this so learned an age, or to
trouble your studies with my rude labors. And here lastly I offer these my
labors such as they are unto the good liking and favorable correction as well
in matter, as in manner of you my right christian learned readers, of whom in
full recompense and satisfaction of any fruit, that either you or the simpler
sort shall hereby reap, I only now make this request, as dutifullie to
reverence the divine works of so noble and learned authors, by whose holy
travels you perceine your selves to enioie most inestimable benefits: so
friendly to take in good part these first fruits of my poor studies,
proceeding from a well meaning mind, and built upon so good foundations, as
from him that did that he could though not that he ought to benefit all, and
to hurt or offend none. That they being now as lamps well esteemed of in the
opinion of the rich in virtue and knowledge, and gratefully accepted and
approved of the learneder sort, as the monuments of so famous matrones, may
yet at the least for their sakes become welcome and approved of all other
simple christians, and I by that means greatly encouraged to go forward in
virtuous studies for the benefit of my country, with hearty thanksgiving unto
God both for his mercy, and your great courtesy and goodness toward me, in
whom I bid you farewell, and unto whose heavenly defense, almighty
protection, divine favor, and continual blessing, I finally commend and
betake both these my labors, my self, and you dear and well-beloved readers,
beseeching you to love me, as I love you unfeignedly, to speak of me and my
work, no worse than I do of you and yours christianlie, and that for his
sake alone that loved us all most dearly, and in that love for us all endured
all manner of reproach and slanders that might be most patiently, even to the
effusion of his most precious blood often and sundry times truly, as well in
fervent prayer as in sweat, and otherwise on the cross for our eternal
glory: to whom therefore, and for all the inestimable benefits of his bloody
prayers, dririe death, and bitter passion be evermore rendered and given as of
writers and readers, so of angels, men, and all creatures in heaven, in earth,
or in the deep, all possible praise and perpetual glory that heart can
think, hand can work, or tongue can speak,

Amen.
Yours as his own in him that is all in all, and our own for ever, THOMAS
BENTLEY.

Facies militantis Ecclesiae.
IAm prope sexagies redijt centesimus annus,
Quum laeso aeternum seruans sub pectore vulnus,
Incensis animis gerit implacabile bellum
Cum serpentino mulieris semine semen.
Nam pater omnipotens (nec iam pater: improbus ex quo
Seduxit serpens primos errore parents)
Nullus amor natis, dixit, nec foedera sunto.
Exoriare aliquis pura de virgin vindex,
Cuius dextra caput serpentis conterat, and cui
Iratus serpens leniter calcanea tundat.
Nunc olim stirpem pono, and genus omne futurum
Exercendum odijs vtrinque: atque impero tolli
Infestas aquilas aquilis, contraria pilis
Pila, alas alis, and signa minantia signis.
Haec Deus ex illo struere and male nectere serpens.
Art dolos coepit, bellique opponere molem.
Nulla quies: aetas, quae tempore fluxit ab illo,
Militia est; hostis factum iam grande periclis
Ingenium, and longo creuit solertia bello.
Effrendetque draco ruber immortalibus iris,
Crudelis, reparatque nouas in praelia vires,
Audet and a nobis sumptis confligere telis,
Nam peccatorum, been quae numerantur ab illo,
Vel numero miseras animas vel pondere terret.
Tunc apt mortem peccati ostendere stipem,
Tunc stygias turmas, totumque Acheronta ciere
Promptus, and hijs hominem petit exitialibus armis:
Non par lex huius, non ius aequabile pugnae:
Nos sumus in terris, est in coelestibus hostis.
Non pede congreditur pes, densusque viro vir:
Sed micat in tenebris, and spiritualibus armis
Vtitur, and nocet, and non vult nocuisse videri
Improbus, infligit vulnus, neque vulneris author
Extat: sic pugnat, sic est metuendus Abaddon.
Add alios hosts, quos intus habemus and extra.
Hinc caro nos blandis odijs, affabilis hostis
Enecat, and leni peccati imbuta veneno
Strangulat, inclusas animas and conficit intus.
Extra alias scelerum faces, dirasque cohortes,
Et coniuratum cernas obsistere mundum.
Quacunque aspicimus, timor vndique and vndique terror,
Infernaeque ruunt acies praedamque requirunt
Christicolas. Quem das finem, rex magne laborum?
Nos tua progenies coeli quibus annuis arcem
Perdimur, ac coeli long disiungimur oris.
Haec est illa fides, potis est quae vincere mundum,
Infernique fores? Sic nos in sceptra reponis?
Ollis subridens Christus, qui cuncta serenat,
Oscula libauit natis, dein talia fatus:
Nata Deo proles ex viui semine verbi,
O multum dilecta mihi, dilecta parenti,
Moestane per tantos semper iactabere fluctus?
Nec quae sit tua spes, quae sit victoria, noris?
Tu sathanam? Tu tela times ignita gehennae?
Esto: tuos quondam potuit superare parents,
Nec dum animo exciderint irae saeuoque dolores,
Et veteres verset frauds, ac pectora tentet,
Atque omne secum Phlegetonta in praelia ducat,
Idcircone tuo poteris diffidere Christo?
Nec venit in mentem, quam crux ferat alma salutem?
Ille, vides? Leo terribilis, quique omnia saeuus
Circuit, immanis rugit, praedamque futuram
Faucibus expectat siccis, quem pessima ventris
Exigit impransum rabies, exutus, inermis,
In cruce confossus iacet: en victor Leo Iudae,
Inferni fregit portas, and contudit omnes
Peccati vires, and mortem morte peremit.
Haecspolia aeterna, has lauros ex host reporto.
Ecce Deum summum medijs est cernere terris,
In coelis hominem, tibi sese aeterna reseruant
Gaudia, cum superis homini been conuenit, actum est,
Vicisti, pepigit cum terra foedera coelum.
Iam Cherubinorum vaginae includitur ensis,
Atque iterum tibi se tradit paradisus habendum.
Namque ego, quem gremio tellus absorpsit iniquo,
Vincula perrupi mortis, coelumque petiui.
Et cupis hijs mecum pariter considere regnis?
Regnum quod teneo vestrum est: hic meta laborum.
Iudaque, gensque mihi nullo discrimine agetur.
Pugnat adhuc sathanas and confert agmina: pugnet,
Iusti materiem praebet tibi pugna triumphi:
Per varios casus, per multa pericula rerum
Tenditur in coelum, seeds vbi fata quietas
Ostendunt, illic fas laeta pace potiri,
Durato, and temet rebus seruato secundis,
Sic placitum: dum in te pietas excocta periclis
Splendeat, and viua formetur imagine Christus.
Tempus erit, quum me, paucis labentibus annis,
Cernes in densis venientem nubibus, and quum
Regnabis mecum, and victo dominaberis hosti.
Tu modo posce Deum veniam, sacrisque litatis,
Arma assume Dei, causasque innecte morandi.
I, bona, simplicitas animi tibi baltheus esto,
Quo stes contra ictus omnes circundata lumbos;
Indue iustitiae thoracem, and pectora muni,
Tum pro calceolis coelestis nuncia pacis,
Aptato pedibus certis: super omnia viuae
Sum manu scutum fidei, galeamque salutis
Spem capiti imponas, laterique accingere ferrum
Spirituale pares, and in hostem stringe rebellem:
Quicquid and aduersum verbo est, interfice verbo.
Sic vbi iam mundi decursa volubilis aetas,
Post exantlatae diuersa pericula pugnae,
Non arescentis folijs redimita coronae,
Foelix coelestem patriam Hierosolyma cernes.
Dixerat: extemplo moestos attollere vultus
Coepit, and afflictis laetari ecclesia rebus;
Infusoque oleo manibus sua lumina portans,
Praesto lansque suum patiens and laeta maritum,
Vota Deo supplex animo solennia fundit.
L. S.

Rob. Marbeck ad lectorem.
AVscultat nostris diuina potentia votis;
Et prece, non pretio flectitur ira Dei.
Perlege scripturas, and sancta volumina patrum;
Assiduis precibus nos vigilare iubent.
Si male te morbus prostratis viribus vrat;
Si te paupertas inuidiosa premat;
Per steriles saltus, per dura and inhospita saxa
Passibus ambiguis, si vel inermis eas,
Si mare te iacter, si tempestatibus actus,
Et coelum, and terras, mox ruitura putes:
Si te circunstet vel mill pericula mortis;
Inuoca, nil dubitans numina, saluus eris.
Ergo si precibus vis tanta putetur inesse,
Praeponi precibus, nil (mihi creed) potest.
Hic labor, hic liber est, tibi quem Bentle^ius offert,
Nil aliud resonans, quam pietate preces;
Et pius est Author: pius and conatus: vtrunque
Cur perames, causam candide lector, habes.
Argumentum libri.
VIn' tibi quid portent haec scire volumina septem?
Occurrunt animo lumina sparsa tuo.
Nulla quidem frustra est praelata a virgin lampas:
Ostendit varias illaque, and illa preces.
Prima docet Myriam, quas olim and Debora fudit, 1

Quas Domino Judith fudit and Aanna preces.
Altera reginis quas a nostratibus vsquam 2

Legimus in medijs incaluisse malis.
Hic Katherina suas, mulieribus aemula sanctis,
Hic cernit Princeps ELIZABETHA suas.
Tertia habet psalmos, quos pro solamine nostrae
Reginae docti composuere viri. 3

Hic modo de nostri loquitur moderamine regni,
Excipit hic votum principis ore Deus.
Quarta alias fuse complectitur omnibus aptas
Personis, rebus, temporibusque preces. 4

Quinta precum formas narrat, quas foemina quaeuis
Seu virgo fuerit, sieve marita, legate. 5

Sexta locos recitat sacris e fontibus haustos, 6

Possit vt officium foemina scire suum.
Continet historias illarum septima, quarum
Vel bona vita fuit, vel mala vita fuit. 7

Hinc Saram propone tibi, castamque Rebeccam;
Et subeat menti sancta Maria tuae.
Illinc ante oculos infamis Iezabel adsit,
Occurratque tibi labe notata Thamar.
Sic exempla pares illustria, turpia vites:
Historiae fructus maximus ille sacrae.
Interea Bentlaee, tuo de lumine lumen,
Qui facis accensum fratribus esse tuis:
Hic aeterna pij cernis monumenta laboris,
Hic zeli laus est non peritura tui.
L. S.

A brief catalog of the memorable names of sundry right famous Queens,
godly Ladies, and virtuous women of all ages, which in their kind and
countries were notably learned, and whereof some marked with this mark * were
the authors of a great part of this book, as shall appear: set forth in
alphabeticall order.
A.
* A Bigael Queen. * Agnes martyr. Agrippina. Anna. * Anne Askew martyr. Anne
Bacon. Anne Basset. Angelia virgin. Argentaria. Assiothea. Aspatia.
B.
Bridgit. Bundiuica.
C.
Cambra. Cassandra virgin. Catherina Cellia. Catherina Senensis virgin. *
Catherina Parre. Claudia Ruffina. Cleobula virgin. Cleopatra. Corinna.
Cornelia Africa.
D.
Damma. Danophila Pamphia. *Deborah prophetess. Demetria. Diodorus five
daughters. Diotima. *Dorcas Marten.
E.
Edesia Syria. Egitha Queen of England. * Elizabeth Q. of England. Elizabeth
Queen of Syria. * Elizabeth Tirwit Lady. Elizabeth an Abbess. Erinna.
Eudoxia Theodosia. Eustasia. * Eulalia martyr.
F.
Fabrola. * Francis Aburgauennie La. Furia.
G.
Genebria. Gysla.
H.
* Hagar. * Hannah Elcanah. Helena Flauia. Helizabeth Cenobia. Helpis Boetia.
Herophila. * Hester Queen. Hierontia. Hilda. Hildizarda virgin. Hipathia.
Hortensia. * Huldah prophetess.
I.
* Jane Dudley Lady. Joan Philippa Queen. Isota virgin. Isabel Q. her four
daughters * Judith Bethulia. Juno Chrissa virgin.
K.
* Katherine Q. of England.
L.
Lady commended by s. John with her daughters. Lasthemia. Leontium. Leta.
Lucretia.
M.
Mantinea. Marcella. * Marie the blessed virgin. Marie Queen of England.
Marie Lady Cicil. * Margaret Q of Nauar. Margaret Countess of R. Martia Q of
England. Maximilla prophetess. Myriam prophetess. Moera.
N.
* Naomi. Nossidis.
O.
Olympiades.
P.
Paula. Panothea. Phemono virgin. Philips four daughters. Polla. Portia.
Priscilla. Proba Romana. Pythagoras daughter.
R.
Richthruda. Rose wyda.
S.
Salina or Salma. Sappho poeta. * Sarra Tobit. Sibyls ten. * Susanna.
T.
Tecla. Theaneo Metaponta. Thesseles or Thelestilla. Theodosia. Thragelia.
V.
Valeria proba.
Z.
Zenobia Queen of Syria, etc.
THus, good Readers, I have set down the names of some notable learned women
to your consideration, referring such as desire to know further of their
several works to this treatise following, and to Gesnerus, Bale, Ludouicus
Viues, the Chronicles, and such other writers of our time. Which I have done,
not like a Sycophant to currie favor by flattery with women; but simply, God
is my witness, and for good purpose: partly, for that I well perceive these
and many other not here named, for their well deserving and excellent works (a
taste whereof you have here in this book) have heretofore been had, and that
right woorthilie, in great veneration of the godly learned fathers and writers
in all ages: and therefore are no less of us also to be reverently regarded
and had in honorable remembrance, to the perpetual recordation and further
continuance of their heroical names and fames, as it were by some inrollment
of their condign praises and memorable doings to all posterities: but
especially for that I might hereby, as much as in me lies, encourage,
provoke, and allure all godly women of our time, in some measure, according to
their several gifts given them of God, to become even from their youth more
studious imitators, and diligent folowers of so godly and rare examples in
their virtuous mothers, that as they either in sex, name, or estate are equal
with them: so in learning, wisdom, good industry, and in all holy studies
and virtuous exercises commendable for women, they would daily endeavor
themselves to become like them, that so being lightened by their good examples
both of life and doctrine, they may shine also together with them on earth, as
burning lamps of very virginity; and in heaven, as bright stars of
eternal glory: which God, for his own name sake, grant,

Amen.
What ceremony every woman ought by Gods word to use in the time of prayer,
public or private.
1. Corinthians. chapter II, verse. 4, etc. EVerle man praieng or prophesieng,
having any thing on his head, dishonors (God) his head: but every woman
that prays or prophesies bare headed, dishonors (her husband) her head.
For it is even one very thing as though she were shaven.

Therefore if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn; and if it be a
shame for a woman to be shorn or polled (as in deed it is) then (for shame)
let her be covered (and keep her hair trussed up under a kercher.)

For a man ought not to cover his head (but ought to be polled and bare, for
so much as he is the image and glory of God, in whom his majesty and power
does shine, concerning his authority over his wife, and other of Gods
creatures subjected under his dominion and rule.)

But the woman is the glory of the man (or receives her glory in
commendation of man, and therefore is subject:) for the man is not of the
woman; but the woman of the man: neither was the man created for the woman's
sake; but the woman for the man's sake.

Therefore ought the woman to have power on her head (that is, some thing to
cover her head in sign of subjection, because of the angels, to whom also they
show their dissolution and shame, and not only to Christ and his church, or
congregation where they pray.)

Judge you in your selves also, is it comely that a woman pray unto God bare
headed? Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair like
a woman, it is a shame unto him: but if a woman have long hair, it is a praise
unto her: for her hair is given unto her for a covering (and to the end she
should trusse it up about her head: to declare that she must cover her head.)
But if any man list to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
church of God.



The first Lamp of Virginity, containing the divine PRAYERS, HYMNS, or
SONGS, made by sundry holy women in the Scripture: something explaned in the
hardest places, for the better understanding and edifieng of the unlearned
Reader: and first,
The prayer of Hagar the handmaid of Sarai, which she made in her trouble and
banishment; wherein she rebukes her own dullness, and acknowledges Gods
graces, who was present with her euerie-where.

Genesis. 16, 13. THou GOD look on me: have I not also looked here after him
that sees me?

The song of thanksgiving of Moses, which Myriam the Prophetess and sister of
Aaron, together with all the women, sang upon Timbrels to the praise of God,
for the people of Isreal's deliverance out of the hands of Pharao, etc.
Exodus. 15, 1. SIng ye unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the
horse and his rider has he over thrown in the sea.

The Lord is our strength and praise, and he is become our salvation: he is our
God, and we will glorify him: he is our fathers God, and we will exalt him.

The Lord is a man of war, Jehovah is his name: [in battle he still over
comes, and is ever mindful of his promise.]

Pharaos chariots and his host has he cast into the sea: his chosen captains
also are drowned in the red sea.

The deep waters have covered them: they sunk to the bottom as a stone.

Thy right hand Lord is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O Lord, has
all to dashed the enemy.

And in thy great glory thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee:
thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them as the stubble.

Through the blast of thy nostrils the waters gathered together, the fluds
stood still as an heap, and the deep waters congealed together in the heart [or
depth] of the sea.

The enemy said, I will pursue them: I will overtake them, I will divide the
spoil, and my lust shall be satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, mine
hand shall destroy them.

Thou did blow with thy wind: the sea covered them, they sanke as led in
the mighty waters.

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods, [or mighty men of the world?]
Who is like thee so glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, showing
woonders?

Thou stretchest out thy right hand, the earth swalowed them.

Thou in thy mercy have carried this people, which thou have redeemed and
delivered: and thou will bring them in thy strength unto thine holy habitation
[the land of Canaan, or Mount Zion.]

The people and nations shall hear, and be afraid: sorrow shall come upon the
inhabitants of Palestina.

Then the Dukes of the Edomites shall be amazed, and trembling shall come upon
the great and mightiest men of the Moabites: all the inhabitants of Canaan
shall wax faint hearted.

Fear and dread shall fall upon them, because of the greatness of thine arm or
power; they shall be as still as a stone, till thy people pass through: O Lord
till this people pass through, which thou have gotten, or purchased.

Thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
inheritance, which is [Mount Zion] the place Lord that thou have made and
prepared for to dwell in, even the sanctuary, O Lord, which thine hands shall
establish.

The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

For Pharao on horseback went with his chariots and horsemen into the sea: and
the Lord brought the waters of the sea upon them: but the children of Israel
went on drieland in the mids of the sea.

Sing ye [therefore] unto the Lord: for he has triumphed gloriously: the
horse and him that rode upon him has he overthrown in the sea.

The song or thanksgiving of Deborah and Barak, after the victory given of
God by the hands of Iael, against Sisera. Judges. 5, 2.

PRaise ye the Lord, for the auenging of Israel: and for the people [of Zabulon
and Nepthali] that offered themselves [gladly,] and became so willing [to resist
their enemies.]

Hear O ye kings, harken O ye princes: I, even I will sing unto the Lord, I
will sing praise unto the Lord God of Israel.

Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou departedst out of the field of
Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens rained, the clouds also dropped water.

The mountains melted before the Lord, even as did Sinai before the Lord God
of Israel.

In the days of Samgar the some of Anath, in the days of Iael, the high ways
were unoccupied [for fear of the enemies,] and the travelers walked through
bywaies.

The towns were not inhabited, they decayed (I say) and the inhabitants
thereof were gone in Israel: until I Deborah came up, which [miraculously
moved by God to pity and deliver them] rose up a mother in Israel.

They chose new gods, and then had they war, or the enemy in the gates: was
there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand of Israel? [they had no
heart to resist their enemies.]

My heart is set on the governors of Israel, and loves them that are willing
among the people: praise ye the Lord.

Speak ye [gouernours] that ride on fair Ass s[or Moiles,] ye that dwell
by Middin [in danger of your enemies,] and that walk by the ways.

For the noise of the archers among the drawers of water ceased. There shall
they rehearse the righteousness of the Lord, his righteousness in his
unfenced towns in Israel: then did the people of the Lord go down to the
gates [without fear of the enemy.]

Up Debora, up, arise and sing a song. Arise Barak, and lead thy captivity [or
them that kept thy people in bondage and captiuitie] captive, thou son of
Abinoam.

For they that remain, have dominion over the mighty of the people: the Lord
has given me dominion over the strong.

Of Ephraun their root [Iosua first] arose [and fought] against Amalek: and
after thee [Iosua] Benjamin [that is Saule] shall fight against thy people, O
Amalek, Of Machir came rulers, and of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the
writer, [euen the learned did help to fight.]

And the princes of Issachar were with Debora, and [the whole tribe of]
Issachar, and also Barak, he was sent on foot into the vallie: for the
divisions of Ruben were great thoughts of heart.

Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks?
For the divisions of Ruben [that came not over Jordan to help their brethren
in their necessitie] were great thoughts of heart [and much maruelling.]

Gilead abode beyond Jordan [and yet came to help their brethren: therefore
thou Ruben can have no excuse,] and why does Dan remain in ships? Asher
continued on the sea shore, and tarried in his desolate and decayed places.

But the people of zebulun and Nepthalie have ieoparded their lives unto the
death, in the hie places of the field.

The kings came and fought, then fought the king of Chanaan in Taanach, by the
waters of Megiddo, and wan no money [but lost all.]

They fought from heaven, even the stars in their courses fought against
Sisera, [and by Gods power his people were helped to over come their enemies.]

The river of kishon swept them away [as a beesome does the filth of the
house,] that ancient river, the river Kishon: O my soul, thou have marched
valiantly.

Then were the horse hoofes broken with the praunsing and often beating together
of their mighty men.

Curse ye the city of Meros [where ye fought] (said the Angel of the Lord,)
curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help the Lord, to
help the Lord against the mighty.

Iael the wife of Heber, the Kenite, shall be blessed above other women:
blessed shall she be above women dwelling in tents.

He asked water, and she gave him milk: she brought forth butter in a lordly
dish.

She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmans hammer: with
the hammer smote she Sisera: she smote off his head, after she had wounded and
persed his temples.

He bowed him down at her feet, he fell down, and lay still at her feet, he
bowed himself down, and fell, and when he had sunk down, he lay there dead
and destroyed.

The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the lattise:
Why is his chariot so long a coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariots?

All her wise Ladies answered her, yea she answered [or comforted] her self
with her own words.

Surely they have gotten, and found, they divide the spoil: every man has a
damsel or two. Sisera has a pray of diverse colored garments, even a pray
of raiment died with sundry colors, and that are made of needle work;
raiment of diverse colors, and of needle work on both sides, which is meet
for him that is chief in distributing of the spoils.

So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord: but they that love him, shall be as
the sun when he rises in his might [and grow daily more and more in Gods
favor.] And the land had rest forty years.

The prayer or blessing of Naomy for her two daughters in law, Ruth and Orpah.
Ruth. 1, 8, 9. THE Lord show favor, and deal as kindly with you [my good
daughters] as ye have dealt with the dead [your husbands my two sonnes] and
with me. Yea the Lord grant you that you may find rest, either of you, in the
house of her husband.

The prayer or vow of Hanna, for a son. 1.
Samuel. 1, 11. O Lord of hosts, if thou will look on the trouble of thine
handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but give unto thine
handmaid a manchild: then I will give him unto the Lord, all the days of his
life, and there shall no rasor come upon his head.

The song and thanksgiving of Hanna, after she by prayer had obtained a son
called Samuel. 1.
Samuel. 2. MIne heart reioiceth in the Lord, and mine horn is exalted in the
Lord [for I have recovered strength and glory by his benefit:] my mouth is
enlarged or wide open over mine enemies: [so that I can now answer them that
reprove my barrenness,] for I rejoice in thy salvation.

There is none holy as the Lord, yea there is none besides thee, and there is
no god like our God.

Speak no more presumptuouslie [against God in condemning my barrenness,] let
not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and
his purposes come to pass, and by him enterprises are established.

The bow with the mighty men are broken, and they that were weak, have
girded themselves with strength.

They that were full are hired forth for bread, [and sell their labors for
necessary food,] and the hungry are no more hired, [but cease to have
need:] so that the barren has borne seven [euen many,] and she that had many
children is waren feeble.

The Lord kills, and makes alive: brings down to the grave, and raises
up again.

The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: brings low, and exalts up on high.

He raises up the poor out of the dust, and [according to his own will]
lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make
them inherit the seat of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the Lords,
and he has set the world upon them: [therefore he may dispose all things at
his pleasure, and prefer whom he will to honor.]

He will keep the feet of his Saints [so that they shall neither walk nor
fall into any euill] and the wicked shall keep silence in darkness: for in
his own might shall no man be strong.

The Lords adversaries shall be destoried, and out of heaven shall he thunder
upon them: ye Lord shall judge the ends of the world, and shall give power unto
his king [Iesus,] and exalt the horn of [Christ] his anointed.

The song of the women of Israel, in the praise of David's victory over Goliath.
1. Samuel. 18, 7. Saul has slain his thousand: and David his ten thousand.

The prayer or wish of Abigael for king David, against his enemies.
1. Samuel. 25, 24. OH my Lord, I have committed the iniquity: and I pray
thee let thine handmaid speak unto thee, and hear thou the words of thine
handmaid. Let not my Lord I pray thee regard this wicked man Nabal, for as his
name is, so is he. Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: but I thine
handmaid saw not the young men of my Lord, whom thou sentest. Now therefore
my Lord, as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, the Lord, I say, that
has withholden thee from coming to shed blood, and that thine hand should not
save thee, [nor revenge thee on thine enemies.] So now, I pray God that thine
enemies, and they that intend to do my Lord evil, may be as Nabal: and I
pray thee, forget the trespass of thine handmaid, etc.

The song of Sion, or the familiar talk and mystical communication, or divine
dialogue of the special love between the spiritual bridegroom Jesus Christ,
and the bride the faithful soul, his sanctified, chaste, and holy spouse the
Church: commonly called,
The Song of songs, or Ballat of ballats, made by king Solomon. Cantic. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The Church or faithful soul speaks to Christ.
O That thou would kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth [euen with thy
peace which passes all understanding:] for thy love [O Christ] is better and
more pleasant [vnto me] than wine: and that because of the good and pleasant
savor of thy most precious balmes or ointments, [euen of thy great benefits,
which I taste and feel from thee.]

Thy name [O Christ] is as a sweet smelling ointment when it is powered out and
shed forth: [thy mercy is set forth and published by preaching thy Gospel,]
therefore the Uirgins [euen they that are pure in heart and conuersation] do
love thee.

Draw thou me [O sweet Christ] unto thee, and we will run after thee: [for
otherwise I confess we can not come to thee, except we be drawn of thee.] The
King has brought me into his privy chambers: [and revealed unto me the secret
ioies not known to the world,] we will [therefore] be glad and rejoice in
thee, [yea] we think more of thy love, than of wine. [For] they that be
righteous love thee [aboue all things.]

I am black [I confess through the spots of sin, persecution, and troubles]
O ye daughters of Jerusalem: but yet comely, fair, and welfauoured [through
faith in the blood of Christ, in whose favor I have confidence and trust,] as
the fruits or tents of the Kedarens or Arabians: and as the hangings or
curtens of Solomon [which within were all set with precious stones and jewels.]

Marvel not therefore at me, because I am so black, [nor regard or consider me
by the outward apperance,] for why? the sun [euen the corruption of nature
through sin and affliction] has looked and shined upon me. Yea and my
mothers children [euen mine own brethren which should have most favored me]
were angry against me, and having evil will at me, they made me the keeper
of the vineyards: but mine own vineyard have I not kept, [such alas has been
mine own negligence.]

[Therefore feeling my faults and imperfections, I fly now unto thee, O
Christ, my spiritual husband only for succor, beseeching thee and saying,]
Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest the sheep, [O show
me, I say,] where thou lie, and make them rest at the noon day: for why
should I be like her that turns aside, or goes wrong about the flocks of thy
companions [whome thou have called to the dignity of pastors in thy Church:
and yet they like apostataes not only set forth their own false dreams and
traditions in steed of thy true doctrine: but also are become the domestical
enemies that persecute the Church.]

Christ speaks to his Church, or the faithful soul.
O Thou the fairest among women: if thou know not thy self [but art ignorant
in my ways:] then go thy way forth after the footsteps of the flock of
sheep, [euen after the doctrine of the Apostles] and feed thy goats and kids
by the tents of the shepherds [and learn of the true pastors and spiritual
doctors.]

I have compared thee, O my love, unto the troop of horses in the chariots of
Pharao [bicause that for thy spiritual beauty and excellency there was no
worldly treasure to be compared unto thee.]

Thy cheeks and thy neck are beautiful as the turtles, and behanged with
spangles, chains, and goodly jewels: a neckband [also] imbrodered with gold
and studs, or buttons of silver will I make thee.

The Church.
WHen the King sits at the table, and is at his repast: he shall smell my
Nardus, or spikenard [for I rejoice that I am admitted to the company of my
husband Christ] yea my well-beloved is as a bundle of Mirrh unto me, and he
shall lie betwixt my breasts, [for he is most dear unto me,] my well-beloved [I
saie] is as a cluster of Camphire unto me in the vineyards of Engedi: [wherfore
so long as I follow my Christ, I can not err from the true faith of
salvation.]

CHRIST.
O How fair art thou my love? Oh how fair art thou? Thine eyes are like the
dooues eyes. [behold, most acceptable art thou unto me, and I commend thy
beauty.]

The Church.
OH, how fair art thou [also] my beloved? How welfauoured and pleasant art
thou? Our bed [euen the heart of the faithful: where thou, O Christ, dwell
by thy spirit] is all green, bedecked with flowers: the beams or seelings of
our house are of Cedar trees, and our cross ioints of Cipresse.

I am the rose of the field, and the lilly of the valleys.

CHRIST.
YEa like as the lilly among the thorns: so is my love among the daughters:
[for my Church is to be preferred before and above all other things, yea so am
I also among mine enemies.

The Church.
LIke as the apple tree among the trees of the forest: so is my well-beloved
among the sons of men, [I can not but testify my love and great desire
toward him,] for my delight is to sit and rest under his shadow, because his
fruit [and word] is sweet unto my mouth: [and when my strength fails me] he
brings me into his own wine seller: and spreads the banner of his love over
me, [and there I desired to be comforted, saying:] Set about me cups or
flagons of wine, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love, [and lo, I
have felt it.] For his left hand is under my head, and his right hand does
embrace me.

CHRIST.
I Charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, [yee rulers, which have to do in the
Church, as it were by this solemn oth] by the roes, and by the hinds of the
field, that ye wake not up my love, nor touch her, [or trouble her quietnesse]
until she please, or be content her self.

The Church.
ME think I hear ye voice of my well-beloved [spouse Christ] behold, he [hath
taken our nature upon him, and] comes leaping upon the mountains, and
skipping over the little hills [to help his Church:] My beloved is like a Roe
or a young Heart. Behold, he [hauing his divinity hid under the cloak of our
flesh] stands behind our wall looking forth of the windows, showing
himself thorough the grates, [so that we can not have full knowledge of him in
this life] and my well-beloved spoke and said unto me.

CHRIST.
O My love, arise, and stand up, my fair one, come thy way, and go to thine
own. Behold, the winter [of sin, error, and infidelitie] is now past,
[driuen back and put away by my coming in the flesh, which is compared to
the Springtime, when all things flourish:] the rain is changed and gone away:
the flowers [of good works] are come up and appear in the fields: the time of
the birds singing is come, and the voice of the turtle dooue [or holy Ghost]
is heard in our land. The fig tree brings forth her figs, and the vines
bear blossoms, and have a good smell.

O stand up then, and come my love, arise, I say, my beautiful one, and come
away, O my dooue. Thou that art in the caves of the rocks, holes in the wall,
and in the secret place of the stairs: [thou, I say, that art ashamed of thy
sins, come and] show thy self unto me. O let me see thy countenance, and
hear thy voice. For sweet is thy voice, and fair and comely is thy face.

Take us the foxes, yea the little foxes, which destroy the vines: [suppresse
the heretics and enemies of my Church whiles they be young: that is, when they
begin to show their malice, and destroy my vine, by preaching false doctrine:]
for our vines bear blossoms, and have small grapes.

The Church.
My well-beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the lillies until the
day break, and till the shadows be gone.

Return [I pray thee] and come again, O my beloved [Christ,] and be like a
Roe, or young Heart upon the wild mountains of Bether, [euer most ready to
help and defend me in all dangers.]

In my bed by night, [or in my troubles] I sought him whom my soul loves, yea
diligently sought I him, but I found him not [by carnal reason, but by the
scriptures] neither was I incontinently heard.

[And because we must continue in prayer till we feel comfort, though we feel
it not at the first:] therefore thought I, I will now rise and get up, and go
about the city by the streets, and by the hie ways and open places, and will
seek him [by prayer continually,] whom my soul loves, [for I desire to be
joined inseparably to Christ my husband.] But when I sought him [by carnal
reason] I found him not, [but by the scriptures. Then seeking further unto all
others also, of whom I hoped to have any comfort and succor, at last] the
watchmen that went about the city found me, to whom I said, Saw ye not him
whom my soul loves?

So when I was a little past them, I found him [by the preaching of his word]
whom my soul loves. I have gotten hold upon him, and will not let him go,
until I have brought him into my mothers house, [euen] into the chamber of her
that conceived me, and bare me.

CHRIST.
I Charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, [ye rulers and Magistrates that
have to do in my Church, as it were by this solemn oath,] by the Roes and by
the Hinds of the field: that ye wake not up my love, nor touch her, [nor
trouble the state, quietness, or peace thereof,] until she please and be
content her self.

The Church speaking of her deliverance out of the wilderness; and of the
beauty of Salomons Temple, says:
WHo is this that comes up out of the wilderness like pillars or vapors of
smoke, perfumed as it were with the sweet smell of Mirrh and incense, and with
all manner spices or sweet powders of the Apothecarie or merchant, [me think it
is like the coming of the children of Israel, which were led in the
wilderness, and followed Christ forty years.]

Behold the bedsted, [or Temple,] which Solomon made, round about it stand
threescore strong men [euen] of the most valiant and mighty men of Israel.
They all handle the sword, and are expert in war, every one has his sword
upon his thigh, [watching, keeping, and defending the Temple by the word of
God,] because of the fear in the night.

King Solomon made himself a palace, or chariot, of the trees and wood of
Lebanon, he made the pillars thereof of silver, and the pauement and covering
thereof of gold, the hangings thereof of purple, whose mids, or ground, was
paued pleasantly with the love of the daughters of Jerusalem.

Come forth, O ye daughters of Zion, [euen all ye that are of the number of
the faithful,] and behold this King Solomon [euen Christ become man] crowned
[by the love of God with the glorious crown of his divinity,] wherewith his
mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of the gladness
of his heart.

CHRIST.
O How fair art thou my love! how fair art thou! [I can not choose but praise
and commend all that is in thee, in whom I have so great delight.] Thou have
dooues eyes, [euen a simple and sincere faith,] besides that which lies hid
within thy hearie locks [euen the fruits of a true faith] are like the wool of
a flock of goats that be shorn upon Mount Gilead, [so great respect have I
to the multitude of the faithful ones, which are many in number.]

Thy teeth, [or faith by the which all the faithful are made the sons of God
equallie] are like a flock of sheep in good order of the same bigness, which
went up from the washing place, where every one bears two twins; and not one
is unfruitful or barren among them.

Thy lips are like a rose colored riband, thy words are lovely, and thy talk
comlie: thy cheeks or temples are like a piece of a pomgranate within thy
hearie locks.

Thy neck [or preachers] is like the tower of David, builded with costly
stones lieng out on the sides for defense: a thousand shields hang therein: yea
and all the weapons and targats of the giants or strong men [are fixed therein.]

Thy two breasts, [the old Testament and the new] wherein are knowledge and
zeal, [two precious iewels] are like two twins of young Roes, which feed
among roses.

O that I might go to the mountain of Mirrh, and to the hill of frankincense,
till the day break, and till the shadows be past away!

Thou art all fair, O my love, and no spot [or blemish] is there in thee [in
my sight.]

Come to me from Lebanon, O my spouse: come to me from Lebanon. Look from the
top of Amanah, from the top of Shenir and Hermon: from the dens of the lions,
and from the mountains of the leopards [euen from all the corners of the world
will I call thee, my Church and faithful unto me.]

O my sister, [for so I call thee my Church, in respect that I have taken the
flesh of man upon me.] O my spouse: thou have wounded or bewitched my heart with
love. O my sister and spouse, thou have wounded my heart with one of thy eyes,
and with a chain of thy neck, [yea I love my gifts in thee, whom I have
therewith made so beautiful and rich.]

O how fair are thy breasts, my sister, my spouse, how fair is thy love! Thy
breasts or love are much better and more pleasant [vnto me] than wine, and the
savor of thine ointments passes all spices.

Thy lips, O my spouse, [bicause of thy confession and thanksgiving, and
through preaching of the Gospel,] drop as the honey comb, [and bring forth
much consolation and comfort:] yea milk and honey are under thy tongue, and
the sweet smell or savor of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

My sister, my spouse is as a garden well locked or enclosed: as a spring shut
up, and a fountain sealed up.

The fruits that are planted in thee are like a very paradise or orchard of
pomegranates: with sweet fruits, as Camphire, Nardus, or Spikenard, Saffron,
Calamus, and Cinnamon, with all sweet smelling trees of incense, Mirrh, Aloes,
and all the best spices.

The Church.
O Fountain of the gardens! O Well of living waters and the springs of
Lebanon! [I confess that all my glory and beauty comes of thee, O Christ,
who art the true fountain of all grace and goodness to me the Church thy
spouse.]

Arise O north wind, and come O thou south wind, come and blow on my garden,
that the spices and smell thereof may flow out, and be carried on every side:
yea let my well-beloved come to his garden, and eat of the sweet and pleasant
fruits that grow therein. [For this is all my desire to have thee, O Christ,
my beloved spouse, to come and comfort me, and to power the graces of thy holy
spirit from all quarters upon me.]

CHRIST.
I Am come into my garden, [euen unto my kingdom and Church, where I prepare
the banquet for mine elect, and bestow upon them my singular benefits.] O my
sister, my spouse, I have gathered my Mirrh with my spice: I have eaten my
honey with the honey comb: I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat ye [also]
O friends, drink ye, and make you merry, O well-beloved.

The Church.
I Sleep [and am troubled with the cares of worldly things,] but mine heart
waketh: I hear the voice of my well-beloved that knocks, saying:

CHRIST.
OPen to me, O my sister, my love, my dooue, my derling, mine undefiled. For
mine head is full of dew, and the locks of my hear are full of the night
drops: [hauing long patience toward sinners.]

The Church.
I Have put off my cote, [and confess my nakedness, having of my self
nothing:] how shall I put it on again? I have washed my feet: [and am made
clean,] how shall I defile my self again? [Yea therefore, seeing I am once
by thee made clean, I here promise now unto thee, never to defile or pollute
my self with sin again.]

My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my heart and bowels
were affectioned, or moved toward him.

I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with Mirrh: and the
Mirrh ran down my fingers upon the hands of the bar, or lock.

I opened unto my well-beloved, but he was departed and gone his way past me,
and my heart was gone when he did speak. [For when I sought him, and would
feign have been anointed of Christ, I could not find him, because I thought
to anoint him with my good works.] I sought him, [I saie] and could not find
him: I called, and cried upon him, but he answered me not. [For he left me for
a time, to the end he might stir up in me a greater desire of him by continual
prayer.]

So the [wicked] watchmen [and false teachers] that went about the city found
me: they smote me, and wounded my [conscience with their traditions,] yea the
watchmen that kept the walls, took away my veil or kerchife from me.

I charge you [therefore] O ye daughters of Jerusalem, [ye godly watchmen of
Zion, from whence the law and salvation commeth] if ye find my well-beloved,
that you tell him that I am sick of love, [and that ye direct me unto him.]

The daughters of Jerusalem, or faithful Christians, to the Church, say:
O Thou fairest among women, what manner of man is thy well-beloved above other
lovers? or what is he more than other well-beloved? or what can thy love do more
than other lovers, that thou do so straightly charge us?

The Church.
MY well-beloved [to describe his perfect beauty and comeliness unto you,] is
white, and ruddie colored, the goodliest and chiefest person among ten
thousand.

His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are curled, and black as a raven.

His eyes are like dooues eyes, by the water brooks, [which looke] as though
they were washed with milk, and remain by the fullers vessels, and are set
like pearls in gold.

His cheeks are like a garden bed, wherein the Apothecaries plant all manner of
sweet spices, flowers, and things.

His lips are like lillies, that drop down pure and sweet smelling Mirrh.

His hands are like gold rings, set with the Chrysolite, or precious stone of
Tharsis.

His belly is like white Iuorie, decked or covered over with Sapphires.

His legs are as the pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold.

His face or countenance is as Lebanus, and excellent as the beauty of the
Cedar trees.

His mouth, and the words thereof are sweet, and he is altogether lovely, and
wholly delectable, [euen] this or such a one is my love, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, [and] such a manner of man is this my well-beloved [spouse Christ.]

The daughters of Jerusalem, or the faithful to the Church, say:
O Thou fairest among women, whither is [this] thy well-beloved [Christ] gone?
whither is thy well-beloved turned aside, that we [also] may seek him with thee.
[For hearing of this his excellency and beauty, we are inflamed greatly with
desire to know how and where to find him also,]

The Church.
MY well-beloved is gone down into his garden, [and is conversant here in earth
among men in his Church, which is directed by his scriptures,] unto the sweet
smelling beds of spices, [is my love come,] that he may refresh himself, and
feed in the gardens, and gather lillies.

[I assure my self of the love of Christ, and that] I am my welbeloueds, and
my well-beloved is mine, who feeds among the lillies.

CHRIST.
THou art beautiful, O my love, as is the place, or strong and fair city
Tirzah: thou art comlie and fair as Jerusalem: fearful and terrible as an
army of men with their banners.

Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have set me on fire, and overcome
me: [so exceeding is my love toward thee my Church, yea I must needs praise
thy spiritual and comlie beauty also in all thy members. For] thy hearie
locks are like a flock of goats, which go down to be shorn upon the
mountain of Gilead.

Thy teeth are like a flock of shorn sheep, which go up from the washing
place, where every one bears twins, and not one is barren, or unfruitful
among them.

Thy cheeks, or temples, are like a piece of pomgranate, within thy locks of
hear.

There are threescore Queens, and fourscore concubines, or wives, and of the
damsels without number. [For the faithful are many in number, and diverse
orders and degrees of men there are therein: or the gifts and graces which I
do give unto my Church, are infinite.]

But my dooue is one alone, and mine undefiled dearling, she is the only
beloved daughter of her mother, and dear unto her that bare her. [For diverse
particular Churches dispersed, make but one catholic Church.] When the
daughters saw her, they said she was blessed: ye a even the Queens and
concubins, or wives praised her.

What, or who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
pure as the sun, terrible and fearful as an army of men with their banners?
[Though the beginning of my Church was but small, yet has it grown up to a
great multitude.]

I went down unto the nut garden, [and looked upon my Church, subject to
affliction, what fruit it brings,] and to see what grew by the brooks in the
vallie, if the vine budded, and if the vineyard and pomgranats flourished: [I
went down, I say, into the Synagogue, to see what fruits came of the law and
the Prophets, but] I knew nothing, [nor found any thing but rebellion therein.]
My soul set me as the chariots of my noble people that be under tribute: [and
I ran as swift as the nobles of my people in their chariots, to call them to
repentance, saying:]

Come again, turn again, O Shulamite, thou perfect one: turn again, O my
people of Jerusalem, turn again, and we will look upon thee. What shall ye
see in the Shulamite, [that is, Jerusalem, the which was Shalem, that
signifies peace,] but like men of war singing in a company?

O how pleasant and beautiful are thy goings with shoes, thou princes
daughter! The ioints of thy thighs are like a fair jewel, which is wrought by
the hand of a cunning workemaister?

Thy navel is like a round goblet or cup, which is never without drink, or
wants liquor, [but is ever replenished with the rich knowledge of Gods word,
and heavenly desires.]

Thy belly or womb is as an heap of wheat that is set about with lillies:
[euen full of spiritual treasures.]

Thy two breasts [of the old testament and the new, which came from God,] are
like two twins of young Roes, [and are of equal authority in the Church.]

Thy neck [or preachers,] is like the tower of Iuorie, [and ought to be pure
and godly.] Thine eyes also are like the water pooles that are in Nesbon, by
the gates of Bath-Rabbin, [euen thy magistrates must be well instructed in Gods
word.] Thy nose [or Judges of good and evil,] is like the tower of Lebanon,
which looks toward Damascus.

Thine head that stands upon thee is like Carmel, or skarlet, and the hear
of thine head like purple. The king is tied in the gallerie or rafters, or
dwells among many water conduits, [and delights to come near thee, and to
be in thy company.]

O how fair and lovely art thou my love! How pleasant art thou O my dearling
in pleasures!

This thy stature is like a palm tree, [which the more it is pressed and
persecuted, the more it grows and increases,] and thy breasts are like the
clusters of grapes.

I said, I will climb up into the palm tree, and take hold of her high
boughs. Thy breasts also shall now be like the clusters of the vine, and the
smell of thy nostrils like as the savor of apples.

And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine, which is meet for my best
blood, and causes the lips of the ancient to speak.

The Church.
I Am my welbeloueds, and his desire is to turn toward me. O come on my
well-beloved, let us go forth into the field, and take our lodging in the
villages, and there remain.

CHRIST.
IN the morning will we get up earelie, and go see the vineyard, we will see if
the vine be sproong forth, if the grapes be grown, and if the pomegranates
flourish, and be shot out. [I will call them that profess my word to an
account, what fruit they do bring forth in my Church.] There will I give thee
my love, or my breasts: [euen my graces to the faithful that are in my Church.]

The mandrakes have given their smell, and in our gates are all sweet things,
new and old, which I have kept for thee, O my beloved.

The Church.
O That I [that is, the fathers of the old testament,] might find thee without,
[that is, see the incarnation of Christ,] and kiss thee, whom I love as my
brother, which sucked my mothers breasts, then they should not despise thee nor
me.

I will lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house, that thou [O Christ]
might teach me, and that I might give thee drink of the spiced wine, and of
the sweet sap of my pomgranats.

His left hand shall be under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.
[His gracious favor shall preserve me from desperation in adversity, and from
presumption in prosperity.]

CHRIST.
I Charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, [ye magistrates or elders, which
rule in my Church;] that ye stir not up [contentions, or wars therein,] nor
wake my love, [by tumults and troubles,] until she please.

Who is she that thus comes up from out of the wilderness, leaning upon her
well-beloved? I waked, or raised thee up among the apple trees, where thy mother
conceived thee, where thy mother, I say, that bare thee, brought thee into the
world.

The Church.
O Set me as a seal upon thine heart, and as a signet upon thine arm. [For I
thy spouse desire to be joined in perpetual love with thee, O Christ, by the
seal of the holy Ghost.] For love is strong as death, and jealousy is cruel
as the grave.

The coals thereof are fiery coals, and a very vehement flame of the Lord:
so that many waters are not able to quench love, neither may the streams of
fluds drown it: yea if a man would give all the substance of his house for
love, he should count it nothing: [but] would greatly contemn it.

We have a little sister, [namelie, the Church of the Gentiles,] she is but
young, and has no breasts, [but wants both the old and new testament.] What
shall we do for our sister, when she shall be spoken for?

If she be [sure and firm as] a wall, we will build upon her a silver palace:
and if she be a door, we will keep or fasten her with boords of Cedar trees.
[If the Church be sure and fast, she is meet for the husband to dwell in, and
we the Apostles will preach to them that are called inwardly of God to
salvation.]

[Yea] I am a wall, and my breasts are as towers. [For I do promise fidelity
and constancy unto my spouse Christ.] Then was I as one that has found favor
and peace in his sight.

Solomon [the Lord Christ] has a vineyard at Baalhamon, and this vineyardlet
he out unto kepers, that every one, for the fruit thereof, should give him a
thousand pieces of silver.

But my vineyard, which is mine, is in my sight before me: to thee O [Christ
the spirituall] Solomon apperteine a thousand pieces of silver, and two
thousand to them that keep the fruit thereof: [euen the greatest profit, which
is life everlasting, obtained by the grace of God, and not by our merits.]

O thou that dwell in the gardens, [thy Church, where] thy companions [or
faithful ones,] hearken unto thy voice. O let me hear it [also,] that my
companions may hearken unto the same.

O my well-beloved [Christ, if thou] fly away, and [depart from us thy
faithful ones for a while, yet we beseech thee] be like unto the Roe, or as
the young Heart upon the sweet smelling mountains of spices, [and make haste (we
pray chae) to come again, and help us in our troubles, Amen.]

The four lamentations of the daughter of Zion, the Church, wherein with
weeping, sighing, howling, and with an heavy and woeful heart she sorowfullie
bewaileth her miserable estate, being plagued of God, and forsaken of her
spouse Christ, for his sins, unfaithfulness, and rebellion.
Lament. 1. The first Lamentation.
ALas, how does the city [Jerusalem] remain so solitary and desolate, that
sometime was full of people? How is she become like a widow? How is she
brought under tribute, that was great among the nations, and ruled the lands
and provinces as princess?

She weepeth sore continually in the night, and the tears run down by her
cheeks: [so that she takes no rest.] For among all her lovers she has none
to comfort her, yea all her next friends trangresse against her, and have dealt
vnfaithfullie with her, and are become her enemies.

Judah is carried away captive, because of [hir crueltie] affliction and great
bondage, or servitude, [and oppression of their servants, and the poor:] she
dwells [now] among the heathen, and finds no rest: all her persecutours
took her in the strait places, where she could not escape.

The ways and streets of Zion mourn and lament, because no man comes any
more [with mirth and joy as they were woont] to the solemn feasts: all her
gates are desolate: her priests sigh and make lamentation: her virgins are
discomfited, her maids are careful, and she her self is in great heaviness.

Her adversaries are the chief [rulers over her,] and her enemies prosper. For
the Lord has chastened and afflicted her for her great wickedness, and her
children are gone into captivity before the enemy, for the multitude of her
transgressions.

And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is gone and departed, her
princes are become like hearts that find no pasture, [euen as men pined away
with sorrow, and have no courage,] and they are driven away, and gone without
strength before the enemy and pursuer, so that they have no more power.

Now Jerusalem remembered, in the time of her misery and affliction, bare
estate and rebellion, all her toie and pleasure that she has had in times
past: seeing her people is brought down under the power of the enemy, and
there is no man for the help her. The enemies stand looking at her, and laugh
and mock her Sabbath days [that is, her Religion and serving of God,] to
scorn.

Jerusalem has greeuouslie sinned, therefore is she come in decaie, and had in
derision: all they that had her in honor [now] despise her, because they have
seen her filthiness: yea she sigheth and turns backward, as she that is
ashamed of her self.

Her filthiness is in her skirts [and manifest,] yet she [was not ashamed of
her sin, nor] remembered her last end: therefore is her downe-fall so
wonderful, and there is no man to comfort her. O Lord, behold mine
affliction, and consider my trouble, for mine enemy has the upper hand, and
has proudly magnified himself.

The enemy has put his hand to all the precious things that she had: yea even
before her eyes came the heathen, and entered in and out of her Sanctuary,
whom thou (nevertheless) did command and forbid to come within thy Church
and congregation.

All her people sigh, and seek their bread with heaviness: and look what
precious or pleasant thing every man has, that gives he for meat to save
his life, and refresh his soul. Consider O Lord, and see, how vile I am become.

Have ye no regard [to pity me] all ye that pass by this way? Behold and
see, if there be any sorrow like unto mine, wherewith the Lord has afflicted
or troubled me, in the day of his fierce and fearful wrath, [and learnc to
beware by mine example.]

From above has he [euen GOD] sent down a fire into my bones, which
prevails and burns them cruelly: he has spread or laid a net for my feet,
turned me back, and thrown me wide open: he has made me desolate, so that I
am daily in heaviness, and must ever be mourning.

The yoke of my transgressions is bound fast to [God] his hand, they are
wrapped or wreathen, and come up upon my neck, [so that by no means it can be
shaken off, or remitted, but only of his special grace and mercy.] He has
made my strength to fail: the Lord has delivered me into their hands, neither
am I able to rise up, and quit my self from them [that have me in bondage.]

The Lord has trodden under foot, and destroyed all my valiant and mighty
men, that were in the mids of me: he has proclauned an appointed time, and
called an assembly to slaughter and destroy all my best young men. The Lord
has trodden down the virgin, the daughter of Judah, like as it were [grapes] in
a wine press.

Therefore do I weep, and mine eyes, even mine eyes gush out with water,
because the comforter that should quicken me and refresh my soul, is far from
me. My children are driven away and desolate. And why? Because the enemy has
gotten the upper hand, and prevailed.

Zion casts out her hands, and there is none to comfort her: the Lord has
laid the enemies of Jacob round about him, and Jerusalem is as a menstruous
woman, [who for her pollution, is separate from her husband,] and is become
abomination in the midst of them.

The Lord is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandments, and
provoked his countenance to anger. O hear I pray you, and take heed all ye
people, behold my sorrow, and consider my heaviness: my virgins, my maidens,
and my young men are led away [prisoners, and] gone into captivity.

I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: for my priests and counselors,
but they perished [and died for hunger] in the City, even whiles they sought
for meat to save their lives, and refresh their souls.

Behold, O Lord, and consider how I am troubled, my bowels swell, my womb is
disquieted, my heart turns about within me, and I am full of heaviness,
because I rebelled stubbornly: the sword spoileth me abroad, as death does
at home.

They hear my mourning, but there is none that will comfort me: all mine
enemies have heard of my trouble, and are glad thereof, because thou have done
it: [but] thou will bring forth the day and time that thou have pronounced,
and calledst, when they also shall be like unto me.

Let all their wickedness come before thee, and do thou unto them, as thou
have done unto me for all my transgressions and trespasses. For my sorrow is
very great, my sighs are many, and mine heart is heavy.

The second lamentation of Zion.
ALas, how has the Lord darkened the daughter of Zion in his wrath, [and
brought her from prosperity to adversity?] How has he cast the beauty and
honor of Israel down from heaven unto the earth, and [giuen her a most sore
fall,] not remembering his own footestoole, [the Temple of Jerusalem,] in the
day of his wrath, when he was angry?

The Lord has cast out and destroyed all the habitations of Jacob, without
any favor: all the strong places or holds of the daughter of Judah has he
broken in his wrath, and thrown them down to the ground, and not spared her
kingdom, and the princes thereof has he profaned and polluted.

In the wrath of his fierce indignation he has broken all the horn [or power
and strength] of Israel, he has drawn back his right hand [of succour] from
before the enemy: yea a flame of fire was kindled in Jacob, which has
consumed and devoured up all round about.

He has bent his bow like an enemy, his right hand was stretched up and
fastened as an adversary, and every thing that was pleasant to the eye to see,
he has slain, he has powered out his wrath like a fire into the tabernacle of
the daughter of Zion.

The Lord is become as it were an enemy, he has devoured Israel, and consumed
all his palaces: yea all his strong holds has he destroyed, and filled and
greatly increased the daughter of Judah with much sorrow and heaviness,
lamentation and mourning.

For he has destroyed his tabernacle as a garden, his solemn meetings or
congregation has he put down, yea the Lord has brought it so to pass, that
the high solemn feasts and sabboths are clean forgotten in Zion, and has
despised in the heavy displeasure and indignation of his wrath [both] the king
and the priest.

The Lord has forsaken his own altar, and has abhorred his own Sanctuary:
he has given the walls of her palaces and towers into the hand of the
enemies, who have made a noise [with blasphemous shoutings and criengs] in the
house of the Lord, as in the day of solemnity and feasting [when the people
were accustomed to pray.]

The Lord has determined to break down the walls of the daughter of Zion,
he spread out his line, and has not withdrawn his hand from destroieng:
therefore he makes the [insensible things, even the] rampart turrets, and
walls [as it were to take part of the sorrow, and to] mourn and lament,
because they fell down and were destroyed together.

Her gates are sunk down to the ground, her bars are broken and smitten in
sunder, her king and princes are carried away to the Gentiles, they have not
the law, neither have her Prophets any vision from the Lord.

The Senators and Elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and
keep silence, they have cast up dust and ashes upon their heads, and girded
themselves with sackcloth: the virgins or maids of Jerusalem hang down their
heads to the ground.

Mine eyes do fail through weeping, and abundance of tears: my bowels swell,
my liver is powered upon the earth, for the great hurt and destruction of the
daughter of my people, because the children, babes, and sucklings faint and
sown in the streets of the City.

They have said to their mothers, Where is bread and drink? when they sowned
and fell down as the wounded in the streets of the city, and when they gave
up the ghost, and died in their mothers bosom.

What thing shall I take to witness against thee? Or what thing shall I liken
to thee, O daughter Jerusalem. [Thy calamity is so evident, that it need no
further proof.] To whom then shall I compare thee, O thou virgin daughter
Zion, to comfort thee withal? For the breach [in thy hart] is like [the breach
in] a maine sea. Who may heal thee?

Thy [false] Prophets have looked out vain and foolish things for thee, and
they have not discovered thine iniquity, or showed thee of thy wickedness, to
turn away thine affliction, and to keep thee from captivity: but they [to
flatter thee in thy sinnes] have seen or looked out for the false prophesies,
and causes of banishment, [and destruction.]

All that pass by the way, clap their hands at thee, hissing and wagging
their heads upon the daughter Jerusalem, and say: Is this the City that men
call so fair, the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole earth?

Al thine enemies gape upon thee with open mouths, they hiss at thee, and
grind their teeth, saying: Let us devour it, for certainly this is the day,
the time that we looked for is come, we have found, and seen it.

The Lord has fulfilled the thing that he was purposed to do, and performed
his word that he had devised and determined of old time long ago: he has
thrown down, destroyed, and not spared: he has caused thine adversary to
rejoice and triumph over thee, and has set up the horn [or power] of thine
enemy.

Their heart cried unto the Lord: O thou wall or city of the daughter Zion, let
thy tears run down like a river: day and night take thee no rest, neither
let the apple of thine eye cease or leave off [weeping.]

Arise, stand up, and cry in the night, in the beginning of the watches: power
out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord, lift up thine hands
toward him, for the lives of the young children that faint and die for hunger
in the corners of all the streets.

Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom thou have done thus. Shall ye women then
eat their own fruit, even their children of a span long? Shall the Priest and
the Prophet be slain in the Sanctuary of the Lord?

The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and my young
men are slain, and fallen with the sword: thou have slain them and put them
to death in the day of thy wrathful indignation: yea even thou have killed
them, and not spared.

My terrors [euen mine enemies whom I feared] that are round about me, have
thou called as it were to a feast-daie, so that in the day of the Lords wrath
none escaped, neither was any left behind: those that I have nourished and
brought up, has mine enemy destroyed and consumed.

The third lamentation of Zion.
HOw is the gold [or the princes] become so dim? the most fine gold so
changed? How are the stones of the Sanctuary [or the priests] so scattered in
the corner of every street?

The noble men of Zion that were alwaie in honor, and clothed with the most
precious gold, how are they esteemed, and now become like the earthen vessels,
the work of the potters hand? [of small estimation, and without any honor.]

The Dragons [though they be cruel, yet for pitie] draw out their breasts,
and give suck to [nourish] their young ones: but the daughter of my people is
become cruel, [and the women forsake their children] like the Estriches in the
wilderness, [which forsake both egg and bird.]

The tongs of the sucking children cleave to the roof of their mouths for
very thirst, the young children ask bread, but there is no man that gives it
them.

They that were wont to fare delicatelie, perish in the streets: they that
before were brought up in purple and scarlet, now make much of doong.

For the iniquity of the daughter of my people is beecome greater than the
wickedness of zodome, that suddenly was destroyed, and not taken with hands,
nor any camps pitched against her.

Her Nazarites or absteiners were purer than the snow, and whiter than the
milk: their color in body was fresh and red as coral, and their beauty
like the polished Saphyr, [so greatly were they once in Gods favor.]

But now their faces be very black as a cole, in so much that none can know
them in the streets: their skin cleaves to their bones, it is withered, and
become like a dry stock, [and they are in greatest abomination unto him.]

They that be slain with the sword, are happier than they that are killed or
die with hunger. For they fade [and pine] away, as they were stricken through
for the lack of the fruits of the field [and food.]

The women, which of nature are pitiful, have sodden their own children with
their hands, that they might be their meat in the miserable destruction of the
daughter of my people.

The Lord has performed his heavy wrath, he has powered out the furiousness
of his wrathful displeasure: he has kindled a fire in Zion, which has
consumed the foundations thereof.

Neither the kings of the earth, nor all the inhabitors of the world, would
have believed, that the enemy and adversary should have entered and come into
the gates of Jerusalem.

Which nevertheless [contrarie to all men's expectation] is come to pass, for
the sins of her Prophets, and the iniquities of her Priests, that have shed
the blood of the just and innocent in the midst of her.

As blind men went they stumbling in the streets, and stained or polluted
themselves with blood, so that the heathen would not touch their garments.

But they cried unto them, Depart and flee ye polluted: Away, get you hence,
touch not [those priests,] for they are unclean, and be removed. Therefore they
fled away, and wandered, yea they have said among the heathen, They shall no
more dwell there.

The anger, wrath, and countenance of the Lord has scattered them, and shall
never look more upon them, nor regard them. For they themselves neither
regarded, nor reverenced the face of the priests, nor had compassion or pity
of their Elders.

Wherefore our eyes failed, whiles we yet looked for our vain help of man.
For in our waiting we have looked for [the Egyptians,] a nation and people
that could do us no good, nor save us.

They hunt our steps, and lay so sharp wait for us, that we can not go safe in
the streets: our end is near at hand, our days are fulfilled, for our end is
come.

Our persecutors are swifter than the Eagles of the air, they pursued and
followed upon us over the mountains, and laid wait for us in the wilderness.

The very breath of our nostrels, even [Iosias the king and] the anointed of
the Lord, (himself) [in whom stood our hope of Gods favor, and on whom
depended our state and life,] was taken in their nets, [and slain,] of whom
we said, Under his shadow we shall be preserved alive among the heathen.

And thou, O daughter Edom, that dwell in the land of Huz, [go to,] be glad
and rejoice [at our destruction and fall: yet be thou sure thou shall not
escape.] For the cup [of Gods wrath] shall pass through, and come unto thee
also: thou shall be dronken, and discover thy nakedness, and vomit [vp thine
own shame.]

[Be of good comfort therefore] O thou daughter Zion, thy sins are fully
punished, and thy punishment accomplished. [For after seventy years, thy
sorrows shall have an end.] He will no more carry thee away into captivity:
but thy wickedness, O daughter Edom, shall he visit, and will discover thy
sins: [so that the wicked shall be tormented for ever.]

The fourth lamentation or complaint of Zion.
I Am she, that through the rod of his wrath have experience of misery.

He drove me forth, and led me: yea into darkness, but not into light.

Surely against me is he turned, he turns his hand daily against me.

My flesh and my skin has he made to wax old, and my bones has he bruised
and broken.

He has builded against me, and closed me in with gall and travel.

He has set me in dark places, as they that be dead for ever.

He has hedged me in, that I can not get out, and he has laid heavy linkes
and chains upon me.

Also, though I cry and call pitiouslie, yet hears he not my prayer.

He has stopped up my ways with hewn or squared stones, and made my paths
crooked.

He lays wait for me like a Bear, and as a Lion in a hole, or secret places.

He has stopped up my ways, and broken me in pieces, he has laid me waste,
and made me desolate.

He has bent his bow, and made me a mark to shoot at with the arrowe.

The arrows of his quiver [I saie] has he shot [at me,] and they are entered
even into my reins.

I am laughed to scorn and had in derision of all my people, and they make
songs [or ballets] upon me all the day long.

He has filled me with bitterness, and made me dronken with woormewood [and
with great anguish and sorrow he has made me loose my senses.]

He has smitten my teeth in pieces with stones, and rolled me in the dust.

Thus my soul was far off from peace, I forgot prosperity, and all good
things.

And I said, My strength and mine hope is perished from the Lord.

O remember yet my misery, and my trouble, the woormewood and the gall.

Yea in remembering, my soul does still remember them, and is humbled within me.

I consider these things in my heart, and therefore I get hope again.

Namely, it is of the Lords mercies, that we are not utterly consumed for our
wickedness: for truly his pitiful compassions fail not.

New mercies shall the Lord show upon thee early in the day springing every
morning. O Lord great is thy faithfulness: [for we feel thy benefits
continually.]

The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

O how good is the Lord unto them that put their trust in him, and to the soul
that seeks after hun!

The good man with silence and patience does both trust and wait for the
health and salvation of the Lord.

It is good for a man to take and bear the yoke upon him, in and from his
youth up.

He sits alone [and murmureth not, but is patient,] and holds him still,
and keeps silence, because he has taken and borne the Lords yoke upon him.

He lays his face upon the earth [and humbles himself, waiting with
patience,] if there may happen to be any hope [of succor.]

He offreth his cheek to the smiter, he will be content with reproaches.

For the Lord will not forsake for ever.

But though he send affliction, and punish, yet will he have compassion, and
according to the multitude of his mercies he receives to grace again.

For he does not plague willingly, nor [delighteth to] afflict the children of
men, [but does it of necessity for our amendment.]

To tread all the prisoners of the earth under his feet,

To overthrow the right of a man before the face of the most high,

To condemn a man in his cause: the Lord has not pleasure in such things.

What and who is he then that says, And it comes to pass, And the Lord
commands it not. [For without his providence nothing is done.]

Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good: [both
prosperity and adversity.]

Wherefore then mourns the living man, [when God afflicts him?] Let him
mourn, and be sorrowful for his own sins, for which he suffers.

Let us search and try, and look well upon our own ways, and remember our
selves, and turn again to the Lord.

Let us [without hypocrisie] lift up both our hearts and our hands unto God,
that is in the heavens, [and say:]

We have sinned, and rebelled, therefore have thou not spared.

Thou have covered us in thy wrath, and persecuted us: thou have slain without
any favor.

Thou have hid thy self as in a cloud, that our prayers should not pass
through.

Thou have made us the offscowring and reffuse in the mids of the people.

All our enemies have opened their mouths against us, and gape upon us.

Fear and snare is come upon us, yea desolation and destruction.

Whole rivers of waters gush out of mine eyes, for the destruction of the
daughter of my people.

Mine eye droppeth without stay, and cease not: for there is no rest,

Till the Lord look down from heaven, and consider.

Mine eyes break mine heart, [and I am overcome with weeping:] because of all
the daughters [or people] of my City.

Mine enemies hunted and chased me sore like a bird, yea and that without a
cause.

They have shut up my life in a dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

The waters flowed over mine head: then thought I, Now I am destroyed.

I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the deep pit, and low dungeon.

Thou have heard my voice: stop not thine ear from my sighings and crieng.

Thou drewest near unto me in the day when I called upon thee, and have said,
Fear not.

O Lord, thou have maintained the cause of my soul, and have redeemed my life
[that was in danger.]

O Lord, thou have seen my wrong: take thou my cause upon thee, and judge it.

Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their devises against me.

Thou have hard their reproachful and despitefull words O Lord, yea and all
their imaginations against me.

The lips also of those that rise against me, and their devises and whisperings
that they take against me all the day long.

Behold also their sitting down, and their rising up: how I am now their song.

Reward them, O Lord, according to the works of their hands.

Give them sorrow of heart, and an obstinate heart, even thy curse to them.

Persecute them, O Lord, with thine indignation, and root them out, and
utterly destroy them from under the heaven.

The fifth lamentation, or prayer of Zion.
CAll to remembrance, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider and behold our
confusion and reproach.

Our inheritance is turned to the strangers, and our houses to the aliens.

We are underlings without fathers, and our mothers are as widows.

We have drunken our water for money, and our wood have we by sale sold unto us.

Our necks are under persecution: we are weary, and have no rest.

Aforetime we yielded our selves to the Egyptians, and now [we have submitted
our selues] to the Assyrians, only that we might be satisfied, and have bread
enough.

Our fathers which now are gone have sinned, and we must bear their
wickedness.

Servants have the rule of us, and no man delivers us out of their hands.

We must get our living with the peril of our lives, because of the drought of
the wilderness.

Our skin is made black like as an oven, because of the trouble, famine, and
very sore hunger.

They ravish and defile the wives in Zion: and the maidens in the city of
Judea.

The princes are hanged up by their enemies hand: they have not honored the
old sage men's faces.

They have taken the young men [for slaues] to grind, and the boys fainted
under the burden of wood, [not able to abide it.]

The elders have ceased from the gates, [so that there were no more laws, nor
form of Commonwealth:] and the young men from their songs.

The joy of our heart is gone, our danse and melodious meeting is turned into
mourning.

The garland or crown of our head is fallen: Woe now unto us, and alas that
ever we sinned.

Therefore our heart is full of heaviness, and for these things our eyes are
dim [with weeping.]

Because of the hill or mountain of Zion, which is destroyed and desolate,
insomuch that the foxes run upon it.

But thou, O Lord, remainest for ever, and thy seat and throne from generation
to generation, world without end: [and therefore thy covenant and mercies can
never fail.]

Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time?

Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and so we shall be turned: renew our days as
in old times.

But thou have utterly banished and rejected us: and thou art exceedingly
angry and displeased against us.

The prayer and thanksgiving of Sarra Tobits wife, which in her virginity,
with fasting and weeping for the space of three days and three nights, she
made to be delivered from the shame and reproach, wherewith her fathers maids
vpbraided her.
Tobit. 3, 11. BLessed art thou, O Lord my God: and thine holy and glorious
name is blessed and honorable for ever. Let all thy works praise thee for
ever, O God of our fathers, which when thou art wroth show mercy: and in
the time of trouble thou forgiuest the sins of them that call upon thee. Unto
thee, O Lord, turn I now my face: unto thee lift I up mine eyes, and [saie,] I
beseech thee, O Lord, loose me out of the bonds of this rebuke, or else take me
utterly away from out of the earth, that I may hear no more any reproach.
Thou know, O Lord [minc innocence,] that I never had desire unto man, and
that I have kept my soul clean from all vncleanlie lusts. Thou know, O
Lord, [I say,] that I am pure from all sin with man, and that I have never
polluted my name, nor the name of my father in the land of my captivity. I
have not kept company with those that pass their time in sport: neither have
I made my self partaker with them that walk in light behavior. I am the
only daughter of my father, neither has he any man child to be his heir,
neither any near kinsman or child borne of him, to whom I may keep my self
for a wife. An husband have I consented to take, not for my pleasure, but in
thy fear: and my seven husbands are now dead, [one after another,] and why
should I live [to endure so great reproach, as to be counted a murderer of my
husbands? Now] peradventure, either I have been unworthy of them, or else
were they unmeet for me. But if it please not thee that I should die, [as I
desire:] for thou happily have kept me to another husband, command [then] to
look on me, and to pity me, that I do no more hear reproach. For why, thy
counsel is not in the power of man: but every one that serves thee, is sure
of this, that if his life be in trieng, he shall be crowned: and if he be in
trouble, that God no doubt shall deliver him: and if his life be in chastening,
that he shall have leave to come unto thy mercy. For thou have no pleasure in
our damnation. And why? After a storm thou make the weather fair and still:
after weeping and heaviness thou give great joy. Thy name, O God of Israel,
be praised for ever, Amen.

And at the same time were her prayers heard before the majesty of the great
God.

The prayer of Judith, which she made with fasting and tears, for the
deliverance of her people the Bethulians, out of the hands of Holophernes, and
the Assyrians host that besieged their city.
Judith. 9, 2. O Lord God of my father Simeon, which gave him a sword for a
defense against the enemies, and to take vengeance of the strangers, which used
violence in their uncleanness, and opened the womb of the maid [Dinah,] and
defiled her: that ravished the virgin, and discovered the thigh with shame,
and polluted the womb to her reproach and confusion. (For thou had commanded
that it should not so be: yet they [the Sichemites I mean,] did things, for
the which thou gave their princes to the slaughter. For they were deceived,
and washed their beds with blood.) And have stricken the servants with the
governors, and the governors upon their thrones. Thou that gave their wives
for a pray, and their daughters to be captives, and all their spoils for a
booty unto thy children and servants the Israelites, that thou louedst, which
were moved with thy zeal, and abhorred the pollution of their blood, and
called upon thee for aid.

O God, O Lord my God, hear me also a widow, and help me, I beseech thee.
For thou have wrought the things before, and these; and the things that shall be
after: and thou considerest the things that are present, and the things that
are to come. For the things which thou do purpose are present, and say,
Behold, we are here: and look what thou have taken in hand and devised, it
came ever to pass. For all thy ways are ready prepared, and thy judgments
are put in thine everlasting foreknowledge. O look now upon the armies of the
Assyrians, like as it was thy pleasure sometime to look upon the host of the
Egyptians, when they being weaponed, persecuted thy servants, and put their
trust in their chariots, horsemen, and in the multitude of their men of war:
but thou lookedst upon their host, casting a thick darkness before them. And
when they came into the deep, the waters overwhelmed them: even so Lord,
behold, and let it go with those Assyrians, which are multiplied by their
power, and have exalted themselves with horses, and horsemen: which glory in
the strength of their footmen, that trust in shield, spear, and bow: and do
not know that thou only art the Lord our God, which breakest the battles, and
destroiest the wars from the beginning. The Lord is thy name, and it
apperteineth unto thee to be called Lord.

O lift up thine arm now like as ever from the beginning, and break thou
their strength by thy power, and cause their force to fall by thy wrath. For
they have purposed, yea and make their vaunt and boast, to vnhalowe and defile
thy sanctuary, to pollute the tabernacle where thy glorious name rests: and
to waste, spoil, and cast down with sword and weapons the horns of thine
altar. Behold their pride, and bring to pass, O Lord, that the blasphemy of
this enemy [Holophernes] may be cut down with his own sword, and send thy
wrath upon their heads. Give into mine hand which am a widow, the strength
that I have conceived, that he may be taken with the snare of his eyes in me,
and that thou may smite him with the lips of my love. Smite (I say) by the
deceit of my lips, the servant with the prince, and the prince with the servant.

O give me a steadfast mind, that I may despise him and his strength, and that I
may destroy him. This shall bring thy name an everlasting remembrance, if thou
abate his strength, and overthrow him by the hand of a woman. For thy power, O
Lord, stands not in the multitude of men, nor thy might in strong men,
neither have thou any pleasure in the strength of horses, neither was there
from the beginning any proud persons that pleased thee. But in the prayer of
the humble and meek has thy pleasure been evermore. Thou (I say) O Lord,
art the help of the humble and little ones: the defender of the weak, and the
protector of them that are forsaken, and the Savior of them that are without
hope. Surely, surely, thou art the God of my fathers, and the God of the
inheritance of Israel: the Lord of heaven and earth: the Creator of the waters:
the King and Lord of all creatures. O hear thou my prayers: hear me (I say)
poor woman, calling upon thee, and putting my trust in thy mercy. Remember
thy covenant, O Lord, and minister words in my mouth, and stablish this devise
in my heart, that thy house may continue still in holiness: yea grant me words,
I say, and craft, and a wound, and a stroke against them that enterprise cruel
things against thy covenant, and against thine holy house, and against the top
of Zion, and against the house of the possession of thy children. Show
evidently among all thy people, and all the tribes, that they and all the
heathen may know, that thou art the God of all power and strength, and that
there is none other that defends the people of Israel, but thou: So be it.

Judith her prayer that she made secretly, or mentallie in her heart, when she
stroke off the head of proud Holophernes.
Judith. 13, 4. O Lord God of all power, behold at this present, and have
respect unto the works of my hands in this hour for the exaltation of
Jerusalem, that thou may set up thy city like as thou have promised.
Strengthen me, O Lord God of Israel, and grant that I may perform the thing,
which in hope that it may be done by thee I have devised. For now is the time
to help thine inheritance, and to execute mine enterprises to the destruction
of the enemies, which are risen against us. Strengthen me therefore this day,
O Lord God of Israel, now strengthen me [I saie] O Lord God, [euen] in this
hour.

Judith her song of praise and thanksgiving, which she, together with all the
people, made for their deliverance from the hands of the Assyrians, by the
destruction of Holophernes.
Judith. 16. BEgin unto my God with Timbrels: sing unto my Lord with Cimbals: O
tune unto him a Psalm, and sing a new song of thanksgiving unto him, exalt
his praise, be ioifull, and call upon his name.

For it is the Lord that destroieth wars, and breaks battles, even the Lord
is his name.

It is God, which has pitched his tents, or camp in the mids of his people,
and delivered me and them out of the hands of all the persecutors our enemies.

Assure came out from the mountains of the north, in the multitude of his
strength, he came with thousands in his army: so that the multitude of his
people stopped the water brooks, and their horses covered the valleys.

He purposed to have burnt up my borders and land, and said that he would kill
my young men with the sword, and dash the suckling children against the ground,
and lead away my children, and my virgins as a pray or spoil into captivity.

But the almighty Lord hindered him, and delivered him into the hands of a
woman, which has brought him to naught and confusion.

For the mighty [Holophernes] did not fall, nor was destroyed by the young
men. It was not the sons of Titan that slew him, neither have the great
giants invaded him, or set themselves against him: but Judith the daughter of
Merari, with her fair beauty and comlie countenance has discomfited and
brought him to naught.

For she put off, and laid away the garment of her widowhood, and put on the
apparel of gladness, for the exaltation and reioicing of those that were
oppressed in Israel.

She anointed her face with ointment, and bound up her hear in a coife, and
took a new stole or linen garment to beguile him.

Her slippers ravished his eyes, her beauty captiuated and took his mind
prisoner, with the sword or faulchin smote she off his head.

The Persians were astonished at her boldness: and the Medes were troubled
with her hardiness.

But mine afflicted reioiced, and my feeble ones that appeared dry of thirst,
showted for joy: then [the Persians and Medes] feared, they lift up their
voice and howled, and turned back.

The children of maids, or the sons of the daughters have pierced them
through, and wounded them as they fled away like fugitive children: they
perished in the battle for the very fear of the Lord my God.

I will sing unto the Lord a song of thanksgiving: a new song of praise will I
sing unto my God.

O Lord, Lord, thou art a great and glorious GOD, marvelous mighty and
invincible in power, whom no man may overcome.

Let all thy creatures serve thee. For thou spakest but the word, and they were
made: thou sentest thy spirit, and they were created: and there is none that
can resist or withstand thy voice.

For the mountains move, and leap up from their foundations with the waters:
the stony rocks melt at thy presence like wax: yet thou art merciful to them
that fear thee.

For all sacrifices are too little for a sweet savor, and all the fat is too
little for thy burnt offering. But they that fear thee, O Lord, shall be great
with thee in all things at all times.

Woe to the people and nations that rise up against my generation and kindred.
For the almighty Lord will take vengeance himself of them, and in the day of
judgment will he visit them, in sending fire and woormes in their flesh, and
they shall burn, and feel them, and weep for evermore: So be it.

The prayer of Queen Hester, which she made for the deliverance of her self,
and her people, out of the bloody hands of Haman, that conspired their death.
Hester. 14, 3. O My Lord, thou only art our King: help me desolate woman,
which have no helper but thee. For my danger, misery, and destruction is hard
at hand. From my youth up I have heard in the kindred of my father, that thou,
O Lord, tookest Israel from among all people, and our fathers from their
predecessors and foreelders, that they should be thy perpetual inheritance. And
look what thou did promise them, thou have performed, and made it good unto
them.

Now Lord, we have sinned before thee, therefore have thou given us into the
hands of our enemies: because we worshipped their gods. O Lord thou art
righteous: nevertheless, it satisfies them not that we are in bitter and
heavy captivity, and oppressed among them. But they have stricken hands with
their idols, that they will abolish and take away the thing, that thou with
thy mouth have ordained and appointed, and destroy thine inheritance, to shut,
and to stop up the mouths of them that praise thee, and to quench the glory
of thy temple, and worship of thine house and altar: and to open the mouths of
the heathen, that they may praise the power and virtue of the gods or idols,
and to magnify a fleshly king for ever.

O Lord, give not thy scepter unto them that be nothing, least they laugh us to
scorn in our misery and fall: but turn their devise upon themselves, and
punish him [this wicked Haman I mean,] and make him an example, that has
begun the same against us. Think upon us, O Lord, and show thy self unto us in
the time of our distress and trouble: and strengthen me, O thou King of gods,
and Lord of all power. Give me an eloquent and pleasant speech in my mouth
before the lion, [king Ashuerus my husband.] Turn his heart to hate our
enemies, and to destroy him, [that Hamam I mean,] and all such as consent
unto him: but deliver us with thy hand, and help me thine handmaid that am
solitary, and have no defense, nor helper, but only thee, O Lord.

Thou know all things, O Lord: thou wotest that I hate the glory and
worship of the unrighteous, and that I abhor the bed of the uncircumcised, and
of all the heathen. Thou know my necessity, that I hate this token of my
preeminence, worship, and dignity, which I bear upon mine head, what time as
I must show my self, and be seen, and that I abhor it as an unclean or
menstruous cloth and that I wear it not when I am quiet and alone by my self.
Thou know also, that I thine handmaid have not eaten at Hamans table, and
that I have had no pleasure nor delight in the kings feast, nor drunk the wine
of the drink offerings. And that I thine handmaid have no joy, since the day
that I was brought hither, until this day, but in thee, O Lord GOD of
Abraham. O thou mighty God above all, hear (therefore) the voice of them that
have none other hope, and deliver us out of the hand of the wicked: and deliver
me out of my fear: So be it.

Susanna her prayer, which she made, at what time she was condemned by false
witnesses, to die for adultery.
Susanna. 1, 42. O Everlasting God, thou searcher of secrets, that know all
things before they come to pass. Thou know that they have borne false
witness against me: and behold I must die, whereas I never did any such
thing, as these men have maliciously invented against me.

A prayer of the Church made in her affliction and captivity.
Psalm. 123. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwell in the
heavens.

Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters:
and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her maistresse: even so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised.

Our soul is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy: and with the
despitefulnesse of the proud.

The song of the blessed virgin Marie, the mother of our Savior Christ, which
she made at the time that she felt her self conceived of our Savior Jesus in
her womb.
Luke. 1, 46. MY soul magnifieth the Lord: and my spirit reioiceth in God my
Savior.

For he has looked on the poor degree and lowliness of his handmaiden and
servant: for behold from henceforth, now shall all generations call me blessed.

Because he that is mighty has done for me great things: and holy is his
name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to generation.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low
degree.

He has filled the hungry with good things: and sent away the rich empty.

He has vpholden and helped his servant Israel, being mindful of his mercy.

Even as he spoke to our fathers Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

The woman of Canaans prayer unto Christ for her sick daughter.
Matthew. 15, 22. Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David: My daughter
is grieuouslie vexed with a devil: Lord, help me, and vouchsafe I beseech
thee, that the whelps may eat of the childrens crumbs, which fall from their
masters table.

The prayer (but all too late) of the five foolish virgins.
Matthew. 25, 11. Lord, Lord: open to us. To God only be all glory,
AMEN.
THE SECOND LAMP OF VIRGINITY: Containing diverse godly Meditations, and
Christian Prayers made by sundry virtuous Queens, and other devout and godly
women in our time: and first, A Godly MEDITATION of the inward love of the
soul toward Christ our LORD: composed first in French by the virtuous Lady
Margaret Queen of NAVARRE: aptly, exactlie, and fruitfullie translated by our
most gracious Sovereign Lady Queen ELIZABETH, in the tender and maidenlie
years of her youth and virginity, to the great benefit of Gods Church, and
comfort of the godly.

Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

1582 Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.



Certain godly Sentences out of the 13. Psalm, written by the Queens
Majesty, in Latin, French, and Italian.
Latin.

Stultus dixit in cord suo: Non est Deus. Illi corrupti sunt, and
abhominabiles in sua impietate, nullus est qui aliquid boni facit.

French.

Le fol dit en son coeur: Il n'y a point de Dieu. Ils sont corrompus and
abhominables en leur impiete, iln'y a null qui face aucun bien.

Italian.

Lo stolto disse ne'l suo cuore: Egli non vi e Dio. Essi son corrotti and
abomineuoli ne la lor' impieta, non vi e nessuno che faccia alcun been.

A godly meditation of the inward love of the Christian soul toward Christ
our Lord.
The first Chapter, Of the souls slavery by sin: and redemption by Christ
his passion.
WHere is the hell, full of travel, pain, mischief, and torment? Where is the
pit of cursednesse, out of which does spring all desperation? Is there any hell
so profound, that is sufficient to punish ye tenth part of my sins, which in
number are so many, that the infinite swarm of them so shadoweth my darkened
senses, that I can not account them, neither yet well see them? And I so far
am entered among them, that I have no power to obtain the true knowledge of the
deep dangers of them. I perfectly feel also, that the root of sin is so
graffed in me, that in my self I find none other effect, but all is, either
branch, leaf, or fruit that it brings forth in me.

And if I look for better, a branch thereof shadoweth mine eyes: and in my
mouth does fall, when I would speak, the bitter fruit of cursed sin. If my
spirit be stirred to harken, then the noise of her leaves stops mine ears,
and fills my nostrils with the smell of her flowers. Behold now therefore how
in pains my soul, a slave, and prisoner without light, or comfort, lies
crieng and weeping, having her feet bound with the chain of concupiscence,
and her arms fast tied thorough evil use. Who then has power to help or
remedy it? Not I: neither have I power to cry for succor. And as I can
perceive, there is no help of hope for me, but by the special grace of God,
which of my self I can not deserve, but by Christ his only son, whose
brightness gives light to my darkness: whose power examining my fault,
breaks the veil of ignorance, and gives me clear understanding what thing
abides in me, where I am, and wherefore I labor.

He it is, whom I have offended: he it is, to whom I did obeie so seldom:
wherefore it is convenient that my pride be suppressed. With weeping heart and
sorrowful sighs, I humbly therefore confess that I am much less than
nothing. Before my birth, mire; after a dunghill, having a body prompt to all
evil, not willing other study: subject to care, sorrow and pain, short of
life, the end uncertain, and under sin by Adam sold, and by the law
condemned. For of my self, I never had yet the power to observe one only
commandment of God, the force of sin was such in me, and therefore is my
sin no whit the less to be hidden: and the more I cloaked and dissembled my
sin outwardly, the more it increased within my heart. For what God would,
that could I not will: and what he would not, I often times desired to perform:
which thing does constrain me by importable sorrow, in this weary and raging
life, to wish the end of this miserable body, through a desired death.

Who shall he then be, that shall deliver, or recover any good for me? Alas,
it can be no mortal man. For his power and strength is not such as can deliver
me. Who then? The only grace of the almighty GOD, who never is slack to
help the penitent with his mercy. Oh what a master is that, which without
deserving will show his mercy on sinners! I served him slothfullie, and
without ceasing offended him every day: yet is he not slack in helping me.

He does see the evil that I have, what and how much it is, and that I of my
self can do nothing that is good: but with heart and body so inclined I am to
the contrary, that I feel no strength in me, unless it be to do evil. Yet
does he not tarry till I humbly pray him, or that seeing my hell and
damnation, I do cry upon him: but his spirit whurling in my heart, greater
than I can declare, asks for me a gift, whereof the virtue is unknown to my
little power.

And this the same unknown gift or whurling in my heart, does bring me a new
desire, showing the good that I have lost by my sin, and given me again
thorough his grace and bounty, that which has overcome all sin.

O my Lord, what grace and goodness is this, which does put out so many
sins? Now may I see that thou art full of all godly love, to make me of a
sinner, thy servant and child. Alas, my God, I did not seek thee, but fled and
ran away from thee: and here beneath, thou came down to me, which am
nothing but a woorme of the earth all naked. What do I say? A woorme? Naie,
worse than a woorme, full of pride, deceit, malice, and treason. The promise
which my friends made when I was baptized, is such, that I always, thorough
faith in thy passion, should feel the mortification of my flesh, and dwell
always with thee in the cross, where thou wast fast nailed as I believe, and
yielded death dead, as I also should yield all sin.

This have I oftentimes untied, taken down, and set at large; I have broken,
denied, and falsified my promise, and through pride I have lifted up my will in
such manner, that through sloth, my duty toward thee was forgotten, and that
much more is, as well the profit, or value, which I had of thee in the day of
my baptism, as also thy saving love and promises following, I have all alike
neglected? What shall I say more? Albeit that oftentimes thou perceiving me
wretched, and unhappy, have given me so many warnings in faith and
sacraments, admonishing me by preachings, and comforted me by the receiving
of thy blessed body and sacred blood, promising by the same to put me in the
number of them that now are adorned with perfect innocence: yet have I all
these high benefits thrown into forgetfulness.

Oftentimes, O Lord, have I with thee broken covenant, and partly for that my
poor soul was too much fed with the evil bread or damnable doctrine of
hypocrites, I despised such succor and ghostly physic in Gods word, as
would have helped me, if I had been willing to look for it: yet knew I at
that time no teacher convenient. For there is neither man, Saint, nor Angel,
that can without thy spirit change the heart of a sinner. Alas, good Jesus, thou
beholding my blindness, and that at my need I could have no succor of men,
did open the way of my salvation. O how great is thy goodness, and how
inestimable the sweetness which thou have showed therein! Is there any
father so natural to the daughter, or brother to the sister, which would ever
have done as thou have done? For thou came down into hell to succor my
soul, where against thy will she was, intending to have perished, because she
did not love thee.

Alas, sweet Lord, thou have loved her, yea even to the very outshedding of
thy most precious blood. O charity fervent and incomparable! Nothing slack
art thou in love, that so louedst every sinner, yea and also thine enemies,
not only in forgiving their offenses, but also in giving thy self for their
salvation, liberty, and deliverance to the death, cross, travel, pain, and
sufferance. When I cast in mind what should be the occasion of thy love toward
me, I can see nothing else but a love wonderful, which moves thee to give
me that, which I can not deserve. Then as far forth as I can see, I ought to
give no thanks for my salvation, but only to thee my Lord Jesus, to whom I owe
the praise thereof, as to him which is my Savior and Creator.

The second Chapter, Of the souls affinity with Christ.
WHat a thing is it, O God, that thou have done so much for me? Thou art not
only contented to have forgiven me my sins, but also have given unto me
the right fortunate gift of grace.

For it should suffice me, I coming out of such a danger, to be like a
stranger used. But thou do handle my soul, if I durst so say it, as a
mother, daughter, sister, and wife: notwithstanding, my Lord, I am the
trespasser, which am not worthy to come near the door of thy right high
place, to ask bread, where thy dwelling is. Oh what grace is this, that so
suddenly thou vouchsafest to draw my soul into such highness, that she
feels her self ruler of my body! She poor, ignorant, and lame, does find
her self with thee rich, wise, and strong, because thou have written in her
heart, the root of thy spirit and holy word, giving her true faith to receive
it, which thing made her to conceive thy son, in believing him to be man,
God, Savior, and also the true forgiuer of sins. Therefore do thou assure
her, that she is mother to thy Son, of whom thou art the only father.

And furthermore, O my father, here is a great love of thy well doing, that
thy holy son has taken on him the body of a man, and has mingled himself
with our ashes, which thing we may not understand, without a most true faith.
It has pleased thee to put him so near us, that he did join himself to our
flesh, and I seeing him to be called man, am bold to call him brother. Now since
my soul may say of her self, that she is the sister of God, ought she not
to have her self assured in him? Yes truly. For thou do declare with great
love, that her creation was only of thy good will, which it pleases thee
always to have toward her, giving assurance, that before her first day, or
time of being provided for her, thou thorough love have made her, as thou of
power alone can well do it, and also did put her within this body, not
for to slack with sloth, but that both of them should have none other
exercise, but only to think how to do some service unto thee.

Then this truth makes her to feel that there is in thee true paternitie. O
what honor, what sweetness, and what glory has the soul, which does
always remember that she is thy daughter, and that in calling thee father,
she does thy commandment! What is there more? Is that all? No, it does please
thee to give her another name, to call her thy wife, and that she again do
call thee husband, declaring thereby how thou have freely manifested the
marriage of her. By baptism have thou made a promise, to give her thy goods and
riches, and to take on thee her sins: for she has nothing by heritage but
sin of her first father Adam. All her treasures that she has of nature, are
nothing else but sins, which thou have tied upon the Cross, and paid all her
debts with thy goods and lands.

Thou have made her so rich, and with so great a iointure endued her, that she
knowing her self to be thy wedded wife, does believe to be quit of all that
she owes, esteeming very little that she has here beneath. She forsakes
her old father, and all the goods that he gives her, for her husbands sake.
For surely, O my GOD, it hurts my soul to be fed with such good: and again
relieved in leaving the pleasures of this world, for that which is eternal, and
where peace is without war. Father, alas, what ought I to think? Shall my
spirit be so bold as to take upon him to call thee father? yea, and also our
father, for so have thou taught in the Pater noster. But to call me daughter,
have thou so said? I pray thee tell me. Alas, yea Lord, when with great
sweetness thou saiedst: Daughter, lend me thy heart: and again, thou saiedst,
Daughter thy faith has saved thee.

O my soul, instead of lending, my Lord is ready to give himself wholly unto
thee: receive him then, and do not permit that any creature put him from thee,
so that for ever with faithful steadfastness he may love thee, with a
daughterlie love. Now my Lord, if thou be my father, may I think that I may be
thy mother? Indeed I can not well perceive, how I should conceive thee that
createdst me: but in this matter, thou did satisfy my doubt, when in
preaching and in stretching forth thy hands, thou did say, Those that shall
do the will of my father, they are my brethren, my sister, and my mother. I
believe then, that hearing, and reading the words that thou have taught, and
uttered by thy holy Prophets and Apostles: the same also which through thy
true Preachers thou do daily declare unto men, in believing it, and
steadfastly desiring to fulfill the same, I conceive thee, and bear thee by
love.

Therefore without any fear I will take upon me the name of a mother. What?
Mother of Christ? O sweet virgin Marie, I beseech thee be not angry that I
take up such a title: I do neither steal, nor usurp any thing upon thy
privilege, for thou only above all women, receiuedst of him so great honor,
that no man can in himself comprehend, how he has been willing to take in
thee our flesh: for thou art the mother and perfect virgin, before, and after,
and in his holy birth. In thy blessed womb thou did bear him and nourish
him, thou did follow him in his tribulations, and also in his teachings. Now
briefly to conclude, thou have with God found such grace, as the enemy
through malice and deceit had caused Adam and his posterity to lose: by Eve,
and him we have lost it, and by the Son has it been yielded unto us again.

Therefore have thou been rightfullie called full of grace, as one to whom the
Lord has showed abundant favor. Since then that he, which is the best among
them that be good, and also the spring of all goodness and power, has created
in thee so pure innocence, endued thee with such grace, and exalted thee to
such dignity, that he in thee, of all other the example of virtue, has
builded his dwelling and temple: he through love did confirm himself with
thee, and thou through grace art confirmed in him, therefore no man can give
thee greater praise, then God himself has given thee, for there is no such
praise, as is the same, which comes from God. Thou also have had so firm and
constant a faith, that thou by the holy Ghost wast filled with all godliness.
I will not take upon me therefore to give to thee greater praise, than the
honor which thy son and sovereign Lord has given thee. And as thou art his
corporal mother, so art thou thorough faith his spiritual mother: and I
following thy faith with all humbleness, am his spiritual mother also.

Alas, my God, the brotherlinesse that thou have toward me, thorough thy
humbleness, in calling me sister, is great, for thou have broken the kindred
of mine old father, calling me daughter by adoption. Seeing then that we have
both one father, I will not fear to call thee my brother. For thou have so
reported it by the wise Solomon in his Canticle, saying: My sister and spouse,
thou have wounded my heart with the sweet look of one of thine eyes, etc. Alas
my brother, I wish for nothing else, but that in wounding thee, I might find
my self wounded with thy love, to that would I give over my self. And
likewise, thou do call me wife, speaking to me these amorous words: Arise
my dear dove, and come hitherward my delectable spouse. Wherefore I may say
with loving faith, Thou art mine, and I am thine, because thou have called me
thy love and fair spouse. If I be so, such have thou made me. Alas, does it
please thee to give me such names? Truly they are able to break the heart, and
cause it to burn through love unspeakable, when it thinks upon the honor
that thou do unto the soul, which is much greater than it has deserved. A
mother, a mother? Alas, but of what child is it? My God, my son? O Jesus what
speech is this! Mother, daughter, sister, and brother. O happy kindred! O what
sweetness does proceed out of that paternitie! But what daughterlie and
reverent fear ought I to have toward him, my father, yea and my creator, my
protector, and savior, to be my brother? Alas, here is a great love: I will
therefore say with Solomon, Now can my heart no longer refrain, but break in
sunder, to make room for the same so sweet a brother, so that none other name
be written in the same, but only the name of my brother Jesus the son of
God. None other creature will I give place to, for all the scurging and beating
that can be done unto me: keep my heart then my dear brother and love, and let
not thine enemy enter into it.

The third Chapter, Of the souls infidelity or apostasy from GOD.
O My sweet Father, my child, my brother, and spouse, with hands joined,
humbly upon my knees I yield thee thanks and praises, that it pleases thee to
turn thy face toward me, converting my heart, and covering me with such grace,
that thou do see no more my evils and sins. So well have thou hidden them,
that it seems thou have put them in forgetfulness: yea and also they seem
to be forgotten of me, which have done and committed them. For faith and love
so working in me, causes me to forget them, wholly putting my trust in thee
alone.

Then my Father, in whom lies unfeigned love, whereof can I have fear in my
heart? I confess that I have done all the evil that one creature can do, and
that of my self I am naught. Also, I have offended thee, as did the prodigal
child, following the foolish trade of the flesh, wherewith I have prodigally
spent the substance and abundance of goods, which thou here have given me to
use to thy glory: and for the mispending of them, poverty has taken me, and
has withered me away, even as haie, and yielded my spirit dead for hunger,
compelling me to eat the relief of swine: but in such meats I found very
little savor. Then I seeing my life to be so miserable, did return to thee my
father again, saying: Alas dear father, I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee, I am therefore no more Worthy to be called thy child. But O
bountiful and merciful father, do thou no worsse to me, than to one of thy
household servants. Alas, dear father, what love and zeal is this, that thou
would not tarry my coming and prayer, but speedily stretching forth thy
hands, receiuedst me, when I did think thou would not look on me: and so
receiving me, in stead to have punished me, thou did assure me of my
salvation? Where is he then that shall punish me, when my father shall deny
him my sin? There is no Judge that can condemn me, unless God himself will
damn me: the want of goodness I fear not, for I have my God for my father:
my enemy shall do me no harm, for my father will take all his strength away
from him. If I owe any thing, he shall pay it for me: if I have deserved
death, he as a King shall pardon me, and deliver me from prison and death.

But here is the woorst, what manner of mother have I been? For, after that I
by faith had received the name of a true mother, I became very rude unto thee
my Son: because that after I had conceived and brought thee forth, I left
reason, and being subject to my will, not taking heed unto thee, I fell
asleep, and gave place to my great enemy, the which, in the night of
ignorance, I being asleep, did steal thee from me craftily, and in thy place
she did put her child, which was dead, and so I did leese thee, which was a
sorrowful remorse for me. Thus did I loose thee my son, by mine own fault,
because I took no heed to keep thee. Sensuality my neighbor, I being in my
beastly sleep, did steal thee from me, and gave to me her child, which had
no life in him, named sin, whom I said I would not have, but utterly did
forsake him.

She affirmed, that he was mine own, but I knew him to be hirs. For as soon
as I came to the light of grace, which thou had given me, then I knew my
glory to be changed, when I saw the dead child not to be mine. For the same
which was alive, whom she had taken away, was my child: so apparent was the
change between Jesus and sin. But now here is a strange thing, this old
woman causes me to keep this dead child, whom she reports to be mine, and
so will she maintain. O Solomon, thou true and wise Judge, thou have heard
this lamentable process, and ordained to content the parties, that the child
should be divided in two parts. The false woman agrees it should be so, but I
remembering him to be mine own son, which was alive, was rather content to
leese him, than to see his body parted in twain. For true and perfect love is
never content with the one half of that it loves: rather I had therefore to
weep for the whole, than to recover the one half without life. Alas noble
Solomon, give her the child which is alive. For better it is for me to die,
than to see my son divided. But my Lord, thou did better look to it, than
I. For thou seeing the anguish that I did suffer, and how I rather did forsake
my right, than to behold such cruelnesse, thou saiedst, This is the true
mother, and so caused them to give me my child again, for whom before my heart
was sorrowful.

O sweet Jesus, thus have thou proved me, how much I loved thee: yea and when
by sin I had lost thee, yet did thou return unto me. Alas, how gently
do thou vouchsafe to come again to her, which being let by sin, could not
keep thee my sweet child, my sweet son, my helper, my nourisher, of whom
I am an humble creature? Do not permit that ever I do leave thee again, for I
do repent the time past.

Now come sensuality with thy rablement of sins, thou have no power to make
me to receive thy dead child. For my son is strong, and will defend me, he
shall not permit that thou take him any more away from me, his strength is
greater than any others, therefore may I sleep and take rest near him. For
all things well considered, he shall keep me from thine assaults. O sweet
rest of the mother, and the son together, my sweet child, my God, only unto
thee be the honor and praise, for that every creature may see, how it has
pleased thee to call me (less than nothing) a mother: and the more it is
strange and hard to be done, the more ought thy goodness to have praise for
it. And further, thou have retained me for thy sister, wherefore I acknowledge
my self more bound, than to any other creature.

Now I am sister unto thee, but so naughty a sister, that better it were for
me that I were without the name, than I to forget the name of adoption in so
noble a kindred, and also thy good and brotherly behavior toward me. I with
pride did rise against thee, and not remembering my faults, but going astraie
from thee, did agree with Aaron my brother, being in will to give judgment
against thy works; and following the example of Miriam, privily I grudged
against thee, which thing caused me to have remorse in my conscience. Alas
right bountiful brother, and true Moses, which do all with goodness and
justice, I have esteemed thy works to be even sin, being so bold to speak
even rashly, saying: Wherefore have thou married a strange woman? Thou give
us a law, and punishment, if we do not fulfill it, and then thou would not
be bound to it, forbidding us the thing which thou thy self do.

For thou forbiddest us to kill any man, and thou do kill, and sparest
none, of three thousand, which thou commandedst to be slain. Further, God gave
us in commandment by thee, that we should not marry the daughter of a
stranger, yet thou tookest thy wife from among them. Alas my dear brother
Moses, with a great many of these words, which I know to be foolish, with
Aaron and Miriam, which is mine own wit, I imbraided thee, whereof I repent.
For the lively voice of God, rebukinglie took me up before I went out of the
place. What would thou then of my sin? Thou would not have me punished,
but rather would my salvation and health, in asking for me this great
benefit, that it might please God to mitigate his judgment, the which thing
thou could not obtain. Wherefore I became a Lazar, so that all that looked
on me might well say, I had not been wise: and for mine uncleanness and
leprosy, I was put out from the tents and tabernacles, from among the people,
because the sick should not infect such as were whole. Oh what soul can have
a greater punishment, than to be banished out of the company of them which are
holy in God! But what did thou my sweet love and brother, seeing my
repentance? Thou prouidedst that my penance was soon at an end, and with true
love made means for me, whereupon I returned to thee. O what brother would,
in stead to punish his foolish sister, so naturally cleave unto her? For
injury, grudge, and great offense by her committed, thou give her grace, and
love in recompense. Alas my brother, how exceeding is this thy love? Much more
is it than brotherhoode is bound to give, to so poor and wretched a woman as I
am. I have done thee evil, and thou give me good for it. I am thine, and
thou say, thou art mine: even so I am, and ever will. I fear no more the
great foolishness of Aaron and Miriam, for no man may separate me from thee;
and now that we are together, as brother and sister, I care little for all
other, for thy land is mine inheritance.

Let us then keep, if it please thee, but one household, since it has pleased
thee to humble thy self so much, as to join thy heart with mine, in making thy
self a lively man. I do right heartily thank thee, and to thank thee as I
ought, lies not in my power. Take my meaning then I pray thee, and excuse
mine ignorance, seeing I am of so great a kindred as to be thy sister. O my
God, I have good cause to love, to praise, and to serve thee vnfeignedlie, and
not to fear, nor desire any thing save thee only. Keep me well then I
humbly pray thee, for I will ask none other brother nor friend to help me.
If any father have had any pity upon his children; if any mother have taken
any care for her son; if any brother have hid the sin of his sister, it
is thou.

The fourth Chapter, Of the entier affection and love of God toward the
sinful soul of man.
I Never saw, or else it was kept wondrous secret, that ever any husband
would thoroughlie forgive his wife, after she had him once offended, and did
return unto him.

There have been many of them, which for to avenge their wrongs, have caused
the Judges to put them to death. Other, beholding their sins, did not spare
their own hands to kill them. Other also, seeing their faults to appear, did
send them home again to their own friends. And some, perceiving their evil
dispositions, have shut them up in prison. Now briefly to conclude upon their
diverse complexions, the end of their pretense is punishment, and the least
harm that ever I could perceive in punishing them, is this, that they would
never see them again. But I do wish, that all of this mind should rather help
to turn them, than to forsake them. And therefore my God, I can find no man
comparable unto thee: for of love thou art the perfect example. Now therefore I
confess with lowly heart, that I have broken to thee mine oath and promise.

Alas, thou hadest chosen me for thy wife, and did set me up in great state
and honor. For what greater honor may one have, than to be in the place of
thy wife, which sweetly takes her rest so near to thee, and not only in
surety of soul and body, but also of all thy goods, Queen, Mistress, and
Lady? O what great favor is it, that I so vile a creature, am so ennoblished
by thee to so honorable an husband! Now to speak it briefly, I have more by
possessing of thee, than any man mortal can desire. Yet, when I remember mine
unworthy deserving, my heart does sob and sigh, mine eyes let fall abundance
of tears, my mouth can not make too many exclamations. For there is neither
new nor ancient writings, that can show so pitiful a case as the same is which
I tell now. Shall, or dare I tell it? May I pronounce it without shame? Yea,
for it is my confusion, not to show the great love of my husband: and for his
worship to declare my fault.

O my savior, which wast crucified on the cross for my sins, this deed of
thine is not such, as a father to leave his son, or as a child to offend his
mother, or as a sister to chide and grudge. But alas, my fault is such, and far
greater. For the more familiarity I have with thee, and the more benefits I
receive of thee, the greater is mine offense, when I with thee dissemble;
specially that I should so do, which am called thy spouse, and loved of thee
as thy soul. Shall I now tell the truth? O my spouse, I have left thee,
forgotten thee, and am run away from thee; I did leave thee, for to go at my
vain pleasure: I forsook thee, and chose me another: yea I refused thee the
welspring of all goodness, and faithful promise. I did leave thee. But
whither went I? Into a place where nothing was but cursednesse.

I have left thee my trusty friend and lover, worthy to be beloved above all
others: I have put thee aside, O welspring of all health somnes, by mine own
wretched will: yea I have forsaken thee, full of beauty, goodness, wisdom,
and power, and sought to withdraw me from thy love. I have accepted thy great
enemies, that is, the devil, the world, and the flesh, against whom for my
sake thou foughtedst so sore on the cross, to set me at liberty, which was by
them of long time a prisoner and slave, and so bound, that no man could cause
me to humble my self. And as for the love and charity that I should have had
toward thee, they did quench it; so that the name of Jesus my dear husband,
which before I had found so sweet, was to me tedious and hateful, so that
oftentimes I did jest at it: and when I have heard the Gospel preached or
taught, the word which I have hard, has not tarried with me, but as a feather
does in the wind.

I went never yet to hear thy word preached, but for a fashion only, which
was a work of hypocrisy: I was also annoied, when I hard speak of thee,
because I was more willing to go at my pleasure. Now briefly to conclude, all
that thou did forbid me, I fulfilled: and all that thou commandedst me to do,
I did eschew, and this was the cause why I loved not thee. But yet Lord, for
all that I did thus hate thee, and forsake thee, ran away from thee, and
betrayed thee, should I give place to any other? Have thou suffered, that I
should be mocked, either yet beaten, or killed? Have thou put me in dark
prison, or banished me for ever, setting naught by me? Have thou taken away
thy gifts and precious jewels again from me, to punish me for my unfaithful
fruits? Have I lost my iointure, which thou promisedst me, through mine own
offense done against thee? Am I accused by thee, before the eternal father, for
a naughty woman? Have thou forbidden me thy presence, as I have deserved, and
that I should never appear in thine house?

O most true husband, pure and perfect friend, the most loving among all
lovers! Alas, thou have done otherwise for me. For thou have diligently sought
for me, when I was going into the most deep place of Hell, where all evils are
done. When I was farthest from thee, both in heart and mind, and directly out
of the way, then did thou lovingly call me back, saying, My dear
daughter, hearken and see, and vow thine ear toward me: forget that strange
nation, with whom thou have run astraie, and also the house of thine own
father, where thou have dwelt so long, and then shall the King of all
faithfulness desire thy beauty. But when thou Lord saw, that thy sweet
and gracious calling did not profit me, then begannest thou to cry to me with
a loud voice, saying: Come unto me all you which are wearilie laden with
labor, for I am he that shall plentiouslie refresh you, and feed you with the
bread of life.

Alas, sweet Lord, unto all these sweet words would I not hearken, but rather
doubted whether it were thou, that so spoke unto me, or else a fabulous writing
that so said. I was so foolish, that without love I read thy word: I considered
not the comparison of the Uineyard, which brought forth thorns and briers in
stead of good fruit, and that it signified me, that so had done. I knew also,
that when thou did call the barren wife, saying, Return Shulamite, that thou
did speak it, that I should forsake my sins. Yet for all these words did
I, as though I had understood never a whit. But when I had perused the Prophet
Jeremy, I confess that I had in the reading thereof, fear in my heart, and
bashfulnesse in my face. I will tell it, yea with tears in mine eyes, and all
Lord for thine honor, and to suppress my pride. Thou have said by that holy
Prophet: If a woman have offended her husband, and is so left of him, for going
astraie with other: if he thereupon refuses her, is she not to be esteemed
polluted, and of no value?

The law does consent to put her in the hands of justice, or to drive her
away, and so never to take her again. Thou have made a separation between
thy bed and mine, says he unto me, and placed foreign lovers in my room,
committing with them fornication: yet for all this, thou may return to me
again, for I will not always be angry against thee. Lift up therefore thine
eyes, and look about thee on every side, and then shall thou well see, into
what place thy sin has lead thee, and how filthilie thou lie in the earth.
O poor soul, look where thy sin has put thee, even upon the high ways,
where thou did wait, and tarry to beguile them that came by, even as a
thief does, which is hidden in the wilderness. Therefore thou, in fulfilling
thy wicked pleasure, have with fornication infected all the earth, which was
about thee: thine eyes, thy forehead, and thy face, have lost all their good
manner, for they were such as an harlot has, and yet thou hadest no shame of
thy sin.

And the surplus that Jeremy says, constreineth me to know my wretched life,
and to wish with sorrowful sighs, the hour, the month, the day, the year,
and time that my life might have an end, yielding my self condemned, and
worthy to lie for ever in the everlasting fire. The same fear which
proceeds of thee, and not of my self, puts me rather in hope, than in
despair, as often as I do remember my sin. For as soon as thou know my
will, bowing under thine obedience, then putting in me a lively faith, thou
did use great clemency, so that after I knew thee to be that same Lord,
Master, and King, whom I ought to have feared, then found I my fear not
quenched, but mixed with love, believing that thou art so gracious, gentle, and
sweet, and so pitiful an husband, that I which should rather have hid me,
than to have showed my self, was not then in fear to go forth, and to look
for thee, and so seeking, I found thee.

But what did thou then? Did thou refuse me? No Lord, but rather have
excused me. Have thou turned thy face from me? No, for thine eye so sweetly
penetrated my heart, that wounding it almost to the death, it did give to me
remorse of my sins. Thou have not put me back with thy hand: but with both
thine arms, and with a sweet and manly heart, thou did meet with me by the
way, and not once reproving my faults, embracedst me. I could not see in
beholding thy countenance, that ever thou did once perceive mine offenses:
wherefore thou have done so much for me, as though I had never broken promise
with thee. For thou did hide my fault from every body, in giving me again
the part of thy bed, and also in showing, that the multitude of my sins are
so hidden and overcome by thy great victory, that thou will never remember
them more: so that now thou see nothing in me, but the graces, gifts, and
virtues, which it has pleased thy free goodness to give me.

O charity most precious! I do see well, that thy goodness does consume my
lewdness, and makes me a new, godly, and ioifull creature. The evil that
was mine, thou have destroyed, and made me so perfect a creature, that all the
good a husband can do to his wife, thou have done it to me, in giving me a
faithful hope in thy promises. Now have I through thy good grace, recovered
the place of thy wife. O happy, and desired place! O gracious bed! O thou
right honorable seat of peace, rest from all war, high sleep of honor,
separate from the earth! Do thou receive this unworthy creature, giving her
the scepter and crown of thine Empire and glorious Realm? Who did ever hear
of such a story, as to raise up one so high, which of her self was nothing;
and makes of great valor, which of it self was naught?

The fifth Chapter, Of the union of death and life in the faithful soul by
Christ.
ALas, what is this? For casting mine eyes on high, I see thy goodness, thine
unknown grace, and thy love so incomprehensible, that my sight is wonderful
in beholding thee: but looking downward, I might see what I am, and what I was
willing to be. Alas, I do see in it the lewdenesse, darkness, and extreme
deepenes of mine evils. My death, which by humblenes closes mine eye: the
admirable goodness of thee, and the unspeakable evil, which is in me: thy
right highness, and pure majesty, my right fragill and mortal nature: thy
gifts, goods and beatitude, my malice and great unkindness.

O how good art thou unto me! and how unking have I been unto thee? this that
thou will, and this that I pursue? Which things considered, causes me to
marvel, how it pleases thee to join thy self to me, seeing there is no
comparison between us both. Thou art my God, and I am thy work: thou my
creator, and I thy creature. Now to speak briefly, though I cannot define,
what it is to be of thee; yet know I my self to be the least thing that may be
compared unto thee. O most happy love! Thou made this agreement, when thou
did join life and death together, but ye union has made alive death; life
dieng, and life without end, have made our death a life. Death has given unto
life a quickening, yt through death I being dead, may receive life; and by
death, I am ravished with him which is alive. I live in him, otherwise of my
self I am dead. And as concerning bodelie death, to me it is nothing, but a
coming out of prison: death is to me life, for through death, I am alive. And
as this mortal life fills me full of care and sorrow, so death yields me
content.

O what a godly thing is it to die, that the soul may live! For in delivering
her from this mortal death, she is delivered from the death miserable, and
matched with her most mighty lover. Is not then the soul blameless, which
feign would by to have life? Yes truly, and ought to call death her well-beloved
friend. O sweet death, pleasant sorrow, mighty king, delivering from all
wickedness! O Lord, those which trust in thee, and in thy death, are mortified
by the hope they have in thy passion.

Thus with a sweet sleep do thou put them out of that death, which causes
many to lament. O how happy is the same sleep unto him, which when he
awaketh, does find through thy death, life everlasting! For death is none other
thing to a Christian man, but a liberty or deliverance from his mortal band:
and the death which is fearful to the wicked, is pleasant and acceptable to
them that are good, because that death through death is destroyed.

Therefore my God, if I were rightly taught, I should call death life, the end
of labor, and beginning of everlasting joy. For I know that long life does
let me from the sight of thee. O death come and do thine office on me, that I
may see my spouse: or else sweet love, transform me in thee, and then shall I
the better tarry the coming of death! O sweet Lord, let me die, that I may
live with thee! For there is none other that can deliver me, but thou only. O
my Savior, through faith I am planted and joined with thee. O what union is
this, since that through faith I am assured to thee, and may call thee father,
brother, son, and husband!

O my father! what paternitie? O my brother! what fraternity? O my child! what
delectation? O my spouse! what conjunction is this? A father full of humility,
a brother having our similitude, a son engendered through faith and love, a
husband loving and releeuing in all extremity. But whom do thou love? Alas,
it is she whom thou have withdrawn from the snare, wherein through malice she
was bound, and have put her in place, name, and office of a daughter, sister,
mother, and wife. O my Savior, it is a great savor of sweetness, right
pleasant, and delectable; when a soul after the hearing of thy word, shall call
thee without fear, his father, his brother, child and spouse: such a soul
doubtless may continually burn in love.

Is there any love, unless it be this manner of love, but it has some evil
condition? Is there any pleasure to be hereto compared? Is there any honor
to this, but may be accounted shame? Yea, is there any profit equal to this?
Moreover to conclude, is there any thing, that I could more earnestly love?
Alas no. For he that unfeignedly loves God, reputeth all these things wordlie,
of less valor than the dunghill. Pleasure, profit, and honor of this world,
are all but vanity and trifles unto him which has found God. Such love is so
profitable, honorable, and abundant in grace, that I dare say, she only
suffices the heart of a godly soul, and yields her so constant, that she
never desires, or would have other. For whosoever has God, as he ought to be
had, accounts all other things superfluous or vain.

Now thanked be my Lord, and my father; through faith I have gotten the same
love: wherefore I ought to be satisfied and content. Now have I thee my father,
for defense of my want on foolishnes, and my long youth. Now have I thee my
brother, for to succor my sorrows, wherein I find no end. Now have I thee my
son, for my feeble age, as an only stay. Now have I thee a true and
faithful husband, for the satisfieng of my whole heart. And now, since I have
thee, I will, and do forsake all them that are in the world, holding thee
fast, that thou may no more escape me. Seeing now that I have possessed
thee, I will look upon none other thing, that might keep me back, from the
beholding of thy divinity. Seeing that I do hear thee, I will hear nothing
that lets me from the fruition of thy voice. Seeing that I may freely talk
with thee, I will common with none other. Seeing it pleases thee to put me so
near thee, I will rather die, than to touch any other: and seeing I serve
thee, I will serve none other. Seeing that thou have joined thy heart with mine,
if it depart from thee, let it be punished for ever. For the departing from thy
love is harder than any damnation. I do not fear the pain of ten thousand
hels, as I do fear the once loosing of thee.

Alas my God, my Father, and Creator, do not thou suffer that the enemy,
inuenter of all sin, have any power to make me to loose thy presence. For
whosoever shall feel the loss of thy love, shall say, he would rather be
bound for ever in hell, than to feel the pain thereof one moment of time. O
my Savior, do thou not permit, that ever I depart from thee again; but that
it may please thee, to put me in such a place, that my soul, through
wantonness of sin, be never separated from thy love.

The sixth Chapter, Of the longing of the soul, by death to feed with Christ.
IN this world I can not perfectly have this my desire; which thing makes me
fervently to desire the departing from this body of sin, not fearing death,
nor any of her instruments. For what fear ought I to have of my God, which
through love offered himself, and suffered death, not of debt, or duty; but
only because he would, for my sake, under the power of mortal death? Now is
Jesus dead, in whom we are all dead, and through his death we all shall live: I
mean those, which through faith are partakers of his passion. For even as the
death, before the great mystery of the cross, was hard to every man, and
there was no man but was feared therewith, considering the copulation of the
body, and the soul, their order, love, and agreement; so were their sorrows
extreme, in departing of the one from the other.

But since it has pleased the sweet Lamb to offer himself upon the cross,
his great love has kindled a fire within the heart, so vehement, that every
true believer esteems the passage of death but a play, or pastime, and so
provoke other constantly to die. And even as the fear of death does
retrograde us: so ought love to give us a desire to die. For if true love be
unfeignedly within the heart of man, he can feel none other thing; because love
is so strong of it self, that she keeps all the room, and puts out all
other desires, suffering nothing there but God only. For wheresoever true and
perfect love is, there is remembered neither fear, nor sorrow: yet our own
pride to attain honor, causes us to seek death by many strange ways. As
if a man, to have his foolish pleasure, puts himself in ieopardie of life:
if a merchant, to obtain riches, does danger himself sometime for a small
value: if the thief, conceiving of roberie, or murder, cruelty, or deceit,
does so blind a man, that he doubts nothing the danger of death, neither yet
misfortune, when he seeks to aduenge himself, or does any other evil: if
the fury of sickness, or the rankenesse of melancholy, causes a man
fiercely to wish for death, or oftentimes to drown, hang, or kill themselves.
Such evils are sometimes so great, that they cause their pained patient to
choose death for liberty. If it so be then, that these pains full of evils
and imperfections, cause them not to fear the hazard of death, but rather to
think that death tarieth too long: alas, what ought true and laudable love to
do? What ought the love of the eternal creature to wish? Should she stir a
heart in such wise, that she being maistered with such affections, should feel
none other thing in her? Alas yea. For death is a pleasant thing to the soul,
which is in love with God, and esteems the passage easy, thorough the which
she comes out of prison. For the hard way, where through she comes, can be
no let for her to embrace her husband. O my Savior, how good and pleasant is
the same death, through whom I shall have the end of all sorrows: and by whom I
shall enioie thy sight without impediment, and be transformed into the
likeness of thy majesty!

O death, through thy force I trust to have such honor, as upon my knees with
crieng and weeping I daily do desire. Therefore come quickly, and make an
end of my sorrows. O happy daughters, right holy souls, joined to the city
Jerusalem, open your eyes, and with pity look upon my desolation! I beseech
you, that for me, and in my name, ye do show unto my dear and best beloved,
my God, my friend, and my King, how that every hour of the day I do
languish for his presence. O sweet death, come unto me, and lovingly bring me
unto my Lord God. O death, where is now thy sting and dart? Alas, are they
banished from mine eyes? Is not rigor changed into sweetness, seeing that for
my sake, my friend did suffer upon the cross, whose death does so encourage
me, that death I wish to follow him?

The seventh Chapter, Of the trust the soul has in the merits of her
Redeemer, against the dread of hell and desperation.
Since then that death is so pleasant to me, that it pleases me more than it
fears me; then ought I to fear nothing, but only the right judgment of
GOD. My sins with his just balance shall be weied, and all that I have done,
openly shall be showed: my thoughts and words shall be better known, than
they were written in a roll. Wherefore I may not think, that charity would
offend justice and truth. For certain it is, whosoever lives vnfaithfullie,
shall be punished in everlasting pain. For God is just, and his judgment
righteous, and all that he does is perfect in all things. What am I then,
considering mine own righteousness? A wretch and poor creature.

I know that all the works of just men, are so full of imperfection, that
before God, they are more filthy than mire, or other vileness. What will it be
then, concerning the sins which I have committed, whereof I feel the burden
importable? I can nothing else say, but that I have won by them damnation. Is
this the end? Shall despair then be the comfort of my great ignorance? Alas my
God, no? For the invisible faith causes me to believe, that all things, which
are impossible to man, are possible unto thee; so that thou do convert my
work, which is nothing, into some good work of thine in me, which is
specially faith. Then my Lord, who shall condemn me? Or what Judge will damn
me? Since that thou, which art my Judge, art also my father, my spouse, and my
refuge. Alas, what father? Such as does never condemn his child: but always
does excuse and defend him.

Then I perceive to have none other excuser, but Jesus Christ, which is my
spouse, and my redeemer, whose death has restored me my lost inheritance. For
he made himself my man of law, showing his so worthy merits before his
father, wherewith my great debt is so abundantly recompensed, that in
judgment it is nothing. O redeemer, here is a great love: I find but few such
men of law. O sweet Jesus, it is to thee that I am a debtor, yet do thou
both pray and speak for me. And moreover, when thou do see that I am
poor, with the abundance of thy goods thou do pay my debts. O
incomprehensible sea of all goodness! O my dear father, do thou vouchsafe
to be my Judge, not willing the death of a sinner? O Jesus Christ crucifier and
savior of the soul, friend above all friends: thou being my man of law, did
excuse and speak for me, where thou could justly have accused me.

I fear no more therefore the cruelty of mine enemy, for the law by thee is
satisfied for all: the payment is so made by my sweet spouse, that the law
can ask nothing of me, but it is paid by him. For as I believe, that he has
taken all my sins upon him, and has given me in place of them his own
goods in abundance: so, O my Savior, thou presenting thy virtues, do
content the law. And when she will reproach me of my sins, thou do show
her how willingly, in thine own flesh, thou have taken the discharge of them,
through the conjunction of our marriage. Also upon the Cross, through thy
passion, thou have made satisfaction for it. Morouer, thine only charity has
given me this, that thou have for me deserved. Therefore, seeing thy merit to
be mine, the law can ask nothing of me. Now then will I fear no more the
judgment, but with desire, more than with perforce, I will tarry the time
that I shall see my Judge, and hear a just judgment of him.

I know that thy judgment is just, and that there is no fault therein, though
mine infidelity is worthy to suffer the cruelnesse of hell. For if I do
only consider my deserving, yet I can see nothing in it that can keep me from
the fire of hell. For true it is, that the torment of hell was prepared for the
Devil and his children. So if any man have set his mind, to be like to the
Devil, by sensual appetite, then ought he, as the Devil, to be paid with a
like reward. But if a man through contemplation of the soul, do hold of thee,
his Angel of counsel, virtue, and perfection, he is sure to obtain heaven,
which is a place of thy deserving for him: then shall the wicked be punished,
with the same punishment, which they ought to have, to whom they have joined
themselves. For since they followed Satan, they must enioie such place as is for
him, and his Angels prepared.

Now I, considering the diversity of both the sorts, am little comforted in
spirit by this. For I cannot deny, but that I am more like the Devil, than
the Angel of light: wherefore I fear and tremble. For as the Angel is pure
and perfect, so am I vnpure and imperfect, and am nothing like unto him. But
thus I confess, that to the other I am so like in my doings, and so
accustomed in his ways, that of his pain and torment I ought to be partaker.
For the cruel sin which has bound me in hell, is so great, and his force so
strong, that it lets nothing to come from it, neither fears it the
contrary assault. But he, whose force lies in this kind of strength, knows
not how his strength goes away, when a stronger than he comes in place.

I could never yet see, that any man by merit, or pains taking, could ever
yet vanquish that hell, save only he, which did the great assault through his
unspeakable charity, when he humbled himself to the cross, whereby he has
vanquished and overcome his enemy, and robbed hell of his power: so that now,
it has no more force and strength to keep that soul, which puts her trust
in God. Then believing in the great strength that my savior has, I do not set
by hell and sin. For sin can have no hold of me, unless it be to show how my
God is merciful, strong, mighty, and a puissant vanquisher of all the evils
within my heart. If by sins forgiveness, is the glory of my most loving
savior: then ought I also to believe, that my glory is increased by his love,
and that I am planted and graffed in him.

His honor only does honor all his, and his riches do replenish every one
with his goods. Then death, hell, and sin are overcome by him. O gluttonous
hell! where is thy defense? Thou cruel villain sin, where is thy tyrannous
power? O Death! where is thy sting, and victory, which are so much spoken of?
Instead of death, thou death give me life, and so do thou contrary to thy
will. Also, thou sin couetest to draw each creature to damnation. Thou
give me a ladder, to reach thereby that godly City Jerusalem: yet would
thou of thy cursed nature, that mine eternal maker should loose his creature:
but through his love and grace, the sorry remembrance of thine uncomeliness,
does cause her by repentance again to come, and submit her self unto God,
whose inestimable goodness causes thee to loose thy whole labor, which thou
take in hand. For the number that thou pretendest to have, thou shall not
have, because that the comfortable shadow of Christ his passion, is such a
mighty protection to the soul, that he needs neither to doubt death, sin,
nor hell. Is there any thing then, that can pull me back, if God be willing,
through the gift of faith to draw me to him? I mean such a faith, as we must
needs have, to obtain the high graces from above: and also such a faith, as
through charity does join the humble servant to his maker. Now I being joined
unto him, ought to have no fear of travel, pain, nor sorrow. For whosoever
does willingly suffer any manner of death, pain, or sorrow, for the truth, as
Christ did, he shall feel in such torment, great comfort and consolation for
his soul: knowing all this, I my self am weak, yet with God I am right strong.

Through his comfort I may do all things, and his love is so constant, and
permanent, that it varieth not for any worldly thing. Who can then withdraw
me from his grace? Surely the great height of heaven, the depth of hell, the
breadth of the whole earth, neither death, nor sin, which daily does war
against me, can separate me one minute from the great love and charity, that
my heavenly father, through Jesus Christ, has unto me. His goodness is such,
that he loves me, which has not all times loved him; and if I now love hun,
then shall I feel his love increase in me. But because my love is not a
worthy love to him, I desire his love to be mine, which I feel such as it
were mine own: his desire is to love, and his love inflameth my heart with a
heavenly love.

And through such love, he finds himself, that his own deed yields him
well content, and not my love or strength: thus contenting himself, his love
does more increase in me, than I can of him desire.

The eight Chapter, Of the incomprehensible love of Christ to the sinful
soul: and benefits that come of a true faith.
O True lover, the fountain or welspring of all charity, and only purse of
the heavenly treasure! Ought I to think, or dare I say what thou art? May I
write, or can any mortal man comprehend thy goodness, or love? And if thou
print in man's heart, can he express it? No surely. For the capacity of man
cannot comprehend the unmeasurable goodnesses which are in thee. For natural
reason does show us, how there is no comparison between an eternal and a
mortal thing: but when through love the mortal is joined with the eternal,
the mortal thing is so filled with the eternal, that it cannot find the end
thereof: for it has more good thereby, than it can contain or hold. Therefore
does man think, which has one spark of the love of God, that he has all the
world therewith: even as we see the Sun, with one only spark of his light,
does blind the eye, and yet does he withhold from it his great light. If then
you should ask the eye, what it has seen, he would say, that it has
beholden the whole brightness of the same. Nevertheless, he is so content, that
it seems unto him as though he had so much light as the Sun contains,
which if he had more than the said spark, he were not able to suffer it. Even
so the soul, which through faith does feel one spark of the love of God,
does find therewith the heat so great and marvelous, so sweet and delicious,
that it is impossible to hit to declare what thing the same love is. For the
little thereof, that she has felt, does yield her mind satisfied, and yet
desiring more, where of she has enough: thus does she live, languishing and
sighing in her self.

The heart that does feel that he has received too much, has conceived such a
desire in this too much, that he always desires to receive the thing which he
cannot have, neither is he worthy to receive it. He knows not the good that
he has already to be unspeakable, yet would he have more of that, where of he
cannot skill: truly he cannot feel or think the good which is in him. Then
lies it not in my power, to tell what thing the love of God is, since I have no
knowledge of the feruentnesse thereof. He that thinks to have all this love
within his heart, can not truly declare what thing it is: happy is he
therefore which has such abundance of this love, that he may say, My God, I
have enough of it.

He which has this love within him, dare not much boast thereof, least in much
speaking he do loose it, unless he do it, to edify his neighbor to
salvation. The impossiblitie then of the declaration of this love, shall make
me hold my peace. For there is no saint so perfect, if he will speak of the
love of the high God, of his goodness, sweetness, graces, and of all things else,
which pertain to him, but looking a low, shall find himself unworthy, and so
stop his mouth. I then, a worm of the earth, less than nothing, ought to
cease, and not to speak of the incomparable highness of this love: yet were
it too much unkindness to be noted in me, if I had written nothing, having
that done unto me, which would satisfy a much better wit than mine is. For he
that would hide the goodness of God, so good a master, should commit a sin
worthy to be punished with everlasting pain.

Therefore come O happy Paul, which have tasted so much of the same sweet
honnie, being blind for the space of three days, and rapt up into the third
heaven, and satisfy (I beseech thee) mine ignorance, and tell me what in such
vision thou have seen? Harken then what he says. O the unspeakable highness of
the abundant riches or treasure, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
incomprehensible are his judgments, and how unsearchable are his ways unto
our weak wits? O holy Paul, thy words cause me much to marvel, that thou
having knowledge, and so heavenly secrets, would speak no further in them.
At the least yet tell thou me, what thing I may hope to have, through such
godly love, as grace has wrought in me; and I will give ear unto thy words:
neither has the eye seen, nor yet the ear heard, neither yet has it ever
entered into the heart of man, what GOD has prepared for them that love him. O
blessed Paul, all this yet that thou have said, is for none other purpose, but
to provoke me earnestly to love, willing me by thy words to think, that thou
can none otherwise declare of it, and so give mine heart to patience, and hope
of that thing, which never man yet could see, or yet deserve, although many
through love have died.

O excellent gift of faith, whereof so much good comes, that it causes man
to possess the things which he can not comprehend! For faith, joined with
truth, brings forth hope, whereby perfect charity is engendered: and
charity is God, as witnesses the Apostle. If we have charity, then have we
also God therewith, and then is God in us, and we in him; and all this comes
of the benefit of faith. For he dwells in all men, which have true faith.
Thus have we a greater treasure than we can tell of, nor yet any man express
unto us.

Now to conclude, since that so great an Apostle, as is S. Paul, will speak no
further of God, and his inestimable love; I will (according to his righteous
example and doctrine) hold my peace and be still, following nevertheless his
teachings. Notwithstanding, though herein I acknowledge my self but earth and
dust, yet may I not fail to yield thanks to mine eternal, and living God, for
such great graces and benefits, as it has pleased him to give me. Unto that
everlasting King of heaven, immortal, invisible, incomprehensible, mighty and
wise, only to him be all honor, praise, glory, magnificence and love, for
ever and ever:

Amen.
These four clauses or texts of Scripture, are added to the work by the
Queens Majesty.
Ecclesiasticus. 25, verse. 17. THere is not a more wicked head, than the head
of a Serpent: and there is no wrath above the wrath of a woman.

But he that has gotten a virtuous woman, has gotten a goodly possession:
she is unto him an help and pillar, whereupon he rests.

It were better to dwell with a Lion and Dragon, than to keep house with a
wicked woman.

Ecclesiasticus. 7, verse. 19. Yet depart not from a discreet and good woman,
that is fallen to thee for thy portion in the fear of the Lord: for the gift
of her honesty is above gold.

The Christian prayers of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, which her
grace made in the time of her trouble, and imprisonment in the Tower, and after
her Coronation.
Help me now, O God, for I have none other friends but thee alone. And suffer
me not (I beseech thee) to build my foundation upon the sands: but upon the
rock, whereby all blasts of blustering weather may have no power against me,

Amen.
Another prayer made by her Majesty, when she was in great fear and doubt of
death, by murder.
GRant, O God, that the wicked may have no power to hurt or beetraie me;
neither suffer any such treason and wickedness to proceed against me. For
thou, O God, can mollify all such tyrannous hearts, and disappoint all such
cruel purposes. And I beseech thee to hear me thy creature which am thy
servant, and at thy commandment, trusting by thy grace ever so to remain,

Amen.
Another prayer and thanksgiving made by her grace, as she rode in her Chariot
from the Tower, to be crowned Queen at Westminster.
O Lord almighty, and everlasting God, I give thee most hearty thanks, that
thou have been so merciful unto me, as to spare me, to behold this ioifull
day. And I acknowledge, that thou have dealt as woonderfully with me, as thou
did with thy true and faithful servant Daniel the Prophet, whom thou
deliueredst out of the den from the cruelty of the greedy raging lions: even
so was I overwhelmed, and only by thee delivered. To thee therefore be only
thanks, honor and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
The rest of the prayers belonging to her Majesty to use, are to be found in
the beginning of the third Lamp.
WILLIAM CICILL having taken much profit by the reading of this Treatise
following, wishes unto every Christian by the reading thereof like profit
with increase from GOD.
MOst gentle and Christian Reader, if matters should be rather confirmed by
their reporters, than the reports warranted by the matters, I might justly
bewail our time, wherein evil deeds be well worded, and good acts evil
cleaped. But sincere truth is, that things be not good for their praises; but
be praised for their goodness. I do not move thee to like this Christan
Treatise, because I have mind to praise it; but I exhort thee to mind it, and
for the goodness thou shall allow it, for whose liking I labor not to obtain,
only moved by mine example, their judgment Iregard, chiefly confirmed by
the matter. Truly our time is so disposed to grant good names to evil fruits,
and excellent terms to mean works, that neither can good deeds enioie their
due names being defrauded by the evil, neither excellent works can possess
their worthy terms, being forestalled by the mean: insomuch that men seek
rather how much they can, than how much they ought to say, inclining more to
their pleasure, than to their judgment, and to show themselves rather
eloquent, than the matter good: so that neither the goodness of the cause can
move them to say more, neither the euilnes less. For if the excellency of
this Christian contemplation, either for the goodness herein to marvel
appearing, either for the profit hereupon to the Reader ensuing, should be with
due commendation followed, I of necessity should either travel to find out
new words, the old being anticipated by evil matters, or wish that the common
speech of praising were spared until convenient matters were found to spend
it: such is the plenty of praising, and scarsenes of deserving.

Wherefore lacking the manner in words, and not the matter in deed of high
commendation, I am compelled to keep in my judgment with silence, trusting
whom my report could not have moved to like this present Treatise, the
worthiness of the matter shall compel to give it honor.

Any earthly man would soon be stirred to see some mystery of magike, or
practice of Alchumie, or perchance some enchantment of elements; but thou which
art christened, have here a wonderful mystery of the mercy of God; a
heavenly practice of regeneration; a spiritual enchantment of the grace of
God. If joy and triumph be showed when a kings child is borne to the world;
what joy is sufficient when Gods child is regenerated from heaven? The one is
flesh, which is borne of flesh; the other is spirit, which is borne of spirit.
The one also shall wither like the grass of the earth in short time; the other
shall live in heaven beyond all time. If the finding of one lost sheep be more
ioifull, than the having of ninety and nine; what joy is it to consider the
return of a straie child of almighty God, whose return teaches the ninety
and nine to come to their fold? Even such cause of joy is this, that the
Angels in heaven take comfort herein. Be thou therefore ioifull when a noble
child is newly borne; show thy self glad when the lost sheep has won the
whole flock: be thou not sad, wherein Angels reioise.

Here may thou see one, if the kind may move thee, a woman; if degree may
provoke thee, a woman of high estate; by birth, made noble; by marriage, most
noble; by wisdom, godly; by a mighty King, an excellent Queen; by a famous
HENRY, a renowned KATHERINE; a wife to him that was a King to Realms:
refusing the world, wherein she was lost, to obtain heaven, wherein she may be
saved: abhorring sin, which made her bound, to receive grace, whereby she may
be free: despising flesh the cause of corruption, to put on the spirit the
cause of sanctification: forsaking ignorance wherein she was blind, to come to
knowledge, whereby she may see: remoouing superstition, wherewith she was
smothered, to embrace true religion, wherewith she may revive.

The fruit of this Treatise (good Reader) is thine amendment: this only had,
the writer is satisfied. This good Lady thought no shame to detest her sin,
to obtain remission; no vileness, to become nothing; to be a member of him,
which is all things in all; no folly to forget the wisdom of the world, to
learn the simplicity of the Gospel at the last; no displeasantnesse to
submit her self to the school of the cross, the learning of the Crucifix,
the book of our redemption; the very absolute library of Gods mercy and
wisdom. This way thought she her honor increased, and her state permanent,
to make her earthly honor heavenly, and neglect the transitory for the
everlasting.

Of this I would thee warned, that the profit may ensue. These great mysteries
and graces be not well perceived, except they be surely studied; neither be
they perfectly studied, except they be diligently practiced; neither
profitablie practiced, without amendment. See and learn hereby what she has
done, then may thou practice, and amend that thou can do: so shall thou
practice with ease, having a guide, and amend with profit, having a zeal. It
is easier to see these, than to learn: begin at the easiest to come to the
harder; see thou her confession, that thou may learn her repentance;
practice her perseverance, that thou may have like amendment; despise thy
self in eschewing vice, that thou may please God in asking grace: let not
shame hinder the confession, which hindered not the offense. Be thou sure if we
knowledge our sins, God is faithful to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Obeie the Prophets saying; Declare thy ways to the Lord.

Thus far thou may learn to know thy self; next this be thou as diligent
to relieve thy self in Gods mercy, as thou have been to reveal thy self in
thine own repentance. For God has concluded all things under sin, because
he would have mercy upon all, who has also borne our sins in his body upon
the tree, that we should be delivered from sin, and should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes we be healed. Here is our anchor; here is our
shepherd; here we be made whole; here is our life, our redemption, our
salvation and our bliss: let us therefore now feed by this gracious Queens
example, and be not ashamed to become in confession Publicanes, since this
noble Lady will be no Pharisie.

And to all Ladies of estate I wish as earnest mind to follow our Queen in
virtue, as in honor, that they might once appear to prefer God before the
world, and be honorable in religion, which now be honorable in vanities; so
shall they, as in some virtuous Ladies of right high estate, it is with great
comfort seen, taste of this freedom of remission of the everlasting bliss,
which exceeds all thoughts and understandings, and is prepared for the holy
in spirit. For the which let us with our intercession in holiness and pureness of
life, offer our selves to the heavenly father an undefiled host: to whom be
eternal praise and glory throughout the earth without end,

Amen.
The Lamentation or Complaint of a sinner, made by the most virtuous and right
gracious Lady Queen CATHERINE, bewailing the ignorance of her blind life, led
in superstition: very profitable to the amendment of our lives.
The first Chapter, Of an humble confession of sins to the glory of God.
WHEN I consider, in the bethinking of mine evil and wretched former life, mine
obstinate, stony, and intractable heart, to have so much exceeded in
euilnesse, that it has not only neglected, yea contemned, and despised Gods
holy precepts and commandments: but also embraced, received, and esteemed
vain, foolish, and feined trifles, I am partly by the hate I owe to sin,
who has reigned in me, and partly by the love I owe to all Christians, whom I
am content to edify, even with the example of mine own shame, forced and
constrained with my heart and words, to confess and declare to the world, how
ingrate, negligent, unkind, and stubborn I have been to God my Creator: and
how beneficial, merciful, and gentle he has been always to me his creature,
being such a miserable and wretched sinner.

Truly I have taken no little small thing upon me, first to set forth my
whole stubbornness, and contempt in words, the which is incomprehensible in
thought (as it is in the 12. Psalm) Who understands his faults? Next this,
to declare the excellent beneficence, mercy, and goodness of God, which is
infinite, and unmeasurable. Neither can all the words of Angels, and men, make
relation thereof, as apperteineth to his most high goodness. Who is he that is
not forced to confess the same, if he consider what he has received of God,
and does daily receive? Yea, if men would not acknowledge and confess the
same, the stones would cry it out. Truly I am constrained and forced to
speak and write thereof, to mine own confusion and shame; but to the glory
and praise of God. For he, as a loving father, of most abundant and high
goodness, has heaped upon me innumerable benefits: and I contrary, have
heaped manifold sins, despising that which was good, holy, pleasant, and
acceptable in his sight, and choosing that which was delicious, pleasant, and
acceptable in my sight.

And no marvel it was that I so did. For I would not learn to know the Lord,
and his ways; but loved darkness better than light, yea darkness seemed to
me light. I embraced ignorance, as perfect knowledge; and knowledge seemed to
me superfluous and vain. I regarded little Gods word, but gave my self to
vanities, and shadows of the world. I forsook him in whom is all truth; and
followed the vain foolish imaginations of my heart. I would have covered my
sins with the pretense of holiness: I called superstition godly meaning,
and true holiness error. The Lord did speak many pleasant and sweet words
unto me, and I would not hear: he called me diversely, but through
frowardness I would not answer.

Mine evils and miseries be so many, and so great, that they can accuse me
even to my face. Oh how miserably and wretchedlie am I confounded, when for
the multitude and greatness of my sins I am compelled to accuse my self!
Was it not a marvelous unkindness, when God did speak to me, and also call
me, that I would not answer him? What man so called would not have heard? Or
what man hearing, would not have answered? If an earthly Prince had spoken,
either called, I suppose there be none but would willingly have done both. Now
therefore, what a wretch and caitife am I, that when the Prince of princes, the
King of kings, did speak many pleasant and gentle words unto me, and also
called me so many and sundry times, that they can not be numbered: and yet,
notwithstanding these great signs and tokens of love, I would not come unto
him, but hid my self out of his sight, seeking many crooked and biwaies,
wherein I walked so long, that I had clean lost his sight? And no marvel or
wonder. For I had a blind guide called Ignorance, who dimmed so mine eyes,
that I could never perfectly get any sight of the fair, goodly, straight,
and right ways of his doctrine: but continually traveled vncomfortablie, in
foul, wicked, crooked, and perverse ways. Yea, and because they were so much
haunted of many, I could not think, but that I walked in the perfect and
right way, having more regard to the number of the walkers, than to the order
of the walking: believing also most assuredly, with company to have walked to
heaven, whereas I am most sure they would have brought me down to hell.

I forsook the spiritual honoring of the true living God, and worshipped
visible idols, and images made of men's hands, believing by them to have gotten
heaven: yea, to say the truth, I made a great idol of my self. For I loved
my self better than God. And certainly, look how many things are loved, or
preferred in our hearts before God, so many are taken and esteemed for idols,
and false gods. Alas, how have I violated this holy, pure, and most high
precept and commandment of the love of God? Which precept binds me to love
him with my whole heart, mind, force, strength and understanding. And I, like
unto an evil, wicked, and disobedient child, have given my will, power, and
senses to the contrary: making almost of every earthly and carnal thing a
god.

Furthermore, the blood of Christ was not reputed by me, sufficient for to wash
me from the filth of my sins; neither such ways as he had appointed by his
word: but I sought for such riffraffe, as the Bishop of Rome has planted in
his tyranny and kingdom, trusting with great confidence, by the virtue and
holiness of them, to receive full remission of my sins. And so I did, as
much as was in me, obfuscate and darken the great benefit of Christ's passion;
than the which no thought can conceive any thing of more value. There cannot
be done so great an injury and displeasure to almighty God our father, as to
tread under foot Christ, his only begotten and well-beloved son. All other
sins in the world, gathered together in one, be not so heinous, and
detestable in the sight of God. And no wonder. For in Christ crucified, God
does show himself most noble and glorious, even an almighty God, and most
loving father, in his only dear and chosen blessed son.

And therefore I count my self one of the most wicked and miserable sinners in
the world, because I have been so much contrary to Christ my savior. Saint
Paul desired to know nothing but Christ crucified, after he had been rapt
into the third heaven, where he heard such secrets as were not convenient and
meet to utter to men: but counted all his works and doings as nothing, to win
Christ. And I, most presumptuouslie thinking nothing of Christ crucified, went
about to set forth mine own righteousness, saying with the proud Pharisie:
Good Lord I thank thee, I am not like other men; I am none adulterer, nor
fornicator: and so forth, with such like words of vain glory, extolling my
self, and despising others, working as an hired servant for wages, or else for
reward: and not as a loving child, only for very love, without respect of
wages or reward, as I ought to have done. Neither did I consider, how
beneficial a father I had, who did show me his charity and mercy of his own
mere grace and goodness, that when I was most his enemy, he sent his only
begotten and well-beloved son into this world of wretchedness and misery, to
suffer most cruel and sharp death for my redemption. But my heart was so
stony and hard, that this great benefit was never truly and lively printed
in my heart, although with my words it was often rehearsed, thinking my self to
be sufficiently instructed in the same, and being in deed in blind
ignorance: and yet I stood so well in mine own judgment and opinion, that I
thought it vain to seek the increase of my knowledge therein.

Paul calls Christ the wisdom of God; and even the same Christ was to me
foolishness. My pride and blindness deceived me, and the hardness of my heart
withstoode the groaning of truth within it. Such were the fruits of my carnal
and humane reasons, to have rotten ignorance in price for ripe and seasonable
knowledge: such also is the malice and wickedness that possesses the hearts of
men: such is the wisdom and pleasing of the flesh. I professed Christ in my
baptism, when I began to live: but I swarued from him after baptism, in
continuance of my living; even as the heathen which never had begun.

Christ was innocent and void of all sin; and I wallowed in filthy sin,
and was free from no sin. Christ was obedient unto his father, even to the
death of the cross; and I disobedient and most stubborn, even to the
confusion of truth. Christ was meek and humble in heart, and I most proud and
vainglorious. Christ despised the world, with all the vanities thereof; and I
make it my God, because of the vanities. Christ came to serve his brethren; and
I coueted to rule over them. Christ despised worldly honor; and I much
delighted to attain the same. Christ loved the base and simple things of the
world; and I esteemed the most fair and pleasant things. Christ loved
poverty; and I wealth. Christ was gentle and merciful to the poor; and I
hard-harted and ungentle. Christ prayed for his enemies; and I hated mine.
Christ reioiced in the conversion of sinners; and I was not grieved to see
their reuersion to sin. By this declaration, all creatures may perceive, how
far I was from Christ, and without Christ; yea how contrary to Christ,
although I bare the name of a Christian. Insomuch that if any man had said I
had been without Christ, I would have stiffelie denied and withstoode the
same: and yet in deed I neither knew Christ, nor wherefore he came.

As concerning the effect and purpose of his coming, I had a certain vain
and blind knowledge, both cold and dead, which may be had with all sin: as
does plainly appear by this my confession and open declaration.

The second Chapter, A lamentation of a sinner, with hearty repentance in faith
to obtain absolution and remission, through the merits of Christ.
WHat cause now have I to lament, sigh, and weep for my life and time so evil
spent? With how much humility and lowliness ought I to come and knowledge my
sins to God, giving him thanks, that it has pleased him of his abundant
goodness, to give me time of repentance. For I know my sins in the
consideration of them, to be so grievous, and in the number so exceeding, that
I have deserved very often eternal damnation. And for the deferring of Gods
wrath, so manifoldlie due, I must vncessantlie give thanks to the mercy of
God: beseeching also, that the same delaie of punishment cause not his plague
to be the sorer, since mine own conscience condemns my former doings. But
his mercy exceeds all iniquity. And if I should not thus hope, alas, what
should I seek for refuge and comfort? No mortal man is of power to help me;
and for the multitude of my sins, I dare not lift up mine eyes to heaven,
where the seat of judgment is, I have so much offended my God. What? Shall I
fall in desperation? Naie, I will call upon Christ the light of the world, the
fountain of life, the relief of all careful consciences, the peacemaker
between God and man, and the only health and comfort of all true repentant
sinners.

He can by his almighty power save me, and deliver me out of this miserable
state, and has will by his mercy to save even the whole sin of the world. I
have no hope nor confidence in any creature, neither in heaven nor earth; but
in Christ my whole and only Savior. He came into the world to save sinners,
and to heal them that are sick. For he said, The whole have no need of the
physician. Behold Lord, how I come to thee, a sinner sick, and grieuouslie
wounded: I ask not bread; but the crumbs that fall from the childrens table.
Cast me not out of thy sight, although I have deserved to be cast into hell
fire.

If I should look upon my sin, and not upon thy mercy, I should despair.
For in my self I find nothing to save me, but a dunghill of wickedness to
condemn me. If I should hope by mine own strength and power to come out of
this maze of iniquity and wickedness, wherein I have walked so long, I should
be deceived. For I am so ignorant, blind, weak, and feeble; that I can not
bring my self out of this entangled and wayward maze: but the more I seek
means and ways to wind my self out, the more I am wrapped and tangled
therein.

So that I perceive my striving therein to be hinderance, my travel to be
labor spent in going back. It is the hand of the Lord that can and will bring
me out of the endless maze of death. For without I be prevented by the grace
of the Lord, I can not ask forgiveness, nor be repentant or sorry for them.
There is no man can auow, that Christ is the only Savior of the world, but by
the holy Ghost: yea, as S. Paul says, no man can say, The Lord Jesus, but
by the holy Ghost. The spirit helps our infirmity, and makes continual
intercession for us, with such sorrowful gronings as can not be expressed.

Therefore I will first require and pray the Lord, to give me his holy
spirit, to teach me to auow that Christ is the Savior of the world, and to
utter these words, The Lord Jesus, and finally to help mine infirmities, and
to intercede or entreat for me. For I am most certain and sure, that no
creature in heaven nor earth, is of power, or can by any mean help me: but
God, who is omnipotent, almighty, beneficial, and merciful, welwilling, and
loving to all those that call and put their whole confidence and trust in him.
And therefore I will seek none other means nor advocate, but Christ's holy
spirit, who is only the advocate and mediator between GOD and man, to help
and relieve me.

The third Chapter, What true faith works in the soul of a sinner.
BUt now, what makes me so bold and hardy to presume to come to the Lord with
such audacitie and boldness, being so great a sinner? Truly nothing but his
own word. For he says, Come to me all ye that labor, and are burdened, and I
shall refresh you. What gentle, merciful, and comfortable words are these to
all sinners? Were he not a frantike, mad, beastly, and foolish man, that
would run for aid, help, or refuge to any other creature? What a most
gracious, comfortable, and gentle saying was this, with such pleasant and
sweet words to allure his very enemies to come unto him? Is there any
worldly Prince or Magistrate, that would show such clemency, and mercy, to
their disobedient and rebellious subjects, having offended them? I suppose they
would not with such words allure them, except it were to call them, whom they
cannot take, and punish them being taken. But even as Christ is Prince of
princes, and Lord of lords: so his charity and mercy exceeds and
surmounteth all others. Christ says, If carnal fathers do give good gifts to
their children, when they ask them, how much more shall your heavenly father,
being in substance all holy, and most highly good, give good gifts to all
them that ask him?

It is no small nor little gift that I now require, neither think I my self
worthy to receive such a noble gift, being so ingrate, unkind, and wicked a
child. But when I behold the benignity, liberality, mercy, and goodness of
the Lord, I am encouraged, boldened, and stirred to ask such a noble gift. The
Lord is so bountiful and liberal, that he will not have us satisfied and
contented with one gift; neither to ask simple and small gifts: and therefore
he promises, and binds himself by his word, to give good and beneficial
gifts to all them that ask him with true faith, without which nothing can be
done acceptable or pleasing to God. For faith is the foundation and ground of
all other gifts, virtues, and graces: and therefore I will pray and say: Lord
increase my faith.

For this is the life everlasting, Lord, that I must believe thee to be the
true God, and whom thou did send Jesus Christ. By this faith I am assured,
and by this assurance I feel the remission of my sins. This is it that makes
me bold, this is it that comfort me; this is it that quenches all despair.

I know O my Lord, thine eyes look upon my faith. S. Paul says, We be
justified by faith in Christ, and not by the deeds of the law. For if
righteousness come by the law, then Christ died in vain. S. Paul means not
here, a dead, humane, and historical faith, gotten by humane industry: but a
supernall, and lively faith, which works by charity; as he himself
plainly expresses. This dignity of faith is no derogation to good works. For
out of this faith spring all good works: yet we may not impute to the
worthiness of faith or works, our justification before God: but ascribe and
give the worthiness of it, wholly to the merits of Christ's passion, and refer
and attribute the knowledge and perceiving thereof, only to faith: whose
very, true, and only property it is, to take, apprehend, and hold fast the
promises of Gods mercy, the which makes us righteous: and to cause me
continually to hope for the same mercy, and in love to work all manner of
ways allowed in the Scripture, that I may be thankful for the same.

Thus I feel my self to come (as it were) in a new garment before God; and
now by his mercy, to be taken just and righteous, which of late without his
mercy was sinful and wicked: and by faith to obtain his mercy, the which
the unfaithful can not enioie. And although S. John extolleth charity in his
Epistle, saying that God is charity, and he that dwells in charity,
dwells in God. Truly charity makes men live like Angels; and of the most
furious, unbridled, and carnal men, makes meek lambs.

Yea, with how fervent a spirit ought I to call, cry, and pray to the Lord,
to make his great charity to burn and flame my heart, being stony and evil
affected, that it never would conceive nor regard the great inestimable
charity and love of God, in sending his only begotten and dear beloved son
into this vale of misery, to suffer the most cruel and sharp death of the
cross for my redemption? Yea I never had this unspeakable, and most high
charity, and abundant love of God printed and fixed in my heart duly, till it
pleased God, of his mere grace, mercy, and pity, to open mine eyes, making
me to see and behold with the eye of lively faith, Christ crucified, to be
mine only Savior and redeemer. For then I began (and not before) to perceive
and see mine own ignorance and blindness: the cause thereof was, that I would
not learn to know Christ my Savior and redeemer.

But when God, of his mere goodness, had thus opened mine eyes, and made me
see and behold Christ, the wisdom of God, the light of the world, with a
supernatural sight of faith; all pleasures, vanities, honor, riches, wealth,
and aids of the world, began to wax bitter unto me. Then I knew it was no
illusion of the devil, nor false, ne humane doctrine I had received. When such
success came thereof, that I had in detestation and horror that which I erst
so much loved and esteemed: being of God forbidden that we should love the
world, or the vain pleasures and shadows in the same: then began I to
perceive that Christ was my only Savior and redeemer; and the same doctrine to
be all divine, holy, heavenly, and infused by grace into the hearts of the
faithful, which never can be attained by hnmane doctrine, wit, nor reason,
although they should travel and labor for the same, to the end of the world.
Then began I to dwell in God by charity, knowing by the loving charity of
God, in the remission of my sins, that God is charity, as S. John says. So
that of my faith (whereby I came to know God, and whereby it pleased God, even
because I trusted in him, to justify me) sprang this excellent charity in my
heart.

I think no less, but many will wonder and marvel at this my saying, that
I never knew Christ for my Savior and redeemer, until this time. For many
have this opinion, saying: Who knows not there is a Christ? Who being a
Christian does not confess him his Savior? And thus, believing their dead,
humane, historical faith and knowledge (which they have learned in their
scholasticall books) to be the true infused faith and knowledge of Christ,
which may be had (as I said before) with all sin, they use to say, by their
own experience of themselves, that their faith does not justify them. And
true it is, except they have this faith, the which I have declared here before,
they shall never be justified.

And yet it is not false, that by faith only I am sure to be justified. Even
this is the cause that so many impugn this office and duty of true faith,
because so many lack the true faith. And even as the faithful are forced to
allow this true faith; so the unfaithful can in no wise probably entreat
thereof: the one feeling in himself that he says, the other having not in him
for to say.

I have certeinlie no curious learning to defend this matter withal, but a
simple zeal, and earnest love to the truth inspired of God, who promises to
power his spirit upon all flesh, which I have by the grace of God whom I most
humbly honor) felt in my self to be true.

The fourth Chapter, Of the great love of God toward mankind, and of the
inward beholding of Christ crucified.
LEt us therefore now, I pray you, by faith behold and consider the great
charity and goodness of God, in sending his son to suffer death for our
redemption, when we were his mortal enemies, and after what sort and manner he
sent him.

First it is to be considered, yea to be undoubtedly, and with a perfect faith
believed, that God sent him to us freely. For he did give him, and sold him
not. A more noble and rich gift he could not have given. He sent not a servant
or a friend, but his only son so dearly beloved: not in delights, riches,
and honors; but in crosses, pouerties, and slanders: not as a Lord, but as a
servant, yea and in most vile and painful passions, to wash us: not with
water, but with his own precious blood: not from mire, but from the puddle and
filth of our iniquities. He has given him, not to make us poor; but to enrich
us with his divine virtues, merits, and graces: yea, and in him he has given
us all good things, and finally himself; and with such great charity, as can
not be expressed.

Was it not a most high and abundant charity of God, to send Christ to shed
his blood, to loose honor, life, and all, for his enemies? Even in the time,
when he had done him most injury, he first showed his charity to us, with
such flames of love, that greater could not be showed. God in Christ has
opened unto us, (although we be weak and blind of our selves) that we may
behold in this miserable estate, the great wisdom, goodness, and truth, with
all the other godly perfections, which be in Christ. Therefore inwardly to
behold Christ crucified upon the cross, is the best and godliest meditation
that can be.

We may see also in Christ crucified, the beauty of the soul, better than in
all the books of the world. For who that with a lively faith, sees and
feels in spirit, that Christ the son of God is dead for the satisfieng and
purifieng of the soul, shall see, that his soul is appointed for the very
tabernacle and mansion of the inestimable and incomprehensible majesty and
honor of God. We see also in Christ crucified, how vain and foolish the world
is, and how that Christ being most wise despised the same. We see also how
blind it is, because the same knows not Christ, but persecuteth him. We see
also how unkind the world is, by the killing of Christ, in the time he did show
it most favor. How hard, and obstinate was it, that would not be mollified
with so many tears, such sweat, and so much bloudshead of the son of God,
suffering with so great and high charity?

Therefore he is now very blind, that sees not how vain, foolish, false,
ingrate, cruel, hard, wicked, and evil the world is. We may also in Christ
crucified weigh our sins, as in a divine balance, how grievous and how
weighty they be, seeing they have crucified Christ. For they would never have
been counterpaised, but with the great and precious weight of the blood of the
son of God. And therefore God, of his high goodness, determined that his
blessed son should rather suffer bloudshead, thau our sins should have
condemned us. We shall never know our own misery and wretchedness, but with
the light of Christ crucified: Then we shall see our own cruelty, when we
feel his mercy; our own unrighteousness and iniquity, when we see his
righteousness and holiness. Therefore, to learn to know truly our own
sins, is to study in the book of the Crucifixe, by continual conversation
in faith: and to have perfect and plentiful charity, is to learn first by
faith the charity that is in God toward us.

We may see also in Christ upon the Cross, how great the pains of hell, and
how blessed the ioies of heaven be: and what a sharp and painful thing it
shall be to them, that of that sweet, happy, and glorious joy Christ shall be
deprived. Then this Crucifixe is the book, wherein God has included all
things, and has most compendiouslie written therein all truth, profitable and
necessary for our salvation. Therefore let us endeavor our selves to study
this book, that we being lightened with the spirit of God, may give him thanks
for so great a benefit.

The fifth Chapter, Of the glorious victories of Christ over all enemies.
IF we look further in this book, we shall see Christ's great victory upon
the cross, which was so noble and mighty, that there never was, neither shall
be such. If the victory and glory of worldly Princes were great, because
they did overcome great hosts of men: how much was Christ's greater, which
vanquished not only the Prince of this world, but all the enemies of God;
triumphing over persecution, injuries, villainies, slanders, yea death, the
world, sin, and the devil; and brought to confusion all carnal prudence?

The Princes of the world never did fight without the strength of the world:
Christ contrarily went to war, even against all the strength of the world.
He fought, as David did with Golias, unarmed of all humane wisdom and policy,
and without all worldly power and strength. Nevertheless, he was fully
replenished and armed with the whole armor of the spirit. And in this one
battle, he overcame for ever all his enemies. There was never so glorious a
spoil, neither a more rich and noble, than Christ was upon the Cross, which
delivered all his elect from such a sharp and miserable captivity. He had in
his battle many stripes, yea and lost his life, but his victory was so much
the greater. Therefore, when I look upon the son of God with a supernatural
faith and light, so unarmed, naked, given up, and alone with humility,
patience, liberality, modesty, gentleness, and with all other his divine
virtues beating down to the ground all Gods enemies, and making the soul of
man so fair and beautiful: I am forced to say, that his victory and triumph
was marvelous. And therefore Christ well deserved to have this noble title:
JESUS OF NAZARETH, KING OF THE JEWS.

But if we will particularly unfold and see his great victories, let us first
behold how he overcame sin, with his innocence; and confounded pride, with
his humility; quenched all worldly love, with his charity; appeased the
wrath of his father, with his meekness; and turned hatred into love, with his
so many benefits and godly zeal.

Christ has not only overcome sin, but rather he has killed the same; in
as much as he has satisfied for it himself, with the most holy sacrifice and
oblation of his precious body, in suffering most bitter and cruel death.
Also, after another sort, that is, he gives all those that love him, so much
spirit, grace, virtue, and strength, that they may resist, impugn, and
overcome sin; and not consent; neither suffer it to reign in them. He has
also vanquished sin, because he has taken away the force of the same; that
is, he has cancelled the law, which was in evil men the occasion of sin.
Therefore sin has no power against them that are with the holy Ghost united
to Christ: in them there is nothing worthy of damnation. And although the
dregs of Adam do remain, that is, our concupiscences, which in deed be
sins: nevertheless, they be not imputed for sins, if we be truly planted
in Christ. It is true, that Christ might have taken away all our immoderate
affections: but he has left them for the great glory of his father, and for
his own greater triumph. As for example. When a Prince fights with his
enemies, which sometime had the souereigntie over his people, and subduing
them, may kill them if he will: yet he preserves and saves them: and whereas
they were Lords over his people, he makes them after to serve, whom they
before had ruled. Now in such a case, the Prince does show himself a greater
conqueror, in that he has made them, which were rulers, to obeie: and the
subjects to be Lords over them, to whom they served, than if he had utterly
destroyed them upon the conquest. For now he leaves continual victory to
them whom he redeemed, whereas otherwise the occasion of victory was taken
away, where none were left to be the subjects. Even so in like case, Christ
has left in us these concupiscences, to the intent they should serve us, to
the exercise of our virtues; where first they did reign over us, to the
exercise of our sin. And it may be plainly seen, that whereas first they
were such impediments to us, that we could not move our selves toward God: now
by Christ we have so much strength, that notwithstanding the force of them, we
may assuredly walk to heaven. And although the children of God sometime do
fall by fariltie into some sin: yet that falling makes them to humble
themselves, and to reknowledge the goodness of God, and to come to him for
refuge and help.

Likewise Christ, by his death, has overcome the Prince of devils with all his
host, and has destroyed them all. For as Paul says, it is verified, that
Christ should break the Serpents head, prophesied by God. And although the
devil tempt us, yet if by faith we be planted in Christ, we shall not perish,
but rather by his temptation take great force and might. So it is evident, that
the triumph, victory, and glory of Christ is the greater, having in such sort
subdued the devil; that whereas he was Prince and Lord of the world, holding
all creatures in captivity: now Christ uses him as an instrument to punish
the wicked, and to exercise and make strong the elect of God in Christian
warfare.

Christ likewise has overcome death in a more glorious manner (if it be
possible:) because he has not taken it away, but leaving universally all
subject to the same. He has given so much virtue and spirit, that whereas
before we passed thereto with great fear, now we be bold through the spirit,
for the sure hope of the resurrection, that we receive it with joy. It is now
no more bitter, but sweet: no more feared, but desired: it is no death, but
life.

And also it has pleased God, that the infirmities and adversities do remain
to the sight of the world: but the children of God are by Christ made so
strong, righteous, whole, and sound, that the troubles of the world, be
comforts of the spirit: the passions of the flesh, are medicines of the soul.
For all manner things work to their commodity and profit. For they in spirit
feel, that God their father does govern them, and disposes all things for
their benefit: therefore they feel themselves sure. In persecution they are
quiet and peaceful, in trouble they are without weariness, fears, anxieties,
suspicions, miseries: and finally all the good and evil of the world works
to their commodity.

Moreover, they see that the triumph of Christ has been so great, that not
only he has subdued and vanquished all our enemies, and the power of them;
but he has overthrown and vanquished them after such a sort, that all things
serve to our health. He might and could have taken them all away, but where
then should have been our victory, palm, and crown? For we daily have
fights in the flesh, and by the succor of grace have continual victories over
sin: whereby we have cause to glorify God, that by his son has weakened
our enemy the devil, and by his spirit gives us strength to vanquish his
offspring.

So do we knowledge daily the great triumph of our Savior, and rejoice in
our own fights; the which we can no wise impute to any wisdom of this world;
seeing sin to increase by it. And where worldly wisdom most governs,
there most sin rules. For as the world is enemy to God, so also the wisdom
thereof is adverse to God: and therefore Christ has declared and discovered the
same for foolishness. And although he could have taken away all worldly
wisdom: yet he has left it for his greater glory, and triumph of his chosen
vessels. For before, whereas it was our ruler against God: now by Christ we are
served of it for God, as of a slave in worldly things: albeit in supernatural
things the same is not to be understood. And further, if at any time men would
impugn, and gainsaie us, with the wisdom of the world: yet we have by Christ
so much supernatural light of the truth, that we make a mock of all those
that repugne the truth.

Christ also upon the cross has triumphed over the world. First, because he
has discovered the same to be naught: that whereas it was covered with the
veil of hypocrisy, and the vesture of moral virtues; Christ has showed,
that in Gods sight the righteousness of the world is wickedness: and he has
yielded witness, that The works of men, not regenerated by him in faith, are
evil: and so Christ has judged and condemned the world for naught. Further
more, he has given to all his so much light and spirit, that they know it,
and dispraise the same: yea and tread it under their feet, with all vain
honors, dignities, and pleasures, not taking the fair promises, neither the
offers which it does present: naie, they rather make a scorn of them. And as
for the threatenings and force of the world, they nothing fear.

Now therefore we may see how great the victory and triumph of Christ is, who
has delivered all those the father gave him, from the power of the devil,
cancelling upon the cross the writing of our debts. For he has delivered us
from the condemnation of sin; from the bondage of the law, from the fear of
death, from the danger of the world, and from all evils in this life, and in
the other to come. And he has enriched us, made us noble, and most highly
happy, after such a glorious and triumphant way, as can not with tongue be
expressed: and therefore we are forced to say, his triumph is marvelous.

It is also seen and known, that Christ is the true Messiah. For he has
delivered man from all evils, and by him man has all goodness: so that he is
the true Messiah. Therefore all other helpers be but vain, and counterfeited
saviors; seeing that by this our Messiah Christ, wholly and only we be
delivered from all evils, and by him we have all goodness. And that this is
true, it is evident and clear; because the very true Christian, is a
Christian by Christ. And the true Christian feels inwardly by Christ, so
much goodness of God, that even troublous life and death be sweet unto him,
and miseries happy. The true Christian by Christ is disburdened from the
servitude of the law, having the law of grace (graven by the spirit)
inhabiting his heart, and from sin that reigned in him, from the power of the
infernal spirits, from damnation, and from every evil: and is made a son
of God, a brother of Christ, heir of heaven, and Lord of the world: so that in
Christ and by Christ, he possesses all good things.

But let us know, that Christ yet fights in spirit in his elect vessels, and
shall fight even to the day of judgment: at which day shall that great enemy
death be wholly destroyed, and shall be no more. Then shall the children of God
rejoice on him, saying: O death where is thy victory and sting? There shall be
then no more trouble nor sin; naie rather, none evil: but heaven for the
good, and hell for the wicked. Then shall wholly be discovered the victory and
triumph of Christ, who (after Paul) shall present unto his father the
kingdom, together with his chosen saved by him.

It was no little favor toward his children, that Christ was chosen of God,
to save us his elect, so highly by the way of the cross. Paul calls it a
grace, and a most singular grace. We may well think, that he having been to
the world so valiant a captain of God, was full of light, grace, virtue, and
spirit: therefore he might justly say: Consummatum est. We seeing then, that
the triumph and victory of our captain Christ, is so marvelous, glorious,
and noble, to the which war we be appointed: let us force our selves to follow
him, with bearing our cross, that we may have fellowship with him in his
kingdom.

The sixth Chapter, That we ought to submit our selves to the school of the
Cross: and still look and learn in the book of the Crucifix.
Truly it may be most justly verified, that to behold Christ crucified, in
spirit, is the best meditation that can be. I certeinlie never knew mine own
miseries and wretchedness so well by book, admonition, or learning; as I have
done by looking into the spiritual book of the Crucifix. I lament much I have
passed so many years, not regarding that divine book: but I judged, and
thought my self to be well instructed in the same: whereas now I am of this
opinion, that if God would suffer me to live here a thousand years, and should
study continually in the same divine book, I should not be filled with the
contemplation thereof. Neither hold I my self contented, but always have a
great desire, to learn and study more therein. I never knew mine own
wickedness, neither lamented for my sins truly, until the time God inspired
me with his grace, that I looked in this book: then I began to see perfectly,
that mine own power and strength could not help me; and that I was in the
Lords hand, even as the claie is in the potters hand; then I began to cry and
say:

Alas Lord that ever I have so wickedlie offended thee, being to me from the
beginning so gracious and so good a father, and most specially now have
declared and showed thy goodness unto me, when in the time I have done thee
most injury, to call me, and also to make me know and take thee for my Savior
and redeemer. Such be the wonderful works of God to call sinners to
repentance, and to make them to take Christ his well-beloved son for their
Savior: this is the gift of God, and of all Christians to be required and
desired. For except this great benefit of Christ crucified be felt and fixed
surely in man's heart, there can be no good work done acceptable before God.
For in Christ is all fullness of the Godhead, and in him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Even he is the water of life, whereof
whosoever shall drink, he shall never more thirst; but it shall be in him a
well of water, springing up into everlasting life. S. Paul says, There is no
damnation to them that are in Christ, which walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. Moreover he says: If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God, by the death of his son: much more, seeing we are
reconciled, we shall be preserved by his death. It is no little or small
benefit we have received by Christ, if we consider what he has done for us, as
I have perfectly declared heretofore. Wherefore I pray the Lord, that this
great benefit of Christ crucified, may be steadfastly fixed and printed in all
Christians hearts, that they may be true lovers of God, and work as children
for love: and not as servants, compelled with threatenings, or provoked with
hire.

The sincere and pure lovers of God do embrace Christ, with such feruencie of
spirit, that they rejoice in hope, be bold in danger, suffer in adversity,
continue in prayer, bless their persecutors. Further, they be not wise in
their own opinion, neither high minded in their prosperity, neither abashed
in their adversity: but humble and gentle always to all men. For they know
by their faith they are members all of one body, and that they have possessed
all one God, one faith, one baptism, one joy, and one salvation. If these
pure and sincere lovers of God were thick sown, there should not be so much
contention and strife growing on the fields of our religion, as there is. Well,
I shall pray to the Lord to take all contention and strife away, and that the
sowers of sedition may have mind to cease their labor, or to sow it among the
stones, and to have grace to sow gracious virtues, where they may both take
root, and bring forth fruit, with sending also a godly unity and concord
amongst all Christians, that we may serve the Lord in true holiness of life.

The seventh Chapter, A Christian bewailing of the miserable ignorance and
blindness of men.
THe example of good living is required of all Christians, but specially in
the Ecclesiastical pastors and shepherds. For they be called in scripture,
Workmen with God, Disbursers of Gods secrets, The light of the world, The salt
of the earth: at whose hands all other should take comfort in working,
knowledge of Gods will, and sight to become children of light, and taste of
seasonable wisdom. They have, or should have the holy spirit, abundantly to
pronounce and set forth the word of God, in verity and truth. If ignorance
and blindness reign amongst us, they should with the truth of Gods word
instruct and set us in the truth, and direct us in the way of the Lord.

But thanks be given unto the Lord, that has now sent us such a godly and
learned King, in these latter days to reign over us, that with the virtue and
force of Gods word, has taken away the vailes and mists of errors, and
brought us to the knowledge of the truth, by the light of Gods word; which was
so long hid, and kept under, that the people were nigh famished, and hungered
for lack of spiritual food. (Such was the charity of the spiritual curats
and shepherds.) But our Moses, and most godly wise Governor and King, has
delivered us out of the captivity and bondage of Pharao. I mean by this Moses
King Henry, the eight, my most sovereign favorable Lord and husband; one (if
Moses had figured any mo than Christ) through the excellent grace of God,
meet to be an other expressed verity of Moses conquest over Pharao. And I
mean by this Pharao the bishop of Rome, who has been, and is a greater
persecutor of all true Christians, than ever was Pharao of the children of
Israel. For he is a persecutor of the Gospel and grace, a setter forth of all
superstition and counterfeit holiness, bringing many souls to hell with his
alchimie and counterfeit money, deceiving the poor souls under the pretense
of holiness: but so much the greater shall be his damnation, because he
deceives and robs under Christ's mantell. The Lord keep and defend all men
from his iuglings and sleits, but specially the poor, simple, and unlearned
souls. And this lesson I would all men had of him, that when they begin to
mislike his doing, then only begin they to like God, and certeinlie not
before.

As for the spiritual pastors and shepherds, I think they will cleave and
stick to the word of God, even to the death; to vanquish all Gods enemies, if
need shall require: all respects of honor, dignity, riches, wealth, and their
private commodities laid apart: following also the examples of Christ, and his
chosen Apostles, in preaching and teaching sincere and wholesome doctrine, and
such things as make for peace, with godly lessons, wherewith they may edify
others: that every man may walk after his vocation, in holiness of life; in
unity and concord: which unity is to be desired of all true Christians.

It is much to be lamented, the schisms, varieties, contentions and
disputations that have been and are in the world, about Christian religion,
and no agreement nor concord of the same among the learned men. Truly, the
devil has been the sower of the seed of sedition, and shall be the
mainteiner of it, even till Gods will be fulfilled. There is no war so cruel
and evil as this. For the war with sword kills but the bodies, and this
slaieth many souls. For the poor unlearned persons remain confused, and
almost every one believes and works after his own way: and yet there is
but one truth of Gods word, by the which we shall be saved. Happy be they that
receive it, and most unhappy are they which neglect and persecute the same.
For it shall be more easy for Sodom and Gomor at the day of judgment, than
for them. And not without just cause, if we consider the benevolence,
goodness, and mercy of God, who has declared his charity toward us,
greater, and more inestimable, than ever he did to the Hebrews. For they lived
under shadows and figures, and were bound to the law. And Christ (we being
his greatest enemies) has delivered us from the bondage of the law, and has
fulfilled all that was figured in their law, and also in their prophesies,
sheading his own precious blood, to make us the children of his father, and
his brethren, and has made us free, setting us in a godly liberty: I mean
not license to sin, as many be glad to interpret the same, when as Christian
liberty is godly entreated of.

Truly it is no good spirit that moves men to find fault at every thing, and
when things may be well taken, to pervert them into an evil sense and meaning.
There be in the world many speakers of holiness and good works, but very rare
and seldom is declared which be the good and holy works. The works of the
spirit be never almost spoken of, and therefore very few know what they be. I
am able to justify, the ignorance of the people to be great, not in this
matter alone, but in many other, the which were most necessary for Christians
to know. Because I have had just proof of the same, it makes me thus much to
say, with no little sorrow and grief in my heart, for such a miserable
ignorance and blindness amongst the people.

I doubt not but we can say all, Lord, Lord. But I fear, God may say unto
us; This people honors me with their lips, but their hearts be far from me.
God desires nothing but the heart, and says, He will be worshipped in spirit
and truth. Christ condemned all hypocrisy and feigned holiness, and taught
sincere, pure, and true godliness: but we worsse than frantike or blind, will
not follow Christ's doctrine, but trust to men's doctrines, judgments, and
saiengs, which dimmeth our eyes, and so the blind leads the blind, and both
fall into the dich. Truly, in my simple and unlearned judgment, no man's
doctrine is to be esteemed or preferred like unto Christ's, and the Apostles;
nor to be taught as a perfect and true doctrine, but even as it does accord and
agree with the doctrine of the Gospel.

But yet those that be called spiritual pastors (although they be most
carnal, as it does very evidently and plainly appear by their fruits,)
are so blinded with the love of themselves, and the world, that they extol
men's inventions and doctrines, before the doctrine of the Gospel. And when
they be not able to maintain their own inventions and doctrines, with any
jot of the scripture, then they most cruelly persecute them that be contrary
to the same. Be such the lovers of Christ? Naie, naie: they be the lovers of
the wicked Mammon, neither regarding God nor his honor. For filthy lucre has
made them almost mad, but frantike they be doubtless. Is not this miserable
state of spiritual men in the world, much to be lamented of all good
Christians? But yet I cannot allow, neither praise all kind of lamentation,
but such as may stand with Christian charity.

The eight Chapter, Of the fruits and rules of true Christianity for men to
follow.
Charity suffers long, and is gentle, enuieth not, vpbraideth no man,
casts frowardlie no faults in men's teeth, but refers all things to God:
being angry without sin, reforming others without slanders, carrieng ever a
storehouse of mild words to pearce the stonie-harted men. I would all
Christians, that like as they have professed Christ, would so endeavor
themselves to follow him in godly living. For we have not put on Christ, to
live any more to our selves, in the vanities, delights, and pleasures of the
world, and the flesh, suffering the concupiscence and carnalitie of the flesh
to have his full swinge. For we must walk after the spirit, and not after the
flesh. For the spirit is spiritual, and coueteth spiritual things: and the
flesh carnal, and desires carnal things. The men regenerate by Christ,
despise the world, and all the vanities and pleasures thereof. They be no
lovers of themselves. For they feel how evil and infirm they be, not being
able to do any good thing, without the help of God, from whom they knowledge
all goodness to proceed.

They flatter not themselves, with thinking every thing which shines to the
world, to be good and holy. For they know all externe and outward works, be
they never so glorious and fair to the world, may be done of the evil, as
well as of the good. And therefore they have in very little estimation the
outward show of holiness, because they be all spiritual, casting up their
eyes upon heavenly things: neither looking nor regarding the earthly things,
for they be to them vile and abject. They have also the simplicity of the
dove, and the policy of the serpent. For by simplicity they have a desire to
do good to all men, and to hurt no man, no though they have occasion given: and
by policy they give not nor minister any just cause to any man, whereby
their doctrine might be reproved. They be not also as a reed shaken with
every wind: but when they be blasted with the tempests and storms of the
world, then remain they most firm, stable, and quiet, feeling in spirit, that
God (as their best father) does send and suffer all things for their benefit
and commodity. Christ is to them a rule, a line, an example of Christian life.
They be never offended at any thing, although occasion be ministered unto them.
For like as Christ, when Peter would have withdrawn him from death, answered
and said, Go back from me Satan, for thou offendest me: that is, As much as
lies in thee, thou give me occasion with thy words, to make me withdraw my
self from death, although I yielded not thereto. For this thy procurement can
not extinguish the burning desire I have, to shed my blood for my chosen. Even
so the perfect men are never offended at any thing. For although the world
were full of sin, they would not withdraw themselves from doing of good, nor
wax cold in the love of the Lord. And much less they would be moved to do
evil: yea rather, they be so much the more moved to do good.

The regenerated by Christ are never offended at the works of God, because they
know by faith, that God does all things well: and that he can not err,
neither for want of power, nor by ignorance, nor malice. For they know him to
be almighty, and that he sees all things, and is most abundantly good. They
see and feel in spirit, that of that will most highly perfect, can not but
proceed most perfect works. Likewise, they be not offended at the works of
men. For if they be good, they are moved by them to take occasion to follow
them, and to reknowledge the goodness of God, with giving of thanks, and
praising his name daily the more. But if they be indifferent, and such as may
be done with good and evil intents, they judge the best part, thinking they
may be done to a good purpose, and so they be edified. But if they be so
evil, that they can not be taken in good part by any means; yet they be
not offended, although occasion be given, naie rather they be edified, in
as much as they take occasion to be better, though the contrary be ministered
to them.

Then begin they to think and say thus: If God had not preserved me with his
grace, I should have committed this sin, and worsse. O how much am I bound to
confess and knowledge the goodness of God! They go also thinking and saying
further: He that has sinned, may be one of Gods elect: peradventure the Lord
has suffered him to fall, to the intent he may the better know himself. I
know he is one of them that Christ has shed his blood for, and one of my
Christian brethren: truly I will admonish and rebuke him; and in case I find
him desperate, I will comfort him, and show him the great goodness and mercy
of God, in Christ: and with godly consolations I will see if I can lift him
up. And thus ye may see, how the men regenerated by Christ, of every thing win
and receive fruit.

The ninth Chapter, Of the fruits of infidelity, and offense of weakelings.
AND contrariwise, the yonglings and imperfect are offended at small trifles,
taking every thing in evil part, grudging and murmuring against their
neighbor: and so much the more, as they show themselves fervent in their so
doing, they are judged of the blind world, and of themselves great
zeale-bearers to God. If this were the greatest evil of these yonglings, it
were not the most evil. But I fear they be so blind and ignorant, that they
are offended also at good things, and judge nothing good, but such as they
embrace and esteem to be good, with murmuring against all such as follow not
their ways. If there be any of this sort, the Lord give them the light of his
truth, that they may increase and grow in godly strength. I suppose, if such
yonglings and imperfect, had seen Christ and his Disciples eat meat with
unwashed hands, or not to have fasted with the Pharisees, they would have been
offended, seeing him a breaker of men's traditions. Their affections dispose
their eyes to see through other men, and they see nothing in themselves: where
charity, although it be most full of eyes to see the faults of others, whom it
coueteth to amend, thinks none evil, but discreetlie and rightly
interprets all things, by the which more justly and truly every thing is
taken.

Now, these superstitious weaklings, if they had been conversant with Christ,
and seen him lead his life sometime with women, sometime with Samaritanes,
with Publicanes, sinners, and with the Pharisees, they would have murmured at
him. Also, if they had seen Marie power upon Christ the precious ointment,
they would have said with Judas: This ointment might have been sold, and given
to the poor. If they also had seen Christ with whips drive out of the Temple
those that bought and sold, they would forthwith have judged Christ to have
been troubled and moved with anger, and not by zeal of charity. How would
they have been offended, if they had seen him go to the Jews feast, heal a
sick man upon the sabbath day, practice with the woman of Samaria, yea and
show unto her of his most divine doctrine and life? They would have taken
occasion to have hated and persecuted him, as the Scribes and Pharisees did:
and even so should Christ the Savior of the world, have been to them an
offense and ruin.

There be an other kind of little ones imperfect, which are offended after
this sort and manner. As when they see one that is reputed and esteemed holy to
commit sin, forthwith they learn to do that, and worse, and wax cold in
doing of good, and confirm themselves in evil: and then they excuse their
wicked life, publishing the same with the slander of their neighbor. If any
man reprove them, they say: Such a man did this, and worse. So it is
evident, that such persons would deny Christ, if they saw other men do the
same. If they went to Rome, and saw the enormities of the Prelates, which is
said to reign there among them, I doubt not, if they saw one of them sin,
which were reputed and taken for holy, their faith should be lost; but not the
faith of Christ, which they never possessed: but they should loose that humane
opinion, which they had of the goodness of the Prelates. For, if they had the
faith of Christ, the holy Ghost should be a witness unto them, the which should
be mighty in them, that in case all the world would deny Christ, yet they
would remain firm and stable in the true faith.

The Pharisees also took occasion of the evil of others, to wax hautie and
proud, taking themselves to be men of greater perfection than any other;
because of their virtue, even as the Pharisie did, when he saw the Publicans
submission. And so they be offended with every little thing, judging evil,
murmuring against their neighbor, and for the same, they are of many reputed
and taken for the more holy and good: whereas in deed they be the more wicked.
The most wicked persons are offended, even at themselves. For at their little
stabilitie in goodness, and of their delectable and evil life, they take
occasion to despair: where they ought the more to commit themselves to God,
asking mercy for their offenses: and forthwith to give thanks, that it has
pleased him of his goodness to suffer them so long a time.

But what needs it any more to say? The evil men are offended even at the
works of God, they see God suffer sinners, therefore think they, sin
displeases him not. And because they see not the good rewarded with riches,
oftentimes they imagine, that God loves them not. It seems to them God is
parciall, because he has elected some, and some reproved. And therefore they
say, that the elected be sure of salvation, taking by that, occasion to do
evil enough, saying: Whatsoever God has determined, shall be performed. If
also they see the good men oppressed, and the evil men exalted, they judge God
unjust, taking occasion to live euillie, saying: Inasmuch as God favors the
naughty men, let us do evil enough, to the intent he do us good. If then
the wicked be offended even at God, it is no wonder if they be offended at
those that follow and walk in his paths and ways.

The tenth Chapter, Of carnal gospellers, by whose evil living Gods truth is
shamefullie slandered.
IWill now speak with great dolor and heaviness in my heart, of a sort of
people, which be in the world, that be called professors of the Gospel; and by
their words do declare and show, they be much affected to the same. But I am
afraid, some of them do build upon the sand; as Simon Magus did, making a
weak foundation: I mean, they make not Christ their chiefest foundation,
professing his doctrine, of a sincere, pure, and zealous mind; but either for
because they would be called gospellers, to procure some credit and good
opinion of the true and very favorers of Christ's doctrine, either to find out
some carnal liberty, either to be contentious disputers, finders or rebukers
of other men's faults, or else finally to please and flatter the world. Such
gospellers are an offense, and a slander to the word of God, and make the
wicked to rejoice and laugh at them, saying: Behold I pray you their fair
fruits. What charity, what discretion, what godliness, holiness, or purity
of life is among them? Be not they great auengers, foul gluttons, slanderers,
back biters, adulterers, fornicators, swearers, and blasphemers; yea and
wallowe and tumble in all sins? These be the fruits of their doctrine.

And thus it may be seen, how the word of God is evil spoken of, through
licentious and evil living: and yet the word of God is all holy, pure,
sincere, and godly, being the doctrine and occasion of all holy and pure
living. It is the wicked that pervert all good things, into evil. For an evil
tree can not bring forth good fruit. And when good seed is sown in a barren
and evil ground, it yields no good corn: and so it fares by the word of
God. For when it is heard and known of wicked men, it brings no good fruit:
but when it is sown in good ground, I mean the hearts of good people, it
brings forth good fruit abundantly: so that the want and fault is in men,
and not in the word of God. I pray God all men and women may have grace to
become meet tillage for the fruits of the Gospel, and to leave only the
iangling of it. For only speaking of the Gospel makes not men good
Christians, but good talkers, except their facts and works agree with the same:
so then their speech is good, because their hearts be good. And even as much
talk of the word of God, without practicing the same in our living, is evil
and detestable in the sight of God: so it is a lamentable thing to hear, how
there be many in the world, that do not well digest the reading of scripture,
and do commend and praise ignorance, and say, that much knowledge of Gods word
is the original of all dissension, scismes, and contention; and makes men
hautie, proud, and presumptuous, by reading of the same.

This manner of saying is no less than a plain blasphemy against the holy
Ghost. For the spirit of God is the author of his word, and so the holy Ghost
is made the author of evil, which is a most great blasphemy, and (as the
scripture says) a sin that shall not be forgiven in this world, neither in
the other to come. It were all our parts and duties, to procure and seek all
the ways and means possible, to have more knowledge of Gods word set forth
abroad in the world, and not allow ignorance, and discommend knowledge of Gods
word, stopping the mouths of the unlearned with subtle and crafty
persuasions of Philosophy, and Sophistry, whereof comes no fruit, but a
great perturbation of the mind to the simple and ignorant, not knowing which
way to turn them. For how is it not extreme wickedness, to charge the holy
sanctified word of God with the offenses of man? To allege the scriptures to
be perilous learning, because certain readers there of fall into heresies?

These men might be enforced by this kind of argument, to forsake the use of
fire, because fire burns their neighbors house: or to abstain from meat
and drink, because they see many surfeit. O blind hate! They slander God for
man's offense, and excuse the man whom they see offend; and blame the
scripture, which they can not improve. Yea I have heard of some, that have
very well understood the Latin tongue, that when they have heard learned men
persuade to the credit and belief of certain unwritten verities (as they
call them) which be not in scripture expressed, and yet taught as doctrine
apostolic, and necessary to be believed; they have been of this opinion,
that the learned men have mo Epistles written by the Apostles of Christ, than
we have abroad in the Canon of the old and new testament, or known of any,
but only to them of the Clergy. Which belief I did not a little lament in my
heart to hear, that any creature should have such a blind ignorant opinion.

Some kind of simplicity is to be praised, but this simplicity, without the
verity, I can neither praise nor allow. And thus it may be seen, how we
that be unlettered remain confused, without God of his grace lighten our
hearts and minds with a heavenly light and knowledge of his will. For we be
given of our selves to believe men better than God. I pray God send all
learned men the spirit of God abundantly, that their doctrine may bring forth
the fruits thereof. I suppose there was never more need of good doctrine to be
set forth in the world than now in this age. For the carnal children of Adam,
be so wise in their generation, that if it were possible, they would deceive
the children of light. The world loves his own, and therefore their facts and
doings be highly esteemed of the world: but the children of God are hated,
because they be not of the world. For their habitation is in heaven, and they
do despise the world as a most vile slave.

The fleshly children of Adam be so politic, subtle, crafty, and wise in
their kind, that the elect should be illuded, if it were possible. For they
are clothed with Christ's garment, in utter appearance, with a fair show of
all godliness, and holiness in their words: but they have so shorn, nopped, and
turned Christ's garment, and have so disguised themselves, that the children of
light beholding them with a spiritual eye, do account and take them for men
which have sold their masters garment, and have stolen a piece of every man's
garment. Yet by their subtle art, and crafty wits, they have so set those
patches and pieces together, that they do make the blind world, and carnal men
to believe, it is Christ's very mantell.

The eleventh Chapter, Of the virtuous properties of Gods children: of whom
every one attends his vocation.
BUT the children of light know the contrary: for they are led by the spirit
of God, to the knowledge of the truth, and therefore they discern and judge
all things right, and know from whence they come, even from the bishop of
Rome, and his members, the headspring of all pride, vain glory, ambition,
hypocrisy, and feigned holiness.

The children of God be not abashed, although the world hate them; they believe
they are in the grace and favor of God, and that he, as a best father, does
govern them in all things, putting away from them all vain confidence and
trust in their own doings. For they know they can do nothing but sin of
themselves. They be not so foolish, and childish, not to give God thanks for
their election, which was before the beginning of the world. For they believe
most surely they be of the chosen. For the holy Ghost does witness to their
spirit, that they be the children of God; and therefore they believe God
better than man. They say with Saint Paul, Who shall separate us from the
love of God? Shall tribulation, anguish, persecution, hunger, nakedness,
peril, or sword? As it is written, For thy sake are we killed all day long;
and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain: nevertheless, in all these
things we overcome, through him that loves us. For I am sure, that neither
death, nor life, neither Angels, nor rule; neither power, neither things
present, neither things to come, neither quantity or quality, neither any
creature, shall be able to depart us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.

They are not by this godly faith presumptuouslie inflamed, nor by the same
become they loose, idle, or slow in doing of godly works, as carnal men
dreme of them: so much the more fervent they be in doing most holy and pure
works, which God has commanded them to walk in. They wander not in men's
traditions and inventions, leaving the most holy and pure precepts of God
undone, which they know they be bound to observe and keep. Also they work
not like hirelings, for meede, wages, or reward; but as loving children,
without respect of lucre, gain, or hire. They be in such liberty of spirit,
and joy so much in God, that their inward consolation can not be expressed
with tongue. All fear of damnation is gone from them; for they have put their
whole hope of salvation in his hands, which will and can perform it; neither
have they any post or pillar to lean to, but God, and his smooth and
vnwrinkled Church. For he is to them all in all things, and to him they lean,
as a most sure square pillar, in prosperity and adversity, nothing doubting
of his promises and covenants. For they believe most surely they shall be
fulfilled.

Also the children of God be not curious in searching the high mysteries of
God, which be not meet for them to know: neither do go about with humane and
carnal reasons to interpret Scripture, persuading men by their subtle wits,
and carnal doctrine, that much knowledge of Scripture makes men heretics,
without they temper it with humane doctrine, Sophistry, Philosophy, and
Logic, wherewith to be seduced according to the traditions of men, after the
ordinances of the world, and not after Christ. S. Paul does most diligently
admonish us, which arts are not convenient and meet to be made checkmate with
Scripture. For the Scriptures be so pure and holy, that no perfection can be
added unto them. For even as fine gold does excel all other metals, so does
the word of God, all men's doctrines. I beseech the Lord to send the learned and
unlearned such abundance of his holy spirit, that they may obeie and observe
the most sincere and holy word of God, and show the fruits thereof, which
consists chiefly in charity and godly unity: that as we have professed
one God, one faith, and one baptism; so we may be all of one mind, and one
accord, putting away all biting and gnawing. For in backbiting, slandering,
and mis-reporting our Christian brethren, we show not our selves the Disciples
of Christ, whom we profess. In him was most high charity, humility and
patience, suffering most patiently all ignominy, rebukes, and slanders,
praieng to his eternal father for his enemies with most perfect charity; and
in all things did remit his will to his fathers, as the Scripture does
witness, when he prayed in the Mount. A godly example and lesson for us to
follow at all times and seasons, as well in prosperity, as in adversity; to
have no will but Gods will, committing and leaving to him all our cares and
greefes, and to abandon all our policies and inventions. For they be most
vain, and foolish, and indeed very shadows and dreams.

But we be yet so carnal and fleshly, that we run headlong like unbridled
colts, without snaffle or bridle. If we had the love of God printed in our
hearts, it would keep us back from running astraie. And until such time as it
please God to send us this bit to hold us in, we shall never run the right
way, although we speak and talk never so much of God and his word. The true
followers of Christ's doctrine have always a respect, and an eye to their
vocation. If they be called to the ministry of Gods word, they preach and
teach it sincerely, to the edifieng of others; and show themselves in their
living, followers of the same. If they be married men, having children and
family, they nourish and bring them up, without all bitterness, and
fierceness, in the doctrine of the Lord, in all godliness and virtue;
committing the instruction of others, which apperteine not to their charge, to
the reformation of God, and his ministers, which chiefly be Kings and Princes,
bearing the sword even for that purpose, to punish evil dooers. If they be
children, they honor their father and mother, knowing it to be Gods
commandment, and that he has thereto annexed a promise of long life. If they
be servants, they obeie and serve their masters with all fear and reverence,
even for the Lords sake; neither with murmuring nor grudging, but with a free
heart and mind.

If they be husbands, they love their wives, as their own bodies, after the
example as Christ loved the congregation, and gave himself for it, to make it
to him a spouse without spot or wrinkle. If they be women married, they learn
of S. Paul to be obedient to their husbands, and to keep silence in the
congregation, and to learn of their husbands at home. Also they wear such
apparel as becomes holiness, and comlie usage, with soberness; not being
accusers or detractors, not given to much eating of delicate meats, and
drinking of wine; but they teach honest things, to make the young women sober
minded, to love their husbands, to love their children, to be discreet, chaste,
houswifelie, good, and obedient unto their husbands: that the word of God be
not evil spoken of. Uerelie, if all sorts of people would look to their own
vocation, and ordeine the same according to Christ's doctrine, we should not
have so many eyes and ears to other men's faults as we have. For we be so busy
and glad to find and epsy out other men's doings, that we forget, and can have
no time to weigh and ponder our own, which after the word of God we ought
first to reform: and then we shall the better help an other with the straw
out of his eyes.

But alas, we be so much given to love and to flatter our selves, and so
blinded with carnal affections, that we can see and perceive no fault in our
selves. And therefore it is a thing very requisite and necessary for us, to
pray all with one heart and mind to God, to give us an heavenly light and
knowledge of our own miseries and calamities, that we may see them, and
acknowledge them truly before him.

The twelfe Chapter, The conclusion, with a Christian exhortation to the
amendment of life.
IF any man shall be offended at this my lamenting the faults of men, which be
in the world, fantasing with themselves, that I do it either of hatred or of
malice, to any sort or kind of people; verelie in so doing they shall do me
great wrong. For I thank God by his grace, I hate no creature; yea I would
say more to give witness of my conscience, that neither life, honor, riches,
neither whatsoever I possess here, which appertains to mine own private
commodity, be it never so deerlie beloved of me, but most willingly and
gladly I would leave it, to win any man to Christ, of what degree or sort
soever he were. And yet is this nothing in comparison to the charity that God
has showed me, in sending Christ to die for me. No, if I had all the charity
of Angels, and Apostles, it should be but like a spark of fire compared to a
great heap of burning coals.

God knows of what intent and mind I have lamented mine own sins and
faults to the world. I trust no body will judge that I have done it for praise
or thank of any creature; since rather I might be ashamed, than rejoice in
rehearsal thereof. For if they knew how little I esteem and weigh the praise
of the world, that opinion were soon removed and taken away. For I thank
God (by his grace) I know the world to be a blind judge, and the praises
thereof vain, and of little moment: and therefore I seek not the praises of
the same, neither to satisfy it none otherwise than I am taught by Christ to
do, according to christian charity. I would to God we would all (when
occasion does serve) confess our faults to the world, all respects of our own
commodity laid apart. But alas, self-love does so much reign among us, that
(as I have said before) we can not epsy our own faults. And although sometime
we find our own guilt, either we be favorable to interpret it no sin: or else
we be ashamed to confess our selves thereof. Yea, and we be sore offended and
grieved, to hear our faults charitablie and godly told us of other, putting
no difference between charitable warning, and malicious accusing.

Truly, if we sought Gods glory, as we should do in all things, we should
not be ashamed to confess our selves to digress from Gods precepts and
ordinances; when it is manifest we have done, and daily do. I pray God our
own faults and deeds condemn us not at the last day, when every man shall
be rewarded according to his doings. Truly, if we do not redress and amend
our living, according to the doctrine of the Gospel; we shall receive a
terrible sentence of Christ the son of God, when he shall come to judge and
condemn all transgressors and breakers of his precepts and commandments; and
to reward all his obedient and loving children. We shall have no man of law to
make our plea for us, neither can we have the day deferred, neither will the
Judge be corrupted with affection, bribes, or reward; neither will he hear
any excuse or delaie, neither shall this Saint or that Martyr help us, be
they never so holy; neither shall our ignorance save us from damnation. But
yet wilful blindness, and obstinate ignorance shall receive greater
punishment, and not without just cause. Then shall it be known who has walked
in the dark. For all things shall appear manifest before him. No man's deeds
shall be hidden; no, neither words, nor thoughts. The poor and simple
obseruers of Gods commandments shall be rewarded with everlasting life, as
obedient children to the heavenly Father: and the transgressors, adders, and
diminishers of the law of God, shall receive eternal damnation for their just
reward. I beseech God we may escape this fearful sentence, and be found such
faithful servants, and loving children, that we may hear the happy,
comfortable, and most ioifull sentence ordained for the children of God, which
is; Come hither ye blessed of my father, and receive the kingdom of heaven,
prepared for you before the beginning of the world. Unto the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world without end,

Amen.
Also here follow godly Prayers and Meditations, wherein the mind is stirred,
patiently to suffer all afflictions here; to set at naught the vain
prosperity of the world: and alwaie to long for everlasting felicity:
collected out of holy works, by the most virtuous and gracious Princess
KATHERINE, Queen of England, France, and Ireland.
Colossians. 3, verse. 1, 2. If ye be risen again with Christ, seek the
things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God.

Set your affection on things that are above: and not on things which are on
the earth.


The first Chapter, Of prayers to perform Gods will in patience.
MOst benign Lord Jesus, grant me thy grace, that it may alwaie work in me,
and persevere with me unto the end.

Grant me, that I may ever desire and will that, which is most pleasant, and
most acceptable to thee.

Thy will be my will, and my will be to follow alwaie thy will.

Let there be alwaie in me one will, and one desire with thee, and that I have
no desire to will, or not to will, but as thou will.

Lord, thou know what thing is most profitable, and most expedient for me.

Give me therefore what thou will, as much as thou will, and when thou will.

Do with me what thou will, as it shall please thee, and as shall be most to
thine honor.

Put me where thou will, and freely do with me in all things after thy will.

Thy creature I am, and in thy hands, lead and turn me where thou will.

Lo, I am thy servant, ready to all things that thou command. For I desire
not to live to my self, but to thee.

Lord Jesus, I pray thee grant me grace, that I never set my heart on the things
of this world: but that all worldly and carnal affections may utterly die,
and be mortified in me.

Grant me above all things, that I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and
pacify my heart in thee.

For thou Lord art the very true peace of heart, and the perfect rest of the
soul: and without thee all things be grievous and unquiet.

My Lord Jesus, I beseech thee, be with me in every place, and at all times;
and let it be to me a special solace, gladly for thy love to lack all
worldly solace.

And if thou withdraw thy comfort from me at any time, keep me, O Lord, from
desperation, and make me patiently to abide thy will and ordinance.

O Lord Jesus, thy judgments be righteous, and thy providence is much better for
me, than all that I can imagine or devise.

Wherefore do with me in all things as it shall please thee. For it may not be
but well, all that thou dooest.

If thou will that I be in light, be thou blessed: if thou will that I be in
darkness, be thou also blessed.

If thou vouchsafe to comfort me, be thou highly blessed: if thou will I live
in trouble, and without comfort, be thou like wise ever blessed.

Lord give me grace gladly to suffer whatsoever thou will shall fall upon me,
and patiently to take it at thy hand: good and bad, bitter and sweet, joy
and sorrow: and for all things that shall befall unto me, heartily to thank
thee.

Keep me Lord from sin, and I shall then neither dread death, nor hell.

O what thanks ought I to give unto thee, which have suffered the grievous
death of the cross, to deliver me from my sins, and to obtain everlasting
life for me!

Thou gave us most perfect example of patience, fulfilling and obeieng the
will of thy father, even unto the death.

Make me wretched sinner, obedientlie to use my self after thy will in
althings, and patiently to bear the burden of this corruptible life.

For though this life be tedious, and as an heavy burden to my soul: yet
nevertheless thorough thy grace, and by example of thee, it is now made much
more easy and comfortable, than it was before thine incarnation and passion.

Thy holy life is our way to thee, and by following of thee we walk to thee,
that art our head and Savior: and yet, except thou had gone before and
showed us the way to everlasting life; who would endeavor himself to follow
thee? Seeing we be yet so slow and dull, having the light of thy blessed
example and holy doctrine to lead and direct us.

O Lord Jesus, make that possible by grace, that is to me impossible by nature.

Thou know well that I may little suffer, and that I am anon cast down and
overthrown with a little adversity: wherefore I beseech thee O Lord, to
strengthen me with thy spirit, that I may willingly suffer for thy sake, all
manner of trouble and affliction.

The second Chapter, A confession of our infirmities, with a desire to rest in
God above all things.
LOrd, I will knowledge unto thee all mine unrighteousness, and I will
confess to thee all the unstableness of my heart.

Oftentimes a very little thing troubles me sore, and makes me dull and
slow to serve thee.

And sometime I purpose to stand strongly: but when a little trouble comes,
it is to me great anguish and grief, and of a right little thing rises a
grievous temptation to me.

Yea when I think my self to be sure and strong, and that (as it seems) I
have the upper hand: suddenly I feel my self ready to fall with a little
blast of temptation.

Behold therefore (good Lord) my weakness, and consider my frailenesse best
known to thee.

Have mercy on me, and deliver me from all iniquity and sin, that I be not
entangled therewith.

Often times it greeueth me sore, and in a manner confounds me, that I am so
unstable, so weak, and so frail, in resisting sinful motions.

Which although they draw me not alwaie to consent, yet nevertheless their
assaults be very grievous unto me.

And it is tedious to me to live in such battle, albeit I perceive, that such
battle is not unprofitable unto me: for thereby I know the better my self,
and mine own infirmities, and that I must seek help only at thy hands.

O Lord God of Israel, the lover of all faithful souls, vouchsafe to behold
the labor and sorrow of me thy poor creature.

Assist me in all things with thy grace, and so strengthen me with heavenly
strength, that neither my cruel enemy the feend, neither my wretched flesh
(which is not yet subject to the spirit) have victory or dominion over me.

O what a life may this be called, where no trouble nor misery lacks! Where
every place is full of snares of mortal enemies!

For one trouble or temptation ouerpassed, another comes by and by; and the
first conflict yet during, a new battle suddenly arises.

Wherefore Lord Jesus, I pray thee give me thy grace, to rest in thee above all
things, and to quiet me in thee above all creatures, above all glory and
honor, above all dignity and power, above all cunning and policy, above all
health and beauty, above all riches and treasure, above all joy and pleasure,
above all fame and praise, above all mirth and consolation that man's heart may
take or feel besides thee.

For thou Lord God, art best, most wise, most high, most mighty, most
sufficient, and most full of all goodness, most sweet, and most comfortable,
most fair, most loving, most noble, most glorious, in whom all goodness most
perfectly is.

And therefore, whatsoever I have besides thee, it is nothing to me. For my
heart may not rest, ne fully be pacified, but only in thee.

O Lord Jesus, most loving spouse; who shall give me wings of perfect love,
that I may fly up from these worldly miseries, and rest in thee?

O when shall I ascend to thee, and feel how sweet thou art?

When shall I wholly gather my self in thee so perfectly, that I shall not
for thy love feel my self, but thee only above my self, and above all
worldly things, that thou may vouchsafe to visit me in such wise, as thou
dooest visit thy most faithful lovers?

Now I often mourn and complain of the miseries of this life, and with sorrow
and great heaviness suffer them.

For many things happen daily to me, which oftentimes trouble me, make me
heavy, and darken mine understanding.

They hinder me greatly, and put my mind from thee, and so encumber me many
ways, that I can not freely and cleerelie desire thee, ne have thy sweet
consolations, which with thy blessed Saints be alwaie present.

I beseech thee, Lord Jesus, that the sighings and inward desires of my heart may
move and incline thee to hear me.

The third Chapter. A recounting of Gods benefits, with prayer to obtain a
free and clean mind, with hearty wisdom and deliverance.
OIesu, King of everlasting glory, the joy and comfort of all Christian
people, that are wandering as Pilgrims in the wilderness of this world: my heart
cries to thee by still desires, and my silence speaks unto thee, and says:
How long tarieth my Lord God to come to me?

Come O Lord, and visit me: for without thee I have no true joy, without thee
my soul is heavy and sad.

I am in prison, and bounden with fetters of sorrow, till thou O Lord, with thy
gracious presence vouchsafe to visit me, and to bring me again to liberty and
joy of spirit, and to show thy favorable countenance unto me.

Open my heart (Lord) that I may behold thy laws, and teach me to walk in thy
commandments.

Make me to know and follow thy will, and to have always in my remembrance
thy manifold benefits, that I may yield due thanks to thee for the same.

But I knowledge and confess for truth, that I am not able to give thee
condign thanks, for the least benefit that thou have given me.

O Lord, all gifts and virtues that any man has, in body or soul, natural
or supernatural, be thy gifts, and come of thee, and not of our selves; and
they declare the great riches of thy mercy and goodness unto us.

And though some have mo gifts than other; yet they all proceed from thee, and
without thee the least cannot be had.

O Lord, I account it for a great benefit, not to have many worldly gifts,
whereby the laud and praise of men might blind my soul, and deceive me.

Lord, I know that no man ought to be ashamed or miscontent, that he is in a
low estate in this world, and lacks the pleasures of this life; but rather
to be glad and rejoice thereat:

For so much as thou have chosen the poor and meek persons, and such as are
despised in the world, to be thy servants and familiar friends.

Witness be thy blessed Apostles, whom thou made chief pastors and
spiritual governors of thy flock, which departed from the counsel of the
Jews, reioising that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for thy name.

Even so (O Lord) grant that I thy servant may be as well content to be taken
as the least, as other be to be greatest; and that I be as well pleased to be
in the lowest place, as in the highest; and as glad to be of no reputation in
the world for thy sake, as other are to be noble and famous.

Lord, it is the work of a perfect man, never to sequester his mind from thee;
and among many worldly cares to go without care: not after the manner of an
idle or a dissolute person, but by the prerogative of a free mind, alwaie
minding heavenly things, and not cleaving by inordinate affection to any
creature.

I beseech thee therefore, my Lord Jesus, keep me from the superfluous cares of
this world, that I be not inquieted with bodily necessities; ne that I be not
taken with the voluptuous pleasures of the world, ne of the flesh.

Preserve me from all things, which hinder my soul health, that I be not
overthrown with them.

O Lord God, which art sweetness unspeakable, turn into bitterness to me all
worldly and fleshly delights, which might draw me from the love of eternal
things, to the love of short and vile pleasures.

Let not flesh and blood overcome me, ne yet the world with his vain glory
deceive me, nor the feend with his manifold crafts supplant me: but give me
ghostly strength in resisting them, patience in suffering them, and constancy
in perseuering to the end.

Give me for all worldly delectations, the most sweet consolation of thy holy
spirit, and for all fleshly love, indue my soul with fervent love of thee.

Make me strong inwardly in my soul, and cast out thereof all unprofitable
cares of this world, that I be not led by unstable desires of earthly things:
but that I may repute all things in this world (as they be) transitory and
soon vanishing away, and my self also with them, drawing toward mine end.

For nothing under the sun may long abide; but all is vanity, and affliction
of spirit.

Give me (Lord) therefore heavenly wisdom, that I may learn to seek and
find thee, and above all things to love thee.

Give me grace to withdraw me from them that flatter me, and patiently to
suffer them that unjustly grieve me.

Lord, when temptation or tribulation comes, vouchsafe to succor me, that
all may turn to my ghostly comfort, and patiently to suffer, and alwaie to
say, Thy name be blessed.

Lord, trouble is now at hand; I am not well, but I am greatly vexed with this
present affliction. O most glorious father, what shall I do? Anguish and
trouble are on every side, help now, I beseech thee in this hour: thou shall
be lauded and praised, when I am perfectly made meek before thee, and when I
am cleerelie delivered by thee.

May it therefore please thee to deliver me. For what may I most sinful wretch
do? Or whether may I go for succor, but to thee?

Give me patience now at this time in all my troubles; help me, Lord God, and
I shall not fear ne dread, what trouble so ever fall upon me.

And now, what shall I say, but that thy will be done in me? I have deserved
to be troubled and grieved; and therefore it behooves that I suffer, as long
as it pleases thee.

But would to God that I might suffer gladly, till the furious tempests were
ouerpassed, and that quietness of heart might come again.

Thy mighty hand, Lord, is strong enough to take this trouble from me, and to
assuage the cruel assaults thereof with them, as thou have oftentimes done
before this time; that when I am cleerelie delivered by thee, I may with
gladness say, The right hand of him that is highest, has made this change.

The fourth Chapter, To despise all things in the world, and yield our selves
up to God, that he may be all in all for our redemption in time of need.
LOrd grant me thy singular grace, that I may come thither where no creature
shall let me ne keep me from the perfect beholding of thee.

For as long as any transitory thing keeps me back, or has rule in me, I
may not freely ascend to thee.

O Lord, without thee nothing may long delight or please: for if any thing
should be liking and sauourie, it must be through help of thy grace, seasoned
with the spice of thy wisdom.

O everlasting light, far passing all things, send down the beams of thy
brightness from above, and purify and lighten the inward parts of my heart.

Quicken my soul, and all the powers thereof, that it may cleave fast, and be
joined to thee in ioifull gladness, and ghostly rauishings.

O when shall that blessed hour come, that thou shall visit me, and glad me
with thy blessed presence; when thou shall be to me all in all? Uerelie until
that time come, there can be no perfect joy in me.

But alas, mine old man, that is, my carnal affections live still in me, and
are not crucified nor perfectly dead.

For yet strives the flesh against the spirit, and moves great battle
inwardly against me, and suffers not the kingdom of my soul to live in
peace.

But thou good Lord, that have the Lordship over all, and power of the sea, to
assuage the rages and surges of the same, arise and help me; destroy the
power of mine enemies, which always make battle against me: show forth the
greatness of thy goodness, and let the power of thy right hand be glorified
in me. For there is to me none other help nor refuge, but in thee only my
Lord, my God: to thee be honor and glory everlasting.

O Lord grant me, that I may wholly resign myself to thee, and in all things
to forsake my self, and patiently to bear my cross, and to follow thee.

O Lord, what is man, that thou vouchsafest to have mind of him, and to visit
him?

Thou art alwaie one, alwaie good, alwaie righteous and holy, justly and
blessedlie disposing all things after thy wisdom.

But I am a wretch, and of my self alwaie ready and prone to evil, and do
never abide in one state, but many tunes do vary and change.

Nevertheless, it shall be better with me, when it shall please thee. For thou
O Lord only art he that may help me; and thou may so confirm and
stablish me, that my heart shall not be changed from thee, but be surely fixed,
and finally rest and be quieted in thee.

I am nothing else of my self, but vanity before thee, an unconstant
creature, and a feeble. And therefore, whereof may I rightfullie glory? Or why
should I look to be magnified?

Who so pleases himself without thee, displeases thee; and he that
delights in men's praisings, loses the true praise before thee.

The true praise is to be praised of thee: and the true joy is to rejoice in
thee.

Wherefore, thy name O Lord, be praised, and not mine; thy works be magnified,
and not mine; and thy goodness be always lauded and blessed.

Thou art my glory, and the joy of my heart, in thee shall I glory and
rejoice, and not in my self, nor in any worldly honor or dignity, which to
thine eternal glory compared, is but a shadow, and a very vanity.

O Lord, we live here in great darkness, and are soon deceived with the
vanities of this world, and are soon grieved with a little trouble: yet if I
could behold my self well, I should plainly see, that what trouble soever I
have suffered, it has justly come upon me, because I have often sinned, and
greeuouslie offended thee.

To me therefore confusion, and despite is due; but to thee laud, honor and
glory.

Lord send me help in my troubles; for man's help is little worth.

How often have I been disappointed, where I thought I should have found
friendship? And how often have I found it, where as I least thought?

Wherefore it is a vain thing to trust in man. For the true trust and health of
man is only in thee.

Blessed be thou Lord therefore in all things, that happen unto us. For we be
weak and unstable, soon deceived, and soon changed from one thing to another.

O Lord God, most righteous Judge, strong and patient, which know the
frailty and malice of man; be thou my whole strength and comfort in all
necessities. For mine own conscience Lord suffices not.

Wherefore to thy mercy I do appeal, seeing no man may be justified, ne
appear righteous in thy sight, if thou examine him after thy justice.

The fifth Chapter, Of the everlasting day, and anguish of this life.
OBlessed mansion of thy heavenly City! O most clearest day of eternity,
whom the night may never darken!

This is the day alwaie clear and merry, alwaie sure, and never changing his
estate.

Would to God this day might shortly appear, and shine upon us, and that
these worldly fantasies were at an end.

This day shines clearlie to thy Saints in heaven, with everlasting
brightness: but to us pilgrims in earth it shines obscurelie, and as through
a mirror or glass.

The heavenly Citizens know how ioious this day is; but we outlawes, the
children of Eve, weep and wail the bitter tediousnes of our day, that is of
this present life, short and evil, full of sorrow and anguish,

Where man is oftentimes defiled with sin, encumbered with affliction,
inquieted with troubles, wrapped in cares, busied with vanities, blinded with
errors, ouercharged with labors, vexed with temptations, overcome with vain
delights and pleasures of the world, and grieuouslie tormented with penury and
need.

O when shall the end come of all these miseries?

When shall I be clearelie delivered from the bondage of sin?

When shall I Lord have only mind on thee, and fully be glad and merry in
thee?

When shall I be free without letting, and be in perfect liberty of body and
soul?

When shall I have peace without trouble: peace within and without, and on
every side steadfast and sure?

O Lord Jesus, when shall I stand and behold thee; and have full sight and
contemplation of thy glory?

When shall thou be to me all in all? And when shall I be with thee in thy
kingdom, that thou have ordained for thine elect people from the beginning?

I am left here poor, and as an outlawe, in the land of mine enemies; where
daily be battles, and great misfortunes.

Comfort mine exile, assuage my sorrow; for all my desire is to be with thee.

It is to me an unpleasant burden, what pleasure soever the world offers me
here.

I desire to have inward fruition in thee; but I can not attain thereto.

I covet to cleave fast to heavenly things; but worldly affections pluck my
mind downward.

I would subdue all evil affections; but they daily rebel, and rise against
me, and will not be subject unto my spirit.

Thus I wretched creature sigh in my self, and am grievous to my self, while
my spirit desires to be upward and contrary, my flesh draws me downward.

O what suffer I inwardly! I go about to mind heavenly things, and straight a
great rabble of worldly things rush into my soul.

Therefore, Lord, be not long away; ne depart thou in thy wrath from me.

Send me the light of thy grace; destroy in me all carnal desires.

Send forth the hot flames of thy love, to burn and consume the cloudie
fantasies of my mind.

Gather, O Lord, my wits, and the powers of my soul together in thee; and make
me to despise all worldly things, and by thy grace strongly to resist and
overcome all motions and occasions of sin.

Help me thou everlasting truth, that no worldly guile nor vanity hereafter
have power to deceive me.

Come also thou heavenly sweetness, and let all bitterness of sin fly far
from me. Pardon me, and forgive me as often as in my prayer my mind is not
surely fixed on thee.

For many times I am not there, where I stand or sit; but rather there whither
my thoughts carry me.

For there I am, where my thoughts be, and where as customablie is my thought,
there is that that I love.

And that oftentimes comes into my mind, that by custom pleases me best;
and that delights me most to think upon.

Accordingly as thou do say in thy gospel: Where as a man's treasure is,
there is his heart.

Wherefore, if I love heaven, I speak gladly thereof, and of such things as be
of God, and of that that apperteineth to his honor, and to the glory of his
holy name.

And if I love the world, I love to talk of worldly things, and I joy anon
in worldly felicity, and sorrow and lament soon for worldly adversity.

If I love the flesh, I imagine oftentimes that, that pleases the flesh.

If I love my soul, I delight much to speak and to hear of things that be
for my souls health.

And whatsoever I love, of that I gladly hear, and speak, and bear the
images of them still in my mind.

Blessed is the man that for the love of the Lord, sets not by the pleasures
of this world, and learneth truly to overcome himself, and with the fervor
of spirit crucifieth his flesh; so that in a clean and a pure conscience he
may offer his prayers to thee, and be accepted to have company of thy blessed
Angels, all earthly things excluded from his heart.

The sixth Chapter, A sweet prayer, wherein being pressed down with troubles,
we humbly yield our selves under the mighty hand of God our Creator.
LOrd and holy Father, be thou blessed now and ever. For as thou will, so it
is done; and that thou dooest is alwaie best.

Let me, thine humble and unworthy servant, joy only in thee, and not in
my self, ne in any thing else besides thee.

For thou Lord art my gladness, my hope, my crown, and all mine honor.

What has thy servant, but that she has of thee, and that without her desert.

All things be thine; thou have created and made them.

I am poor, and have been in trouble and pain, ever from my youth, and my
soul has been in great heaviness through manifold passions, that come of
the world, and of the flesh.

Wherefore Lord, I desire that I may have of thee the joy of inward peace.

I ask of thee to come to that rest, which is ordained for thy chosen
children, that be fed and nourished with the light of heavenly comforts. For
without thy help I can not come to thee.

Lord give me peace, give me inward joy, and then my soul shall be full of
heavenly melody, and be devout and fervent in thy lauds and praises.

But if thou withdraw thy self from me (as thou have sometime done) then may
not thy servant run the way of thy commandments, as I did before.

For it is not with me, as it was when the Lamp of thy ghostly presence did
shine upon my head; and I was defended under the shadow of thy wings from all
perils and dangers.

O merciful Lord Jesus, ever to be praised; the time is come, that thou will
prove thy servant; and rightful it is, that I shall now suffer somewhat for
thee.

Now is the hour come, that thou have known from the beginning, that thy
servant for a time should outwardly be set at naught, and inwardly to lean
unto thee.

And that she should be despised in the sight of the world, and be broken with
affliction, that she may after arise with thee in a new light, and be
clarified, and made glorious in the kingdom of heaven.

O holy father, thou have ordained it so to be; and it is done as thou have
commanded.

This is thy grace (O Lord) to thy friend, to suffer her to be troubled in this
world for thy love, how often so ever it be, and of what person so ever it be,
and in what manner soever thou will suffer it to fall unto her. For without thy
will or sufferance, what thing is done upon the earth?

It is good to me, O Lord, that thou have meekened me, that I may thereby learn
to know thy righteous judgments, and to put from me all manner of presumption,
and stateliness of heart.

It is very profitable for me, that confusion has covered my face; that I may
learn thereby rather to seek to thee for help and succor, than to man.

I have thereby learned to dread thy secret and terrible judgments, which
scourgest the righteous with the sinner; but not without equity and justice.

Lord, I yield thanks to thee, that thou have not spared my sins, but have
punished me with scourges of love, and have sent me affliction and anguish
within and without.

No creature under heaven may comfort me, but thou Lord God, the heavenly
leach of man's soul, which strikest and healest, which bring a man nigh unto
death, and after restorest him to life again, that he may thereby learn to
know his own weakness and imbecillitie, and the more fully to trust in the
Lord.

Thy discipline is laid upon me, and thy rod of correction has taught me, and
under that rod I wholly submit me.

Strike my back and my bones as it shall please thee; and make me to bow my
crooked will to thy will.

Make me a meek and an humble disciple, as thou have sometime done with me,
that I may walk after thy will.

To thee I commit my self to be corrected. For better it is to be corrected by
thee here, than in time to come.

Thou know all things; and nothing is hid from thee that is in man's
conscience.

Thou know all things to come before they fall, and it is not needful that
any man teach thee, or warn thee of any thing that is done upon the earth.

Thou know what is profitable for me, and how much tribulations help to
purge away the rust of sin in me.

Do with me after thy pleasure. I am a sinful wretch, to none so well known
as to thee.

Grant me (Lord) that to know, that is necessary to be known; that to love,
that is to be loved; that to desire, that pleases thee; that to regard, that
is precious in thy sight; and that to refuse, that is vile before thee.

Suffer me not to judge thy mysteries after mine outward senses, ne to give
sentence after the hearing of the ignorant, but by true judgment to discern
things spiritual; and above all things, alwaie to search and follow thy will
and pleasure.

O Lord Jesus, thou art all my riches, and all that I have, I have it of thee.

But what am I (Lord) that dare speak to thee? I am thy poor creature, and a
worm most abject.

Behold Lord, I have naught, and of my self I am naught worth. Thou art only
God, righteous and holy; thou orderest all things, thou give all things, and
thou fulfillest all things with goodness.

I am a sinner, barren and void of godly virtues.

Remember thy mercies, and fill my heart with plenty of thy grace. For thou will not that thy works in me should be made in vain.

How may I bear the misery of this life, except thy grace and mercy do
comfort me?

Turn not thy face from me, defer not the visiting of me; ne withdraw not
thy comforts, least happily my soul be made as dry earth, without the water
of grace.

Teach me (Lord) to fulfill thy will, to live meekelie, and worthily before
thee. For thou art all my wisdom and cunning, thou art he that know me as I
am, that knew me before the world was made, and before I was borne or
brought into this life. To thee (O Lord) be honor, glory, and praise for ever
and ever:

Amen.
A certain effectual prayer, made by the Lady Jane Dudley, in the time of
her trouble, a little before her death.
O Lord, thou GOD and father of my life, hear me poor and desolate Woman,
which flies unto thee only in all my troubles and miseries. Thou, O Lord,
art the only defender and deliverer of those that put their trust in thee. And
therefore I, being defiled with sin, encumbered with affliction, unquieted
with troubles, wrapped in cares, overwhelmed with miseries, vexed with
temptations, and greeuouslie tormented with the long imprisonment of this vile
mass of claie, my sinful body and blood, do come unto thee O merciful
Savior, craving thy mercy and help; without the which, so little hope of
deliverance is left, that I may utterly despair of any liberty. Albeit, it
is expedient, that seeing our life stands upon trieng, we should be visited
sometime with some adversity, whereby we might both be tried, whether we be of
thy flock or no, and also know thee, and our selves the better: yet thou that
said, that thou would not suffer us to be tempted above our power; be
merciful unto me now, a miserable wretch, I beseech thee; which with Solomon
do cry unto thee, humbly desiring thee, that I may neither be too much puffed
up with prosperity; neither too much pressed down with adversity, least I
being too full, should deny my God; or being too low brought, should
despair, and blaspheme thee my Lord and Savior.

O merciful God, consider my misery best known unto thee, and be thou now
unto me a strong tower of defense, I humbly require thee. Suffer me not to be
tempted above my strength and power, but either be thou a deliverer unto me out
of this great misery, either else give me grace patiently to bear thy heavy
hand, and sharp correction. It was thy right hand, O God, yt delivered the
people of Israel out of the hands of Pharao, which for the space of four
hundred years, did oppress them, and keep them in bondage. Let it therefore
like wise seem good to thy fatherly goodness, to deliver me, sorrowful wretch
(for whom thy son Christ shed his precious blood on the Cross) out of this
miserable captivity and bondage, wherein I am now.

How long will thou be absent? For ever? Oh Lord, have thou forgotten to be
gracious, and have thou shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure* Will thou
be no more entreated? Is thy mercy clean gone for ever, and thy promise come
utterly to an end for evermore? Why do thou make so long tarieng? Shall I
despair of thy mercy oh God? Far be that from me. I am thy workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus; give me grace therefore to tarry thy leisure, and
patiently to bear thy works: assuredly knowing, that as thou can, so thou will deliver me, when it shall please thee, nothing doubting nor mistrusting
thy goodness toward me. For thou wotest better what is good for me, than I
do.

Therefore do with me in all things what thou will, and plague me what way
thou will; only in the mean time arm me, I beseech thee, with thine armor,
yt I may stand fast, my loins being girded about with verity, having on the
brestplate of righteousness, and shod with the shoes prepared by the Gospel of
peace: above all things taking to me the shield of faith, wherewith I may be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; and taking the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is thy most holy word, praieng
always with all manner of prayer and supplication, that I may refer my self
wholly unto thy will, abiding thy pleasure, and comforting my self in those
troubles that it shall please thee to send me; seeing such troubles be
profitable for me, and seeing I am assuredly persuaded, that it cannot be but
well all that thou do. Hear me, oh merciful father, for his sake, whom
thou would should be a slain sacrifice for my sins, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever:

Amen.
An exhortation written by the Lady JANE, the night before she suffered, in
the end of the new Testament in Greek, which she sent to her sister the Lady
Katherine.
I Have here sent you, good sister Katherine, a Book, which although it be not
outwardly trimmed with gold, yet inwardly it is more worth than precious
stones. It is the book (dear sister) of the law of the Lord; it is his
Testament and last will, which he bequeathed unto us wretches, which shall
lead you to the path of eternal joy. And if you, with a good mind read it,
and with an earnest desire follow it, it shall bring you to an immortal and
everlasting life. It will teach you to live, and learn you to die. It shall
win you more than you should have gained by the possessions of your woeful
fathers land. For as, if God had prospered him, you should have inherited all
his lands; so if you apply diligently this book, seeking to direct your life
after it, you shall be an inheritour of such riches, as neither the covetous
shall withdraw from you, neither the thief shall steal, neither yet the
moths corrupt. Desire with David (good sister) to understand the law of the
Lord your God, live still to die, that you by death may obtain eternal life:
or after your death enioie the life purchased you by Christ's death. And trust
not that the tenderness of your age shall lengthen your life. For as soon, if
God call, goes the young as the old. And labor alwaie to learn to die, deny
the world, defy the devil, despise the flesh, and delight your self only in
the Lord. Be penitent for your sins, and yet despair not; be strong in faith,
and yet presume not: and desire with Saint Paul to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, with whom in death there is life. Be like the good servant, and
even at midnight be waking, least when death comes, and steals upon you
like a thief in the night, you be with the evil servant found sleeping: and
least for lack of oil in your lamp, ye be found like to the five foolish
virgins, and like him that had not on the wedding garment; and then be cast out
from the marriage. Rejoice in Christ, as I trust you do. And seeing you have the
name of a Christian, as near as you can, follow the steps of your master
Christ, and take up your cross; lay your sins on his back, and always
embrace him. And as touching my death, rejoice, as I do (good sister) that I
shall be delivered of this corruption, and put on incorruption. For I am
assured, that I shall for losing of a mortal life, win an immortal life, the
which I pray God grant you, and send you of his graces, to live in his fear,
and to die in the true christian faith, from the which in Gods name I exhort
you that ye never swerve, neither for hope of life, nor fear of death. For if
ye will deny his truth to lengthen your life, God will deny you, and yet
shorten your days. And if ye will cleave to him, he will prolong your days,
to your comfort, and his glory. To the which glory God bring me now, and you
hereafter, when it shall please God to call you. Farewell good sister, and put
your only trust in God, who only must help you.

Your loving sister, Jane Dudley.

* Certain verses written by the said Lady Jane with a pin.
Non aliena putes homini quae obtingere possunt,
Sors hodierna mihi, cras erit illa tibi.
JANE DVDLEY.
Deo iuuante, nil nocet liuor malus:
Et non iuuante, nil iuuat labor grauis.
Post tenebras spero lucem.
Her prayer that she said at the time of her death, was the 51. Psalm of David
here after following, entitled, Miserere mei Deus, Have mercy upon me O God:
which in most devout manner she said to the very end: with these her last
words: LORD, into thy hands I command my spirit.

Morning and Evening prayers, with diverse Psalms, Hymns, and Meditations,
made and set forth by the Lady ELIZABETH Tyrwhit.
A Confession to be said before Morning prayer.
I Do acknowledge, and confess unto thee, O most merciful and heavenly
father, mine often and grievous offenses that I have committed against thy
divine Majesty, from my youth hitherto, in thought, word and deed; leaving
undone those things, which I ought and should have done; and doing those
things which I ought not to have done: provoking thy wrath and indignation
against me. And now lamenting this my wickedness; I appeal unto thy mercy, and
say with the Publicane, O Lord GOD be merciful unto me a most wretched
sinner, forgive all that is past, save and defend me from evil, and confirm
me in good life, to the glory of thy name: So be it.

A prayer to be said at our vprising.
I Do thank thee, my most merciful and heavenly Father, by thy dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ, that this night thou have given me sleep and rest,
preserving me from hurt and peril. I cry thee mercy for mine offenses, and
most humbly beseech thee, that thou will likewise this day keep me from
sin and all evil, so that all my thoughts, words and works may please thee.
I do commit my self, both body and soul, and all things that I go about
into thy hands; beseeching thee that thine holy spirit may abide with me,
least my deadly adversary the devil have power over me,

Amen.
Another prayer at our vprising.
OBlessed Jesus, this day I commend me and all my proceedings into thy hands:
this day I most humbly pray thee to help me, which have made me to thine
own image, and in thy blood have cleansed me, which art my hope in
heauiuinesse, my comfort in care, and trust in trouble. Although sweet Lord,
my conscience accuses me, and the law condemns me, yet thy precious death
and testament has delivered me, with thee to reign in glory, after death
has arrested me, and the earth consumed me; yet good Lord, I trust in the
resnrrection to dwell with thee eternally, through thy promise made to me, and
to all that do believe in thee, and call upon thy holy name. Thy kingdom
come this day to me, from Satan deliver me, with the bread of Angels feed
me, from fleshly lusts purge me, from sudden death and deadly sin, O Lord
take me. Give me an heart to believe in thee, and that all my senses may obey
thee, and of thy mercy accept my prayers this day before thee, which art one
God in Trinity, to whom be all honor and glory,

Amen.
The Hymn or prayer to the son of God.
THe beamie sun large light does give, and chase away the night:
So bless us with thy benefits, endue us with thy spirit.
Sweet dews from heaven to earth God grant, of peace and quiet mind,
That we may serve the living God, as his statutes do bind.
O mighty Lord our help at need, drive far away the feend:
That sin nor hell do us molest, when as our life shall eend.
Thou art the ever lasting day, which shinst in every place:
And feedest every living wight, with plentious gifts of grace.
Into thy heavenly hands dear God, my spirit I do commend:
This day from sin and Satan's power, thy servant me defend.
We laud thee Father for thy grace,
We praise the Son which made us free:
We thank the holy Spirit for our solace,
Which is one God and persons three.
An Antheme.
HIs deerlie beloved son God did not spare; but for us all delivered him. How
shall he not with him give us all things also?

A prayer to God the father to be used before Morning prayer.
OUr merciful father, which in teaching us to pray, by thy son Christ, have
commanded us to call thee father, and to believe that we are thy beloved
children, who stirrest up none of thine to pray, but to the intent that thou
would hear them, giving unto us also all things more effectually and
plentiouslie, than we can either ask or think. We do beseech thee, for thy
sons sake, to give us grace to believe, and know assuredly, that thy son
our Savior Christ, is given of thee unto us to be our Savior, our
righteousness, our wisdom, our holiness, our redemption, and our satisfaction.
O Lord suffer us not to trust in any other salvation, but in thy son our
Savior Jesus Christ: So be it.

The Hymn of our redemption by Christ.
PRaise we our father lovingly, which gently us preserved:
When we forsook him wretchedlie, and death by sin deserved.
His mercy was so bountious, that though we from him fell:
Freely in Christ he pardoned us, and us redeemd from hell.
Glory be to the Trinity, the Father, Son, and spirit living:
Which art one God and persons three, to whom be praise without ending,
Amen.
A form of private Morning Prayer. Our father which art in heaven, etc.
O Lord open thou my lips, that my mouth may speak and show forth that which
is to thy glory and praise. And shut my mouth from speaking of any thing,
whereby I should offend thy divine majesty, or be hurtful to my neighbor. O
God make speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
Praise ye the Lord. Thanks be given to God.
The first Psalm at Morning Prayer.
O Lord hear my words, mark my crieng, O my King and my God, for unto thee
only come I to pray: neither do I look for succor any where else than of
thee.

O Lord, I beseech thee, that thou will graciously hearken to my petitions,
that thy grace may spring in my heart with the morrow light of thy comfort, the
night of care and perturbation being ouerpassed: suffer me not to perish with
the ungodly folk whom thou cursest.

I come running to thee, not trusting in mine own righteousness; but to thy
great and manifold mercies.

O Lord with the rule of thy justice will I be directed. For thy name sake make
plain thy way before me, and my way before thee; least the spirit of malice
do turn me thence.

Let them rejoice that repose themselves and trust always in thy mercy; let
them sing Hymns and Psalms, which do glory and rejoice in thee, let them
triumph which love thy name.

Defend me, O Lord, with thy grace, as with a shield in time of peril; to the
intent that when I am assaulted with them, I may yet with constant cheer grow
up unto my full perfection.

Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
The second Psalm.
OH Lord GOD and father, I beseech thee by Christ our Lord, that of thine
infinite mercy thou keep me, so as at no time I follow the counsel of the
ungodly, which know thee not; or of Hypocrites, which with their hearts seek
thee not.

O Lord, suffer me not to enter into the way of sinners, with a mind to
fulfill the desires and lusts of the flesh.

But whenever through frailty of my corrupt nature. I shall chance to run
astraie, then O Lord, stay me, and pluck my foot back again.

Keep me, that I sit not in the seat of pestilent scorners, which cloaking
their Pharisaicall and devilish intents, condemn in other men thy verity and
Gospel.

Oh Lord, bring to pass that I may burn in the desire of thy law, that upon
the advancement of thy word my mind may always be occupied, that I may
evermore choose that which is most pleasant to thee, and hate that both in my
self and others, which to thee is displeasant.

Make I pray thee that I may be a tree planted by the sweet rivers of thy
ghostly waters, to the intent I may bring forth fruit to thy glory, and to
the profit of my neighbor, as often as thou shall minister time and occasion
thereunto.

Least my leaves, which are my words and works should fade and fall away; but
that all things may prosper, whatsoever I shall do in thy name.

Assist me, I beseech thee, and grant O most merciful father, that for Jesus
Christ's sake I may take root in the ground of life; least with the ungodly,
like chafe and dust I be blown abroad with the most pernicious winds of this
world.

And grant that I may stand in the assembly of the righteous, and that I may
enter into judgment without punishment; and escape everlasting damnation.

Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the begin, etc.
The third Psalm.
TO thee, O Lord, I lift up my mind, in thee I trust, O Lord God; let me not be
confounded, least mine enemies make me a jesting stock, and a matter to laugh
at.

O Lord make thy ways known unto me, and trade me in thy paths.

Direct me in thy truth, and instruct me; for thou art God my Savior, I look
after thee every day.

O Lord thou art sweet and rightful, and bring again into the way them
which went out.

Thou leadest strait into thy judgment, them that be mild and tractable, and
teach them that be meek thy word and testimonies.

Thou healest them that be contrite in heart, and asswagest their pains and
grief.

Thou hold up all them which else should fall, and all that are fallen thou
liftest up again.

Thou give sight to the blind, and loosest them that be bound.

Thou art nigh unto all them that call upon thee, so that they call upon thee
faithfully.

Thou fulfillest the desire of them that do fear thee, and hear their
prayer, and sauest them.

Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me, for in thee my soul trusts.

Uerelie my soul has a special respect to thee. For my health, my glory,
and all my strength comes from thee.

For thine own sake, oh Lord God, lay not my sins to my charge.

I understand not all mine errors, innumerable troubles do close me round
about, my sins have taken hold upon me, and I am not able to look up.

Put to thy hand to help me, and lead me right in all my works.

Make me to walk perfectly in thy ways, that no kind of sin overcome me.

Set a watch before my mouth; and keep the door of my lips.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be ever pleasant and
acceptable in thy sight.

Let the word of truth never go away from my mouth, and suffer no malice to
dwell in my heart.

O Lord deliver my soul from lieng lips, and save me from the deceitful
tongue.

Put into my mouth thy true and holy word, and take from me all idle and
unfruitful speech.

Deliver me from false surmises and accusations of men: rule me even as thou
think good, after thy will and pleasure.

Turn away mine eyes, that they behold no vain things; fasten them in thy
way.

Take from me fornication and all uncleanness, and let not the love of the
flesh beguile me.

Yea deliver my soul from pride, that it do not reign in me, and then shall
I be clean from the greatest sin.

Stay and keep my feet from every evil way, least my steps swerve from
thy paths.

Mine eyes look ever unto thee, O Lord, because thou art nigh at hand, and all
thy ways be the truth.

Thy mercies be great and many, O Lord, blessed is he whosoever trusts in
thee.

For when I said unto thee, My feet be slipped, thy mercy, O Lord, by and by
did hold me up.

Teach me to do thy will, and lead me by thy path-waie, for thou art my God.

Oh Lord, save my soul, and deliver me from the power of darkness.

Let the brightness of thy face shine upon thy servant, for unto thee, O Lord
God, I have fled for succor.

Look unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and poor.

Keep my soul and deliver me, that I be not confounded. For I have trusted in
thee.

O Lord God, forsake me not, although I have done no good in thy sight.

For thy goodness grant me, that at the leastwise now I may begin to live
well.

O Lord show thy servants thy works, and their children thy glory; and the
gracious majesty of the Lord our God be upon us. Oh prosper thou the works of
our hands, oh prosper thou our handie works.

Glory be to the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
A contemplation of Christ's Passion.
O What love and mercy of man undeserved from God the father, through his
only son Jesus Christ, by whose flesh and blood we have clean remission of
our offenses; when we call to mind this mystery of our redemption, and our
sufficient sacrifice, whereby sin, death and hell be put to exile; and grace,
mercy and peace be obtained! For this we have not only occasion to lament our
selves, which were the very causes why Jesus did lament in care, and became
poor in body, sweat water and blood against his death, prayed in affliction,
and suffered for our redemption: but also to give daily thanks, and to rejoice
to God the father, for this his son, by whom we have fellowship with Angels,
and are become Citizens of the saints, and of the household of God, partakers of
everlasting life for ever. O happy be they which forget not this heavenly
Philosophy, this giltlesse passion of Jesus Christ! To know and believe this,
is life everlasting, and the quietness of conscience. This passion is our
riches in poverty, and help in adversity, and only life in death. By this
his painful affliction, were all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, and
every believing body saved, that ever was, or shall be; without which all
flesh is damned and accursed. Now sweet Christ, for this thy blessed oblation,
have mercy on me now and in the hour of death; that in the dreadful day of
judgment, sin, death and hell may not prevail against me sinful creature,
but have mercy upon me, according to thy greatest mercy, which is this thy
death and passion, for which be praise to the holy Trinity for ever and ever,

Amen.
The Hymn of the passion of Christ.
Jesus which is the lively well of wisdom,
And the heavenly truth of the father eternal,
Which from heaven to this world did come,
To deliver us thrales from pains infernal,
Of Judas was sold, and of the Jews taken,
And of his Disciples at midnight was forsaken.
We laud thee father for thy grace,
We praise the son which made us free,
We thank the holy spirit for our solace,
Which is one God and persons three.
In the dawning of the day they did him fast bind,
And before Pilate he was then conuented,
False witness against Jesus they did then find,
When the cruel Seniours in judgment him presented,
Beaten was his body, defiled was his face,
And yet God and man, the very well of grace.
We laud thee father, etc.
When three hours were past, before Pilates throne,
All the people cried, Kill Jesus the Jews king,
His crown was thorns, in purple he made moan,
With a cross over Cedron they did him bring,
And prepared his deadly place on Galgatha hill,
To suffer pains for Adams gilt, so was his fathers will.
We laud thee father, etc.
The sirt hour approached his painful end,
When on the tree his body they nailed,
In heaven was his help, in earth he had no freud,
He died between two thieves, on him the Elders railed,
Then he thirsted for his elect, which subject were to thrall,
Unthankefullie they offered him vinegre mingled with gall.
We laud thee father, etc.
This very God, Gods only begotten child,
Said to his father, Why have thou me forsaken?
Yet receive this sacrifice, and my spirit vndefild:
The heavens were darkened, asunder the stones were shaken.
Blood and water then sprang from this blessed lamb,
Then graves opened, the dead alive forth came.
We laud thee father for thy grace, etc.
The second Meditation or prayer of our frailty and misery.
O Miserable wretched woman that I am, how may I be compared to any of thy
saints that shall dwell in thy Tabernacle or holy hill? For they love to be in
holy contemplation: and I in the vain multitude, forgetting thee: they be
meek, and I impatient: they do not forget thee, but my good Lord, when do I
remember thee, but when affliction enforces me; or the lamentable fall of my
breethren constrain me to thank thee? Thou most mighty and fearful God of
hosts, thy holy name be blessed forever, Amen. What shall I say my God? Thou
art most good, and I evil; thou holy, and I miserable; thou art light, and I
am blind; thou art the blessed joy, and I am careful and full of sorrow. My
Lord, thou art the Physician, and I the miserable patient; I am nothing but
vanity and corrupt, as every living man is. What shall I say (O Creator) but
this, that I am thy creature, and shall I perish? Thy hands have made me, and
were wounded for me; thy blood was shed for me, and has washed me; thy holy
Ghost has sanctified me, and taught me: yet Lord, my days are nothing. What
should I mortal creature thus talk with my self, Lord God, but that need
has no law? Sorrow has compelled me to seek comfort, sickness enforces me
to follow the Physician, conscience pricketh me to cry to thee my Lord for a
heavenly cordial of comfort, which am in great discomfort, borne of a woman,
full of misery and shortness of time, and pass away like a shadow, never
content with one estate, but in earth remain for ever.

The Hymn to God the Creator.
O Creator, to thee thy creature I call,
Who made of mould do live in pain,
And sick in soul, my flesh is thrall,
O woe is me, my days be vain:
Yet unto God I call for grace,
My soul in heaven to have a place.
A prayer to the blessed Trinity. Let us pray.
O Holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three equal, and coeternall persons,
but one God almighty, have mercy upon me vile, abject, abominable, and
sinful wretch, meekelie acknowledging before thy divine Majesty my long
continued life in sin, even from my childhood hitherto. Then good gracious
Lord, as thou give me the grace to acknowledge them; so give me grace not in
word only, but in heart also, with sorrowful contrition to repent, and utterly
to forsake them. Forgive me also those sins, through which by mine own
fault, wicked affection, and evil custom, my reason is with sensuality so
blinded, as I cannot discern them for sin. Illuminate my heart (good Lord)
and give me grace to acknowledge them. Forgive me my sins negligentlie
forgotten, and bring them to my mind, with grace to be thoroughly repentant for
them.

O merciful God, grant me thy grace so to despise sin, and all worldly
vanities, that I may say with the blessed Apostle Saint Paul: The world is
crucified to me, and I to the world; Christ is to me life, and to die is my
gain and advantage; I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. Lord give me
thy grace to amend my life, and to have an eye to mine end, without any
grudge, or fear of death, which to them that die in thee, is the gate of
eternal life.

Almighty God, teach me to do thy will; take my right hand, and lead me in
the true way from mine: draw me after thee, bind my mouth with snaffle and
bridle, when I will not draw unto thee. Oh gracious God, all sinful fear,
all sinful sorrow and pensiveness, all sinful hope, all sinful mirth and
gladness take away from me. On the other side, concerning such fear, such
heaviness, such comfort, consolation, and gladness, as shall be profitable
for my soul, do with me according to thy great goodness.

O Lord give me grace, in all my fear and agony, to have recourse to that
great fear and wonderful agony that thou my savior had at the Mount of
Oliuet, before thy most bitter passion; and in the meditation thereof to
conceive ghostly comfort and consolation, profitable for my soul. Almighty
God, take from me all vainglorious minds, all appetites of mine own praise,
all envy, couetise, gluttony, sloth and lechery, all wrathful affection,
all appetite of revenging, all desire of delight of other men's harms, all
pleasure in provoking any person to wrath and anger: all delight in taunting
or mocking any person in their affliction or trouble. And give unto me, O
Lord, an humble, quiet, peaceable, patient, charitable, kind, tender, and
pitiful mind, in all my words, my works, and thoughts, to have a taste of thy
holy and blessed spirit.

Give me good Lord a full faith, a firm hope, a fervent charity, a love to
thee, good Lord, incomparable, above the love of my self, that I may love
nothing to thy displeasure, but every thing in a due order to thee. Give me
good Lord, a longing to be with thee, not for the avoiding of the calamities of
this wretched world, nor so much for the avoiding of the pains of hell,
neither so much for the obteining of the kingdom of heaven, in respect of mine
own commodity: as even for very love of thee. And bear me good Lord, thy
love and favor, which thing my love to thee-ward (were it never so great) could
not but of thy great goodness deserve. And pardon me good Lord, that am so bold
to ask thee so high petitions, being so vile and sinful a wretch, and so
unworthy to attain the lowest: but good Lord such they be, as I am bound to
desire and wish, and should be much nearer the effectual desire of them, if my
manifold sins were not the let, from which O glorious Trinity, vouchsafe of
thy goodness to wash me, with that blessed blood that thou my sweet savior
Jesus Christ did shed out of thy body, in the diverse torments of thy most
bitter passion, that by that same grievous passion, glorious resurrection and
ascension, I may come to that unspeakable joy, the which thou have prepared
for thy chosen and elect, through the same Jesus Christ our savior, to whom
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all honor
and glory world without end: So be it.

After prayer, say this conclusion, or Collect.
O God, that art the strength of such as trust in thee, mercifully assist us
that call upon thy name; and for as much as man's infirmity can do nothing
without thee, grant I most humbly beseech thee, the help of thy spirit, that
fulfilling thy commandments, both in will and deed, I may please thee, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: So be it.

The blessing.
OH Lord bless me and defend me, O Lord lift up thy countenance over me, and
be merciful unto me: O Lord lift up thy countenance over me and give me thy
peace, that in thy peace, O Lord, I may depart, to amend my life, and do unto
the poor as much as I can: give me grace to be at unity, in quietness, and
in charity with all thy chosen and elect people, and that thy fear, oh Lord,
may ever rest in my heart: So be it.

Praise unto God the Father, and peace unto the living: As they that depart in
thy faith, in thee do rest and have their being.
The end of Morning prayer.
EVENING PRAYER. A Confession to be said before Evening prayer.
O Father of heaven, O son of God redeemer of the world: O holy Ghost three
persons and one God; have mercy upon me most wretched caitife, and miserable
sinner. I have offended both heaven and earth, more than my tongue can
express. My sins (alas) are above all men's, both in number and greatness,
which I have committed. Whither then may I go? Or whither should I fly? To
heaven I may be ashamed to lift up my face, and in earth I am not worthy to
find a place of refuge or succor. To thee therefore, O Lord, do I run; to
thee do I humble my self, saying; O Lord my God, my sins be great and
innumerable: but yet have mercy upon me for thy great mercy. The great
mystery that God became man, was not wrought for little or few offenses. Thou
did not give thy son, O heavenly Father, unto death for small sins
only, but for all the greatest sins in the world: so that the sinner return
unto thee with his whole heart, as I do here at this present. Wherefore have
mercy upon me, O God, whose property is alwaie to have mercy: wherefore have
mercy upon me O Lord, for thy great mercy. I crave nothing, O Lord, for mine
own merits, but for thy name sake, that it may be hallowed thereby, and for thy
dear son Jesus Christ's sake, and now therefore: Our father of heaven
hallowed, etc.

A prayer to be said in the Evening.
MOst merciful and heavenly father, I thank thee by thy son Jesus Christ,
that this day thou have given me all things needful both for my soul and
body, preserving me from all hurt and peril. I ask thee mercy for mine
offenses, and I most humbly beseech thee, that thou will likewise this night
keep me from sin and all evil, so that all my thoughts, my words and works
may please thee. I do commit my self both body and soul, and all that I go
about, into thy hands. I beseech thee that thy holy spirit may be with me,
least my deadly adversary have any power over me,

Amen.
Another Evening prayer.
O Sovereign, dreadful, and most loving Lord my God, who never ceasest to
show thy mercy toward sinners, yea when they offend and trespass against
thee, such is thine infinite clemency and love. As then thou forbearest not to
heap thy benefits upon them; I most sinful and wretched wretch, yield thee
humble thanks, for thine inestimable goodness showed toward me, in creating
me to thine own likeness, and making me capable of thine everlasting glory:
for the creation of so many other creatures for my behoof and sustenance, for
that inestimable work of my redemption, whereby thou deliuerest me from the
slavery of Satan, and purchasest me free entrance into thy celestial
region: for having singled me amongst so many millians that know thee not, and
lie drowned in ignorance, superstition, and miserable errors, to be thy
servant and a true faithful Christian: for both thy blessed Sacraments,
especially for that Sacrament above all Sacraments, wherein thou thy self art
spirituallie contained. Finally, for having preserved me so many times from
hell, wherein I had been long since plunged, had not thou of thine
unspeakable goodness sustained and delivered me from my foes. For these and
all other thy benefits: namely, for those thou have this day most
bountifully bestowed upon me, O my sovereign Lord, I yield thee such sincere
and dutiful thanks as my poor heart can possibly afford thee: beseeching
thee to have mercy upon me, and in supply of my wants to accept the mediation
and thankesgiuings of Jesus Christ thy only son, and mine only Savior
and intercessour.

And now mine only redeemer and Savior I humbly crave the light of thy
grace, to know wherein I have this day any ways offended thee by nature;
and that by sound discussion, and through examination of my conscience, I may
see mine own sins with sorrow and detestation; and thine ineffable mercy
with a zealous and firm purpose of amendment of life. Thou see, O Lord, my
lewdness, and wotest my misery, much better than I my self do. Sorry I am
with all my heart, that I should still offend so loving a Lord, and wish to God
my sorrows were greatly multiplied. I purposed erst, to do better by thy
grace, which wanted not, and yet have I transgressed in my former trespasses:
neither yet may I despair, O Lord, but will continually trust to thy mercies
in all events, and purpose firmly, as I now do, every day to amend my life.

Deliver me, my gracious God, from all mortal sin for ever, and give me
grace to persecute my vices with sorrow during life. And for the satisfaction
of these and all my former sins, as also for all thine ineffable benefits
bestowed upon me and all mankind; I offer unto thee the merits of thy bitter
passion, those most precious drops of blood thou sheddest for me; and that
inflamed charity, wherewith thou wholly resignedst thy self to all thy
torments, for my sake; and in the union of this thine oblation on the cross, I
offer up my self, soul, body, and all I have of thine, within or without me,
to thine honor and everlasting glory. I retain nothing to my self: but give
all to thee, whose it is; and make that thine by my will, which is thine of
justice. Give me thy grace, O my God, to live better herafter, and to confess
my sins in due time unto thee. Give me true humility, continual repentance,
and grace both to know thee, and also my self. Give me purity of heart in all
my doings, patience, chastity, and perfect charity. Give me a good life, and
a good death, and in the dangerous hour of my departure, the assistance of thy
blessed Saints and Angels, with whom I may, through thy mercy, in another
world praise and glorify thee everlastingly,

Amen.
The Hymn or prayer to God the Father.
BLessed be God father of heaven,
Which has strengthened his feeble flock:
With steadfast faith, and boldness even,
To bear his cross, burden and yocke.
These are the last days perilous,
Freely Christ's Gospel to profess:
Come down Lord shortly to judge us,
And take us from the heaviness.
An Antheme.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

A prayer to God the Father to be used before Evening prayer.
O Merciful Lord and loving Father, without whose aid and motion, I am not
able to stir one member toward heavenly service, the burden of this slow and
sinful flesh does so ouercharge my weak soul. According to thy fatherly
pity look upon me, O God, and quicken my dull spirit with thy grace, to rise
out of this mirie puddle, and to come before thy presence in humble repentance,
craving thy mercy for my miserable sins and wickedness, that being released
in the blood and righteousness of Jesus Christ, I may ioifullie serve, honor,
and praise thine eternal Majesty, through thy dear son my merciful Lord
and redeemer, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all glory and thanks
for ever,

Amen.
The Hymn of our redemption by Christ.
PRaised be God for his exceeding favor,
Which has given us his son to be our Savior,
We are sinners, unrighteous, foolish, and fleshly,
Christ is our mercie-stoole, righteousness, and wisdom verelie.
We are unclean, holden under the danger of death and sins exaction,
Christ is our holiness, our life, our redemption and satisfaction.
Glory be to thee, O Lord, borne of the undefiled virgin,
Glory be to the Father, and to the holy Ghost, our souls surgin: So be it.
A form of Private Evening prayer. Our Father which art in heaven, etc.
Convert us our Savior, and turn away thy wrath from us. O God make speed
to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.


Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the be, etc. Praise ye the Lord.
Thanks be given unto God.
The first Psalm at Evening prayer.
BOw down thine ear, O Lord, to my requests, and suffer me to exhibit my
supplication up unto thee. For behold, night and day I trace and hunt after
thee by all means I can. To thee only early and late do I still call and
cry for mercy, according as thou have given me in commandment.

For when I call to memory the time of my life evil dispent, I quake to
think upon thee, yea and my spirit fails me, so sore am I afraid of thy
judgments.

Yet well pondering the process of thy grace and mercy promised me in Christ,
I cease to despair, knowing that thou, O GOD, have not forgotten thy gifts of
grace, and that thy power to have compassion is not waxen faint, but that both
thou can and wilt put back thy wrath most justly conceived against me for
my sin.

In full trust whereof O Lord I come unto thee, beseeching thee to hide my life
with Christ within thee, and under the shadows of thy wings to defend me, that
thy grace and covenant may be with me evermore.

Turn not thy mercy from me O Lord, nor bring me down to destruction as I
have deserved: but show thy grace and favor unto me, that I may live, and
(being exalted through thy righteousness) praise thy name most ioifullie.

Remember my corrupt nature O Lord, how short my life is, and that thou made
not man for nothing. No man can deliver himself from death: no man can save
his own soul from hell: thou only O Lord must do it, namely, to such as
believe in thee.

This life passes as does a dream, or grass in the field, which to day is
green, and to morrow dry. If thou be displeased, then we be lost: if thou
chafe, then we shrink for fear, for through sins we be dead unto thee; with
whom a thousand years be but as one day, yea as the least minute of an hour.

Certesse Lord, if thou have respect to our sins, who shall continue? Show me
therefore how many be the days of my life, that I may dispend them wisely,
to the praise of thy name, least that I foolishlie trusting upon long life,
suddenly might perish and come to death.

Come Lord now unto us, and comfort us. Come O God, and hide not thy face from
me, that I be not like unto those that be hurled into the pit of perdition. And
after this night of calamity ouerpassed, let the pleasant morning of comfort
luckily shine upon me, that betimes I may hear and feel thy goodness, for
in thee is all my trust.

Deliver me this night from the snare of Satan's guard, which hunt in the dark
how to pluck me from thee.

Let me not stand in the fear of the night-euill of unbelief, and of thy
strait judgment, neither let me be afraid of the fleeing arrowe in the day
time.

Let me not be in fear of that horrible pestilence, creeping in through
darkness, I mean, let me not be ignorant how detestable my sins be, that I
dissemble them not, nor qualify them.

Let me not dread that middaie devil, which abuses thy Church under a title
and pretense of holiness; neither let Satan, though he change himself into
an Angel of light, strike any fear in me.

But both on the right side and on the left, as well in the night as in the
day, that is, as well in adversity as prosperity, and as well in spiritual
business, as in corporal, let thy holy Angels diligently wait upon me, that
I do not stumble: then shall I tread underfoot that hellie dragon.

Yea so shall I of duty be bound alwaie with courageous spirit, to praise and
hallowe thy name: not only in the morrow, when all things shall chance to my
hearts desire, to ascribe all to thy goodness, without any deserving on my
behalf: but also in the night of trouble and adversity, when I shall call
unto mind thy most faithful and trusty promises, that I despair not, thus to
praise thy mere and special grace, and bless thee, saying:

Blessed art thou O Lord God of our fathers, for thou art praise and honor,
worthy, and to be magnified for ever.

Blessed be the glory of thy holy name, for it is worthy to be praised, and
above all to be magnified for ever.

Blessed art thou, O father, O Son, and O holy Ghost, for thou art worthy
to be praised, and above all to be magnified for ever.

Blessed be thou in the firmament of heaven, for thou art praise-worthie for
ever.

O give thanks unto the Lord all his creatures, for he is kind-harted and
merciful: yea his mercy endures for ever.

Oh speak good of the Lord all ye works of his in all places of his dominion:
and let every thing that has breath praise the Lord, and give him thanks: for
his mercy endures for ever.

O that all men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

Praise thou the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits, yea and all
that is within me praise his holy name, for his loving mercy and for his
truth, which endures for ever, and worlds without end,

Amen.
Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the begin, etc.
The second Psalm.
MY God, my God remember me, forsake me not, suffer me not to be lost, since
both night and day I cry to thee, hear me my Lord.

Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou helpedst them, whenever they called
upon thee, at no tune thou failedst them, but wast always at hand to assist
them.

Come forth father most dearly beloved in my heart, restore me from Satan's
kingdom.

Thou drewest me forth of my mothers womb, and have preserved me unto this
day.

Of thy benignity and mercy (which I beseech thee deny me not at this my
need) go not away from me, for anguish and pensiveness of heart draw nigh
unto me, and yet is there none that can help me, but thou only.

Let me escape from these dangers through thy Christ my savior, who for my
sake has suffered so spiteful and bitter pains, who for me was sore vexed,
cruelly scourged, wounded, nailed, and hanged on the cross.

Let me escape I say for his blood sake, which he so largely shed for us, to
cause us obtain forgiveness of our sins, and enioie the new and everlasting
covenant made betwixt thee and us.

Stand not far from me O Lord my refuge and strength: come near and help
me, deliver my life from the sword, and my soul from the wood dogs, from the
Lions jaws restore me, between the horns of the Unicornes hear thou me.

Then shall I blow abroad thy name with all praises unto my brethren, and in
the assembly of the holy persons I shall commend thee.

Despise not the prayers of the poor, turn not away thy face, hear my cry,
for I will record this thy goodness among the miserable, painful, and
troublesome consciences, that they thereof may take heart of comfort, grow in
hope, cleave more fervently unto thee, blow abroad thy most glorious name,
and give thee everlasting thanks for their salvation,

Amen.
Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.
The third Psalm.
OUT of the furthest angles of the earth on every side, thou shall with a
mighty voice call men to judgment Lord God omnipotent, to whom nothing is
hid.

Open our ears that we may hear this thy promise: I shall be your God.

In thee constantly believe we, with thy foison we be filled.

Prudentlie thou do declare and testify, that of our goods and sacrifices
thou have no need, and do not either regard or measure them: for all be
thine, and in thee it lies to make the things we now possess to be ours, or
not ours.

Thou only requirest sacrifices of thank sgiuing: let us therefore disclose
the bottom of our hearts to thee: let us knowledge thee to be our God.

Let us halowe thy name in all things, flow in thy word, render thanks both in
weal and woe, require thy succors in straits and necessities, in which time
thou have promised to help us: then shall we, so delivered, blase thy name.

Lord God most just, true of promise, and dearest Father: thee beseech I to
send succors unto me even of thine infinite goodness.

For thy renowmes sake, for Jesus Christ's sake thy beloved son, and for his
precious blood largely shed for us on the cross, have mercy upon me, so that
once purged I may come again in favor with thee.

Pity me, hear me out of the straits of this sinful flesh, wherewith on
every side I am hampered in.

Set me at large again, rid me from mine enemies, which seek to draw me
away from thy true service.

In thy comfort let me rejoice, and be full of spiritual joy: let me ever
brute thy name, not unmindful of thy benefits.

Relieve me most pitiful God, according to thy word, which is the truth.

Most tender father, show me that thy ioifull health.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the begin, etc.
The fourth Psalm.
THy clemency and blessing most mighty God we crave, and require of thee full
instantly.

Let thy countenance shine upon us, have compassion upon us, that here in earth
we may find out the way which leads unto thee, and may attain thy
salvation among the Gentiles.

O that all people would confess thee with loving hearts for thy manifold
benefits and pleasures, which they have received at thy hands, who do with
justice govern men, and art their leader upon earth!

Power down Lord thy goodness, and continual blessings upon us, and then
shall the earth yield unto thee glory and praise, and to us fruits for meat.

Thou God the father bless us, thou God the son bless us, and thou God the
holy Ghost bless us: yea thou holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, grant us
thy continual blessing.

O that all the coasts of the earth (Lord God) would fear and stand in awe of
thee!

Would God that we also might study to work no man either pleasure or
displeasure that should be against thy will; but that we may do all things
according to thy commandments!

Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the begin, etc.
A contemplation and prayer exclaming of the careful passions of the soul and
body.
WOE is me careful carcass and filthy defiled flesh, conceived and borne in
sin, deprived of original justice, compared to a beast, in Adam fallen as a
rotten apple from a living tree. What have I gotten by my fall? Darkness, care,
misery, affliction, sickness, pain, anguish, and finally dreadful death.
And alas, what shall I be hereafter? A stinking carrion, woormes meat, food
for fire, dust and claie, doong and forsaken, rotten and consumed, blind, poor
and naked, trodden under the feet of my posterity, and forgotten of all men,
not knowing where my body is, which shall vanish like a shadow, and my life
shall wither like a leaf, and fade as a flower.

O holy God, the more our bodies do increase, the nearer death does approach,
the clock of our conscience does ring every minute, the hour of death to be
at hand. Death approaches with his sharp dart and bloody chariot: Away
(says he) to every living wight. For what is he that shall not see death, and
come to nothing? Oh uncertain life; but most assured death! His net is cast
over all flesh: now I do rejoice, then I lament: now am I whole, then
sickness does come: now have I friends, then am I forsaken: now at liberty,
soon after in bondage: now young, then age draws near. And thus I never
remain in one state: made light and proud in prosperity, desperate in
adversity, withered and old with care, despised in poverty, flattered when I
am in health; and finally uncertain when or where I shall die. But yet I most
humbly pray thee dear father, for Jesus Christ's sake, which suffered a
shameful death for my sins, to have mercy upon me, according to thy great
mercy, and take not thy holy Ghost from me, and lead me not into temptation,
but deliver me: for into thy hands I commend my soul, O thou God of truth,

Amen.
An Hymn of the state of all Adams posterity.
I Am the fruit of Adams hands, through sin locked in satan's bands, Destined to
death, the child of ire, a flaming brand of infernal fire: Borne I was naked
and bare, and spend my time in sorrow and care, And shall return unto the
dust, and be deprived of carnal lust. Yet thou father did Jesus send, to
pardon them that did offend: We laud him in the work of might, that we be
blessed in his sight.

The second meditation of the dreadful day of judgment.
O What fear and sorrow shall happen to the reprobates, when they shall stand
helpelesse before the terrible and dreadful throne of God, to render accounts
of all thoughts, words and works, I say, the acts of the flesh and blood, in
the extreme day, when he shall come with fire; and then all creatures in
heaven, earth and hell, shall tremble at his presence. Then shall all guilty
consciences be opened, and evils endless punished, where that Judge will not
be corrupted. That day does come; that day is at hand, and where as pure
hearts shall be accepted, and no bribes of vain gifts shall be preferred, but
justice without mercy unto the ungodly, infernal torments to the wicked,
endless care and affliction to the idolater, fornicator, extortioner,
persecutour, disobedient, murderer, blasphemer, thief, false witness bearer,
usurer, heretics, witches and malefactors, and to all the vessels of
reprobation. Where as shall be heard wailing, crieng, lamenting and gnashing of
teeth: then they mourn that shall never die: hell fire never be quenched, nor
the Judge entreated; but the wicked still molested with dolor, agony, dread,
and in his pain absent from God, present with devils and monsters infernal.
This is the second death when both body and soul shall remain in pain, as
long as God is, which is everlasting. This day is at hand, when the elect and
all the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs and all the blessed shall receive
their rewards, not of themselves, but only of Jesus, before whom all the
blessed shall kneel and cast off their crowns, and give honor to him that
sits on the seat, whose holy name is blessed of all tongues and kindreds:
Amen, Amen. This is the day, when all tears shall be wiped from the careful
eyes of the servants of God, which shall never be molested, nor of worldlings
be afflicted, but everlastingly glorified, with the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, three persons and one God, who of his mercy defend us from
damnation, and that unspeakable pain, which we through sin have deserved,
ever to be punished withal: but yet are through Jesus preserved, by whom we
are elected, redeemed, justified, and brought from sin, death and hell: to
whom be laud and praise, in the world of worlds, of Angels and men:

Amen.
The Hymn of the day of judgment.
SWeet Jesus of thy mercy, our pitiful prayers hear:
That we may be on thy right hand, when thou shall appear.
For thou shall come with heavenly power, and sit on the throne:
None shall judge the quick and dead, but thou Christ alone.
O Christ cast us not away, in that day of ire:
When thou shall send before thee, a hot consuming fire.
To purge all creatures, defild with Adams sin:
Then a new heaven and earth, O Lord thou will begin.
Then the elect shall be blessed, upon thy holy hill:
But the wicked shall be damned, that have withstood thy will.
Thy sheep shall be safe, and defended in the fold:
The goats shall wander, in hunger, storm and cold.
Thy Saints shall behold thee, in thy throne of light:
The reprobates shall ever, have fearful things in sight.
Wailing in wretchedness, with everlasting pain:
Yet Lord be merciful, our lives are but vain.
Our flesh shall fade, death has digd our grave:
Yet of thy mercy Lord, thy sinful creature save.
And bless us in the time of grace, before the day of ire:
When the corrupt elements, shall be purgd with fire.
We laud thee Father, etc.
A general prayer, wherein we commend our selves, and the whole state of
Christ's Church unto GOD.
O God thou Father and God of my life, suffer me neither to have a proud look,
nor a proud thought; turn away all voluptuousness from me: let not the
intisements of the world beguile me; let not the concupiscence of the eye
deceive me; let not the lusts of the flesh take hold upon me; let not rancor
and malice reign in my heart. O Lord God, for thy son our Savior Jesus
Christ's sake, I beseech thee, that thou will not give me over to an unshamefast
and obstinate mind: So be it.

Unto thee Lord almighty, the King of mercy, be now and ever eternal honor
and glory. Unto thee the same Lord of mercy I do commit my soul and body,
most humbly beseeching thee, for thine abundant mercy sake, to take the cure
of me, and to have mercy on me. I do commit also unto thy mercy my faithful
friends and well-willers living, beseeching thee to forgive us all, and to have
mercy upon us, and give us grace to live according to thy law, and to the
glory of thy name, that we may do that, which thou requirest of us, that it
will please thee of thy mercy, to save and defend us from all perils, bodily
and ghostly this night and ever, and especially all things that shall turn
to thy displeasure. And with all my heart I thank thee most merciful Lord, for
the great benefits that thou have bestowed upon me largely in this world,
before many creatures, which are more worthy a thousand times than I: but my
most gracious Lord, I wot and knowledge verelie, that all good gifts do come
freely from thee, of thine abundant mercy. Wherefore with all my heart I
thank thee, and all worship, praises and thanks be to thee and none other.
Therefore I say with the Prophet David: Not unto us, Lord, not unto us: but
unto thy name be given all honor and glory.

Also I commit to thy mercy mine enemies, persecutors and slanderers,
beseeching thee to turn their hearts, and to give us grace one to forgive
another from the very botome of our hearts, that from hence-foorth we may live
in love and charity, to thy glory, and to the increase of thy kingdom.

I do commit to thy mercy our Queen Elizabeth, and this Realm, beseeching
thee to incline her heart to all godliness and virtue, that she may long reign
over us in peace and tranquillity, to live in thy fear, and call upon thy
holy name, and to be ready at all times to set forth thy blessed laws and
commandments: and that thou O omnipotent God, with thy mighty hand and
stretched out arm, wilt confound all Idolatry and superstition, and set up
thy true and holy religion, that thy faithful servants may triumph and
rejoice in thee with merry hearts, and sing unto thy praise, that this the
mighty hand of GOD has brought to pass, and to thy name give the honor and
glory, to whom all honor and glory is due.

I do commit unto thy mercy, all those that in this transitory life be in
sorrow, sickness, need, tribulation, or any other adversity, and specially
all those that for the profession of thy Gospel, and the defense of the saine,
do put their lives unto the edge of the sword. O Lord for thy mercies sake,
forgive them and us our offenses past, comfort them in their grievous
afflictions, strengthen them in their weakness, send them patience in their
tribulations, abate the pride of their and our enemies, assuage the malice of
them, confound their wicked devises, that we and they being armed with thy
mighty defense, may be preserved evermore from perils, to glorify thee, which
art the only giver of all victory, through ye merits of Christ: So be it.

I commit to thy mercy all those that do faithfully profess thy holy
Gospel, beseeching thee to give us grace to live according to thy laws, that
by well doing, we may stop the mouths of the ungodly adversaries of the
Gospel, and thereby win them to the right way, that we may all with one heart,
and one mouth, glorify thee, O Lord God in the day of visitation, to whom
all honor and glory is due.

And now O my most merciful Lord, and loving father, I finally commit unto
thy mercy my wretched soul and body, humbly beseeching thee to have mercy
upon me, according to thy great bountiful mercy: and according to the
multitude of thy tender compassions, do away I beseech thee my most grievous
iniquities.

Unto God the father, the son and the holy Ghost, be now and ever eternal
honor and glory, world without end,

Amen.
A prayer at night going to bed.
THe God of Angels and men, the founder of all creatures visible and invisible,
in whose hand is life and death, light and darkness, and all the motions of
soul and body, without whom there is no good gift, nor perfect quietness of
conscience, but only vanity and vexation of mind, and utter confusion of
soul and body, and final torments in the horrible pit of darkness: now my
Lord God, darkness does approach, this day has lost his beauty, I as
unworthy of thy benefits, most humbly pray thee this night to bless me, and
with thy holy Angels assist me, thy holy spirit this night lighten me, which
have of earth made me, and by thy creatures do nourish me, and with thy
blood have consecrated me with thee to dwell eternally in glory, when death
has dissolved me, which am but vanity, etc. And banish Satan from me, that
neither mine own conscience now vex me, nor mine old offenses trouble me. I
most humbly beseech thee this night to pardon me, which have sore offended
thee, in thought, word and deed, against thy divine majesty, which sore
repents me. Save me good Lord this night sleeping, from dreadful dreams,
and painful slumber deliver me, that I may awake in Christ, and rest in
peace: So be it.

The Hymn or prayer for night.
PRaise ye the Lord his servants all, lift up to him your hands,
The night singers in Gods courts, in all Christian lands.
Praise we the Lord our God and king, which made the earth and heaven,
His blessing be on us this night, which made the planets seven.
Into thy hands O Lord our God, our souls we do commend,
This night from sin and Satan's power, thy mercy us defend.
We laud thee Father for thy grace,
We praise the Son which made us free:
We thank the holy Spirit for our solace,
Which is one God and persons three:
Amen.
Another Hymn or prayer to be said when ye go to bed.
I Go to bed, I hope to sleep, God knows when I shall rise,
My soul, O Lord, defend and keep, from it turn not thine eyes.
This day I have committed sin, a hundred times and more:
I was conceived and borne therein, forgive me Lord therefore.
To thee I will my soul betake, sinful it is to see,
For I do know thou can it make, as pure as need to be.
Forgive me mine offenses all, my soul, Lord, do not kill,
To thee I will betake my soul, accept my zealous will.
Thy pardon Lord I trust to have, as David had and mo,
My soul I trust thou will now save, from death and damned woe.
In thee O God I put my trust, to guide and aid me still,
To keep me always true and just, according to thy will.
Thou God of might, and great renown, I trust thou will me keep,
Lord with thy leave I will lie down, to take my rest and sleep.
So be it. M. W.

The Antheme.
WE look for our savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our
vile body, that it may be like to his glorious body, according to the power
whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Amen.

Let us pray. Lord have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have
mercy upon us.


* Our Father which art in heaven, etc.
VIsit we beseech thee O Lord, this our dwelling, and drive from it all the
assaults of our enemy: let thy holy Angels dwell in it, which may keep us all
this night in thy peace, and ever let thy blessing be upon us. Grant this O
most merciful father, for thy sons sake, Jesus Christ, who with thee, and
the holy Ghost, lives and reigns one God world without end,

Amen.
Save us O good Lord waking, and keep us sleeping, and be so merciful to us,
that with Christ we may wake, and quietly to rest in peace, So be it.

The conclusion after Evening prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ that art in heaven perfect God and man, hear my prayers,
have mercy upon me, and pray unto thy father for me. Be thou my merciful
mediator unto thy father, that I might find mercy for my sins at all times,
and thy holy Angels to guide me this night, and all the time and days of my
life, and at the general day of judgment, that I may be partaker of that
ioifull voice of thine, saying, Come hither ye blessed, and possess
everlasting life,

Amen.
The Blessing.
GOD, even our own GOD bless us: and grant unto us, and all our faithful
and dear friends, his continual benediction and health.

Yea let thy mighty hand and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still my defense;
thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son my salvation;
thy true and holy word my instruction; thy grace and holy spirit my comfort
and consolation unto the end, and in the end: So be it.

Certain godly sentences written by the Lady E. T.
Use invocation of Gods holy name. Think upon the needy once a day. The
life to come forget not. Further the just suit of the poor. Prefer Christ his
kingdom. Offend not in evil doing. Set little by the judgment of man: but
fear the judgment of God. Be at peace with all men. Use to be acquainted with
the godly. Help to pacify displeasure. Hastily judge not any body. Kill
anger with patience. With pity rebuke. Make much of modesty. Harbor a
harmless heart. Let no good deed. Speak in season. He that keeps his mouth,
keeps his life. In being well occupied, think not long. Lose as little time
as ye may. Be always one. Favor the friendlesse. Be not unthankful. Trust
not the world. Deceive none. Rather take hurt, than do any. Avenge not. Let
once be amended. Favor not flattery. Look cheeflie on your self. Do not
forget your charge. Let your mind be occupied well. Use pleasures after a
mean. Once you were not here. Away you must, and turn to dust.
Finis
quod E. T.

The Prayers made by the right Honorable Lady Frances Aburgauennie, and
committed at the hour of her death, to the right Worshipful Lady MARIE Fane
(her only daughter) as a Jewel of health for the soul, and a perfect path to
Paradise, very profitable to be used of every faithful Christian man and
woman.
A fruitful prayer to be said in the Morning.
AL mighty God, and most merciful father, the fountain of all felicity,
from whom only proceeds all good gifts, most humbly I beseech thee of
thine abundant mercy and exceeding kindness, so to direct and govern me this
day and ever with thy good guiding Spirit, that all my thoughts, words and
deeds, may only be occupied in thy service, faith, fear and love, and so
assist and strengthen me with thy grace, O most merciful and loving father,
for thy son Jesus Christ his sake, that neither sin, death, hell, nor
Satan have the dominion and upper hand of me. Indue my heart with the true
understanding of thy true and lively word, that I may be ready and prone
manfully to fight under the standard of my glorious captain Jesus Christ
against the world, the flesh, and that cruel Serpent the old Leuiathan, which
hunteth continually, like a roaring Lion, seeking the utter destruction of my
soul.

Make me constant in time of temptation, that when or at what time my rebelling
and sinful flesh shall intise me, to lust after the pompes and vanities of
this wicked world, I may by a strong, lively, and unspeakable faith, through
the bitter torments that my Savior Christ Jesus suffered for me, and all that
faithfully believe and call upon him; so mortify and subdue the old Adam,
that I may be dead and buried from sin and all iniquity; and the new man
Christ Jesus may continually dwell and reign in me, by whose means I shall
be garnished and decked, by the means of a fruitful faith, with immortality,
and heavenly blessedness.

Uouchsafe, O Lord, I beseech thee, according to the multitude of thy mercies
to look upon me, and by thy celestial providence, so illuminate the eyes of
my soul, that I may continually watch for the glorious coming of thine
anointed son Jesus Christ. Root out, O Lord, in and from me the vile and
corrupt branches of rapine, deceit, avarice, luxury, concupiscence, and all
ungodliness, let the motions of my mind altogether depend upon thee, prepare
my tongue to publish thy praise; let my lips be locked up from all scurillitie
and vncomlie talk: let mine ears loath and abhor to hear thy glorious and
blessed name blasphemed, and thy truth to be by any Sectarian ill spoken of,
and slandered: keep and defend me under the wings of thy comfortable
protection, from all errors, schisms, and detestable heresies. Make me
without faining, firmly and constantly to build upon the truth, wherein is
perfectly set forth thy great mercy and divine justice. Let the zeal of thy
promises in all distres be my chiefest joy and consolation, and give me grace
from above, that as I make my boast of thy mercies and loving kindness, by
virtue whereof I am by my Savior Christ Jesus quickened from death to life,
and in his dearest death and precious bloud-shedding regenerated, and borne
anew, not of water, but of the spirit by faith.

So Lord, I may with thine abundant love showed to me ward, and the whole
posterity of Adam, I may be afraid wilfully, or of a set purpose to
transgress thy commandments, and so incur thereby thy displeasure, that the
effects of thy justice in the day of thy coming to judgment, be pronounced
against me to the utter destruction of body and soul. Make me always
willing, good Lord, to hear thy word, by the power whereof my faith is
increased, and there withal plant in me perfect love and obedience, and so
direct my footesteps in this vale of misery, that I may tread the path that
leads to thee, with whom my soul thirsts to rest, even as vehemently as
the Heart longs after the water brooks. Grant this, O merciful God, for the
honor and glory of thy name sake,

Amen.
A fruitful prayer to be said at the going to bed of every Christian.
MOst merciful Father, I most wretched and unworthy sinner prostrate my
self before the throne of thy heavenly grace, yielding unto thee most humble
and hearty thanks, that have of thine exceeding love and favor preserved me
this day from all peril and danger, humbly beseeching thy divine Majesty,
this night to preserve me, for the love of thine only son, and my sweet
Savior Jesus Christ, mediator and advocate: who continually pleads and
makes intercession to thee for me, and all the rest of thy chosen children,
presenting his bloody wounds, and his glorious body all to be scourged in
thy divine presence, who thereby does mitigate thy wrath and indignation,
justly conceived against me a miserable and wretched creature, and all mankind.

Make me Lord still to confess mine unworthiness, and weakness to be such
and so great, that of my self I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven,
much less to be called thy son, or handmaiden, such and so great is the
burden of my sin and iniquity, so that by the means of my corruption and
filthiness, I acknowledge my self to be the child of death and destruction,
yet build I still on thy promises, good Lord, and in this great danger I come
unto thee with tears, saying:

O Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy child. Of my self I have nothing; but by thee I have
althings: of my self I acknowledge I have justly deserved the heavy sentence
of thine ire; but by grace of thee, O mighty Emanuel, I am regenerate, and
borne again from death to life; from danger to joy; from peril to peace;
from bondage to liberty, and so in fine, from hell and damnation, to bliss
and salvation.

Such is the effect of thy mercy, so abundant is thy love toward me, and all
those that with contrite hearts present themselves unto thee. Increase my faith
Lord, that it may abound in good and fruitful works: so fortify me, that I
never swerve from thy verity: give me thy grace from above, O merciful Jesus,
that I may never shrink from thy sacred testimonies.

And moreover, I with all humility and reverence of heart and mind, beseech
thee this night, which thou have ordained for man to rest in, that thou will
guard and protect me with thy good guiding spirit. And albeit my sinful flesh
shall sleep and slumber, yet grant, good Lord, that my soul may continually
keep watch and ward: let not the enunie find me slumbering and sleeping, as
careless, in the cradle of sinful security, least that whilst I am unarmed,
that is, naked and destitute of thy grace and favor, he enter in and break up
the house of my sinful body, and make such havoc and spoil, that mine
infected and leporous soul, deformed by means of mine iniquity, and wounded
with the dangerous darts of transgression, be thrown with the body of sin
into the lake of destruction, wherein is continual wailing, and gnashing of
teeth.

Make me still, O good Lord, to consider, that the bed is a plain pattern and
similitude of the grave, which continually calls for me, and all other thy
creatures. Make me to understand, that when I am laid, (of my self) without
thy heavenly providence I can not be able to rise again. Make me to
acknowledge that sleep is the very figure of death, to whose stroke, at thine
appointed pleasure, I must submit my self. Indue me with love and charity to
all men, let my lamp O Lord be garnished with oil, that whenever, or at
what time soever thy messenger death shall draw me, and knock at the gates of
my house, I may at his summons, in the day of the resurrection of the dead, be
ready to attend on thee and thy bride, with my burning lamp, that is, with a
steadfast faith, when as by thee I shall be clothed anew. For my mortal body
shall then be covered with immortality; the corruption of my sinful and
rebelling flesh shall be changed to incorruption and perfect purity: thy
righteousness shall be mine; thy merits shall make me perfect and holy, by
virtue whereof, hell shall loose his victory; death shall loose his sting; my
faith and hope shall have end and reward, and I with thy Saints continually
dwell in love and charity with thee, the heavenly bridegroom, Christ Jesus:
to whom with the father, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all laud, glory,
power, praise and dominion, for ever:

Amen.
A prayer for the remission of sin, and to obtain a virtuous life.
FOrasmuch as (O bountiful Lord) it is most meet, right and just, that all
flesh should praise, magnify, and worship thee, and should without ceasing give
thanks unto thee, who only art the Creator and maker of all things, as well
visible as invisible; who only art the treasure of all goodness, and well of
life, only God and Lord, whom the heavens, and heaven of heavens, the sun,
the moon, the stars, the earth, the sea, with all that move therein, yea the
heavenly company of Martyrs, the souls of the Prophets and Apostles, Angels,
Archangels, together with the souls of all just and righteous persons do laud
and glorify.

It is most requisite, that each mortal creature living in this world, should
also acknowledge thy magnificence. Wherefore, most merciful father, I with my
heart and mouth do acknowledge thee to be my King and Lord, the giver of all
goodness: I confess thee to be omnipotent, reverend, merciful, long
suffering, God of all consolation, comfort, mercy and pity.

I know that of thine infinite goodness only thou did make man after
thy similitude and likeness, placing him in the most delectable place of
Paradyse. And although he did transgress thy commandment, and thereby
deserved eternal death and damnation: yet thou, like a most loving and
pitiful Father, did not utterly reject him, but gently correct him, and
after that thou had sent him into the earth, commanding him there to increase
and multiply, thou did instruct his posterity with thy law; thou did
teach them by thy Prophets, and after that sentest down thine only begotten
son to take upon him our nature, and to suffer death for our sins, thereby
to make a recompense for the offense which man had committed against thee: and
all this thou did of thine exceeding great mercy and kindness, without any
desert of mankind, not being so much as by any one prayer, or yet entreaty
thereunto incited.

Therefore I being boldened with such inestimable benefits, so freely given
and bestowed, do without any fear at this time, appear before thy divine
Majesty, prostrating my slefe before the seat of thy mercy, and with all
humbleness of heart and mind do make this my prayer unto thee.

Despise me not (O Lord God) being defiled with sin and iniquity. For behold,
I present my self before thee, not presuming upon mine own worthiness, but
trusting in thy goodness.

Be merciful unto me a sinner: light thou the dull sighted eyes of my mind,
open thou the stopped ears of mine heart, that I may both see, hear, perceive
and understand that, which thou teach, and always do that, which thou
command. Make me not only a hearer of thy heavenly doctrine; but also a
perfect follower of the same: direct, sanctify and govern my life: be thou
always present and ready, both to hear, and to help me. Save and defend me
from all shame and reproach: be thou my shield and buckler against all
temptations; cleanse my mind and thought from all uncleanness; keep and
preserve me from all danger both of body and soul. This frail life is
nothing else but a continual warfare in this world: our sins most like to
cruel enemies, assault us on every side: again our days are but few in
number.

Guide me therefore with thy grace, so to spend my small, short and transitory
time in this world, the very fountain, welspring, and vale of all misery,
that I may be made a member of Christ, and partaker of thine eternal
felicity. To the which, seeing that through mine own desert, I shall never be
able to aspire, (for sin truly so abounds in me, that each deed and act of
mine, is not only infected, but altogether polluted therewith) none other
remedy have I to ease my self: none other salve to heal my sore, but only
to take hold of that promise of thine whereas thou say: Come unto me all ye
that ye that labor, and be ouerladen, and I will refresh you.

This is my hold-fast; this is mine anchor and sure stay. For verelie (sweet
Savior) when I look upon mine own frailnesse, and behold how ready I am to
offend thee; then I quake for fear, then I am almost in utter despair: but as
soon as I call to mind thy great love and kindness, and how that thou will
not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live, and that
in what day soever he does heartily repent and call unto thee, thou will hear
him: then I am relieved; then I am not a little comforted, knowing surely that
thou will perform that which thou have promised, in faithful assurance
whereof, I now say unto thee:

Turn thou me, O my God, and I shall be turned: from all my wickedness
deliver me. Heal my soul, which is wounded with sin: for I do acknowledge
mine iniquity, and am heartily sorry for mine offenses: correct me, O Lord,
but yet not in thy fury, look not upon my weakness; but think upon thine
own worthiness: remember thy loving kindness, and in the abundance and
multitude of thy mercies, wipe clean away, pardon and forget all my sins,
through which I have either in word, deed or though, or any other kind of way
offended thee, blot them out of thy remembrance, and let the blood of that
immaculate lamb Jesus Christ, wash them away: let mine old offenses so decaie
and die in me, that I never commit them any more, or by any means renew them
in thy sight.

And in the mean time do not withdraw thy grace from me, but cause me to do
all that which good is. O Father, remove thy wrath away from me, and restore
unto me thy favor: turn thou thy loving countenance unto me, and plentifully
power forth thy mercy upon me. Incline my heart to do that only, which is
acceptable in thy sight: guide thou my footesteps in thy paths, and suffer me
not at any time to straie from thy ways: let me always have the fear of thee
in my heart, and the remembrance of thy benefits fresh in my memory: and if at
any time through weakness and failtie, I do transgress thy commandments,
yet do not therefore reject and cast me out of thy sight; but be thou that
good Samaritane, and power the oil and wine of mercy and forgiveness into
those wounds, which sin shall make in me. Disdain me not for my reuolting;
but have mercy upon me, according to thy great goodness, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies wipe away mine iniquity. Hide me under the shadow
of thy wings and protection: lighten me with thy holy spirit. Make me thy
servant: so indue me with thy grace, that I may unfeignedly, with heart and
voice, serve, honor, and praise thee all the days of my life:

Amen.
Another prayer for the obteining of grace and mercy.
O Most merciful Lord God, whose Majesty is incomprehensible, and power
infinite, whose magnificence is exalted above the heavens: vouchsafe, I beseech
thee, from thy high throne to behold the work of thy hands: have pity on the
unhappy and desolate condition of thy creature. I am a sinner, conceived in
sin, and of my self I have no good thing: wherefore, O Lord, I cleave to the
altar of thy mercy. Thou art my anchor, my hope, my refuge and stay.
Therefore O Lord, have mercy upon me, for no flesh can be justified in thy
sight. Thou know the frailty and weakness of men. We are taught by the
fall of Peter, that we can do nothing without thee. Grant us therefore good
Lord thy grace, without which in this world, we are like by the waves of
temptations to be swallowed in the gulf and whirlepoole of sin: to be
drowned as the ship without anchor and Pilote in every tempest, to run on
the rock and perish. Guide us therefore by thy grace good Lord, through the
floods of this careful world, that we may rest for ever in the pleasant port,
and happy haven of everlasting joy, with thine elected, through our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, in all worlds,

Amen.
A Confession to be said of the penitent person.
O Most merciful Lord God, I have offended against the throne of thy Majesty;
my sins are ever before mine eyes: I am not worthy to live or enioie the
fruits wherewith thou have blessed the earth. Mine own conscience is my
tormenter, bringing testimony and witness against me. The Sun does hide his
light against me, and the place is the woorsse wherein I become. O Lord what
shall I do? Shall I despair? No, thou art merciful, and more ready to
forgive, than we to ask. I will confess my sins to thee. I am weary of my
sinful life. I am sorry in my soul for mine offenses. Wherefore good Lord,
thou which dooest ease them that are laden, and refresh them that travel: thou
which have promised mercy to the penitent, look on me thy servant with thy
cheerful countenance: behold me with those pitiful eyes, with which thou
did Marie Magdalen, and the woman taken in adultery. Thou which have shed
thy blood ou the altar of the Cross, offering thy most precious body an
eternal sacrifice for our sins: despise not that which thou have redeemed.
Thou which cammest into the world to call sinners to repentance, and to save
the lost sheep of Israel, have mercy upon me, and lead me by thy grace to
the fold, among thy sheep, for they go in sweet pasture, and are not in danger
of Wolves, for thou art their shepherd, and keep good account of every one
of them. Though I have gone astraie, wandering from thy flock, and borne the
marks of the world: yet good Lord disclaim not thy right, I beseech thee; but
take me unto thee, that I may be safe under the shadow of thy wings. He may
sleep soundly whom thou dooest keep. Thou art the watchman of Israel. All
honor and glory be unto thee for ever,

Amen.
Another godly Confession and meditation of the penitent.
I Altogether unhappy and comfortless, have greeuouslie offended my Lord God.
What shall I do? Whether shall I go? I can not hide me from his sight. How often
have I trespassed against him? How often have I deserved his displeasure? And yet
how seldom has he punished me? How often has he been good and merciful unto
me? How often have I promised and vowed amendment, and how little and seldom
have I performed it? This is a woeful case. Who will have pity on me, I dare
not lift up mine eyes toward heaven, because I have sinned against it: and in
earth I can look for no refuge, because I have been a slander and shame unto
it. What then? Should I despair? No, God is merciful, and a good Savior: he
does visit them that live in darkness, and is a cheerful light to them that sit
in the shadow of death. He wills us to forgive our brother, though he offend
seventy tunes, yea infinitely. And God is more merciful than any man can
be, and he must be the only refuge and comfort: he will not despise his
creature, the image of himself.

Return thee therefore O my soul unto thy Lord God, pray to him humbly on
thy knees for grace, and continue to bewail thy sins past, because that he
which loves thee, provoke thee daily with his gracious gifts and blessings
to love him, and will not leave thee, until he have made perfect his work
begun, and brought his mercy to full effect in thee. What natural cause
begins his work, and leaves it in the half way imperfect? The virtue of
seed sown, does not cease till the fruit be brought to perfection, yet that
nature works not at once, but first prepares the matter, and then disposes
and makes it fit to receive the shape, which is the perfection and end thereof.
And as by natural order, and right course things do proceed and increase by
little and little, from the less to the more, even so does God first dispose
us to his mercy, and then increasing his goodness daily, bestows on us in
the end, the treasure of his grace and inheritance of everlasting ioies. What
bird forsakes her young, till they be able to live of themselves, and yet no
avail, for their pain comes to them. Uerie love works in natural causes,
to bring forth their affects to perfection. If it be so in creatures, what
will the Creator do? which is love it self, and infinite goodness; he will
withdraw thee from thy sins, make thee clean and pure, and finally bless
thee with eternal life, which he has prepared for thee. O Lord, I come to
thee sad and mourning, I sit at thy feet, humbly waiting for thy mercy. Thou
art my hope and helper, according to thy great mercies, have mercy upon me,

Amen.
A prayer to be purged from sin and uncleanness.
TAke away from me, O Lord, the burden of my corruption, which by the
continual exercise of my sin and wickedness, has wounded my soul
woefully, with the dangerous darts of transgression; so that I feel my
putrefaction abounding, and my festered conscience ouerladen with uncleanness;
so that I have no other mean nor remedy, but to prostrate my self before the
throne of thy glorious majesty, beseeching thee entirely, of thy gracious
goodness, to salve my sores with the comfortable oil of thy mercy.

Thou only (O Jesus) art the sweet Physician of my soul, sprinkle upon me
hysope, and I shall be made whiter than snow. If thou of thine exceeding
bounty and favor good Lord, wilt vouchsafe to wash away the spots of my
sin and wickedness, that heapeth thine indignation and fury against me, I
shall then excel the gold that has been purified in the furnace seven fold.

Let it therefore good Lord and merciful father, seem pleasant unto thy
divine majesty, to touch my corrupted and unclean heart, with the heavenly
finger of thy grace, that I may bring forth the fruits of true repentance,
which are more acceptable to thy glorious and divine presence, than the
offering of calves, bullockes, sheep, goats, or any other burnt offerings,
or sacrifice of peace. A contrite and sorrowful soul, is the thing that thou
do most delight in. An humble and a lowly spirit is the oblation that thou
dooest desire. A clean and pure heart, O Lord my God, I know thou dooest love
and favor.

Wherefore I beseech thee, to purge me from my sin and inquitie, of thy great
mercy. Let the bitter deploration of mine offenses, and hearty contrition,
through thy glorious merits and painful passion, O Jesus, be the only mean
and way to set me free from the powers of hell, death and damnation. And since
I am by thy goodness begotten and borne anew, strengthen me good Lord, that I
never slide nor fall from thee, but that I may continually bear in my
remembrance, the state whereunto I am called by thee. Through thine abundant
love and kindness wipe away, good Lord, all my sins out of thy remembrance.
Cleanse me in the blood of thy spotless Lamb Jesus Christ, and I shall be
made clean, pure and safe. Grant this most merciful God, for the honor and
glory of thy name sake, through the bitter death of thy son Jesus Christ my
only mediator and advocate, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be given
all laud, glory, power, and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer of the penitent for mercy.
O Lord I am a sinner, my sins are heavy upon me, the burden of them is
intolerable, refresh me with thy grace, wash away mine offenses, and I shall
be whiter than the snow. Let the cheerful beams of thy countenance shine
upon me, and give light to the darkness of my life. We can look for nothing
as deserved, but punishment due to our offenses. Wherefore good Lord, not
according to thy justice, but in the multitude of thy mercies, deal with thy
servant. Remember not the sins of my forefathers: think not on the mild
meanour of my youth passed: have pity on thy creature, which according to the
likeness of thy self thou have made and shaped of earth. How long will thou
turn thy face away from me? Forsake me not, O my God, but renew in me thy
holy spirit. Pluck away from me all that withdraws me from thee. Graffe in
my heart thy grace, that I may love thee, and fear thee, and so finally
rejoice in thy goodness with the elected, and praise thee in thy woonderous
works for ever. Grant this most mighty God, for our Savior Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever
and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said of the sinful soul.
MY sinful life increasing, and my sins still abounding, good Lord; to whom
shall I flee, or to whom shall I resort for succor? From offending thee I can
not cease, neither day nor night; and my sins are heavy upon me, pressing
me down even to hell, such is the weight thereof.

Moreover, when I prepare my self to amendment of life, and think steadfastly
to serve and please thee, even soon after does my corrupt and infected nature
offend and displease thy divine Majesty: so that I am prone and ready to run
headlong into all kind of wickedness and sin, such is my strength, such is my
force, (or rather weakness) in perfourming those things, which thou requirest
at my hands. So that good Lord, I am ready utterly to despair, and forsake
thee, unless thou of thy great mercy and pity, send thine aid from above,
and power into me thy most healthful grace, that I may make have to flee unto
thee with most bitter tears, a sorrowful heart, and bowing knees, lamenting my
sinful life, and grievous offenses committed against thee, trusting most
assuredly and faithfully, in the merits of my Savior Jesus Christ, that by
his most bitter death and bloud-shedding, which is of far greater force, virtue
and effect in preserving me, than all my sins and offenses are in condemning
and casting me away; for whose sake I most assuredly believe all my sins
and offenses are cleerelie forgiven, and shall never be laid to my charge, but
that I shall enter with thee in the last day into thine everlasting kingdom,
there to be with thee for evermore, to whom be all honor, praise and glory,
for ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to God the father.
Almighty God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom no desert, merit, or
worthiness of ours; but thine own great clemency, mercy and pity caused to
send down thine only begotten son into this world, to bear the burden of
our sins, with the which we most miserable sinners were ouerladen, and that
he should suffer most cruel torments, yea and also most bitter and shameful
death, and sanctify the reproachful name of the cross, with the renting of
his blessed body, and shedding his most precious blood thereon; thereby to
make atonement between thee and us, thereby to pay the ransom for our
souls, thereby to consummate and finish the perfection of our redemption, and
salvation. Which thing it was thy good will that he should do, not only to
assuage thy wrath and indignation, but also to bring us again into thy grace
and favor; and that we being delivered out of the bondage of sin and hell,
might serve thee in righteousness and holiness, all the days of our life,
and by the free gift and benefit of his death and passion, be made partakers
of his resurrection, and of thine endless and unspeakable glory.

Wherefore my God, my maker, my Lord, my King, seeing thou have so abundantly
bestowed thy heavenly gifts upon me, and all mankind, and have so plentifully
powered out thy grace and favor on us, that for our sakes thou would not
spare thine own son: how shall we escape thine indignation, which for this
care and kindness of thine, are most careless and unkind? And among all
other, which way shall I poor creature turn me? How shall I, who have been
most unthankful for thy benefits, and most unmindful of them, be so bold as
to lift up my heart or hands unto the heavens, and to call upon thee? Thou of
thy singular goodness did so provide, that the wickedness of old Adam
should be purged and washed away with the blood of Jesus Christ; but I have
wilfully fallen into sin again. Thou made me the child of light, but I
have made my self an inheritour of darkness. Thou made me thine by
creation, I have made my self the child of perdition.

What shall I now therefore do? Shall I doubt of any further mercy and
forgiveness? No no, sweet Lord, so great is thy mercy, which surmounteth all
thy works; so large are thy promises; so sure is the performance of them to
all such as take hold thereof; so dear in thy sight are the merits of thy
son Jesus; so acceptable unto thee is the hearty repentance of a sinner, that
with the remembrance thereof, I am provoked to cry unto thee, saying: Father,
I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, I am no more worthy to be
called thy child. Nevertheless, behold thou me, not as I am, a grievous
offender, but as thy creature. Have now no respect to mine offenses, but behold
my repentance: think not upon my wickedness, but upon the wounds of my
Savior Jesus. Look not upon my false heart, which has wauered from thy laws,
but behold the bleeding heart of thy son Jesus Christ, which was pierced to
release me, and set me free. My sins I cast upon thy back, beseeching thee
that his merits may bear them, and thy mercy pardon them.

Hear me O Lord my God, hear me: for I know, the more earnestly that I
seek for, and desire thine aid, the readier thou art to stretch forth thine
hand to help me. Hear me therefore, O Lord; bow down and incline thine ear
unto my prayer: inspire me so with thy holy spirit, that I may love thee above
all things, and that I never fail to put my hope and trust of salvation in
him, whom thou would to be my redeemer and savior.

Make me, by the forsaking of all wickedness, so to rise from falling into
sin, that I may obtain the true serving of thee with innocence, and
pureness of life. Grant this O Lord, for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory,

Amen.
A prayer unto God the son.
O Most sweet savior, O most merciful redeemer; O bountiful Jesus, the son
of God; who although thou art high, yet thou art most humble; although thou art
omnipotent, thou art also most meek: and as thou art most mighty, so art thou
most merciful. To thee, O Christ, the guide of all felicity, the father of
heaven has given all power, both in heaven and in earth.

Thou art the true pastor of our souls, thou art our Messiah. Thou castest off
none that sue unto thee, but as thou have taken away the handwriting that was
against us, and have fastened it to thy cross, so art thou ready to impart
the merits of thy passion unto all such, as with true repentance of their sins
call upon thee faithfully.

Wherefore my sweet Jesus, I most faithfully and unfeignedly acknowledge the
benefits that thou have bestowed upon me, and steadfastly believe, that thou
being an immaculate lamb, in whose mouth was never found guile, did suffer
most cruel torments at the hands of sinners, for the love of us most wretched
sinners. For the which cause, I most heartily beseech thee, and most humbly
pray thee, to accept me into the number of them, whom thou will make
coinheritours of thy bitter pains. And although I of my self, be most
unworthy thereof, yet thy merits can make me worthy: to them do I fly,
craving that I may be so armed and defended by them, that I may subdue the
world, the flesh and the devil, even as thou have gloriously conquered sin,
death and hell.

Thou see, O my savior, how I am daily and hourlie beset with these three
enemies, and so hardly beseeged of them, that without thy help, I can by no
means escape, but that I must needs be a pray unto one of them. Strengthen me
therefore O Lord, that neither the one with carnal lusts, neither the other
with delectable pleasures, nor Satan himself with all his crafty and subtle
devises get the dominion over me.

Thou have bought me, thou have paid for me; take thou me, save, keep and
defend me, be always ready at the voice of my crieng; power into me thy
grace, patiently to abide thy divine will and pleasure in all things. Make me
both at this present, and all the days of my life, to have in mind, and
profoundly to root in my heart, the mysteries of thy painful passion, and so
to be filled with the remembrance thereof, that sin may no more enter into me,
and that Satan mine old enemy may well perceive, that he has neither part
nor fellowship in me, but that I am both body and soul altogether thine, to
whom be all praises world without end,

Amen.
A prayer unto God the holy Ghost.
O Holy Ghost, O blessed and holy spirit, comforter of them that be
afflicted: thou proceeding from the Father and the Son, art the true
instructor and teacher of the divine and heavenly verity. Wherefore, I with
all humility pray thee to renew and make in me a clean heart, to graffe a
right spirit in me, to guide and govern me, that I may think nothing, speak
nothing, do nothing, but that only which shall please thee.

And whereas I have not ceased to offend my Lord God and maker, and most
greeuouslie to transgress against Jesus my redeemer and savior; I pray thee
that I may have inward sorrow, repentance, and shame thereof; and that ever
hereafter I may perform my duty, as I ought to do, and so bring forth the
fruits of repentance, that the passion of Jesus Christ may defend me from all
sin and wickedness, and bring me to the ioies of paradise: So be it.

A godly prayer for the true worshipping of God, which may be used in the
Church before common prayer.
STablish our hearts and minds, O most gracious God, in the true woorshipping of
thy divine majesty; make us to believe thy holy and sacred Gospel, wherein
we are daily and hourelie instructed to love, fear, honor, and obeie thee:
to hate sin and iniquity, to renounce all superstitious ceremonies, whereby
thy worship is defaced, thy glory profaned, and thine honor greatly
diminished. Give us the grace to hate sin and iniquity, to renounce and
forsake the vanities and wanton pleasures of this wicked and sinful world.
Arm us, we beseech thee, to mortify and bring under the rebellious appetites
and straieng lusts of the flesh. And finally give us power from above, to
withstand Satan the prince of darkness, and all his damnable ministers, who
by diverse temptations provoke and allure us from godly purity, and perfect
integrity, which passes only from Christ Jesus unto us, who is the fullness
of our perfection and holiness, to all kinds of evil, impiety and
uncleanness; by means whereof thy worship is greatly profaned, and of a set
purpose contemned.

Make us constant to skirmish against the world, sin, death, and hell; and by
the power of a fruitful faith, give us grace to resist and bridle the
concupiscence of our flesh, in such sort, that our souls may triumph with
victory, and continue constant in woorshipping thee; from whom passes the
fullness of our joy. Prepare our hearts and minds (good Lord) now and ever to
spread forth the glory of thy name. Keep our tongues from all filthy talk,
and uncomely gesture, least by the exercise of such sin, we contemn thy
worship, and provoke thee to displeasure and indignation. Set thou a watch
before the gates of my mouth, that my lips by thy grace may be always made
open to sound forth thy praise and everlasting glory. Be merciful to our
offenses, think thou not on our unrighteousness; but upon thy clemency.
Forgive them freely, and pardon graciously our sins, make us faithful in
Christ Jesus. Shorten the dangerous days of iniquity, increase the number of
thy chosen and peculiar Saints. Hasten thy coming, O savior Christ, that we
with the fellowship of the Saints, heavenly Angels, and the blessed company of
Martyrs, may celebrate thy praise, and worship thee in thy glorious kingdom,
before the father our God, and the holy Ghost, to whom be praise for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer that we may live so vprightlie in this life, that at the last
we may dwell in the everlasting tabernacle.
O Lord, seeing that the righteous shall dwell in thy tabernacle, grant me I
beseech thee, a pure and undefiled soul. O what is the shape of the earth,
wherein Gods enemies have abiding; in comparison of the wonderful beauty of
heaven, wherein righteousness does dwell; in comparison of that place, wherein
Angels, Archangels, all good men, yea and God himself is abiding! What are the
pleasures of the world, wealth, honor, company of our parents and friends,
wherein all our pleasure and sweetness is mixed with sowrenesse and sorrow;
wherein every perfection has his imperfection* What is all this to the
unspeakable joy in the kingdom of God? What is the company of friends
here, in comparison to the company of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the
Patriarchs and Prophets, and all the Saints of God?

Oh the felicity of everlasting life, which is without all discommodities;
perpetual, without all peril and molestation! Oh the glorious majesty, the
singular mirth, and passing ioies of the life to come! The eye has not seen,
nor the heart of man is able to conceive in any part, the happy estate of the
blessed souls in heaven. Oh how amiable are thy tabernacles! My soul has a
desire to enter into the courts of the Lord. My heart and my soul rejoice in
the living God; blessed be they that dwell in thy house, they may be always
praising thee. One day in thy courts, is better than a thousand elsewhere. I
had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents
of ungodliness. The Lord God is a light and defense. My soul is athirst for
God, even for the living God. When shall I come before the presence of my God?
My flesh longs after thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is. Good
Lord remember me, and grant that I may wear the white garments of innocence
with thine elected, in thine everlasting kingdom,

Amen.
A prayer against the fellowship of the ungodly.
PRotect and defend me, O heavenly Father, and most merciful God, from the
fellowship of the ungodly men, which daily imagine mischief in their hearts to
harm the innocent. Keep me from the counsels of the foolish and ungodly,
which speak proud things against the glory of thy blessed name. Defend me
from faithless and deceiptfull ones, whose guilty stomaches are gorged with
grudge, envy, malice, hatred, disdain, and all uncharitableness. For their
throtes are like unto an open sepulcher, or swallowing grave: their tongs are
given to slander and backbite their neighbors: the poison of Adders lies
hidden under their lips; and in fine, they as thine enemies blaspheme thy holy
and blessed name, and contemn thy testimonies.

O Lord give me thy grace, to be conversant with good and godly men; such as
favor thy glorious Gospel, and do their endeavor to practice thy precepts,
to the glory of thy holy and blessed name. Make me, by their example, to
exercise my self in the heavenly verity; that thereby I may be instructed in
the lively knowledge of thy commandments, and obtain such wisdom from
above, that by faith I may cleave to thee, and the fellowship of those that
fear thy holy name; and so avoid the company of the wicked and ungodly
worldlings, which have laid snares to entrap me. Grant this, O most merciful
Father, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, who ever lives and reigns with
thee, and the holy Ghost, to whom be all laud, glory, power and praise, for
ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to be said before or after the Sermon.
MOst mighty GOD, which by thy word have made all things, whose voice the
floods and hills do know, whose heast both quick and dead, heaven and hell
obey, at whose displeasure the devils in hell do tremble: let thy word so
lighten our hearts, that by our good works we may testify our profession,
seeing that the tree which bears not fruit shall be cut down, and thrown
into the fire. Grant that I may not only be a hearer, but also a dooer of thy
holy word, that so finally I may be partaker of thine everlasting joy and
bliss.

O Lord grant me wisdom to know thee, and grace to follow thee in true
humility: that as thou did suffer to be spitted at, and smitten of thine
enemies; so we may bear the displeasures of the world, and rage of our enemies
with patience. Thou have blessed the little ones, and revealed unto them the
things hidden from the wise. For thou will have mercy where it pleases thee.
O set thy fear always before mine eyes, make me to understand wisdom
secretly; and graffe thy faith so in my heart, that I may both know thee, and
love thee, and glorify thy holy name for ever:

Amen.
A prayer for faith.
O Blessed Savior Jesus, son of the everliving God, the unspeakable joy of
thy servants, most present comfort to sinners, which came into the world to
save offenders, which so louedst the world, that thou sparedst not thy most
precious blood to redeem the loss of our first father Adam, and to make us
coheires of the forfeited inheritance with thy self; that all which believe in
thee might be saved. Good Lord, which have promised to them that knock, it
shall be opened; and that they which seek shall find: grant I beseech thee,
that I may search thy holy laws, and find the truth of thy holy word; that I
may always constantly confess and show thee and thy goodness, as well in my
words as living. Inspire me with thy holy spirit, that I may know thee
steadfastly, trust in thee, and serve thee in prayers and well-dooing, all the
time of my life. O most merciful Lord and Savior of the world, for the glory
of thy name sake, I beseech thee to hear my prayers. My soul rejoice in God
my saving health, for he has been good to thee, he has kept thee from the
snare of the hunter, and blessed thee. The Lord is a merciful God, let all the
earth fear him: let the mouths of all men sound praises unto him. God is a
good Lord, and daily increases his good gifts to his servants; the Lord will
increase my faith in him, and I shall be saved: So be it.

A prayer to be said before the receiving of the Lords Supper.
OMnipotent GOD and father everlasting, whose mercy is infinite, and whose
kingdom has none end; vouchsafe I beseech thee, of thine exceeding goodness, to
increse our faith, that as thy ghests repair to the table of thy son Jesus
Christ, who has left unto us, before he gave his body to be crucified, and
his blood to be shed largely on the cross for our redemption, as a pledge of
his great love and abundant kindness, the celebration of his glorious supper,
wherein as it were in a looking glass, the death of our great master, the
high shepherd of our souls Jesus Christ, is most lively set forth unto us.
Give us grace therefore from above, rightly to understand the divine mysteries
offered unto us thereby, and not to wrest or wring the same contrary to thy
will.

Let it be far from our thoughts, good Lord, to leave thine eternal verity;
and to build on the doctrine of men, who following their own imaginations, run
headlong to the gaping gulf of danger and destruction. Pluck the scales of
ignorance from our eyes, that we may cleerlie descerne and behold, by the light
of thy glorious Gospel, how we may truly communicate and participate the
fruits of thy grace, represented unto us in this comfortable Sacrament. Indue
us plentifully with such pure knowledge, that we may not once think or say
after any gross form, or carnal manner, we feed upon, or eat thy flesh
reallie, or carnally; but make us always constantly to believe, that thy
glorious body is ascended up into heaven, and sits on the right hand of thy
Father, concerning thy humanity; and cannot be thence removed, till the time
that thou shall come with legions of Angels, to judge the quick and the dead,
before whose presence shall run a consuming fire.

And moreover, we do most humbly beseech thee so to confirm us in the truth
of thy blessed testament, that we may confess thy divine nature to be equal
with the Father and the holy Ghost; and to believe that thy power is not a
power particular, but a power general; and such as does and shall govern in
heaven and earth, in the deep and low waters: yea and in the nethermost parts
of hell. Strengthen us therefore good Lord, that stand; least that in falling
from the true knowledge of thee, we perish everlastingly.

And since thou have called us by thy word, as thy ghests to this blessed
banquet, wherein ye mouths of our carnal bodies are fostered and fed with bread
and wine: so Lord confirm our faith in thee, that the mouths of our souls may
feed spirituallie upon thy sweetest flesh, and drink thy dearest blood, and so
be nourished to everlasting life, and heavenly blessedness. Which reward as a
dowry due, thou have promised to all those that faithfully build upon thee,
which art the rock and strong pillar of our salvation.

And as these most holy mysteries must set forth unto us most lively thy
death and passion; so make us thankful to thee for the same: and thereby give
us grace, to print in our hearts thy great love and exceeding clemency, that
sparedst not to give thy body to the most vile, shameful and slanderous death
of the Cross; and thy blood to be shed for our offenses.

Indue us with love and charity to all men; make us ready to forgive, to
love, and pardon our enemies, persecutors and slanderers. Turn our hearts and
minds from all impiety, covetousness, blasphemy, pride, gluttony,
fornication, and all other detestable evils. And if at any time we have
defeated the fatherless of his right, the widow of her dowry, or gathered
together our goods wrongfullie, by violence, oppression, fraud, collusion, or
deceit: give us grace to make restitution, and to ask with sorrowful plaints
and fluds of tears, from the bottom of our hearts, pardon and free
forgiveness of thee, for such and all other our offenses whatsoever we have
done, or committed in thought, word, will and deed, against thy divine
Majesty, or any other our brethren and sisters.

Take away from us ali bitterness, cursed speaking and backbiting. Give us
grace to come woorthilie, by the virtue of a true and fruitful faith, to this
holy and blessed supper, that our souls feeding faithfully on thy sweetest
flesh, and drinking thy dearest blood, we may both in body and soul be
nourished by thee to everlasting and endless glory in heaven, where with thee
and the fellowship of thy chosen Saints, we shall enioie the fruition of the
everlasting kingdom, which thou have ordained for all those that ouelie and
alone, without wavering do build upon thee.

Sanctify and make clean our hearts and minds, by the power of thy holy
Ghost, the very comforter of thy chosen. Purge thou our cankred consciences,
infected with sin, by the working of thy good grace, least that by the
presuming to this thy table, O Lord, we incur thy displeasure; and being
unrepentant for our offenses, we be found unmeet ghests to come to thy holy
banquet, and so we eat and drink to the utter confusion of our souls and
bodies. Give us grace therefore good Lord, to convert us wholly unto thee, and
we shall be turned from all our sin and iniquity. Give us grace to rest
only upon thee, and we shall be made safe. Give us thine aid from above, we
beseech thee, by faith to strive with the man of sin, and so to vanquish him,
that he may die to us, and we may live to thee, which art the giver of life.
Grant this, O most gracious God, for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost be given all praise, honor and glory, for ever and ever:

Amen.
A prayer or thanksgiving to be said after the receiving of the Communion.
WE give thee most hearty thanks, O heavenly Father, that have at this present
fed us, and refreshed our hungry souls with the flesh and blood of our
Savior Christ; not carnally, but spirituallie. Give us grace therefore
continually, by the means of an increasing and fruitful faith, to believe
that thy flesh is meat indeed, and thy blood is drink indeed: and that
vnneths we eat thy flesh, and drink thy blood, we can not enter into thy
kingdom, nor be saved in the day of thy coming. Give us grace therefore,
being unprofitable servants, and vnwoorthilie called, by the reason of the
multitude of our sins, to banquet at thy table, whereas the celebration of thy
supper has been used, and thy death by the visible elements of bread and wine
represented unto us, to offer up unto thee continually the fruits of true,
repentant, and sorrowful hearts, that thy name may be glorified, we by thy grace
comforted, thy displeasure turned to love, thy wrath to compassion, our sins
pardoned and forgotten, and our names written in the book of life.

And as it has pleased thee at this present to account us for thy ghests, and
not only to feed us with visible creatures, namely bread and wine: but also
in soul, which is thine own similitude, to cherish us with thy flesh and
blood, whereon by the virtue of a lively faith we have to our great comforts
most plentifully fed: so now, O Lord, we beseech thee of thine abundant
goodness, to increase our faith, that it may wax strong in thee, and fruitful
to exercise the works of charity and love to all men; that thereby as we have
now been at the celebration of thy glorious and blessed supper, so we may,
whenever it shall please thee to call us to thine heavenly banquet, be found
furnished: not empty, not naked, but armed and covered with fruitful faith
and truth, and so, as thy ghests or vessels of honor enioie the participation
of thy heavenly and rich palace, whereas ioies never vade, but continually
endure. Take from us the burden of our corruption; set us free from the cursed
clog of sin; deliver us from the snares of death and destruction. Give us
willing minds to obeie and hear thy commandments, cleanse thou our hearts from
all iniquity, and give us grace henceforth to walk in newness of life, and
godly conversation, that thy name may be glorified, and we saved in the day
of thy coming to judgment. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our mediator
and advocate:

Amen.
A godly prayer to be said of every Christian, especially at burials.
GOod Lord, which with thy hands do stay the frame and engine of the earth,
and rulest the course of the swift heavens, disposing and ordering all things
by thy divine providence, which have appointed bounds to our life, which we can
not pas: I beseech thee that by my living, I learning to die, mortifieng by thy
spirit the affections of the flesh, though not expelling them, yet subduing the
rage of them, it may at the last, by the haven of death, land in the most
glorious city of everlasting life; where our bodies which are now dark,
miserable and corruptible, shall be most bright, glorious and incorruptible,
like to the immortal and shining body of our Lord Jesus Christ. We shall be
like to Christ our Savior; even as he is, so shall we be. And as we have borne
the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly, and
shine like to the sun, as the face of Christ did in his transfiguration.

Oh Lord Jesus, blessed Savior, which by thy death have triumphed over sin
and death; thou have trodden on the sting of the monster, our hidious enemy;
the gates of hell have not prevailed against thee: grant to me a true and
lively faith, by which men pass from earth to heaven, from death to eternal
life. This can we not do without thee, thou must be our mediator. For a child
of a nights birth is not pure in thy sight. In sin were we borne, and by
nature we are the children of perdition, and firebrands of hell: but thou, O
blessed Savior, art the perfection of the law to them that believe. As death
came by sins; so by thy death and precious bloudshedding is death conquered
and exiled; and we that believe washed and cleansed of our sins. All the
Prophets bear witness, that they which believe in thy name shall receive
remission of their sins. If we confess our sins, thou art righteous to
forgive us our iniquities. Whosoever calls on thy name shall be saved. Thou
have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather desire that they should
live, and be converted. Thou have so loved the world, that thou not only did
become man, and took our nature upon thee, but were content also to suffer
most cruel death on the Cross, to purge our nature from mortal sin and
corruption, and adorn it with immortality and eternal glory; not only in
thine own person, but in us also, to satisfy the justice of the Father for
our sins.

Oh blessed shepherd, thou doubtedst not to spend thy most precious blood to
save thy beloved sheep from rauine and spoil. Good Lord, so increase thy
grace in me, that thy holy word may take root, and flourish in me, that the
good seed may not be choked with thorns. So order my living, that when by
course of nature I shall be dissolved from the prison of my body, I may come
to thee, that when thou more bright than the sun shall come in the midst of the
legions of Angels, in thy shining glory and Majesty to judge the quick and
the dead, I may be in the number of the blessed ones, whom thou shall call to
possess the kingdom prepared for them, by thy Father, saying: Come ye blessed
children of my Father, receive the kingdom prepared for you before the
beginning of the world. Thou which did die and rise again, wilt raise and
bring to life all those that are dead believing in thy faith: So be it.

A prayer to live well.
GOod Lord so rule the eyes of my heart, that they being kept simple and pure,
my body may be a clear and shining temple of thy holy spirit. So kindle in
us the love of thy glorious son, that we following his steps, may do that
which is good, and decline from the evil; so that our light shining before
men, we may glorify thee by our good works, with thy blessed son our
Savior, and the holy Ghost: to whose infinite Majesty, in trinity and
unity be all honor and glory for ever,

Amen.
A prayer for humility.
O Lord I am a sinner, and sorry for mine offenses: I can not make satisfaction
for my defaults. If I have any good thing, it comes of thee. The most
acceptable sacrifice to thee is a contrite and humble heart. O God let me not
be oppressed with the waves of sin, let me not sink into the whirlepoole
and gulf of despair. Thou which liftest up the fallen, and raisest the humble
and meek, clothing them with purple, and set them up with princes in the
seats of honor; thou which despisest the imaginations of the proud, and
resistest their enterprises; bless me in all my doings, send me happy
success in all mine affairs, that I may rejoice in thy goodness, with thine
elected for ever and ever. Accept my humble suite, good Lord, I beseech thee,
for the glory of thy name sake,

Amen.
A prayer for the obteining of Gods grace.
O Almighty and merciful God, shine we beseech thee, through the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the comfortable working of thy sacred spirit, the
heavenly comforter, upon our minds and hearts, with the glorious beams of thy
heavenly grace. Give us such plenty of wisdom and understanding from above,
that through the knowledge of thee, the man of sin, that is, our frail and
feeble flesh, with the wicked lusts and desire of concupiscence may lie dead
and buried in us. Give us, good Lord, the feeling of thy grace, that by the
virtue and divine operation of thy word, the eyes of our souls may be
illumined, and made so light, that the Prince of darkness, with all his
unrighteous ministers, may be expulsed and banished from our memories. So
establish us in thy truth, that our hearts, minds, and thoughts, may
continually be occupied in thy testimonies: that thereby thou good Lord
effectually shining in our hearts, by the virtue of thy good spirit, we may
learn to know and understand, what is the fullness of our calling, and how
rich thou art in the glory of thy celestial and heavenly heritage of thy
Saints, and that excellent greatness of thy power and loving kindness
toward us, which believe without faining thy holy Gospel, according to the
might and force of thy strength, which thou shewedst in Christ Jesus, when thou
did raise him from the dead, and did set him on thy right hand, far above
all empire, power, authority and dominion, and every name that is named, not
only in this world, but in the world to come. By whose precious death, and
dearest bloud-shedding, we are assured, that sin, death and hell are
vanquished, overcome, and utterly destroyed. And if we believe without
wavering, we shall in him be able to resist all the power of hell, and in
Christ as conquerors, to triumph with victory over sin, death, and Satan,
and at the last to have and enioie the fruition of his rich and glorious
kingdom, which he by most painful agony, bloody stripes, grievous and
bloody wounds, and lastly by his most painful death, purchased for his
chosen and elect. To whom for our sanctification, justification, redemption,
and our salvation be rendered, with his celestial Father, and the holy Ghost,
all laud, glory, power, honor and dominion for ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer against presumptuous pride and vainglory.
WE hear, O heavenly Father, and are daily taught and instructed out of
thine eternal word, how greatly the grievous sin of presumption, pride, and
vainglory displeases thy divine majesty. We are learned, that for the
practice of this pestilent and heinous evil, thou have not spared the very
Angels, but have thrown them in thy displeasure, for their pride,
vainglory, and presumption, from beatitude, to misery: from joy without
end, to perdurable pain: from brightness of thy glorious presence, to utter
extreme and palpable darkness: from the glorious fruition, and participation
of thine everlasting kingdom, to the bottomless pit of hell, death,
damnation, and endless flames of fire. Besides this, we are taught that by the
transgression of Adam, whose haughty presuming, through the entisement of the
subtle and perilous allurement of the Serpent, thought to be as thy self;
but in fine, thy justice condemned him, and all his posterity.

This pestiferous sin of pride drowned him in the floods of all dangerous
evils, as gluttony, luxury, and such other perils; that had not thy mercy
taken effect, to keep and hold plea for his and our safeguard; and thy son
Christ embased the glory and power of his divine essence, and taken upon him
our flesh and frail nature, sin only except, who freely offered his
innocent body to the death of the cross, we had perished everlastingly, and
been utterly confounded. Print therefore good Lord, and write these examples
in my memory, that I fall not from thy favor, by the exercise of this
detestable sin. Make me still to consider, that the proud and disdainefull
are always abhorred in thy sight. And since it is thy good will, and gracious
pleasure, to regard the humble and lowly man, give me such meekness from
above, that I may continually present thee with the sacrifice of a gentle,
meek, and contrite spirit: that I may avoid the plagues and punishments which
thou have prepared for the proud and haughty minded. Grant this good Lord,
for Jesus Christ his sake, mine only mediator and advocate, who lives and
reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, in glory permanent and everlasting,

Amen.
A prayer against covetousness, or too much care of the world.
GOod Lord, seeing that it is thy pleasure, that we shall not be careful for
worldly things: if a sparowe falls not on the ground without thy foresight,
how much more care do thou take for us thy children? Good Lord, thou feedest
the birds of the air, and cloathest the lillies of the feeld, which take no
care. Wherefore good Lord, so provide for our necessity and sickness, we
beseech thee, that we casting all our care upon thee, may cheeflie study to
please thee, and serve thee, which live and reignest king of all kings for
ever,

Amen.
A prayer against lieng and evil imaginations.
O Lord cleanse my heart, I beseech thee, from all vnpure and wicked cogitations
and thoughts; and give me a clear conscience, shamefast eyes, innocent hands,
and a tongue to tell the truth; seeing that there is nothing hid, that shall
not be discovered. Good Lord I beseech thee to search my thoughts, and renew in
me thy holy spirit. Direct my feet in thy ways, that walking after thee, in
the path of the righteous, I may pass through this vale of misery, bearing
thy banner stoutelie in my warfare, and obtain everlasting joy; the promised
hire to such as here have patiently borne thy cross, and valiantly fought
with the armor of faith, against temptations and all evils. Vouchsafe, O Lord,
to grant my petitions, I most humbly beseech thee, for thy only begotten
son, our Savior Jesus Christ his sake,

Amen.
A necessary prayer in Meeter against vices.
O Lord my God, make thou my heart repentant for to be,
The spirit of contrition, do thou ingraffe in me.
Unto mine eyes let there be given abundant tears of weeping,
And let my hands be occupied with often alms giving.
O thou my King quench out of me all foul fleshly desire,
And with the love of thee alone set thou my heart on fire.
O my redeemer drive away the spirit of pride from me,
And grant to me that great treasure of meek humility.
Take from me O my Savior, the furious rage of ire,
The shield of patience give to me, the which I do desire.
O Creator root out of me all spitefulness of mind,
And grant in stead thereof again meekenes that I may find.
O bountiful father give me a faith that shall endure,
With hope agreeing thereunto, and charity most sure.
O thou my guide keep from my lips all lieng vanity,
And from my mind drive far away all vain inconstancy.
All wavering take thou from my heart, and from my mouth scoffing,
With all proud looks and gluttony, backbiting and slandering.
Covetousness wipe clean away, with curiosity,
The fond desire of vainglory, with all hypocrisy.
Let me never the poor despise, nor yet the weak oppress,
And let me not blaspheme, for then I die remediless.
O thou which did me form and make, take all rashness from me,
And leave me not such a mind as, will not with peace agree.
Take from me idleness and sloth, and heavy lumpishnesse,
Take from me disobedience, and eke all stubbornness.
O my God, for thy dear sons sake, I humbly beseech thee,
To grant me the works of mercy, with abundance of pity,
That I may thee both love and fear, and eke pity the poor,
Make me good men always to love, and wicked to abhor.
Make me so little to esteem those things that worldly be,
With heart and voice that I may crave in heaven to be with thee:
Amen.
A thanksgiving for benefits received at Gods hand.
O Most merciful Father, I yield thee most humble thanks, for thy great
benefits bestowed upon me a sinner, of thy free mercy only. Thou have of thy
fatherly love brought me up tenderly, and instructed me in thy holy law.
Thou have given me knowledge and understanding. Thou have preserved me from
many dangers and evils, which diverse men have felt. Thou have blessed me with
health, quietness, joy, plenty and wealth, which a number do want. Thou
have taken care of me, and done all things for me. Lord, though I can deserve
nothing but punishment by thy just displeasure, yet good Lord, I trust to thy
goodness, craving mercy, and not justice. And for thy mercy sake, I beseech
thee to continue thy grace, and to increase thy good gifts toward me, and have
me in thy protection till my lives end. Good Lord bless me, that I may enioie
the fruits of the earth, and use them to thy honor and glory. Good Lord be
thou mine aid and guide in all my doings: my buckler and defense in all
dangers, that I may freely and ioifullie sing praises to thee, which live
and reignest one God almighty and incomprehensible, worlds without end,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving for the goodness of God to us.
O Almighty God, and euer-ruling King, whose infinite power and majesty our
wits can not comprehend; whose glorious brightness with our mortal eyes, we
can not behold; whose woonderous works and manifold mercies the tongs of men
can not sufficiently declare. Good Lord I yield thee most humble thanks, for
thy singular great gifts and benefits bestowed upon me a sinner. Good Lord thou
have blessed me with knowledge, with increase and plenty of all things; thou
have given me friends, health, and rest, that I should eat my meat with
joy, and praise thee in all thy gifts and works. I know that I have no good
thing, but it comes from thee, and oulie for thy mercies sake, thou have so
regarded me thy servant. Wherefore good Lord, I beseech thee to grant me thy
grace withal, that I may use these thy gifts to thy honor and glory, and the
comfort of them that need; that using the talent which thou have lent me, I
may become a good servant, and obtain eternal bliss, the promised hire to
such as do well. Uouchsafe good Lord, for thy son our Savior Jesus Christ
his sake, to hear my prayers.

Almighty God, refresh me with thy grace, I beseech thee; comfort me with thy
mercy, and bless me; that safe from all evils, free from fear of all
dangers, in peace and quietness, I may sing praises to thy holy name, and
rejoice in thee with thine elected for ever and ever,

Amen.
A prayer to be said in time of quietness and prosperity.
Give us good Lord, the comfortable and healthful spirit of thy grace and
abundant favor, that we may without ceasing make our continual boast of thy
praise. We know, and from the bottom of our hearts confess, that thou have
dealt more lovingly with us, than thou have done with our next neighbors,
whose painful miseries, and bloody broiles may be a sufficient warning unto
us, to hate our sin and iniquity, least the like calamity or ever we be
aware, do compass and hedge us round about. Give us grace therefore in time of
peace and happy prosperity, so to walk, that thy fatherly blessings be not
withdrawn nor taken from us, and the rod of thy sharp correction laid upon
our necks, even in such sort as thou have visited our brethren in other
countries, whose bodies, by the means of civil dissension, have been made a
pray to the sword.

We hear and understand, that not far off, but even hard at the gates of our
borders, the father is ready in arms to seek the destruction of his son:
the son is as greedy to gape for the blood of his father. We hear how
violently the brother thirsts after the blood of his brother, friend is
against friend, neighbor against neighbor, young men are murdered, old men
are suddenly slain, many a wife is husbandlesse, many a child is desolate
and fatherless. The cruel hearted enemy spares none, he makes havoc, no
tears can stay him from his affectioned tyranny. The tender infants are
haled from the earnefull paps of their weeping mothers, and torn to
peece-meale before the sorrowful eyes of their careful parents. Old age is
contemned, godly matrones are abused, virgins are defloured and ravished by
violence; a spectacle of extreme cruelty for us to behold, and a glass of
great carfulness for us to look upon, that have worthily deserved like or
far greater punishments.

Yet with-holdest thou from us thy scourge, although our offenses are so great
and diverse, that might heap up the sentence of thine exceeding justice against
us. In place of war and bloody battle, thou have given unto us prosperity,
and perfect peace. In place of penury, dearth and scarsitie, thou have given
us increase, fullness, and great plenty. In stead of discord and dissension,
thou have sent us unity and concord: and by thy celestial providence we are
defended from the cruel enemy, and from the domestical and civil war. And
besides these thy gracious gifts, to heap up our consolation and joy, thou
have given us thy true and lively word, as a lantern to direct us, and guide
our footesteps from vanity to virtue; from wickedness to godly wisdom; from
licentious liberty to newness of life, and godly conversation. Besides all
these thine inestimable graces, freely bestowed upon us, thou have given us
godly and zealous Preachers, which plentiouslie break unto us, out of thine
eternal testament, the bread of life; whereon good Lord give our souls such
power to feed by faith, that they may be nourished to eternal joy; and we by
the diligent observing and obeieng of thy commandments, may be preserved from
all kind of dissension; and peaceably enioie the fruits of pure peace and
trusty tranquillity. Grant this, O merciful Father, for thy son Christ's
sake, our only Savior and Redeemer Christ Jesus,

Amen.
A godly and fruitful prayer to be said in time of bloody battle.
O Lord our heavenly Father, and everliving God, we thy wretched and most
miserable creatures confess and acknowledge, we have woorthilie deserved the
rod of thy correction and punishment: and do merit many sharp and bitter
stripes, that knowing thy blessed and glorious will, have of set purpose
contemned thy divine and heavenly precepts; for which cause the sentence of
thy wrath is sharply kindled against us, even as it has been against thy
chosen people Israel, in the days of our forefathers, who glorieng in their
wickedness, were plagued in the fullness of thine indignation. The sword of
their enemies beset them round about, and hemmed them in on every side. The
Iebusites, the Ammonites, the Philistines and the Amorites oppressed them
diuerselie: their strong holds were rased, their cities were besieged, their
houses were ransacked, their goods and their riches were carried away by force
of the bloud-thirstie enemy: their young men were led away captive, their
virgins were woefully defloured. But in fine, when thou Lord God did behold
their hearty and earnest contrition, thou did withdraw thy frowning
countenance, and sentest them speedy and safe deliverance.

One while thou Lord sentest them Moses, to bring them out of the servitude of
Pharao, the stony and stubborne-harted king of the Egyptians: another while
Iephthah set them free from the sword of the Ammonites, wherewith they were
greeuouslie afflicted: and to make thy power and excellent glory fully
known, thou gave Samson much fortitude to bridle the proud Philistines. Over
and besides these, thou of thy love and miraculous goodness have made feeble
women mighty and victorious conquerors. Debora was a shield to thy people:
Judith comforted the distressed Bethulians, and cut off the head of proud
Holophernes: that thy self good Lord, when thou beholdedst their tears, and
hearty sorrow for their offenses, did prepare thy self to go forth with
their hoasts. Thou thy self, I say, with the breath of thy nostrils, did
confound and overthrow their enemies.

So good Lord, be thou now present with us in the fullness of thy divine power:
look upon us with the eyes of thy favorable pity. Forget our corrupt and
most filthy offenses: let our contrite and sorrowful hearts be a mean to
vanquish thy displeasure conceived against us: be thou present with us in this
time of necessity and trouble: set thy hand to help and assist us against the
enemy: be thou present with us in this time of peril and danger: go thou
forth with our hosts: then shall we be assured to prevail: let not the
multitude of furious foes dismaie us. For victory we do know consists not
in the power nor strength of many men, horses, armor nor weapons; but it is
thou, O merciful Father, that give the conquest, where and to whom thou
please. To thee therefore in this great extremity we fly and appeal;
beseeching thee of thine inestimable love and kindness, for the love of our
Savior Jesus Christ, to look upon our true repentant hearts, and in the
fullness of thy miserations and pities, to set us free from the power of the
raging enemy, and to pardon our sins and grievous offenses, that henceforth
we may vow and dedicate our hearts and minds wholly to walk in integrity and
newness of life: which grant good Lord, to whom with thy son Christ Jesus,
and the holy Ghost, be praise and glory attributed for ever and ever, world
without end,

Amen.
A godly prayer to be said in time of any common plague, private affliction
or trouble.
OEternall and everliving God, the Father of all consolation and comfort,
vouchsafe of thine infinite love and kindness to strengthen me with thy
heavenly grace, patiently to bear and with meekness to suffer this cross
of affliction and trouble, which thou have laid upon me for the use of sin
and iniquity. I know, O gracious and loving Father, that my deserts are such
as woorthilie have provoked thee to displeasure. The burden of my sins are
intolerable, for the which I must acknowledge, and earnestly from the bottom
of my heart confess, that justly thou have corrected and visited me; yet not
in the fullness of thy fury, but according to thy fatherly love and
kindness. And albeit thy rod lie heavy upon my shoulders; yet in this time of
thy correction I am comforted greatly, knowing assuredly that thou correctest
and simitest where thou love: thou woundest, and healest again: thou
throwest down to hell, and liftest up again to heaven: such and so great is
thine omnipotency, that thou rulest above the firmament, in earth, floods, and
the lowermost parts of hell.

In heaven the Angels, Archangels, the souls of thy Saints, the blessed
company of Martyrs give thee praise, glory and veneration. The sun, the
moon, and glistering stars, each one of them in their course and quality show
themselves obedient unto thy will. In earth the beasts of the field, and the
seely feathered fowls of the air in their order seem to set forth thy
glory and praise. In the deep waters the fishes of the sea are ready to
observe thy will, and in their manner they as thy creatures give thee due honor
and reverence. But among these, man, whom thou by thy divine will and pleasure
have endued with reason, and in his creation, concerning the inward man, had
fashioned him to thy similitude and likeness, is now most prone and willing to
be (by the ministers of darkness) seduced and carried away from virtue to
vice; from godliness to all impiety; from obedience to wilful breach and
contempt of thy precepts: so that diligence is banished by negligence. And such
is the power of our flesh, that our eyes, which should have their chiefest
contemplation and delight in perusing and reading thy glorious and sacred
Gospel (wherein we may behold thee crucified and slain, O sweetest Savior
Christ Jesus, perfect God and perfect man, by whose innocent death and bloody
passion, atonement is made betwixt thy Father and us) are so dazeled with the
dim and dark mists of Satan, that they are occupied in the beholding of
mundane and transitory pleasures; all which in effect vanish and wear away,
even as the flower that either is parched by the force of Phoebus radiant
beams, or by Winters storms and horie frosts consumed.

Our ears, which thou have given to us to hear, and understand the sacred and
divine mysteries contained in thy holy law, are made deaf of purpose; so
that they glory more in fables and loathsome leasings, than they conceive
delight in the zealous predication of thine Evangelical and heavenly
doctrine. Our hearts are hardened like the Adamant; so that for the greatest
part they can not brook thy testimonies: they continually lust and desire to
be satisfied with worldly wealth, honor and dignity. And who beholds not
in these days, what cruel conflict and bloody fight there is betwixt good
conscience and filthy avarice, the root of all mischief and evil? Naie, who
sees not in this age, plain dealing murdered by deceit and faithless fraud?
Who now beholds not true meaning strangled by forged flattery and loathsome
leasings? The bowels of compassion and pity are shut up by violent oppression
and tyranny.

Our feet are willing to tread the paths of pride, fornication and
uncleanness. Our hands are ready to offer wrong and injury to the innocent:
yea and in fine, whatsoever thou have given unto us to spread and set forth
thy glory and honor, is by sin so corrupted, that we make the members of
our bodies (which by grace and of pure love are ingraffed in the body of
Christ, the rich and great shepherd of our souls) the very members of
Satan. So that of set purpose our transgression abounding, we fly from Christ
the rock and strong pillar of our salvation; and run headlong to death and
utter destruction of body and soul. Yet like a loving God and merciful
Father, thou call us home again by thy word, wherein not only thy mercies,
but also thy terrible threats are thundered forth against us, for our
impenitencie. But when neither thy manifold mercies, freely of thine abundant
goodness offered unto us in Jesus Christ, can move nor stir us to handfast
contrition; neither yet thy terrible comminations and thretnings can reclame
nor call us back from the dangerous puddle of our sins: then thou sendest
forth thy plagues and punishments; as pestilence, famine and bloody sword,
intending thereby to drive us to amendment of life, and to acknowledge thine
omnipotency.

But when thou beholdest our true repentant hearts, our sobs and sighing tears
powered forth before the throne of thy divine Majesty; thou withdrawest from
us the terror of thine indignation and vengeance; the rod of thy correction is
laid aside; thy displeasure justly conceived against us for the continual
exercise of sin, is utterly forgotten; and by the intercession of thy son
Jesus Christ, that sits on thy right hand, in glory permanent and
everlasting, like a loving Father, and most merciful God; the siluered scepter
of peace is offered unto us, with all other thy gracious benefits; that thine
anger is converted to clemency; thy displeasure is turned to loving kindness;
and in fine, thine indignation is so calmed by thine abundant grace and mercy;
that like a loving and gentle Father, thine arms are stretched forth,
ioifullie to embrace and receive us to thy favor again. All this I know to
be most certain and true. For when, or at what tune soever we shall appear
before the gates of mercy, and by the means and power of a constant and
lively faith knock thereat; thou art ready to open unto us; not for any of
our deserts; but for the merits of Jesus Christ, the fullness of thy divine
miseration, compassion and pity. And whenever we shall call upon thee, with
lowliness and meekness of our hearts and minds, bewailing woefully our
heinous offenses committed against thee; thine ears are most attentive to
hear, and willingly do grant us our petitions.

Wherefore, O most gracious and loving father, we come unto thee with sorrowful
and contrite hearts, beseeching thee for the love of thine anointed son Jesus
Christ our Messiah, Savior, and Redeemer, to behold and look upon us with the
eyes of compassion and pity. And albeit we have worthily deserved this thy
plague and punishment, yet respect thou not our deseruings, least in thy fury
and indignation we be confounded and perish. Have an eye rather to thy son
Jesus Christ, behold his bloody wounds, which yet are fresh and green, and
never stint bleeding. Think upon the bitter and painful torments that he
suffered for us upon the cross, in whose name we beseech thee favorably to
look upon our infirmities, mercifully to hear our prayers and petitions
offered unto thee, and graciously for the glory of thy name sake, to take and
withdraw from us this thy heavy rod of correction, which our sinful lives,
and contempt of thy precepts have heaped heavily on our necks.

Give us patience to suffer whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon us.
Give us grace alwaie to call and cry upon thy holy and blessed name, and
faithfully with tears to say unto thee continually: Spare us good Lord,
spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, neither yet
good Lord be thou angry with us for ever. Grant this O merciful father, for
the love of thy only son Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy
Ghost, be all honor, glory and praise ascribed forever,

Amen.
A prayer for patience in trouble, and meekelie to suffer adversity.
Gracious Lord, and omnipotent God, whose mercy is everlasting and infinite,
bow down thine ear, and harken unto this my prayer, which I make before thy
divine Majesty, most humbly beseeching thee, of thine accustomed goodness,
to indue me with the works of mercy, and deeds of charity; and above all
things to give me patience in adversity, meekelie to suffer, and patiently to
take, whatsoever it shall please thee to lay upon me, and never to murmur or
to grudge thereat, but always to think thy loving and gentle correction to be
much less, than the deserts of my great and manifold offenses.

Again, if I be not under correction, then am I not thy child. For what father
is he, who corrects not his children, whom he most entirely loves? This
then is an evident token that thou love us, when as thou correctest us. For
as the scripture says, Whom God loves, him he chasteneth. Thou see all
things, thou understand and know all things; so that not so much as one
little sparowe lights upon the ground, without thy knowledge: yea our very
thoughts are foreknowne unto thee. Thou disposest and orderest all things, as
seems best to thy holy will and pleasure. By thy help I may do all things;
without thee I can do nothing. When thou powrest upon us thy creatures, thy
good gifts and benefits: when thou bestowest upon us prosperity, health,
wealth, and such like, thou dooest it to this intent, that we acknowledging the
same, should thereby be encouraged to serve, honor, and humbly obeie thee,
and always praise and magnify thy glorious name. Contrariwise, when thou
strikest us with thy rod of correction, as plaging us with great mortality;
suffering our enemies to invade us; robbers for to spoil us; poverty to
oppress us; or fire to consume those things which thou have lent us, for the
maintenance of our bodies in this mortal life: thou do it to put us in
mind, that we have transgressed thy commandments, that we have not harkned
unto thee, neither done that which is acceptable in thy sight, but willingly
falling into the puddle of sin, and following our own appetites, have provoked
thy just wrath and indignation against us.

Thus thou dealest with us, O Lord, to the intent that we suffering bodily
punishment, and feeling the smart of the same, may thereby be admonished of our
duty, and with true compunction of heart, desire to be released from thy
scourges, which we have deserved, and worthily receive: and then acknowledge
our selves to be lost children, and straieng sheep, may both see and be
ashamed of our unbridled affections and wilfulness, which have brought us to
calamity and misery, and with the true penitent to say:

We are not worthy (most merciful Father) to lift up our eyes or voice unto
thee, for our manifold sins and wickedness. Nevertheless, presuming upon
thine abundant mercy (who refusest none that do call upon thee) most
lamentably we do cry, Have mercy upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us
miserable sinners, being now greeuouslie afflicted with the burden of
punishment and affliction, which thou have laid upon us. Put thou therefore
away displeasure conceived against us thy poor creatures, and grant us, that
being warned by this, we may ever hereafter serve thee in newness of life,
and never commit any thing which shall displease or offend thee.

This O heavenly father, I acknowledge to be our duty. But though I, for my
part, have not performed the same, as I ought to do; yet I beseech thine
inestimable goodness, not to execute the rigor of thy justice upon me: but to
state thine hand, and before thou give me any greater wound, to behold my
humility and repentance, which being not able to recompense and satisfy the
trespasses, which I against thee have committed; do offer unto thee (according
as the poor widow did) all that which I am able to give, that is, a sorrowful
contrition of heart for my former offenses done and passed.

Thy justice, as it is right; so is it rigorous to sinners. Thou art so
gealous, and so much do detest sin, that thou sparest not to punish thy
very elect and chosen servants, when as they fall into it. Who was more
acceptable in thy sight, than that holy Prophet King David, of whom thou thy
self did say, I have found a man according to mine own heart, even David my
servant: yet nevertheless, diverse and sundry ways did thou punish him,
when that he had swarued from thy testimonies. Thou sufferedst him to be
molested with the insurrection of his own son; thou did send the prophet
unto him, to offer him the choice of plagues which thou would send upon him,
for his wicked living: but when he with sorrowful sighs, and trickling tears
turned unto thee, confessing his fault, craving pardon, and promising amendment
of life, thou forgatest thine anger, and forgauest his offense.

Other of thy chosen vessels thou have permitted to be greeuouslie tormented,
and vexed by sundry troubles and adversities, only to try their faith and
steadfastness toward thee. As thou did suffer that patient man Job, to be
most cruelly entreated by that enemy of all mankind, to have his houses
burned and spoiled, his cattle taken away, his servants driven into bondage,
his children to be slain, his own body to be afflicted with most loathsome
diseases, plagues and sores. And all this thou did not for any evil deed
of his, but to show thine omnipotency and power. For when thou had tried
him to the utmost, and found that his enemy the devil could not prevail
against him, or by any pain and grief cause him to blaspheame and speak
evil of thee, thou did reduce him to health, thou did enrich him
again, thou did restore unto him again his children, friends, family,
and all his goods, with much more than ever he before possessed: showing most
manifestly, that thou will reward them most plentiouslie, which do love thee,
follow and observe thy commandments.

Wherefore I beseech thee to give me grace, that whatsoever way it shall
please thee to visit me with thy punishment, I may take it patiently, and say
with patient Job; Naked came I into this world, and naked shall I return to
the earth again: the Lord gives, the Lord takes away, even as it pleases
the Lord, so be it. Suffer me not to despair, or to think that thou dealest
unjustly with me, but to say; Shall I receive prosperity at the Lords hand,
and not to be content with adversity? And alwaie to think upon this, Happy
are they whom thou do punish. For though thou make a wound, thou also
give a plaster: though thou smitest, thy hand makes whole again. Mine
iniquity is great, but be thou merciful unto my wickedness. O deliver me from
thine anger, and press me not further than I shall be able to bear. But now
that I acknowledge that whatsoever trouble thou have sent me, or wilt lay upon
me, is either for the punishment of mine iniquity, or for the trial of my
constancy, I may with repentant David find remission of my sins, and with
patient Job, release of mine adversity, and obtain such favor in thy sight,
that thou never again so greeuouslie punish me; but that I may so pass this
life, that I may afterward live with thee, to whom be honor and glory for
ever and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer in trouble and adversity.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me most miserable creature,
which do that which I ought not, and fear that which I have most justly
deserved. If I weigh with my self the wickedness that I have done; the
punishment thereby deserved is not half so great, as the sin that I have
committed. But thou art a merciful God, and thy judgments are right, neither
dooest thou at any time punish us unjustly. Thou almighty God made us, when
as we were not; and when as we were lost and damned, thou did miraculouslie
restore us. I know and I am sure, that our life is not led by sudden and
uncertain motions; but is disposed and directed by thee; thou have a fatherly
care of us all, but especially of such as do put their whole trust and
confidence in thy mercy.

Therefore I humbly pray and beseech thee, that thou would not deal with
me after my deseruings; but according to thy great mercy, which does exceed
the sins of the whole world. And as often as thou dooest punish me
outwardly, give me grace inwardly with patience to bear the same, and that
thy praise never depart out of my mouth. Order my doings, even as shall be
most necessary both for my body and soul. Thou only have power over all
things, thou know all things, to thee be all honor for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer in trouble, for the obteining of mercy.
BEhold, out from the bottom of my heart do I cry unto thee, O Lord,
beseeching thee that thou would save me from the bottomless pit of hell. I
know that there is mercy with thee; do not therefore mark what I have done
amiss. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for then can I by no means
be justified in thy sight. The remembrance of mine offenses is grievous unto
me, and therefore I right humbly crave pardon thereof. My heart is troubled,
my soul is vexed, there is no health in my flesh. Forsake me not mine only
stay and comfort: despise not my contrite heart, open the bosom of thy mercy:
take clean away mine iniquity, bring my soul out of tribulation, turn the
extremity of thy justice, into thy tender mercy. And when thou shall come to
judge the quick and the dead, be not revenged on me by eternal damnation; but
to take me amongst thine elect, into the blessed state of salvation. Grant
this, O Father, for Christ his sake, our mediator and advocate,

Amen.
Another.
O Lord my God, although I have committed that, whereby I am an offender, can I
make my self not to be thy creature? Though through sin I have lost my
cleanness and purity; have I also taken away thy goodness and mercy?
Though I have committed that, wherefore thou may condemn me; have thou not
done that, whereby thou may save me? True it is, O Lord, that my conscience
does show me, that I have deserved damnation; but thy mercy exceeds all
offension. Spare me, O God, because it is not impossible for thy power; it is
not unmeet for thy mercy, it is not unaccustomed, or yet contrary to thine
infinite goodness. Wherefore thou which have created me, do not destroy me.
Thou, O Jesus, which have redeemed me, do not condemn me. Thou which have made
me, let not thy work be cast away by my wickedness. Wipe away all that is
mine, and draws me from thee; and knowledge all that is thine in me, and may
bring me unto thee, which live and reignest one God in persons three, to
whom be all honor, now and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer, wherein the penitent longs for comfort.
HOw long, O Lord, will thou turn away thy face from me? How long will thou
be angry with thy servant? How long shall I abide mourning and solitary, as
the bird that has lost her young? O Lord think on me in thy mercies, and do
not correct me in thy wrath: for then shall I become as the dust and smoke in
the wind. O Lord forsake not thy servant Israel, whom thou have chosen. My heart
being comforted in thy mercies shall rejoice, and I will sing unto thee, and
praise thee in thy good works and miracles, which thou have done in our fathers
time: So be it.

Being tempted by the ghostly enemy (as all that fear God are) to doubt in
any article of the Catholic faith, to despair in Gods mercy, to yield to
melancholy fancies, to be vexed with unkindness of friends, or the malice of
enemies, to be troubled with sickness, or any other ways oppressed with
grief of body and mind: say devoutly as follows.
I Humbly accept most merciful Jesus, this heavy temptation, which now I
suffer at the hands of thy divine providence; and would a greater if thou
please to lay it on me for thy sake, who have ordained this from the
beginning, for the tender love thou bear to the health of my sinful soul:
and I most heartily thank thee for it. I confess I have deserved worse for
my sin and unkindness toward thee, and am not worthy to receive any
comfort or consolation at thy hands. Therefore to the honor of the passion, and
death, which thou willingly sufferedst on the cross, I offer my self to
sustain this, or any other adversity, with all my heart, not seeking
otherwise ease or relief, than in and by thee, O Lord, and as thy good will
and pleasure shall appoint. Yet this one thing I crave and beseech thee, for
the tender love thou bear to me, and all mankind, (for in me is no virtue,
or ought that good is) to help and assist me with thy holy spirit, as my
trust is thou will, who promisest that no man shall be tempted more than he
shall be able to bear. And give me all what ever shall be necessary, to
sustain with patience this cross and temptation, which thy divine wisdom
has appointed for me; to the intent that I bearing the same willingly with
thee here in this world, may conceive assured hope to be partaker of thy glory
in the world to come. Grant this my request, most merciful Savior, not for my
merit or deserving, but only for the merits of thy death and bitter passion, I
humbly beseech thee,

Amen.
A prayer against the fear of worldly casualties.
O Most bountiful and loving Father, mine only guider and comforter, the well
of mercy, the true light of the world, take away the darkness of my mind,
lighten my heart and senses, indue me with thy grace, arm me so strongly with
sure hope, confidence and trust in thee, that I never be driven into fear,
either by the subtle invasions of our ghostly enemy Satan, or by the
crafty wiliness of the world, neither yet by loss, damage, hurt or
hinderance of any of those vain and transitory things, which we in this
world do possess: but always whatsoever shall become of them, to think that
they are but things lent, and not our own, and that we shall make a straight
account of the use or abuse of them; whereby the more we possess thereof, the
greater shall be our pain, if we abuse them.

Wherefore take from me all inward heaviness, thought and care, for any
loss or discommoditie received by worldly goods; and always to think, that
as well poverty as riches, needinesse as abundance; sickness as health;
adversity as prosperity; come from thee: and that it is known to thine
inscrutable judgment only, why and wherefore thou sendest either of these
upon us. And therefore let not my mind be troubled with any fear of things to
chance, (saving only to fear to displease thee:) but always to be merry in
thee with sobernes, and to cast all my care of worldly affairs upon thee;
forasmuch as thou have commanded that we should not be careful what to eat,
or what to drink, or with what raiment we shall be clothed. For thou will not
see the righteous forsaken, or their children begging their bread; and that
thou turnest all things to the best to them that serve thee, and fly unto thee
for succor, in the time of their distress.

Let this, O Lord, be evermore fresh in my memory, graven in my heart; and
ready in my mouth: so that I leaving all needless fear, may always give
thanks unto thee, and praise thy holy name,

Amen.
A prayer to be delivered from enemies and dangers.
O Most mighty Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which did lead the
children of Israel through the red sea, and made the streams of Jordan run
back into their springs again, that thy people might pass through the midst
thereof. Good Lord, whose heasts the floods obeyed; at whose voice the hills do
leap, and the earth does tremble. O most mighty Lord, which can destroy
the proudest kings with very flies and ants: which made little David to
triumph on the giant Goliath, which deliueredst his enemy king Saul into his
hands: gave Gedeon thy servant, with his few soldiers, victory of so many
legions of strong men. Thou which have subdued so many mighty kings, and
sundry nations, unto thy people Israel. O God, which workest all in all
things, which give victory always as seems best to thine unsearchable
wisdom: defend me always, I beseech thee, against mine enemies, and all
evils; that my ship tossed and beaten in the waves of this world, may rest in
thy happy haven of everlasting joy for ever.

My soul cleaves unto thy mercy, as to an holy sanctuary. O God, if thou
should not be merciful, who could abide the heat of thy displeasure? But
thou O Lord, art good to thy servants: and I hope to see thy goodness in the
land of the living. All glory be to the most high and merciful God, for ever
and ever,

Amen.
A prayer for righteous judgment, in matters of controversy.
O Lord God of all justice, which in equal balance dooest weigh the cause of
the Prince and of the poorest man, which despisest not the suites of the
simple, which deliuerest the captive, and comfortest the desolate and careful.
O Lord, which have blessed them that are poor in spirit: relieve thy servant
oppressed with grief, remove from me the clouds of my sorrows. O Lord,
stretch forth thy mighty hand, and help me. Let me not sink in the seas of
slander and shame. Thou know the secrets of my heart: defend me in mine
innocence, plead thou my cause against the ungodly, which have laid their
net for me. O God, thou which have delivered Joseph, Daniel, Mardocheus and
Susanna, from captivity and instant death; and did cloth them with honor:
good Lord strengthen me, and be my defender against all evils: and let not the
poisoned arrows of malicious tongues do me any harm. Grant these my
prayers, good Lord, I beseech thee, for our Savior Jesus Christ his sake,

Amen.
A Psalm to be said after trouble escaped.
MY soul rejoice in God, for he is my light, and my defense, my help, the
lantern to my feet. He has heard my prayer, when I called on him, he has
helped me in my need, he has delivered me in my dangers. The Lord is the
keeper of my life, from whom shall I shrink; whom shall I fear? Lieng
prostrate at the feet of my Lord, I bewailed my case, and he heard my plaint;
he forsakes not his servants. Wherefore, if armies of men stood up against me,
I should not fear. For if God be on my side, who can prevail against me? He
is happy and safe, whom God, the mighty God of Israel keeps. The Sun shall
not burn him by day, nor the Moon by night. Chrise blessed is he that
fears the Lord, for he shall see happy days. As the Heart thirsts after
the water springs, so my soul has longed for my Lord, the living God. When
shall I come to appear before thy presence, to see thee in thy glorious
majesty, face to face? O Lord let thy kingdom come. Come Lord Jesus, that I
may see the day of my redemption. Good Lord make have to help me. All glory,
majesty, and empire, be unto God the Creator, God the Redeemer, and God the
holy Comforter, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Comfortable exhortations against the manifold assaults of Satan.
IF thou perceive that the storm of temptation does very often and
greeuouslie assault thee, dismaie not therefore thy self, neither be
displeased with thy self, as though almighty God nothing regarded thee; but
rather thank him that he instructs and teaches thee, as one to be his heir;
that he punishes and corrects thee, as his most dear soune; that he
proves and assaieth thee as his well-beloved friend. It is a manifest and great
token, that man is reject from the mercy and favor of God, when he is
troubled with no temptation.

In thy temptation remember the holy Apostle S. Paul, which being rapt to the
mysteries of the third heaven, was vexed with the Angel of Satan. Remember the
temptation of the holy man Job, and other which were greeuouslie troubled with
their offenses. O happy and fortunate man, in whom this earthly Adam is so
mortified and subdued, that it in no wise resists the spirit! But whether
this perfect quietness may be in any, I will not affirm; peradventure it is
not necessary to be. For Paul in this life, notwithstanding his high
perfection and grace, had a motion of the flesh to vex and trouble him. And
when he thrice desired God to be delivered from the said motion, he only had
this answer: Paul, my grace is sufficient, for virtue is made perfect by
vexation. Paul was vexed by pride, that he should not be proud: to be perfect
and strong in God, he was caused to be weak and feeble. For he carried the
treasure of heavenly revelation in a frail and brittle vessel, that the
honor and victory should only be in God, not in himself. This one example
of Paul, is erudition and learning in many things, when that we be entised
and moved to sin, that we diligently call to almighty God by prayer.

Remember that David the Prophet, King Solomon, and Peter the Apostle,
notwithstanding they were great lights and examples of holiness, yet they fell
into grievous and great sins, whom almighty God peradventure suffered to
fall for this cause, specially that thou should not despair. Lift up thy
self therefore upon thy feet, and with high courage, and bold stomach return
again into battle against thy enemies, not only more fierce and bold, but
also more ware and diligent. And think with thy self what intolerable and
invincible temptations Christ suffered for thee; wherein there appeared no
help, comfort, aid, nor defense any where; wherein God and the whole world
seemed to be his most cruel and malicious enemies, when that he cried alowd,
My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me? Truly this was a most grievous,
painful, and bitter temptation, which Christ suffered for us, that he might
make the way of the cross easy for us.

Therefore prepare thy self patiently to drink of that cup, which Christ
Jesus thy head has so willingly drunk on, for the salvation of all mankind.
And seeing therefore that Christ so willingly put himself in subjection, and
dipped himself in those so horrible and intolerable sorrows and calamities
(our most loving and heavenly father willing the same out of doubt,) he also
understands and knows our infirmity: out of doubt he taking compassion on
us, will not extremely deal with us; but will rather bear with our
imbecillitie and weakness. Does not he himself calling all men unto him
say? Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. What greater comfort I pray you can be given us? How could Christ speak
more mercifully unto us?

There be many things that greeuouslie vex and trouble man, but what thing
can more cruelly vex and torment his conscience overwhelmed with sin, than
when he doubts of the mercy of God? When he dreadeth least God be his
adversary, and will reject him? When he is not able to conceive this faith of
his mercy; and does imagine himself to be cast away, as a dry member that
is cut off?

Be present here, O Jesus Christ with thine aid and help; here we have
need of thy comfort: let not this black, violent and horrible tempest of
troubles overthrow and drown wretched man.

But there is no cause why we should doubt. Christ is true, he will make his
promise to appear, he will help us and refresh us. Therefore, whereas thy
faith is not strong enough; whereas thou feel thy self to doubt of Gods
mercy; and have well-neere no faith at all; streightwaies call upon God;
bewail thy misery and lack of belief before him; seek for his aid and
succor by fervent prayer, and he will both help and refresh thee; he has
taken upon him thus to do, and he will bring it to pass.

But take heed thou cease not to call upon God; beseech thou, without ceasing,
the father of all consolation and comfort, with sighs from the bottom of
thine heart, that he turn not his face from thee: lay thy weakness upon
him, and power out into his bosom all things which trouble and torment thee.
Cry out with his disciples; O Lord increase my faith. Likewise say thou with
the father of the lunatike child; Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief;
make haste O Lord to help me, before that I oppressed with this weight be
drowned. O most loving and most merciful father; Lord God of my health, our
only help and refuge: enter not into judgment with thy servants. Christ is
my righteousness, redemption and innocence, which suffered most bitter and
cruel death for my sake. Let those things move thee O father of all
compassion; have mercy upon me for thy sons sake; confirm and strengthen my
heart by faith in Christ; comfort me with the consolations of the holy Ghost,
that I may enioie the true ioies of everlasting life, through the merits of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be
all praise and glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
A godly meditation of the unspeakable ioies of heaven, and the intolerable
pains of hell, very often to be remembered.
O God, my Lord, my hearts delight, with whom my soul longs to dwell in that
heavenly Jerusalem; wherein is continual health, eternal felicity, happy
liberty, and perfect blessedness; where men shall be like unto the Angels of
God, and just men shall shine as the Sun, in the everlasting kingdom,
wherein is no heaviness, no sorrow, no grief, no fear, no labor, no death,
no disease, no lack, no hunger, no thirst, no cold, nor heat; no weariness
of fasting, nor temptation of the enemy, no will to sin, nor power to do
evil, no old age, no lame or deformed person, no fear of poverty, or
weakness by disease; but a quiet harbor of all joy, and everlasting
happiness, where men in the society of Angels, shall continually dwell
without any infirmity of the flesh. For there is infinite joy, and eternal
bliss, from whence none shall be removed, that once by thy providence shall
enter therein.

There is rest from labors, peace from the enemy, a new kind of joy and
delight, such as no heart can conceine, save only by taking a marvelous
delight, and exceeding pleasure in the beholding of thee my Lord God, my
glorious redeemer, and the heavenly comforter, which proceeds from the
Father and the Son. O heavenly Jerusalem, thou art sweet and beautiful in
all thy ioies and delights! There are no such miseries in thee, as we feel and
suffer in this poor and miserable life. There is in thee no darkness, nor
change of time: the shining of the Moon; the twinkling brightness of the
Stars gives not light in thee: but only the God of all power, glory and
majesty, the light of lights. For in thee the Sun of justice gives light to
those that are adopted in his blood to euer-during blessedness.

The bright and immaculate Lamb, a most beautiful light is thy light, that
does illuminate his chosen children. The King of kings is in the midst of
thee, environed on each side with his beloved Saints, and ready to crown them
with everlasting glory. In thee are legions of Angels, singing of sweet Hymns
and songs, that set forth the praise and honor of thy name: in thee are the
fellowship of heavenly citizens: in thee rests the sweet solemnity of all
such as return from this miserable pilgrimage unto thy glory; the company of
the Prophets, Apostles, and victorious army of Martyrs; holy men and women,
which have vanquished the pleasures of the world, have their abiding with thee.
There are young children and maidens, which have passed over their days in
holiness of life, publishing thy praise in all purity and piety. Every one
reioiceth in his degree, though not equal in glory, yet like in ioies and
gladness. For there reigns perfect charity, and God is all in all, whose
Majesty without end they see continually, and still in beholding him their
love increases.

Of this eternal blessedness the holy Apostle Peter had as it were a
shadow, or a taste, upon the mount Thabor, at the transfiguration of Christ,
from whence he desired he might not depart. Paul also had a proof of it, when
he was rapt or taken up into the third heaven, where he heard words, and saw
things so marvelous and secret, as far passes all man's understanding, and
such as were not to be told or revealed unto men. Moses his face became so
bright, through the conversation that he had with the divine glory upon mount
Sinai; that the Israelites could not abide it. What then shall become of us,
when perpetually with thee (which art the Lord of all glory) we shall be
conversant, after the manner of thy children and familiar friends? Who is he
then, that will not seek and desire by all means possible, to be a dweller
there; both for the desire of peace, joy and eternity; and for the perfect
sight of God?

Contrariwise, who is able to express the torments appointed for the ungodly
and unrepentant livers; in that deadly place called Hell, which Satan
himself abhors? What other thing can be there, but continual pains,
eternal tribulation, and infinite calamity, repleat with all evils? There
dwell wicked and ouglie Angels, whose horrible looks bring sudden fear,
grievous pains, and fearful death, with continual clouds of euer-during
darkness. There is nothing but howling, wailing, lamentation and mourning
without all end; fearful scriches, and confused cries are there in all places
suddenly raised. There the woorme of conscience never dies: in that damnable
dungeon, there is fire unquenchable, and perpetual gnashing of teeth. The
miserable soul finds there no rest, but is afflicted with all kind of
torments, and such as can never be expressed; all which endure for ever.

Alas, little avails it those that are subjected as firebrans of hell, to
cry unto the Lord: for he will not hear them. Then shall they know, that all
things which they had in this life are vain; and such things as they thought
to be pleasant, to be found more bitter than gall or poison. Then where is the
pleasure of the flesh, so termed falsely? For there is none other pleasure, but
to fear the Lord. Then shall they confess and say, that the judgment of God
is true and righteous, saying: Did we not hear of this, and yet would not be
converted from our wicked deeds? But then shall nothing prevail. No sorrow can
find comfort; no complaints, any remorse; no torments, ease; nor painful
passions an end: such and so exceeding are the vexations of the second death,
wherewith all the bodies and souls of the unrighteous shall for ever be
environed.

Since therefore, O heavenly Father, and most gracious God, it seems good to
thine eternal wisdom, by the knowledge of thine everlasting truth, to give me
knowledge of thine inestimable mercy offered freely unto me in Jesus Christ
my merciful Savior, in whose bloody death and painful passion I am assured
of eternal life and blessedness. Give me grace to print in my remembrance thy
manifold mercies, that feeding my soul by faith in thee, I may attain unto
those endless ioies, that thou have prepared for thine adopted sons and
chosen children, in the kingdom of everlasting righteousness: and so escape
those everlasting torments, which thou have prepared for the devil and his
Angels. From the which place of woeful vexation and endless misery, deliver
me O heavenly Father, for the love of Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all laud and praise for ever,

Amen.
A prayer to be said of the sick, at the hour of death.
MOst mighty art thou, O Lord, in all thy deeds, and most holy in all thy
ways. Blessed be the name of my father, my God, and glorious Creator; who by
his divine power, and celestial providence, of nothing made all things, fish,
flesh, fowls, fruits, trees, herbs, and all other things, whatsoever are
contained both in heaven, earth, seas, and the nethermost parts thereof. Man,
concerning the outward parts, thou by thy celestial providence and fatherly
bounty, framedst and createdst of claie; but concerning the inward substance
of thy creature man, thou did fashion and make him even according to thine
own similitude and likeness. Moreover, such and so great was thy love and
good will toward him, that all the creatures, or works of thy creation served
to this use. In earth thou made him lord and king over the fruits thereof:
the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the little
floods and great waters. In the firmament thou have placed the glistering
Sun, with his orient beams to give him light by day, and therewith thou
have given him the Moon and the stars to govern him by night. For the which
cause, above all other the works of thy creation, man should and ought of right
to give thee that glory, that to thee belongs.

But alas, such and so great is the corruption of our frail and sinful flesh,
that for all these thy graces we are carried away from thee, and enter into
contempt of thy precepts. For which cause thou oftentimes do correct and
punish us, to the intent we might thereby (feeling thy rod of correction) be
driven to embrace hearty and true repentance. But when thy threats, and the
stripes of thy displeasure laid upon us, can not take place amongst us: thou
oftentimes give us up to follow our lusts and affections: but at last, when
thou dooest behold our enormities, thou in a moment, by the power of thy divine
justice, restrainest the rope of our disordered liberty, and cuttest in sunder
the bridle of our voluptuousnes, either by sudden death, sword, fire, famine,
sickness, or other the divine sentences of thy conceived ire; to the intent
that other thy creatures might, by the terror of thy justice, avoid sin, and
learn to amend their lives, least they fall into the like calamity or danger.

True, and most true it is, good Lord, that by the exercise of sin we are the
children of death and destruction: but by grace of the almighty and victorious
conqueror sweet Jesus Christ, we are the adopted sons of thy Father, and
made fellowe-heires with thee our perfect Emanuel. In whose name with all
humility and lowliness of heart and mind, I come unto thee in this great
extremity of sickness and danger of death; beseeching thee to be present with
me, to forget mine offenses, to think upon thy mercies. And although I have
not deserved so much as the least drop of thy favor, by means of the great
burden of my sins, which are in the presence of thy divine Majesty, most
ouglie and loathsome to behold: yet respect thou not, O Father, mine iniquity;
but have an eye, I beseech thee, to the merits of my Savior Christ Jesus, to
whom as my Mediator, Savior and Redeemer, I appeal: who has promised comfort
and sweet consolation to all those, that in his name fly unto thee for
relief.

I confess that woorthilie thou have visited me with this sickness and
disease, and yet not according to the multitude of my sins; but in the
fullness of miseration and fatherly pity. Give me grace therefore in these
bitter brunts of death, who vehemently at this present begins to combat
with fainting and feeble life, constantly to cleave unto thee. Let not the
pleasures of this wicked world be a let or impediment for me to come unto thee:
let not my frail and feeble flesh subject to sin, which has through my
transgression made me a bondsman to death, move me to despair in thy great
mercy: neither yet let the caueling adversary, the enemy of mankind, at my
last end, triumph over me. Give me patience to suffer, and gladly to bear and
abide this thy scourge and visitation; and so fortify me in soul and body,
that so long as life shall endure in me, I may never cease to call upon thy
holy and blessed name. Yea and when death is most busiest, make thou me most
constant: yea when he seeks most strongly to assail my feeble body; give
me thy grace, good Lord, that I may in spirit, heart, mind, and all the powers
of my soul, give praises unto thee, that of thy grace and inestimable
kindness, have sent thy son Christ Jesus to ransom me, by his bloody death
and passion, from the power of hell.

Give me grace therefore, now that thou have appointed thy messenger death to
finish the days of my pilgrimage, and to call me by his summons from out of
this vale of misery and wretchedness, to build steadfastly upon him, and
faithfully to hope for life and salvation, in and alone through him. Let the
remembrance of my former wickedness be no more thought upon: let mine offenses
be blotted out of thy glorious sight. Behold my sorrowful and true repentant
heart, which come unto thee with tears, not building on my merits; but upon thy
mercies. Though I be sinful; thy son my Savior is righteous: though I be
wicked; yet he is most holy: though I be full of impiety; yet he is full of
all goodness: though I have greeuouslie offended thee; yet he has fully
contented thee: though I have transgressed thy law; yet he has fulfilled the
same, and has promised in his blood, to wash away their sins, that by faith
continue in him constant to the end. I therefore, in this my great and painful
agony, beholding death to be at the gates of my body, come unto thee, by the
virtue of a fruitful faith; beseeching thee, when thou shall see it meet and
convenient, that he shall dissolve the bands of this vading life, which
endures but a while (for a thousand years are as yesterdaie in thy sight) to
take my soul into thy glorious and blessed hands; and so to confirm me in thy
truth, that at the last, when it shall please thee, by the sound of a trumpe,
to raise my body from the grave, when and in which time body and soul shall
unite and come before thy presence, I may by faith in thee pass over the mount
of my corruption, shake off the bands of sin, be set free from death and
destruction; and being by the virtue of thy righteousness made holy, I may
triumph with happy victory over sin, death, and all the powers of hell, and
enter with thee, and the fellowship of thy chosen Saints, into everlasting rest.
Grant this, most loving Father, for Christ Jesus sake, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be rendered all laud, glory, honor and praise, for ever, Amen.

The Lord God be merciful to me; pardon and forgive me my sins, look upon
me with his gracious and blessed countenance: preserve me from the second
death, and everlasting destruction of body and soul. The Lord God justify me
in his death and blood; cloth me with his everlasting righteousness; and
register my name in the book of life. The Lord God comfort my guilty
conscience with the everlasting light of his bountiful favor; and lot my
place among his Saints in his heavenly kingdom. The Lord God for his mercies
sake, after this my bodily death, give me the fruition of his presence, in his
rich palace of endless glory, to whose merciful protection I commend with
all humility and reverence my soul. Lord Jesus preserve me, Lord Jesus
comfort me, Lord Jesus refresh me, Lord Jesus pray for me. For only into thy
hands that have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, I commend my soul,

Amen.
A devout meditation to be used after prayer.
REmember not, O Lord God, thine anger against me an offender, but be mindful
of thy mercy toward me a true penitent. Forget that through pride I have
provoked thee to ire; and favorably harken unto my prayer. What is Jesus, but
a Savior? Therefore O bountiful Jesus, be thou my Savior, rise up in thine
own strength to help me. Say unto my soul, I am thy safeguard. In thy
goodness do I trust, in thee is my help. And forasmuch as thou have willed,
that we should without ceasing seek and sue unto thee; behold, I being
counseled and foretold by thy commandments, do now both ask, seek, and
knock. But thou which command me to ask; grant that I may receive: thou
biddest me seek; make me to find: thou have taught me to knock; open unto me
that stand knocking: strengthen me that am weak; restore me that am lost;
revive me that am dead by sin; make me to serve thee, to live to thee, to
give my self wholly to thee. I know my God, that because thou made me, I
owe my self unto thee: and for that thou have redeemed me, I should owe thee
more than my self. But behold, I have no more to give, neither can I give my
self unto thee, unless thou make me willing thereunto. Take thou me, draw me
unto thee, that as I am thine by creation, so I may be thine by following of
thee, which live and reignest for ever and ever,

Amen.
A Prayer deciphering in Alphabet form, the name of the right Woorshipfull
Lady MARY FANE.
M
MOst mighty art thou Lord in all thy deeds, and holy in all thy works. Have
mercy upon me, and give me understanding therefore from above, to consider the
substance whereof thou have framed me; and by the knowledge thereof, make me to
consider mine own weakness and infirmity to be such, that unless thou set
to thy hand speedily to help me that am oppressed with sin, I shall perish
in my wickedness.

A
AS my sins are innumerable, and redder than scarlet, so give me grace to
acknowledge thy great mercies, which are surmounting the sands of the seas;
and that thou by thy grace, at thy good pleasure can wash away my
deformity, and make me to excel the snow of Libanus. I beseech thee, O
merciful father, let it be far from my thought, wilfully, or of a set
purpose, to fall into the danger of sin, or to commit any heinous sin, or
grievous wickedness against thine eternal majesty. For by the exercise of such
and so great evil, I by means of my presumption provoke thee to displeasure.
Give me grace therefore to stand in awe of thy justice, least that thy mercy
be withheld and kept from me, and thou give me over, as thou did proud
Pharao, to the lust and affections of mine own heart, and so I be drowned in
the dangerous gulf of destruction.

R
Ready art thou Lord at all times to hear, and give ear unto the petitions
of thy people: but more readier are we to run astraie from thy will, and to
transgress thy sacred laws and divine statutes, than we are to leave the
lusts of carnalitie, the pleasures of this vain and wicked world; so greatly
are we affected to licentious liberty, and all other kind of notorious evil.
But yet O merciful father, of thine abundant love, favor, and exceeding
kindness, give me grace to renounce sin, to hate this transitory and vading
world, to mortify my frail and feeble flesh, which rebelleth against the
spirit, and by faith in Christ, in this my dangerous pilgrimage, so give me
strength, that mine enemies may be overthrown, and I being delivered from the
snares of hell, may by thee, which art the author of man's felicity, have the
fruition of thy kingdom, and celestial mansion of endless and sempiternall
glory.

Y
Idleness is the nurse and root of all infectious evils. Give me thine aid
therefore, O Lord, to loath and detest this deadly and dangerous sin, least
thereby I run headlong into thy heavy displeasure. Make me always and ever to
be occupied (good Lord) in thy holy law, that with all the powers of my
soul, heart, mind and understanding, I may give thee continual praise, honor
and glory. Yield plentiouslie unto me also, good Lord, thy grace from above,
that I may continually make my boast of thine everlasting name, and by hearty
contrition, and bitter deploration of my sins and wickedness, obtain thy
favorable pardon, and by thee being sanctified, and made clean from all mine
uncleanness and ungodliness, I may enter with thee at the last day into the
celestial and glorious kingdom, purchased in the bloody death of my Savior
Jesus Christ. Yea, illuminate mine eyes (I say) O good Lord, that I sleep not
in darkness, but give me grace good Lord, continually to keep watch and ward,
least that the enemy find me slumbering in the cradle of carelessness, the
gates of my body be broken up, and in the day of thy coming to judgment,
the sentence of thy displeasure be pronounced against me, to the utter
confusion of my body and soul.

F
FAith is to be embraced of all those that hope for felicity and blessedness
in Jesus Christ. Give me therefore such wisdom from above, that I may be
daily desirous to learn thy sacred precepts, and walk in the path-waie of
thy glorious statutes, that by the exercise of thy will, sinful vice and
iniquity may be vanquished, and virtue may have the dominion and souereigntie
in me.

A
ABstinence coupled with constant and faithful prayer, is a thing that much
pleases thy majesty, and withdraws from us the force of thy heavy
indignation. Give me grace then with prayer, to exercise such fasting, as may
hold down the man of sin, that he swell not in pride, excess, gluttony, or
superfluous eating or drinking. Make me always to use thy gifts so
moderately, that thy name may be glorified; and I fasting from sin with
hearty prayer faithfully, may beat at the gates of thy grace, and so obtain
the full effects of thy fatherly love and favorable kindness. Finally,
abate I beseech thee, the pride of the ungodly that trouble me. Confound in
thy justice the imaginations of the foolish, which stick not to say in their
hearts, There is no God. Break the iawe bones of those in sunder, that consult
and take counsel together how they may harm the innocent and weak. From the
bloud-thirstie and deceiptfull man, deliver me O Lord my God. Look favorably
upon me, glad thou my heart with the cheerful looks of thy gracious and
loving countenance. Say unto my soul, I am thy safeguard. Be thou ever with
me, then shall I not need to fear the power of my subtle and cruel enemies;
but at thine appointed will and heavenly pleasure, I shall be made safe, and
with the fellowship of thy chosen Saints, enioie the fruition of thine
everlasting kingdom.

N
NOthing O Lord I brought into this world, and nothing shall I carry hence with
me. Give me grace and power therefore to consider that all worldly things
are vain, and shall vanish away like smoke. Make me to understand that I am a
stranger here, and far from my country, the new City of Jerusalem, which
thou have in the fullness of thy great mercy ordained for those, that continue
faithful in thee to the end. And since that all earthly things are subjected
to consuming, as mere vanities, endue me with such understanding, that I may
lay my treasure plentifully in heaven, with Jesus Christ; to whom in the
water of baptism by grace in spirit, I am coupled and knit. Withdraw me
therefore from the delight of worldly pleasures, and give me streugth to offer
my self up wholly into his blessed and heavenly hands, that my heart, my mind,
the powers of my soul, and all that I have, may depend on him, with whom my
treasure rests, that being under the comfortable guard of his defense, I may
be delivered from all danger of body and soul. Naked was I borne, and naked
to the grave shall I return again; the Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away, even as it pleases his majesty, all things are brought to pass, whose
glorious name be praised for ever. No man can escape the sting of death, all
flesh must bow unto the grave. Give me a fervent faith therefore, O Lord, to
continue faithful in Jesus Christ, that whenever it shall please thee to
send thy messenger death to arrest me, I may be ready at his summons,
ioifullie to bear his stroke, and by the power of a lively faith, so to
withstand sin and Satan, that death may with the enemies of man's felicity,
be vanquished and subdued, and I by him may live in Jesus Christ.

E
Expel and root out in and from my remembrance, the detestable branches of
wrath, pride, concupiscence, vainglory, and all other horrible vices and
noisome evils, that heap up thy grievous displeasure against me. Take from me
all abuse, let me never blaspheme thy blessed and glorious name, let my tongue be
purged by thee from all corrupt and uncomely talk, let all my thoughts be
occupied in thy service, faith, fear and love. Make me good Lord always
obedient to do thy will, and to walk in the ways of thy commandments, and
to delight in thy blessed testimonies. And grant me thy grace, that by the
hearing of thy Evangelical and heavenly doctrine, my faith may be increased,
made strong and fruitful, to exercise the works of charity and love to all
men; and chiefly to those that constantly favor thy Gospel, and continue
faithful in Christ Jesus. Evermore (I say) good Lord, give me thy blessings
from above, and let my heart, my soul and tongue, be ever ready, for thy
gracious benefits received, to publish and set forth thy glory and praise in
weal and woe, in poverty, and prosperity, in time of peace and in time of
danger. Stretch forth thy hand to protect me; and I by thee delivered from all
perils, shall make my boast of thy mercies freely shown unto me without my
deserts; and with the fellowship of thy Saints, give such honor, praise, and
reverence unto thee, as of right and bounden duty I ought to do.

And forasmuch as not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of God and Christ, make me not then a professor of thy word with my
lips, but an earnest lover of the same, and a faithful follower of thy
commandments, least at the coming of the great and rich Bridegroom Jesus
Christ, I be refused, as were the five indiscreet and foolish virgins, that
wanted oil to garnish their Lamps. For if thou O Lord pass by, and find me
unprovided, the gates of thy grace being fast shut up, and locked close, I
shall then stand knocking and calling the Lord all in vain. For thou will give
answer, thou know me not, and being forsaken of thee, I shall perish
everlastingly. Give me grace therefore O good Lord, to be ready prepared with
my wedding garment, and oil in my Lamp, that I may continually watch thy
coming, and so enter with thee as thy ghest, to the rich banqueting house of
everlasting glory,

Amen.
F From sinfulness preserve me Lord,
R Renew thy spirit in my heart,
A And let my tongue therewith accord,
V Uttering all goodness for his part.
N No thought let there arise in me,
C Contrary to thy statutes ten,
E Ever let me most mindful be,
S Still for to praise thy name: Amen.
A As of my soul, so of my body,
B Be thou my guider, O my God:
V Unto thee only I do cry,
R Remove from me thy furious rod.
G Grant that my head may still devise,
A All things that pleasing be to thee,
V Unto mine ears, and to mine eyes,
E Ever let there a watch set be,
N None ill that they may hear and see,
N No wicked deed let my hands do,
Y In thy good paths let my feet go.
Finis.
Certain prayers made by godly women Martyrs.
The prayer of Agnes the Martyr at her death.
O Eternal Governor, vouchsafe to open the gates of heaven once shut up
against all the inhabitants of the earth: and receive my soul, oh Christ that
seeks thee.

The song of Eulalia the Martyr at her death.
BEhold, O Lord, I will not forget thee. What a pleasure is it for them, O
Christ, that remember thy triumphant victories, to attain unto those high
dignities?

The prayer of Anne Askue the Martyr, before her death.
O Lord, I have mo enemies now than there be hears on my head: yet Lord, let
them never overcome me with vain words, but fight thou Lord on my side. For on
thee cast I my care. With all the spite they can imagine they fall upon me,
which am thy poor creature; yet sweet Lord, let me not set by them, which are
against me: for in thee is my whole delight. And Lord, I heartily desire of
thee, that thou will of thy most merciful goodness forgive them that violence
which they do, and have done unto me. Open also thou their blind hearts, that
they may hereafter do that thing in thy sight, which is only acceptable
before thee; and to set forth thy verity aright, without all vain fantasies
of sinful man: So be it, O Lord, So be it.

The prayer that master Bradfords morher said and offered unto God in his
behalf, a little before his martyrdom.
AH good Father, which dooest vouchsafe that my son John Bradford, being a
grievous sinner in thy sight, should find this favor with thee, to be one of
thy son Christ his captains and men of war, to fight and suffer for his
Gospels sake, I thank thee: and pray thee in the same thy dear son Christ's
name, that thou would forgive him his sins and unthankfulness; and make
perfect in him that good which thou have begun in him. Yea Lord, I pray thee
make him worthy to suffer, not only imprisonment, but even very death for thy
truth, religion, and Gospel sake. As Hanna did apply, dedicate, and give her
first child and son Samuel unto thee: even so do I dear Father; beseeching
thee, for Christ's sake, to accept this my gift; and give my son John Bradford
grace always truly to serve thee, and thy people, as Samuel did;

Amen: Amen.
Other godly prayers taken out of the Psalms, written by a godly hearted
Gentlewoman.
POnder my words, O Lord, consider my meditation: O harken thou unto the voice
of my woeful mourning, my King and my God: for unto thee will I make my prayer.
Hear my voice, O Lord betimes: early in the morning will I direct my prayer
unto thee, for thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither
shall any evil dwell with thee. Thou hate all them that work vanity:
lead me therefore in thy righteousness, O Lord; for I am weak, and without
thee I have no strength at all: therefore, O Lord God, rebuke me not in thine
indignation, neither chasten me in thy heavy displeasure. Have mercy upon me,
O Lord, and deliver my soul. Oh save me, for thy mercy sake. I am almost
weary of my groaning. Every night wash I my bed, and water my couch with my
tears. O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me. O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing, as
is laid to my charge; or if there be any such wickedness in me; then let mine
enemy persecute my soul, and take me captive. Have not thou, O Lord my God,
defended me from such ungodliness? Oh how long will thou hide thy self from
me thy poor afflicted servant? Oh how long shall I seek comfort in my soul,
and be so vexed in my heart? Yea how long shall mine enemies triumph over me?
Consider and hear me, O Lord my God, lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in
death: least mine enemies say, I have prevailed against him. For if I be cast
down, then they that trouble me will rejoice at it. But my trust is in thy
mercy, O Lord, and my heart is ioifull in thy salvation. For after a storm
thou make the weather fair, and still after weeping and heaviness thou
give great joy. Thy name, O most mighty God, be praised for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer.
O Lord consider my meditation, and complaining. Oh harken thou unto my prayers
that go not out of fained lips. Let my sentence come forth from thy presence,
and let thine eyes look upon the thing that is equal. O hold thou up my
goings in thy ways, that my footsteps slip not. I have called upon thee, O
God, for thou shall hear me: incline thine ear to me, and hearken unto my
words. Show thy marvelous loving kindness, thou that art the Savior of all
them that put their trust in thee. Keep me as the apple of an eye: hide me
under the shadow of thy wings, from the ungodly that trouble me. Mine enemies
compass me round about to take away my soul. Up Lord, let not man have the
upper hand: let the heathen be judged in thy sight, that they may know
themselves to be but men? Yet of thy mercy, O Lord, forgive all mine enemies,
and turn the hearts of such as hate me. Who can tell how often he offends? Oh
cleanse thou me from all my secret offenses. Keep thy servant also from
presumptuous sins; least they get the dominion over me: so shall I be
undefiled and innocent from the great offense. Let my mourning tears, and the
sorrowful sighing of my heart, come before thy presence, and be always accepted
in thy sight.

O Lord my strength and my redeemer, let it be thy good pleasure to rid and
deliver me out of all my troubles, I most humbly beseech thee: and show some
token of thy favor to me poor wretched sinner, which am as a banished woman.
Look upon me, O Lord, I beseech thee, as thou did look upon Susanna, and
Sarai the daughter of Raguel. Those holy women trusted in thee, and thou did
deliver them; they hoped in thee, and were not forsaken. I know Lord, thy
strength is not weakened, neither is thy power abated: so that if it be thy
good pleasure, O Lord, thou will help, and make thy power to be known. In the
mean time, O merciful and most gracious Lord God, give me grace thankfully
and patiently to take all, whatsoever it shall be thy good will and pleasure
to lay upon me. O Lord grant me those things, which I heartily have prayed for
ever, for Jesus Christ's sake my Lord and my redeemer. To whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, glory and praise,

Amen.
When God has delivered thee out of thy troubles, sing those Psalms: the 9,
30, 33, 34, 116, 145, 146.
And ever be giving thanks to God the almighty Lord and King, saying as
follows.
A thanksgiving after trouble.
THe Lord is my strong rock and my defense, my Savior, my God, and my might,
in whom I will trust, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge. Yea the
Lord is my shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing. He has comforted my soul,
and brought it out of trouble, even for his mercies sake. Though I walk
through the vale of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil: for thou art
with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me. For in thee, O Lord, have I put
my trust, and I fear not what flesh and blood can do unto me. I have waited
long, and with weeping tears have I tarried the Lords leisure, and now he has
of his great goodness delivered me out of all my trouble. Most mighty God, of
thine accustomed mercy, preserve me from all sin and wickedness. O Lord, I
feel mine own infirmity and weakness. O most merciful Lord, keep me in
(as it were) with a bit or bridle, that in this my ioifulnesse I do not forget
my duty to thee, and my neighbors. For when we have althings at our own
pleasure, and nothing to trouble us, then is our daily enemy ready to puff
us up with pride and unthankfulness: yea and with forgetfulness of thy laws.
Wherefore most mighty Lord, look down from thy holy heavens, even with thy
fatherly eyes of pity, and strengthen my trembling soul with thy holy
spirit. Guide me that I swerve not from thy truth taught in holy Scripture:
but that all my thoughts, words and deeds may redound to the glory, honor,
and worthy praise of thy most holy name. This with tears I most humbly
beseech thee to grant, even for Jesus Christ's sake, in whose name I come to
thee, and in none other, saying: O our Father, etc.

Another thanksgiving after trouble.
O Lord, I most humbly render lauds, thanks, and praises unto thee. For thou
have set me up, and not made my foes to triumph over me. O Lord my God, I cried
unto thee, and thou have heard me: yea thou broughtest my soul out of trouble,
and girded me with joy and gladness. Sing praises unto the Lord with me, Oye
Saints of his, and let us all give thanks unto him, for a remembrance of his
holiness. For his wrath indureth but the twinkling of an eye, and in his
pleasure is life everlasting. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning. Thou did turn thy face from me, O Lord; and lo, I
was sore troubled: then cried I unto thee, O Lord, and prayed unto my God right
humbly, saying: Hear, O Lord, and have mercy on me. Lord be thou my help in
all my trouble: bow down thine ear to me, and make haste to deliver me: for
thou art my strong rock and deliverer. Into thy hands, Lord, I commit my
spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God most high.

Oh what reward should I give unto the Lord for all the marvelous benefits,
that he has done unto me: which I can not woorthilie express? For in my
trouble I called upon the Lord, and he heard me at large; and in my temptation,
with his holy spirit he mightily preserved me. Therefore I know that the
Lord is on my side, and I will not fear what man can do unto me. For it is
better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Princes; for with
the Lord there is mercy, and with him there is plentious redemption. The
earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy, therefore will I talk of thy praise all
the day long, and sing Psalms of thanksgiving unto thee. It is good for me
that I have been in trouble, else should I not have learned thy statutes. If
my delight had not been in thy laws, I should surely have perished in my
trouble. The law of my God is more deerer unto me than thousands of silver and
gold, yea all the riches in the world is nothing worth in comparison of thy
word. For it is more comfortable, than the most costliest and precious
restoratiue that any Physician can make. For it comfort, nourishes and
preserves the soul, leading it unto life everlasting. Oh Lord God of hosts,
who is like unto thee? Thy truth most mighty God endures for evermore. I will
always give thanks unto thee for the great benefits that thou have bestowed on
me. The righteous shall hear thereof and rejoice with me; yea, and the
unrighteous shall fear the Lord, and say, Doubtless there is a GOD that
defends his servants; and he also does punish the wrong dooers. Thou art the
God that dooest woonderous things: O Lord, who may be compared unto thee? For
thou deliuerest me thy poor oppressed servant from the hand of my strong
enemy; yea from such a one as was too mighty for me to deal withal. Thou
have (I say) mightily defended me, and now, O Lord, be mindful of me: and
command my spirit to be received in grace, when it is thy good pleasure,

Amen.
An instruction for Christians, containing a fruitful and godly exercise, as
well in wholesome and fruitful prayers, as in reverend discerning of Gods holy
Commandments and Sacraments: translated out of French into English by a right
virtuous and godly Matrone and Gentlewoman named Mistress DORCAS MARTIN.
Psalm, 119. verses, 37, 133. From vain desires and worldly lusts,
Turn back mine eyes and sight:
Give me the spirit of life and power,
To walk thy ways aright.
Direct my footesteps by thy word,
That I thy will may know:
And never let iniquity,
Thy servant overthrow.

The Lords prayer.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and ever,

Amen.
The Articles of the Christian faith.
I Believe in God the father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ, his only son, our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost.
Borne of the virgin Marie. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead,
and buried. He descended into hell. The third day, he rose again from the
dead. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty. From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church. The communion of
Saints. The forgiveness of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life
everlasting,

Amen.
The ten Commandments of Almighty GOD, Exodus 20.
The Preface.
HEarken O Israel. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

The first Table.
_1 THou shall have none other gods before me.

2 Thou shall make thee no graven image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the
waters under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor woorship them.
For I am the Lord thy God, a gealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, upon the third generation, and upon the fourth of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord will
not hold him giltlesse that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor
and do all thy works: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy man-seruant, nor thy maide-seruant, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made the heaven and the earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: therefore the Lord
blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it.

The second Table.
_5 Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged upon the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall not kill.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass,
neither any thing that is thy neighbors.

The Sum.
THou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind: This is the first and the greatest commandment. And the
second is like unto this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

On these two commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.

Matthew, 7. verse, 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so
do ye to them. For this is the Law and the Prophets. John, 15. verse, 12.
This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. John,
13. verse, 35. Hereby shall all men know that you are my disciples, if ye
love one another.
A prayer to be said in the Morning when one awaketh. Our help be in the name
of the Lord, who has made heaven and earth.
O My God and father, I most humbly praise and thank thee for this, that of
thine infinite goodness and mercy, it has pleased thee to watch for me this
night whiles I slept, preserving me from so many kinds of dangers, whereunto
this miserable life is subject. O Lord I beseech thee bring into my memory thy
other great and innumerable benefits also, according as I may be able to
comprehend them, to the end that I may likewise render thanks for the same,
least I be ungrateful toward thy majesty, as thou have done me this good,
not to forget that thou alone have preserved me from all inconvenience. And
herewithall I beseech thee most gracious father, through thy mercy, to
continue this thy fatherly care, which thou have for me, until such time as I
shall rest in that happy sleep, whereof they rejoice which sleep in peace,
through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son, who in the unity of the holy Ghost,
lives and reigns God with thee eternally: So be it.

The exercise of an householder with his family to pray in the Morning.
O Our God, Father and Savior, seeing it has pleased thee to give us grace to
pass this night, to come unto this day present, vouchsafe now also to bestow
this goodness upon us, that we may emploie our selves altogether to thy
service, in such wise, that we neither think, say, or do any thing, but
only to please thee, and to obey thy good will: to the end that by this means,
all our works may be to the praise of thy name, and to the edifieng of our
neighbors. And as it has pleased thee to cause thy Sun to shine upon the
earth, to lighten us corporally; vouchsafe also by the cleerenesse of thy
spirit, to illuminate our understandings, and our hearts, to direct us unto the
straight way of righteousness. Even so, to what thing soever we may apply
our selves, let our chief end and purpose be always to walk in thy fear, to
serve and honor thee: looking for all our wealth and prosperity, from out of
thy holy blessing, to the end we enterprise nothing which shall not be
agreeable unto thee. Moreover, let us so travel for our body, and for the
life present, that we alwaie have a further regard; namely, to the life of
heaven, which thou have promised unto thy children. Nevertheless, let it
please thee to be our protector, both touching the body, and touching the
soul, strengthening us against all temptations of the devil, and delivering
us from all the dangers that may come unto us. And because there is nothing
well begun, which does not continue, vouchsafe to receive us into thy holy
governance, not only for this present day; but for our whole life, continuing
and increasing daily thy grace in us, till thou have brought us unto the full
conjunction of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the true Sun-light of
our souls, shining day and night without end perpetually. And to the intent
that we may obtain these graces of thee, O vouchsafe to forget all our faults
past, pardoning us them through thine infinite mercy, as thou have promised
unto all them that seek thee with a good heart. Hear us O father of mercy,
for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ his sake: So be it.

Out of the 143 Psalm. 8 Let us hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for
in thee is our trust. O show us the way that we should walk in, for we have
lift up our heart unto thee.

9 Deliver us O Lord, from our enemies, for we have cried unto thee.

10 Teach us to do thy will, for thou art our God.


A prayer to say before one begin his work.
THE Lord God and Father vouchsafe to assist us through his holy spirit, and
by him to govern and guide us in such sort, as all that we shall do, say, or
think, may be to his glory, in the name of his son Jesus Christ our Lord:
So be it.

Another prayer to the same purpose.
O Our God, Father and Savior, seeing it has pleased thee to command us to
travel for the sustentation of our necessity; vouchsafe through thy grace so
to bless our labor, that thy blessing may extend unto us, without the which
also we are not able to continue. And let such favor of thine serve us for a
testimony of thy bountifulness and assistance: and that we by the same may
know the fatherly care, which thou have for us. Moreover, let it please thee,
O Lord, to assist us by thy holy spirit, to the end that we may be faithfully
exercised in our estate and vocation, without any guile or deceit: but that we
rather regard to follow thine ordinance, than to satisfy our own desire of
gain. And if it please thee to prosper our labor, give us also a willing mind
to succor those that are in necessity, according to the ability which thou
have granted us: so yet that we mind not to lift up our selves above those,
which have not received of thee such liberality. And when thou will handle us
with greater poverty and necessity than our flesh shall desire: let it please
thee, O Lord, to show us this grace, even to know that thou through thy
bountifulnes wilt continually nourish us, least we be tempted with mistrust:
but that we patiently abide, until thou replenish us, not only with thy
corporal gifts; but also with thy spiritual graces; that we may still have
more ample matter and occasion to thank thee, and sincerely to stay our
selves upon thine only goodness. Hear us, O Father of all mercy, through
thy son Jesus Christ our Lord: So be it.

A prayer to say before one begin to study his lesson. Out of the 119 Psalm.
verses, 9, 18, 34.
Wherewithal shall a young man redress his way? Even in taking heed
thereunto according to thy word.

Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the marvelous works of thy law.

O give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall keep it
with my whole heart.

O Lord, which art the fountain of all wisdom and knowledge, seeing it has
pleased thee to give me the means to be instructed in the age of mine
infancy, to make me know how to govern the whole course of my life holilie
and honestly: vouchsafe also to illuminate mine understanding, (which of it
self is blind) that it may comprehend the learning which shall be taught me. O
vouchsafe to confirm my memory for to keep it well. O let it be thy pleasure
to dispose my heart to receive it willingly, and with such a desire as is
convenient, that through mine ingratitude the occasion that thou offerest me be
not lost. For to do this, vouchsafe to power upon me thy holy spirit, the
spirit (I say) of all understanding, verity, judgment, prudence and learning,
which may make me able to profit well, to the end that the travel, which shall
be taken to teach me be not lost. And to what study soever I apply my self,
make me to reduce it unto the true end; namely, to know thee in our Lord
Jesus Christ, to have full affiance of salvation and life in thy grace, and to
serve thee vprightlie and purelie, according to thy good pleasure: so as all
that I shall learn, may be as an instrument to aid me unto the same.

And seeing thou promisest to give wisdom unto babes, and to the humble, and
to confound the proud in the vanity of their own minds: likewise to show thy
self unto those that are of a right heart; and contrarily to blind the wicked
and perverse: vouchsafe to bring me unto true humility, whereby I may yield my
self apt to learn; and obedient, first unto thee, secondly to my superiors,
whom thou have ordained to rule and to teach me. Furthermore, vouchsafe to
dispose my heart to seek thee without feinednesse, renouncing all carnal and
evil affections, and that in such sort I may prepare my self now to serve thee
once, in that estate and vocation, to the which it shall please thee to ordeine
me when I shall come to age. Hear me, O Father of mercy, through our Lord
Jesus Christ: So be it.

Psalm, 25. verse, 13. THe Lord shows his secrets unto them that fear him,
and makes them to know his covenant.
A prayer or grace to say before meat.
ALl things wait upon thee, O Lord, and thou give them meat in due season:
when thou give it them, they gather it, and when thou openest thy hand, they
are satisfied with good things. O Lord, in whom consists the fullness of all
good things, vouchsafe to extend thy blessing upon us thy poor servants, and
sanctify unto us thy gifts, which we receive of thy liberality, that we may
use them soberlie and purelie, according to thy good will: and by this means
to knowledge thee to be the Father and author of all goodness, still seeking
principally the spiritual bread of thy word, whereby our souls may be
nourished eternally, through Jesus Christ thy son our Lord: So be it.

Matthew, 4. verse, 4. MAn lives not by bread only: but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.
Grace after meat.
LEt all nations praise the Lord, let all people sing praise unto him.

For his mercy is multiplied upon us, and his truth endures for ever.

We render thanks unto thee, O Lord God, for all the benefits that we receive
continually at thy hand; for that it pleases thee to sustain us in this
corporal life, ministering unto us all our necessities: and specially, for
that it has pleased thee to regenerate us into the hope of a better life,
which thou have revealed unto us by thy holy Gospel. We beseech thee not to
suffer our affections to be here rooted in these corruptible things, but that
we always have an higher respect, waiting for our Lord Jesus Christ, until he
appear in our redemption: So be it.

A prayer to be said before sleep. Exhortation.
LEt us all fall down, humbling our selves before the high and soeuereigne
Majesty of our good God and Father, acknowledging us to be as we are; namely,
poor and miserable sinners, praieng heartily unto him, as follows.

O Lord God, Father eternal, we beseech thee, that it will please thee to cast
the eye of thy fatherly mercy upon us thy poor servants, not laieng to our
charge so many faults and offenses, whereby we are worthy to be brought unto
thy judgment, and whereby we cease not to provoke thy wrath against us. And
forasmuch as we are too unworthy to appear before thy holy Majesty;
vouchsafe to receive us in the name of thy well-beloved son our Lord Jesus
Christ, accepting the merits of his death and passion for a recompense of all
our faults: regarding rather the obedience which he has rendered unto thee, and
not the manifold faults that we daily commit against thy Majesty. O Lord God,
seeing it has pleased thee to create the night for man's rest, so as thou have
ordained him the day to travel; grant us grace so to take our bodily rest
this night, that our souls may alwaie watch unto thee, that our hearts be lift
up in thy love; and that we so renounce all earthly cares, that we succor our
selves according as our infirmity requires. Let us never forget thee, but let
the remembrance of thy goodness and grace continue alwaie printed in our
memory; and by this means our consciences also shall have their spiritual
rest, as our bodies take theirs.

Furthermore, let not our sleep be excessive; to accomplish the ease of our
flesh beyond measure, but only to satisfy the frailty of our nature; that
we may be disposed to serve thee. Moreover, let it please thee to preserve us
vnderfiled, both in our bodies, and in our spirits, and to keep us against all
dangers, that our very sleep may be to the glory of thy name. And seeing the
day is not so passed, but that we have offended thee many ways (according as
we are poor sinners) so that all is now hid through the darkness that thou
sendest upon earth; vouchsafe also to bury all our faults through thy mercy,
least we thereby be taken from thy presence. Let it please thee also, O Lord
God, to illuminate us by thy holy spirit, in the true understanding of thy
holy will: and bring to pass also, that we may yield unto thee the love and
fear that true and faithful servants do owe unto their masters, and children
unto their parents, seeing it has pleased thee to show us such grace, as to
receive us into the number of thy servants and children,

Amen.
The prayer of the Church of the faithful, to speak the word of God with all
boldness. Acts, 4. verse, 24, etc.
O Lord thou have made the heaven and the earth, the sea, and all things that
be in them. Which through thine holy spirit have said by the mouth of David
thy servant: Wherefore have the nations raged, and the people have imagined
vain thoughts? The kings of the earth have assembled, and the princes are come
together against the Lord, and against his Christ. For truly Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, have gathered themselves
together in this city, against the holy child Jesus, (whom thou have
anointed) to do those things, which thy hand and thy counsel has determined
to be done. And now Lord, behold their threatenings, and give unto thy servants
that they may speak thy word with all boldness: so that thou stretch forth
thine hand, that healing, and signs, and woonders be done by the name of thy
holy child Jesus,

Amen.
The manner how to examine such young persons as be willing to receive the Supper
of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Mother. IN whom believe you?


Child. In God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, and in the holy Ghost.


Mother. The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are they more than one God?


C No.


M Must God be served after his own commandments, or after the traditions of
men?


C He must be served according to his own commandments, and not according to
the commandments of men.


M May you accomplish Gods commandments of your self?


C No.


M Who is it then that accomplisheth them in you?


C The holy spirit.


M And when God gives you his holy spirit, can you perfectly accomplish them?


C No.


M And yet notwithstanding God cursseth and rejects all such, as do not
sincerely fulfill his commandments.


C It is true.


M By what means then shall you be saved and delivered from the curse of God?


C By the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.


M How is that?


C Because that by his death he has restored life unto us, and reconciled us
unto God his father.


M And whom pray you unto?


C To God.


M In whose name pray you?


C In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our advocate and intercessor.


M How many Sacraments are in the Christian Church?


C Two.


M Which be they?


C Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


M What is the signification of Baptism?


C It has two parts. For our Savior does therein represent unto us the
remission of our sins, and then our regeneration or spiritual renouation.


M And the Supper, what signifies it unto us?


C It signifies unto us, that by the communion of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ, our souls are nourished in hope of the life everlasting.


M What is it that the bread and wine (which are given us in the Supper) do
represent unto us?


C They represent unto us, that the body and blood of Jesus Christ have such
virtue toward our souls, as the bread and wine have toward our bodies.


M Understand you, that the body of Jesus Christ may be enclosed in the bread,
and his blood in the wine?


C No.


M Where then must we seek Jesus Christ to enioie him?


C In heaven, in the glory of his father.


M What is the means to come unto heaven, there as Jesus Christ is?


C It is faith.


M It behooves us then to have true faith, before we can well use this holy
Sacrament.


C It is so.


M And how may we have this faith?


C We have it by the holy spirit that dwells in our hearts, and assures us
of Gods promises, which are made unto us in the Gospel.

Unto God the Father, of whom, and by whom, and in whom are all things. And
unto Jesus Christ our Lord and Redeemer of the world. And unto the holy Ghost
be honor and glory for ever, So be it.


The true sum of all Christian Religion.
Mother. MY child, art thou a Christian?


Child. Yea, by the grace of God, whereas of nature I was a child of wrath as
well as others.


M Art thou certain that thou art a Christian?


C Yea, through faith, and the holy spirit, who gives witness unto my
spirit, that I am the child and heir of God.


M What is it to say a Christian?


C It is the same which by faith in Jesus Christ, has received the holy
spirit, as a child of God, doing his duty in time and place.


M What is the duty of a Christian?


C It is for to know God, for to serve him in spirit and truth, according to
the doctrine of Jesus Christ.


M In how many points consists the true Christian adoration, and the true
service of God?


C It is faith, which is the only foundation of Christians.


M The faith, comes it of us?


C No, for it is the gift of God.


M Where lies this faith?


C In the heart, for with the heart we believe to righteousness, and with the
mouth we confess to salvation.


M Be we then bound to render a reason of our faith and hope?


C Yea, to all men that demand it of us, so that it be done with wisdom,
gentleness, reverence, and gracious words.


M And he that confesses not Jesus Christ in time and place, does he not
renounce him?


C Yea: for he that is not with him, is against him: and he that gathers not
with him, scatters abroad.


M Give me then a reason of thy faith, and first what confession make thou of
the Christian faith?


C The same that the Church holds, being founded upon the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, which is briefly comprehended in our Creed.


M Can thou make confession in the common language?


C Yea, I thank God.


M Say it with an high voice, and pronounce it well.


C I believe in God the Father almighty, etc.


M Beleeuest thou that thou art saved by this faith of the Church?


C Yea well, if I have it in my self, as the first word shows (I believe in
God.) For the just shall live by his own faith.


M What is it to believe in God?


C It is a full assurance and hope to trust and commit all to him, according to
his promises in Jesus Christ.


M Can we have this faith in perfection, whiles we be in this world?


C No. For we have need with the Apostles to require augmentation of faith.
The Lord increase it in us, and make us persevere in it unto the end.


Of Invocation.
Mother. WHat is the second part of Christian adoration, and service of God?


Child. It is invocation, whereby we have all our refuge unto our father,
through faith in the name of Jesus Christ.


M Why put thou invocation after faith?


C Because it is one of the greatest and principal fruit of the same. For
whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord in faith, shall be saved.


M Have we commandment to call upon God only, and not upon others?


C Yea, even as we are commanded, neither to believe nor worship any other,
but him alone.


M Should we not pray to the father in the name of other, but of Jesus Christ?


C No. For the father has given us none other advocate but him, who only is
very God and very man: and we have no promise to be heard in the name of any
other, but in his name only.


M Yea, but we know not what we ought to pray as apperteineth.


C Jesus Christ teaches us by his holy spirit, according to the form that he
has given us.


M Rehearse it in the common language, to the end that we all may understand
it, and be edified.


C Our father which art in heaven, etc.


M Wherefore will he that we call him father?


C To declare the love that he bears toward us in Jesus Christ, to the end
that in full assurance and boldness we may come to him only, and not to be
afraid of him, no more than a child is of his father.


M What does this word (our) show?


C The unity and charitable brotherhood which ought to be here well practiced
among us, according as the communion of Saints requires.


M Seeing that God is every where, and fills heaven and earth, ought not we
to seek and worship him in all his creatures?


C No. For he is a spirit, and incomprehensible: wherefore he wills that in
Jesus Christ we seek and worship him in spirit and truth, lifting up our
hearts above all corruptible things.


M What contain the six petitions comprehended in this prayer?


C The three first, all yt which makes for the advancement of the honor and
glory of God, which we ought to desire with our whole heart, and before all
things.


M And the three last, what do they contain?


C Our entertainment and salvation, which is also the glory of God.


M Why adds he to the end: For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the
glory, for ever?


C To show that the dignity and efficacy of our prayers consists not in us,
but altogether in that good father by Jesus Christ, working in us by the holy
spirit.


M Then is it to say, that we all will live and die in his obedience,
subjection and glory?


C Yea, acknowledging him to be the author of all goodness; and unto whom
only apperteineth the true majesty royal, with all power and glory for
ever.


M What is the conclusion of this prayer?


C It is, that all our desires, requests, and actions of grace be addressed
unto God alone, through Jesus Christ, confirming us thoroughly in substance
unto that which it contains, as unto the perfect rule of all true godliness.


M Why is this word added to the end Amen, or So be it?


C To assure us that our prayer made thus in truth, and according to his will,
is truly heard.


Of Obedience.
Mother. WHat is the third point of Christian adoration, and service of God?


C It is to obeie the law of God, in true charity, out of a pure heart, and
out of a pure conscience, and of faith unfeigned.


M What is this charity here required?


C It is to love God with all our heart, soul, understanding and power: and our
neighbor as our self.


M This true obedience and charity, proceeds it not of faith?


C Yea, and all the good works here commanded, which God has prepared that we
should walk in them.


M Faith then, it is not an opinion vain and fleshly, to entise us to sin
more boldly, and to live in all carnal liberty.


C No. For if we by faith be truly graffed in Jesus Christ, and call upon God
to salvation, we will no more bring forth the works of the flesh, but the
fruits of the spirit.


M Which are the works of the flesh?


C Adultery, fornication, filthiness, outragiousnes, idolatry, enimitie,
strife, emulation, anger, altercation, sedition, sects, envy, murder,
drunkenness, gluttony, and things like unto the same.


M And which are the fruits of the spirit?


C Love, joy, peace, patience, benignity, goodness, faith, caurtesie,
temperance.


M Seeing we are all carnal, evil, and servants of sin, have we power of
our selves to do good, and to keep us from evil?


C No, not so much as to think any good thing. For it is God that works in
us both the will and the deed, according to his good will.


M We must not then do every one of us, what seems unto him good and right;
what good nature, inclination, or free will soever he allege.


C No. For of us can come nothing but perdition; but ail our goodness, aid and
salvation comneth of God only.


M Our reason, wisdom, and intent, can the same be the rule to know and
discern of our works, whether they be good or evil?


C No. For we have all but one Lawe-giuer, who has given us the true and
perfect rule out of the ten commandments of the law.


M What contain the four commandments of the first table?


C How God declares himself to be our God, and therefore by good right he
requires of us faith, homage, adoration, obedience and duty.


M And the six commandments in the second table, what do they contain?


C Our office and duty toward our neighbor; which is to do unto him, as we
would be done unto our selves: and not to do unto him that, which we would
not to be done unto our selves.


M Go to, recite now this holy law.


C Harken, O Israel; I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the
land of Egypt, etc. as Exodus. 20.


M And how is it, that Jesus Christ accomplished in us this law so perfectly?


C In giving us his holy spirit, who ingendreth in us a continual desire and
mind, to do all that the law commands us, as near as we can.


M And this obedience so imperfect, does it please God?


C Yea, by this, that our imperfection is not imputed unto us, because of Jesus
Christ, whose justice and perfect obedience is ours through faith.


M Alas, who shall give us the heart and the power to do the will of God, which
he here has declared unto us by his holy ordinances?


C It shall be even he himself by his spirit, in the name of Jesus Christ his
son, whom he has given unto the death, to deliver us from the condemnation
of the law, and from the bondage of sin, that is to say from eternal death.


Of Confession.
Mother. WHat is the fourth point of Christian adoration and service of God?


C It is the solemn confession or acknowledging that we make in the Church,
through the use of the Sacraments.


M What confession?


C Of all good things, both general and particular, which we receive in the
Church, through the communion that we have with Jesus, and together among our
selves one with another.


M Do we not daily make such a confession unto God, in hearing his word, and
calling upon him, seeking to obeie him, according to the benefits which he
has given unto us?


Sacraments.
Child. YEa certainly. But we make it also through the exercise of the
Sacraments in greater force and edifieng.


M Show the reason.


C Because they are annexed to the preaching and promises of the Gospel, to
move our souls and bodies to praise God with greater confirmation of our
faith and love.


M Understandest thou not, that there is one like salvation by preaching, and
by the Sacraments offered unto all, as well to the faithful, as to the
unfaithful?


C Yea: but the unfaithful, in respecting this salvation, receive nothing but
the word and outward signs to their condemnation.


M Nevertheless, the Sacraments do not signify and represent less to one
than to the other.


C It is certain. For God is alwaie true, and uses not to teach lies.


M The Lord then has joined the Sacraments with the preaching and promises of
the Gospel, as the seals are joined with the letters and instruments which
they confirm.


C Yea, to print and seal them the more in our souls and bodies, and to move
all our senses unto this confession.


M The Sacraments then are unto us great succor and comfort.


C Yea, in our infirmities, disquietnesse, and temptations, which come daily
unto us, as well from the devil and the world, as from our own flesh.


M Which are the Sacraments that the Lord Jesus has instituted in his Church?


C Baptism and the Supper, putting end unto Circumcision, and to the Paschall
Lamb.


M How is it that he himself has authorized and sanctified them?


C In that he would receive Baptism in his own body, and to be the first
administrator of the Supper.


M Where is it yt the Lord commands Baptism?


C In S. Matthew the last Chapter: And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying:
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach
all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, teaching them to keep all those things that I have commanded
you.


M Is Baptism a washing of bodily filthiness?


C No. For so little water can do nothing to us.


M From what filthiness then are we there washed?


C From spiritual filthiness, which are our sins.


M We come then into the world all filthy and corrupt.


C If we were not conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, we should not
have to do with baptism.


M In whose name be we baptized?


C In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, who is
our only and very true God in three persons.


M And with what water are we washed and regenerated?


C With the water of life, which is the holy spirit, in the blood of Jesus
Christ.


M Baptism then represents unto us, and assures us of the full remission of
our sins, and exchanging of our wicked nature.


C Yea, and by the same both we and our children are received into the Church,
as partakers of the covenant of the Lord, as well as Abraham and his seed by
circumcision.


M Seeing that by baptism we are borne, clothed, washed, and regenerated in
the house of God, which is the Church: with what meat, and with what drink are
we nourished and fed?


C Even with himself, who has begotten us. For as he is our washing and
clothing: so is he unto us meat and drink.


M Is this because he is the word of God, which is the true food of our souls?


C Yea, and we must go further: seeing that his word became flesh, whereof it
comes that we are nourished with his flesh, and with his blood into life
eternal.


M And how is it that his body was made meat or heavenly bread, and his
blood drink unto us?


C By his death and passion, as he declares in his holy Supper.


M Where shall we find the institution of the holy Supper?


C In three Evangelists, and very largely declared in the first to the
Corinthians the xi. Chapter.


M Read the place.


C I received of the Lord, that which I have given unto you; namely, that the
Lord Jesus, in the same night that he was be traied, took bread; and when he
had given thanks, he brake it, and said: Take, eat, this is my body, which
is broken for you: do this in remembrance of me. Likewise, after supper he
took the cup, saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood: do this as
often as you shall drink it in the remembrance of me. For as often as you
shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall declare the Lords
death until he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat of this bread, or drink
of this cup vnwoorthilie, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup. For whosoever eats and drinks vnwoorthilie, eats and drinks
his own damnation, making no difference of the Lords body, (or not discerning
the body of the Lord.)


M Did not the Lord then minister unto all equally, one bread and one wine in
his Supper?


C Yea, as indifferently as he died for all, and commanded to take, eat, and
drink.


M What signifies then the bread of the Supper?


C The precious body of Jesus, which he gave unto the death of the Cross for
us.


M And what signifies the wine?


C His precious blood, which he shed upon the Cross for us.


M This bread and wine being called the body and blood of the Lord, do they
change their substance and nature?


C No: but as we corporally eat the bread, and drink the wine; so
spirituallie we eat the body, and drink the blood of the Lord.


M And how may we ascend up to heaven (where he is) to eat his flesh, and to
drink his blood?


C By love, and lively faith; seeing that already we have there our
conversation, and that the words of the Lord are spirit and life.


M And he being in heaven, how is it that he communicates unto us his body
and his blood; we being here below upon the earth?


C By the virtue of his holy spirit, by whom he ioineth us unto himself, and
makes us partakers of himself in true holiness of soul and body.


M The Infidels, may they eat the body, and drink the blood of the Lord?


C Naie: for through their infidelity, they receive it to their condemnation,
as did Judas.


M How must we prepare our selves, before we come to this holy Table?


C Every one must prove himself, whether he come with true faith and
repentance, and with Christian charity, as he witnesses.


M The true preparation then, and worthiness consists not in this, that our
faith and charity be so great as it ought to be.


C No: for though we ought continually to tend thereunto, yet shall we never
be able to come at it.


M How is it then, that our faith, so little and imperfect, saves us, and
makes us worthy to receive that which is offered unto us by the Gospel, and
the Sacraments?


C In that, that it sounds us, and makes us wholly to rest in the
righteousness, dignity, and perfection of Jesus, unto whom only the father
has regard.


M Must all they be received, that present themselves to the Supper?


C Yea, all those whom we know to be disciples, and members of Jesus, willing
to live and die in this faith and doctrine thereof.


A collection of the principal points, which they ought to know, that will
communicate at the holy Supper of the Lord Jesus Christ.
THere is one only God, on whom all things depend.

1 The first point to honor God well, consists in this, that we have all our
confidence in him, and that we perceive the means to know him; namely, in
Jesus Christ. Hereunto serves the confession of faith before recited. The
said confession contains four parts.

The first is of God the father, who is the beginning and principal cause of
all things.

The second of his son Jesus Christ, who is the eternal wisdom of God. And
in this part is comprehended the whole history of our redemption, to know,
that by Jesus Christ alone we obtain salvation, and the means whereby he has
purchased it for us:

The third of the holy spirit, who is the virtue and power of God, which he
powers upon his creatures, and nevertheless is resident still in himself.

The fourth of the Church, and of the graces of God toward the same.

2 The second point to honor God aright, consists in this, that we obey his
will. The rule to obey him, is given us in the ten commandments of the law.

The four first commandments contain the duty that we owe unto God.

The six following contain the duty that we owe unto our neighbors.

3 The third point to honor God aright, consists in this, that in all our
necessities we call upon him alone.

The instruction to call rightly upon God, is given us in the prayer of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The three first petitions of the same prayer, concern the glory of God.

The other three concern our own welfare and profit.

4 The fourth point to honor God aright, lies in this, that we look for all
good things at his hand, as it is he only from whom all good things proceed.

The promises of this free goodness that God uses toward his own, are
contained in the Gospel.

The same promises are comprehended by faith.

Faith is an assured knowledge of the good will of God toward us, grounded
upon the free promises, which is given unto us in Jesus Christ, and confirmed
in our hearts by his holy spirit.

Because of the weakness of our faith, our Lord has given us the Sacraments.

A Sacrament is an outward testimony, which by a visible sign represents
unto us the promises of God, spirituallie accomplished in us.

Baptism is unto us as an entrance into the Church of God, and represents
unto us the remission of our sins, and our renouation of life.

The water, as the property thereof is to wash, does signify the washing of
our souls, which is done for us through the blood of Jesus Christ, in the
forgiveness of our sins.

The water also is put upon the head, in sign of death: nevertheless, in that
it is done but for a little time, it is a figure of our resurrection.

The Supper was instituted of our Lord, to assure us, that by the communion of
his body, and of his blood, our souls are nourished in hope of life
everlasting.

The bread and the wine signify unto us the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
which have the same property toward our souls, that the bread and wine have
toward our bodies; namely, to nourish and strengthen.

The right use of communicating at ye supper, is chiefly, a man to prove
himself, whether he have true faith with repentance and charity toward his
neighbors.

FINIS.
D. M.

A godly exhortation to mortification of our sinful affections, and to
holiness of life: written by a virtuous Gentlewoman.
IF ye live after the flesh, you shall die: but if ye through the spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the
spirit of God they are the sons of God. Romans 8.

This also, we know the season that we should now awake out of sleep. For now
is our salvation near: the night is passed, the day is come nie: let us put
on the armor of light, let us walk honestly, as it were in the day light, not
in eating and drinking, neither in chambering and wantonness, neither in
strife and enuieng: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. Romans 13.

The reward of sin is death: but eternal life is the gift of God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.

Deerlie beloved, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul:
and see that ye have honest conversation among the Gentiles, that whereas they
backbite you as evil dooers, they may see your good works, and glorify God in
the day of visitation. 1. Peter. 2.

I say walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh. For the
flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh.
These are contrary one to the other, so that ye can not do whatsoever ye
would: but and if ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under the law. The
deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are these: adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, worshipping of images, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
zeal, wrath, strife, seditions, sects, enuieng, murder, drunkenness,
gluttony, and such like. Of the which I tell ye before, as I have told you in
times past, that they which commit such things, shall not be inheritours of the
kingdom of God. They truly that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts thereof. Galat. 5.

Let no filthy communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to edify withal: as often as need is, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers, and grieve not the holy spirit of God. Phil. 4.

Follow not thy lusts, but turn thee from thine own will. For if thou give
thy soul her desires, it shall make thine enemies to laugh thee to scorn.
Sirac. 18.

An adulterous woman shall be trodden under foot as mire of every one that
goes by the way. Sirac. 9.

Ye adulterers, and women that break matrimony, know ye not how that the
friendship of the world is enimitie to Godward. Whosoever will be a friend of
the world, is made enemy of God. Submit your selves to God, and resist the
devil, and he will fly from you: draw nie to God, and he will draw nie to
you. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering minded:
suffer afflictions, sorrow ye, and weep, let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Cast down your selves before the Lord,
and he shall lift you up. James. 4.

For the children of adulterers, they shall come to an end, and the seed of an
unrighteous bed shall be rooted out. And though they live long, yet shall they
be nothing regarded, and their last age shall be without honor. If they die
hastily they have no hope, neither shall they be spoken to in the day of
knowledge. For horrible is the death and end of the unrighteous. Wisd. 3.

The children of the ungodly are abominable children, and so are all they
that accompany with the ungodly. The inheritance of ungodly children shall
come to naught, and their posterity shall have a perpetual shame and
confusion. Woe be unto you ye ungodly, which have forsaken the law of the
highest. If ye do live, ye shall be cursed: if ye die, the curse shall be your
portion. Labor to get thee a good name, for it shall continue surer by thee,
than a thousand great treasures of gold. Sirac. 41.

The Lord allows the righteous, but the ungodly and him that delights in
wickedness, does his soul abhor. Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares,
fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink.
For the righteous Lord loves righteousness. Psalm. 11.

As for sinners, they shall be confounded out of the earth, and the ungodly
shall come to an end. Psalm. 103.

Another godly exhortation to move us to prayer, and to cause us to be in a
continual readiness to wait on our Master Christ, when he shall come again
to judge both the quick and dead: written by the same godly Gentlewoman.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice: let your softness be
known to all men. The Lord is even nie at hand, be careful for nothing: but
in all prayer and supplication, let your petitions be manifest unto God with
giving of thanks. Be fervent in spirit: apply your selves to the time: rejoice
in hope: be patient in tribulation: continue in prayer. Romans 22.

Take heed therefore how ye walk: circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise
men redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise,
but understand what the will of the Lord is. And be not dronken with wine,
wherein is excess: but be filled with the spirit, speaking unto your selves in
Psalms and Hymns, and in spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the
Lord in your hearts: giving thanks always for all things unto God the Father,
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, submitting your selves one to another in
the fear of God. Epes. 5.

Pray always with all manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit, and
watch thereunto with all instance and supplication. Ephesians. 6.

Uerelie verelie I say unto you says Christ, Whatsoever ye ask the father
in my name, he will give it you. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy
may be full. And when thou praiest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are,
for they love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, because they would be seen of men: verelie I say unto you, they
have their reward. But when thou praiest, enter into thy Chamber, and when thou
have shut the door, pray thou to thy father which is in secret, and thy father
which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. And when thou praiest, babble
not much as the heathen do, for they think, that they shall be heard for their
much babbling sake. Be ye not like them therefore, for your father knows
whereof ye have need, before ye ask of him. After this manner therefore pray
ye. Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc. Matthew. 6.

Watch and pray, for you know neither the day, nor yet the hour when the
son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him. Then
shall he sit upon the seat of his glory, and before him shall be gathered all
nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides
the sheep from the goats: and then he shall set the sheep on his right hand,
and the goats on the left. Then shall the King say to them on his right hand,
Come ye blessed children of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat.
Then shall the King say unto them that shall be on the left hand, Depart from
me ye curssed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
Angels. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I was thirsty, and ye
gave me no drink. Then shall they answer him saying: Lord; when saw we thee
an hunged, or a thirst, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee. Then shall he answer them saying: Uerelie, I say unto you, in
as much as you did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not unto me.
And these shall go away into everlasting pain, but the righteous to life
eternal. Matthew. 25.

As Jesus sat in mount Oliuet, his disciples came unto him secretly, saying:
Tell us when these things shall be, and what sign shall be of thy coming, and
of the end of the world. And Jesus answered, and said unto them: Take heed that
no man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and
shall deceive many. Ye shall hear of wars, and of the fame of wars, but
see that you be not troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the
end is not yet. Matthew. 24.

And there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars,
and in the Earth: the Sea, and the waters shall roar, and men's hearts shall
fail them for fear, and for looking for those things which shall come on the
earth. Behold the fig tree, and all other trees, when they shoot forth
their buds; ye see and know of your own selves that Summer is then nigh at
hand. So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, understand that
the kingdom of God is then nigh at hand. Luke. 21.

But of that day and hour no man knows, no not the Angels of heaven, but my
father only. As the time of Noah was, so shall likewise the coming of the
son of man be. For as in the days before the flood, they did eat and
drink, marie and were married, even unto the day that Noah entered into the
ship, and knew of nothing till the flood came; and took them all away, so
shall also the coming of the son of man be. Matthew. 23.

Take heed to your selves, least your hearts be overcome with surfeting and
drunkenness, and cares of this world, and that day come on you unawares. For
as a snare shall it come upon all them that sit on the face of the earth. Watch
therefore continually, and pray, that ye may obtain grace, and fly all this
that shall come, and that ye stand before the son of God. Luke. 21.

Take heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. As a man which
is gone into a strange Country, and has left his house, and given authority
to his servants, and to every man his work, and commanded the porter to
watch. Watch therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house will
come, whether at even, or at midnight, whether at the cocke-crowing, or in the
dawning, least if he come suddenly, he should find you sleeping, and that I
say unto you, I say unto all men, Watch and pray. Matthew. 13.

Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion, walks
about seeking whom he may devour, whom resist ye steadfastly in faith.

Finally, let us in all our prayers remember to pray for the Queens most
excellent Majesty, that it will please the almighty God to prosper her in all
her affairs, and send her a long and triumphant reign over us, that she may
overcome all her enemies, and that after this painful life ended, she may
reign with Christ in his heavenly kingdom, there to receive a glorious
crown that never shall perish: So be it.

FINIS.
THE THIRD LAMP OF VIRGINITY; Containing sundry forms of divine meditations
and Christian prayers; penned by the godly learned, to be properly used of
the QVEENES most excellent Majesty, as especially upon the 17. day of
November, being the day of the gladness of her heart, and memorable feast of
her coronation: so on all other days and times at her Graces pleasure.

Whereunto also is added a most heavenly HEAST spoken as it were in the person
of GOD unto her Majesty, containing his divine will and commandment
concerning government: and a right godly and Christian Vow uttered again by
her Grace unto God, comprehending the heroical office and duty of a Prince:
faithfully compiled out of the holy Psalms of that Princely Prophet King
DAVID, as they are learnedlie explaned by Theodore Beza: very profitable to be
often read and meditated upon of her Majesty, and all other Christian Rulers
and Governors, to the glory of God; the benefit of his Church, and their own
everlasting joy and comfort in the holy GHOST.

PSALM. 45. Audi filia, and vide, and inclina aurem tuam, obliu^scere popul^
t^^. and domus patris tui.

Et concupiscet Rex formam tuam, quia ipse est Dominus tuus, ipsum adorabis.

Omnis gloria filiae Regis intus est.

1582



Right godly Psalms, fruitful Prayers, and comfortable Meditations to be
said of our most virtuous and dear Sovereign LADY Queen ELIZABETH, as at
all times at her Graces pleasure: so especially upon the 17. day of November,
being the memorable day of her Majesty's most ioifull deliverance out of
trouble: and happy entry to her blessed reign.
The 18. Psalm of DAVID, which he made for the first beginning of his
gratulation and thanksgiving unto God, in the entering into his kingdom, for
the marvelous mercies, victories and graces of God toward him:
paraphrasticallie explaned and opened by that godly learned man THEODORE BEZA.
I Do love thee, O LORD, my strength: I do love thee, even from the bottom
of my heart.

The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, my deliverer, my God, my mount, my
refuge, my sheeld, the horn wherewith I drive away the enemy, and my high
tower of defense.

I have praised the Lord, and called upon him: and he has delivered me from
all mine enemies.

The bands of death had compassed me round about and bound me: most wicked men,
like most raging floods, made me afraid, enuironing me round about.

I did lie as it were wrapped in my winding sheet, even snarled with the
snares of death.

I called upon the Lord in these extremities, I called upon my God, I say, and
he heard my voice out of his high palace: and received into his ears the cry
that I made unto him in the prison.

Then began the earth to quake and tremble, the very foundations of the
mountains to shake and shudder.

And he breathed out smoke from his nostrels, spitting forth fire out of his
mouth: yea casting forth even coals of fire.

He bowed the heavens and came down, the darkness being spread all abroad
under his feet.

He did ride upon the wings of the Angels, and was carried with the wings of the
wind.

Black darkness environed his tabernacle round about, and he was carried with
most dark and thick clouds.

Until his glistering brightness did break those clouds, and the flames of
fire did flash on every side.

At the length, he thundered from heaven, and filled all places with his
mighty sounding voice, and with haile-stones and lightenings.

He shot forth his fiery darts, and increasing his lightenings, he terrified
mine enemies, and destroyed them.

Then the deep bottoms of the waters appeared, and the foundations of the
world were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord, and at the blustering wind of thy
wrath.

So then has he (stretching his right hand from the heaven) taken me, and
drawn me out of the bottom of the deep waters.

From the mighty enemy, I say, and from the other enemies, by whose power I
was oppressed.

For they verelie had almost cast me down, and destroyed me at the sudden: but
he was my staff that stayed me.

And he has drawn me out of these streights, and placed me in an open and
large place: because it so pleased him (without my deserving) to favor me.

For he had regard indeed of me, that so was oppressed of these men without
cause, and granted these things to me being guiltless.

For I have followed the way that the Lord has appointed me, howsoever these
men vexed me: neither could I be drawn by any of their injuries, that I
should fall from my God as the wicked use.

For I had all his laws before mine eyes, neither did I put his statutes
forth of my sight.

But I behaved my self without hypocrisy with him, neither did I follow mine
affections, which else would easily have carried me forth of the way.

Therefore had the Lord regard of me that was oppressed of them without any
cause: and favored me the innocent party.

For thou, O Lord, wilt show thy self good and upright to them that deal
vprightlie.

And as thou show thy self sincere, with them that deal sincerely: so the
crafty men shall perceive thee to be more cunning.

For although many times thy servants be sore vexed: yet dooest thou preserve
them, and dooest cast down those that behave themselves so proudly.

Hence have I my light, whereby thou causest me to shine: and driuest away my
darkness.

Thou have made me to overcome these dangers easily, and to leap over the
walls and lets that were in my way.

For the way whereby God leads us is plain, the word of God is most pure:
the Lord does defend all that trust in him as with a shield.

For who is God, but the Lord? And who is mighty, but our God only?

He has girded me with power, and has made my way safe.

He has made me as swift as the Hinds, and has placed me in most high and
safe places.

He has taught mine hands to fight, and he has given me so great strength,
that I am able to break a bow of brass with these mine arms.

Thou have preserved me with the protection of thy shield, and thou have stayed
me with thy right hand, when I was ready to fall, through thy great mercy.

Thou have caused me to go safely without danger, and thou have stayed my
sliding steps.

Therefore have I pursued mine enemies, and taken them, and I have not turned
back, till I have destroyed them.

I have so beaten them down, and trodden them under foot, that they were not
able to raise themselves again.

For thou verelie have given me such strength, that they which have risen
against me, have fallen hedlong at my feet.

Thou have given me power to strike off their heads, and that I might destroy
them that pursued me.

Yet Lord, I grant they cried unto thee: but thou have not delivered them,
neither would hear their cry.

Therefore did I beat them small, like the dust that the wind scatters
abroad: and I did beat them like the mire, which is tempered under the foot
of them that walk the streets.

Yea, also thou have delivered me from domestical and inward troubles, and
thou have given me dominion over the nations that I never knew before.

Unknown people (I say) obey my commandments, and strangers be compelled for
fear to submit themselves unto me.

The hearts of the strangers have failed, so that they fall down for fear in
their strongest forts.

Let the Lord live, and let him that is my defense be knowledged and worshipped
of all, as he worthily deserves. Let God my deliverer be praised
euerie-where.

Even God (I say) who is mine aduenger, who has subdued so many people under
me.

Thou have saved me from mine enemies, thou have delivered me from them that
rose up against me, especially from that cruel curssing man.

Therefore will I praise thee, even amongst the profane nations, and I will
sing unto thy Majesty.

For verelie thou have maruellouslie preserved thy Queen, and not only
ELIZABETH her self, whom thou have anointed Queen, but also thou have showed
singular favor to her posterity that shall remain for ever,

Amen.
* Glory therefore be unto thee o FATHER, the Son, and the holy Ghost, as
it was from all beginnings, is at this present, and ever shall be through all
ages and worlds, world without end:
Amen, AMEN.
The 118. Psalm made by DAVID, when he obtained his kingdom after the death
of Saul.
OH acknowledge, and declare ye openly that the Lord is good, for his
bountious goodness is for ever.

Let Israel now confess this thing, for his bountious goodness and mercy
endures for ever.

Let the stock of Aaron now confess, that his loving kindness is perpetual.

Let all the sincere woorshippers of the Lord now confess this, that his
loving kindness is perpetual.

I doubtless, being a notable example of his unspeakable bounty, have not
ceased (as ye know) to call upon him in my greatest extremities: and he (as
you your selves see) having heard me, has exalted me into this most large
room.

Wherefore I, having experience that the Lord works for me, and that he is so
near at hand unto me, God forbid that I should fear the power or the threats
of any man.

For the Lord himself is the chief leader of those that help me, so that I
can not doubt at all, but that I shall see with mine eyes those enemies which
remain justly punished of him.

Oh how far better is it to trust in the Lord, than in men!

How far better is it to trust in the Lord, than in any men, how excellent
soever they be!

Behold, many nations compass me about, but I calling upon ye Lord, shall most
undoubtedly destroy them.

They compass me in I say, they beset me round about, but calling upon the
Lord, I shall most undoubtedly destroy them.

Mine enemies in great multitudes compass me like swarms of Bees, but I shall
forthwith stiffle them, as though they were cast into the fire, and calling
upon the Lord, I shall most undoubtedly destroy them.

For in deed before, the most cruel enemy did so sore thrust at me, that I
seemed even now ready to fall: but as I was falling, the Lord supported me.

Therefore I account him mine only strength, I acknowledge him to be my
Savior, and praise him in my song.

Hereof come those voices of those that sing, and rejoice together with me,
out of their tabernacles, now doubtless the Lord has advanced the power of
his most strong right hand.

The Lord has now exalted that his right hand, now the Lord has showed forth
the power of his most strong right hand.

Behold me then that am yet alive, and about to set forth the works of God.

For though he has stricken me very sore, yet has he spared me life.

I pray thee therefore, let that gate now at the length be open unto me, which
only the lovers of righteousness must go unto, that I being entered thither,
may praise the Lord.

For it is consecrate unto the Lord, therefore is it open to the just alone.

Here will I praise thee, O Lord, because thou giving ear have delivered me.

For the stone which the very chief builders have so stubbornly as yet
rejected, as nothing fit, is not only now counted in the building: but even as
a principal it vpholdeth the whole weight of the very building.

Uerelie, it is a work of God indeed, which makes all the beholders thereof
to be amazed.

Go to then, seeing the Lord has commanded this most ioifull day to shine
unto us, let us pass it wholly in mirth becoming Saints, and say:

I beseech thee O Lord, preserve the Queen that is given us from heaven. I
pray thee, I say, I pray thee O Lord give the Queen ELIZABETH all
prosperity.

Let her have prosperity and bliss, that comes to govern us in the name
and commandment of God. We wish prosperity to you also; that are the nearer
inhabitants of the house of the Lord.

Iehoua is the only God, who shines unto us, bind the Lamb with cords, that
is brought to the horns of the altar.

Thou art my God, I will praise thee, thou art my God, I will sing thy praises
most loud.

Confess that the Lord is exceeding good, for his bountious goodness is
everlasting.

* Glory be therefore unto thee o blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, as always it has bin, continually is, and ever shall be, worlds
without ending: So be it.
The prayer.
O Almighty GOD, most gracious Lord, and heavenly Father, behold, I thine
handmaid prostrate here before the throne of thy divine Majesty, meeklie
confess thee to be my merciful God, my highest King, and everlasting
Savior; and humbly I acknowledge thee the Sovereign Lord above all lords;
the highest King of all kings, and the only omnipotent Creator, wise
preserver, and wonderful ruler of all thy creatures in heaven and earth, high
and low, visible and invisible: and my self also to be the work of thine
hands; the sheep of thy pasture; a subject and servant to thy most high and
sacred Majesty, and a child depending alone and wholly upon thy divine and
fatherly providence for all things. And because I know unthankfulness does
greatly displease thee, (For it is the root of all spiritual evil, and the
only thing that dammeth up the fountain of thy godly mercy for ever,). I
will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, least I be unthankful to thee, my God, my
deliverer and Savior. And I yield thee now most humble and hearty thanks, for
that it has pleased thee, of thy singular mercy, to give me this especial
honor: first, to suffer for thy glorious truth much extreme misery, fear,
care, impriso^ment, peril of body, trouble of mind, hazard of life, and
danger of death, by sickness, fire, conspiracy, and sword: and afterward
blessedlie protecting and preserving me from so manifold dangers, and
miraculouslie delivering me out of the hands of all mine enemies; to call me to
this excellent state and royal dignity of a Prince: and as this day to
cloth me with the garments of honor; to set the Crown of gladness, and
diadem of dignity upon mine head; to put the scepter of righteousness, the
globe of glory, and the sword of thy power into mine hands, and to anoint and
consecrate me thine handmaid QVEENE of this Realm, that I might be the
principal member and chief instrument in the same to advance thy glory, and
further thy Gospel, for the which I suffered. Yea, to be thy peoples Joseph,
their Moses, their Joshua, their David, their Josias, their Samuel, and their
Solomon: finally, to be their Deborah, their Iael, their Hester, their Judith,
and their Elizabeth; that is, their rest, stay, and staff of Majesty, their
shepherd and ringleader in the way of virtue, holiness, zeal, and sincere
religion. Which marvelous work of thine, oh gracious GOD, for thy name sake,
give me grace, not only this day; but all the days and time of my life to
remember and solemnize with worthy thanksgiving: that with the Queen of
Saba I may continually bless thee, and say; Blessed be thou O Lord my GOD,
which thus have loved me, and thy people, to set me in thy throne as QVEENE,
and to establish them for ever, by making me their Governor over them in thy
steed, to execute thy judgment and justice.

Neither can I now forget, but thankfully also call to my remembrance all thy
other great mercies, O merciful God, showed toward me since my coming unto
the Crown: namely, how often in thy mighty and marvelous mercy thou have
delivered unto me and my Counsel, the wicked attempts, malignant devises, and
mischeeuous practices wrought and conceived of all my common, crafty, and
cruel enemies, Satan, and his ministers; who to exalt themselves, and to rob
me both of thy people, kingdom, peace, and religion, even of very malice and
deadly hatred, have by all devilish means raged, blasphemed, and conspired
against thee, O GOD, and thy truth, like hypocrites: against me and my Crown,
like traitors; and against their Commonwealth and country, like spoilers:
and that for no offense of mine to themward, LORD, thou know; but only of
cruel spite they bear me, because in truth I profess thy Christian
religion, and seek by establishing the same through good and godly laws, to
serve thee zealouslie, sincerely, and purelie; according to the rule and
verity of thine eternal word. Which thy great benefits, when I well consider,
together with mine unworthiness thereof, I am even forced with my father
DAVID, to give humble thanks, and to bless thee before all the congregation,
and say: Blessed be thou, O LORD GOD of Israel, our Father for ever and ever.
Thine, O LORD, is greatness, and power, and glory, and victory, and praise.
For all that is in heaven and in earth is thine. Thine is the kingdom, O LORD,
and thou excellest, (as head over all.) Both riches and honor come of thee,
and thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and strength: in thine
hand, I say, O mighty GOD, it is to make great, and to give strength unto
all: now therefore I thank thee, and praise thy glorious name for ever. But
who am I, O Lord GOD, and what is my people, that thou have brought me to this
honor, and thus redeemed and delivered both me and thy people out of thrall
unto thy self, and art beecome our GOD? Does this apperteine to man, O LORD?
Or comes not this rather of thy free mercy, more than of any our
worthiness? And what can ELIZABETH say more unto thee? For thou Lord God
know thy servant, and even for thy words sake, and according to thine own
heart, have thou made my fountain become a flood, and my light to shine as the
sun: and done all these great things, to make them known unto thy servant.

Now therefore, for this thy gracious favor after so long restraint; so great
dangers ouerpassed; such blusterous storms ouerblowne; so many injuries
digested, and wrongs sustained, by thy mighty protection, O merciful God, to
my no small comfort, and thy peoples commodity, in exalting, erecting, and
bringing me out of thrall to liberty; out of darkness into light; out of
danger to peace and quietness; from dread to dignity; from misery to
majesty; from mourning to ruling: breeflie, of a prisoner to make me a Prince,
and to place me in the royal throne, there to sit as Queen now full 24.
years, in the admirable rest, blessed quietness, and long peace, which I now
enioie. For this thy divine wisdom, O heavenly father, in unfolding,
revealing, and frustrating the proud platformes, and peevish practices of
Achitophels, and all mine enimes. For this thy mere mercy, O dear Christ, in
spacing me and my people so long from the bloody hands of spoilers,
oppressors, traitors and usurpers. For this thy heavenly providence, O holy
Ghost, in preventing their devilish purposes, and so graciously protecting,
preserving and defending me, as well before I was Queen, as since, from so
extreme miseries, and manifold dangers, as also from the hands and violences of
al mine enemies, visible and invisible, domestical and foraine. Finally, for
these and for all other thy great graces, singular blessings, and mestimable
benefits, and principal virtues, spiritual and corporal, O glorious
Trinity, which through the mercy and merits of my sweet Savior Jesus Christ,
thou hertofore from my birth have, presently dooest, or hereafter unto my
death shall bountifully bestow upon me and my people: I most heartily laud,
entirely magnify, and incessantly extol thy most high, holy and renowned
name, and sacred Princely Majesty.

And as I meeklie even of duty from the bottom of my heart, render unto thee
my GOD and my King, all condign honor, worthy praise, and possible thanks,
together with the unfeigned resignation of all empire, kingdom, power, rule,
dominion, majesty and glory, both in heaven and in earth, as to thee only,
and most justly belongs: so now I most humbly and heartily beseech thy
divine Majesty, O excellent Father, and most merciful GOD, to have mercy
upon me thine humble handmaid and sinful servant. And be not provoked, good
Lord, with my sins, nor with the sins of my parents and people, to give us
over to the lust of our enemies. Make us not a reproach unto the foolish, nor
let our adversaries in our overthrow triumph against us, saying, Where is now
their God? But of thy rich mercy and woonted compassion in Christ Jesus,
forgive me my sins both old and new, both secret and open, both past,
present, and to come: yea from both mine own and others faults, O God, I
beseech thee deliver me, and cast all mine offenses into the bottomless depth,
out of thy remembrance and sight for ever: making the cross and passion, the
death and resurrection of thy most dear and only son my sweet Savior, and
only Redeemer Jesus Christ the righteous and immaculate Lamb, most effectual
in me to all virtue, godliness of life, and piety, as best becomes thy
daughter, thy virgin, thine anointed, and elect vessel of honor. That to all
other thy good graces, and bountiful benefits alredie showed toward me: the
which of thine accustomed goodness I beseech thee to confirm, finish, and
work out in me, as thou have graciously begun, and continue toward me to
the end according to thy good pleasure, with such further increase thereof from
time to time, as best shall serve to the setting forth of thy glory, the
benefit of thy Church to all posterity, and mine eternal peace in Christ
Jesus the Prince of peace. Grant, I say, O Lord, this also may be added:
namely, that as it has pleased thee in thy secret wisdom to quicken me, that
was Tanquam ouis, even as a seely sheep or lamb led to be slain, to raise
me up out of the dust and mire of persecution, to lift me up out of the pit and
dungeon, and to set me the chief of the Princes of this land, and to make me
meet to inheri^t the seat of glory, yea to build me the chief and head
pillar of this thy Church of England, France and Ireland, whereupon the whole
body of thy Saints therein do stay themselves in thy blessed peace and
unity. As I say, it is thy good will, not my deserts, to exalt the horn of
thine anointed: to appoint me a frail woman thy Lieutenant here on earth: and
to give power unto thy QVEENE to judge the ends of thy dominions, and execute
thine office here amongst thy people for a space in the regal seat of justice
and mercy: so vouchsafe thou, O gracious God, and loving Father, in like
mercy to power down continually upon me all those thy special good gifts,
princely virtues, and heavenly graces, fit for this my so high calling, that
being plentiouslie endued therewith, the bright shining beams thereof, as from
a glittering Star in the firmament, or the glorious Sun in his orient
arising, to the setting forth of thy most glorious, invisible, and eternal
Majesty, in this my frail, earthly and visible majesty, may cleerelie shine
and appear in me, to the benefit of thy Church far and near. And that I
remembering whose minister I am, may first above all things, in a perfect zeal
of thy house, and love of thy people, ever seek thy honor and glory, and
study continually to preserve thy people committed to my charge, in wealth,
peace and godliness. Dear Father, so bless me, so love me, so in the
spirit of counsel, prudence, knowledge and fortitude, sanctify, strengthen,
and direct me, that in a perfect faith, fear and love, as in thy sight, I may
walk vprightlie, without offense giving, in the obedience of thy holy word,
and fulfilling of thy blessed commandments all the days of my life: and may
be a true follower of that King, which is the Sovereign over the holy hill of
Zion, whose seat and kingdom endures for ever. Give me grace both
thankfully to acknowledge thy manifold great benefits bestowed upon me, and
also faithfully and diligently to discharge my duty toward thee, and thy
people, in executing thy judgments indifferently without parcialitie, to the
advancement of thy kingdom, the establishment of my throne, and the universal
comfort and commodity of all thy people.

Make me, good Lord, of an entire affection, and perfect heart toward thee: and
of an humble and gentle spirit toward all under my government, after the
example of Christ our eternal King, who to fulfill thy will, O GOD, did
vouchsafe to take flesh of the virgin Marie, and became man for man, that man
might become a God unto men: and who also did very much abase and humble
himself as a servant, even unto the death of the Cross, to redeem both
Prince and people out of thrall and bondage of sin, Satan, death and hell.
Let my natural affection and disposition, I say, O Lord, continue to my foes
terrible; to my subjects amiable; to mine offenders merciful; to the virtuous
bountiful; to all men indifferent; and parciall to none: that being guided by
thee to govern thy people justly, in all godly peace and quietness, I may
be able with a good conscience to witness of mine integrity before thee and
all the world, as thy faithful servants Moses, Samuel, and Nehemias sometimes
did of theirs, and boldly and truly with them say: Behold, here I am; bear
record of me before the Lord, and before his anointed. Whose ox, or whose
ass have I forcibly taken away? Or whom have I done any wrong to? Or whom
have I injured or hurt? Or of whose hand have I received any bribes, to blind
mine eyes therewith, and I will restore it you: that my people seeing, and well
perceiving my motherlie affection, faithful government, careful diligence,
and diligent watchfulness over them, by all means to do them all the good I
possibly may or can in thee, may woorthilie witness, rightly answer, and
justly confess and say of me, to thy glory, and my perpetual praise, as
the Israelites heretofore said of Samuel: That I have not grieved them, nor
troubled my land by oppression or injury: that I have not hurt them, nor taken
ought of any man's hand, nor by any means, either by my self or others,
willingly abused my power, or dealt unjustly with my people.

Oh kindle more and more in my heart, I beseech thee, most holy Father, a pure
zele above all things to promote thy glory, and a vigilant care, not only to
serve thee my self sincerely; but also to have thee diligently served of my
family and people. And to this end vouchsafe I pray thee, both to adorn me
with all thy heavenly gifts: and also to bless my whole family, court and
household with thy graces and virtues; that all these, both high and low, one
and other, which are placed therein under me, may for their virtuous life, true
faith, and right religion toward thee their God: and for their loiall hearts,
and conscionable obedience toward me their Prince and Mistres: and for their
entire affection and charity one toward another as brethren: and lastly, for
their hearty love and natural good will they bear to their Commonwelth and
country, be an example and pattern of true godliness and purity, both in
religion and life, for all the whole Realm and country, yea the whole world
besides to follow, as their head, fountain and light.

Moreover, O blessed God, as hitherto by thy mighty protection thou have
preserved me, and in thy great mercy, maugre the heads of all mine enemies,
miraculouslie have delivered me, and established me in this my kingdom, thus
long in admirable peace and blessed quietness, all glory and praise be
rendered unto thy glorious name therefore: so I beseech thy gracious goodness,
O Lord, in like mercy to bless, preserve, maintain, keep and defend me, and
my Realm still, from all both foreign and domestical conspiracies, treasons,
deceits, and violences of enemies, and from all other dangers and perils
imminent and to come, both bodily and ghostly, public and private: that I
may still govern blessedlie over a blessed people, and my Realm and people,
by thy defense and protection, continue in the truth of thy Gospel, and happy
enioieng of perfect peace and quietness both outward and inward.

Thou, O Lord of hosts, have ordained me the Governor over thy people, and
made my people to be thy people: and thou Lord art become our God, yea and our
great and mighty God, besides whom we have none other God. I know also, my
God, that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in righteousness: behold
therefore, I offer, vow, and dedicate my self willingly and entirely in the
uprightness of my heart, to serve and worship thee only for ever with joy,
and therefore am I thine handmaid bold to pray this prayer unto thee,
beseeching thee for ever to keep me, and to help me in this my good purpose
of holy serving and worshipping of thee. For that which I have hitherto done,
is nothing at all to speak of. O direct thou continually the thoughts of my
mind, and prepare my heart evermore unto thee. Give unto me thine handmaid a
perfect heart to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and
cause me to use my power lawfully, to the reforming both of thy house, and
estates, according to the prescript rule of thy written word and revealed will,
that so it may please thee O Lord God to confirm, for ever thy merciful
promises made unto me in my father DAVID, and to bless the throne or house of
thy servant, with thy blessing, that it may continue and be established before
thee for ever.

And that this may the better come to pass, to the glory of thy name, the
benefit of thy Church, and wealth of my Realm, as I heartily wish and desire:
remove far from thy Church, far from me O excellent father, all those which
fall from thee by infidelity, and are through obstinate wilfulness traitorous
rebels to thy sacred Law, and sincere Religion, which I profess. Let
backbiters together with such as are proud, and those that dare shamelessly
presume any thing, be utterly rooted out: but contrariwise, let there be
space in especially for such as be very zealous of the truth, that they only
may be conversant with me before thee, and cause me to feed them with a
singular faith and innocence, and minister all things diligently unto them.

Finally, let not the enemies of thy Gospel I beseech thee O gracious and
mighty God, thus despise thy grace offered them unto repentance: but those
that are to be converted, convert and turn them O God speedily, if it be thy
will. Make thou Saul at the length to become a Paul: and let not the
persecutor persist in his errors, but let them rather account thy long
suffering, and my peaceable and unbloody government, an occasion of salvation
to their souls, and of unfeigned love to thy Church. Otherwise, if they will
needs remain still disobedient to thy truth, disloiall unto me, dangerous to
the state, and enemies to their Country and Commonwealth, then O God of my
salvation, arise, and help to wound the head of thine enemies, and the hearie
scalpe of such as go on still in their wickedness. Let thy right hand find out
them that every day provoke thee, and revenge thy self on those blasphemous
hypocrites, that thus proudly contemn thee to thy face. And as thou have
discovered them, and their peevish practices, against thee and thine anointed,
so discover them still. As thou have prevented their devilish purposes, and
execrable intents, so prevent them still. Yea let their fiery eyes wax weary
with looking, their bloody hearts and hands faint with waiting for their golden
day, and that which comes not yet; neither let come O Lord I beseech thee,
but in thy good time, and according to thy will, a blessed and healthful
reign unto my self, much joy and comfort to my subjects, and long peace to
Zion for evermore.

Lastly, O most mighty God, look what remains yet of the happy building,
enlarging and finishing of thy Church, and to the establishing and planting of
thy Religion perfectly therein, according to the prescript rule of thy blessed
word, and full discharge of my duty, when I shall be called to render an
account before the judgment seat of Christ: because that without thee I can
do nothing, neither is it possible to please thee, do thou O father of light,
from whom all good gifts do come and proceed, vouchsafe to power down
plentifully of thy principal spirit upon me, and so ravish my heart with the
flame of the love of thee and thy people, and with an earnest zeal of thy
house, that with Joseph I may carefully and faithfully provide for thy
people: with Moses painefullie lead them out of the deserts of error and
oppression: and with Joshua, bring thy people into the land of promise: with
Debora fight thy battles: with Iahel knock Sisera of Room in the temples of
his usurped headship: with Judith cut off the head of proud Holophernes: with
Hezekias and Josias root out and destroy all superstition and relikes of
idolatry: with David and Solomon finish and consecrate to eternity thy
glorious Temple among thy people: and with them all most earnestly and
continually to pray unto thee for their salvation. That here on earth for
the time, after their virtuous example, doing that which is good in thy sight,
reigning blessedlie, ruling prudentlie, and like a loving mother, and tender
nursse, giving my fostermilke, the food of thy word and Gospel abundantly
to all, in all places of my dominion, and endeavoring my self faithfully to
discharge the great trust committed unto me: when thy son, to whom not only
the sea and winds, but all creatures are subject, shall come as King of kings
to require an account of the charge committed unto me, I may be found
faithful, and not fail finally in heaven, but in the pureness of my
virginity, and holiness of mine innocence, be presented to the Lamb my
sovereign Lord and only God, my heavenly Bridegroom and spiritual spouse,
my everlasting King dear Christ, and only sweet Savior Jesus, there to see
the Saints, and to be a Saint, and with all the holy Patriarchs, Judges,
Kings, and Queens, yea with all the Archangels, Angels, Saints, Martyrs,
Confessors, Uirgins, and the whole company of thy celestial and blessed
spirits, to reign with him over spiritual powers and principalities for ever,
and sing the sugared songs of my wedding-daie to my perpetual joy, and thine
eternal praise, O most glorious Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, one invisible God almighty, blessed for ever and ever:

Amen, Amen.
Another prayer to be said of the Queens Majesty.
BLessed art thou Lord God of Sabbath, for unto thee apperteineth all
magnificence, and power, and glory, to thee belongs all honor and
authority.

For whatsoever is either in the heavens above, or in the earth beneath, it is
thine. Thine, O Lord, is the kingdom, thou art above all Princes and Kings.
Riches are thine, glory is thine, and thou art Lord over all. In thee
remains virtue and power, greatness and government.

O God of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, which have made all things by thy
word, and by thy wisdom appointed man to rule the creatures which thou have
made, and to govern the world with equity and justice; I praise thee, and
extol thy glorious name, for appointing me thy servant, to rule and govern
this thy people committed unto my charge.

Now therefore, gracious Lord, favorably behold me, that I may tread the
path of truth, righteousness, and sincerity of heart in thy sight.

Let me not abuse mine authority, but govern with lenity and gentleness the
people under me, that living a godly and honest life, mankind may enioie their
desired peace.

Give therefore unto thy servant an heart desirous of instructions, that I may
judge the people, and discern between good and evil, and neither declining
to the right hand, or to the left, stoutelie and valiantly maintain the cause
of the righteous.

Grant me counsel and assistance to do such things as are grateful unto
thee, good for thy Church, and profitable for my people and Commonweal.

Give me thy wisdom, and reject me not from thy children: for I thy servant
and handmaiden am a frail woman of a short time, and full weak in the
understanding of judgments and the laws.

Thou have chosen me a Governor of thy people, and a Judge of thy sons and
daughters; send me therefore wisdom from thy sacred heavens, and from the
seat of thy magnificence, that it may be with me, and labor with me, whereby
I may perceive what is acceptable in thine eyes, and learn that I have no
power of my self, but from thee, which art Almighty, and reignest over the
kingdoms of men, giving them at thy pleasure.

Grant that I never conceive proudly of my self, but may receive in patience
the discipline of thy Law.

Make me wise and circumspect, that I neither offer injury to any man,
neither suffer any to be iniuried, that so equity may be maintained, and
justice among men preserved.

Let me at no time, under the show and color of equity, uphold or countenance
a wicked cause: neither yet without sufficient examination and trial of both
parties, give sentence against any.

Allow me such Counselors, Governors, and Overseers, as are of courage,
fearing God, dealing vprightlie, hating covetousness; that by them the
burden, charge, and care which I sustain, may be somewhat lightened.

Endue both me and them with thine holy spirit, that with earnest study, and
watchful minds, we may discern between matters, that no man through our
negligence have the overthrow in a righteous cause, but that sentence be
rightly pronounced between a man and his brother, and a stranger, without
respect of any person in judgment.

Let us hear as well the little as the great, and fear no man, because the
judgment is thine, which stand in the company of judges, and among the
gods thou plaiest the Judge; for the judgment is not of man, but of the Lord,
and whatsoever we shall judge it will come upon us.

Wherefore, let thy fear be with us, that we may do all things with care and
circumspection, that we prove not children in understanding: neither give our
selves to lusts and pleasures, but to eat our meat in due season, and that
for strength, not for dronkennes.

For thou will make earnest and diligent inquiry of all our works, and search
all our cogitations, because we are thy servants and deputies to govern, men
of a very short life: and he which is to day a King, to morrow may be dead:
for we be all mortal, and subject to one and the same corruption.

Besides, an horrible judgment is nigh for such as walk not after the will of
thee our God: for he that is most low, shall find mercy: but the mighty
shall be mightily tormented: for thou which art the Lord over all, regardest
not the person of any, neither do thou fear the greatness of the mighty,
because as well the great as the small are the workmanship of thine hands; thy
care is equal over all, and thou give to godly Princes eternal happiness,
which art the Judge both of the quick and dead, living and reigning with thy
Son in the unity of the Spirit a God for evermore,

Amen.
Another.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased thee O King of kings, and Lord of lords, to
appoint me among other, a Ruler of thy people: give me grace I beseech thee so
to minister the Commonweal, and so to execute mine office, that I may please
thee, and hurt no man in all my doings, but judge equally, and justly rule
according to thy will, show my self a Mother unto thy people, and so be have
my self in all mine enterprises, that I seeking thy glory, the furtherance of
thy blessed Gospel, and the weal of thy subjects, may, when thou shall render
to every one according to his deeds, be found blameless in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord:

Amen.
Another.
OAlmightie God, Lord of heaven and earth, which have appointed me thy servant
to be a governor of thy people, and a ruler over men: I most humbly beseech
thee send me thy wisdom from above, whereby I may vprightlie judge thy people,
rightly discern between good and evil, and constantly continue in doing
my duty, without respect of persons.

Give me power and wisdom to do that is grateful in thy sight, profitable for
my subjects, and good for the continuance of peace.

Let me always remember that I have no power of my self, but of thee, and
that the judgment is not of man, but of thee my God, which stand among the
judges, and plaiest the Judge among the gods.

Give me grace likewise to consider, that one day, how soon I know not, thou will bring me to a reckning, and make diligent inquiry, how I have behaved my
self in my place and office.

For I thy servant have but a short race to run, and such is the state of us
all; he which is to day a King, to morrow may be dead.

And forasmuch as an horrible judgment shall be given upon such as rule not
vprightlie, nor walk after thy will; for mighty men shall mightisie be
tormented: thou being Lord over all, wilt spare no person, nor fear any
greatness, for thou have made the small and great, and carest for all alike.)

I beseech thee gracious and eternal God, give me grace to learn what thy
will is, and to deal wisely, to infer none injury unto any, nor to suffer
any to be injured, to countenance none evil cause, nor to slide from the path
of justice.

For I thy servant am a frail person, of a short time, and full weak in the
understanding of judgments, and the laws.

Send me therefore wisdom from the throne of thy Majesty, that she may be
with me, and labor with me, that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight,
and be led by her in all my doings, and preserved by her power, so shall my
works be acceptable, and then shall I govern thy people righteouslie in Christ
my Lord and Savior,

Amen.
Another.
Hear me, O LORD, thou high and mighty God, whose Majesty may not be
comprehended, whose word is true, whose commandment is strong, thou that
ridest upon the Cherubins, and fliest with the wings of the wind. Thou God of
all mercy, most worthy to be sought, before whom the hosts of heaven stand
with trembling, whose ordinance is dreadful, whose looks dry up the depths,
whose hands rule the starrie firmament, whose goodness only gives the
fruits of the earth, whose wrath makes the mountains to melt, and consumes
the wicked, whose truth bears witness, and mercy saves the sorrowful
sinner. Thou, thou incomprehensible Creator, that never tookest beginning, and
want end. Since of nothing thou have wrought me (with the woonders of the
world) to thy most seemly shape, and vouchsafest thy dririe death and
passion, to drown the danger of my sinful deserts, and have as a careful
captain, cherished my body with comfortable gifts unto this present day:
continue, O God, such goodness toward me unworthy, which do here with
contrite heart, and bowed knees appeal to the height of thy mercy, and loving
kindness, to accept mine unequal thanks for the same: humbly beseeching thy
fatherly goodness, that thy holy hand may still renew in me thy former gifts
plentiouslie powered upon me from the prime of my birth unto this present: not
remembering, good Lord, mine unworthiness of the same, nor frailty of my
passed years, that speaks against me; but altering the ministers of thy
wrath into mild mercy. Grant I beseech thee, that through the assistance of
thy holy spirit I may be led to correct that is amiss, and that I may now
persevere in setting, ordering, and reforming all my travels, counsels, and
studies, as best may accord with thy blessed will, and cancel the bonds of my
heavy charge; wherein assist me, most puissant Prince of all power, with thy
prudent skill and heavenly grace, that I may be truly able to advance
justice, and to hate wrong, and so be found a faithful minister over thy
people. In whom plant, I beseech thee, thy heavenly grace and fear, with
obedience toward me thy minister, and kindle in me the love of thy holy
spirit, that I may persevere in the truth of thy word, without doubt or
wavering to the end. Grant this, oh mighty God of hosts, for the merits and
passion of thy dear son my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,

AMEN.
The prayer of King SOLOMON for Wisdom to govern well. Wisd. 9.
O GOD of my fathers, and Lord of mercy, which have made all things with thy
word, and ordained man through thy wisdom, that he should have dominion over
the creatures which thou have made, and govern the world according to equity
and righteousness, and execute judgment with an upright heart. Give me
wisdom, which is ever sitting above thy seat, and put me not out from among
thy children. For I thy servant and handmaid am a feeble person, and of a short
time, and yet less in the understanding of judgments and the laws. And
though a man be never so perfect among the children of men; yet if thy wisdom
be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded. Thou have chosen me to be a
QVEENE unto thy people, and the Judge of thy sons and daughters. Thou have
commanded me to maintain thy Church, which from the beginning thou have
chosen.

Oh send out of thy holy heavens therefore unto me, that thy wisdom,
wherewith thou made the world, gouernest thy works, and know what is
acceptable in thy sight, and right in thy commandments. Send her, I say, from
the throne of thy Majesty, that she may be with me, and labor with me, that
I may know what is acceptable in thy sight, and right in thy commandments.
For she knows and understands all things, and she shall lead me soberlie
in all my works, and preserve me by her power and glory: so shall my works be
acceptable, and then shall I govern thy people righteouslie, and be well and
worthy to sit in my fathers throne,

Amen.
Holy Prayers, and godly Meditations, desciphering in Alphabeticall form,
the Royal name of our virtuous Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH, properly to be
used of her Majesty.
ELIZABETH.
E
ENter not into judgment with thy servant, O LORD: for no flesh is righteous
in thy sight. PSALM 143, verse 2.
O GOD, which dwell in light that no man can attain. O God, which art hid,
and can not be seen with bodily eyes, nor comprehended with any
understanding, neither expressed with the tongue of men, or Angels. O my God,
what is it to be righteous in thy sight? It is that we should be without
sin before thee, which no man ever was since the fall of Adam. For which
cause the holy Prophet DAVID says in this wise: Enter not into judgment with
thy servant, O Lord: for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. If then no flesh
be righteous in thy sight; O unhappy that I am, laden and burdened with sin,
who shall have pity or compassion on me, or whither shall I go? My sins are
ever before me, mine unrighteousness condemns me. What shall I do? Shall I
despair? God forbid. For merciful, meek, and loving is my Savior. My refuge
therefore shall be in my God: for certain I am, he will not forsake his own
image, neither will he forsake the work of his own hands. Wherefore most meek,
loving, and merciful Father, to thee come I all sad and sorrowful. But what
shall I say unto thee? I will say: Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
O Lord: for no flesh is righteous in thy sight. And again, I will with the
Prophet power out before thee the words of sorrow. I will heartily beseech
thee, saying: Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me, according to thy
great mercy: not after the mercy of men, but after thy great mercy, which is
incomprehensible, which is unmeasurable, and which passes all sins without
comparison. According therefore unto that thy great mercy, by the which thou
have so loved the world, that thou gave thy son for it; by the which thou
have taken away all our sins; by the which through his cross thou have
lightened all men; by the which also thou have restored all things in heaven,
and in earth: wash me, I say, O Lord, wash me in his blood, restore me in his
resurrection, and justify me by thy grace and favor, and the redemption which
is in Christ,

AMEN.
L
LORD, look thou no more on my sins: but according to the multitude of thy
compassions, wipe away all mine iniquities. Psalm. 51. verse 1.
THy mercy, O Lord, is the abundance of pity; thy compassions are the works
and process of thy mercy; by the one thou look gently on the poor and
wretched: by the other thou forgiuest the multitude of sins. O sweet, and
merciful Savior Jesus Christ, the sorrowful and penitent sinner Marie
Magdalen came prostrate before thy feet, she washed them with her bitter
tears, she wiped them with the hears of her head: thou forgauest all her
sins, and sentest her away in peace: this was, good Lord, one of thy
compassions. Peter thrice denied thee; and forsook thee with an oath: thou
mercifully lookedst on him, and he beholding thee bitterly wept: and thou
Lord forgauest him; which was another of thy compassions. The thief on the
Cross was saved with one word: Paul in the furious madness of persecution
was called, and by and by was filled with the holy Ghost: these all Lord are
thy pitiful compassions.

Since therefore that thou art the same our GOD, with whom is no alteration,
neither shadow of change; and since there is but one Mediator and atonement
between God and man, that is Christ Jesus, which endures for ever; why do
thou not power out thy plentious compassions upon us, as well as thou did
upon our forefathers? Why stand thou so far, O Lord, and hidest thy face in
the needful tune of trouble? Have thou forsaken us? Or are all thy mercies
spent, and none left? O Lord my God, I heartily beseech thee, and most humbly
pray thee, that thou will, according to the multitude of thy compassions, wipe
away all mine iniquities: that as thou have drawn and received innumerable
sinners unto thee, and have made them righteous in thy sight: even so thou will
vouchsafe to draw and take me, and also to make me righteous through thy
grace, and so to cleanse and purify my heart; that after all mine iniquities and
uncleanness put out, it may be as a clean table, in the which thy finger, O
GOD, may write the law of thy love and charity,

AMEN.
I
IN the day of trouble I will call on thee o LORD, Psa. 120, verse. 1. Because
thou have said, In what hour so ever a sinner does repent him of his sins, I
will no more remember his iniquities. Ezech. 18, verse 27.
BEhold good Lord, now are the days of sorrow, now are the days of calamity;
and now is the time wherein I must call on thee. For now feel I mine old
cankered and festered sores of sin ready to break forth in me, to my utter
confusion. Behold good Lord, all my desires, and all my lamentable and
sorrowful sighs, I power them all before thee; crieng and saying, O Lord
cleanse me from my sins: for I am unclean and filthy before thee. Increase
therefore thy light in me, that I may be a vessel of thy grace: kindle my heart
with thy love; put out all fear: for perfect love expels fear. Let the
love of the world, the love of the flesh, the love of vainglory, and the
love of my self, utterly depart from me: that I may (through thy mercy) be
cleansed from mine iniquities, by the which I have offended thee. Cleanse me
therefore, O Lord, with the water of thy gracious favor, of which water he
that drinks, shall no more thirst, but it shall be made in him a fountain of
living water, running and flowing into eternal life. Cleanse me I say, O
Lord, with the water of thy weeping tears; cleanse me with the comfortable
waters of thy sacred Scriptures, that I may be numbered among them, unto whom
thou saiedst: Now are ye clean through the words that I have spoken to you:

AMEN.
Z
ZACHE was a perfect man, and thou Lord saiedst unto him, when he was in the
figtree, ZACHE come down, for to day I will come into thy house, and he came
down, and ioifullie received thee. Luke 19, verse 5.
O Merciful God, how many sins have I don in thy sight, which I would in no
wise have done before mortal men? I feared men more than thee, because I was
blind, and loved blindness. I had only eyes of flesh, therefore did I only
fear and look on men which are flesh. O my God, behold, I stand before thy
face, that I might find mercy. I stand before thy goodness and benignity,
looking for thy favorable answer: have mercy therefore on me. Thou saiedst to
Zache, This day I will abide in thy house, and he ioifullie receiving thee,
said; Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any
man wrong, I will restore him fourefold. But Lord Jesus, I will not part half
that I have, but I bequeath my self wholly unto thee, reserving nothing from
thee, promising to serve thee for ever with a clean and pure heart. O sweet
Lord Jesus, what saw thou in Zache? even thine own image, for he had cast
off the image of the devil, which before was on him, and had put on him thine
image. If then thou did see in Zache, by putting from him the image of the
devil, that which did draw thee to his house; take then from me, sweet Jesus,
all my sins and wickedness; all I pray thee, that none may remain in me,
which may keep thee from me; that I may put off, as Zache did, that evil
which is in me; that thou may see in me, which thou saw in Zache, that
when thou shall call me out of the figtree of this miserable world, thou may
say unto me, Come down, for this day I will abide with thee:

AMEN.
A
A Pure heart create in me, o GOD, and a right spirit renew within me. Psalm
51, verse 10.
ALas my Lord and Savior, my heart has forsaken thee, it is turned from thee,
and is gone astraie: it is wandered into strange countries, and ensues
vanities: her eyes are in the uttermost part of the world. It is lost, gone,
and sold under sin. It is stony, yea harder than the Flint or Adamant stone,
which relented and yielded at thy sons death. What now Lord? What shall I
say? A pure heart create in me, a fleshie heart, a mollified and soft heart, an
humble heart, a penitent heart, a merciful heart, a devout heart, a religious and
zealous heart: yea and such a heart as will love thee above all things. Create
therefore good Lord such a heart in me, that it may be of such efficacy through
thy grace, as nature is not able to make it. Give me also a right spirit, that
I may love and worship thee, which art the chief and principal spirit. For
thou art a spirit, and wilt be worshipped in spirit and verity. My soul, good
Lord, is also a spirit, and so made of thee, that of it self it is right. For
of her own nature she loves thee above her self, and desires all things for
thy glory; so that her own natural love is right, because it comes of
thee. Make steadfast therefore in me, O Lord, through thy gracious favor, this
spirit; that it may, according to his own nature, lead and keep me in the
way of thy commandments; and that by it my heart may be so inflamed with
heavenly love, that it may cause me to sigh unto thee, to embrace thee
continually, and never to forsake thee; but always to be firm and constant
in thee. Give me therefore an upright spirit, not seeking her own glory, but
thy will and glory. Renew it in me, I pray thee good Lord; renew it I say,
for my sins have quenched the first that thou gave me,

AMEN.
B
BEhold, LORD, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight:
that thou may be justified in thy words, and may overcome when thou art
judged. Psalm 51, verse 4.
TO thee only O Lord it is proper to forgive, and to be merciful, for through
mercy and forgiveness thou dooest declare thine almightinesse. I grant
therefore Lord, and confess, that against thee only I have offended, and have
done that which is evil in thy sight. Have mercy therefore on me O Lord, have
mercy. Express and show forth thine omnipotency in me, that thou may be
justified in thy words. For it is written, Thou came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Grant me therefore good Lord a true
repentant heart, and justify me according to thy words. Call me, receive me,
and give me thy grace; so that thereby I may do the works of repentance. Thou
saiedst, When I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all unto my self.
Uerifie Lord the words on me, draw me after thee, and let me run with thee in
the sweetness of thine ointments. Again, thou saiedst, Come unto me all ye
that labor, and are laden, and I will ease you. Behold my Lord and my God, I a
sinner do come unto thee, all laden with sins, day and night, laboring in
the sorrow of my heart for thy grace and mercy. Refresh and ease me therefore
good Lord, that thou may be justified and proved, when thou art judged. For
there are many, which say, There is no help for him in his God. Overcome
Lord these persons, when thou art thus judged of them, and forsake not me at
any time: but give to me thy creature thy mercy and pardon, and then are they
vanquished which say, There is no help for him in his God,

AMEN.
E
EStablish me, o LORD, with a free and principal spirit, and restore unto me
the joy of thy saving health. Psalm 51, verse 12.
IT is a great thing, O heavenly father, that I desire of thee; seeing thou
art a great Lord, and King above all gods. He does thee injury which asks of
thee small things; and he which asks of thee bodily things, asks but vain
trifles. He therefore that desires spiritual things, desires great things:
but he that desires thy joy and saving health, desires the greatest thing
thou have to give. What is thy saving health, but Jesus Christ thy only son,
which is very God and everlasting life? And for so much as thou have bin so
loving and liberal a father, as to give him unto the death of the cross, and
there to offer him for me; why should I be ashamed to ask him of thee, whom
thou have given for me? Give me therefore thy principal spirit, that I may
rejoice in thy saving health. And for so much as in thy holy word thou biddest
me ask and knock, even till I see me importunate, and what can I ask that
should be more wholesome to me, than that thou should make me rejoice in thy
son our saving health? I will therefore continually cry to thee, saying:
Make me again to rejoice in thy saving health, and restore to me again the
thing which my sins have lost. Restore to me that which through my fault is
perished in me. Restore me I beseech thee for his mercies sake, that ever
sits on thy right hand, and makes intercession for me, that by his gracious
favor, I may at my last end enioie the fruitful benefit of thy saving health:

AMEN.
T
Thou ever, o LORD, have loved truth: and the unknown things of thy wisdom
have thou revealed unto me. Psalm 51. verse 6.
WHat means it to say, Thou love truth; but that of thy gracious mercy
thou make us promises, and fulfillest them for thy truths sake? Thou did
promise unto Abraham a son when he was aged: thou fulfilledst thy promise in
old and barren Sara, because thou love truth. Thou made promise unto David
thy servant, saying: Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon the regal
throne: and it came to pass, because thou love truth. Thou have promised
unto sinners, which will come unto thee, forgiveness and favor, and thou have
never defrauded any man: for thou love truth. There are other innumerable
promises, in the which thou have ever been faithful, because thou love
truth. Love therefore, O father of mercies, this truth in me, which with
repentant heart turns to thee. Behold therefore thy creature, in whom thou
may keep it, and to whom thou may forgive many sins. Spare good Lord,
spare thy servant, and command me to be of the number of the babes; that the
unknown things of thy wisdom, which thou have opened unto me, may lead me
unto the fountain of wisdom, which is on high; that thou may be praised in
the works of thy mercy, which thou dooest exercise toward thy servant, O
LORD, which never forsakest them that trust in thee:

AMEN.
H
Had thou, o LORD, desired sacrifice, I would have given it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings. Psalm 51. verse 16.
MY mouth, Lord, shall show forth thy glorious fame. For I know it to be most
acceptable before thee, seeing thou have declared it by the mouth of the
Prophet, saying: The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me; by which mean
(says the Lord) I shall be entised to show him my saving health. Psalm. 48.
Therefore will I offer praise unto thee for my sins, even the praise of
infants and sucklings. And why shall I offer praise for my sins, rather than
sacrifice? Because thou delightest not in burnt sacrifice. For if thou had
desired sacrifice, I had surely offered them: but thou delightest not in them.
And again, thou saiedst, I require mercy, and not sacrifice. Ose. 6.
Therefore my mouth shall show forth thy praise, because thereby I do show
forth thy honor, and it shows me through thy grace the way to my saving
health. O Lord, thou made the body for the spirit, therefore seek thou
spiritual things, and not bodily things. For thou say, My son give thy
heart unto me. Prou. 23. which is the sacrifice that pleases thee. Let me
therefore offer unto thee, O Lord, a heart repenting and sorrowing for my
sins; and inflame it with a desired love of heavenly things, and then will thou desire no more of me: for with such sacrifices will thou, O Lord, be
pleased,

AMEN.
REGINA.
R
REbuke me not, o LORD, in thine anger, neither chasten thou me in thy heavy
displeasure: but have thou mercy on me, for I am weak and in misery. Psalm
6, verse 1.
MY sins, O Lord, are so many, that the burden of them has weakened me. My
bones are so bruised, my sinews are so shrunken, my strength so fails me,
the rod of thy displeasure has so chastened me, that I feel no help in my
self. I appeal therefore, O Lord, to thy mercy, crieng out with the prodigal
and unthrifty son, saying: O Father, I have sinned against heaven, and
before thee; have mercy therefore, have mercy on me; not because I have
deserved thy mercy, but because thou art merciful. Since therefore thou art
merciful, what art thou, but even the very mercy it self? And what am I but
very misery? Behold therefore, O God, which art mercy, behold misery is
before thee. What shall thou do, O mercy? Truly thy works. Can thou go
back from thy nature? And what is thy nature? Uerelie to take away misery.
Have mercy therefore on me, O God. God, which art mercy, take away my
misery: for the depth of misery requires the depth of mercy. The depth of
sin requires the depth of grace and favor. Greater is the depth of mercy,
than the depth of misery. Let therefore, good Lord, the one depth swallowe up
the other. Let the bottomless depth of mercy swallowe up the depth of misery,

AMEN.
E
EXcept LORD the prayer of thy servant, as thou did the prayer of
Cornelius, and cast me not confused from thy presence. Acts 10, verse 6.
O Sweet Jesus, who ever came to thee with a pure and steadfast faith, and went
away confused? Or who ever desired thy favor, and went without it? Surely
thou passest in thine abundant pity, both the deseruings and also the desires
of them that pray unto thee. For thou give more than man can desire. The
woman of Canaan followed thee, she cried and made a pitious noise; she moved
thy Disciples to compassion, and worshipped thee, and said: Lord help me; but
yet would thou not answer. Yet she trusting in thy mercy, prayed again,
saying: Lord help me. Unto whose importunity thou did answer, saying: It
is not good to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs. O Lord, who
would not have been confounded, and have gotten him away at these thy words?
And yet did this woman continue still in prayer, and said: It is truth Lord
that thou say: it is not meet to cast the childrens bread unto dogs. But
yet Lord, the dogs do eat of the crumbs which fall from the childrens table.
And thou Lord reioicing in her great constancy, did say: O woman, great is
thy faith, be it unto thee as thou desire. Now therefore sweet and merciful
Lord Jesus, as thou did vouchsafe to accept and hear the prayer of
Cornelius, and of this woman of Canaan; so I heartily beseech thee to hear my
humble prayers, which I make day and night before thee; not only that thou
should deliver me from bodily oppressions, but also from the spiritual
power of the devil, that after this mortal life I may come to thy blessed
presence, in the everlasting kingdom, where thou reignest God with the Father,
and the holy Ghost:

AMEN.
G
Give ear, O LORD, and let all my sorrowful complaints, which go forth of
unfeigned lips, come before thee, that my mouth may show forth the worthy
praise of thy name. Psalm 17. verse 1.
THy praise is a great thing, O Lord: for it proceeds out of the fountain
whereof no sinners drink. There is no glorious praise in the mouth of a
sinner. Deliver me therefore O Lord from the way of sinners, and my tongue
shall magnify thy righteousness; and my lips and my mouth shall show forth
thy praise. Thou have the key of David, which shuttest, and no man opens; and
openest, and no man shuts. Therefore open thou my lips, as thou have opened
the mouths of infants, out of whose mouths thou have established thy praise.
Truly the Prophets and Apostles, and all other thy Saints praised thee, and
despised themselves. The sucklings extol thy fame and glory, which they know
through thy heavenly and celestial grace. Thy friends, which spreading thy
glory, have converted innumerable souls from sin unto virtue and true
felicity. Thy beloved have openly preached thy bountious gentleness, and
merciful favor, which thou show in thy dear son unto all the world. Now
therefore merciful God, give me true humility, that thou may stablish thy
praise by my mouth. Make me as one of the infants and sucklings, that I may
ever hang on the paps of thy wisdom. For thy paps, O Lord, are better than
wine, and thy wisdom better than riches. Make me as one of thy friends or
beloved, that I may constantly abide in thee, that my mouth and voice may
among the sucklings extol and set forth thy praise, saying and singing,
Ozanna in the highest,

AMEN.
I
I Am filthy and unclean before thee, O LORD. If thou therefore sprinkle me
with Isope, I shall be clean. If thou wash me, I shall be whiter than snow.
Psalm 51. verse 7.
I Soap, Lord, is a low herb, it is hot, and of a good savor, which
signifies nothing else, but thine only son Jesus Christ, which humbled
himself unto death, even unto the death of the Cross; which with the heat of
his fervent love loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood; which
also with the redolent and sweet savor of his benevolence and righteousness
has replenished the world. Therefore with this Isope shall thou, O holy
Father, sprinkle me, when thou shall power upon me the virtue and blood of thy
dear son Christ, when he through faith shall dwell in me; when through love
I am joined with him, when I shall imitate and follow his humility and
passion, then shall I be cleansed from all mine uncleanness. Then shall thou
wash me with mine own tears, which flow out of the love of thy son Christ.
Then shall I sigh till I be weary: then shall I water my bed every night with
my tears, so that it shall swim in them; and then Lord shall thou wash me,
and I shall be whiter than snow,

AMEN.
N
NOT every one that says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven. Matthew. 7,
verse 21.
THy will is, O heavenly father, that we do believe in thy beloved son,
whom thou have sent. Thy will is, that we believe that he, whom thou have
sent, is come in the flesh. And thy will is, that we imitate and keep his
saying. Thy will is also, that we should hear him. For thou spakest from
heaven, saying: This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I delight, hear him.
Give me therefore, O heavenly father, a steadfast faith, a strong faith, yea
such a faith, that no tribulation, that no vexation, that no persecution may
cause me to deny thy Son whom thou have sent: but that I may with a pure and
constant faith confess him to be come in the flesh, for the redemption of the
world; and that I may imitate and follow him, that I may keep his saying, who
was delivered for my sins, and was raised again for my justification. Give
me also, O holy father, a perfect hearing, and not a corrupt hearing; but that
I may, through the teaching of the holy Ghost, hear thee out of the Prophets,
out of the Apostles, out of the pen of the Evangelists, and out of the mouth of
thy Spouse the Catholic Church: to whom thou saiedst, I will send you a
comforter, even my spirit, which shall lead you into all truth. Grant me O
Lord this spirit, for there is none that can say Jesus is the Lord, but by
this thy holy spirit,

AMEN.
A
A Sacrifice to God, is a troubled spirit: a contrite and humble heart, o GOD,
shall thou not despise. Psalm 51. verse 17.
A Broken and troubled spirit, and not broken and troubled flesh pleases thee
O Lord. For the flesh is broken and vexed, because it has not the carnal
things that it desires, or else feels in it self things which it hates.
The spirit is broken and unquieted for his fault, because it has offended
against God, whom it loves. He soroweth that he has sinned against his maker
and redeemer, and that he has not regarded such a good and loving father. This
broken and sorowing spirit, is unto thee, O Lord, a sacrifice of most sweet
savor, which notwithstanding has his confection of most bitter spices, even
of the remembrance of his sins. For when our sins are gathered together
into the mortar of the heart, and beaten with the pestle of compunction, and
made into powder, and moistened with the water of tears, thereof is made an
ointment, and sacrifice most sweet, which being offered to thee, O Lord, thou will not despise. Marie Magdalen, which was a great sinner, made such an
ointment, and put it into the Alablaster box of her heart. She feared not to
enter into the Pharisees house, and there humbling her self at thy feet, sweet
Lord, washed them with her tears, wiped them with her hear, and anointed
them with most precious ointment, and ceased not to kiss them. Surely Lord,
her sacrifice was right acceptable, and pleased thee, so that thou preferredst
it above the Pharisie, which in his own sight was righteous. O Lord, great is
thy power, great is thy might, which declares it self most chiefly in
sparing and having compassion on sinners: showing to us, that a contrite and
humble heart thou will not despise.

Accept therefore sweet Lord Jesus, this my sacrifice of praise, proceeding out
of a broken and sorrowful heart. And if it be imperfect, amend thou the fault,
merciful Lord, which only art of power to do it; that it may be an holy and
acceptable sacrifice, inflamed with the fervent heat of thy bountious
charity; that it may be acceptable unto thee, or at the least, that thou
despise it not. I know well that I shall find favor in thy sight, and that
hereafter none of thy Saints, either in heaven or in earth, shall despise me.
Accomplish therefore in me even now O Lord, that which I so often do crave of
thee, which is, that thou will have compassion on me, according to thy great
mercy; and that also thou will receive me for a sacrifice of righteousness,
for a holy oblation, for a burnt sacrifice of good living, and for a Calfe to
be offered upon thine Altar or Cross: by the which I may pass this vale of
misery, unto that joy, which thou preparest for them that love thee,

AMEN.
* ANOTHER. ELIZABETH.
E
ENgraue thy laws in the depth of my heart, O Lord, that being instructed in
thy commandments, I may serve thee in fear, and rejoice in thee with
trembling, and take hold upon thy discipline in all things: least at any time
thou become angry, and I perish from the right way,

Amen.
L
LORD give me help from my trouble: for vain is the help of man, in thee I
have strength, and thou bring unto nothing those things which trouble me:
let my soul be subject unto thee. For from thee proceeds my patience. For
thou art my God and Savior, my helper, and I will not depart from thee. In
thee is my health and my glory, thou art the God of my help, and my help is
in thee,

Amen.
I
I Have broken thy fold, and wandered long as a lost sheep: let me return, O
Lord, because I have not forgotten thy commandments. The misdeeds and
ignorances of my tender years remember not Lord, but according to thy mercy
have mind on me. For thy goodness, O Lord, keep my soul, and deliver me: let
me not be ashamed, because I have trusted in thee. Turn my heaviness into
joy, cut off my sack of sorrows, and gird me with gladness, that my glory may
sign unto thee, and I shall not be grieved.

Z
ZORobabel King of Judah in the depth of thy displeasure tasted of thy mercy
and received by the mouth of Aggeus thy Prophet sweet comfort and knowledge of
thy favor and grace: yea after thy determination to destroy the whole
kingdom of the heathen, thy right hand did preserve him, and thine
incomparable mercy did choose him for a seal to thy self. Lord, this happy
King in thy goodness was but an earthly creature, and then could he have no
righteousness in himself to move such thy compassion. If it proceeded from
the multitude of thy mercies, that surmount the iniquities of the whole world,
and that thou did only vouchsafe to behold in him the image of thy self:
bow down thine eyes, Lord, and behold the selfsame in me. Certify my
conscience with remission of my sins, that my sorrowful soul may be at rest
within me. Send down thy holy spirit to remain with me, that I may become
with that good King thy chosen seal and servant: and so grant thy people,
that I may with them, and they with me, never deserve further than to taste of
thy rod of favorable correction: but that all my labors and studies may ever
bend to the performance of thy holy will, and discharge of my duty,

Amen.
A
ARise and illuminate my mind (most benign Savior) that I sleep not at any
time in death, least mine enemies say, they have prevailed against me. They
which trouble me, will be glad, if I be cast down: but I have fixed my hope in
thy mercy. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for no living creature
shall be justified in thy sight. I will ever look upon the Lord, for he shall be
on my right hand, that I be not moved. For this my heart is glad, and my tongue
reioiceth, yea moreover my flesh shall rest in hope,

Amen.
B
BE thou unto me O Lord in the day time a defendour, and in the night season a
place of refuge, that thou may save me: for thou art my strength, and unto
thee I fly. Lord God deliver me from the hand of sinners, and from the
Lawe-breaker, and the wicked dooer: for thou Lord art my patience, thou art my
hope, even from my youth. In thee I am confirmed even from my mothers womb:
thou art my protector, in thee shall be my song for ever and ever,

Amen.
E
EVER my tongue shall be telling of thy rich mercy and woonderous works O
Lord, for thou have caused me to pass through fire and water, and led me into
a fresh place; thou have given my soul life, and have not suffered my feet to
fall. According to the multitude of my sorrows, thy comforts have made my soul
merry. My soul is like a Sparowe taken out of the Fowlers snare. Thou have
delivered my life from death, and my hands from blood, that I may please thee O
Lord in the light of the living,

Amen.
T
THOU art just, O Lord, and all thy commandments be true; and all thy ways
mercy, truth and judgment. And now Lord be mindful of me, take not
reuengement of my sins, remember not mine offenses, neither the offenses of
my fathers, because we have not obeyed thy precepts. Give me an heart of
understanding, and set thy fear always before mine eyes, that I may be
obedient in word, deed and thought, to all that is thy will. Lord give unto me
the power of thy holy spirit, to rule and govern thy people committed to my
charge, in all godly fear, and knowledge of thy word, and that I may be unto
them an example in all godliness and virtue, to the praise of thy holy name,

Amen.
H
HEAL me Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved. My life
cleaves unto the earth. Quicken me according to thy word, according to thy
mercy relieve me; and I will keep the testimonies of thy lips. Help me Lord,
so shall I be safe, and I will from henceforth study thy righteousness. Thy
mercies are many O Lord, according to thy word restore my health,

AMEN.
REGINA.
R
REgard my prayers, O thou God of my life; leave me not in the thoughts of
evil. Deliver me from the wicked man: let not the foot of pride come upon me,
and to vainglory give me not. Take from me all sinful lusts: let no desire
of uncleanness take hold upon me: give me not over to an unshamefast and
obstinate mind, but correct me in thy mercy: for into thy hands I commit me,

Amen.
E
ENter thy judgments in the tables of my heart, destroy mine affections with
thy love: send thy wisdom from the holy heavens, and from the seat of thy
Majesty, that she may be with me, and labor with me, that I may know what
thing is acceptable before thee, and may judge the people righteouslie, and
discern between good and evil.

G
Gracious Lord, thou that art the most high God above all the earth,
long-suffering, and of much mercy, sorowing the sins of man: and of thy
great goodness have promised to the penitent remission of sins: Lord I have
sinned, mine iniquity is multiplied above the sands of the sea, and there is
no hope of life in me, because I have stirred thee to anger, in multiplieng
offenses before thee. And now, O Lord, trusting in thy mercy, I bow the knees
of my heart, beseeching thee of thy goodness, destroy me not together with
mine iniquity. For the dead, whose souls are out of their bodies, can neither
praise nor thank thee: but the sorrowful heart, and the thirsty soul ascribe
praise unto thee. O Lord, I power my prayers before thee, and require mercy in
thy sight; save me which am unworthy, and reserve not eternal punishment for
me. For thine own sake I ask it, and will praise thee all the days of my
life,

Amen.
I
ILluminate my heart, O Lord, with the light of thy word: lead me Lord in thy
way, and I shall enter into thy truth. Print thy fear in my heart, that I may
rejoice in thee. Let thy word be a lantern unto my feet, and a lamp of light
unto my paths, so shall I not err from the right way: but walk like a pure
and wise virgin with an upright heart, chaste mind, and clean conscience, and
single eye before thee this day and evermore,

Amen.
N
Never will I cease to call upon thee, most mighty God of hosts, which sit
upon the Cherubins, and have dominion over all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou
which made the heavens, and all things comprehended in them, bow down thine
ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold: save me from the hand of mine
adversaries, suffer no evil to happen unto me, that all the people may know
that thou alone art my God,

Amen.
A
ASsist me, O Lord my God, with thy heavenly grace, and renew in me a right
spirit, that I may receive strength and ableness to do thy righteous will,
and to stand against all the assaults of wily Satan, that they may have no
place in me: but that the old man, which I bear about in my body, may be
crucified, and daily die in me, that the desire of sin, error, and of
worldly vanities may utterly be destroyed, that I may evermore be renewed in
the spirit of my mind, that the life of my Savior Christ may always appear
in me: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, triumph
and glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
The versicle.
Even now and ever vouchsafe, O LORD, for thy dear sons sake to hear my
humble petitions.

The answer.
Receive my prayers, I say, O GOD, and in thy truth and mercy pardon mine
offenses, and grant me thy grace.

The Collect.
O Emanuel, my Lord and my GOD Jesus Christ, son of the pure virgin Marie:
thou art not only the sweet spouse of my soul; but with God the Father a
most meek Mediator, full of mercy and truth. Wash away my sins with the
most precious blood of thy holy passion: make me rich in thy mercy, and my
faith so strong in thee, that assisted with thy grace and holy spirit, to all
duties and works in this life toward thee, I may enioie afterward the glory
of thy blessed kingdom, with thy holy Saints and pure Uirgins in everlasting
honor and triumph,

Amen.
The Prayer.
O Root of Iesse, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which have redeemed all
mankind from sin, death and hell, thou which have said: I am the way, truth,
and life. The way in doctrine, commandments, and examples; truth in promises;
life in reward. I pray thee by thine ineffable love, wherewith thou have
vouchsafed wholly to bestow thy self for our security; that thou will not
suffer me ever to straie from thee, because thou art the way: nor at any time
to distrust thy promses, which art the truth, and performest whatsoever thou
promisest: neither let me rest in any other thing, because thou art eternal
life, without the which there is nothing that ought to be desired, neither in
heaven nor in earth.

By thee we learn the sure and expedient passage unto true health, that we
wander no longer in the Laberinth of this world. Thou have exactlie taught what
to believe, and what to do, what to hope for, and in whom we ought to rest. By
thee we learn how we were of that first Adam unfortunately borne: by thee
we are assured there is no hope of health but through faith in thee: that thou
art the only brightness, which give light to all men traveling the dark
deserts of this world, where is nothing but a profound dimnesse, whereby we
neither see our calamities, nor from whence we ought to seek remedy of our
evil. Thou vouchsafedst to descend into the earth, and disdainedst not to take
our nature upon thee, that by thy doctrine thou might shake off the dimnesse
of our ignorance: by thy commandments might direct our feet in the way of
truth and peace. By the examples of thy life thou have showed us the way to
immortality, and by thy steps have restored to us a plain, easy, and
profitable way, out of an uneven and rough way. So thou art made unto us a
way, which knows no error, in the which, least we should be weary, thou
have vouchsafed to uphold us in thy benignity with great and sure promises.
For who can be weary, accounting himself ready through thy steps to enter thy
heavenly heritage? Therefore whilst we be in this journey, thou would be a
sure hope unto us, to be in steed of a staff unto us, wherewith we are
sustained. Neither was thy goodness content with this, but knowing the weakness
of our flesh in the mean while, with the comfort of thy spirit dooest so
refresh our strength, whereby we run cheerefullie. And as thou being made unto
us the way, dooest drive away all error: so being truth dooest thou take
away all distrust. Finally, being made life unto us, dooest revive the dead
in sin, to live by thy spirit, releeuing all things, until in the
resurrection, all mortality utterly abolished, we may always live with thee,
and in thee, when Christ shall be to us all in all. For eternal life is, to
know the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost to be one true God; where now
thorough faith we behold only in a glass and riddle. And then seeing more
felowlie the glory of the Lord, we shall be transformed into the same image.

Therefore I beseech thee, most merciful Savior, that thou would nourish
faith in thy servant, that I may never waver in thy heavenly doctrine.
Increase obedience, that I never turn from thy precepts; fortify constancy,
that entering into thy steps, I be not pulled back, nor through the terror or
intisements of Satan overthrown, but may persevere in thee, which art the true
way, unto death. Build my sure trust, that accustomed with thy promises, I
never wax old in the exercise of virtue: but forgetting those things which are
past, I may co^tinuallie strive to com to perfecter. Accept my contrite heart,
the woonted sacrifice of thy delight, and the oblation of these my petitions,
granting the sum of my requests. Blot out all mine offenses for thine own
sake, and increase thy grace in me, that I may in all things carry upright
swaie and equal judgment: govern thy people in the light of thy word, and
fear of thy laws, and daily more and more die to my self, and live and be
led by thy spirit, fearing nothing but thee, than the which nothing is greater
or mightier: loving nothing beside thee, than whom nothing is more to be
beloved: glorieng in nothing but in thee, which art the glory of all Saints:
requiring nothing beside thee, which art the best: desiring nothing but thee,
which art the full and perfect felicity with the Father and the holy Ghost,
above the starrie firmament: to whom be praise both now and ever,

Amen.
The KINGS Heast, or GODS familiar speech to the QVEENE: Collected out of the
holy Psalms of good King DAVID, as they are learnedlie expounded by THEODORE
BEZA:
Wherein almighty GOD (after a divine sort speaking unto her Majesty, as he
sometimes did unto David, though not in so mystical manner) does first declare
his 1
merciful providence in preserving her, and his gracious goodness in exalting
her to the Crown, exhorting her therewithal, humbly to acknowledge his
souereigntie over all earthly powers, and to worship him. Secondly, 2
he describes unto her Grace, the worthy properties that are required to be
in every godly Prince, and wise Governor, for the maintenance of his glory,
and their estates. Thirdly, he exhorts her Majesty to 3
the faithful discharge of her office and duty in his fear and service, to
the increase of virtue, and suppressing of vice. And so showing the commodities
that will ensue thereby to her and her people, he fourthlie promises, not 4
only to be her continual defender against all her enemies; but also to
bless her, and her Realm, with many large, sweet and comfortable benefits,
both corporal and celestial, and to make her partaker of all his ancient
mercies, promised long since to her father David; namely, upon this condition:
if finally she persevere in the 5
perfect love and due obedience of her spiritual spouse Christ Jesus.

The first Chapter of the HEAST.
ELIZABETH, thou Uirgin mine, the KINGS Daughter, and fairest among women; most
full of beauty and majesty: attend a little to my Heast, and mark what I
shall say. Thou art my Daughter in deed, this day have I begotten thee, and
espoused thee to thy King CHRIST, my Son; crowned thee with my gifts, and
appointed thee QVEENE, to reign upon my holy mount Zion.

Behold, I which am the only Lord (by full right and authority) of all men;
and do my self govern the Empires and Kingdoms, as the greatest King of all,
and most mighty Monarch of the whole world: even I the most high God, and
celestial father, have elected thee a chosen vessel of high honor and price
in my house, and to that end have mightily preserved thee, and miraculouslie
delivered thee out of so many and so great dangers, and now at the last have
brought into thy subjection the people, over whom thou have authority.

It is I, and none other, which have consecrated thee unto my self; and
anointed thee with holy oil, to be the Queen, the Mother, and the Nursse of
my people in Israel: and who only have given thee this most excellent and
goodly heritage, which thou possessest in peace.

Thee I say, O Daughter ELIZABETH, have I raised up, and chosen out a pure and
perfect virgin from the rest of the whole people, and that because I loved thee
most dearly above them all; so that now thou may worthily rejoice and
glory of thy dignity and honor, yet by my singular power and benefit, and
for none other cause, but that it has pleased me thy God to exalt thee above
others, and to embrace and receive thee into my special grace and favor.

Therefore, to the intent I might always use thy diligent service, faithful
ministry, and dutiful endeavor in this great business, and high office of a
Queen and kingly Governor; and that by thy power received from me, my people
may be defended and cherished: behold, I have ordained a Lamp for thee mine
anointed, and powered forth upon thee all my bounty, that none is able to be
compared unto thee: yea I have adorned thee most bountifully and beautifullie
with all my gifts and graces incomparable, which shall never be taken from thee.

Now then O dear daughter, consider diligently with thy self awhile, what
manner of husband thou art coupled and conioined unto: learn of him alone, (thy
spouse Christ mine only Son I mean) to whom as this day I married thee, what
he requires of thee: namely, that thou should forget thine own Nation,
thy Fathers house, and all other worldly things, now that thou art come under
his authority, and into the family and spiritual society of thy heavenly
Bridegroom.

Now therefore, I say, be wise O QVEENE, be learned thou Judge of the earth,
that with all the Emperors, Kings, and Potentats of the world, thou may give
place unto the Lord, and resign up unto him the honor of all glory and
power. Give (I say) unto the GOD of gods, and King of kings, even the very
God of glory, the majesty and dominion due unto his name, and fall down and
worship him: do unto him all possible reverence, that gives power to his
people, and blesses both prince and subject with his continual benefits: and
rejoice in him with fear and trembling.

O kiss this my son Christ thy spouse betimes, least he be angry, and then
thou suddenly perish, when his wrath shall flame forth. Worship the Lord I
say with due worship, and trust in him alone, as she that wholly depends
upon his mercy, favor, and protection: so shall thou be blessed, and thy
throne shall never be shaken.

Confess who it is that has set thee in so high a place far above other men
that are thy subjects, and remember also this, that I the most high God am
present with thee, and thine assembly of States and Senators; who have not
debarred my self of mine authority over you, neither am I present as an idle
beholder, but as your Judge also.

And know this assuredly, that as you are honored in deed with that name
(Gods,) whereby mine authority over all men is declared. And albeit I have
embraced you with special favor, as a father his children; yet think that I
have not exempted you from my power and authority: and that though you be
Princes and Magistrates, yet know that you are mortal, even as other men: yea
remember that you shall once die, and shall stand at my iudgement-seate, even
as every most vile and poor man, to render and give an account of your
stewardship, and of all things done in the flesh.

CAP. II.
BEware therefore that ye abuse not this authority given unto you by me,
under certain laws and conditions. See that you directly follow the ways
that I have appointed you to walk in, and take heed that you be not drawn
away to the right hand, or to the left, with the error of the wicked, to
forsake my laws and ordinances, and to fall from me your God, who have exalted
you.

For be you sure that I have placed you in this seat upon this condition, and
given it unto you in plain charge and commandment, that you should decree
just laws, and execute judgment by right and equity, without favor,
parcialitie, or regard to any party: that you should devise all manner of
godliness, and show your selves openly to be friends to virtue, and foes to
vice, and to weigh nothing but equity and justice in your balance.

That as the very law of Nature does require, you should relieve them that
are spoiled by violence, defend the fatherless, maintain the poor against
the injuries of the rich: deliver the miserable from the hands of the wicked,
and see diligently that the wringing worldlings, and cruel extortioners
exercise not their tyranny and oppressions continually over the godly and
feeble of my people.

Moreover, that you should make diligent inquisition for bloudshead and
murder, to revenge it, carefully search out wickedness and abomination, to
condemn it, to execute the traitor, murderer, and thief, to pull the pray
out of the teeth of the spoiler, to break down the power of the wicked
mighty ones, to destroy the workers of iniquity, and utterly to root out
sin and ungodliness from the earth: even all such as conspire against the
souls of the righteous, and abusing justice by color of law, gather
themselves together to sit and condemn the innocent blood, and trouble my
heritage.

Finally, it is I that in the disordered state of the world, which seemed to
be utterly void of justice, have set thee, O Daughter of my people, now at the
last to restore the same to that ancient and most right godly order of
justice, religion and faith, that thou should be a defense and fortress
among my people, and follow me thy God with great cheerfulness, and have thy
delight fully fixed in my laws and statutes day and night, that being well
exercised therein, as it behooves, thou may be able to know, sift and try
the ways of all men, and judge betwixt right and wrong.

CAP. III.
HArken therefore unto me, O Daughter, and take heed that thou have nothing to
do with the stool of wickedness: and that the throne of iniquity and
tyrannical domination, which forgeth wrong for a law, and adioineth
authority to most wicked decrees, have no fellowship nor be agreeable with
thee.

And because the wicked do wander on every side, when the woorst men are
exalted into the highest place of honor and offices in the Commonweal:
therefore I advise and counsel thee betimes, to expel and thrust out of thy
Court and house, all the unworthy and ungodly men, flatterers, parasites,
iesters, atheists, and reuengers of blood: and place the worthy and godly in
their rooms, that they may sit among the Princes of my people, and be
assistant unto thee.

O make much of them that fear the Lord, and let all thy delight be upon my
Saints, which are on earth: be careful alwaie to preserve the virtuous, and
exalt the best and most worthy persons. Call such to be thy states of
dignity, Senators, Counselors, Judges, and Magistrates under thee, as are
grave, wise, learned, godly, zealous of my truth, and gelous of thy renown.

Advance such men, I say, to honor and office under thee, as be of a good
conscience, sound religion, and upright life, such as will be painful
watchmen, and diligent stewards, and both can and will make just decrees, and
execute good laws, even such as will care for nothing more, than to know what
is their duty, and that therefore are most willing to do their duty, hating
unfeignedly all manner of vice, and loving entirely all manner of virtue.

Come forth, I say, O dear Daughter; come forth thou most beautiful of all
women, and fairer than the children of men: thou, O QVEENE, Uirgin, I say of
incomparable eloquence and grace of speech; come forth thus and show thy
beauty, so full of majesty and grace, that in this thy government and
pastorship, there may want neither integrity and uprightness in taking of
counsel, neither wisdom in performing of thine interprises: but do all
things prudentlie and prosperously, carried upon the triumphant Chariot, even
the word of God, as a wise and virtuous Governor directing it: and let truth,
mercy, justice, and equity draw it round about thy dominion.

Thus shall thou declare thy self a bountiful Daughter of this Prince and
worthy Governor, if using thy power neither weakelie nor idlelie, thou
govern my people by moderate equity, and punish mine enemies and thine by
severity of judgment, as she, before whom also sitting upon thy throne of
Majesty, the two pillars, mercy and truth are seen to stand and support thee.

CAP. IIII.
AND I, O QVEENE, will surely perform my covenant (begun with thy father
DAVID that chosen man,) unto thee also his Daughter, whom I will indue also
with eternity, and make thy kingdom perpetual in heaven: and I, as is his
will, will continually defend thee with a certain special power, together
with the people and land, which I have chosen and given unto thee.

My hand, I say, shall establish thee, and mine arm strengthen thee: so that
no enemy shall overcome thee by subtlety, nor any wicked man oppress thee
by force.

Yea and though thou shall not want many, and those most mighty enemies, both
domestical and foreign, which shall resist thee, O sacred QVEENE, and thy
godly proceedings: yet I assure thee, all their enterprises shall be in vain
and frustrate, and thou for all those miseries most grievous; and battle,
wherewith thou may seem to be vexed, shall suffer no detriment: but
contrariwise by this same means, as it is plain by experience, thou loving
righteousness, and hating whatsoever is against it, and being armed with sharp
arrows, and the sword of the word, shall not only therewith wound the hearts
of thine enemies, cast them down to the ground, and tread them under thy
feet; but also bring marvelous things to pass in my name, by this thy
mighty power.

For I the Lord IEHOVA, which am the revenger of royal dignity, and the
defender of DAVID my servants posterity, will destroy all that would oppress
thee: before thy face I will slaie all thine enemies, and fill them with shame
and confusion.

My mercy shall never fail thee, my truth shall never forsake thee, and thou
(trusting to my favor) shall lift up thine head most high, crowned with
everlasting glory.

I will cause thee to have one hand upon the sea, and another upon the floods,
and thou shall call me thy Father, thy God, and thy safe tower.

And I will place thee as my first begotten Daughter, in the sacred family of
the Kings of the whole world, even in a throne most high above others.

Yea, thou being a pure Uirgin borne of my kindred, shall be so highly exalted
of IEHOVA, which has decreed this from all eternity, that thou shall sit a
glorious QVEENE, over a mighty people, and shall have rule and dominion over
all thy subjects without exception.

Even I the mighty IEHOVA will give unto thee in Zion a kingdom of stabilitie
over all the ends of the earth, in the which kingdom thy power shall be so
great, that the more enemies thou have, the more excellent and more evident
shall thy fame and renown be to all nations.

And the people shall willingly and obedientlie offer themselves to be
governed by thee, after the infinite victories which thou shall have over the
enemies that vex thee.

And the day shall come, that when thou have overcome all thine enemies, thou
shall muster all thine armies to appear before thee, and to make a triumph
also in garments of triumph which shall be holy, most pure, and most shining.
Then I say O QVEENE, thou shall behold the multitude of thy most chosen young
men, and beautiful virgins, which the morning of that most heavenly light
shall bring forth unto thee, by pouring down her most plentiful deaw upon
the earth.

Yea, I will arm thee with a double edged sword in thy hand, wherewith thou
may punish the profane Gentiles, and avenge the cruelty of the proud
people, and also may draw their kings and nobles bound in chains and iron
fetters, and execute the judgment appointed and commanded by me thy Lord God
upon them.

And this verelie is the dignity, the honor and renown that I will give
thee, O daughter; whom I have received into my favor, even to bring into
subjection unto thy kingdom the people far and wide and (saving thine own
nation) to make an horrible slaughter of the rebels and traitors euerie-where,
that go about to overthrow the Monarch, which rules, and shall rule, both far
and near.

I will defend thee I say, O my dear Daughter, with everlasting mercy, and
my covenant made with thy father DAVID shall be established for ever in his
generation.

Thy throne shall be as the Sun before me, it shall continue as the Moon in
all ages, and be as stable as heaven it self.

For I the holy one have once sworn by mine own self, and neither will I
break my promise, nor violate my covenant, nor will change any of those
things that I have spoken to DAVID thy Father.

These things have I promised of old I say, and now will I undoubtedly bring
them to pass. If thou my Daughter keep my commandments, and do not violate
the ordinances that I have commanded thee, but order thy self and thy people
by the rule of the laws that I have prescribed unto them.

So shall all things be in good order, and nothing confounded; yea the very
foundations of the earth also shall be firm and remain stable. Peace,
righteousness, and judgment, and all good things else shall remain safe and
sure amongst men.

Neither will I suffer that in this thy dangerous journey, and perilous
pilgrimage, thou should so stumble, that thou should fall, or be
compelled to go back: and though many do lie in wait for thy destruction,
yet I (preventing all dangers) will be thy watchful keeper.

For seeing that I have taken in hand freely, of mine own good will, to call
thee to this excellent estate of a Prince, and have hitherto been very
careful to defend thee, and my people Israel, I will not now once slumber,
much less will I be so deep in sleep, that I will suffer thee to be
oppressed.

Therefore let this be a thing certainly determined unto thee, and be thou
comforted and confirmed with this only hope in all distress, that I the Lord
am thy keeper; and a shadow for thee against all storms, and that I am
present by thee, and will never fail thee.

And as I was present of old, when thou returnedst out of the Egypt, and
bondage of the spiritual Pharao: so now also I will be present with thee
against ye heat of the Sun in the daie-time; and against the noisome humors,
which the Moon uses to raise in the night season.

For like as the City Jerusalem is compassed round about with massy
mountains, so I the Lord stand round about thee and thy people (trusting in
me) on every side, and will never forsake you.

But as I have done hitherto, so surely I will continue to defend them that
love virtue, and to bind thee unto me by new benefits.

I will bring to pass that thou shall enioie a stable peace, and sure
tranquillity, and that thou shall see Jerusalem flourishing so long as thou
do live.

Yea I the Lord will so bless thee from heaven with most plentiful blessings,
that by the power of my Majesty, all thy counselles and enterprises shall
prosper, and have good success continually.

I will preserve thee safe against all discommodities, and defend thy life from
violence: yea which way soever thou shall go or ride, I, even I thy mighty
maker and God will be with thee, when thou go forth, and come in, from
place to place; and not only in this temporal voyage or journey, but for ever
will I govern and guide thee.

Thou shall never be laid open to the reproach of men.

Thy Crown shall never be cast to the ground, nor thy self rejected.

All thy fortresses and cities shall stand unassaulted, and thy forts, and
strong castles and holds shall not be battered, nor laid open with breaches to
the spoil of passengers.

The edge of thy sword shall never wax blunt, thy scepter never broken, nor
thy crown cast down into the dust, nor thy power stained.

But I will minister continual power, and cause of joy unto thee, o QVEENE,
and take away all courage and force from thine enemies, so that they shall not
be able to arise or stand against thy mighty power.

Finally, this my league, which I have made with thee, shall never be
abrogated. For I will come down from my Sanctuary to help thee, even from
the mount Zion to strengthen thee in all dangers. And when thou call upon me
by prayer, I will hear thy petitions, and grant unto thee that thy heart
desires, and accomplish all thy purposes, so that thou doubtless shall be
preserved and delivered a way by me, that have anointed thee to be QVEENE.

CAP. V.
THus, I say my dear Daughter, if thou carefully behave thy self, and walk
in the ways that I have commanded, thou shall be woorthilie honored indeed
with that name, whereby mine authority over all men is declared: and I thy GOD
and heavenly Father will embrace thee with my special favor, as my dearly
beloved Dooue and obedient child.

Yea so shall the KING have pleasure in thy fairenes, and love thy goodly
personage: and it shall come to pass, that thou shall be more and more in the
high favor of thy spiritual spouse Christ my son, to whom only it is meet
that thou should be subject, as to thy sovereign Lord, King and head, and
under whose government thou shall remain most honorable and admirable, for
the singular and unspeakable gifts of his grace, to all manner of people,
strangers and others: of whom even the most mighty and most rich shall desire
to see thee, and to be linked in friendship with thee.

For then shall thou come forth of thy princely yuorie palace, and stately
royal throne, most gloriously adorned with gorgious garments, and royal
robes that smell most fragrantlie, and yield their sweet savors, and
odoriferous odours, most pleasantly spread over all those men and people, who
to declare their joy and good-wils toward thee, shall run and press together
by thousands, to see, praise, and extol thy renowned name and Majesty, crieng
alowd, and saying: GOD save the QVEENE.

To conclude, here in my house the Church thou shall see thy children and
offspring (who by publishing and promoting my Gospel, thou have borne after a
manner unto thy husband Christ) flourishing, and spread both abroad and at home:
and nothing inferior unto those thy most noble Elders, reigning over the
provinces of the whole world.

But at home chiefly, even in heaven, with me thy Father, and with thy
husband Christ, thou shall sit at my right hand, beautified with all my gifts,
and most richly beedecked all over with glorious garments, broidered with
gold, having a crown of most pure gold upon thy head.

Even thus royally, I say, shall thou then, O Uirgin, o QVEENE, O deerlie
beloved Daughter, be set before the KING thy husband, with such and so precious
apparel, the Uirgins thy companions waiting upon thee, and going with thee,
unto the most glorious KING of kings, whilst that you (altogether with most
great triumph, mirth, joy, and reioicing) shall enter into the highest mansion
of the heavenly Paradise, and most holy palace, there to enioie a most
certain, unchangeable, and everlasting kingdom, glory, dignity, bliss and
felicity; and to sing praises unto the name of the holy Trinity, together
with all Kings, Queens, Saints, Uirgins, and elect people of the world, that
ever were, are, or shall be: worlds without end.

The Queens Vow, or selfe-talke with GOD: Collected out of the Psalms of the
princely Prophet King DAVID, as they are paraphrasticallie expounded by that
godly learned man, THEODORE BEZA.
Wherein the Queens Majesty, after a most Christian manner, even with David's
spirit, his sweet words, and divine sentences, first inciteth and prepares her
heart and mind to 1
devotion. Secondly acknowledges the omnipotent power of God over all kings,
kingdoms, and creatures: 2
and, after a true rehearsal of his manifold benefits bestowed upon her from
her birth, with an acknowledgement of her souereigntie to come only from the
Lord, she thirdly confesses her unworthiness, and reioiceth 3
greatly in his protection and mercy toward her, since her coming to the
Crown. Fourthlie, having his wondrous works and benefits, done for her
preservation, in 4
great admiration, she not only yields condign thanks for the same, but
exhorts all creatures, both in heaven and earth, to praise God together with
her. And so lastly she binds her self as it were by a solemn oath, vow and
promise, to consecrate her life wholly to the true 5
worship and sincere service of God, in all holy obedience to his laws, to
the glory of God, and full discharge of her duty, both in her Court and
Realm.

* The first part of the VOW.
RABBONI, my heart so voileth within me, that I must needs burst forth that,
which it has conceived; even a magnifical Uow of a QVEENE consecrated to the
KING of heaven himself, and that with such zeal and feruencie, that no pen
may seem to be able to attain unto the voice of the speaker.

Therefore, O my God, I being now prepared with my whole heart; with my whole
heart and mind, I say, have great desire to speak unto thee: and in this my
present most happy estate, to call into my remembrance thy wonderful works,
wrought and brought to pass by thine almighty power for me, from my
conception, even until this hour.

Neither will I do it, O Lord, with my mouth only, as hypocrites use to do;
but I will unfeignedly testify thee my God to be mine only maker, redeemer,
preserver, and Savior, with praise that shall proceed even from the deep
bottom of my heart.

Go to then my tongue, go to my mouth, I say; be thou no longer dumb; but
open thy self wide, to speak out the most excellent praises of my God, and
make thy hearty Uowes, and say: as follows.

The second part, containing four Chapters.
CAP. I.
O Heavenly Father, my almighty maker, my greatest King, mine only GOD, and
sovereign Savior; thou which art the King of glory, and most glorious King;
the Lord of hosts, strong, valiant, and mighty; whose seat is in the highest
heavens, and thy dominion is stretched forth over all things without exception.

I humbly acknowledge thee to be the very God of Angels, and of men; the most
sacred Emperor of the most mighty spirits, and holy company of the
heavenly armies, which celebrate thy truth and praise perpetually, in the
regions above us; yea, the greatest God, highest Lord, and most magnificall
King, far above all Emperors, Kings, Lords and Princes, how great soever.

Even the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of my father David, and his
posterity, Kings and Queens my predecessors; which art higher than the
heavens, and the mighty Monarch of the whole world; having of nothing made
heaven and earth, and all things therein by thine almighty power; guiding,
preserving, and ruling by the same the state of kingdoms, and all the creatures
and people that dwell in the world: reserving in thy power and authority, as
the Lord of all, both the low secret parts of the earth, the deep bottoms of
the Sea, and the high tops of the mountains: reigning ever full of Majesty,
power, and authority, and that most gloriously and triumphantly, in an
eternal and everlasting kingdom.

For whereas all other kingdoms truly are transitory, and subject to
destruction; thy kingdom only O God, I confess, is not limited in any
bounds, nor subject to any term of years or time; but always endures one,
and unchangeable, from all eternity to eternity; as he whose throne is for
ever and ever: and which have raised a kingdom for thy self, among thine
Angels and people, both in heaven and in earth of old, to continue alwaie most
stable, firm, and immovable.

So that thou, Lord, only may justly challenge unto thy self, the
authority of the kingdom in deed, over all nations upon the earth: who art
that most gelous and dreadful IEHOVA, unto whom all the Emperors, Kings, and
Governors in the world shall bow, submit themselves, and do their homage and
divine service, with their scepters and crowns cast under thy feet: and who
dooest declare thy self very terrible to all the potentates and powers of the
world, and cuttest off their courage, strength, and glory, throwing it in the
dust, even as the Gardener does twist and proine his Uine.

CAP. II.
AND therefore, most worthily ascribing and resigning up the honor and glory
of all empire, kingdom, rule, power and dominion unto the holy, secret,
marvelous, and renoumed name of thy most high and sacred Majesty, which art
the father of lights, ancient of days, the savior of all believers, and the
only redeemer, strength, glory and hope of Israel, and of all the ends of the
earth, even Alpha and Omega, the first without beginning, and the last without
ending, that shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, God blessed for
ever, Amen.

I (according as it is meet, and my very bounden duty) do now meekelie
confess, and protest to thy perpetual praise, that it is thou, O most
merciful God, and none other, which in the beginning, when I lay as a rude
lump without shape, being shut up in the secret place of my mothers womb,
did form, fashion, and nourish me; and at the time appointed, and set down
in thy book, did draw me forth of the dark cave, wherein I was fashioned,
and broughtst me forth of the bowels of my mother, as it were a midwife.

So that the very bowels within me, are thine own, by good right and
authority; because thou ioining all my sinews and bones together, have made
me a mortal woman, and covered me within my mothers womb. For there is no
King or Queen that had any other beginning of birth: for all men have one
entrance into life, and one going out in like manner.

Which work of thine surely, when I behold in my self, it is so wonderful,
O Lord, that I should utterly show my self most senseless and unthankful,
unless I praise thee for the same, and confess, that thy works are exceeding
marvelous in deed, seeing I do perceive the thing so manifestly as it is.

So soon also as I, thy workmanship, came, forth a reasonable creature into
this world, I received like air as other men, and was committed unto thee my
Creator, at what time thou did declare thy self to be my God, and causedst
me to look up unto thee, when I did hang yet on my mothers breasts.

Even in my very cradle and swaddling clouts, O God, thou had a special care
and regard over me, and tookest in hand fatherly to foster and govern me so
many years ago, and to lead and guide me from my tender years unto this
day.

Ever since I was borne, I say, thou my God have defended me from dangers,
both when I was strong, and in the flower of my youth: neither have thou
forsaken me now, being in my middle age, nor wilt (I trust) when I am
graie-headed.

O mine inlightener, it is thou that have taught and instructed me with the
knowledge of thee, from my childhood hitherto. Therefore have I depended wholly
upon thee alone; upon thee, I say, O excellent Father, have I set all my hope,
even from mine infancy, and will do so still even unto mine old age.

CAP. III.
NEither has thy providence and mercy toward me, ceased at any tune. For
surely, thou have made me a singular and everlasting example of thy favor and
mercy to all men, in that thou beholding me always with thy pleasant
countenance, and observing continually with thine heavenly eye, what injury
soever was offered me, have not only woonderfullie comforted and preserved me
in all my troubles: but also oftentimes most miraculouslie saved and delivered
me out of most great and manifold miseries, imminent perils, and multitudes of
mighty enemies, wherewith I have been assaulted, environed, vexed, afflicted,
persecuted, and turmoiled from my tender age.

Yea so tenderly, O God, have thou loved me, that thou have not suffered me
to be intrapped of thousands of adversaries, that rose up against me, saying in
their hearts, Her God can not help her. But being the judge of mine innocence,
my glory, my shield, and my valiant Champion, thou have thy self smitten
down all mine enemies, brought me safely out of distress, and lift up my
head above all mine adversaries.

Thou have delivered my life, I say, forth of the present doors of death,
stayed the tears of mine eyes, and established my feet, that I did not fall
for any temptation: so that I walked safe and sound before thee, among the
living that praised thee. And that I live now to praise thee, I may only
thank thee my deliverer, who have caused me thus to taste, feel, and enioie
the most comfortable sweetness of thy goodness, mercy, and favor.

And though I was forsaken of all men; and the most mighty, together with my
nearest friends, had me in contempt: though the superstitious adversaries, I
say, heaued vehemently against me, and with great violence sought to cast me
down, and lay mine honor in the dust: yet have thou, my God, by thine own
hand repulsed and driven out all those mine irreligious foes, which so
wickedlie resisted thy purpose; and to their confusion of faces, have exalted
me to the highest degree of dignity.

Wherefore, great cause of continual joy and hearty reioicing have thou, O
Lord, given unto me, thine handmaid, which acknowledge my self mightily and
miraculouslie preserved by thy power.

Doubtless, now thou have woonderfullie delivered in deed thy QVEENE, that was
anointed by thee, and have heard me out of the highest Sanctuary, and granted
unto me that, which I requested in my prayers.

For I put my trust, neither in chariot, nor horses, men nor munition: but
only remembered thy name, and called upon thee in all my troubles: and lo,
thou, o KING of heaven, have heard me in all my necessities, and given me my
hearts desire, accomplishing all my purposes.

I required this thing only of thee, that I might escape alive and safe from
persecution; but thou have not only strengthened and comforted me out of
Zion, and placed me here in thy dominion and empire in safety: but also have
granted unto me a life that shall never fail; and that because I only set my
hope still in thee, in whom all power remains, as I oftentimes by good
experience have proved.

Yea thou, O most excellent Father, have done a notable work, worthy to be
set forth in writing to all posterity, and to be limmed out in gold to
everlasting memory; because, O Lord, thou have not despised the prayers and
tears of thy most miserable people; but from thy holy throne have looked
down upon me, and them, to hear the mournings of the prisoners, thy
persecuted members; and to loose them forth of bonds and fetters, of whose
life it was utterly despaired: that in Zion once again thy name, O Lord; and
thy praises, I say, in Jerusalem might be published by my ministry, as it is
this day, many nations and people running together to worship thee, who have
now showed thy self much more glorious therein, than at any time before.

Therefore, O God, which art indeed the Governor and Lord over all people, in
heaven and in earth: thou art our God by a peculiar right, and mine only
honor. For so great glory have I attained, by this thy defense and salvation;
and so bright is the glittering of this honor, wherewith thou have crowned me;
that I may woorthilie triumph in thee, being thus preserved and delivered by
thee: and also condignelie celebrate this day wholly to thee, with banners
displaied, which have so graciously granted all the petitions of thine
handmaid.

Namely, for that thou, Lord, being ever mindful of thy promise and word,
which is of force for ever, and providing for thine own only glory, did so
mercifully and miraculouslie preserve me from dangers; and rebuking even Kings
and Princes for my sake, so precious and dear was my blood in thy sight, that
none should touch thine Anointed, nor do me any harm, at the time appointed
by thee; thou allowing, justifying, and commending me as innocent, whom others
did maliciously condemn as guilty of wickedness, did most faithfully and
freely perform thy promises toward me, and changing my miserable estate into
bliss, did bring me forth glad and ioifull, whom thou had appointed thine
elect handmaid, and chosen servant, to govern thy people and affairs in this
kingdom.

CAP. IIII.
WHerefore, I humbly acknowledge that it is thou, O almighty GOD; which
raisest up the abiects, and exaltest the miserable from the dunghill, to place
them among the Princes of the people: and which sometime laiedst help upon one
that was mighty, and did exalt one chosen of the people (my father DAVID thy
servant I mean,) whom thou tookest from the sheepfold, and with thy holy oil
did anoint, and broughtest to feed thy people and inheritance in Israel.

Even thou, O God, I say, the selfsame good God it is, I confess, which
have also consecrated ELIZABETH to thy self, to govern thy people, over whom
thou dooest chiefly rule: and who have vouchsafed in like favor, and in as
great mercy, to call me out of the prison to the palace, and to appoint me to
be the Prince and Pastor to feed the posterity of Jacob, and most dear
people of Israel, with the spiritual food of thine eternal word.

My preferment, Lord, and promotion I know, is come neither from the east, nor
from the west; from the south, nor from the north; neither, as I have well
perceived, was it in mine own power to exalt my self, and to mount up out of
so great misery to so high dignity.

But it was thou my KING, and my God, even thou most just Governor of all
things, (which bring to pass mighty things, far passing the condition of
mankind, and rulest the state of kingdoms, to whom alone it belongs, and in
whose power and authority it is, to cast down whom thou will, and to exalt
whom it pleases thee) which have exalted me thine handmaid, and given unto me
thine absolute authority, over all the great Princes and people of England;
that I should govern the very Magistrates and Commons thereof, by the
direction of thy word, wisdom, and counsel.

Yea, I take thee to record, O Lord, against the slanders of all men, that I
never desired this honor, as though I had deserved it; neither labored that I
should be brought unto this dignity; nor that I am now proud, being promoted
by thee thereunto; nor that I do so much as think or rejoice that I am brought
to this Kingly office by blood, birth, or by mine own endeavor or power.

But always I have, and still will confess, and humbly acknowledge to thy
glory, that it was thou only, O Lord, my Redeemer and Savior, upon whom I
did earnestly call and set mine eyes, which (at what time it pleased thee to
hear me) did vouchsafe to embrace me with thy special grace and favor, and
to bestow this so great a benefit upon me. First, to choose and take me only
out of the rest of the people, and to exalt me above others; and then to
consecrate me to thy self, and to anoint me with thy holy oil to be the
QVEENE of this Realm, and that not for any desert of mine at all, I say; but
only because it so pleased thee to use my service and endeavor, in this so
weighty business, to defend thy people by my power received from thee.

Finally, it was thou, O heavenly KING, who favoring me thine handmaid more
than I deserved, did richly apparel me in the royal robes, and all over
cloathedst and beedeckedst me with stately garments, brodered with gold and
precious stones; and as upon this day, settedst me in the regal throne, and
causedst me most gloriously to come forth from the yuorie Palace of my
Coronation, accompanied with many noble Princes, and goodly Uirgins, and
bearing the diadem or Crown of pure gold upon mine head. At what time also
thou made the most fragrant odours of my sweet garments so spread it self,
that nothing was more pleasant unto the beholders; who as then upon that happy
day, so continually ever since do run together, and press in great
multitudes unto me, to see me; and to declare their thankful hearts to thee
for me, and their good wills they bear toward me in thee; evermore they cry
with loud voices, and ioifull hearts; uttering forth to the praise of thy name,
and my great comfort, these and such like hearty prayers unto thy Majesty for
me, saying: God save the QVEENE: God save the Queen ELIZABETH.

So that I may now justly say, O most excellent father, that this is the day
in deed, wherein thou have chiefly showed thy mercy unto me, and that this
day thou did as it were beget me a dear Daughter unto thy self; in that as
upon this day thou did so graciously anoint me thy Minister and Queen, to
deliver thine afflicted Church, and to reign upon thy holy mount Zion, there
to declare to all nations the wonderful works that thou have done for me, and
thy people Israel; as I do at this present. Go to therefore, O my soul,
return now to thy rest, and take thine ease; seeing that so notable a change
of thine estate is happily wrought by the Lord, for he has well deserved
thereby everlasting praise for his mercy.

The third part containing three Chapters.
CAP. I.
BUT, O Lord my God, who am I thy sinful servant, that thou have been thus
mindful of me? And what have I deserved (who of all others have least
deserved, and am thy most unworthy handmaid,) that thou should thus regard
me, and exalt me to so high dignity before many others?

Thou have anointed me with the oil of gladness before my fellows, and set
a most precious diadem upon my head. Thou make me to sit in the highest
place of dignity and estate, far above other men that are my subjects. Yea
thou, O God, which art Lord of the whole earth, have brought into subjection
the people that lie near unto me, over whom I have authority; and have
honored me in deed with that heavenly name, whereby thine authority over
all men is declared.

Thou have crowned me, I say, with great glory and honor, causing my renown
and fame to spread far and near; yea thou have made me nothing inferior to
other Potentates of the world; but ordained me Lord over the works of thine
hands in sovereign wise, so that thou causest all to serve me dutifullie.

Thou, my King and my God, have powered forth upon me (I confess) all thy
bounty and graces, that none is able to be compared unto me.

Thou have caused both Kings and Queens to come from far, and to bring
presents and rich gifts unto me: and thou have made me honorable, even to
strange people, of whom even the most mighty and rich honoring me, have and
do desire greatly my friendship and favor.

Thou have prevented me with thy blessings, and without any asking, given me
the people for an inheritance, and the ends of the earth for my possession.

Surely a most pleasant place, and a most beautiful portion of inheritance is
fallen unto me from thee, O Lord, which art my portion, my reward, and alone to
me all-sufficient.

Thou art he that have given me this most large and excellent heritage, and
planted me in a most fat and wealthy place; by whose power I may worthily
glory of my dignity and honor, and that by thy singular benefit; and for
none other cause, but only that it has pleased thee to receive me into thy
special favor.

For surely, there is no cause why I should ascribe the atteining of this
kingdom to mine own worthiness (although I called often upon thy name) or that
I should imagine that I have resisted so many, and so mighty people, by mine
own power and strength; neither by the trusting in mine own bow or sword
have I obtained so many victories, and driven away mine enemies: but thou thy
self, O Lord, have done it by the strength of thine own arm, and that only
because it so pleased thee, I say, of thine own mere mercy and goodness to
preserve and deliver both me and my people.

CAP. II.
NEither has thy mercy ceased here, O God: for it has not failed ever
since my coming to the Crown, to govern me afterward by thy wisdom and
grace; and miraculouslie to preserve and defend me by thy princely power, from
all mine enemies, visible and invisible, domestical and foraigne.

Hitherto have thou been unto me a most safe refuge, and a most sure tower
against all the powers of Satan.

Oh how great and marvelous things do I see, that thou, O God, have brought to
pass for me thine unworthy servant, by thy mighty power!

For when there wanted not such, who rebelled against me, and resisted thy
power and ordinance: yet I do see my self sufficiently armed by thee
continually with sharp arrows, wherewith to wound the very hearts of mine
enemies, and so to cast them down.

Moreover, how long and how often have the sons of men labored greatly to
distaine mine honor, reioicing and persisting in vanity and superstition? And
what secret and wicked counsel they have taken to bring ungodly things to
effect against me; thou, O Lord, well know, and I have proved.

For I am she, against whom the superstitious enemies have intended all these
evils. I am she, against whom they have invented, and daily do invent that
wickedness, which they shall never be able to bring to pass.

For thou, Lord, have had mercy upon me, and made frustrate the devises and
desires of all my crafty and cruel enemies, and established me in my throne,
that according to the office and authority thou have given me, I might justly
punish their infidelity.

Thou have scattered the people that delight in war, and caused the runnagates
to turn their backs unto me, by directing their own swords to light upon
their own necks, and their own darts against their faces.

For in thy wrath, Lord, thou have cast the ungodly into the flaming fire; and
utterly destroyed and consumed them and their posterity, by the heat of thy
fury, that proudly rose up against thee, and thine Anointed.

Yea, thou have caused me to be revenged on the heathen, to break mine enemies
asunder with an iron rod, and to crush them in pieces like potshards on the
earth. Mine hand, I say, has taken mine enemies, O God, through thy power;
and thou will bring to pass, that my right hand shall apprehend them that hate
me without cause.

For undoubtedly now I know, that thou do not hate me; but love me
tenderly, even by this; that thou have not suffered mine enemies to triumph
over me, as they verelie hoped: but have made me stand fast and sure, through
thy defense, whereby I know thou will always care for me.

O God my God, what shall I say? Uerelie I do greatly rejoice, that thou
have, with so great favor, embraced me; ever preventing my prayers, and giving
help unto her that called upon thee, with a mind free from all evil
imaginations. For else thou would not have heard me, nor restored my life,
when it was as good as lost, as thou have done.

But I, calling heartily upon thy name, chiefly in mine adversities, thou have
delivered me out of all my troubles, frights, and fears, and defended me, and
wast my refuge in extreme dangers; and by thy mercy have brought to pass,
that not only I daily behold my traitrous enemies to have their condign
punishments: but also this people, whom thou have appointed to be governed by
me, to consider this thy judgment extended upon those guilty rebels,
superstitious adversaries, and profane men, that so wilfully resist thine
ordinance and authority in me: and to be sufficiently taught by their example
and destruction, to remember the fear, dread, and reverence due unto thee
their God, and their Prince.

CAP. III.
Moreover, O Lord, I do greatly rejoice, when I bethink me what a tower of
strength, a safe haven, and vnassaultable habitation thou have ever been, not
only unto me: but also unto my predecessors and forefathers, Kings and
Princes of this land, succeeding one another in order. And how thou have been
the honor, and also the strength both of them and me: and have from time to
time, with a certain special power, defended this little Island, which thou
have chosen to be thy peculiar heritage, and given it first unto them, and now
unto me in possession.

Yea, what alterations or changes of things or times soever have fallen; yet
have thou, O most mighty Governor (whose kingdom for ever has been, is,
and alwaie shall be most sure, stable, permanent, unchangeable, and immovable)
lift up the head of thine handmaid, as it were of an Unicorne, being anointed
by thee with fresh oil, and laden with new benefits continually.

Thou art he, I say, by whose power consists whatsoever is high in the
world: even by thy might, which as it establishes the kingdoms and policies,
whereby mankind is preserved: so also by these testimonies of thy most mighty
power, the inhabitants of the earth being convinced, do tremble and keep
silence. And this peace being restored in my dominion, thou causest that my
people again do lead their lives both day and night in comfortable peace,
and godly tranquillity.

Wherefore thou have given me great cause of new joy, and to rejoice in thee,
O Lord my God, who have thus mercifully dealt with me thine handmaid; and
especially, because thou have granted unto me to overcome all mine enemies,
how many, and how mighty soever; and to compose and set my kingdom in
peaceable order; and to place in Judah the throne of judgment and justice,
being directed by thy word, O GOD, which I have, and whereof I glory, and
still will glory.

To conclude, I do rejoice; because thou, Lord, art my loving shepherd, and
feedest me in the green pastures and sweet meadows of thy word with joy and
solace; making me, that was sometime as a barren woman, without comfort, now a
ioifull and glad foster mother of many spiritual children to thee.

Yea, even in the very sight of mine enemies dooest thou, O most bountiful
Father, prepare a deintie table for me, and reaching unto me a full cup, thou
give me drink of thy pleasant springs; and causest thy goodness and mercy,
thy bounty and liberality to follow me, wheresoever I become: blessing both
me and my people with all thy blessings continually.

Finally, it is thou, O Lord, only; who of thy singular goodness have
assuredly fortified my hill woonderfullie with honor, health, peace, and
security: and that dooest presently keep me in safety, and causest me
quietly to lie down and take my rest in thee.

Thou do ward the gates of my Cities with bars, and mightily multiply and
cherish thy family my citizens. Thou bring me into amity with my
neighbors, and feedest me with the finest flower of wheat.

And these things verelie do testify most plainly, both thine infinite
goodness and power; yet surely they are nothing, in comparison of that
benefit of the doctrine of salvation and holy word, which thou have bestowed
upon thy people; and delivered unto us, as a rule to lead our lives both godly
and honestly: neither is there any nation under heaven, with whom thou have
so dealt, as with us herein. Therefore, having such experience of thy support, I
will comfort my self in thee, my strength and my shield, in whom my heart does
rest; neither will thine Anointed trust in any other: but only in thee,
which give power unto Princes.

Even I will bless and praise thee, O Lord, which thus have blessed both me
and my people with thy continual blessings. And in this my present blessed
state, I will not cease to magnify thee, O Lord, my deliverer; but I will
declare and set forth before all people the marvelous works, which thou, my
God, have done for me; and whereof I my self, from the beginning of my life,
unto this hour, have had good proof and experience.

The fourth part of the Vow, containing five Chapters.
CAP. I.
OH Lord my God, how excellent is thy name over all the earth! Advancing me
thus to glory, far above my deserts, I as one nothing able to compass such
great mercies, am even astonished with the admiration of thine excellent
liberality, and fatherly providence over me.

O how greatly do these so many, and so great benefits bind me unto thee!
And what shall I give again unto thee for all thy bounty, which thou have
bestowed upon me? Uerelie I will pay that which only I am able; namely, I
will take in my hands the Lamp which thou have ordained for thine anointed,
and will therein continually magnify thy mercy.

I will take in my hands (I say) the cup of thankful sacrifice; and calling
upon thee by name, O Lord, I will testify openly, that I knowledge this my
deliverance and honor to be only of thee.

And those things which I vowed unto thee, O Lord, when I was in danger, will I
now pay in the presence of all the people. For thou art he, by whose benefit I
remain alive: thou art my defense, my tower, my savior, my sheeld, my refuge;
finally, thou art he, who only have subdued all this people unto me, and
therefore well deseruest the renown and praise of all these victories, by most
worthy right.

Wherefore, by good right, O Lord, I will declare thy praises, even with a
sounding voice. And because it becomes all men and women, that have received
benefits of thee, and to whom thou grantest the use of this life, and
delivered from so many, not dangers, but deaths, to do this thing diligently
and continually; I will labor to commit the memorial of thy benefits unto
others, and exhort them to accompany me in the duty of thankfulness
earnestly, and say:

CAP. II.
O All ye holy spirits, the apparitors of the Lords Majesty, which are
divided into innumerable garrisons, go ye before others in this his praise,
and sound them forth, even from the most high heaven.

O ye Citizens of Zion, rejoice ye in the Lord your King and Governor, and
set forth his praise far and wide, not only privately, but also publikelie.

Praise the Lord, I say; for his infinite goodness and everlasting mercy
deserves the same.

O you the innumerable multitude, whom God has delivered out of manifold
dangers, and forth of the hands of your enemies and persecutors, praise the
Lord; for his infinite goodness and everlasting mercy deserves the same, and
acknowledge this thing with me.

For how many has he gathered from the beginning of the world, which were
scattered from the East and the West, from the North and South Ocean sea?

How many wandering wretches in the waste wilderness, and seeking a City
commodious to dwell in, half dead, and killed with famine and thirst; crieng
unto thee, O God, in their extreme miseries, have thou heard; and drawing them
forth of their distress, have brought into the right way, and led them into
commodious Cities of refuge to dwell in peace?

O let these men therefore set forth this thy great mercy before thee, O Lord
thy self, and show forth thy marvelous works to other men; who have thus
refreshed them panting for thirst; and fed them so mercifully, being
hunger-starued!

How many also being shut up in dark prisons, and even as it were in the
darkness of death, being chained in their mind with sorrow, and in their
bodies most strictly with iron fetters? And that worthily (I confess,)
because they did not obeie thy commandments oh God, which are engraven in the
minds of all men, but rather followed their own lusts, than the wholesome
counselles of thee their God.

Notwithstanding, when thou, O God, thereby well had tamed their fierceness,
and had brought them to this point, that they could find no help in any;
thou graciously heardst them crieng unto thee in their distress, and
deliueredst them from their misery, and broughtst them from the dongeons of
the prisons, and darkness of death, breaking their iron fetters in sunder.

O praise ye therefore this so great mercy of the Lord before him, and
declare his wonderful acts to other mortal men, who has broken the brazen
gates, and has dashed in pieces their iron bars.

How many also being driven away through persecution, unto that profane
Babylon, even avoiding so much as lay in you, the sight of the wicked enemies,
did confess with most doleful silence, even with abundance of tears, both
your sins and sorrows, at the floods of Euphrates, being mindful of Zion.

And though you carried your harps even to be your comfort in so great
calamity, yet being outragiouslie mocked and derided in your misery, by the
enemy that drove you away into most miserable captivity, you were feign to
hang them up upon the sallowe trees, and make no noise in the sight of the
persecutors; as they that saw more cause rather to mourn than sing in that
time and place.

Notwithstanding, the Lord did not forget you for ever, but seeing the cruelty
of the persecutors, in his good time turned away your captivity and mourning,
and restored you to liberty and joy again, so that you live and see the
day, wherein Babylon is destroyed, and her children dashed against the stones.
For the Lord has given her prosperity unto us, to deal with them again, as
they have dealt with us.

Yea, the Lord has armed his people with double edged swords in their hands,
wherewith they may punish the profane Gentiles, and avenge the cruelty of the
oppressed; and also may draw their kings and nobles bound in chains and iron
fetters, even to execute the judgments appointed and commanded by thee O Lord.
And this verelie is the dignity and the honor of all them, whom God has
received to his favor.

Wherefore, O ye glorious people, upon whom the Lord has bestowed so many
benefits, now see that ye in this your great quietness and rest, sing and
triumph.

Praise the Lord in deed, O Israel, and delight thy self in setting forth
his praise continually, whose work thou art as it were newly formed, being
delivered from so many not dangers but deaths.

What shall I speak, Lord, furthermore of them, who by their own
foolishness, going in the way of wickedness, and being oppressed by manifold
plagues and diseases, do daily suffer the reward of their madness; and
loathing all manner of meat, are at deaths door; whom notwithstanding thou, O
Lord, did hear crieng unto thee in their misery, and thou deliueredst
them out of their distress; yea thou speaking but one word, did take away
all the cause of their deadly disease, and restoredst them to health.

Let these men also, I say, praise this thy so great mercies, O Lord, and
publish thy marvelous works before other mortal men. Let them offer the
sacrifices of praise unto thee, O God, in the middle multitude of the people
standing about them; and let them rehearse with great joy, what he has done
for them, in the assembly of the cheifest.

Go to therefore, O all ye people; praise the Lord our God together with me;
who when we were oppressed with Pharaos tyranny, was mindful of us; and with
a strong force delivered Israel from the slavery of Egypt, and has given this
dominion to be possessed by ELIZABETH his handmaid; for his mercy endures for
ever.

CAP. III.
O All ye people, I say, tribes, kindreds, and inhabitants of the earth; both
noble and simple, rich and poor; clap your hands, and praise this most holy
God with most ioifull voices.

Give unto the Lord the praise of all power, worship, and glory: give him the
honor due unto his name and majesty. For lo, he is come to govern the earth.
The Lord himself reigns amongst you, and governs the whole world with a
just and righteous government, and rules altogether with the scepter of his
justice and truth.

Go to therefore O ye young striplings, and old men, young children, maidens and
matrones, and you also all other that love and fear God, come (I pray you)
and praise ye name of ye Lord, even of our most mighty IEHOVA, together with
me. For he alone deserves most high praise, as he that is more deep than the
very earth, and more high than the heavens, and far above all the powers and
potentates of the world.

Go to also O ye damsels and virgins, stir up your joy to day with songs of
praise upon timbrell and lute, but void of wantonness: so that your joy may
tend to the glory of God, your only strength; and celebrate this day of your
deliverance, as festiuail to the Lord our deliverer.

O ye Uirgins and damsels unmarried now rejoice with me, I say; and sing unto
the Lord a triumphant song. Praise the Lord also, O ye brides in your marriage
songs with glory and majesty, that ye live to see my days, and that the
flower of your youth is not consumed in the flame of Gods fury.

For the time was, when you being desolate and unmarried, did remain pensife
without your marriage songs, and lived solitary, sitting at home among the
soote of pots: but now, the women that durst not come out of their houses, come
forth glittering like gold, and shining like dooues as white as snow, and
boldly divide the spoil of the enemy.

Go to therefore, O ye damsels of Judah, and multitude of Uirgins; seeing ye
have so great cause to rejoice; show not your selves unthankful in any wise:
but praise the Lord together with me in Hymns, and celebrate his name with
spiritual songs, for his victories, goodness, and mercy toward us.

Come forth ye daughters of Zion, I say; and break out into gladness with
me, rejoice you of the just judgments of God upon our enemies: yea, compass
you Zion round about, account her towers, consider diligently her walls and
bulworks, and set forth the praises of her peace and palaces; so that ye may
spread forth the memory thereof, even to all posterity. And do you let all
men to understand, that this is God, even our own God for ever, which has not
forsaken us, neither will leave us, no not in the last minute of our life.

Go to now therefore I beseech you, let us altogether praise the Lord, as we
are bounden; let the whole company of us Uirgins play upon the Timbrels on
every side, and corner of the city Zion, one exhorting and answering another
by course, and that with new and excellent songs of praise to the glory of God.

Let us magnitie that mighty and eternal name of his; for it is holy: let us
continually come before the Lord, and worship him; for he is holy.

For what should we rather do, than to give hearty and continual thanks, by
all possible means, unto God; who, besides that he is God, and therefore has
bound all men unto himself by good right, has bestowed upon us so many
peculiar benefits? And again, what can be more ioifull, and more to be
desired, than such a testimony of his fatherly love, who has delivered us
from so many, not only dangers, but deaths also?

CAP. IIII.
GO to also, O all ye Kings, Princes, Governors, and Judges of the earth; hold
up your hands humbly unto God the eternal KING; acknowledge his power, which
sits upon the most high heavens from all eternity, as it were upon a
chariot, and makes a terrible and most mighty sound from the clouds.

O ye mighty Monarchs and Potentates of the world, now worship and praise ye
the LORD our GOD together with me; do him all possible reverence: and rejoice
unto him with fear and trembling, as I do.

O ye Kings, and all ye of power, give place unto the Lord; give unto the Lord,
I say, the honor of all glory and power: give unto the Lord the majesty and
glory due unto his name, fall down before his footestoole, and worship him in
his most holy temple: for he is holy; and seek his glory carefully, as I
do.

For this chiefly becomes all Princes to do, whom God, of his unspeakable
favor, has consecrated unto himself, and brought them into the most high
state of dignity, above others: but specially, it becomes me to rejoice,
and to set forth thy praises, O God, after a most exquisite manner; in whom thy
most excellent Majesty does so gloriously shine, and who have received so
many rare and singular benefits of thee, from my conception, to this hour.

Go to then, O my dear soul, and mine inward bowels, give thanks unto God
with all your power: praise the Lord, O my soul, and declare thy self that
thou art mindful of all his benefits.

For what honor is not the Lord worthy of, which of his unspeakable mercy
and compassion has forgiven thee all thy sins, healed the deadly wounds
thereof, cured thy diseases, borne thine infirmities, redeemed thy life from
death, preserved thee from misery, renewed thy youth like the Egle that lives
most long, and adorned thee so richly with all his benefits; as testimonies of
his singular goodness, and fatherly mercy toward thee?

Go to therefore with me, you mighty spirits, being his apparitours, and the
diligent executioners of his will; so soon as ye hear him speak, celebrate
ye the praises of the Lord.

O ye mighty armies of his most obedient soldiers, praise the Lord, I say;
O ye, even the very Angels, worship him as your Lord and King.

Praise ye the Lord, O all his works, in what place soever of his dominion; and
whatsoever has breath, let it sound and set forth his glory: finally, thou
my dear soul set thou forth the praise of God.

CAP. V.
AND I, O my God, my King, even I thy handmaid and anointed, in thankful
remembrance, and worthy memorial of thy wonderful works and benefits,
wrought and showed unto me continually, do again (as it is meet) render
unto thee this acceptable sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

I pay the vows unto thee, which I have promised both secretly among the
faithful, and openly before the whole assembly of thy people; and that in
the courts of thy house, O Lord; and in the midest of the City Jerusalem,
wherein by thy power and benefit I thus flourish.

I will praise thee with my whole heart, and magnify thy name for ever; because
I have experience of thine infinite goodness in my self, and am delivered
from so manifold dangers of death and destruction.

Neither will I be ashamed to sing forth thy praises also in songs, before the
assembly of the mighty, and before the very Angels that stand about thine
arc.

I will, together with all Angels, Spirits, and souls; and with all Kings,
Queens, virgins, and creatures both in heaven and earth, incessantly magnify
thee in the palace consecrated to thy Majesty; and will sing of thy mercy and
truth, because thou have gotten unto thee now at the length most great honor;
for that thou have so maruellouslie, above expectation, surely performed unto
me that which thou did promise in thy word.

I, with the residue of the people of my dominion, as a mother with her
daughters, and the virgin with virgins; being for this cause replenished with
incredible joy, and comforted with thy judgments, O Lord, will rejoice in
thee, which (seeing nothing in me that should so move thee) have nevertheless
embraced me with so great favor, and mightily also defended me: and with all
the just I will magnify the holy remembrance of thee, so great a King
continually, which sitting upon thy most holy throne, rulest the whole earth,
and exaltest thy self far above all that is aloft any where.

For to this end chiefly thou, O Lord, have consecrated and set me over them,
that I should diligently exercise the rites of thy divine worship among them.
Therefore I will delight my self in setting forth thy praises more and more,
and I will testify my self in my whole life, to be desirous of thy honor and
glory, to whom all honor and glory of right belongs.

O my God, my King; I will highly extol thee, and celebrate thy name for ever
and ever: I will consecrate all the days of my life to set forth thy glory,
and will amplify thy name with songs, that never shall have end.

For thou art great, O Lord; and no praise is sufficient for thee: neither can
any man attain to thy greatness.

For thy wonderful works endure not for one generation and age alone; but as
one age succeeds another, so likewise must some men commit the memorial of
them unto others, unless they will be negligent in doing their duty.

Wherefore truly, be it far from me thy handmaid, that any thing should be of
greater authority with me, than that I should carefully think, that the
brightness of thy Majesty, which shines unto us in the very daily use of
things; and that thy deeds to me and my people-ward are greater, than can be
comprehended, by the admiration or capacity of all mortal men and women.

And doubtless, Lord, though very many be most blockish, and wonderful
thankelesse; yet can there never be wanting some, which shall even against
their wills confess at the least thy terrible power, even over all princes
and people of the world. But admit that others be silent, and unthankful; yet
I will never cease to declare thy greatness; and the nations most far off
shall hear me publishing thy praises, and singing unto thee, for delivering
and saving me by thy power, whom thou have chosen and loved.

But God forbid, that I alone should labor to do this my duty. For verelie,
there will be always some assembly, which will by all means testify the
remembrance of thy peculiar goodness, and thy most undoubted promises.

Namely, that thou art most merciful, and most ready to exceeding mercy;
and of whom a man may almost doubt, whether thou be more slow to wrath, or
more prone to pardon.

For is there any thing, O Lord, void of thy goodness? Naie, what is there in
this whole world any where, which does not testify thy clemency, and even of
it self set forth thy glory in this point, that thou dooest suffer so many
generations and ages to pass and succeed in this world, that is defiled so
many and fundrie ways: and that thou dooest cause thy chosen people to know,
and declare by experience, what thy dominion and power is, that is to say, to
be publishers of thy praise and valiant acts, for committing the glory of thy
kingdom to their posterity.

Wherefore by good right, O Lord, I will give unto thee due and convenient
praise, and declare thy woonderous works, even with a sounding voice; that all
may hear, as it becomes me; and all men, to whom thou grantest the use of
this life, to do both diligently, and continually.

As for me, I will still call to mind the multitude of thy miracles, and
woonderous works wrought for me; and I will consume all my life days in
praising thee therefore, so long as I shall remain alive. It shall be my
special care to publish thy renown with songs of praise. And would to God
that my songs might be so pleasant and acceptable unto thee, as I with glad heart
and cheerful mind will celebrate thy so many and so great benefits bestowed
upon me.

And be it far away, and God forbid, O my soul, that ever we should forget
the Lord our God. But let rather my right hand forget her cunning, and all
plaieng of instruments: and let the tongue of every one of us rather cleave to
the roof of our mouths, than that it should be once unmindful of him; or at
any time abandon the due deserved praises, belonging to his most holy,
glorious, mighty, and eternal name and Majesty.

O all ye creatures in heaven and earth, agree ye unto me, and say hereunto
with one heart and mouth, Amen. Praise ye the Lord; praise thou thy God, O my
soul:

Amen, Amen.
The fifth and last part of the Vow divided also into five Chapters.
CAP. I.
AND now, O Lord, my God, and King; I thine handmaid being appointed QVEENE by
thee, after such a manner of bountifulness, as never was heard, do consecrate
this song unto thee, both of mercy and judgment: whereunto I do vow and bind
my self before thee this day, to perform them in the government of the
kingdom; as thou both fatherly requirest of me, and graciously have
commanded.

And first I will endeavor my self wholly to piety and godliness, and will
labor diligently to preserve and to amplify thy Church, that thy pure
worship may be continually exercised therein, with as great care, devotion,
and holiness as is possible.

I will go, I say, into thy sanctified house, O Lord; even into the holy
habitation of thy most true wisdom will I enter, that I may there learn thy
judgments, and understand thy will revealed, to do to the uttermost of my
power, whatsoever thou requirest and command a King to do.

For I do testify before thee, that I desire nothing more, than to visit and
behold thy glorious Majesty in thy Sanctuary: and therefore will I hasten
speedily to stand in the porches thereof, to taste and see those visible
signs of thy power and Majesty, showed commonly therein. For doubtless, thy
goodness that offers it self as it were there to be handled and felt, is
more sweet by far, than life it self, which causes my soul so much the more
to be inflamed with earnest desire to seek thy face, to see thy glory, and to
set forth thy praises with all my power.

Especially, that the people, which are holy unto thee, my God, might
assemble together by tribes and thousands, after the manner appointed of thee, to
power forth praises and prayers, and to celebrate thy holy name, to the
safety and preservation of all the families of our nation, that love and
favor thy truth, to all posterity.

Yea, even I my self, O God, with my father DAVID, will gladly go forth with
the multitude; and lead thy people, as he was wont, into thy holy house, O
God, with the voice of ioifull praisings and thanksgiuings; as those that
observe thy sabaoths and festival days, most glorious unto thee, before the
face of all people.

I will present my self often before thine altar, not only with my hands
washed in water; but rather purified from all wickedness, that I may openly
stablish thy praise, and celebrate thy wonderful works.

There will I sound forth thy renown with loud voice, with all my heart,
satisfied with the fatness and marowe of thy most holy delicates. I will lead
my life therein, I say, O God, setting forth thy magnificence; and there will
I lift up mine innocent heart and hands with others; and openly, amids the
whole multitude, call upon thy name, wherein is my safeguard.

For there is nothing that I love more deerlie than that Temple, wherein thou
have set thy seat of glory, even the house of thy Majesty and holy City,
wherein the tribunal seat of my father DAVID (left to his posterity to
minister justice indifferently to every one) is firmly placed.

And why should not I do so? Why should not my soul, I say, he thus
inflamed, and the zeal of thine house even consume me with fervent desire,
and hearty longing, to seek thy face, O Jacob? Seeing I have had experience so
often of thy gracious goodness and miraculous help; and seeing thou, O Lord, my
God, have set thy house in Jerusalem, that thy true worship might be by my
diligence holilie exercised therein.

Therefore, O God, I, even I thine handmaid, to whom thou have appointed the
kingdom, will rejoice and praise thee in thy sacred Sanctuary; and join my
self as companion with those that do worship thee truly and devoutly
therein: neither will I be far or long from thence; if I be, Lord, it shall be
full sore against my will, through some urgent necessity of my calling or
office in this life.

And though I be absent in body at any time from thy house, as many times it
comes to pass, by reason I change my place so often: yet I make a vow, I
will do that I am able; to wit, whersoeuer I become, I will cleave unto thee
in my heart wholly, and will not cease to think of thee, and to meditate of thy
manifold benefits powered upon me.

Yea, Lord, thou know that I am accustomed to rise at midnight, when other
do soundly sleep: and setting aside all other cares, as she that is ever
mindful of thy statutes, I do watchfullie think how I may please thee, and
keep thy commandments; and how I am wont to prevent the twy-light in the
morning, with my loud prayers: yea, that I am so far from following the
example of the wicked, who lie snorting in sin and security; that contrariwise
I, beholding the excellent judgments of thy justice, in crowning thy gifts in
the righteous, seven times a day do I celebrate thy praises: neither do the
watchmen doubtless so carefully keep their watch, as I am diligent in
meditating thy Heast and commandments.

CAP. II.
ANd because, O Lord, though man be increased with never so high dignity,
riches, and honors: yet if he want thy wisdom, he shall be counted to
differ little or nothing in this life from the brute beasts, which wholly
perish: (For he does not long remain in this worldly pomp and glory; but
all his power shall vanish and flow away, like water spilt on the ground, and
brought to naught:) I will therefore number my days, while I have time; so
that I may betimes apply my heart unto thy wisdom, and endeavor my self to
learn thy statutes by thine instruction; and to be taught the true knowledge,
joined with such a judgment; whereby I may discern all things aright, as it
were by tasting a sauourie thing; because I desire to depend on thy
commandments, and to fulfill thy Heast.

Uerelie, Lord; I will meditate thy commandments continually, and will apply
my whole mind to observe thy ways. I will delight my mind, I say, in thy
statutes, neither will I at any time forget thy words.

For neither have thou, O Lord, my heavenly father, commanded me any thing
unadvisedly in thy Heast: neither are they things that I should only
understand, or lightly consider of: but thou have wisely spoken and commanded
them unto me, that they should be observed and kept of me with all diligence.

And would to God that my manners and state might so be ordered by thy
government, that I might sincerely seek to please thee; and holilie walk
after the rule of the doctrine prescribed by thee; and that I might most
constantly persevere in keeping most carefully thy statutes! For then verelie
I should lead an upright and blameless life, at hearts ease, with a quiet
mind, and all things should go well with me; yea, by that means shall I only
worship thee rightly, and purelie, without following this or that manner of
worship, not prescribed by thy law, nor allowed by thy word.

Therefore am I fully purposed to keep thy statutes firmly to the end, and
to hold the way prescribed by thy word. For I have chosen this as the true
way, and I do prefer this before all other things.

O Lord, I endeavor my self, I say, with a pure heart, to cleave fast unto
those things, which are approved by thy testimonies; of the which my good
purpose grant, I beseech thee, that I do never repent.

But direct me that am well entered into the way of these thy precepts, and
inflame me wholly more and more with great desire, both of true knowledge
joined with judgment, whereby I may discern all things aright; and also keep
thy laws, as well in prosperity as adversity, unto the end of my life; that
I may finish the whole course of my reign, by the direction of thy precepts,
which are mine only counselors; thy mercy and thy truth being my two
keepers and assistants, whereupon I also only trust.

Neither am I, O Lord, of their number, who have no regard whither they walk,
in the right or wrong way before thee: but I have searched carefully by good
advise, what way I should keep; and I have fastened my steps in those paths,
which thou have testified do please thee. Neither have I stayed, when I did
know the matter so to be; but straightwaies bent my self to observe thy
commandments, and been most willing and ready to accomplish thy will, in all
things that might advance thy glory.

Oh how do I love thy doctrine! Surely thou know Lord, that I am wont to
consume whole days and nights in meditating of thy laws. And I do find, by
experience, that I have not done this in vain. For I have proved to be much
wiser by thy precepts, than all mine adversaries, which labor with all their
power to destroy me, of how great dignity or authority soever they be. For I
have obtained by thy gift, a wisdom that will never forsake me.

Yea thou have made me better learned than my teachers and masters, even
because I have given my self wholly, not to man's inventions, but to meditate
those things only, which thou have given unto us for sound learning.

Finally, I am more skillful than any of the ancient; because I was bent not
only to know thy commandments, but also to keep them in deed. For I held
back my feet, that I should not go the way that leads unto evil; but that
I should always rather hold the way, which thou have taught us by thy mouth.

Thy precepts, O Lord, have been, and shall be like a burning Lamp in my hand;
and as a light shining before me, to show me the way that I shall go: yea they
have taught me the true wisdom. And therefore I now abhor the other guids and
rules of the order of this life, as wicked and false. For I see all the most
absolute and perfect works come to an end: yea both the decrees and laws,
which man's wisdom does set down, to be subject unto change, and at length
even to come to naught. Only thy precepts, most true and most stable, are
prolonged without measure, and without any end. Wherefore, I am wholly
consumed, being inflamed with the love of thee; because I see thy words
despised of mine adversaries.

Surely I feel thy words more pleasant and sweet to my mouth, than if I had
tasted honey; yea thy precepts are more precious unto me, than any gold or
jewels, be they of never so high price and estimation.

I do, and will still affirm, that all thy commandments are the most
certain and perfect rule of thy justice and truth, to direct me to equity and
godliness: and therefore I utterly abhor, as a thing appointed to deceive us,
whatsoever leads us from them: neither will I at any time forsake thee, nor
turn from thy laws; but rest upon thee, my teacher, and ghostly instructor.

O Lord, thou know that I hate and abhor all deceits, I say; and that I
embrace thy doctrine: yea and that I never conceived more grief of any thing,
than when I did perceive those men, that are thine and mine enemies, to despise
thy word so stubbornly and impudentlie.

Mine eyes verelie do swim with tears, when I behold the general contempt
of thy doctrine, and too bold profanation of all thy holy Heasts and laws,
the which thing I neither would nor could dissemble. For even so often as I
perceived thy glory to be diminished, I burnt with sorrow; and I accounted my
self to be wounded with the reproaches cast out against thee. Uerelie, there is
nothing more pure than thy words. Wherefore I, even I thy servant, do embrace
them with an incredible love and desire: yea I have bound my whole heart for
ever, even to my last gasp, to observe thy statutes.

CAP. III.
IAm determined, O Lord, to embrace with most great love, those things, which
thou have testified unto me; and to keep all thy Heasts most diligently: yea,
I will so behave my self in this my government, that none shall worthily
complain of me, that I have committed any thing against them, contrary to
right and equity. For I do bear thy Heast in my hand, as a Lamp ordained of
thee, for to lighten me in thy perfect paths and way. And I lay up thy word
in my heart as a precious treasure, least I offend thee in any least thing.

And how sincerely I do this; that is, how without all hypocrisy I apply my
self to fulfill thy commandments, and to accomplish and do to the uttermost
of my power, all things that thou have testified unto me, it is best known
unto thee, who being my witness, and privy to all my thoughts and doings, I
do whatsoever I do.

O Lord, unto whom I appeal; and whom I can not deceive, though I would: I
am thoroughly known and manifest unto thee I say. For no part of my life is
unknown unto thee, whether I sit or I rise: yea thou do even understand all
my thoughts a far off; and thou obseruest narrowly my walking, and my lieng
down; neither is any of those things hidden from thee, which I go about. For
thou know even my words, O Lord, before my tongue pronounce them.

I submit my self, O God, in this thing therefore to thy trial; how I do
prefer the consideration of thy wonderful works, words, and benefits, before
all others; which are so great verelie, that I am not able once to account the
sum of them, nor to reach to the height, depth, length, and breadth of thy
great mercies toward me. For I find them mo than the sands of the sea, or the
hears of my head. Wherefore I only refer my self to thee my God, I say,
that thou may thoroughly prove thine handmaid, and see if my heart be not
altogether fixed upon thee; and utterly search out all my thoughts, to write
them down in thy book of consciences.

Finally, consider Lord, I pray thee, whether I have provoked the ungodly,
with giving any offense: and as thou know me innocent, so preserve thou me,
and govern the course of my life with thy counsels.

Yea thou know, O Lord, that I have never bent mine eyes to high things; nor
entangled my self willingly with great matters, whereby I might win to my
self the opinion of excellency, above all other: neither yet have reached
unto such things, as were above my capacity. But contrarily, unless I have
been content with my state howsoever; and have staid my mind to depend wholly
on thee, as they teach the weaned child to forget the Nursse, and to regard the
mother alone: unless, I say, I have so behaved my self hitherto, as the
weaned infant, let me in deed be refused of thee.

Therefore, according to this mine innocence, O Lord, by the assistance of thy
grace, I will proceed: yea surely, Lord, according to my power, as I have
begone in thee, so I will endeavor my self to end in thee, and to walk with
thee vprightlie; and setting all my confidence in thee alone, I am fully
minded to continue to the end of my life, without wavering in the faith of a
right Christian fear and love to thee.

That I stand upright in the way of thy truth, I do attribute it only unto
thee, O Lord my God; and will therefore magnify thy name in the public
congregation. And I doubt not, but thou, O Lord, thine own self, wilt sullie
perform the work that I have enterprised by thine authority. For this is
thine everlasting mercy, testified by thy word: neither will thou, I know,
leave the work imperfect, which thou have once begun by me, and in me.

And now surely mine eyes are still always bent upon thy goodness, and I
have appointed thy truth to be the guide and leader of my life: yea, I
unfeignedly vow, and make a solemn promise before thee, and all thy holy
Angels; that I will give all possible diligence, both that I may thoroughly
know the right way appointed by thee, and also may observe the same purelie,
in my house and Realm.

I will never set before me to do any wicked thing; but will endeavor my
self to godliness more and more, and keep my hands pure from all injury and
wrong: that I may so live the true life; and spend the whole course of this my
peregrination, in setting forth thy glory.

CAP. IIII.
HEnce from me therefore ye wicked ones, that I may keep the precepts of my
God so much more purelie. For I abhor the wavering and wanderings to and fro in
religion; and I count thy word and doctrine most dear and precious.

I will forsake them that are of corrupt manners; neither will I take such unto
me. I will put far from me the authors of evil counsels; neither will I
embrace, at any time, the thing that I know to be evil.

Yea, Lord, thou know how carefully I have avoided the company of these
most vain men; and I have fled away from these deceitful dealers.

They that run after another God, I utterly detest. Their drinke-offrings of
bloody sacrifice, which I am afraid even once to name, will I not offer. All
such abomination my soul does utterly abhor.

For I, as thou know, love righteousness and holiness, and hate whatsoever
is against it. And because they hate thee, O Lord, which art righteousness it
self; therefore do I again hate them, and do even abhor them, because I
perceive them to rise up against thee.

I hate the superstitious crew of the ungodly, I say, utterly; and count
them for my greatest enemies: much less will I join my self unto them, or
can abide to wink at their wickedness and rebellion.

Yea, I fully determine to exercise thy power given unto me, and to destroy
the wicked and profane utterly; that thy Church may be well purged, and free
from these cruel and bloud-thirstie hypocrites; from these men, I say, which
speak blasphemy against thee: so great and so proud is the cruelty of those,
not of mine enemies so much, as of thine. For they abuse thy holy name and
Majesty.

Those superstitious men, I say, Lord, that bear thy name in hypocrisy,
shall have their mouths stopped, and be put to silence in the congregation;
and that because they be deadly enemies to thy word and holy Gospel, which I
profess.

Therefore, because they resist not me; but thee, O God, thy self: therefore
thou shall carry in thy hand a cup full of troubled wine, and full of dregs,
the which thou shall give to all the wicked to suck up, and to drink even the
very dregs thereof. Yea, with the edge of the sword will I cut off the horns
of the wicked and rebellious; and will execute the judgment appointed and
commanded by thee my God, upon them, till they be consumed; that the honor and
dignity of thy Saints may flourish in Israel in all piety and peace.

All those wicked men, whom I see or hear do abuse their authority under me,
against the good and godly, will I cast down again; but I will increase the
just with honors.

The subtle man will I thrust out of my house; neither will I suffer those
that be scoffers, and speak deceiptfullie, to tarry in my sight.

The extortioner and cruel man, which do speedily put in execution their
wicked devises, and whose hands are full of bribes, those will I utterly
destroy from off the earth.

I will bridle the proud and dissolute persons, I will terrify the wicked,
that they shall not lift up their horns so high, with blasphemous words
against thee, and thine anointed.

Finally, I will destroy the slanderer and false accuser; I will not suffer
the proud and the ambitious to dishonor thee. Yea I will painefullie, and
without any delaie, worthily punish whomsoever I shall understand to be
wicked; and will purge the holy City of the Lord from all wicked persons.

Contrariwise, I searching out on every side men that love the truth, will
take them to be my familiar companions and counselors; and I will not use, in
doing mine affairs, any but such as are trusty and faithful, both to God,
and their Prince.

If I do know any that fears thee, and that keeps thy statutes, I will
join him to my fellowship: those (I say) whom I see do worship thee truly
and devoutly, will I join my self as companions with me.

Yea, all my delight, Lord, shall be upon the Saints that are in the earth
with me, to comfort them; and to promote such as excel in virtue and
godliness. For otherwise, I am able to do little or nothing that can profit
thee. Neither will I suffer any violence to be done unto them that be godly,
by any man; but will rebuke even the mighty Princes for their sakes. None
shall touch thine anointed Priests, no man will I suffer to hurt any of thy
Prophets.

CAP. V.
TO conclude, I will surely care for nothing so much, now that I am set
peaceably over the kingdom, and have the people by thy goodness committed
unto me, as to institute an holy and righteous government. And thou granting
me grace, when the case so stands, that the bonds of the laws are broken,
and the kingdom is in any thing disordered or confounded; I will carefully
compose, and set the same again in good order; and establish the pillars and
foundations thereof in their places, if they be removed. And this will I do by
the direction of thy revealed will, that all things may remain safe among my
people, by the difference of right and wrong preserved and maintained; and that
they may follow thee, our God, with great cheerfulness, whosoever delight in
righteousness, when they see the disordered state of the Realm restored by me
at the last, into the ancient most right order of discipline and justice,
prescribed by thy word.

Thus, by the grace and assistance of thy holy spirit, (the which I beseech
thee plentifully to power down upon me) do I thy servant determine with my
self, unfeignedly to serve and worship thy dreadful Majesty, O my God, in
fear and trembling: and I will labor to preserve and to amplify thy Church,
with as great care as is possible; that thy pure worship may continually to
all posterity be exercised therein.

For so have I sworn, even by an oath, and make my solemn Uowes, that I will
do; and that I will keep thy most sacred Heasts, and just laws inviolable;
the which thing I will perform in deed. Neither will I suffer my self, at
any time, to be drawn away from thy judgments; nor to depart one ynch from
thy holy commandments, O God, which way soever thou leadest me. But trusting
only unto thee, by whose power and conduct I have gotten the Empire and
regiment of so many large provinces, strong cities, and goodly towns; I will
now set my kingdom in good order, and place the throne of judgment therein,
even the tribunal seat of my father DAVID, that judgment and justice may be
ministered indifferently therein to every one; and the safety and welfare of
the people that love thee, and favor thy truth, be procured and maintained.

For to this end, O my God, have thou given me this kingdom, the possession of
so many goodly countries, and sundry sorts of people; and caused me to
obtain it with so great facility and ease; that being thus peaceably placed
therein, I should love Jerusalem with all my heart: and that I should root out
all the inhabitants therein, that profane the land with filthy superstition,
and evil life; and cause all diligently to observe thy statutes and laws,
given them of thee. And so I make a Uow I will, O Lord, I say, according to
the simplicity of my heart, both provide faithfully for thy people; and also
guide them by good counsel, and continually defend and preserve them by my
power; as thou in thy heast have commanded me.

And that I may the better perform these my Uowes unto thee, and thoroughlie
discharge my duty to the glory of thine eternal Majesty; I beseech thee,
show me thy glory, O God; and let thine honor beautify and adorn me, O my
KING. O govern thou our counsels and endeavors from heaven; yea all our
enterprises, and our counsels guide and govern thou from the highest heavens;
that thy glory, O Lord, thy glory may shine forth in me thine humble
Haudmaid, to all posterities; and the fame thereof fill the whole world, and be
perpetually praised of al thy creatures, both in heaven and in earth, visible
and invisible, for ever and ever: So; even so shall it be, O my GOD: even so
let it be, Amen: Amen.

O Lord, I beseech thee, let the Uowes and free promises of my mouth,
proceeding from an unfeigned heart, be accepted of thee; and teach me thy laws
more and more. For unto thee and them I confess that I owe my life.

Gressus meos dirige verbo tuo: and non dominetur in me peccatum.
Sic psallam nomini tuo in perpetuum: and persoluam vota mea per singulos dies.
Glory be to GOD on high; in earth peace; good will toward men: Halleluiah.

A table orderly comprehending, under some special titles, all such prayers,
meditations, and other matters whatsoever, which conveniently might there unto
be referred or gathered in the first, second, and third Lamps or parts of this
book for the benefit of the simple reader: by T. B. S.
Before prayer.
A Meditation to be used before private morning prayer, the second lamp, page
105. Another to be used before evening prayer, the second lamp, page 121.
Another to be used before common prayer in the church. 2. l. page 158.
Morning prayer.
When one awaketh, 2. l. page 224. At our vprising, 2. lam. page 103, 104. A
form of private morning prayer, 2. l. page 106, 107, etc. An exercise of an
householder with his family to pray in the morning, 2 l. page 225. A fruitful
morning prayer to be used of all christians, 2 l. page 139. Before one begin
his work, 2. l. page 226. Another to the same purpose, ibid. Before one begin
to study his lesson, 2. l. 227. Before or after the sermon, 2. l. page 162,
231. At burials, 2. l. page 168. Before the receiving of the holy communion,
2. l. page 163. After the receiving of the Lords supper. 2. l. 166.
Graces.
A prayer before meat, 2. l. page 229. A prayer after meat, ibidem.
Confessions, Lamentations, and complaints.
A confession before morning prayer, 2. l. 103. Another before evening prayer,
2. l. page 117. A confession of a penitent person for his sin, 2. l. page
148, 149, 153. An humble confession of sins to the glory of God, 2. l. page
37. A lamentation and complaint of a sinner bewailing the ignorance of her
blind life led in superstition, with hearty repentance in faith to obtain
remission through Christ, 2. l. page 42. A christian bewailing of miserable
ignorance and blindness of men, 2. l. page 60.
Contemplations.
Of Christ's passion, 2. l. page 111. Of the careful passions of the sinful
soul and body, 2. l. page 128.
Meditations.
Of the spiritual love between CHRIST the bridegroom, and the faithful
souls of his church the brid, 1. l. pa. 8. Of the inward love of the christian
soul toward Christ, 2. l. page 1. Of the souls slavery by sin, and
redemption by Christ, ibid. Of the souls affinity with Christ, 2. l. page 5.
Of the souls infidelity and apostasy from God, 2. l. page 10. Of the entire
affection and love of God toward the sinful soul of man, 2. l. page 15. Of
the union of life and death in the faithful soul by Christ, 2 l. pa. 21. Of
the longing of the soul by death to feed with Christ. 2. l. page 24. Of the
trust the soul has in the merits of her redeemer against the dread of hell and
fear of damnation, 2. l page 27. Of the incomprehensible love of Christ to the
sinful soul of man, and of the benefits that come of a true faith, 2. l. page
31. Of true faith, and what it works in the soul of a sinner, 2. l. page 45.
Of the great love of God toward mankind, and of the inward beholding of Christ
crucified, 2. l. page 49. Of the glorious victories of Christ over all enemies,
2. l. page 51. Of the school of the cross, whereunto we ought to submit our
selves: and of the book of the Crucifix, wherein we ought often to look, 2 l.
page 58 Of the miserable ignorance and blindness of men much to be bewailed, 2.
l. page 60. Of the fruits and rules of true Christianity to be followed, 2. l.
page 64. Of the fruits of infidelity, and of the office of weakelings to be
eschued, 2 l. page 66. Of carnal gospellers by whose ill living Gods truth is
shamefullie slandered, 2 l. page 69. Of the virtues and properties of Gods
children following their vocation, 2. l. page 73. Of amendment of life in all
estates, 2. l. page 77. Of our frailty and misery, 2. l. page 113. Of the
dreadful day of judgment, 2. l. page 129. Of the unspeakable joys of
heaven, and the intolerable pains of hell, 2. l. page 198.
Prayers.
The Lords prayer, 2. l. page 221. The Creed or articles of christian faith, 2.
l. page 222. The ten commandments, 2. l. page 222.
The prayers also.
Of Hagar, 1. l. page 1. Of Naomic, 1. l. page 6. Of Hannah, 1. l. page 6. Of
Abigael, 1. l. page 8. Of Sarra Tobit, 1. l. pa. 39. Of Iudeth, 1. l. page 41.
43. Of Q. Hester, 1. l. page 46. Of Susannah, 1. l page 48. Of the Church, 1.
l. pa 48. Of the woman of Canaan, 1. l. page 49. Of the five foolish Virgins,
1. l. page 49. Of the Queens Maiestic, 2. l page 1. 35. 36. Of Q Katherin, 2.
l. page 37. 80. etc. Of L. Jane Dudly, 2. l. page 98. Of Lady Tirwit, 2. l.
page 103. etc. Of the L. Aburgaueny, 2. l. page 139. Of Agnes the Martyr, 2. l.
page 214. Of Eulalia the martyr, ibid. Of An Askew the martyr, idid. Of Mistres
Bradford, 2. l. page 215. Of a certain godly Gentlewoman, ibid. Of mistres
Dorcas Martin, 2. l. page 221. Proper prayers to be used only of the Queens
most excellent Majesty, 3. l. page 253, etc. 261. 273. 275. 276. 277. 279.
280. 297. The Kings heast, 3. l. page 307. The Queens vow, 3. l. page 321.
Prayers to God the Father, 2. l. page 121. 154. To God the Son, 2. l. page
156. To God the holy Ghost, 2. l. page 157. To the blessed Trinity, 2 l. page
114. Alphabeticall prayers, desifering the name of the Queens Maiestic. 3. l.
page 280. 297. 303. The name of the L. Aburgaueny. 2. l. page 207. 213. For the
whole estate of Christ's church, 2. l. page 131. For faith, 2. l. page 162. For
the true worship of God, 2. l page 158. For remission of sins, and to obtain a
virtuous life, 2. l. page 144. For the obtaining of grace and mercy, 2. l.
page 147. 150. 152. For to be purged from fin and uncleanness, 2. l. page
151. For the obtaining of mercy, and mittigating of miseries, 189. 190. etc.
For wisdom to govern well, 3. l. page 279. For humility, 2. l. p. 170 For
the obtaining of Gods grace and all good gifts of the spirit, 2. l. page 170.
For to live vprightlie and to dwell in the everlasting tabernacles, 2. l. page
159. 168. 169. For patience and meekness to bear all afflictions, 2. l. page
184. For the preachers to speak the word of God boldly, 2. l. page 231.
Against presumptuous pride and vain glory, 2. l. page 172. Against
covetousness and too much care of the world, 2. l. page 173. Against lieng and
eull imaginations, 2. l. page 173. Against the fear of worldly casualties. 2.
l. page 192. Against the fellowship of the ungodly, 2. l. p. 161 Against all
vices generally, 2. l page 174.
In time of sickness.
For a sick child, 1. l. p. 49 Of tho sick at the hour of death, 2 l. page
202. To die in faith, etc, 2. l. page 168.
In time of plague.
In the time of any common plague, etc, 2. l. p. 180
In time of battle.
In the 2. lamp. page 178.
In time of any trouble.
In banishment, 1. l. pa. 1. Against barrenness, 1. l. page 6. Against enemies
of the Church, etc, 1. l page 8. A lamentation of miseries and plagues for our
sins, 1. l. page 25. etc. 28. 33. 34. 38. To be delivered from reproach, 1. l.
page 39. For deliverance from enemies. 1. l. page 41. For strength to overcome
all enemies, 1. la. page 43. For deliverance out of the hands of traitors,
etc, 1. l page 46. 2. l. page 36. Of one wrongfullie condemned to death, 1. l.
page 48. Of the Church afflicted, 1. l. page 48. For the tormented in
conscience, 1. l. page 49. Against the power of the ungodly, 2. l. p. 35. 36.
In danger of death by tyranny. 2. l. page 36. In any ghostly temptation of
satan, 2. l p. 191 Against inward heaviness, 2. l. page 192. To be delivered
from dangers, 2. l. page 193. To obtain upright judgment against our
adversary, 2. l. page 194. For patience to suffer all afflictions, 2. l. pa.
184. An effectual prayer in time of trouble, 2. l. p. 98. A sweet prayer of
any pressed down with troubles, 2. l. page 94. Other christian prayers made
out of the psalms of David, 2. l. pa. 215. 216. In martyrdom at the stake, 2.
lam. page 214. For constancy in faith to the death, 2. l. page 215. To
perform the will of God in all places, 2. l. page 80. A desire to rest in God
above all things, 2. l. p, 83 To obtain a clean mind, with speedy
deliverance, 2. l. page 85. To despise all wordlie things, etc, 2. l. page 88.
To long for the life everlasting, 2. l. page 91.
After trouble.
For thanksgiving for deliverance from enemies, 1. l. page 1. 44. A
thanksgiving for the victory gotten, 1. l p 3. 8. A thanksgiving for
fruitfulness of the womb, 1. l. page 648. A thanksgiving for Gods miraculous
deliverance, 1. l. page 36. Psalms of reioising after trouble, 2. l. pa 194.
218. 219. 337.
In time of prosperity.
In the 2 lamp. page 176.
Thankesgiuings.
For benefits received at Gods hands, 2. l. p. 175. For the goodness of God
toward us, ibid.
Songs.
Of Moses, 1. l. page 1. Of Debora and Barach, 1. l. page 3. Of Hannah, 1. l.
page 6. Of the women of Israel, 1. lamp. page 8. Of Solomon or Syon, 1. lam.
page 8. etc. Of Judith, 1. l. page 44. Of the blessed virgin Marie, 1 l. page
48.
Psalms.
In time of captivity and affliction, 1. l. page 48. At morning prayer, 2. l.
page 106. 107. 108. At evening prayer, 2. l. page 122. 125. 126. 127. Of
congratulation for victory and the kingdom obtained, 3. l. page 253. 158.
Himnes.
For the morning, 2. l. page 104. 114. For the evening, 2. l. page 135. Of the
state of Adams posterity, 2 l. page 129. Of our redemption, 2. l. page 106.
121. Of the passion of Christ, 2. l page 112. Of the day of judgment, 2 l.
page 131. To God the father, 2. l. page 120. To God the creator, 2. l. page
114. To God the son. 2 l. page 104. Against vices, 2. l. page 174 213. 221.
Sentenses.
Of scripture, written by our gracious Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth, in four
languages, 2. l. page 135. Of scripture, written by Q Katherin, 2. l. pa. 80.
Of the Lady Elizabeth Tirwhit, 2. lam. page 137.
Verses written.
In Latin by the I* Jane Dudley, 2. l. page 202. In english as I suppose by the
L. Aburgauenie, 2. l. page 215. In english by M. Dorcas Martin, 2. l page 221.
In Latin by Leonell Sharp of Cambridge, in the beginning of the book. In
Latin by master D. Marbek, to the christian reader, ibid.
Anthemes.
At morning prayer, 2. l. page 105. At evening prayer, 2. l. page 121.
Exhortations.
Written by the L. Jane Dudley, to read the testament, 2. l. page 100. Against
the manifold assaults of Satan, 2. l. page 195. To newnes of life, 2. l. page
247. To watch for the coming of Christ, 2 l. p 249. To Magistrates (in the
praise of our Soueraign) humbly and faithfully to discharge their office in
Gods fear and seruise written by the author, T. B. 3. lam. page 306.
Catechism.
Of the true belief, 2 l. page 132. Of the ten commandments, ibid. page 222.
Of christian religion, ibid, page 234. Of invocation, ibid. page 235. Of
obedience, ibid. page 237. Of confession, ibid. page 240. Of the sacraments,
ibid. page 240. 245.
Evening prayers.
A form thereof priuatlie, 2. l. page 122. Other, 2. l. page 118. 135. 136.
Going to bed, 2. l. page 134. 136. 241. Before ye lie down to sleep, 2. l.
page 230.
After prayer.
Say as, 2. l. page 116. 136. 206.
Blessings.
A good form thereof, 2. lam page 117. 137.
Episiles.
Dedicatorie to the Q. most excellent Majesty, etc, 1. lam. before page 1. To
the Christian reader, etc, 1. l. before. page 1. Of the right honorable now L.
Treasurer of England, 2. l before. p. 37.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page. Line. Faults. Correction. In the first Lamp. 1 3 made by, etc. made or
song by, etc. 2 12 as led as lead 24 10 four lamentations. five lamentations.
In the second Lamp. Title. 4 made by made as is supposed, by 49 33 he had don
we had don 52 7 then Christ. then Christ's 85 17 hearty wisdom heavenly
wisdom 88 26 thereof with them, thereof, that I be not overcome with them. 113
21 thank thee think on thee 129 13 health wealth 217 Last. ever for even for
In the third Lamp. 291 9 Except Lord the, etc. Incline Lord unto the, etc. 291
10 as thou did the prayer. as thou did unto the prayer 312 21 bountiful
beautiful 333 32 zea, thou Yea, thou 334 29 And their prince And me their
prince 337 18 that my deliverance this my deliverance.

THE Fourth LAMP of VIRGINITY.

Containing the most pure sacrifice of Evangelical devotion, or an exercise of
holy prayers, and Christian Meditations for sundry purposes, digested as it
were in a Dial of degrees, to direct all godly men and women day and night,
readily and plainly to the holy mount of heavenly contemplation, and true
sanctification of the Lords day our Sabbath, and so consequently of all other
principal feasts, days, hours, times, and seasons of the year, priuatlie
both at home, and also in the Church, at convenient times permitted: Compiled
out of several works of the best approved Authors in our age, to the glory
of God, and profit of his Church. By Tho. Bentley Gent.

Ephesi. 6, 18. Pray always with all manner prayer and supplication in the
spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance. Philip. 4, 6. Be nothing
careful, but in all things et your requests be showed unto God in prayers, and
supplication with giving of thanks. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham,
dwelling in Pater noster row.



The sacrifice of Evangelical devotion, containing Christian Prayers and
Meditations, to be used as specially upon the LORDS day: so generally at all
other times and seasons, to the comfort of the soul, and glory of God, and
first:
So soon as ye awake in the morning, meditate thus, and say:
AWake out of thy heavy sleep and slumber, O my soul; shake off the
deathfull sloth of this earthly trunk. Up, I say, O sinful soul, and
watch for the Lord, who is at hand prepared to judgment. Arise, get thee
before the Lord of grace and mercy, in lowliness and repentance, and cease
not to pray for the forgiveness of thy sins. Labor perseuerantlie in thy
duty, then shall thou find mercy and righteousness, and be made worthy to
enter in as a faithful virgin, and beautiful ghest, with that ioifull
bridegroom, to the feast of eternal mirth and delicacie, there to dwell in
ioies for ever,

Amen.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead: and Christ shall show light
unto thee. Ephesians. 5, verse, 14.
Being well wakened, before you arise, pray thus.
WIth eyes, heart, and hands lifted up, O blessed God, and glorious Trinity, I
most entirely thank thee for all thy bountiful benefits bestowed upon me,
and all mankind: especially for that it has pleased thee now in mercy to
awake my body, to inlighten mine eyes, to quicken my senses; and to revive and
renew me whole again, as it were from the death of sleep, and that by the
same spirit that raised Jesus from the dead. I thank thee that thou have not
covered me with a spirit of slumber, nor shut up mine eyes in obscure darkness,
to cause me to sleep a perpetual sleep, never to awake again, nor to rise
from the evils wherein I lay, as by my sins I have justly deserved.

O good Father, grant also, I beseech thee, that as thou have awaked my body
from sleep, and made mine eyes to prevent the morning light: so vouchsafe in
like mercy, thoroughlie to awaken, quicken, lighten, and deliver my soul from
all drowsinesse, and sleep of sin, security, and darkness of this world,
that from hence-foorth it never become empty, faint, dead, or irksome, with
longing after the vanities of this brittle life: but lively, quick, and
ready to serve and glorify thee, together with my body, with all good works
of true christianity.

Oh dear God, that is but sleep to thee, which is death to us; I heartily
beseech thee therefore after death to restore to life that, which now is awaked
out of sleep; and in the mean while to make my body such a minister of
godliness to my soul, in this present life, that at the last, when in the
bessed resurrection it shall be awaked up after thy likeness, out of the long
sleep of death, and called to appear before thee, and all the holy Angels,
it may ioifullie arise, and be partaker with the same of everlasting happiness
in the life to come, and ioifullie behold thy face among the righteous, that so
I may be fully satisfied both in body and soul, with thy glorious presence,
and ioies eternal, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust: for the deaw is as the deaw of
herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Esaie. 26, verse, 19. Awake (I
say) to live righteouslie, and sin not. 1, Cor. 15, verse, 34.
Meditation.
HEre call to mind the great mirth and blessedness of the everlasting
resurrection; and remember to muse upon that most cleere-light, bright morning,
and new clearness of our body, after the long darkness they have been in:
all then shall be full of joy.

Hearing the clock strike, pray thus with your self.
GRant unto me, O Lord God, I beseech thee, both an happy and healthful hour
of living, and a ioifull and blessed hour of dieng. And whatsoever I do, or
whatsoever I am, let the hour of thy sudden coming so run in my mind, and
keep me watching, that I may ever think, I hear this voice sounding in mine
ears: Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment, good Lord deliver us,

Amen.
Let your loins be girt, and your lamps burning; and be ye always watchful,
and ready prepared. For at an hour, when ye think not, will the Son of man
come to judge both the quick and the dead. Luke. 12, verse, 40.
Meditation.
CAll often to thy mind the hour of thy death, and be careful so to live every
hour in Gods favor, as though every hour were indeed to thee the last
hour to die in his faith.

Remember also, that as there is no hour or instant of time in all our life,
wherein we have not the use of Gods great benefits, so ought there to be no
moment, wherein we are not bound to have him in perpetual remembrance before
our eyes, to serve, love, and praise his name, and that to the uttermost of our
power, with all our heart, soul and strength.

So soon as ye see the day break, and light appear in the sky, pray.
O Day Star most bright: O light most glorious and true, from whence this light
of the day does spring: O light which lightest every man that comes into
this world: without whom, all is most horrible darkness. How is light given
to them that are in misery? and life to a wretch that has a heavy heart? I
looked for light, and behold, I have found it: I wished for day, and lo, the
stars of the twy-light do appear; and I see (I thank thee) the dawning of
the day. Darkness does no longer possess the night, nor the shadow of
death stain the day. For the black mantell is gone, and the thick clouds
are dispearsed, so that the light does begin to shine, and spread it self
abroad to our comfort.

O that the night of perturbations being ouerpassed, the morning light of
comfort and grace might likewise spring in our heart! O that darkness might so
be expelled, that light might be kindled, and the day of gladness and joy
luckily shine upon us: that being translated from darkness to light, from
perishing into safeguard, from death to life, from hell to heaven, we might
continually praise thee, who only have immortality, and dwell in the
light that none can attain unto,

Amen.
Or say thus.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has redeemed his people, and
delivered us out of the hands of all our enemies, and given us free remission
of all our sins, through the tender mercy of our God; whereby also the day
spring from an high, does now visit us, to give light to them that lay in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet into the way
of peace: that we might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life,

Amen.
Ye shall do well, if ye take heed unto the word, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the daie-star appear in your
hearts. 2. Peter. 1, verse, 19.
Meditation.
MUse a little how much the light and eye of the mind and soul is better than
of the body. And remember that we ought therefore much more to care for the
soul, that it may see well, than for the body. Think also that beasts have
bodily eyes as well as men: but men only have eyes of the mind, and that such
as are godly wise.

At the Sunrising, pray.
O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the true Sun of the world, evermore arising,
and never going down; which by thy most whole some appering and light, dooest
bring forth, preserve, nourish, and refresh all things, as well that are in
heaven, as also that are on earth: I beseech thee mercifully and favorably
to shine into our hearts, that the night and darkness of sins, and the mists
of errors, on every side driven away; thou brightlie shining within our
hearts, we may all our life space go without any stumbling or offense, and may
decently and seemly walk as in the day time, and clear sunshine, being
pure and clean from the works of darkness, and abounding in all good works,
which GOD has prepared for us to walk in,

Amen.
The Lords name be praised, from the rising of the sun, unto the going down
of the same. Psalm. 113, verse, 3. To you that fear my name, shall the sun of
righteousness arise and shine. Mala. 4, verse, 2.
Another.
O Mighty God, which have created the heavens, and all the beautiful
ornaments of the same, royally to set up thy glory, and to declare eueriwhere
all the wonderful works of thy hands, wrought through thy son Jesus Christ;
whom as the bright shining Sun of righteousness and understanding, thou
have assigned to have his residence in those heavens. Suffer I beseech thee,
that by the beams of his grace and benevolence, most lovingly shining and
spread abroad, he may cast his light into the world, and kindle in the hearts of
men a fervor of spirit. Let him come forth as a bridegroom from his chamber;
yea, let him appear courageous as a valiant champion, to run through his
course and journey, even till he have conducted us unto the highest heavens,
and holy city Jerusalem, where shall be no need either of sun or moon to
shine, and where we shall walk with those that are saved in the light of the
Lamb, and glory of God,

Amen.
They that love the Lord shall be as the sun, when he arises in his might.
Judge. 5, 31.
Meditation.
REmember thy maker, that knew thee before thou wast, and know, that the eyes
of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun (than the which
though nothing be more clear, yet shall it fail.) For God, which lives for
ever, beholds all the ways of men, and the bottomless depth; looking even
into men's hearts, be they in never so dark and secret corners. And therefore,
wheresoever thou art, and whatsoever thou dooest, fear thou the eyes of God,
more than the eyes of men.

Now also, while the light is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to see the
Sun, remember the days of darkness that follow, and are many. And look
that beetimes, before the Sun set, or that the light of the moon and stars
be darkened, thou fear GOD, and use the light, walking therein as a child of
light: knowing that he that makes the Sun to shine, and arise, both upon the
good and bad, will call thee to an account for thy works done both in darkness
and in light.

Putting off your nearest garment, pray thus.
MOst gracious and merciful Savior Jesus Christ, thou know how we be
borne, clothed, and clogged with the grievous and heavy burden of the first
woman Eve, who fell away unto fleshlinesse, through disobedience; vouchsafe
therefore, I beseech thee, to strip me out of the old corrupt Eve, which being
soked in sin, transformeth her self to all incombrances and diseases of the
mind, that they may lead us away from thee. Rid me also quite and clean of
that her tempter, the deceitful serpent, which turns us away from the
obedience of the Father, So be it.

I have put off my clothes, how shall I put them on? Cantic. 5, 3.
Beholding your nakedness, pray thus.
LOrd how wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked am I! I am naked, O Lord,
yea even stark naked, for that thou see me in my blood and corruption. Open
mine eyes also, I beseech thee, that I may more and more see my nakedness;
feel my misery, and confess my wretchedness; that thou of very pity and
compassion may cloth me with thine innocence, and holy virtues; and so
cover my filthiness, that mine enemies never behold the same to my reproach.
Finally, give me the grace of perfect charity, to do the works of faith
acceptable to thee, especially so to cloth the naked, and after my power to
relieve the needy: that when I shall depart hence naked and bare, as ever I
was borne, and shall carry away nothing of all my labors; yet in thy sight,
at the general judgment day, I may not appear naked of good works, or void
of the marriage garment of faith, and the gifts of grace, through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither.
Blessed be the name of the Lord. Job. 1, 21.
Putting on your nearest garment, pray thus:
PUt upon me, O Lord, the pure garment of the innocence and holiness of Christ
my Savior. O cover thou my nakedness and shame with the fine linen robe of
his righteousness and virtue; so shall not my filthiness be discovered unto
mine enemies, for them to gaze and laugh at; as cursed Cham did at the
nakedness of his father Noah. Yea, make thou my linen clothes as white as
snow, and shining like the light, that I may be of the number of those that
have been called from the beginning of the world, and shall be sanctified,
that have departed from the shadow of the world, and shall receive glorious
garments; even of those holy ones, I say, that have put off the mortal
clothing, and have put on the immortal, which have confessed thee, O God, and
thy Christ, and are already crowned with glory, and have received palms of
victory in their hands, triumphing over all their enemies, and policies of
this world, So be it.

Blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments clean and white; least
he walk naked, and men see his filthiness. Revel. 16, 15.
Or pray thus:
LOrd, send me a ioifull resurrection; and while I live, give me grace so to
overcome the temptations of flesh and blood, and Christianlie to confess thy
holy name, that in the last general day of thy judgment, I may be found
among the number of thine elect servants, which shall stand on thy right hand,
and being clad with the long white robes and shining raines of the
righteousness of thy Saints, who have hated even the garments spotted by the
flesh, and kept their consciences unpolluted with sin, and have made their
long garments white and clean in the blood of the Lamb Christ, I may together
with them enter into the holy city, and remain in the presence of the throne
of God, and serve thee ioifullie day and night in thy holy temple, for ever
and ever,

Amen.
At all times let thy garments be white, and thy works please God. Eccles. 9,
7.
Meditation.
Think now how the children of GOD, while they are burdened in this earthly
tabernacle, sigh, desiring to be cleathed, that mortality might be swallowed
up of life. For if they be found clothed, and not naked, mortality shall be
swallowed up of immortality, and they shall walk with GOD, in white araie.

Being about to arise, and sitting upright in your bed, pray.
O LORD Jesus Christ, which did vouchsafe to die for our sins, and did
rise again for our justification: have mercy upon me, and by that thy
glorious resurrection, I beseech thee, raise me up out of the bed of vices, and
sepulcher of all my sins, wherein I have long lien, to newness of life. For
except I be raised up by thee, I shall lie still for ever in darkness, shame,
and misery. O therefore put forth thine hand, and mercifully raise up
again, not only my body, but my mind and heart also, to the true knowledge
and love of thee: that my conversation may be in heaven, where thou art. And
give me daily part in the first resurrection, to the intent that I may receive
some part in the latter resurrection, and be in the number of those thy
faithful ones, over whom the second death shall have no power, but are
received into life everlasting.

Arise and depart, for this is not your rest. Mich. 2, verse 20. I will arise
now out of my bed, to open to my beloved that, knocks; and I will go about
the city by the streets, and by the open places, and will seek him whom my
soul loves. Cantic. 3, verses 1, 5.
Meditation.
COnsider how foul the fall of Adam and Eve was, by reason of their sin and
transgression: and so of every one of us by them, from the high, excellent,
and honorable estate of Gods grace, into shame and misery. Again, think
upon the inestimable benefits of Christ Jesus, by whose helping hand we daily
arise again from our natural and original declining and fallings: and be
thankful unto him therefore.

In your arising, as you step out of your bed, pray:
I Arise, and enter into this day, to do all things in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, who has made me, redeemed
me, sanctified me, and preserved me. He rule me, keep, bless, and lead me
into all good works; and so direct and confirm me therein, that after ths
frail life ended, I may obtain a ioifull resurrection, with bliss perpetual,

Amen.
I laid me down and slept, and rose again: for the Lord sustained me. Psalm.
3, verse, 5.
If you be risen with Christ, think upon those things that be above. Col. 3,
verse, 1.
Being risen, bless and pray thus:
GOd be merciful unto me, and bless me this day and ever; and show me the
light of his countenance, and be merciful unto me; that I may know his way
upon earth, and his saving health among all nations. God, even our own God
give me his continual grace, peace, mercy, and blessing.

And I beseech thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, which being revived from death to
life, broughtest again to mortal men, that most desired and greatly longed
for day which the Lord made. Grant that I, being now raised up from the death
of sins, to the life of grace, may walk in all Christian obedience: and at
the last day of the resurrection of all flesh, when thou shall be made
manifest in our life, I also may then be openly known, and appear before thee
in glory; and ioifullie triumph over sin, death and hell; saying: O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be unto GOD, which
has raised me from the death of sleep, and given me victory over all mine
enemies, through our Lord Jesus Christ, So be it.

Blessed, holy, and happy for ever is he, that has part in the first
resurrection: for on such the second death has no power. Revel. 20, verse 6.
The ungodly shall not be able to stand in judgment, neither the sinners in the
congregation of the righteous. Psalm. 1, verse 6.
In apparelling your self, pray:
Cloth me, O Christ, with thine own self, that I may be so far from
making provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof; that I may clean
put off all my carnal desires, and crucify the kingdom of the flesh in me.
Be thou unto me a garment to keep me warm, and to defend me from the cold of
this world. If thou be absent, dear Lord, all things will be unto me
forthwith cold, weak, and dead: but if thou be with me, all things will be
warm, lively, fresh, and cheerful. Grant therefore, that as I compass this
my body with this garment, so thou would cloth me wholly; but especially
my soul with thine own self, So be it.

Put upon you as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, meekness, love, peace.
Col. 3, verse, 12. Let not him that puts on his harness, boast himself, as
he that puts it off. 1, Kings 20, verse, 11.
Meditation.
CAll to mind a little how we are incorporate into Christ, and how he does
cloth us, govern, and nourish us; and under his wings, protection, and
providence preserves us.

A consideration of our inward corruption, by the outward easement of the body.
OH wretch that I am, what am I but a rotten carcass, woorms meat, a stinking
coffin, and food for fire? Again, what am I, O Lord? Even a dark dongeon,
wretched, earth, a child of wrath, a vessel meet for dishonor; begotten in
uncleanness, living in misery, and dieng in distress. Out upon me vile
wreth! What am I? Woe is me, Lord. O Lord spare me. Alas, my maker; what shall
become of me? I am a sack of doong, a coffin of rottenness, full of
lothsomnesse and stinch; blind, poor, naked, subject to many exceeding
necessities, woting neither when I came into the world, nor when I shall go
out, mortal and miserable; whose days pass and glanse swiftly away, as a
shadow, or bubble of water, now flourishing, and by and by withering; now
alive, now dead. Oh spare me a little, Lord; for my days are nothing: and be
merciful unto a wretch, that is not ashamed to acknowledge her vileness
before thee.

The glory of mortal man is but doong, and worms meat. 1. Match. 2. verse
62.
Meditation.
COnsider the miserable state of the body, by the excrements that issue out of
the eyes, nose, mouth, ears, hands, arme-pits, fundament, feet, and other
parts thereof: and think that no Bocardo, no little ease, no dungeon, no
prison, no sink, no pit is so irksome, loathsome, and evil a prison for the
body, as the body is for and of the soul; by reason of sin and filthy
affections that have their dwelling therein. Think also what madness it is,
thus to pamper our bodies with delicate meats, to obeie the lusts thereof,
provoking to evil: and desire continually, with S. Paul, the dissolution
thereof, and to be out of this stinking prison.

Washing your hands, pray thus:
WAsh my soul, O God, with the water of thy divine grace, from all the filth
and pollusion of sin, wherewith it is altogether defiled in thy sight.
Sprinkle it, Lord, with the hyssope of true repentance, and sorrowful
contrition; that being cleansed in the most clear fountain of thy grace, I may
be whiter than snow; and also be able ever hereafter to serve thee, in
holiness and pureness of living, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Wash your hands ye sinners, and cleanse your hearts ye wavering minded.
Isaias, 4, verse 8.
I will wash my hands in innocence, o Lord, and so will I go to thine altar.
Psalm. 26, verse, 6.
Or else pray thus.
Have mercy upon me, O God, and pardon the wicked deeds which my hands have
committed. Wash my soul with the holy fountain or well, which I believe did
flow from thy heart, and naked side; and sanctify and purify not only my
hands and face from filth; but my heart, soul, and conscience also, from all
contagion of sin and iniquity, that I may be pure both in body and soul,
and serve thee in holiness and purity, all the days of my life, So be it.

Though I wash my self with snow water, and purge my hands most clean; yet
shall thou plunge me in the pit, and mine own cloths shall make me filthy.
Job. 9, verse, 30.
Meditations.
Think now of thy vow and promise made to God at thy baptism, to forsake
Satan, to renounce the world, and to mortify the flesh; and how often since
thou have broken it, and be heartily sorry therefore. Think also upon the
unspeakable love and mercy of Christ our Savior, who has washed us from our
sins in his own precious blood, and purged our conscience from dead works, to
the end we should serve him in holiness and innocence of life. And consider,
that it shall little avail thee to have washed thy self, if thou touch filth
again; that is, if thou confess thy faults, and after commit them again, and
so which the dog return to the vomit, and with the washed sow to the wallowing
in the mire again. When you be made ready, first before all things, look
that either by your self, or with your family, with all humbleness of mind
you kneel down by your bedside, in your parlour, or other sweet, clean, and
convenient place; and there taking both time and leisure to serve the Lord,
lift up your heart, hands, and eyes, and pray unto his divine Majesty, saying
in manner and form following.



A premeditation, or first form of prayer to be used before prayer.
O Merciful Lord, and loving father, without whose aid and motion I am not
able to stir one member toward heavenly service, the burden of this slow and
sinful flesh does so ouercharge my weak soul: according unto thy fatherly
pity look upon me, O God; prepare my heart to prayer, and quicken my dull
spirit with thy grace, to rise out of this miserable puddle, and to come before
thy presence in humble repentance, craving thy mercy for my miserable sins
and wickedness: and being released in the blood and righteousness of Jesus
Christ, I may ioifullie serve, honor, and praise thine eternal Majesty,
through thy dear son, my merciful Lord and redeemer; to whom, with thee,
and the holy Ghost, be all glory and thanks for ever,

Amen.
Another meditation before prayer.
Unto thee, O heavenly father, do I here prostrate on my knees, lift up my
heart, my hands, mine eyes, and prayers; beseeching thy Majesty, and saying:

Help me, O my Lord, and God, in this my good purpose, and holy worshipping
or serving of thee: and grant unto me to make a perfect entrance and beginning
this present day, that I may do all things in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. For that which I have hitherto done, is nothing
at all.

The Confession and Prayer.
O Father of heaven; O son of God, redeemer of the world; O holy Ghost,
three persons and one God; have mercy upon me most wretched caitife, and
miserable sinner. I have offended both heaven and earth, more than my tongue
can express; my sins are above all men's, both in number and greatness, which
I have committed. Whither then may I go? And whither should I flee? To heaven I
may be ashamed to lift up my face; and in earth I find no place of refuge or
succor. To thee therefore, O Lord, do I run; to thee do I humble my self,
saying: O Lord my God, my sins be great and innumerable: but yet have mercy
upon me, for thy great mercy. The great mystery that God became man, was not
wrought for little or few offenses. Thou did not give thy son O heavenly
father unto death for small sins only, but for all the greatest sins in
the world: so that the sinner return unto thee with his whole heart, as I do
here at this present. Wherefore have mercy on me, O God, whose property is
alwaie to have mercy: wherefore have mercy on me, O Lord, for thy great
mercy. I crave nothing, O Lord, for mine own merits, but for thy name sake,
that it may be hallowed thereby, and for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake;
and now therefore, Our father of heaven, hallowed be thy name, etc.

Another Confession and prayer.
OH almighty everlasting God, and most gracious dear loving father, I beseech
thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, thy most dear and only son, to have mercy,
pity, and compassion upon me, most vile, wretched, and miserable sinner: whose
innumerable offenses, both old and new, be most horrible, heinous, and great;
where through I have justly deserved thy grievous wrath, and everlasting
damnation. But now, good Lord, here I do appeal to thy great mercy only,
which far surmounteth all thy works; as thou have promised the same in thy
holy and infallible word, where thou have said, yea and sworn, as truly as
thou live, that thou will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should convert and live. Ah dear Lord, I confess that I am a great and
grievous sinner, and yet now by thy grace, and good working of thy holy spirit
something turned unto thee. Oh let me live, and not die the everlasting death
of the soul, which I so deeply have deserved; but make me a vessel of thy
great mercy, that I may live and praise thy name among thy chosen children for
ever. Oh let not my horrible sins separate me from the sweet sight of thy
Majesty, but let thy great power and mercy be magnified in me, as it is in
David, in Peter, in Magdalen, and in the notable Thief which was crucified
with Christ thy dear son, in whose most precious death and bloud-shedding
only, O Lord, I put my whole trust and confidence. For he only has taken
away the sins of the world: he came not to condemn the world, but to save
it, that none that truly believe in him should perish, but have life
everlasting. He says, he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

Oh gracious God, give me true, earnest, hearty, and unfeigned repentance, that
I may, from the very bottom of my heart, continually lament my manifold
sins and wickedness, my great ingratitude and unthankfulness toward thee,
for all thy merciful benefits so abundantly powered upon me, through Jesus
Christ: which would vouchsafe, he being thine own dear darling, in whom
was and is all thy whole pleasure and delight, to give him for me to the very
death of the Cross: yea and that when I was thine utter enemy, of mercy
inestimable, and love incomprehensible. Who ever saw such a thing? God became
man, and was crucified for me, that by his death I might live. Alas that ever I
should become so wicked a wretch, and unkind a creature, to displease so
loving, kind, and merciful a God and father. Oh forgive me, forgive me, for
thy great mercy sake, for thy truth and promise sake; and I will never
trespass again against thy divine Majesty any more; but will gladly serve
thee in true holiness and righteousness, all the days of my life, by the
grace and assistance of thy good and holy spirit, the which I beseech thee to
give me also, that he may govern me, and guide my heart, in thy true faith,
fear, and love: that in all my deeds, words, and thoughts, I may glorify thy
holy name, which live, and reignest, with the son, and the holy Ghost,
three persons and one God, to whom be all honor, glory, praise, thanks,
power, rule and dominion, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another confession of sins, proper for the Sabbath day.
OH my most merciful father, the father of mercies, and God of all consolation
and comfort, my God, my father; I most wretched sinner confess and acknowledge
my self unfeignedly, with heart, mind and mouth, now before thee, to have most
greenoushe offended thy high Majesty and goodness. I recognize and
acknowledge my self to be full of sin, full of unfaithfulness, and a
servant unprofitable. For all thy holy commandments have I transgressed and
broken.

First, I have not set all my whole belief, confidence, trust, and hope in
thee. I have not loved and honored thee with all my heart, with all my soul,
mind, and powers of my soul.

Secondly, I have divided thine honor and worship from thee, and given it to
thy creatures, and dead things imagined of mine own fond fantasy, I mean in
the adoring and worshipping of images.

Thirdly, I have abused thy most holy name, by false and deceitful swearing,
to the hinderance of my neighbor, and idlelie and vainlie have I used thy
holy name. I have not said, nor done, neither thought all things to thy glory.

Fourthlie, in the Saboth day, I have not given my self to hearing, reading,
and learning the holy Scriptures; neither have I given meat to the hungry,
drink to the thirsty, lodged the harbourlesse, clothed the naked, visited the
sick, comforted nor relieved the poor, and men in prison. For I have not
expended of how great weight these words of thy son my Savior Christ are;
neither believed him, saying: In as much as ye have done these things unto one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Matthew. 25.

But I have bestowed and spent my gold and silver after my lewd lust and
concupiscence, in excess of meat and drink, in gorgeous apparel of my body,
of my children, servants, and house, etc. where I should not have bestowed it
(or else not so largely, delicatelie, nicelie, and excessiuelie have bestowed
it,) as I have; not regarding in the mean time, to suffer the dear beloved
brethren of Jesus Christ to go naked, and to perish for cold and hunger.

I have, I say, not ceased from mine own sinful will and lusts, praieng at
all times, thy will, and not mine, to be fulfilled.

Furthermore, I have not honored my father and mother; I have not so much set
by them, esteemed them, and had them in such reverence, as thou command me;
nor obeyed them, neither comforted, releened, or helped them. I have slain, I
have broken wedlock, I have stolen, I have sold by false weights and measures,
and borne false witness: finally, I have coueted my neighbors house, I have
desired his wife, his servant, his cattle, and his other goods unlawfully.

Thus most greeuouslie have I sinned infinite ways, O Lord, omitting and
leaving thy commandments, Oh Father, to fulfill the desire of my flesh, the
world, and the devil. Wherefore I cry thee mercy, my God, most merciful
father; and most humbly I desire and beseech thee, for the love which thou
bear to thy deer son, mine only, whole, and entire Savior Jesus Christ,
to have mercy on me, and to forgive me most miserable sinner, even in his
blood, and for his precious death sake. For when I went about to seek thee, to
trust unto thee, or to do any thing to thy glory; yet would not this lust
and concupiscence, that contagious original poison, and fleshly dregs
drawn of our father Adam, suffer me perfectly to do that I would have done.
Through this natural concupiscence, I strive and fight daily against the
holy Ghost in me, which unlawful lust and desire I knowledge to be a grievous
sin against thy highness, if thou should judge me straightly after thy Law,
without the which concupiscence I cannot be.

Wherefore I being a wretched, yea a most abominable wretched sinner in my
self, cleerelie destitute of all righteousness, of all godliness, of all
holiness, and all deseruings, am come now by faith before thee, unto Christ
his mercy seat and righteousness, unto his goodness, deseruings, and
satisfactions; desiring thee, O most merciful father, for his deaths sake,
that his righteousness, his wisdom, his holiness, his goodness, his merits
and satisfactions may be mine, and serve for my forgiveness and salvation. For
like as thou gave me him to die for my sins; even so believe I, that thou
have given me with him all his to be mine, and to serve me for my salvation.
Wherefore, glory, honor, worship, empire, and rule be to thee, oh father, with
the son and the holy ghost for ever world without end, So be it.

Another Confession of sins for Sundaies, to be used in the forenoone or
afternoon.
O Most merciful Lord God, my tender and dear father, vouchsafe, I heartily
beseech thee, to look down with thy fatherly eyes of pity upon me, most
vile and wretched sinner, which lie here prostrate in heart before the feet
of thy bottomless mercy. For I have sinned against the throne of thy glory,
and before thee, O most dear Father, insomuch that I am not worthy to be
called thy daughter. Yet nevertheless, forasmuch as thou art the God and
Father of all mercy, and comfort; and again, desire not the death of a
sinner: but like a true Samaritan take thought for my silly wounded soul;
make me, I pray thee, by infunding of thy precious oil of comfort into my
wounds, ioifullie to run with the lost son into the lap of thine everlasting
pity. For lo, thou art my hope and trust, in whom I only repose my self,
having in thee full confidence and faith. And so I say, with a very faithful
heart, trusting in thy mercy: I believe in thee, O God the Father; in thee, O
God the Son; and in thee, O God the holy Ghost; three persons, and one true
and very God; besides whom I acknowledge none other God in heaven above, nor
in earth beneath.

Yea, and I poor sinner do accuse my self unto thee, dear Father, that I
have sore and greeuouslie offended thine almighty goodness, and divine
Majesty, in committing of mine exceeding, grievous, and manifold sins and
wickedness. For I have not kept the least of thy most blessed commandments,
like as thy righteousness may require and demand the same of me.

I have, I say, not honored thee like my God, nor dreaded thee like my Lord,
loved thee like my Father; trusted in thee like my Savior and Creator. Thy
holy and dreadful name, unto which all honor and glory belongs, have I
used in vain. I have not sanctified the Saboth and holy days with works
which be acceptable unto thee, nor instructed my neighbor in virtue
accordingly. I have not honored my father and mother, nor been obedient unto
them, through whom, as by an instrument, thou have wrought my coming into this
world. The high powers and rulers, which take their authority of thee, I have
not been willingly obedient unto. I have not kept my heart pure and clean
from manslaughter: yea, had not thy mercy and grace defended me the better, I
should have committed the very deed also. I likewise am not pure from theft,
nor from adultery, nor from false-witnesse-bearing: but have in my heart and
mind wished and desired my neighbors goods and things. I have followed the
great Prince of the world Satan, which has been a lier from the beginning, in
concupiscence of the flesh, in pride of living, in lieng, in deceitfulness, in
lechery, in hatred and envy, in backbiting, in despair, and also in
mis-beleefe. My five wits also have I fowlie mis-vsed and spent, in hearing,
seeing, smelling, tasting, and also feeling, which thou have given me to use to
thy honor and glory, and also the edification and profit of my neighbor.

But in what manner soever I have offended and sinned against thine eternal
Majesty; (for no man knows thoroughly his sins, as the Prophet witnesses)
whether it has been by day, or else by night, yea even from my childhood
unto this day, were it in works, words, deeds, or thoughts; secretly or
openly, O my merciful God; I am sorry for it, even from the bottom of my
heart: yea, my soul mourns for sorrow, most merciful Father, that I am not
a thousand times sorier than I am. Howbeit, in token of great repentance,
though all hearts be known well enough to thee, I do knock and strike my
breast, and say in bitterness of heart and soul: Lord God Father have mercy,
Lord God Son have mercy, Lord God holy Ghost have mercy. Spare me of thine
infinite goodness and mercy, good Lord, now and all the days of my life
hereafter; and let me have part of thine abundant grace, so as I may change my
sinful life, and put out of me the old man, with all his concupiscences, and
also that I may die unto the world, and that the world may be a cross unto
me, and so go forth in a new life.

Strengthen me, O Lord, in a true humble heart, in perfect love, hope, and trust
in thee. Give my soul grace to desire thee only, in thee only to rejoice and
repose my self, and that I may utterly renounce and forsake the vain
affiance of this world: so that thou may find me ready with the good
servant, and wise virgins, in the midnight of death, which shall suddenly
steal upon me like a thief, ere I be aware. Be thou unto me at that time of
need, O Lord, a tower of strength, a place of refuge, and a defensible God,
namely, against the face of the feend, who like a roaring Lion shall be then
most ready to devour me, and against desperation, which then shall be busy
to grieve me. Let then thy comfort clean fast unto me; thy mercy keep me,
and thy grace guide me. Fetch then again, Lord God Father, that which thy
puissant might has shapen. Fetch then again, Lord God Son, that which thou
have so wisely governed, and bought with thy precious blood. Take then again,
Lord God holy Ghost, that which thou have kept and preserved so lovingly, in
this region of sin, and vale of misery. Three persons, and one true and also
very God, to whom be all laud and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another confession of sins, and prayer for mercy and grace, commonly
called, Conditor coeli.
OH maker of heaven and earth, King of kings, and Lord of lords; which of
nothing did make me to thine image and likeness, and did redeem me with
thy precious blood, whom I a sinner am not worthy to name, to think on,
neither to call upon: I most humbly desire thee, and meekelie pray thee, that
gently thou behold me thy wicked servant, and have mercy upon me, which had
mercy of the woman of Canaan, and Marie Magdalen; which did forgive the
Publican, and the thief hanging on the Cross. Unto thee I confess my sins,
most holy Father, which if I would, I cannot hide from thee. Have mercy on
me, O Christ; for I am a wretch, and have sore offended thee in idolatry, in
superstition, in blasphemy, in profaning of thy Saboths, in disobedience to
my governors, in pride, in covetousness, in gluttony, in lechery, in vain
glory, in hatred, in envy, in murder, in adultery, in theft, in lieng, in
backbiting, and false-witnesse-bearing, in sporting, in dalliance, in dissolute
and wanton laughing, in idle words, in unclean thoughts, in hearing, in
tasting, in touching, in thinking, in sleeping, in working; and finally, in
all ways, in which I a frail woman, and most wretched sinner might sin: My
default, my most grievous default.

Therefore I most humbly pray and beseech thy gentleness, which for my help
did descend from heaven, which did hold up David, that he should not fall
into sin, have mercy upon me, O Christ, which did forgive Peter thine
Apostle, that did forswear and forsake thee. Thou art my Creator and helper,
my maker and redeemer, my governor, my Father, my Lord and God, my King and my
spouse. Thou art my hope, my trust, my strength, my defense, my redemption, my
sanctification, my life, my health and resurrection. Thou art my steadfastness,
my refuge and succor, my light and only hope. I therefore most heartily and
humbly desire thee to help me, defend me, and make me strong, comfort me,
make me steadfast; make me merry, give me light, and visit me; revive me
again, which am dead: for I am thy making, and thy work.

Oh Lord despise me not; I am thy servant, thy bondwoman, although evil,
although most unworthy, and a detestable sinner. But whatsoever I am, whether
I be good or bad, I am always thine. Therefore to whom shall I flee, except I
flee unto thee? If thou cast me off, who shall or will receive me? If thou
despise me, and turn thy face from me, who shall look upon me? Recognize and
knowledge me, O Lord, to be thine; although unworthy coming to thee, although
I be vile and unclean. For if I be vile and unclean, as I confess my self
in deed to be, thou can make me clean. If I be sick, thou can heal me.
If I be dead and buried, thou can revive me: for thy mercy is much more than
mine iniquity. Thou can forgive me more than I can offend. Therefore, O
Lord, do not consider, nor have respect to the number of my sins; but
according to the greatness of thy mercy forgive me, and have mercy on me
most wretched sinner. Say unto my soul, I am thy health; which saiedst, I
will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he live, and be converted, and
turn to thee. O Lord be not angry with me, I beseech thee; but for thy great
mercy sake forgive and pardon me all my misdeeds, and bring me to the bliss
that never shall cease,

Amen.
Another form of Confession and prayer to be used of the Master and Mistress
with their families in private houses every morning.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father; we do not present our selves here
before thy Majesty, trusting in our own merits or worthiness, but in thy
manifold mercies; which have promised to hear our prayers, and grant our
requests, which we shall make to thee, in the name of thy beloved Son Jesus
Christ our Lord: who has also commanded us to assemble our selves together in
his name, with full assurance, that he will not only be amongst us; but also
be our mediator and advocate toward thy Majesty, that we may obtain all
things, which shall seem expedient to thy blessed will for our necessities.
Therefore we beseech thee, most merciful father, to turn thy loving
countenance toward us; and impute not unto us our manifold sins and
offenses, whereby we justly deserve thy wrath and sharp punishment: but
rather receive us to thy mercy, for Jesus Christ's sake; accepting his death
and passion; as a just recompense for all our offenses, in whom only thou art
pleased, and through whom thou can not be offended with us. And seeing of
thy great mercies we have quietly passed this night; grant O heavenly father,
that we may bestow this day wholly in thy service; so that all our thoughts,
words and deeds may redound to the glory of thy name, and good example to all
men; who seeing our good works, may glorify thee our heavenly father. And
forasmuch as of thy mere favor and love, thou have not only created us to
thine own similitude and likeness; but also have chosen us to be heirs with
thy dear son Jesus Christ, of that immortal kingdom, which thou preparedst
for us, before the beginning of the world; we beseech thee to increase our
faith and knowledge, and to lighten our hearts with thy holy spirit, that we
may in the mean time live in all godly conversation, and integrity of life;
knowing that idolaters, adulterers, covetous men, contentious persons,
drunkards, gluttons, and such like, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

And because thou have commanded us to pray one for another, we do not only
make request, O Lord, for our selves, and them that thou have already called
to the true understanding of thy heavenly will: but for all people and nations
of the world, who as they know by thy wonderful works, that thou art God over
all; so they may be instructed by thy holy spirit, to believe in thee their
only Savior and Redeemer. But forasmuch as they can not believe, except they
hear; nor cannot hear, but by preaching; and none can preach, except they be
sent: therefore, O Lord, raise up faithful distributers of thy mysteries, who
setting apart all worldly respects, may both in their life and doctrine only
seek thy glory. Contrariwise, confound Satan, Antichrist, with all
hirelings, whom thou have already cast off into a reprobate sense, that they
may not by sects, schisms, heresies, and errors, disquiet thy little flock.
And because, O Lord, we be fallen into the latter days, and dangerous times,
wherein ignorance has gotten the upper hand; and Satan by his ministers seek
by all means to quench the light of thy Gospel; we beseech thee to maintain
thy cause against those ravening Woolues, and strengthen all thy servants, whom
they keep in prison and bondage. Let not thy long-suffering be an occasion,
either to increase their tyranny, or to discourage thy children; neither yet
let our sins and wickedness be an hinderance to thy mercies: but with
speed, O Lord, consider these great miseries. For thy people Israel many
times, by their sins, provoked thine anger; and thou punishedst them by thy
just judgment: yet, though their sins were never so grievous, if they once
returned from their iniquity, thou receiuedst them to mercy. We therefore,
most wretched sinners, bewail our manifold siunes, and earnestly repent us
for our former wickedness, and ungodly behavior toward thee. And whereas we
cannot of our selves purchase thy pardon, yet we humbly beseech thee, for
Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercy upon us, and receive us again to thy
favor. Grant us, dear father, these our requests, and all other things
necessary for us, and thy whole Church, our Queen and Realm, according to
thy promise in Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose name we beseech thee, as he has
taught us, saying: Our Father, etc.

Almighty and everlasting God, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to grant us
perfect continuance in thy lively faith, augmenting and increasing the same in
us daily, until we grow to the full measure of our perfection in Christ,
whereof we make our confession, saying: I believe in God the Father almighty,
etc.

Almighty God, which have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in
thy Sons name, we beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us,
that have now made our prayers and supplications unto thee: and grant that
those things, which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may
effectually be obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting
forth of thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us; the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us, and
grant us his peace, Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost, be with us, and remain with us for ever, So be it.

A Morning prayer for Sundaie.
AFter due examination of my former life, with an humble and contrite heart,
with a sorrowful and repentant spirit, I sue unto thee, most merciful father;
beseeching thee of mercy and forgiveness of mine offenses, which in this
night, or at any time heretofore, I have committed against thy godly will
and pleasure, by any manner of uncleanness of soul or body, that I have
fallen into by the illusion of the devil; or else by frailty of mine own
flesh, trespassing against thy godly Majesty, either in thought, consent,
delectation, word or deed. And I most heartily thank thee for the sweet
sleep, and comfortable rest which thou have given me this night: and that to
the innumerable benefits hitherto powered upon my soul and body, thou have
vouchsafed to preserve me this night past, from sudden death, and all other
evil and mischief, spiritual and corporal, that any person, man or woman,
has been stricken withal, by thy permission and sufferance; knowing of a
surety, that the selfsame, or such like, had worthily light on my head
also, had not thou defended and preserved me, and given me time to amend my
life, so that I might live henceforth, not as I will, but as thou will.

And now, seeing thou, O almighty God, and most merciful father, in the
tables of the commandments delivered to the hands of thy servant Moses, upon
the mount Sina, among other precepts, did give charge unto thy chosen
children of Israel, that in six days they should do all such works and
aaffaires, as they had to do, and rest from labor the seventh day: grant, I
beseech thee blessed father, that siuce I have by thy mercy, happily passed
over this whole week, under thy gracious protection, I may not only rest
this day from my daily travels, but that I may abstain also from the works
of sin and iniquity, and sanctify this day wholly unto thee, with prayers
and thanksgiving, abounding in all works of love and charity, as thou have
commanded in thy holy word, that I may be found pure, without spot or blemish,
at that day, when thy Son Jesus Christ shall come to judge the world with
righteousness and equity.

And forasmuch as thou have ordained this day, among the rest, wherein we
should meet all together with brotherly love and affection, to yield thee
praises for the innnumerable benefits we have received at thy hand; to
acknowledge thy fatherly love and pity toward us, from time to time; and to
give thee thanks in general for all and universal thy benefits hitherto
bestowed upon us: I beseech thee to grant me thy holy spirit, that I may be
the more zealouslie inflamed to serve thee, in true holiness and integrity of
life: and by the operation of that spirit, I may kill all carnal lusts,
unlawful pleasures, concupiscence, and all other spots of uncleanness;
whereby I may be made thy child by adoption and grace; and my body the temple
of the holy Ghost, being thoroughly purged and purified from the dregs of
iniquity and abomination. Give me grace, most merciful Father, to spend this
day to thy pleasure, in all good works of the spirit; and charity, proceeding
from an undefiled faith in Christ Jesus; that I fall not into any kind of
danger: but that all my doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another Morning prayer on the Lords day.
O Almighty and merciful God, eternal Father; Son, and holy Ghost; three
in persons, one in substance, God in very deed, and from everlasting.

I extol thy sacred Majesty; I praise thine unspeakable mercy, thy divine
truth I exceedingly commend; for that of thy fatherly and wonderful
goodness thou have protected me this night, under the shadow of thy wings.
Yea, thou also have made me quietly to take my rest, notwithstanding the
dangerous snares of my deadly enemy the devil.

Thou art the God, which exaltest us from the gates of the shadow of death;
and from the power of darkness thou deliuerest us.

Therefore I will acknowledge thee for thy goodness, and for the wonderful
things, which thou dooest among the sons of men.

I will magnify thee in the great congregation, and among much people will I
praise thee.

My heart is ready, O my God, my heart is ready. I will praise thee, O Lord,
among the people, and sing to thee among the nations. For thy mercy is above
the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.

I will not hide thy mercy and truth in the great congregation; because it is
a good thing to praise the Lord, and to sing to thee, O thou most high: to
declare thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy truth in the night.

Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me praise his holy name.

Which forgiueth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine infirmities.

Which redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and
compassion.

Which satisfies thy longing with good things, and protecteth thee from thy
youth.

Which also has kept all my bones this night, not one of them is broken.

To the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be honor
and glory for ever and ever, Amen.

Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

O God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh lusts
after thee in a barren and dry land, where no water is, to see thy strength
and glory.

O eternal God, which have brought me to the beginning of this day, defend me
with thy mighty power, that this day I fall into no sin, nor run into any
kind of danger: but let all my cogitations, words, and works tend to the
setting forth of thy righteousness.

Lighten my mind this morning with the shining and clearness of thy wisdom;
that in my heart, that true daie-star may rise and shine, as it were a candle in
a dark place.

Give me the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of thee; and
lighten the eyes of mine understanding, that I may know what my hope is, how
great the glory of mine inheritance, and what the excellent greatness of thy
power toward me is.

Fill me with thy mercy in this morning, so shall I be glad and rejoice all my
life long.

Merciful God, endue me with thine holy spirit, that I may neither think,
speak, or do any thing this day, but that which may please thee, and tend
to the advancement of thy glory, and health of my soul.

Govern thou mine understanding and will, and so direct all the cogitations of
my heart, that I may wholly be thine, and savor of nothing besides thee my God
and redeemer.

Teach me the way of thy commandments, O Lord; and I will keep it unto the
end.

Give me understanding to keep thy laws, and to love thee, my Lord and God,
with all my heart, with all my soul, and with all my strength: and let all thy
testimonies be my delight, and counselors.

Comfort the soul of thy servant; for unto thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my
soul. For thou, Lord, art good and gentle, and of great kindness to as many
as call upon thee.

Behold, O God, early now this morning I do offer my self a morning
sacrifice unto thee, a troubled spirit; a broken, and an humble heart, O Lord,
thou will not despise.

Make me fit, that I may likewise daily offer up my body a living sacrifice,
holy and acceptable unto thee, which is a reasonable service, and grateful
obedience.

Both now and every day, Lord, I commend my soul and body into thy hands;
thou have redeemed me, O God of truth.

Compass me about with the watch of thine Angels, which are ministering spirits
sent out for their defense, which are the children of salvation; that they may
pitch their tents about me, and encounter with Satan the dragon, to defend me
from evil.

Give thine holy Angels charge of me, that they protect me in all my ways,
least happily I hurt my feet against a stone: so will I praise thee, and
magnify thy name, which live and reignest a true and eternal God, worlds
without end,

Amen.
Another prayer very effectual to be used upon the Lords Sundaie, or other
holy or festival days.
Seeing that the very solemn times and festival holidaies do undoubtedly
greatly renew the reioicing of the godly: yea, and that more is, with a
certain heap, as a man would say, do marvelously augment and increase
their spiritual joy in thee O most holy Lord God of Saboth, and make it
greater than it was. For they are kept to continue, and stir us up unto the
remembrance and recounting of thy wonderful acts, things, and miracles
wrought and done by thine almighty Majesty, for the conservation, and
salvation of mankind: and by that occasion, do exceedingly cheer up and fill
the hearts of the godly with spiritual ioies in thee.

Moreover, because good exercises are to be renewed often; but especially upon
the Sundaie and holy days, as though at that time we were departing out of
this life, and going to the everlasting holy days of spiritual rest, and
continual joy; and therefore ought we at that time especially to prepare our
selves with carefulnes; and to show our selves more godly, and to do thy
commandments more straightly, as they yt shall receive reward of our travels
at thy hand ere it be long.

Behold, I thy silly creature, desirous to keep the godly rest of the new
Saboth, better than hitherto I have done, (for which, as for all other my
defaults I cry thee heartily mercy) do now therefore most humbly beseech
thee, O holy Father, to power plentiouslie upon me thy blessed spirit; through
whose divine power, virtue and grace, I may this day be thoroughly sanctified,
cleansed, dedicated, and prepared both bodily and ghostly, perfectly to serve
and worship thee, according to thy will.

O holy God, which have commanded us to sanctify our selves, and to be holy,
as thou art; grant me grace with S. John to be in the spirit on the Sundaie:
and this day to be holy with them that be holy, and altogether given to
serve and please thee in spirit and truth, as becomes the true worshippers of
thee.

Make thou me this day to refrain my self from doing any bodily labor,
or servile work; and utterly to forbear all manner of ungodliness
displeasant unto thee: as namely, not to abuse or mispend this holy day in
pranking, packing, priinting, pointing, frisling, or vain attiring of my self
to be gorgious and gaie, and to prance in pride: neither yet in unlawful
plays, idle sports, games, Ethnicall pastimes, feasting, banketting,
bellie-cheere, gluttony, riot, excess, chambering, wantonness, niceness,
contention, pride, covetousness, or in any other fleshly filthiness, and
vain pleasures of this transitory world; but contrariwise, to occupy and
give my self obedientlie unto the virtuous works, and holy exercises of thy
divine precepts; namely, unto the expending of the spiritual rest, and
everlasting repose of all Christian souls in heaven, unto the meditation of
thy wonderful works, and unspeakable benefits, which thou, O God,
continually bestowest upon thy Church, and to be thankful for the same: to
study the Scriptures, to hear and read thy sacred word, and follow the
same: to call upon thee by ardent prayer, with hearty thanksgiving, for all
thy mercies: to exercise thy holy Sacraments, and to comfort and give alms
gladly according to mine ability, to the relief of the poor, and comfort of
the needy.

Make me (I say) O Lord, with holy David, both most willing and glad this
day to go forth with my whole family, and the multitude, into thy house and
temple, in the voice of praise and thanksgiving, among such as keep it
holiedaie unto thee, and at all seasons by common order appointed, diligently
to frequent the populous resort and Christian assembly of the congregation in
the Church, and to be present with other thy people often in that most sacred
place on earth; at the most holy, and always to thee, O God, most acceptable
sacrifice of praise, invocation, divine worship, giving of thanks, singing of
hymns, hearing of thy word, using of thy holy Sacraments, prayers,
intercessions, and supplications; which at the coming together of the whole
congregation, is used ordinarily to be made unto thee in the Church, with
very great ceremony and reverence: that thus being free from the travels and
drudgerie of this world, and by thy grace cleansed from all mine own carnal
affections, and wholly given over to serve and sanctify thee in true rest and
spiritual ease, as also to bestow, consecrate, and hallowe this thy sacred
Sabbath or Sundaie, with all other festival holy days, most glorious unto
thee, in all holy and spiritual exercises of a faithful and obedient
Christian, according to thy will, I may even here in this vale of tears,
amidst all my miseries, be thereby occasioned with cheerful heart, both
outwardly and inwardly, exceedingly to rejoice and trust in thee my most
merciful God and loving savior, and after this transitory life ended, be
worthy, happily to enter into thy holy Mountain, the Tabernacle of thine
elect, and kingdom of everlasting blessedness; where the souls of all holy
folk do rest, and there with them to be partaker of perfect holiness, and of
the unspeakable benefit of the wished wealefull rest, and eternal endless
joy of ioies, in the Paradise of God; to see, love, and praise thee most
ioifullie in happy mirth for ever and ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord: to
whom with thee O Father, and the holy Ghost, be immortal glory, infinite
power, everlasting kingdom, perpetual praise, and continual thanksgiving, by
all creatures, through all ages and worlds, world without end,

Amen.
See more for Sundaie afterward.
Meditations.
Here call to mind the commandments of almighty God, concerning the keeping
of the Sabbath day holy unto him; as namely, the third commandment,
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Exodus 20, verse 11.

Call to mind also his promises touching the same, who says, If thou turn
away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on the Sabbath day, and
call the Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor
speaking a vain word, then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause
thee to mount upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
heritage of Jacob thy father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Esaie
58, verses 13, 14.

Yea, blessed is he that keeps the Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and keeps
his hands from doing any evil, Esaie 56, verse 2. Then his threatenings where
he says.

Ye shall therefore keep the Sabbath, for it is holy unto you: he that
defiles it, shall die the death: therefore whosoever works therein, the same
person shall be even cut off from among his people, Exodus 31, verse 14.

Of going to Church.
AND to the end you may the speedilier address your self to frequent the
Church often, not alone, but with your whole family, as you ought; first call
diligently to your mind some of these sentences of holy Scripture, following:

Esaie 66, verse 23. AND it shall come to pass, that from Moon to his Moon,
from Sabbath to his Sabbath, all flesh shall come to worship before me, says
the Lord.

Esaie 2, verses 2, 3. AND it shall come to pass in the latter days, the hill
of the Lords house shall be prepared in the height of the mountains, and shall
be higher than the hills, and all nations shall prease unto him, and a
multitude of people shall go speaking thus one to another; Come, let us ascend
to the hill of the Lord, etc.

Agge. 1, verses 4, 5, 6, etc. Zach. 14. THus says the Lord of hosts:
Consider your own ways in your hearts, o ye people: get ye up to the
mountain and fetch wood, and build this house, and I will take pleasure in it,
and I will be glorified, says the Lord. Is it time for your selves to dwell in
seeled houses, and this house lie waste? Ye have sown much, but ye bring
little in: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled:
ye cloth you, but ye be not warm: and he that earneth wages, puts it into
a broken bag: ye look for much, and lo, it came to little. And when ye
brought it home, I did blow upon it: and why? says the Lord of hosts. Because
of my house that is waste, and you run every one into his own house.
Therefore, upon you is the heavens stayed from deaw, and the earth is stayed
from yielding her increase; and I have called for a drought upon the land, and
upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon the oil,
and upon all that the earth brings forth, upon men and upon cattle, and
upon all the labor of thy hands, etc.

Thus having well perused and weied these holy sentences, stir up your self,
and exhort all your children, servants, strangers and neighbors about you,
with cheerful minds, willingly and diligently to resort to the Church;
especially every Sundaie and Holiedaie, saying unto them as follows.

An exhortation to be used of Masters and Dames every Sundaie morning.
COme, let us ascend to the hill of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob;
and he will there instruct us of his ways, and teach us how to walk in his
paths. For out of Zion shall come a law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem, and he shall give sentence among the heathen, and shall reform the
multitude of the people. Come therefore, I say; let us cheerfullie ascend, and
go up to Jerusalem, the hill and house of the Lord. O let us go our ways into
his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise; that we may
present our selves to day holy before the Lord, and serve him with gladness.

When you be going toward the Church, the better to expel idle thoughts, and
noifull cogitations, and to prepare your hearts to devotion; even by the way as
ye go, meditate and say with your self some of these Psalms and prayers
following; the which also for more readiness would be learned by heart, and
said without book.
Prayers to be used going to Church. A Psalm.
I Was glad when they said unto me; We will go into the house of the Lord; our
feet shall stand in thy gates O Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is builded as a City that is at unity in it self.

For thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes of the Lord, to testify unto
Israel, and to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.

For there is the seat of judgment, even the seat of the house of David.

O my soul, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love it.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
Another Psalm.
LORD, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells; yea the zeal of thine house has even eaten me.

Therefore will I wash my hands in innocence, O Lord; and so will I go to
thine altar, that I may show the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
woonderous works in the great congregation.

Behold, I will go with the multitude, that by the motion of the spirit are
brought forth into thy house, O God: even upon the multitude of thy mercies,
and in thy fear will I (among such as keep holiedaie) worship toward thy
holy Temple, and make haste unto thy Tabernacle, to understand thy worthy wais
and divine will.

For unto thee, O God, which hear the prayers; unto thee shall all flesh
come, to worship thee in Zion: prayer shall be made ever unto thee, and daily
shall thou be praised in Jerusalem.

O therefore let the congregation of thy people come about thee, O God; that
they may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Zion, and
rejoice in thy salvation.

Remember also, I beseech thee good Lord, according to the favor that thou
bear unto thy people; and visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the
felicity of thy chosen children, and rejoice in the gladness of thy people,
and give thee thanks with thine inheritance.

O make me one of the household of faith, and congregation of them that seek
thee: even of them that seek thy face, O Jacob, saying; Lo, I come to fulfill
thy will O God.

O send out the light of thy truth, that they may lead me, and bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling; and that I may go unto the altar of God,
even unto thee, the God of my joy and gladness.

With joy and gladness, I say, cause thou me to be brought to thy mansion
house, and to enter into the Kings palace.

That I may ascend unto the hill of the Lord, and rise up holilie in his holy
place.

That I may receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God
of health and salvation.

Another very godly prayer, to be used going to Church, either at morning, or
evening prayer.
IAm now entered into the voyage of salvation; conduct me, O Lord, luckily unto
the port; that delivered by thee from the very death, I may escape all
dangers, and come to the very life. Behold Lord, my heart hunteth thee out; and
would God I might daily more and more trace thee out! yea I have a great while
sore longed, with so godly affection as I could, to celebrate thee in the
frequented assemblies of the godly, which truly I will now do accordingly,
by the grace and assistance of thy holy spirit; and that with a most ready
and ioifull mind, as it behooves. And that this mine enterprise and beginning
may proceed to a further good success, and amendment of my manners and
imbettering of my life; do thou finish the thing, O God, which thou have begun
in me, and make me continually to increase from faith to faith. Yea, so renew
and shape me again in innocence and righteousness, O grations Lord, I
beseech thee; that as a person newborn of thee, I may insearch thee again
and again, both in the dawning of the day, morning, noone, evening, and
night. Now lead me forooard, O Lord, I beseech thee, in thy righteousness: let
thy loving spirit direct my feet, and make thy ways plain before my face;
because of my mortal and invisible enemies. And do thou vouchsafe luckily to
conduct my body this day, unto thy material temple, and to bring my soul at
the last unto thy holy hill, and blessed mountain, which thou have purchased
with thy right hand, that I may rest both body and soul in heaven, and
remain with thee forever,

Amen.
Or pray thus;
O GOD the word, who art the light; by whom light was made: who art the way,
truth, and life; in whom there is no darkness, oversight, vanity, nor death:
shine forth, O Lord my light, mine inlightening, and my welfare, whom I will
reverence; my Lord, whom I will honor; my Father, whom I will love; my Judge,
whom I will fear; my Bridegroom, whom I will cleave unto, and keep my self
an undefiled spouse. Shine forth, O everlasting light; shine forth, I say,
and lighten the Lamp of my virginity, with the oil of thy divine grace and
mercy; that this blind soul of mine, which yet sits in darkness, and
shadow of death, may see the light, and eschew darkness; see the way, and
eschew straieng; see the truth, and eschew leasing; see the life, and eschew
death. And guide thou my feet unto the way of peace, that by thy merciful
protection, I may see the light, walk in the light, and never stumble upon the
snares of Satan, but may now pass thereby, into the palace of thy wonderful
tabernacle, and be able to climb up even unto the holy house and temple, with
the voice of gladness and confession, there to abide, and receive at thy hands
both mercy, righteousness, health, blessing, and everlasting salvation, with
my fellowe-citizens, thy Saints and household menie,

Amen.
Another godly prayer to be said either going toward, or being in the Church.
Look what earnest and fervent desire soever the old fathers had, O most
mighty GOD, to come unto the place, wherein thou had appointed a tabernacle
to thy self for that time; even the like am I kindled withal, in beholding
the repairing of thy sacred Church, and to see therein a very great company of
godly men and women lawfully assembled together, for the advancement of thy
glory; hearing thy holy doctrine, and duly receiving of thy blessed
Sacraments accordingly. Wherefore, I humbly beseech thee, which art my God
and my King, that I may this day rejoice to be there. For what felicity
soever may be attained unto in this frail life, I doubt not but it will light
upon the sacred company of the godly there assembled. Give ear therefore, O
excellent Father, unto mine earnest prayers; and grant that I make none other
account of thy blessed house, than thy will and pleasure is I should do. For a
more blessed thing it were for me, to have one days meeting and abode therein;
than if I abide never so great a time of continuance in the congregation of the
ungodly; or in such a one as is not lawfully assembled, with the advantage
and ouer-plus of all the pleasures of this transitory world. Seeing that
therefore thou art our most splendent light, and strong defense; cause our
assemblies on the earth; O God, so to redound to thine unspeakable glory, that
our assured hope, by coming in the end unto thee in the everlasting
tabernacles of the heavens, may be augmented, and very much increased, through
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
When you enter into the Church, meditate thus with your self, and say:
LORD, who shall ascend into thy high hill? Or who shall rise up in thy holy
place?

Even he that has clean hands, and a pure heart; and has not lift up his mind
unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor.

He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.

This is the generation of them that seek him; even of them that seek thy
face, O Jacob.

Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors: and
the King of glory shall come in, even the Lord of hosts, most mighty and
strong.

Open me the gates of righteousness, O Lord, that I (with the righteous nation
that keep thy truth) may go into them, and give thanks unto thee. This is the
gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it.

Yea, blessed are they that do thy commandments, O God. For their power shall
be in the tree of life, and they shall enter in through the gates, into the
holy city new Jerusalem.

But without shall be dogs, and inchanters, and whooremongers, and murderers,
and idolaters: yea, there shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes lies: but they only, which are
written in the Lambs book of life,

Amen.
Or thus.
LOrd, who shall enter into thy sanctuary, to consider thy mighty power;
except thou open it unto him? And who shall open it, if thou shut it? Truly, O
Lord my God, I silly worm and claie, am not able to enter into thine
euerlastingnesse; unless thou, which have made all things of nothing, do lead
me in. Yea, I know, Lord, I know and confess, that I am unworthy to enter
under thy roof: but yet I beseech thee, let a blessed entrance to the house of
eternal felicity, whither I have daily a fervent desire to come, be set
open, and made as a free passage unto me, O God. And give me leave now, I
pray thee, though a dog, and an unworthy wretch, even for thine own honor
sake, to enter into thy holy house, and to approach thy sacred presence, and
confound not thy servant that seeks thee, and puts all her trust and
confidence in thy mercy.

Oh suffer me not, I say, good Lord, to knit up and finish my last days with
malefactors, and wicked persons: but grant that after my long and daily
travel, in this transitory world, I may in the end at length be permitted,
through thy mercy, to enter the courts of thy divine presence, and with thine
elect and chosen servants for ever inhabit the haven of eternal felicity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Or say thus, as you enter into the Church.
O How amiable are thy dwellings, thou LORD of hosts! My soul has a desire
and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh rejoice
in the living God.

When shall I enter in, to behold thy face? When shall I come to appear before
thy presence, O God?

For one day in thy courts, is better than a thousand else where? I had rather
be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of the
ungodly.

Yea, like as the Heart desires the water brooks: so longs my soul after
thee, O God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God.

Now therefore I come into thy house, O Lord; even upon the multitude of thy
mercies: and in thy fear do I enter thy tabernacle, and will worship thee:
God grant it according to thy will,

Amen.
As you pass by the people in the Church unto your Pue, salute the
congregation, and say:
PEace be within thy walls, O Jerusalem; and plentiousnesse within thy palaces.
For my brethren and companions sakes I will pray for thy peace, and wish thee
now prosperity: yea because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek to
do thee good, and say:

Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. The Lord prosper you, I
wish you good luck in the name of the Lord: So be it.

Being placed in your Pue, call to mind these sentences of holy Scripture
following.
IT is written, My house shall be called a house of prayer unto all nations:
but ye have made it a den of thieves, and an house of merchandise. Matthew. 21,
verse 13.

Ye shall keep my Saboths, and fear with reverence my Sanctuary. I am the
Lord. Leuit. 19, verse 30.

Holiness becomes Gods house for ever. Ps. 93, ver. 5.

The Lord will utterly destroy every enemy that does evil in his
Sanctuary, that prophaneth his holy temple, and polluteth the dwelling place
of his name. Psalm. 74, verse 3.

When thou come into the house of God therefore keep thy foot, and draw
nigh, that God which is at hand may hear; that thou give not the offerings of
fools. For they know not but to do evil. Eccles. 4, verse 17.

Be not hasty with thy mouth, I say, and let not thine heart speak any thing
rashly before God. For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let
thy words be few. Eccl. 5, verse 1.

A Meditation, wherein is showed how we ought to be very intentive to the
Psalms and prayers in the Church.
WHen thou entrest the temple to pray or sing Psalms; leave behind thee the
heaps of wavering thoughts, and forget utterly the care of outward things,
that thou may give all thine attendance to divine matters. For it is
impossible for him to speak with God, that talks with the whole world in
silence. Intend thou him that intends thee; hear him when he speaks to
thee; that he may hearken to thee when thou praiest to him: so shall thou show
a careful and due reverence in magnifieng God, and a christian attendance in
giving heed to his holy word.

Understand not this, as though I performed that I speak of: yet I strive to
do it, repenting the omission of it in time past, and sorowing that I am not
able to attain it presently. But thou, to whom God has been more liberal
of his graces, inclined his sacred ears toward thee; with hearty prayers, in
sighs and tears beseech him most humbly, to pardon thee all thy riots, and
excess. Extol and magnify him in the excellency of his works with
spiritual songs. For this is most pleasing to the mighty Iehoua, as him self
does witness: The sacrifice of praise shall honor me.

O how happy were thou, if it were granted thee to behold, with spiritual
eyes, the araie of the celestial princes, that go before them that praise God
in the midst of the damsels, plaieng with their Timbrels! Thou should see
doubtless with what endeavor and cheerfulness they accompany them in
singing, assist them in prayer, in meditation comfort them, protect them in
time of rest, direct them in all their affairs and business. Uerelie the
heavenly powers do love their felowe-citizens, and do exceedingly joy in
the society of those, that are free heirs of salvation; they with longing
look for our coming, and earnestly attend, that the ruins and dis-peopling
of their heavenly city may be filled up again, in the multitude of our
companies. They do curiously inquire, and willingly hear all good of us.
They be careful messengers between God and us, and bear a faithful witness
of our doing. They disdain not now to be our servants, that shall be our
fellows: we have made them rejoice in our conversion and repentance. Let us
haste then to fulfill their ioies over us. Woe be unto thee then that love a
return to thy vomit and impuritie. Dooest thou think to have those witness
for thee in judgment, whom thou have bereaved of so great and long hoped-for
joy? They reioiced over us, when we gave our names first to Christ; as if they
had seen us pulled out of hell gates. But what will they do then, when they
shall see those turned back from the gate of Paradise, who had already almost
one foot in heaven?

Wherefore, though our bodies be on earth, let us set our hearts on the highest
heavens: let us run thither, not with bodily members, but with spiritual
affections, desires, and longing; where not the angels only, but the Creator
of angels does long look for us. God the father looks for us, as his own
sons and heirs, to commit the rule of all his treasure unto us. God the
son looks for us, as his dear german brothers, and coparteners, that he
may present God his father with the fruit of his nativity, and price of his
own blood. The holy Ghost also looks for us: for he verelie is that bounty
and benignity, wherein from everlasting we were predestinate to salvation; and
no doubt, he wishes our predestination accomplished.

Seeing then the whole court of heaven does so earnestly look and wish for
us, let us with all zealous affection seek after it. For with great shame, and
a large confusion, shall he come thither, that is lead with a cold and
lukewarm desire: but whosoever, in the strength of continual prayer, and
daily meditation, is alwaie conversant there; shall both from hence depart
with security, and there be received with triumphing joy.

Therefore, wheresoever thou be, still pray within thy self. If thou chance
to be far from thy closet, seek no place. For thou to thy self art a place.
If thou be in thy bed, pray; and pray often in the temple. And in prostrating
thy body, lift up thy mind to God. For as there is no time, wherein we do not
use and enioie the goodness and mercy of God: so there ought to be no moment,
wherein his almightinesse ought not to possess our memory. But thou will
say, I pray continually, and yet I see no fruit of my prayer: as I come unto
it, so I depart; none answers, or speaks unto me; nothing is given me, but
my labor seems vain. This is the speech of humane folly, not observing
what truth it self promises, saying: Uerelie I say unto you, whatsoever ye
ask in prayer with faith, ye shall receive it; and it shall be performed unto
you. Esteem not lightly therefore of prayer. For he to whom thou praiest,
has it in price; and before it proceed from thy mouth, commands it to be
registered in his own book. One of these two we may undoubtedly hope for;
that either he will give us our requests, or better. Think of God as highly
as thou art able, and yet believe more of him, than thou can think. All the
time wherein thou think not upon God, esteem it lost; all other things be
foraigne unto us, time only is our own. Attend therefore upon God; and
wheresoever thou art, be all with him. Impart, but give not up thy self to
worldly affairs. Wheresoever thou art, cast thy thoughts upon God. No place
is unfit for meditation. Therefore, with all cheerfulness, gather up thy
spirits, dwell at liberty with thy self, and out of the largeness of thy
heart measure out a lodging for thy Lord Christ.

A wise man's mind is alwaie with God. He ought to be always in our sight, by
whom we have our being, life, and knowledge. He is the author of our being,
the teacher of our understanding, the treasure of our spiritual and ioifull
happiness. Herein we may acknowledge the divine image of the heavenly
Trinity. For as he has his being in excellency of wisdom and goodness; so
we, according to our creation, have our subsistence; being endued also with
reason, and delight in knowledge, as a signature and impression of the divine
Majesty. Esteem therefore of thy self, as of the temple of God; seeing it
pleased him to impart his likeness to thee, as a high renown, to adore and
imitate God. Thou dooest imitate him, if thou be holy, as he is holy. For a
holy mind is the temple of God; and a sincere heart, the most acceptable
altar. Thou dooest adore God, if thou be merciful, even as he is merciful to
all. For it is a pleasing sacrifice to God, to gratify all for the cause of
God.

Do all things as the son of God, that thou be not unworthy of him, that
has vouchsafed to be thy father. Know that of all thy actions, God is a
witness. Beware therefore to fix thine eye, or settle thy thought in any
unlawful delight: neither speak, nor do any ill, though thou may. Offend
not God, neither in deed nor purpose. For his almightinesse discovers thy
deeds. Thou have need of a great watch, discharging all the actions in the
face of the Judge; yet live thou may without security, if thou behave thy
self so, as he vouchsafe thee his presence. If he abide not with thee in
favor, he will come unto thee in revenge. And if he come in revenge, woe be
unto thee; nay rather, woe if he come not. For God is most angry with him,
whose sin he leaves unpunished. His damnation is prepared, whom God
reformeth not in fatherly chasticement.

Another Meditation to the same effect.
GOod Lord be merciful unto me, that offend worst; where I ought most to
mind the reformation of my faults. Praieng in the temple, oftentimes I heed not
what I speak. I pray, but by the absence of my wandering mind, it is made
fruitless. With my body I enter into thy temple; but my heart stands
without: therefore my prayer vanishes away. For the outward sound of the
voice, without the inward symphonie of the heart avails nothing. Then is it a
great folly, naie madness, when by prayer presuming to speak in presence of
the mighty God, we do brutishlie wander in vain thoughts, and arrest our
minds upon very trifles. An heinous offense also, and worthy a grievous
punishment it is, that vile dust should not vouchsafe audience to the Creator
of the whole world speaking unto him. But the worthiness of thy heavenly
bounty is unspeakable, which every day regards us standing in
wretchedness and misery, turning aside our ears, and hardening our hearts.
Yet he cries out unto us, saying: Return into the way ye transgressors;
attend, and see: for I am God. God speaks to me in the Psalm, and I unto
him; yet in repeating the same, I regard not whose it is. Herein I offer God
great wrong, in desiring him to harken unto my prayer; which my self in making
it, do not hear. I request him to attend me, and I neither intend him, nor my
self; but that which worsse is, I do violate his sacred presence with vnpure
and unprofitable thoughts. Have mercy upon me, pardon mine offenses, and renew
me with thy holy Spirit; that in all my Prayers, Psalms, Songs, and Hymns,
I may both say and sing to the honor and glory of thy name,

Amen.
Here, as time will conveniently serve, before Common prayer begin, make your
private petitions unto Almighty God, and say:
A salutation to God the Father, or first form of prayer, when ye kneel
down in the Church.
Hail our Father, GOD Almighty, full of grace, mercy, and comfort. Thy Son
Jesus Christ, very God and man, is with thee in heaven. Blessed be thy name, O
Father, both in heaven above, and in earth amongst all nations, by thine only
son our Lord,

Amen.
Another first form of prayer in the Church at Morning prayer.
O Most high and blessed Trinity, the very Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
three glorious and inseperable persons in Trinity, and but one God in Deity,
uncreate, incomprehensible, eternal, invisible, and almighty, one being
power, wisdom, goodness and Lord, of coequall, coeternall, and undefiled
Majesty: who before all worlds, in all worlds, and by all worlds into
everlasting, dooest live, and dwell alone in vnapprochable light: with all
my very heart and mouth do I, being the least member of thy Church, fall
down low on my knees here before thy footestoole; and confess, praise,
bless, and worship thee, O glorious Trinity. And now and ever, with all
Angels, creatures and Elders, both in heaven and earth, I cry and say; Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God of hosts, dreadful, strong, righteous, merciful,
marvelous, praise-worthie, to be beloved. Heaven and earth are full of thy
glory. Glory be to thee, O God, for ever,

Amen.
A prayer, that God would vouchsafe to hear the prayers of the Congregation
afflicted, and grant their requests.
OH Lord my God, most high; most holy holy holy Lord God of Sabbath, most
blessed and glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, three glorious
persons of coequall and consubstantiall Majesty, and one almighty and
incomprehensible God in Deity, alwais, by all means, of all creatures, above
all things to be woorshipped in Unity, and glorified in Deity: look down
from thy kingly court and princely palace, where thou art placed, in the
highest coasts of the heaven of heavens; and sit in the celestial throne
of eternal glory, between the Cherubins and Seraphins. Look down, I say,
O most mighty Iehoua, and have respect now, I beseech thee, unto thy sacred
Sanctuary, and holy house of prayer. Let thine eyes I say, O Lord, be ever
open toward thy blessed Tabernacle night and day; even toward thy Church,
thy Temple, and most sacred place on earth; where thine honor dwells, and
whereof thou have said: My house shall be an house of prayer for all people and
nations, and my name shall be called upon therein, that thou may harken this
day unto the prayers, which we thy poor creatures, and most unworthy
servants make before thee in this place.

Hear thou therefore, O our God, even from heaven, the place of thy glorious
habitation, the supplications of thy servants; and also what prayers and
supplications soever shall be made unto thee, of any particular man or woman,
and of all the people. Give good ear (I say) O Lord, unto all the cries,
prayers, and petitions of thy people here assembled, or that shall be gathered
together in thy name; who with rent hearts, bowed knees, and stretched out hands
return unto thee, and present themselves here this day, to confess thee, and
call upon thy holy name in this place. And when thou hear, pardon the
sins of thy servants, and be merciful unto the offenses and iniquities of
thy people, wherewith they have sinned and transgressed, or shall offend
against thy Majesty. Hear us, I say, O Lord, O holy Lord God hear us; we
pray thee be merciful unto thine inheritance, and do and give to every one
of us, according unto all and every thing that we call and pray for unto
thee, this day, in this thy holy house, according to thy will, thorough Jesus
Christ our Lord:

Amen, Amen.
A psalm of preparation to prayer in the morning.
I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation, and will say:
O God, my heart is ready; my heart is ready here now now in thy holy house,
to pay thee my vows, which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth,
when I was in trouble.

My voice shall thou hear beetimes, O Lord; early in the morning will I
direct my prayers unto thee, and will look up.

I my self will awake right early, to sing and give praise unto thee, with
the best member that I have.

Unto thee, my God, will I lift up my hands and heart, in this thy holy
habitation, toward the mercie-seat of thy holy temple.

In the voice of praise and thanksgiving, among such as keep it holy day.
For this is the day, which thou, O Lord, have made, I will rejoice, and be
glad in it.

In this day of thy power will I offer the free will offerings, with an holy
worship; and magnify thee in the congregation of the people.

From the ground of my heart will I rejoice, and give thanks unto thee my God,
in the seat of the elders, for a remembrance of thy holiness.

O let my mouth be filled with thy praise, that I may sing of thy glory and
praise, now and for evermore.

Glory be to the, etc. As it was in the, etc.
A Psalm to be used privately before Evening prayer, in the Church.
IN the evening and morning, and at noone day will I pray, and that
instantly; and he shall hear my voice.

My heart is fixed ready, O God, my heart is fixed ready; I will praise thee and
thy faithfulness yet more and more with the best member that I have: even with
all my heart will I thank thee, and praise thy name for evermore.

My lips be feign to sing unto thee, and so is my soul, whom thou have
delivered: yea my soul shall be satisfied with marowe and fatness, when my
mouth praises thee with ioifull lips.

For it is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord; and to sing praises unto
thy name, O most high; to tell of thy loving kindness early in the morning,
and of thy truth in the evening and night season: yea, a ioifull and pleasant
thing it is, to be thankful unto thee our God alwaie.

Therefore I will sing seven times a day, and will praise thy mercy late in
the evening, because of thy righteous judgments.

As for me, I will be talking of thy worship, thy glory, thy praise, and
woonderous works from time to time. For great art thou, O Lord, and marvelous
worthy to be praised, and feared above all the gods: yea, thou can not
woorthilie be praised; for there is none end of thy greatness nor goodness.

Behold now therefore, praise the Lord all ye servants of the Lord: ye that by
night stand in the house of the Lord, even in the midst of the courts of the
house of our God.

Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and praise the Lord together with me.
For he is good and gracious, and his mercy endures for ever.

Yea let every good man and woman sing of thy praise, O God: and speak of
thine honor in thy temple, with cheerful minds, and that without ceasing for
ever, and say:

The Lords name be praised, from the rising up of the sun, unto the going
down of the same: blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and
worlds without end,

Amen.
Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
Another preparation of the heart before evening prayer in the Church.
LORD behold, mine heart is at this present ready to sing praises more and more
unto thee, and again and again to render unto thee worthy thanks here now
in the assembly of Saints. Only I desire thee to hallowe us from heaven thy
dwelling place, and power down upon us thy holy sanctifieng spirit, which may
so wholly possess our souls, and preserve us from all evil cogitations, and
motions of sin and iniquity, that we may hallowe thy name this evening, and
evermore in all things, flow in thy word, render the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving unto thee, and worship thee only in spirit and truth, as our
God most mighty in heaven and earth, our righteous maker, and the worker of
all goodness, in all such as believe in thee.

A clean heart, O God, make thou in me; restore in me a willing and a right
spirit; deny me not the holy Ghost. For of my self I can perform nothing
that is good. Bless me therefore, O benign Lord, and indue me plentifully
with thy grace; to the intent I may offer the acceptable evening sacrifice of
thanksgiving, (for nothing else verelie requirest thou) and with glad
semblance embrace and celebrate thy righteousness, espied in the releasing and
forgiving of my sins.

Give me of thy goodness to this end, that I may continually praise thy
Majesty day and night, with mystical Psalms, and spiritual songs. Be thou
evermore working through thy holy spirit in me, (which presently keeps the
godly rest of the new Saboth) such things as be allowed and pleasant unto
thee; least at any time cleaving to superstition and hypocrisy, I do worship
thee amiss: but fill my heart with grace, and stuff it with sweetness of
spirit, even as my body is stuffed with abundance of meats. Lord rid me out of
mine ungodliness, pluck from me mine ignorance of thee, banish my
slothfulness of insearching thee. Compel my flesh through thy spirit to his
bounden duty and obedience, and bring to pass that I may now and always
apply my self wholly, without weariness and dryness of mind, unto the right
sincere worshipping and serving of thee, here in thy presence. O Lord, open
thou my lips, and then shall my mouth extol thy renowned name, and publish thy
praise, not with fained lips, but with a full glad heart, lusty stomach, and
quick spirit, and say with the congregation: Our Father, etc. As at evening
prayer in the Church.

Another Meditation before Evening prayer in the Church.
Seeing thou have beautified all those with a notable promise, O most mighty
God, which are knit together in the honoring of thy blessed name; so that thou will not only be present with them, but also bestowest excellent gifts and
benefits upon these men, whosoever they are that excel in sincere faith, and
pure godliness, and have an exceeding desire to be often in the blessed
congregation, in so much as there is nothing, which they more covet or desire,
than to appear diverse times in the day before thee, in the sacred assemblies:
yea it ought to be a most pleasant thing unto us, to celebrate thy high praises
perpetually, and show forth thy marvelous works without ceasing. For the
performance whereof, godliness would require, that we should not only do
the same in the day time, but also in the night season. We will therefore lift
up pure hands in all places, touching the publishing of thy glorious name, and
render perpetual thanks (according to our bounden duty) for thine
unspeakable goodness, and loving kindness extended toward us. But seeing
that this ought to be done in the most sacred and holy assemblies, our earnest
request is, to have thee present here with us, and to bestow thy plentiful
blessings upon thy beloved Israel. First deliver us, we humbly beseech thee,
from our heinous faults, enorme sins, and lewd corruptions, wherewith we have
greatly defiled our selves. And then let our weak and feeble hearts be
strengthened in thy blessed way, and the withered powers of our mind (which are
dried up) watered with the holy Ghost; that we being altogether repaired, and
wholly renewed, may continually celebrate and praise thee, and have a great
desire to direct our prayers unto thy mercie-seate, with a most holy intent,
as Christians ought to do.

Cause us now, not constrained and brought thereto by compulsion, but of a
willing heart, to come before thy presence; and become true worshippers of thee:
yea and such as do think it a goodly matter to spend, not only hours, but
days and nights; yea and all our years and life in the sincere service, and
right worshipping and honoring of thee, in the sacred Church. Let nothing be
so dear and precious unto us, as to continue in the praises, and commendations
of thy glorious name, from morning to night; praieng both publikelie and
privately for all other, as well as for our selves. Grant O excellent father,
that we in giving due thanks for thy benefits, may ioifullie sing double
praises to thy glorious name for evermore; that our minds, I say, may daily
more and more be strengthened, heartily to confess, courageously to extol,
and above all things to exalt thy wonderful praises vncessantlie, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior,

Amen.
A Psalm of exhortation to prayer in the morning or evening.
O Come, let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker;
and let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our salvation.

Let our souls rejoice, I say, in the mercy of the Lord, and not be ashamed
to publish his praise. Let us do our duties betimes, both early and late, and
he will give us a reward in his due time.

For a good thing it is to give thanks unto the Lord, and to tell of his loving
kindness early in the morning.

O come therefore, praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name
together.

Bring hither the book, take the Psalter, and sing unto the Lord a new song.
Let us sing praises, I say, lustilie unto him, with a good courage, and show
our selves glad in him with Psalms; even now in the time appointed, and upon
our solemn feast-daie.

For great is the Lord, and highly to be praised in the City of our God, even
upon his holy hill of Zion.

Glory be to the, etc. As it was in the, etc.
Another Psalm, exhorting all creatures to praise God.
O Praise the Lord of heaven ye Angels of his, ye Saints that excel in
strength, and fulfill his commandments, ye servants of his that harken to the
voice of his words, and do his pleasure. Praise him in the height ye children
of Zion, and be ioifull in your King with glory.

For God is very greatly to be feared in the counsel of his Saints; and to
be had in reverence of all them that are about him.

Praise him all ye heavens, and ye waters that be above the heavens. O God,
the very heavens shall praise thy woonderous works; and thy truth in the
congregation of the Saints.

Yea, let heaven and earth praise thee; the Sea, and all that moves therein.

O sing unto the Lord all the whole earth, woorship him, and stand in awe of
his judgments ye multitude of Isles.

Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.

Praise the name of the Lord, O ye servants of the Lord; ye that by day or
by night stand in the house of the Lord, even in the courts of the house of our
God.

O all ye righteous that love and seek the Lord, and be true-harted toward
him; praise his holy name, and magnify him all ye seed of Israel that fear
and dread his Majesty.

Praise the Lord also all ye heathen, and nations of the world; worship you
him, and glorify his name. For he is great, passing all praise.

Praise the Lord, O ye Kings of the earth; Princes, and all Judges of the
world: yea, worship him all ye gods. For he is higher than the heavens, and
far exalted above all gods.

O ye kindreds of the people, ascribe unto the Lord the worship, power, and
honor due unto his name; bring presents, and come into his courts with praise.

Let the people praise thee, O God; yea let all the people praise thee: both
young men and maids, old men and children; let them all remember thy holy name,
and declare thy power from one generation to another, world without end.

O speak good of the Lord all ye works of the Lord in all places of his
dominion.

Let every thing that has breath, praise the Lord. For his name only is most
excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth.

Praise the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within me, praise his holy name.

My mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord; and let all flesh give thanks
unto his holy name for ever and ever.

Glory be to the father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
A Psalm of Gods presence in the Church.
THE Lord has chosen Zion to be an habitation for himself, he has longed for
her; saying:

This shall be my rest for ever, here will I dwell. For I have a delight
therein.

Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them; and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them.

The Lord is in his holy Temple, even among thousands of thine Angels, as in
the holy place of Sinai.

Gods seat is in heaven, the Lord is in the midst of the holy place; even of
the Tabernacle of the most high.

This is Gods hill, even an high hill, in the which it pleases him to dwell;
yea the Lord will abide in it for ever.

As the hills stand about Jerusalem; even so stands the Lord round about his
people, from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
Another Psalm of the beauty of Gods house, and the souls delight to be
therein.
O GOD, wonderful art thou in thy holy places, even thou God of Israel.

It is well seen, O God, how thou go: how thou my God and King go in the
Sanctuary.

The singers go before, the musicians follow after: in the midst are the
virgins plaieng with the timbrels.

Thou Lord have given thy word plentiouslie, and great is the company of the
preachers.

The Lord is King, he sits between the Cherubins, the Lord is great in
Zion, and high above all people.

Thou, O God, art gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men: yea even for thine enemies, that thou, Lord, might
dwell among them.

Righteousness and equity are the habitation of thy seat, mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

Glory and worship are before thee, power and honor are in thy sanctuary.

This therefore shall be my resting place; here will I dwell, O Lord: even in
the temple and tabernacle of the mighty God of Israel. For I have a delight
therein.

Lord, here is very good being for us. For such as be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God.

They shall bring forth more fruit in their age, and shall be fat, and well
liking; that they may show how true thou my Lord and strength art, and that
there is no unrighteousness in thee.

Yea, blessed is the man, whom thou choosest and receiuest unto thee: he shall
dwell in thy courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house,
even of thy holy temple.

Blessed, I say, are they that dwell in thy house; they will be alwaie
praising thee. For in thy temple does every man speak of thine honor; and
that because holiness becomes thine house, O God, for ever.

This therefore shall be my resting place, even here in thy temple will I
dwell. For it is a good thing for me to be here continually in thy tabernacle,
before thee my God for ever.

Yea, here do I wait for thy mercy and loving kindness, O God; even in the
mids of thy temple. O when will thou come unto me! that I may walk in thy
house with a perfect heart, and praise thy name for ever,

Amen.
Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
A psalm for the prosperity of the Church, and that all people may praise and
bless the Lord.
Return, O Lord, to thy many thousands of Israel. Arise now, I say, to come
into thy resting place, thou and the arc of thy strength, when the people are
gathered together, and the kingdoms also to serve the Lord.

O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that sit upon the Cherubins, be
favorable and gracious unto Zion: build it up, and let thy glory and worship
appear therein, throughout all generations.

Deck her priests with health, and her Saints shall rejoice and sing.

Let the priests be clothed with the white reins of righteousness, and let
thy Saints sing Psalms with ioifulnesse.

Give us thy word still plentiouslie, and let the company of the godly
preachers be great.

Let none touch thine anointed ones, nor do thy prophets any harm.

O Lord save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed
them, and set them up for ever.

Let the congregation of the people come about thee, O God; that they may offer
the sacrifice of righteousness, and show forth thy praises within the ports
of the daughter of Zion.

In this day of thy power let the people make their humble supplication before
thee, and offer the free will offerings with an holy worship.

In the Temple let every man speak of thine honor, and every good man sing
of thy praise without ceasing.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: let the people praise thee, O God; yea
let all the people praise thee, and all creatures both in heaven and earth
bless thee, and say:

Blessed be thou, O Lord God of our fathers. For thou art praise and
honor-worthie; yea and to be magnified for evermore.

Blessed be the holy name of thy glory. For it is worthy to be praised and
magnified in all worlds.

Blessed be thou, O God, in the holy Temple of thy glory. For above all
things thou art to be praised, yea and more than worthy to be magnified for
ever.

Blessed be thou in the throne of thy kingdom. For above all thou art worthy
to be praised, and well spoken of, and to be more than magnified for ever.

Blessed be thou that sit upon the Cherubims, and look through the
deep. For thou art worthy to be praised, and above all to be magnified for
ever.

Blessed be thou in the firmament of heaven. For thou art praise and
honor-worthie for ever.

Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does woonderous
things: and blessed be the name of his Majesty for ever, and the earth shall
be filled with thy Majesty: Amen, Amen.

Blessed be the name of the Lord, from this time forth for evermore.

Blessed, I say, be the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting, and worlds
without end: and let all the people say Amen, Amen.

Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might be unto our God for evermore:

Amen, Amen, Amen.
A prayer to be used at your first coming into the Church, for a pure and
clean soul.
SEeing that by the good motion and happy conduction of thy holy spirit, O
gracious God, I am now entered into this thy holy house the Church, and most
sacred place on earth, to worship thee; and forasmuch as holiness apperteineth
to thee, O Lord; for thou art holy, and nothing unholy may appear before
thee: grant that both now at this present, and so often hereafter as I shall
enter into this holy place and Tabernacle of the congregation, and appear
before thee; I may be thoroughly sanctified, both bodily and ghostly, by the
divine graces of thy spirit, the better therein to serve and worship thee. The
which thing that I may even now this day, the better accomplish and do,
according to thy will (as I heartily desire) and to the glory of thy name, and
the full discharge of my christian duty: I most entirely beseech thy
Majesty, first to sanctify, purify, cleanse, make happy, and keep holy my
wretched soul and sinful body; the posts whereof, dear father, are
sprinkled with the precious blood of thy dear Son, who most dearly bought
them. O comfortable ghest of the soul, leave not our houses desolate; cease
not to fill us by thy continual presence, with thy life and righteousness.
Dress, cleanse, and sweep the foreletten cottage once again I say, good
Lord, with the beesome of thy celestial grace, and heavenly felicity, from
all the pollution and filth of sin and wickedness. Once again, O Christ,
vouchsafe to cast out of the house of my soul, that unclean spirit, and foul
feend Satan, mine old ghest and enemy, with the finger of God; and when he is
cast out of me, give me grace to watch still continually, by hearty and
earnest prayer, that he enter not again into me. For being once mine old
ghest, he knows every hole and corner of my house. Therefore grant me grace
to watch continually, I say, O Lord, by fervent prayer, and virtuous works
proceeding from a firm faith; least he return into the house, from whence he
was cast out, and finding it empty, swept, and garnished, he go and take unto
himself seven other foul spirits, worsse than himself, and they enter in
also, and dwell there with him, and so mine end be woorsse than my beginning;
which God forbid. Oh suffer not the holy house, Lord, of thy Divinity, and
Temple of the holy Ghost, my body and soul I mean, cleansed with thy blood,
and decked with thy righteousness, to be by my mortal enemies defiled,
spoiled, or made a cage of unclean birds, a dungeon of devils, a den of
thieves, a hell of wicked spirits, and a sink of sin, through delectation in
sin, and infidelity. Withdraw not thy hand from me: let me not return unto
my vomit like the dog: let not mine end be worse than my beginning, as happened
to Caine, Saul, Judas, Arius, and many mo. But as by thy great mercy, my
body and soul are made the temple and tabernacle of ye holy spirit: so by the
same thy rich mercy, and infinite goodness, grant that the same may now become
thy holy habitation, and sacred seat of everlasting glory; and so be
purified, cleansed, thoroughly sanctified, and made clean by thy divine
inspiration, and gracious presence: that no heaps of soil, dregs of dust, or
remnants of filth be to be found in any privy or secret corner of this thy
spiritual temple, to offend ye celestial eyes of thy divine majesty, so shall
thy holy Hall, which is my cleansed soul, in all reverence, devotion, and
godly worship, this day and ever resound in the Church, and all places of thy
dominion, with thy perpetual praises, to thine eternal glory,

Amen.
Another prayer to serve God sincerely in the Church.
O LORD God our celestial Father, whose fidelity and truth is stablished in
the high heavens, among thy chosen believers, who also art wonderful in the
congregation of the faithful, and most mighty, of all power, and present
euerie-where, beholding all things done in all places on earth. Forasmuch as
thou, O gracious God, have chosen this house, that thy name might be called
upon therein, and that it should be an house of prayer and petition for thy
people; mercifully promising therewithal, that wheresoever two or three be
gathered together in thy name, there thou would be in the midst of them,
and whatsoever they (believing) asked of thee, it should be done unto them.
Behold, we therefore, whom by thy grace thou have elected to be thy people and
heritage, and with whom thou have made an eternal covenant and promise to
help, hear, assist and confirm in all goodness, righteousness, and
holiness; do here now at this present, through the motion of thy good
spirit, assemble and gather our selves together in thy name, with one accord,
to make our common supplications unto thee: and according to our bounden duty,
with one mind and mouth, in spirit and truth, to laud and magnify thy holy
name and majesty. Humbly beseeching thee, O Lord, to have mercy upon us,
miserable sinners, to purge us and justify us through faith, from all our
offenses old and new: to inflame and lighten the lamps of our hearts with the
oil of sanctification, which is thy holy spirit: and so there-through to
sanctify our souls, to prepare our hearts, and dispose all our members wholly
to true piety, godliness and devotion; that we may be worthy continually
to lift up in this holy place of thy glorious presence, and divine habitation,
pure hearts, innocent hands, and most fervent prayers unto thee in heaven.

Grant also, O gracious God, that we with one heart and voice, in all holiness
and godliness, trembling, dread, Christian reverence, humble obedience,
spiritual worship, and divine service, may incessantly give all honor and
glory unto thee, and for ever to celebrate thy most holy name and Majesty,
in this thy holy temple, as it apperteineth: even by offering up dutifullie
unto thy divine Majesty, the most sweet and acceptable sacrifice of broken and
contrite hearts, of zealous and true repentance, of humble and unfeigned
confession, of pure and incessant prayer, and of most worthy and condign
lauds and praises: that so we may continue blessed in thy holy mountain for
ever, and in the end, according to thy faithful promise, obtain everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
How the soul should rightly worship and praise the Lord in all places.
O GOD, the true and the sovereign life; of whom, and in whom all things do
live, whatsoever things do live truly, and in happy state. O God, even
goodness and goodlinesse, from whom, through whom, and in whom are all good
and goodly things, which art good and goodly. God, whose faith quickens,
hope erecteth, and love linketh us. God, who have commanded us to pray unto
thee, and make thy self to be found, and openest to him which knocks. God,
whom none seeks, but the admonished; and no man finds, but the purged. God,
whom to know is life; whom to serve, is to reign; and whom to love, is the
salvation and joy of the soul. Thee, both with my lips, and with mine heart,
and with all my strength I do praise, bless and worship. To thy clemency and
goodness I do yield humble thanks, for all thy benefits; and to thy Majesty
do I sing, holy, holy, holy.

O blessed Trinity, I beseech thee, vouchsafe to come unto me, and to make me
a meet temple for thine holiness. I do pray the Father, through the Son; I
pray the Son, through the Father; I pray the holy Spirit, by the Father
and the Son; that all wickedness may be set far away from me, and that all
the holy virtues may be implanted within me.

O infinite God, of whom, through whom, and in whom are all things made, both
visible, and invisible; which inclosest thine outward works, and fillest thine
inward; gouernest them above, and bear them below; keep me the work of
thine hands, which trust in thee, and hope only in thy mercy. Keep me, I
beseech thee, both here and euerie-where; now and alwaie; within and without;
before and behind; above and beneath; round about: so that there be no place
for the snares of the enemy against me.

Thou art God almighty, keeper and protector of all that trust in thee;
without whom none is in safety, no man is free from danger. Thou art God, and
beside thee there is none other, either in heaven above, or in earth below;
which do great things, and unsearchable, and marvelous things without
number. Meet it is therefore that thou be praised, that thou be honored, that
thou be magnified with commendations.

To thee, the whole troop of Angels; to thee the heavens and the powers do
sing, and continually yield praises, as creatures to their Creator; servants
to their Lord, soldiers to their King. Every creature does extol, and every
soul does glorify thee the holy and undefiled Trinity. To thee the holy
and humble men of heart, to thee the spirits and souls of the righteous, to
thee do all the supernall citizens, together with all the orders of blessed
spirits yield humble praise and glory, and exalt thee above all things for
ever. O Lord, gloriously and honorably do those heavenly citizens adorn
thee with praises. Man also, the most excellent among thy creatures, does
magnify thee: yea, and I too, a miserable sinner, do exceedingly desire to
praise thee; and greatly do I love to love thee above all things.

O my God, my life, my strength, and my praise; give me grace to praise thee.
Put thy light in my heart, and thy word into my mouth; that both my heart may
think upon thy glory, and my tongue sing and speak out thy praises every
day. But for as much as praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, and I
am a woman of polluted lips; purge mine heart, I beseech thee, from all
iniquity; sanctify me both within and without, O almighty sanctifier, and
make me worthy to sound forth thy praise. Receive in good part, from the hand
of the heart, and from the love of the mind; receive, I pray thee, the
sacrifice of my lips; and let it be acceptable in thy sight, and ascend up unto
thee, like a sweet smelling savor,

Amen.
Another.
MY soul praise thou the Lord; and all that is within me praise his holy
name. My soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Praise
the Lord all ye his works, in all places of his dominion. My soul praise thou
the Lord. Praise we the Lord, whom Angels praise, dominions adore, powers do
reverence, to whom the Cherubins and Seraphins continually do cry, Holy,
holy, holy. Join we therefore our voices to the voices of the holy Angels;
and according to our ability, let us praise the God which we both have. For
they, whose eyes evermore be fixed upon the Lord, whom they behold not through
a glass darkly, but face unto face, they do most purelie, and without
ceasing praise the Lord.

O Lord, that immortal people of thine Angels do praise thee; and the
celestial powers do magnify thy name, who have no need either to read this
our scripture, or to seek after the knowledge of thee the holy and glorious
Trinity. For they always behold thy face, where they read without syllables
of time, what thine eternal pleasure is, they read, they choose, and they
love, yea always they read, and what they read they forget not. By choosing,
and loving, they read this constancy of thy counsel; and their book shall at
no time be shut and folded, because thy self art, and wilt everlastingly be
this to them.

O much blessed are those heavenly powers, that can religiously and purelie,
with an exceeding delight, and unspeakable joy, magnify thee with praises.
Thence they praise, whence they rejoice; for so much as always they behold that,
which offers them continual occasion, both to praise and rejoice. But we,
pressed down with the weight of flesh, and placed far away from thy
countenance, in this exile, and distracted through varieties of the world, we
(alas) are not able woorthilie to praise thee, through faith. We praise thee
not of perfect knowledge, but these angelical spirits praise thee of
knowledge, not through faith. For our flesh is the cause why we praise thee,
otherwise than they do. Notwithstanding, albeit we sing praises to thee after
diverse sorts, yet thou art but one God, Creator of all things, to whom is
offered the sacrifice of praise, both in heaven and in earth. But one day we
shall come unto their company, with whom always we shall see thee, and praise
thee without ceasing.

Now then, O Lord, grant that whiles I do live in this frail body, both mine
heart and my tongue, and all my bones may glorify thee, and say: Lord, who is
like unto thee? Let thine holy memory, and thy blessed sweetness possess my
whole soul, and ravish me with desire of invisible things. Let my soul, I
beseech thee, pass from visible unto invisible, from terrestrial unto
heavenly, from transitory things unto eternal; let it pass, I say, and see
thy wonderful vision. Thou art God almighty, three in persons, yet but one
in the substance of the Godhead, whom we serve and worship: namely, the Father
unbegotten, the Son only begotten of the Father, the holy Spirit both
proceeding from and remaining in them both, an holy and glorious Trinity, one
God almighty; which when we were not, did mightily make us: and when
thorough our own default we were lost, mercifully and maruellouslie had
delivered us.

Oh suffer us not to prove either ungrateful for so great benefits, or
unworthy so manifold mercies. Unto thee do I pray, sue, and beseech;
increase my faith, increase my hope, yea and increase my love also. Through the
same thy goodness make us to be evermore stable in faith, and fruitful in all
good works, that by a right faith, and works agreeable unto faith, we may come
through thy mercy unto everlasting life, where seeing thy perfect and full
glory, even as it is, we may worship thy Majesty; and being made worthy to
behold thy glory, may sing:

Glory to the Father, who has made us.

Glory to the Son, who has redeemed us.

Glory to the holy Ghost, that has sanctified us.

Glory to the sovereign and blessed Trinity, whose works are inseperable,
and whose kingdom has none end. Unto thee belongs all praise, all
commendation, all honor, blessing and love. Glory, power, and might be unto
thee, our God, for evermore,

Amen.
Another prayer very forceable to move the mind unto the praises of God.
O Jesus, who art our redemption, our love, and desire; GOD of God, help me
thy servant. Upon thee do I call, unto thee do I cry from the very bottom
of mine heart: for thee do I call into my soul, O enter thereinto, and join
it to thee, that thou may possess the same without spot or wrinkle. For a
most clean Lord must have a clean habitation. O then sanctify me thy
vessel, which thou have made; purge me from all wickedness, fill me with thy
grace, and being replenished, keep me so, that I may be a meet temple for thy
dwelling, both here and forever.

O most good, most gracious, loving, dear, mighty, desired, precious,
amiable, and glorious God, thou art to me sweeter than honey, whiter than milk
or snow, more pleasant than Nectar, more precious than gold and jewels, and
deerer than all the wealth and promotions of the world. What do I say, O my
God, mine only hope, and so infinite mercy? What do I say, O happy and
quiet sweetness? What do I say, when I say these things? I say what I am
able, but I say not all that I should. Would to God I could say as the
melodious quiers of Angels do say!

O how willingly would I power out my self wholly in thy praises! How
devoutly without ceasing would I sing forth those Psalms of heavenly
music, unto the laud and praise of thy name, in the midst of the
congregation! Notwithstanding, because I cannot do so, shall I be still? Woe to
them which talk not of thee, who openest the mouth of the dumb, and make
the tongues of babes eloquent. Woe to them which talk not of thee; for they
which babble much, are dumb when they sing not thy praises. Who can praise
thee woorthilie enough, O unutterable power, and wisdom of the father! And
albeit I cannot find words, wherewithal I may sufficiently express the
almighty and all-skilfull word, yet until thou call me unto thee, where I may
praise thee as I should, and ought; I will say what I am able. Wherefore, mine
humble request is, that thou would respect, not that which I now do say,
but that which I desire to say. For indeed I do mightily desire to speak of
thee, as I ought, and as becomes me, because to thee praise, to thee Psalms,
to thee honor and glory is due.

A complaint that we be not moved nor pricked in our contemplations and
prayers, like as the Angels be, which tremble at the sight of GOD.
PArdon me, O LORD, pardon me, mercifully forgive me, and have mercy upon
me: spare mine ignorance, and my great imperfectness: do not reprove me as
a rash woman, because I dare be so bold, which am but thy servant. But would to
God I were either a good servant, or none unprofitable or evil servant! And
therefore am I an evil woman, because I praise, bless and worship thee, not
as I ought to do, which art our God almighty, terrible and very much to be
feared: I worship thee, I say, without contrition of heart, and without a well
of tears. For if so be that the Angels, when they worship and praise thee, do
tremble, being fulfilled with marvelous gladness: I which am a sinner,
whiles I stand before thee, saying praises, and offering sacrifice, why am I
not afraid in my heart? why am I not pale in my countenance? why do not my
lips quake, and tremble? why is not all my body afraid? and why do I not
mourn and bewail before thee, after such a sort, that tears might spring out
of mine eyes? I would feign, but I am not able, because I cannot do that which
I desire to do. This makes me truly woonderfullie to marvel, that I am no
more moved, when I see with the eyes of my faith, thee which art so fearful.

But who can do any thing without the help of thy grace? Except thou make
our stony hearts to relent, we of our selves are not able to mollify them. For
all our health depends upon thy great mercy. O wretch that I am! How is my
soul made without any feeling or perceiuerance; that it is not afraid with
overmuch fear, whiles it stands before God, and sings to him his own
praises? Alas, how is my heart so hardened, that mine eyes do not gush out great
floods of tears without ceassing; when I, which am but a servant or bondwoman,
do commune, and talk in my Lord and masters presence? Yea a woman with God,
a creature with a Creator. I that am made of the slime of the earth, do speak
with him that made all things of nothing.

Put me before thee, O Lord; and whatsoever I perceive of my self, in the
secrets of my heart, I do not keep it close from thy gracious ears. Thou art
rich in mercy, and liberal in rewards. Give me of thy goods, that with them I
may serve thee. For with nothing else can we serve or please thee, but with
thine own gifts, which thou have vouchsafed to bestow upon us. Fasten, I
beseech thee, thy fear in my flesh. Let my heart rejoice and be glad to fear
thy name. Would God my sinful soul feared thee so much, as that holy man,
the which said: I always feared God, as though it were great swelling floods
should come and tumble upon me.

O God the giver of all good things, give me among thy praises, a well of
tears, with the pureness of heart and reioicing of mind; that I loving thee
perfectly, and worthily praising thee, may feel, taste, and favor, in the
palate of my heart, how sweet and pleasant thou art, O Lord, as it is written:
Do ye taste and see how sweet and delectable the Lord is. Blessed is the man
that puts his trust in him. Blessed is that people which knows glad and
ioifull praising. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart
are thy ways, which going through the vale of misery, uses it for a well.
Blessed are the clean in heart, because they shall see God. Blessed are they
that dwell in the house of the Lord, they shall praise thee world without end,

Amen.
A very devout prayer for grace to praise God, and to be thankful for his
benefits.
O LORD Jesus Christ, which art the word of the father, which came into this
world to save sinners: I beseech thee, by the most loving bowels of thy mercy,
to amend and repair my life. Make better my deeds, take thou the ordering of
my manners. Take from me that that noieth and hurts me, and displeases
thee: and give me that which thou know will please thee, and profit me. Who
can make clean that which is conceived of an unclean seed, but thou alone?
Thou art the God almighty, of infinite piety; which dooest justify and make
righteous, even those that are wicked men; and raisest again to life them that
were dead in sin; thou changest sinners, and they are, while they live here,
no deadly or damnable sinners.

Take away therefore from me whatsoever is in me that pleases not thee. For
thine eyes do see much imperfectness in me. Lay the hand, I beseech thee, of
thy pity, on me, and whatsoever offends the eyes of thy piety, remove it
from me. In thy sight is both my health and my disease: the one I beseech thee
to preserve, the other to cure. Do thou heal me, O Lord, and I shall be
healed: do thou make me safe, and I shall be saved. Thou, I mean, which dooest
make whole them that be diseased, and dooest preserve them that be cured; which
only with a beck dooest restore and repair things that be decayed, and
fallen into ruin. For if thou will vouchsafe to sow any good seed in the
feeld of my heart, of necessity thou must pluck up first, with the hand of thy
pity, the thorns of vices which be in it.

O most gracious, most gentle, most loving, desired, amiable, and lovely of
all others; power in my heart, I beseech thee, so great plenty of delectation
in thee, that I may desire no earthly or carnal thing, nor yet think upon
them; but that I may love thee alone, that I may have thee only in my heart,
and in my mouth. Write with thy finger in my breast, the delectable remembrance
of thy sweet name, and so, that it may not be blotted out with any
forgetfulness. Write thy will in the tables of mine heart, and also thy
iustifications; that I may always, and in every place have thee, O Lord,
before mine eyes, and in my sight.

Inflame my mind with that fire, which thou did send into the earth, and
willedst it to be kindled, that I might offer unto thee daily, with tears, a
sacrifice of a troubled spirit, and a repentant heart. O sweet Christ, O good
Jesus, even according unto my desire, and even as I heartily require thee with
my whole mind, give me thy holy and chaste love, which may replenish and keep
me, and also fully possess me. Give me an evident sign and token of thy
love, even a flowing well of tears, which will continually run, that those
tears may somewhat testify thy love in me; that they may show forth, and
declare how much my soul loves thee, whiles for the great delectation it has
in the sweetness of thy love, it may not refrain from shedding tears.

O good Lord, I call to my remembrance sometimes that virtuous woman Hanna,
which came to the Tabernacle to pray, that God would send her a son; of whom
the scripture makes mention, that her countenance, after her tears and
prayers, was not again changed, or altered. But when I think upon so great
virtue, constancy, and steadfastness of that woman, I do blush, and am vexed,
with sorrow, and confounded with shame; because I a wretch, do perceive my
self to be fallen overmuch from thee. For if that good woman did weep, after
such a sort, and continued so in weeping, which did search for nothing else but
a son, how ought my sinful soul to mourn, and to persist and abide in
weeping, that seeks and looueth God, and has a desire to come unto him? How
ought such a soul to mourn and weep, which seeks God day and night, which
will love nothing but Christ? My tears now truly should be made meat unto me
day and night.

Look upon me therefore, O Lord, and take pity on me; because the dolours
and sorrows of my heart are many in number. Give me thy heavenly consolation,
and do not despise nor cast away a sinful soul, for the which thou did
die. Give me inward tears, I beseech thee, from the bottom of my heart, which
may wash away the spots of my sins. Replenish my soul always with
heavenly delectation and mirth, that I may obtain some little portion or part
in thy kingdom; although not amongst the perfect men, whose steps I cannot
follow, yet at the least among the religious women and inferior sort.

And here now the marvelous devotion of another woman, called Marie Magdalen,
comes into my mind, which with virtuous love, and godly affection, did seek
thee lieng in the sepulcher; which, when thy Disciples went away, and departed
from thee, did remain with thee her self; which sat there sad and sorrowful,
weeping long and very much; and when she did arise, she searched with a
diligent eye, and with many tears the corners of the sepulcher, which was
left empty, if she might epsy thee out in any place, whom she with a fervent
desire sought. Yea and moreover, she went again and again to the sepulcher,
but that was not enough unto her, neither did it satisfy her desire. For the
grace of a good work, is to persevere and continue in the same. And because
she did love more than other, and that in loving she wept, and in weeping she
searched, and in searching she continued: therefore was it thy pleasure, that
she should first find thee, see thee, and talk with thee before all other. And
not only this, but also she was a tidings-bearer of thy glorious
resurrection, unto thy Disciples, when thou did command and bid her, saying:
Go, and tell my brethren, that they go unto Galilie; there they shall see me,
etc.

Seeing therefore that that devout woman did weep after such a sort, and
continued in weeping, which did seek thee that wast alive among the dead, and
touched thee with the hand of her faith; how ought a soul to mourn and to
continue in mourning, which believes in thee, and with her mouth does
acknowledge thee, to be her redeemer, that sit now in heaven, and reignest
every where? How much therefore ought such a soul to mourn and weep, which
loves thee with all her heart, and with her whole desire does covet to see
thee?

Oh only refuge, the only hope of wretches; unto whom no man or woman needs
at any time to pray, without hope of mercy: grant unto me this grace, for
thy sake, and for thy holy name sake, that as often as I think upon thee, as
often as I speak of thee, write of thee, read of thee, confer of thee; as often as
ever I remember thee, stand before thee, offer up praises, prayers, and
sacrifice unto thee; so often I may weep abundantly with tears in thy sight,
so that my tears may be to me in stead of bread day and night.

Thou truly, O King of glory, and master of all virtues, have taught us with
thy word, and with thine example, to mourn and weep, whereas thou say:
Blessed be they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Thou did weep for
thy friend Lazarus that was dead: and did let tears fall down plentiouslie
for the City, which should perish. I beseech thee, O good Jesus, by those most
precious tears, and by all thy mercies and pities, wherewith thou did
vouchsafe maruellouslie to help and succor us that were lost, give me the
grace to weep, and to be earnestly repentant for my sins; which grace my
soul desires and coueteth very much: and except it come of thy gift, I
cannot have it, but by the holy Ghost, which does mollify the hard hearts of
sinners, and provoke them to weeping.

Give me the grace of tears, like as thou gave to our forefathers and
mothers, whose examples we ought to follow; that I may bewail my self in
all my life, like as they did bewail themselves day and night. Give me the
deaw of thy grace from above, and also a deaw of tears beeneth: that my tears
may be unto me in stead of bread day and night: and that I may be made in thy
sight, O Lord my God, by the fire of thy provocation, a fat and acceptable
sacrifice. Make me to be mortified and killed upon the altar of mine heart, and
that I may be received of thee, as a fat and a sweet smelling sacrifice. Give
unto me, O good Lord, a plentiful, flowing, and clear well of tears, in the
which I may wash continually this foul and spotted sacrifice. For although I
have offered up my self wholly unto thee, by the help of thy grace: yet
nevertheless, in many things I offend thee daily, because of my great
fragilitie and weakness.

Give me therefore the grace of tears, and continual repentance, O blessed
God: and most especially through the great sweetness of thy love, and the
remembrance of thy mercies, prepare this table for thy servant, in thy sight;
and give me power, that as often as I list I may be satisfied of it. Grant unto
me for thy goodness and pity, that this thy cup, replenished and filled
full, may satisfy my thrist, that my spirit may covet thee, and that my mind
may burn in thy love, forgetting all vanity and misery.

Hear, O my God; hear, O light of mine eyes, thou that art the stirrer up and
quickener of my dull ears, hear what I desire and ask: and give me grace to
ask that which thou hear. O pitiful Lord, which art wont to be easily
entreated, be not hard to be entreated of me, because of my sins, but for thy
goodness receive the prayers of thy servant, and grant me the effect of my
petition and desire,

Amen.
A godly and divine Meditation of the ioies of the celestial para dise, to be
used at convenient times in the church, that is, either before, or after
public service: for to that all men present ought to be attentive.
O My soul, let us return to the heavenly city, wherein we be registered, and
made free citizens. For like as we be fellowe-citizens of the Saints, and
houshold-meanie of God; and like as we be the heirs of God, and coheires with
Christ: so let us a little consider the happy roialtie of our city, so far
forth as it is possible for us to consider it. Let us say with the Prophet, O
how glorious things are spoken of thee thou city of God! For thou art the
dwelling place of all them that rejoice, the joy of the whole earth is founded
upon thee. There is not in thee any age, nor misery of age: there is not in
thee any maimed person, any lame man, any crook back, nor any misshapen
body. For all be grown up to perfect men, after the full measure of the age
of Christ.

What blesseder thing can there be, than such a life; where there is no fear
of poverty, nor weakness of diseases? No man is harmed there, no man is
displeased there, no man enuieth there. There is no burning of covetousness,
no desire of meat, no ambitious suing for honor and authority. There is no
dread of devil, no snares of feends, no fear of hell fire. There is no death,
neither of body nor of soul: but pleasant life assured of immortality. Then
shall there be no miseries, then shall there be no debates: but all things
shall be at agreemeut, because all the Saints shall agree in one. Peace and
mirth hold all things together, all things are there calm and quiet.

There the seven lamps of Gods spirits are still burning, before the throne of
God: and there is continual light, not such as is now here, but so much the
brighter, as it is much happier. For as we read, that city shall need no
sun, nor moon, nor light artificial, because the Lord almighty shall shine
in it; and the Lamb, as a lamp, shall be the light of it; where the Saints
and wise Uirgins shall shine as the stars, for ever without end: and such as
have taught many in the way of righteousness, shall be as the brightness of
the sky. Where there shall be no night, no darkness, no meeting of clouds,
no painfulnesse of heat or cold: but there shall be such a temperatnesse as
never eye has seen, ear heard, nor heart of any man conceived. There shall
be no company, saving only of them that are accounted worthy to enioie the
same, whose names are written in the book of life.

But yet it is far above all these things, to be in fellowship with the
companies of Angels, Archangels, and all the heavenly Powers, to behold the
Patriarchs and Prophets, to see the Evangelists and Apostles, to wonder at the
hosts of Martyrs and Confessors, to view the companies of Uirgins, and to see
all the Saints; yea and also to see our own parents and kindred. Glorious are
these things, O my soul; but much more glorious is it to behold the present
countetenance of God.

O happy plesantnesse; O pleasant happiness, to see the Saints, to be with the
Saints, and to be a Saint! Yea, a passing excellent glory shall it be, when we
shall see God in himself; and when we shall both see, and have him in our
selves for ever and ever, of whom we shall never have seen enough.

O my soul, let us think upon this, I say, with a diligent mind; let us long
after this with our whole heart, let us sigh heartily, desire earnestly, and
wish continually, that we may soon come unto them, unto that city above,
whereof so glorious things are spoken, and wherein is the habitation of all
that rejoice,

Amen.
Another divine Meditation, of the happiness of the souls that are with God,
especially to be used, when you have sung a Psalm, after a funeral Sermon.
Happy is the soul, which being let loose from the earthly prison, flies up
freely into heaven, and there beholds thee her most sweet Lord face to
face, and is no more disquieted with any fear of death, but reioiceth in the
euerlastingnesse of incorruptible glory. For it is safe and out of peril, and
henceforth fears neither enemy nor death. It possesses thee her merciful
Lord, whom she has long sought, and ever loved. And accompanieng her self
with the quiers of Psalme-singers, she sings continually the sugared songs of
everlasting mirth, to the glory of thee, O King Christ, O gracious Jesus. For
she is, as it were, made drunken with the bountifulness of thy house, and thou
make her to drink of the stream of thy pleasures.

Happy is the fellowship of the heavenly citizens, and glorious is the
solemnity of all them that return from the sorrowful travel of this our
pilgrimage, to the pleasantnes of beauty, to the beauty of all brightness,
and to the flower of all excellency; where thy citizens behold thee
continually, O Lord. Nothing that may trouble the mind is offered there to the
ear. What songs, what instruments, what Carols, what melody, what music
sounds there without end? There sound always most pleasant tunes of Hymns
and Psalms, most sweet melody of Angels, and most wonderful ditties of
songs; which are sung to thy glory, by the celestial inhabitants, with
heavenly harmony.

No harshnesse, no gallie bitterness, nor iangling discords have any room
within thy realm. For there is neither naughty person, nor naughtiness.
There is none adversary, nor impugner, neither is there any inticement of
sin. There is no needinesse, no shame, no bralling, no mis-vsage, no
excusing, no fear, no unquietness, no penalty, no doubtfulnesse, no
violence, no discord or contention. But there is perfect peace full of love,
continual reioicing and praising of God, careless rest without end, and
everlasting gladness in the holy Ghost.

O how luckie should I silly wretch be, if I might hear the most pleasant
Psalms, Hymns, and Carols of thy citizens, and their sugared songs, advancing
the praises of the sovereign Trinity with due honor: but over happy should
I be, might I once attain to sing a song my self, I say, to sing one of the
sweet songs of Zion, to our Lord Jesus Christ.

Another longing after the ioies of heavenly Zion.
O Lightsome and glorions house of God, I have loved thy goodlinesse, and the
place where the glory of the Lord God, who both enioieth and has created
thee, does dwell. In mine exile I sigh after thee both night and day, mine
heart longs; my mind coueteth, and my soul desires to come unto the society
of your happiness.

My prayer unto him which made me, is, that he would possess me in thee;
because he has made both me and you. For I desire your holy fellowship, and
wonderful glory; not for any merit of mine own; but I trust to attain
thereunto, through the price of his blood; namely of Jesus Christ, whereby we
be redeemed.

I confess, I have gone astraie like a lost sheep, and have too long dwelled
out of my native soil, and am far away cast from the face of the Lord my God,
into this blindness of banishment, who driven out of the ioies of paradise, I
bewail with my self daily the misery of my captivity; and sing a woeful
song with great lamentation, when I remember thee, O mother Jerusalem, while my
feet do but stand in thy courts, O sacred and comlie Zion; and I am not able
plainly to look into thine inner places.

Notwithstanding, I have good hope, upon the shoulders of my good shepherd,
thy Creator, to be brought back unto thee, that I may triumph again with that
unspeakable joy, where withal they be cheered, which dwell with thee before
God his Majesty, and our Savior Christ, which has abrogated, through his
flesh, the hatred; and pacified all things, both which are in heaven, and which
are in earth, by his blood. For he is our peace, which made of both one, and
ioining the two contrary walls together, has promised that he will give the
everlasting felicity of your happiness in himself, after the like manner and
measure, when he said: They shall be like the Angels of God in heaven.

Another longing or desire of the soul after the supernall Jerusalem.
O Mother Jerusalem, the holy city of God, and the deerly beloved spouse of
Christ; after thee does mine heart covet, and my soul exceedingly is in love
with thy beauty. Oh how comlie, how glorious, how honorable art thou! Thou
art all fair, and there is no spot in thee. Triumph and rejoice, O beautiful
daughters of the Princes. For the King has a pleasure in thy fairness, and
loves thy goodly personage. O thou fairer than the children of men! But what
is my beloved, O thou fairest among women, of the well-beloved? My well-beloved is
white and ruddie, the chief of ten thousand. Like as the apple trees of the
forest; so is my well-beloved among the sons of men. Under his shadow had I
delight. Lo now I sit, and his fruit is sweet unto my mouth. My well-beloved put
in his hand by the hole of the door, and mine heart was affectioned toward
him. In my bed by night I sought him that my soul loved; I sought, and I found
him. I hold, and will not let him go, until he bring me into my mothers house,
into the chamber of her that conceived me. For there thou will give me thy
teates most abundantly, and perfectly; and wilt satisfy mine heart with a
marvelous satietie, so that I shall neither hunger nor thirst any more.

Oh happy shall my soul be, yea happy and always happy shall I be; could I
once get to behold thy glory, thine happiness, thy beauty, thy gates, thy
walls, thy streets, thy manifold mansions, thy noble citizens, and thy mighty
King in his Majesty. For thy walls are of precious stones, thy gates of the
richest pearls, and thy streets of the pure gold; wherein is soong the ioifull
Halleluiah without intermission. Thy manifold buildings are founded upon
squared stones, builded upon Sapphires, enclosed with golden walls; whereinto
none shall enter, but the clean; neither shall any unclean person inhabit
it. Beautiful art thou become, O mother Jerusalem, and sweet in thy comforts.
No such thing is in thee, as we suffer in this world, and as we behold in this
wretched life. There is neither darkness nor night, nor any change of times in
thee. There shines not in thee either the light of the lamp, or the
brightness of the moon, or the glittering of the stars: but the God of God,
light of light, even the sun of righteousness evermore does enlighten thee.
The white and unspotted lamb is thy pure and clear light, thy sun, the
cleerenesse, and everlasting contemplation of this most glorious king is all
thine happiness.

He is the King of kings in the midst of thee, and you are his ministers
about him. There be the singing quires of Angels, there be the companies of
supernall citizens, there the solemnity of all, which have returned from this
woeful peregrination unto thy ioies. There be the prudent Prophets, the twelve
Apostles, the victorious host of infinite Martyrs, and the sacred convent of
holy Confessors is there. There be both upright men, and holy virgins, which
have overcome the pleasures of this world, and the weakness of sex. There be
those young men and maidens, old men and matrons, which have spent their time
in godly conversation. There be the sheep and lambs that have escaped the
snares of this world, where they now triumph in their several mansions. The
glory of each particular man differs; but common is the joy of them all.
There full and perfect charity does reign. For God there is all in all, whom
they do always behold, and by beholding him, continually they burn the more
in love toward him. They love, and they praise him; they praise, and they love
him: all their work is to praise God without ending, without fainting, without
toiling. O happy, yea and evermore happy shall I be, if after the resolution
of this mortal body, I may hear those celestial songs of melody, which are
sung unto the praise of the eternal King by those citizens of the supernall
country, and by the companies of the blessed spirits! Happy then, yea much
happy should I be, might I be counted worthy to sing those sugared songs, and
to wait on my King, my God, and my Captain, to behold him in his glory,
according as he has promised, saying: Father, I will that they, whom thou
have given me, be with me, even where I am; that they may behold my glory,
which I had with thee before the foundation of the world. And in another place.
If any man serve me, let him follow me. For where I am, there shall also my
servant be. And again, He that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I
will love him, and will show mine own self unto him.

Another godly and Christian prayer for the Church and congregation presently
assembled.
ALthough the holy Scriptures do teach us every where, that the heaven, O
most good and merciful God, is thy dwelling place; yet the same does in such
wise set out thine infinite goodness, as the Church is both called, and also
is in deed, thy sanctified house, wherein thou most frequentest; wherein also
thy blessed name is lifted up with high praises, the faithful instructed in
thy sacred words, and the holy Sacraments duly received. And therefore the
godly, having an especial regard to the honor of thy glorious name, most
earnestly, with a fervent mind, and vehement affection, do continually stir
up one another, to make holy assemblies, with wonderful exhortations; to the
intent the pure worshipping, and holy inuocating of thy blessed name, might
only be therein practiced. Now therefore, and at what time so ever we shall
come together in the holy congregation, our earnest request is, that we may
be there with cheerful and very desirous minds. For thou truly have, of an
exceeding liberality, adorned thy holy Church with most flourishing and right
excellent gifts; neither is there any thing pretermitted, that apperteineth to
her garnishing, which may either belong to the spiritual decking and
beautifieng thereof, or to the plentious enriching of it, in abundance of all
heavenly good things. Which seeing they have proceeded most fully from thee;
this only remains, that thou would be present with us and them, which are
assembled together in the name of Jesus Christ; and so condescend unto our
fervent prayers, who thereby do call upon thee, as the members thereof may be
annexed together with a perpetual concord. Cause all our meetings (I say)
good father, to be in such sort, as we may render due honor unto thee. Let the
sacred Scriptures be here purelie and sincerely interpreted, and let thy
glorious kingdom from day to day be more and more enlarged, making all these
things to be established with thy ioious peace, and the tranquillity of thy
holy spirit, yea so long as we pray for the quietness and felicity hereof.
Let us procure substantial and perfect good things, both to our neighbors,
and also unto thy blessed house, and holy sanctified Church. And cause that
those Citizens, which do credit the sacred doctrine of thy holy Church, may
by thy excellent benefit become friends and faithful brethren one to another;
and in the end being quite delivered from thrall, bring thou to pass that one
day we may altogether repose our selves in the true and most holy Jerusalem;
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer for the increase of the Church.
THE Church is unto thee, O most good and merciful GOD, as a most royal
Queen espoused; to the intent she may bring forth unto thee a most plentiful
and holy seed. Wherefore, forasmuch as thou have coupled her unto thee, to be
thy wife by faith; and that she is reputed of the ungodly as a barren woman,
because she seems to have left off childbearing: grant her to be made unto
thee, through thy sacred word, and holy spirit, afruitfull and ioifull mother
of many holy and virtuous children, by whom thy glorious name may be exalted
with perpetual praises, in thine holy house, even as it becomes them. Let
her be glad with a perfect and substantial joy, for the great number of her
most faithful and religious sons and daughters. Multiply and increase the
issue of thy sacred Church (I say) O God, with a plentiful and an innumerable
issue; and let her engender godly children unto thee daily more and more,
even such as are worthy of such a father and mother, and to be partakers of
thy blessed spirit. Grant that we may altogether aspire unto the love of thee,
our most delectable bridegroom, and that throughour labor laid together, in
stead of our forefathers, who are now already gathered unto thee, many mo
faithful, religious, and holy children may be begotten unto thee anew, with
whom we may always, in our posterities, set out and celebrate thy famous
honor, and most noble praises. Shine thou down out of Zion, O God, even from
thine exceeding high and vnapprochable light, upon the virgin thy blessed
Church; and preserve her from the number of perils, which she is in continual
danger of. Let her not fall to ruin, nor be as a lamp despised in the opinion
of the rich and welthie men of this world; but let thy mountains glister, and
give their light as lamps of fire. Yea let righteousness and salvation break
forth out of zion, as a shining light and burning lamp; that all men may see
it, and glorify thee. Let the lamps of her love, I say, O God, be as coals
of fire, and a very vehement flame of the Lord, to dazell, overcome, and
consume her enemies after a wonderful and miraculous manner; and cause the
seven lamps of the Uirgins, even all thy spiritual gifts and graces O GOD, in
the Saints to burn bright and clear, without any quenching before thy
throne for ever.

Let thy Church be as a flourishing Uine, spreading it self far abroad; so
that Antichrist, with all his craft and industry, may not be of force to cut
and hew it down. And even as thou, O Lord, have every where maruellouslie
replenished the earth with thine inestimable goodness, so in like manner, be
so good, as to let the number of thy true and faithful suppliants, be daily
more and more greatly enlarged. Let there be continual laboring in thy
beloved Church, by doctrine and example, to nurture the blessed children, so
that their works may be a singular ornament thereof, to thy glory, and the
increase of all manner of virtue. Let her (I say) be made daily like unto a
most fruitful woman, that may be compared to the rank Olives, and exceeding
fertile Uines: and grant, that a continual offspring of thy dear children, may
be multiplied in thy blessed Church, and become notable in peace, in praises,
and in purity of life and doctrine, to the renowned honor of thy glorious
name, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer for the preservation of the Church.
O Celestial God, and Father of infinite mercy and compassion, which not
only gatherest to thy self an holy Church in this world, out of mankind,
through the operation of the holy Ghost, and preaching of thy word; but also
preseruest the same being gathered, and adornest it with all kind of temporal
things, and which more is, with eternal bliss: we humbly beseech thee,
gracious Lord, that of thy goodness, thou would vouchsafe evermore to
maintain this thy little flock, embracing, preaching, and professing thy
word, through thine especial grace. Continue thy favor toward the same, keep
it in sound doctrine, constant in confessing, in the lawful use of thy holy
Sacraments, and in pureness of life; that neither the gates of hell, the rage
of Satan, nor yet the rigorousnesse and tyranny of this world oppress the
same. Protect and keep this thy boat and little bark, tossed among many
perilous tempests, and miserable surges, in the raging sea of this trouble
some world, that it perish not being overwhelmed. Uphold thy Church, which is
builded upon a sure rock, and depends upon Christ a sound and immovable
foundation.

O Lord of hosts, return; look down from heaven, and behold; visit thy
Uine, and make it perfect, which thy right hand has planted, and thou have
chosen to thy self. Hedge the same about with thy strong defense, that the
branches thereof being spread out and pruned, may bring forth abundance of
fruit. Raise up thy power, come, O God, and save us. Convert us, show forth
thy countenance, and we shall be saved. Increase thy sheep within thy hardels,
so shall we be quiet from all invasion and scatterings, neither can any draw
us by force out of thy hands. Defend us from such as seek the utter overthrow
of pure religion, and in place thereof labor to bring in the shameful
instauration of blasphemous idolatry. Suffer not thy word, that most clear
and unchangeable light to be corrupted, or put out by our means: but gather to
thy self, through the sound of the Gospel, such a Church, as may harken unto
thee, honor and sanctify thy name, as well in word, as in honest
conversation, that so thou may have a righteous and holy generation,
celebrating thy goodness for evermore. O join us unto that company, which
does worship thee continually, that we may be citizens of thy kingdom among
thy Saints.

Grant that we err not from the foundation of wholesome doctrine, answering to
the rules of the sacred Scripture; and that we offend not against our
conscience: but separate us from the company of the ungodly ones, and from
the damned crew of the reprobate. Let us not so much as take their names into
our mouths, which power out heaps of blasphemies to thy great dishonor, and
defacing of thy truth; unto whom thy son is a destruction and stone of
offense. For they despise his base estate, and the foolish preaching of thy
Gospel; and the deformed show of the Church, placed in the midst of all kind
of miseries, they loath and abhor; preferring uncertain riches, lordly
authority, and the vain pleasures of this transitory world, before the
profession of the truth; and so making war with thy son, they do purchase
everlasting destruction unto themselves.

Keep us evermore, that we may abide in that Church, which is truly
Catholic, consisting of members of many nations; but linked unto thee in one
and the same confession. Sanctify us with thine holy spirit, that our sins
being forgiven us, we may take another trade of life, in acknowledging thee to
be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Give unto thy
Church resting places, and nests, where they may sound thy sacred Gospel
purelie, without corruption. Suppress the devil, which spredeth blasphemies
against thy doctrine; that so neither feined gods may be erected, nor
superstitious inuocations confirmed, nor thy glory defaced. Weaken the power
of thine enemies, which boil in hatred against thy truth, and conspire the
death of thine elect: so neither shall stables of woolues be made, nor dens
of thieves established.

O Lord return and quicken us; so shall thy people rejoice in thee. Let all
such as trust in thee rejoice and triumph for ever. Dwell thou in them, and let
those which love thy name, rejoice in thee. O Lord remember not our offenses.
Thou which wast sometime merciful, and forgauest the wickedness of thy people,
and hidst all their sins; which withdrawedst all thine anger, and turnedst
from the fierceness of thine indignation; be mindful of thy woonted mercy,
and receive us into thy favor. For we depend upon thee alone, being destitute
of all worldly aid; our trust wholly is in thee, and all our confidence
rests in thy stretched-out arm. O Lord, cover us with thy grace, as it were
with a shield, that so we may be blessed; and abiding in the house of thy
congregation, may acknowledge and call upon thee, according to thy word
revealed, and praise thee evermore, through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A prayer for unity in faith and religion.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, which have called us to the unity
of the true Catholic faith, and gathered us by thy word into the lap of the
Christian congregation, that we may be all of us one body, and one spirit;
even as we are called in one hope of our calling; one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, one God, and Father of all, which is above all, and through all, and
in us all. For even as thou, O Father, art in thy son, and he in thee; so
should we also be one in thee our God. And therefore we cry unto thee, O
almighty Father, and eternal God; teach us thy ways, that we may walk in
thy truth. O knit our hearts unto thee, that we may fear thy name. Grant that
all the faithful may be like affected, and of one mind as thou art, thinking
the same thing after the ensample of Christ our Savior; and that as well in
minds, as with mouth, we may agree among our selves, both in true doctrine, and
in outward behavior of conversation. For the scope of the Churches felicity
consists in the unity of true faith and religion.

Keep us in the true understanding, and right knowledge of thy sacred
Scriptures; that without strife and contention, we may speak one thing. Let
there be no dissentions nor schisms among us. Let nothing be done through
contention, or of vain glory: but let us be one body, endued with one mind
and judgment, according to thy word revealed; until we attain to the unity
of faith, and knowledge of thy son, into a perfect man, according to the
measure of the age of the fullness of Christ, which is the head; by whom the
whole body being coupled and knit together, by every joint, for the furniture
thereof, according to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every
part, receives increase of the body, unto the edifieng of it self in love.

O most holy Father, keep us by thy name, that we may be one in thee; and
that among us, which are believers, there may be one heart and one mind. O
Christ our only Savior and Mediator, which before thy passion did pray,
that we might be one in thee, even as thou art in thy Father: grant that thy
Church may be at concord, and agree in one true faith and confession. Let there
continue among us a godly counsel, let there be one agreement in faith, one
mind in prayer; that we may grow up in thee, and that all our hearts may be
coupled together by the bond of the spirit, using thy gifts as they should be,
to the advancement of thy glory, and to the common profit both of thy Church
and Commonweal; and walking worthy our calling, whereunto we are called,
with all humility and gentleness, with all lenity, forbearing one another,
through charity, being careful to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace.

Repress the furiousness of Satan, which sows dissension among thy flock,
to weaken our faith, and to hinder our prayers, whereby thy glory is defaced.
Grant therefore, that we prove not desirous of vain glory, provoking one
another, and enuieng one another, that we bite not one another to our
destruction. For of emulation springs contention, which being once inflamed,
boil out into mortal divisions. And as many as maintain emulations,
contentions, and factions, are carnal, and walk as men. Wherefore, take from
us the zeal of the flesh, which is foolish: and let all envy, wrath, pride,
and arrogancy be far from us. Likewise let us avoid foolish and unlearned
questions, knowing that they engender strife and contention, and serve for
nothing, but to the subuerting of the hearers, and ingraffing of errors. Where
a desire of strife is, there certainly God dwells not: and they which raise
tumults of nothing, and disquiet thy flock: those will thou, O son of God,
destroy.

Come holy spirit, replenish the hearts of the faithful here assembled, and
else where: and inflame in them the fire of thy love, which once did gather
the nations into the unity of the faith, through the diversity of tongues.
Join our hearts together, that we may nourish christian concord among us, and
that we all glued as it were together in loving hearts, may be of one mind in
thee: so shall thy pure doctrine zealouslie be maintained, and no false
interpretation of the scripture obstinately be defended. Bring home to thy
fold all such as are turned from the unity of true religion, that thrre may be
one pastor, and one fold. To such as are gone out from us, grant constancy;
that they may continue with us, teaching the Gospel to the salvation of the
hearers. And if it happen that any, contrary to the doctrine which they have
learned, raise dissension and offenses; grant that we may avoid them, least the
hearts of the simple, through their sweet persuasions and flattery, be
deceived. O God, author of peace and concord, give grace, that every of us may
think the same thing, acording to our Savior Christ,

Amen.
The Letanie.
O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son redeemer, etc.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, proceeding from, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have
mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people, whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spare us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy; from envy,
hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sins; and from all the deceits of
the world, the flesh, and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightening and tempest; from plague, pestilence, and famine; from
battle, and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedition, and privy conspiracy; from all false doctrine and
heresy; from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word, and commandment.

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and
circumcision, by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious resurrection and ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseeth thee to hear us, O Lord God; and that it may please
thee, to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant Elizabeth, our most
gracious Queen and Governor.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule her heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that she may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and
glory.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be her defender and keeper, giving her the victory
over all her enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of
thy Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the counsel, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekelie thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weake-harted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort, all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons, and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use, the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enioie them.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance; to forgive us all our
sins, negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy
holy spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

The Versicle.

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.

O God merciful father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desires of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers, that we
make before thee, in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us; and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtlety
of the devil or man works against us, be brought to naught; and by the
providence of thy goodness, they may be dispersed; that we thy servants being
hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thy name sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us,
the noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before
them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever, etc.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, o Christ,

Graciously hear us, o Lord Christ.

The Versicle.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us.

The Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy name sake turn from us all those evils, that we most
worthily have deserved; and grant that in all our troubles we may put our
whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of life, to thy honor and glory; through our only mediator and
advocate Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer for the Queens Majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty, King of kings, Lord of lords,
the only ruler of princes, which dooest from thy throne behold all the
dwellers upon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold
our most gracious sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth, and so replenish her with
the grace of thy holy spirit, that she may alwaie incline to thy will and
walk in thy way. Indue her plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant her in
health and wealth long to live, strengthen her, that she may vanquish and
overcome all her enemies: and finally after this life, she may attain
everlasting joy and felicity: through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer for Bishops and Curates.
Almighty and everlasting God, which only workest great maruels, send down
upon our Bishops and Curates, and all congregations committed to their charge,
the healthful spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, power
upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the
honor of our Advocate and Mediator Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A prayer of Chrysostom.
Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and dooest promise, that when two or three
be gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests, fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting,

Amen.
2. Corinthians. 13, verse 13. THE grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore,
Amen.
Other godly Collects and prayers to be used after the Letanie, as occasion
serves, and first:
In time of drought for rain.
O GOD heavenly father, which by thy son Jesus Christ have promised to all
them that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, all things
necessary to their bodily sustenance; send us, we beseech thee, in this our
necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of
the earth to our comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another.
Almighty God merciful Father, who in thy holy word have promised to hear
the prayers of thy people, which they shall make in this place of thy holy
temple: behold now that thou have shut up heaven, and there is no rain given
unto the earth, but a drought does utterly destroy the fruits of the earth,
for our sins and iniquities; we come unto thee, and confess our sins,
wherewith we have provoked thee thus to anger against us, and thy creatures,
for our sakes. We, I say, whom thou dooest justly thus afflict with drought
and barrenness of the earth, return unto thee with all our hearts, in fasting,
weeping, and mourning, beseeching thee, by hearty and earnest prayer, to have
mercy upon us, and deal not with us as we have righteouslie deserved. Hear
thou now in heaven, and pardon the sins of thy servants, and give rain unto
the land, that thou have given the people to inhabit. Hear, O Lord, I say,
the cry of man and beast, and open the treasures of the heavens, and give unto
us moderate showers to water the earth, that our cattle may be satisfied, and
our drought cease. Oh Lord have thou utterly rejected us, or does thy soul
abhor thy people for ever, that thou have so long plagued us with drought and
want of water? Our iniquities in deed testify against us, and our rebellions
are more than can be numbered. For we have sinned against heaven, and against
thee, and have been very noisome to the earth, and all thy creatures therein.
But, O Lord, thou hope of Israel, thou comfort, help and savior of all that
are in trouble; have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us; and do not abhor
us, nor cast us off for ever. O Lord, are there any among the gods of the
Gentiles, that can send rain? Or can the heavens of themselves give showers to
the earth? Is it not only thou, O Lord our God, which have made heaven and
earth, and dooest all things by thy mighty power that must do it? O save the
people therefore that call upon thee. O let the day come, wherein thou will
vouchsafe to hear us, O Lord; when I say thou will hear the heavens, and the
heavens may hear the earth, and the earth hear the corn, and the wine, and
the oil, and they all hear one another, and thou hear Israel, that thou
may have mercy upon us, and cause to come down for us the rain, even the
first rain, and the latter rain, in the first and second months, in due
seasons upon the earth, that our barns may be full of wheat, and our presses
abound with wine and oil, and our cattle serve to labor by thy blessing, and
that both man and beast may cease their mourning, and have cause to rejoice in
thy mercy. Grant us this, O father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
mediator and advocate, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory, now and for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer for the fruits of the earth.
O Lord God almighty, King of heaven and earth, which of thine abundant
goodness do adorn and replenish the earth with all kind of fruit and
grain, whereby the life both of man and beast is sustained: we beseech thee,
even for thy free mercy, that thou would vouchsafe to bless our feelds,
and ground, and to make them prosperously to yield their corn and increase.
For without thy blessing and favor, neither can the earth of it self bring
forth any whit, nor we by our pains make the same to prosper. Wherefore,
grant to all things, springing from the earth, a meet temperature of air; that
luckily they may take and increase. Keep our fruit upon the face of the earth
from all infection of the air; from thunder, hail, from untimely showers,
from too great dryness, and overmuch heat, from woormes hurtful, and beasts
devouring it before their prime, and from all other corruption; that our land
in thine anger be not desolate, and deny us fruit, enioieng her woeful Sabbath.

Shut not up the heavens in thine indignation for our sins, that it be not as
iron, nor the earth as brass, whereby it can not be tilled, ploughed, nor
sown, and so come to a very plain and utter wilderness: but of thy
goodness give us both the early and latter rain, that we may have abundance
of all fruit, and a ioifull harvest with a plentiful vintage. O God, send a
gracious rain upon thine inheritance, and give thy blessing, that our ground
may bring forth her fruit. Cause thy rain to power down in due season, that
it may be rain of blessing; whereby both trees may give their fruit, and the
ground yield forth her grain. Grant also that the air be pure from
infection, our bodies free from sickness, to our whole Realm peace and
quietness, that safely without trouble we may enioie thy gifts. Drive away
and repel from us malediction, and the destroier. Give us not in stead of
rain, dust and ashes; but open thy good treasures, and visit the land with thy
blessing, make it drunken, and enrich it abundantly.

Thy river, O Lord, is full of water; prepare our corn, and dispose our earth
to prosper; water abundantly the furrows of the same, and cause the rain to
descend into the valleys thereof; make the same soft with showers, and bless
our buds. Crown the year with thy goodness, and let thy clouds drop
fatness; let them drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and make the
little hills rejoice on every side. Let the plains be replenished with sheep,
and the valleys with corn, that the inhabitants of the earth may rejoice and
be merry.

O Lord, thou causest grass to grow for cattle, and herbs for ye use of man;
thou bring forth bread out of the earth, and wine to make glad the heart of
man; oil to make the countenance cheerful, and bread for to strengthen the
heart. Have therefore a care, O heavenly Father, of the seed, and other things
springing from the earth: keep them both in cold, rain, ice, and snow, from
the beating of winds, and injury of weather. Preserve them in extreme heat,
dryness, moistness, and such like; that they perish not before their time.
Root out the destroier, that there be neither blasting, mildew, nor
grasshopper, neither caterpiller hurting the fruits of the earth.

Keep us, O Lord, in the time of dearth; that we perish not for hunger, nor be
confounded in the perilous time. For thou art our God and Creator, which
satisfiest the thirsty soul, and fillest the hungry with goodness, which
have said; I will not fail, neither forsake thee; whereby being faithful, we
may say; The Lord is with us, therefore we will not fear what man can do
unto us. Behold, we miserable and great sinners do confess our wickedness,
with groaning and grief of heart, crieng unto thee which art in heaven. Hear
our prayers in thy dwelling place, and be merciful to thy people, which have
sinned against thee; and forgive us all our iniquities, wherein we have
transgressed against thee. By our sins we have brought all these miseries,
which hang over our heads; but blot out all our offenses, O God, after thy
manifold mercies; and take away from us the curse of our ground, that the
people may praise thee, O God; yea that all the people may praise thee, and the
earth bring forth her increase; through our Lord Jesus Christ, thine only
son, which lives and reigns with thee, in the unity of the holy spirit,
a God for evermore,

Amen.
For fair weather.
O Lord God, which for the sin of man did once drown all the world except
eight persons; and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to
destroy it so again: we humbly beseech thee, that although we for our
iniquities have woorthilie deserved this plague of rain and waters; yet upon
our true repentance thou will send us such weather, whereby we may receive the
fruits of the earth in due season; and learn both by thy punishment to amend
our lives, and for thy clemency to give thee praise and glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer in time of unseasonable showers, for fair weather.
O God and merciful Father, we acknowledge that we, through our manifold
sins, have deserved to be sharply rebuked and corrected of thee: but if
thou should deal with us after our sins, we are not able to abide thy
wrath and heavy hand. Wherefore deal mercifully with us, O Lord, after the
greatness of thy goodness, and the multitude of thy mercies; that we rather
may rejoice, and be thankful unto thee, for the abundance of thy great mercy,
and loving kindness, than be cast down and discouraged, by the heavy weight
of thy hand. In thy hands, O Lord, are both heaven and earth; so govern them
therefore, we beseech thee, for thy name sake; that we may have seasonable
weather, to receive the fruits of the earth. Stay the unmoderate plenty of
rain, and unseasonable weather: and power rather upon us the plentiful dew of
thy spirit, that we may daily grow to the perfection of Christian men and
women. Take away from us our stony hearts, and give unto us in stead there of
hearts of flesh, that we may cease at the length thus to provoke thy wrath, to
bring upon us either this so great a plague, as the loss of the fruits of the
earth; either else other plagues of thy just judgments. Grant that we may so
repent us of our former evils, that hereafter the worthy fruits of true
repentance may continually appear therein, and so to pass over and to end
our mortal lives; that at the last we may attain unto the blessed
resurrection, and life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
In time of thunder, lightening, raging tempests, and unseasonable weather,
pray thus:
O Most wise and mighty God, thou art a glorious King in all the world; thy
wonderful majesty does shine and is known also by rain, thundering,
lightening, and other meteors engendered in the air. Thy throne is among the
clouds, thou have made darkness thy secret place and thy pauilion about
thee, even darkness of water, and clouds of the air. At the brightness of
thy presence the clouds do pass away; so do the haile-stones and fiery
coals. Thou dooest thunder from the heavens, and give thy voice; hailestones
and coals of fire. Thou sendest thine arrows, and scatterest them; thou
increasest lightenings, and destroiest them. Who is so great a god as thou our
God? Thou art the God which dooest woonders, and declarest thy power among the
nations. Thou redeemest thy people with thine arm. The waters saw thee, and
were afraid; the depths trembled. The clouds powered out water, the air
thundered, and thine arrows went abroad. The voice of thy thunder was heard
round about the world, the earth trembled and shook. The foundations of the
earth shook and were discovered, at thy rebuking, O Lord; at the blasting of
the breath of thy nostrels.

Therefore shall the very heavens extol thy woonderous works, and the Saints
set forth thy truth in the congregation. For who is equal to thee in heaven?
And who like thee among the sons of the gods? Thou art very terrible in the
assembly of the saints, and to be reverenced above all that are about thee. O
Lord God of hosts, who is like unto thee; which art a mighty Lord, and thy
truth is about thee? Thou rulest the raging of the sea, thou stillest the waves
thereof, when they do arise. Thou only art of power to resolve into vapors
the drops of the sea, by the heat of the sun; thou take the same up being
turned into airie substance, and again turnest it into mere water, and make
it to come pouring down upon the face of the earth. Whatsoever thou will, thou
dooest in heaven, and in earrh, and in the sea, and in all deep places. With
thy power thou made the earth, with thy wisdom thou have established the
world, and with thy discretion stretchest out the heavens.

As soon as thou let thy voice be heard, the waters in the air wax
fierce. Thou drawest up the clouds from the ends of the earth, thou turnest the
lightening into rain, and bring forth the wind out of thy treasures. Thou
couerest the heavens with clouds, and preparest rain for the earth. Thou
make the grass to grow upon the mountains, and prouidest herbs for the use
of man. Thou give to beasts their food, and to the young ravens that cry.
Behold, so great art thou, that thou passest our knowledge; neither can the
number of thy years be searched out. When thou restrainest the drops of water,
the rain powers down by the vapors thereof, and falls abundantly upon
man. Thou bring forth the winds out of thy treasures; that is, from thy
secret places, where thou did hide them in great abundance, that they might
be ready at thy commandment, and come forth when thou think good. Thou
make the clouds to labor to give water to the earth, and scatterest the
cloud of thy light; thou turnest it about by thy government, that they may do
whatsoever thou command them upon the whole world.

O God, mine heart is troubled very sore, when I behold the immoderate showers,
and hear the terrible thunder: yea it forsakes his place, when I hear the
noise of thy voice, and the speech proceeding from thy mouth. O God, which
rulest heaven and earth, I most humbly beseech thee, mercifully to drive
away, or atleast to mitigate these mighty streams, and most raging tempests.
Restrain the thunderbolts, and thy fiery darts, that they hurt us not. Keep
us, and our nests, that we perish not through lightenings, nor be destroyed by
thy thunderclaps. Protect our houses and us, that we be neither consumed by thy
fiery meteor, nor drowned by thy sudden flood. O merciful God, rain not, I
beseech thee, hailestones upon the face of the earth; neither strike such as
are in the fields, be they man or beast. Strike not thou therewith all the
herbs of the feeld; neither break thou, gracious Lord, the trees of our land.
Destroy not our corn with hailestones, nor with hailestones smite thou our
cattle, and deliver our flocks from the thunderbolt. Cast not the feercenesse
of thy wrath, anger, and displeasure upon us. Give us not hailestones for
rain, neither flames of fire in our land; but of thy mercy convert the
thunder into gentle rain, whereby it may bring out fruit abundantly. Send
not among us either untimely or intemperate showers, which be either noisome
to the fruits, and bring the mildew, or destroy the corn. Restrain in like
sort the winds and violent tempests, that they bring none hurt, neither to us
or our goods, even for Christ's sake, our Lord and Savior,

Amen.
In time of dearth, or famine.
O GOD, heavenly father, whose gift it is that the rain does fall, the earth
is fruitful, beasts increase, and fishes do multiply; behold, we beseech
thee, the afflictions of thy people; and grant that the scarsitie and dearth,
which we do now most justly suffer for our iniquity, may through thy
goodness be mercifully turned into cheapenesse and plenty, for the love of
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be praise for
ever,

Amen.
Another prayer in time of any plague or sickness, war, penury,
orscarsenesse, etc.
O Eternal and everliving God, most merciful father, which of thy great long
suffering and patience, have hitherto suffered and borne with us, most
miserable offenders, who have so long straied out of thy way, and broken all
thy laws and commandments; and have neither by thy manifold benefits bestowed
upon us unworthy and unthankful sinners; nor by the voice of thy servants
and preachers by continual threatenings out of thy holy word hitherto bin
moved, as the children of love, to return unto thee our most gracious father;
either for fear of thy judgments, as humble and lowly servants, to turn
from our wickedness. And therefore, most righteous judge, thy patience being
as it were overcome at the last, with our obstinate repentance, thou have most
justly executed those thy terrible threats, now partly upon us, by plaguing
us so with most dreadful and deadly sickness, with troubles of wars, with
penury and scarsenesse of food and victual, whereby great multitudes of us
are daily afflicted, and consumed.

We beseech thee, O most merciful father, that in thy wrath thou will remember
thine old great mercies, and to correct us in thy judgments, and not in thy
just anger, least we be all consumed, and brought to naught. Look not so much
upon our deseruings, O most righteous Judge, to take just vengeance on our
sins; but rather remember thine infinite mercies, O most merciful father,
promised to us by thy dearly beloved son our Savior Jesus Christ; for
whose sake, and in whose name, we do earnestly and humbly crave mercy, and
forgiveness of our sins, and deliverance from this horrible sickness, wars,
dearth, etc. being thy just punishment, and plague for the same. And as thy
holy word does testify, that thy people of all ages, being justly plagued
for their sins, and yet in their distress, unfeignedly turning unto thee,
and suing for thy mercy, obtained the same: so likewise we, most worthily now
afflicted with grievous and dreadful plagues for our iniquities, pray thee, O
most merciful father, to grant us thy heavenly grace, that we may likewise
both truly and unfeignedly repent, and obtain thy mercy and deliverance,
from the same; which we beseech thee, O father of all mercies, and God of all
consolation, grant us for the same Jesus Christ's sake, our only savior,
mediator, and advocate,

Amen.
In time of any common plague or sickness.
Almighty God, which in thy wrath, in the time of King David, did slay
with the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand; and yet remembering
thy mercy, did save the rest; have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now
are visited with great sickness and mortality: that like as thou did then
command thine Angel to cease from punishing, so it may now please thee to
withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
A form of meditation and prayer, very meet to be used daily of all
honsholders in their houses, especially in the dangerous and contagious time
of the plague.
The Master and Mistres kneeling with their family, in some convenient place
of their house well perfumed before with frankincense, or some other wholesome
thing; as juniper, rosemarie, rosewater, and vinegar, etc. shall with fervent
hearts say, or cause to be said that that follows. The servants and family
to every petition shall say Amen.

Master or Mistress. WE read in thy holy word, O Lord, what blessings thou
have of thy mercy promised to them that live obedientlie, according to thy
blessed will and commandments. We read also the cursses that thy instice
has pronounced against such as despise thy word, or negligentlie pass not to
live thereafter. And among the rest of thy heavy cursses, thou threatenest by
name, the plague and the pestilence, with other noisome and most painful
diseases, to such as forsaking thee, worship strange gods, and follow their
own vain fantasies, in stead of thy sacred ordinances.

We find also, how extremely thine own people, the Jews, have oftentimes
fealt the performance of these thy bitter threatenings, and that for sundry
and diverse offenses: because they loathed Manna, and were not contented with
thy miraculous provision; but would have Qualies, and other dainty victuals,
to content their luxurious appetites, thou slewest so many with a sudden and
mighty plague, that the place of their burial was named thereof, and called
The graves of lust.

Also, for murmuring against the ministers of thy word, Moses and Aaron, thou
destroiedst with a sudden plague xiiij. thousand and more; besides those
traitors, whom the earth swallowed for their rebellion. And had not Aaron
entreated for them, and gone between the quick and the dead, thou would
have consumed them all; as thou wast minded to have done before, when they
despised the plentiful land, which thou had promised them; had not Moses
stayed thy wrath, when thou saiedst, I will strike them with the pestilence,
and utterly destroy them.

Furthermore, when they had lost thine Ark, through their own sins, and the
sins of their priests, the keepers thereof, after that the Philistines were
forced, through thy plaguing hand, religiously to send it home again; thou
strookest with the plague fifty thousand of the Beth-samites thy people, for
rashly presuming to look into the same, not having thy warrant so to do.

In the time of King David thou destroiedst three score and ten thousand of thy
people, in three days, with thy wasting plague of pestilence; moved thereto
by the transgression of David the King, whom for the sins of the people thou
sufferedst to be tempted, and subdued with a vain curiosity to number the
people.

Also, shortly after the death of that immaculate Lamb our Savior, thou
sufferedst the plague to reign among the members of his body, the Church of
the Corinthians; for not worthily preparing themselves, and for misvsing the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ: and many died
thereof, as thine holy Apostle Saint Paul has taught us.

Since which time, O Lord, as the Monuments of thy Church, and other Chronicles
do declare, thou have from time to time so plagued with pestilence, not only
cities, but also whole countries for these and other like causes, that we may
justly look for the coming of our Savior; so many and so horrible
pestilences have been among us already.

All which causes, O Lord, for the which thou have so afflicted thy people, are
through the malice of Satan, and our wilful consenting unto him, grown so
ripe in us; that were it not for the exceeding greatness of thy mercy and
compassion, we should all presently perish, and that woorthilie; so horrible
and outrageous are our iniquities.

For we loath, not only the plentiful provision of wholesome victuals and
apparel, which thou have given us for our bodies, more abundantly than to
many nations; traveling by all means to get wherewith to pamper our flesh
with wines, spices, silks, and other vain, costly, and delighting things: but
the precious Manna of our souls, thy holy word and Sacraments, we can not
away with; we are so full, that we are glutted therewith.

We so little esteem the heavenly kingdom, which our Savior has so deerlie
prepared, and kindly promised to us; that we abhor it, and are ready to stone
those few that commend it, and exhort us for our own good to travel
thitherward: better liking and crediting those false prophets the Epicures, and
Atheists, that with their lies discourage us therefrom.

What murmuring and grudging make we against the ministers of thy word, which
thou of thine especial goodness have in mercy given us? How despise we our
bishops, preachers, and other ministers of thy holy Sacraments, whom thou have
commanded us to reverence and honor?

Did not we, through our wicked lives, wretchedlie leese the Arc of thy holy
word, and the true ministration of Sacraments, not many years agone, which
the popish Philistines took from us? And now, when thou through thy plagues
laid upon them have miraculouslie sent it again; see how hold we be with the
Beth-samites, irreverently to receive it. For many make of it a
gazing-stocke, to serve their eyes and tongues; rather than a law, to obeie
and follow in their lives.

Yea, the knowledge of thy truth, goodness, and mercy, breeds in many of
us a careless security, and a contempt of thy holy ordinances. For we
presume upon thy mercy and promises; not regarding the conditions, nor any of
thy commandments, which in our baptism we vowed to observe. Yea, we make thy
Gospel a cloak of our covetousness, under color whereof we seek our own
lucre, and hide all our wicked and filthy practices.

If the Corinthians deserved to be plagued for abusing thy holy Sacraments,
how much more are we worthy of fierce wrath, that not only abuse it; but
also abhor and contemn it: because it is ministered as it ought? For thou
know, O Lord, what a sort there are, which bewitched with the devil, and
the Popes doctrine, do utterly abhor Christ's holy communion; and saving for
fear of the law, would never come at it. In what sort these receive, and how
they be prepared, is not unknown unto thee. How rashly also, and
unadvisedly, and unprepared the common multitude do frequent it; partly
appears, in that many of them never forgive old offenses, nor reconcile
themselves, nor in any thing do amend their old sins and vices.

Seeing then that we, Lord, the common sort and multitude do thus abound in
all kind of wickedness; how can it be, but that thou of thy justice, must
suffer our magistrates to offend also in somewhat, to the end thou may
justly take vengeance of our sins?

For these manifold heaps of sins and wickednesses, O Lord, thou have
justly at this present sent this dangerous pestilence among us; as thou have
often and long time threatened by the mouths of thy faithful preachers, who
continually have called upon us, to stay thy wrath, by earnest repentance and
amendment of life: but we have always been deafer and deafer. The delight in
our sins not only stopped our ears, but also hardened our hearts against
their hearty and friendly admonitions. And in that we now, O Lord, do begin
to feel and acknowledge our sins; it comes more of thy rigor in plaguing
us, than of any good inclination of our selves. Mollify therefore, O Lord,
our flintie hearts, with the suppling moisture of thy holy spirit. Make us to
reverence thee, as children, for love of thy mercies; and not to dread thee
like slaves, for fear of punishment.


Servants: Amen.


Master or Maistres. O dear Father, reclaim us thy lost children. O
merciful Savior, pity us thy putrified members. O holy Ghost, repair us
thy decayed temples. O holy and glorious Trinity, have mercy upon us
miserable sinners.


Servants: Amen.


Master. Grant us, O Lord, such true repentance, as may, through the blood of
our Savior, blot out the stains of our heinous iniquities. Forgive us our
sins, O Lord; forgive us our sins, for thine infinite mercies sake.


Servants: Amen.


Master. Forgive us our blasphemies, idolatries, and periuries. Forget our
vain and outrageous oths. As thou have by thy rigor and plagues, forced us to
acknowledge thee, to be our just and righteous Lord: so let us, through thy
mercy and forgiveness, feel thee to be our mild and loving Father, and give
us grace for ever hereafter to reverence this thy glorious name.


Seru. Amen.


Master. Take from us, O God, the care of worldly vanities. Make us content
with necessaries. Pluck away our hearts from delighting in honors, treasures,
and pleasures of this life. And engender in us a desire to be with thee in
thine eternal kingdom. Give us, O Lord, such taste and feeling of thine
vnspeake able ioies in heaven, that we may alwaie long therefore, saying with
thine elect; Hasten thy kingdom, O Lord; take us to thee.


Seru. Amen.


Master. Make us, O Lord, obedient to thy will revealed in thy holy word.
Make us diligent to walk in thy commandments. Forgive us our contempt and
murmuring against the magistrates and ministers, whom thou have in thy mercy
appointed: make us obedient unto their godly laws and doctrine. Save and
preserve, O Lord, thine anointed our QVEENE ELIZABETH: that she, in thy grace
and fear, may long reign amongst us. Give peace to all Christian nations.
Move us by thy spirit to love one another, as the members of our body; that
we may all do thy will in earth, as it is in heaven.


Seru. Amen.


Master. Dig out of us, O Lord, the venomous roots of covetousness and
concupiscence; or else so repress them with thy grace, that we may be
contented with thy provision of necessaries: and not to labor, as we do, with
toil, strength, guile, wrong, and oppression to pamper our selves with vain
superfluities. Feed our souls, O Lord, daily with the true Manna of thy
heavenly word, and with the grace of thy holy Sacraments. Give us grace
continually to read, hear, and meditate thy purposes, judgments, promises,
and precepts; not to the end we may curiously argue thereof, or arrogantlie
presume thereupon; but to frame our lives according to thy will, that by keeping
thy covenants, we may be sure of thy promises: and so make our election and
vocation certain, through our constant faith, virtuous and godly living.


Seru. Amen.


Master. Confirm us, O Lord, to the image of our Savior. So lighten the
lamps of our hearts with the fire and burning flames of thy love, that no envy,
rancor, hatred, or malice do remain in us, to quench it: but that we may
gladly forgive, whatsoever wrong is, or shall be, either maliciously or
ignorantly done or said against us. And here, Lord, in thy presence; for thy
Majesty is every where; we forgive whatsoever has been, by any man or
woman practiced against us: beseeching thee, of thy goodness likewise to
forgive it. And further, for thy mercies sake; and for our Savior Jesus
Christ's sake, we beseech thee, O dear Father, to forgive us these horrible and
damnable sins, which we have committed against thy Majesty; for which thou
have now justly brought the pestilence and plague upon us. Let the ceasing
thereof, we beseech thee, certify us of thy mercy and remission.


Seru. Amen.


Master. We know, O Lord, the weakness of our selves; and how ready we are
to fall from thee. Suffer not therefore Satan to show his power and malice upon
us. For we are not able to withstand his assalts. Arm us, O Lord, always with
thy grace; and assist us with thy holy spirit in all kinds of temptations.


Servants. Amen.


Master. Deliver us, O dear father, from all evils, both bodily and
ghostly. Deliver, O Lord, from trouble of conscience, all that are snarled in
their sins. Deliver, O Lord, from fear of persecution and tyranny, our
brethren and sisters, that are under the cross for profession of thy word.
Deliver, O merciful father, those that for our sins and offenses, are
already tormented with the rage of pestilence. Recover those, O Lord, that are
already stricken; and save the rest of my household, and elsewhere, from this
grievous infection.


Servants. Amen.


Master. Finally, O Lord God, which for our innumerable sins, dooest here
fatherly correct us, to the end we should not feel the rigor of thy seueare
judgment, in eternal condemnation: we humbly submit our selves unto thy
grace and pity; beseeching thee, for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that
although we have justly deserved this plague now laid upon us; yet it may
please thee, in the multitude of thy mercies, to withdraw thy rod from us.
Grant, O Lord, true repentance of our sins, which (as it did in that good
King Ezekias) may deliver us from the plague laid upon us; and cause those that
be sick here in my house, or otherwhere, to recover. Or, if thou have
determined to take a number of us out of the miseries of this present evil
world, give us the comfort of thy holy spirit, that may make us glad, and
willing to come unto thee. Give us grace, O Lord, so to prepare our selves,
that we may be ready with the wise virgins, to enter into life with our
savior Christ, whenever it shall please thee to call us.


Servants: Amen.


Master. Grant this, O dear father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator, Advocate, Lord, Redeemer, and Savior; to whom, with thee, and the
holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end: and in whose name we,
altogether, with one heart and voice, cry furthermore, and pray unto thee, as
he in his holy word has taught us, saying:


Master and servants altogether. Our Father, etc.


Other Psalms and prayers to be said in the time of any common plague,
sickness, or other cross and visitation of God, by the Master and Mistress,
with their family.
O Come, let us humble our selves, and fall down before the Lord with
reverence and fear.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Lord, for he has smitten us, and
he shall heal us.

Let us repent and turn from our wickedness, and our sins shall be forgiven
us.

Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy wrath, and will pardon
us, and we shall not perish.

For we knowledge our faults, and our sins be ever before us.

We have sore provoked thine anger, O Lord; thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy
heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us.

Thou have made us hear of the noise of wars, and have troubled us by the
vexation of enemies.

Thou have in thine indignation stricken us with grievous sickness, and by and by
we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind.

Indeed we acknowledge, that all punishments are less than our deseruings:
but yet of thy mercy, Lord, correct us to amendment, and plague us not to our
destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened, that thou can not help: neither is thy
goodness abated, that thou will not hear.

Thou have promised, that before we cry thou will hear us: and whilst we yet
speak, thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee, shall be confounded; neither any that call upon
thee, shall be despised.

For thou art the only Lord, who woundest and dooest heal: again, who
killest, and reuiuest; bring even to hell, and bring bark again.

Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were helped; they put their trust in thee, and were
not confounded.

O Lord rebuke us not in thine indignation: neither chasten us in thy heavy
displeasure.

Oh remember not the sins and offenses of our youth: but according to thy
mercy think upon us, O Lord, for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our bones
are vexed.

And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our souls, we
remember thee: and we cry unto thee; hear Lord, and have mercy.

For thine own sake, for thy holy name sake, incline thine ear and hear, O
merciful Lord.

For we do not power out our prayers before thy face, trusting in our own
righteousness: but in thy great and manifold mercies.

Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us from our sins.

Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeeds.

Make us clean hearts, O God, and renew a right spirit within us.

Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name. O deliver us,
and be merciful unto our sins, for thy name sake.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever; and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
Another prayer to be said in the time of the plague, sickness, and mortality.
O Lord our God, great and fearful art thou, keeping covenant and mercy with
them that love thee, and keep thy commandments. We have sinned, O Lord, and
have committed iniquity. We have don wickedlie; yea we have rebelled, and
have departed from thy judgments. We have not obeyed thy servants the
Prophets, which spoke in thy name, to our kings and princes, to our
forefathers, and to all the people of the land.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us open shame and
confusion; as it is come to pass this day, by the plague and sickness
reigning among us, and among all the dwellers of this land, because of the sins
which we have done against thee. Unto thee, O Lord and God, pertains
compassion, and forgiveness; though we have rebelled against thee. We have not
obeyed thy voice, to walk in the laws which thou have laid before us. We have
hitherto despised thy divine word, yea we have loathed preaching, and have
loased the bridle to all beastliness of desires.

Therefore the curse and oath, which is written in the law of Moses thy
servant, is powered upon us; and we, through the plague and corrupt aires, with
burning feauers, and grievous sickness, are lamentably consumed every day.
Yea in our knees and legs are we smitten with most loathsome botches, and those
incurable, from the sole of the foot unto the top of the head. Because we
repent not, neither observe all the words written in thy law, nor fear thy
glorious and dreadful name, thou do, according to thy threatenings
aforetold, increase our plagues, and the plagues of our seed. Thou sendest
great plagues, and of long continuance; evil sickness, and of long durance.
Thou bring upon us incurable diseases, all manner of sickness, and all kinds
of plagues, besides those written in the book of the law.

All these plagues, according to thy word, are come upon us, yet have we not
prayed unto thee our Lord, that we might every one turn from our ungodly
ways. Therefore have thou bin wrathful in punishing us, and in bringing these
evils upon us. Thou art righteous, O Lord, and true is thy judgment. O God
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou have got thee a glorious name, as may
appear this day. O Lord our God, we have sinned; we have done wickedlie: we
have behaved our selves ungodly in all thine ordinances. Turn thy wrath away
from us, we beseech thee: for we are but a few left in this place.

O Lord God, which have promised, that when either pestilence among us, or the
air infected, or any other plague or sickness is hot; thou will hear the
prayers, and grant the requests of any man or woman among the people, praieng
from the bottom of his heart, acknowledging his sins unfeignedly, and lifting
up his hands unto thee, thorough Jesus Christ, before the throne of grace. Be
thou merciful, give unto every man according to all his petitions. For thou
alone know the hearts of all the children of men. Hear thou our prayers and
petitions, and deliver us from this contagious and deadly pestilence. Command
thine Angel, which strikes us, to put up his sword into the sheath; that he
strike not to our final and utter destruction. Proceed not in thy wrath,
spare us from death, and bring not our end by the plague. Let the heavens be
mild, and our dwelling places healthful; least the air being infected, power
down the contagion thereof upon us, to our destruction.

O Lord turn away thine hand, it is sufficient: let now thine hand cease,
that all the earth may know, how that thou Lord art our GOD, and that we do
call upon thy name. O Lord look down from thine holy house, upon us: incline
thine ear and hear: open thine eyes, and behold the affliction and mortality
of thy people. For the dead, whose spirits are taken away, give unto thee
neither praise, nor righteousness: but the soul that is vexed for the multitude
of her sins, which goes on heavily, and weaklie, whose eyes begin to fail;
yea, the hungry soul is it that ascribes due praise and righteousness unto
thee, O Lord.

For we power out our prayers before thee, and require mercy in thy sight, O
Lord our God; not for any worthiness either of our own, or of our fathers:
but in the name of thy son Jesus Christ, in whom thou art well pleased: we
beseech thee be merciful unto us, and help us in necessity. Turn thee
again, O Lord, at the last, and be merciful unto thy servants, that this
poisoned infection may be taken from us. Notwithstanding, if it be thy
pleasure to visit our offenses with the rod, thy blessed will be done; and give
us grace to bear thy fatherly correction laid upon us patiently; remembering
always, that we are chastined of thee our Lord in this world, that we be not
condemned with the reprobate in the world to come,

Amen.
A fruitful Prayer, very necessary to be heartily said at the appearing of
monsters, and in any earthquake, or other plagues, that God would turn away
his vengeance hanging over us for our sins.
OH Lord God, strong and mighty, great and dreadful; which dwell in the
heavens, and workest great woonders: we thy miserable children here, prostrate
upon the earth, do most humbly beseech thee to be merciful unto us, to
pardon our offenses, and to forgive us all our sins. O Lord enter not into
judgment with thy servants; for if thou do, there shall no flesh be saved in
thy sight. We confess and acknowledge, O Lord, that it is our sins which
have moved thee to wrath, and to show such fearful tokens of thy displeasure
toward us in these our days. First with fire from heaven, betokening thy hot
burning indignation, and wrathful displeasure for sin, which abounds at
this day: and then with such horrible and monstrous shapes against nature, as
it was never seen here in our days, nor in any time before us; which betoken
to us none other thing, but thy plagues to come upon us, for our degenerate and
monstrous life and conversation: and of late, by the strange and terrible
earthquake that shook, or rather that even vomited us with fearful trembling
hearts, and amazed spirits out of our houses, which we so shamefully have
polluted and defiled with our vile sins and wickedness: and now last of all,
by the long and great mortality, plague and pestilence, thou do and have
terribly threatened us, fatherly warned us, and mercifully called us to
repentance. The axe is set to the root of the tree, and if we be not as rotten
members, without all sense and feeling, we may perceive our fearful
destruction and desolation to be at hand, unless we speedily repent and turn
to thee: because we have been so long taught out of thy most holy and sacred
word, and yet no fruits of true repentance or Christian life will appear.

Woe and alas to these our days, that neither preaching by word most
comfortable, nor preaching by monsters most ouglie, nor preaching by fire most
strange, nor preaching by earthquakes most terrible, neither yet by plagues and
pestilence most horrible, will stir up our stony hearts, and awake us from
our sins.

We fear, oh Lord, that the Turks, with all the rest of the unbelieving will
condemn us in the last day, which if they had been so long instructed by the
comfortable preaching of thy word, and sweet promises of thy Gospel; or thy
woonders both in heaven and earth, which we have seen, no doubt their
righteousness would have shined at this day to our great shame and confusion.
Thou have no less warned us, oh Lord, of thy fearful displeasure, and heavy
plagues at hand for our great wickedness; than thou did the Israelits of the
horrible destruction, which came upon them, whom thou first in mercy did
call to repentance by the preaching of thy word: but when no warning would
serve, thou did send them monstrous and fearful signs and tokens, to
declare that thy visitation was not far off. But they, like unto us at this
day, did always interpret these things after the imagination of their vain
hearts, promising to themselves peace, when destruction was over their heads.

Which things, when we do call to mind, (for as much as they are written for
our learning, example, and warning) it makes us to tremble and quake for fear
of thy just judgments. For if thou have thus dealt with thine own dear and
chosen children, in token of thy great wrath against sin: what shall we look
for, who do no less deserve thy fearful scourge; (and of mercy it is, that
thou dooest thus long forbear us:) but live as though there were no God at all
to be revenged upon our sins? It makes us to fear and cry unwardlie in our
souls; Come Lord Jesus, holy and true in all thy doings, and shorten our
days: bring this our pilgrimage to an end: suffer us not to heap sin upon
sin unto the day of vengeance, least we be caught up amongst the number of
the wicked and reprobate, which shall never see thy loving countenance.

It makes us to cry to thee, O Lord, let thy kingdom come, and end this our
sinful life, wherein we do nothing but provoke thee to wrath. Correct us not,
O Lord, in thine indignation; neither chasten us in thine heavy displeasure.
And though to us belongs nothing but shame and confusion; though our offenses
have deserved to be visited with the rod, and our sins with scourges: yet in
mercy, Lord, and with fatherly correction chasten us; and thy loving
kindness take not away from us. To thee we fly for succor, under the wings
of thy mercy shall be our refuge, until thou turn thy wrathful countenance
from us. We know that thy mercy is above all thy works, and even as great as
thy self: therefore will we say with holy Job; Though thou kill us, yet we
put our trust in thee.

Thou came to comfort and pluck out of the dungeon of hell, such wretches as
we are. Thou art the good Samaritane, that came to heal our deadly wounds.
Thou art that good Physician, that came to cure our mortal infirmities. Thou
art the good shepherd, that came to seek us wandering and lost sheep; and
to bring us to thy fold again. And more than that, thou art our brother; flesh
of our flesh, and bone of our bones; which have tasted of our infirmities, felt
our temptations, and borne the burden of our sins. Therefore at thy hands we
look for mercy, against the day of vengeance. And though thou punish us, yet
our hope is, and ever shall be, that thy rod shall no further touch us, than
shall make to thy glory, our commodity, and the strengthening and increase of
our faith.

Let this thy preaching sundry ways, O Lord, be sufficient for our warning:
and grant that we may speedily, and from the bottom of our hearts repent,
endeavor to do thy righteous and blessed will revealed in thy word; and frame
our lives according to the same: that we may here live in thy fear all the
days of our life, and after this our sinful course is ended, may dwell with
thee in thy blessed kingdom, through the death and merits of Jesus Christ our
only redeemer,

Amen.
A Psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague, or any other kind
of sickness, trouble, or affliction.
LOrd, thou art become gracious unto thy land; thou have turned away the
afflictions of thy servants.

Thou have taken away all thy displeasure, and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation.

For if thou, Lord, had not helped us; it had not failed, but our souls had
been put to silence.

But when we said, Our feet have slipped; thy mercy, O Lord, helped us up.

In the multitude of the sorrows that we had in our hearts, thy comforts have
refreshed our souls.

Our souls waited still upon the Lord, our souls hanged upon his help, our
hope was always in him.

In the Lords word did we rejoice, in Gods word did we comfort our selves.

For the Lord said; Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee,
and thou shall praise me.

So when we were poor, needy, sickly, and in heaviness, the Lord cared for
us; he was our help, and our savior, according to his word.

In our adversity and distress he has lifted up our heads, and saved us from
utter destruction.

He has delivered our souls from death, he has fed us in the time of dearth,
he has saved us from the noisome pestilence.

Therefore will we offer in his holy temple the oblation of thanksgiving,
with great gladness; we will sing and speak praises unto the Lord our
Savior.

We will give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures
for ever.

The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, plentious in
goodness and pity.

His mercy is greater than the heavens, and his gracious goodness reaches
unto the clouds.

Like as a father pitieth his own children; even so is the Lord merciful unto
them that fear him.

Therefore will we praise thee, and thy mercies, O God; unto thee will we sing,
O thou holy one of Israel.

We will sing a new song unto thee, O God; we will praise the Lord with Psalms
of thanks giving.

O sing praises, sing praises unto our God; O sing praises, sing praises unto
our King.

For God is the King of the earth, sing praises with understanding.

We will magnify thee, O God our King; we will praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Our mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord, and let all flesh give thanks
to his holy name for ever and ever.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever, and blessed be the name of his
Majesty world without end,

Amen.
Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the, etc.
In the time of any particular or general earthquake, pray:
OH eternal, mighty, and most loving Father; which have no desire of the
death of a sinner; but that he convert and live; and unto whom nothing is so
pleasant as the repentant, contrite, and sorrowful heart of a penitent person.
For thou art that kind father that fallest most lovingly upon the neck of the
lost son; kissest, imbracest, and feastest him, when he returns from the
puddle of pleasures, and swill of the swine; and disdainest not the repentant
prayer of thy poor and sinful servants, whenever with true faith they
return and call upon thee, as we have most comfortable examples in David,
Manasses, Magdalen, Peter, and the thief upon the gibbet.

We most heartily and humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, to look down
from the throne of thy mercie-seate, upon us most miserable and sinful slaves
of Satan, which with fearful and trembling hearts do quake and shake at the
strange and terrible tokens of thy wrath and indignation, appearing most
evidently unto us, by the shaking and moving of the earth, which is thy
footestoole; whereby (if we be not utterly destitute of grace) we be warned
that thy co^ming-downe amongst us, to visit our sins in most terrible manner,
can not be far off; seeing thou treadest so hard upon this thy footestoole
the earth, which we most shamefullie have polluted and defiled, with our most
wicked, sinful, and rebellious lives; notwithstanding thy continual crieng
and calling upon us, by thy servants the prophets and preachers, by whom we
have learned thy will; but have not followed it. We have heard much, and done
little, yea nothing at all: but like most perverse and unthankful children,
have made a mock of thy word, derided thy ministers, and accounted thy
threatenings trifles, and thy warnings of no weight or moment. Wherefore we
have justly deserved to taste most deeply of the bitter cup of thine anger
and bengeance, by wars, famine, pestilence; yea and eternal death, if thou
should not temper the rigor of thy justice with the mildness of thy
mercy. But such is thy fatherly affection toward us, that thou show thy
self slow to anger, long suffering, and of much patience and mercy; yea,
thou art a thousand times more ready to forget and forgive, than we to ask
and require forgiveness.

Therefore, though we be not worthy of the least mite of thy mercy; yet
gracious Lord, look not upon us and our sins; but upon thine own self, and
thy son Jesus Christ, the fountain of grace, the treasure of mercy, the
salve of all sickness, the jewel of joy, and the only haven of succor and
safety. By him we come to thee, in him and for him we trust to find that we
have lost, and gain that he has got. He is the scale of Jacob, by whom we
climb up to thee; and thou by the Angels of thy mercy co^mest down to us.
Him we present unto thee, and not we our selves; his death, and not our
doings; his bloody wounds, and not our detestable deseruings: whose merits
are so great, as thy mercy cannot be little; and our ransom so rich, that our
beggarly and beastly sins are nothing in thy sight; for the great pleasure
and satisfaction that thou take of his pains and passion.

Turn this late earthquake, O Lord, to the benefit of thine elect, as thou
did when thou shookest the prison; loosedst the locks, fetters and chains of
thy servants Paul and Silas, and broughtst them out of prison, and conuertedst
their keeper: so gracious Lord, strike the hearts of tyrants with the terror of
this thy work, that they may know that they are but men; and that thou art
that Samson, that for their mocking and spiting of thee, and thy word, can
shake the pillars of their palaces, and throw them upon the furious
Philistines heads. Turn thy wrath, oh Lord, from thy children that call upon
thy name, to the conversion or confusion of thine enemies, that despise and
abhor thy name, and deface thy glory. Thou have knocked long at their doors,
but they will not open to let thee in. Burst open therefore the brazen gates of
their stony hearts, thou that art able of stones to raise up children to
Abraham. And finally, so touch our hearts with the finger of thy grace, that we
may deeply muse upon our sinful lives, to amend them; and call for thy
mercy, to forgive and pardon them; through Christ our Lord, who lives with
thee, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one eternal God; to whom be all
dominion and glory, with praise and thanksgiving, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Or else pray thus:
O Almighty God, and most merciful Father, which willest not the death of a
sinner; but rather that he should return and live: we thy servants most
humbly confess, that we have most greeuouslie offended against thy divine
Majesty, and provoked thy heavy wrath against us, in that we have not
believed and followed thy Gospel preached unto us; nor been thankful for thy
many and very great benefits bestowed upon us: yea and being warned by the
dangers of other, have been too careless to serve thee, oh Lord, the Father
of all mercy, and the God of all consolation, which in thy wrath remembrest
mercy. We acknowledge, that in the late terrible earthquake, which suddenly
shook us out of our houses and dwelling places, thou did warn us of thy
justice; and that we for our great unthankfulness and disobedience, have
deserved most just judgment. O Lord, we thy servants, being vile earth, and
miserable sinners; yet trembling and quaking at the remembrance of that
terrible look of thy wrathful displeasure never to be forgotten, most humbly
crave pardon for our sins; and grace to convert unto thee in time. Convert
us, O Lord, and we shall be converted. Mollify our hard hearts, grant us a
contrite spirit, and to turn unto thee unfeignedly, in fasting, weeping and
prayer. Enter not into judgment with thy servants; spare thy people, O Lord;
spare them, and let not thine heritage be brought to confusion. Have mercy
upon us, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake. Give us grace henceforth to amend
our lives, and to serve thee in holiness and righteousness. So we acknowledging
thy justice, and remembering always that fearful sign of thy fury, in the
memorable earthquake, which thou sentest ye sixth of April, in the year one
thousand, five hundred, fourscore; we shall praise thee for thy mercy, and
glorify thy holy name for ever, through Jesus Christ our Savior,

Amen.
At the sight of a blasing star, or other meteors, or prodigious signs of
Gods judgment in the heavens, pray to prevent the evils foreshewed thereby,
and say:
O Almighty Lord and God, whose workmanship is the whole world, the heaven
and the earth, with all the beauty and blessings of the same; at the presence
of whose power all things do quake and tremble; whose indignation when it
threatens vengeance unto sinners is insufferable, and whose promises of mercy
are unmeasurable: because thou art even the most high Lord over all the earth,
full of patience, forbearance, pity and repentance, over the wickedness of
sinful people, declaring the sharpness of thy judgments for their amendment,
and deliverance from punishment. Thou, O Lord, have promised, according to thy
bottomless bounty and goodness, a penitent spirit, not to just and righteous
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which have not offended against thy Majesty; but to
those that are overwhelmed with the tempestuous tides of their transgressions.
We, O Lord, have offended, and our fathers have committed sin in thy sight.
We have defiled our selves in the filthy puddle of iniquity; and therefore
beholding in the very heavens, such dreadful tokens of thy wrathful
indignation hanging over our heads, for our monstrous and prodigious life, we
bow before thee the knees of our hearts, beseeching thee to be gracious unto us,
and to open thine ears to our prayers. We have sinned, O Lord; we have sinned,
and we acknowledge our misdeeds, humbly beseeching thee to forgive us our
offenses. O forgive us, and deliver us not over to destruction with our
iniquities, neither lay thou up in store vengeance against the day of
judgment. O reserve not for us the whip of woe and wretchedness; but in mercy
pardon our misdeeds: and let not the fiery flames of thy fury and wrath wax
hot against us, to burn and consume us in our iniquities,

Amen.
In the time of war.
O Almighty God, King of all kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful unto them that truly repent; save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our enemies; abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devises; that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorify thee, which art the only
giver of all victory; through the merits of thine only son Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
In time of rebellion or intestine war.
O Most mighty and merciful Lord God, which art King of glory, and Lord of
hosts; the Governor of all creatures, the only giver of all victories; who
alone art able to strengthen the weak against the mighty, and to vanquish
infinite multitudes of thine enemies, with the countenance of a few of thy
servants, calling upon thy name, and trusting in thee; defend, O good Lord, thy
servants, and our governor under thee, our most gracious and sovereign Lady
Queen Elizabeth, and all her faithful subjects and people committed to her
charge. And especially at this time, O Lord, have regard to those her trusty,
loving, and obedient subjects; which be sent into the north parts of this
Realm; or over the seas, to the aid of such as be persecuted for the
profession of thy holy name, to withstand the cruelty, force, and power of
certain false and unfaithful subjects: yea rather cursed rebels, and wicked
traitors, and all those which be common enemies, as well to the truth of thine
eternal word, as to their own natural Prince and country; and manifestly
against the Crown and Realm of England, which thou have by thy divine
providence assigned, in these our days, to the government of thy servant our
sovereign Lady, and most gracious Queen; to the great comfort of all us her
loving subjects, and faithful commons: thy most glorious name be praised
therefore.

O Lord God of hosts, which by thine Angel thereunto appointed, do minister
both war and peace; and which did give unto David both courage and
strength, being but a little one, unarmed, and inexpert in feats of war,
with his sling to set upon, and overthrow the great huge giant Goliath: our
cause now being just, and being forced to enter into war and battle, we most
humbly beseech thee, most gracious God, so to turn the hearts of these rebels,
thine and our enemies, to the desire of peace, that no Christian blood be shed
or spilt. Or else grant, O Lord, that with small effusion of blood, and to the
little hurt and damage of thy servants, who do ieopard their lives for the
defense of thy holy Gospel, our Queen, and Realm, against the adversaries
thereof, we may to thy glory obtain the victory, and that the wars being
ended, the rebels soon put to flight and vanquished, we may all with one heart
and mind knit together, in godly concord and unity, laud and praise thee
which art our God.

O most merciful Father, if it be thy holy will, make soft and tender the
stony hearts of all those, I say, that exalt themselves against thy truth, and
seek either to trouble the quietness of this Realm of England, or to
oppress the Crown of the same, and convert them to the knowledge of thy
son, the only Savior of the world Jesus Christ, that we and they may
jointly glorify thy mercies. Lighten, we beseech thee, their ignorant hearts,
to embrace the truth of thy word, or else to abate their cruelty, O most
mighty Lord; that this our Christian Region, with others that confess thy
holy Gospel, may obtain by thine aid and strength, suertie from all our
enemies, without shedding of Christian and innocent blood; whereby all they,
which be in fear of their cruelty, may be comforted: and finally, that all
Christian realms, and especially this Realm of England, may by thy defense
and protection continue in the truth of the Gospel, and enioie perfect peace,
quietness, and security; and that we, for these thy mercies, jointly all
together, with one consent, heart, and voice, may thankfully render unto thee
all laud and praise; that we knit in one godly concord and unity among our
selves, may continually magnify thy glorious name.

And furthermore, for as much as it is thy good will and pleasure, to appoint
us in the number of subjects; we most humbly beseech thee, O heavenly Father,
to give us faithful and obedient hearts unto our dread sovereign Lady the
Queens most excellent Majesty, and to the high powers and godly rulers, that
are in authority under her noble Grace, that there may be found in us no
disobedience, no unfaithfulness, no treason, no falsehood, no dissimulation, no
insurrection, no commotion, no conspiracy; nor any kind of rebellion, in
deed, word, or thought: but all faithfulness, obedience, quietness,
subjection, and humility; and whatsoever else becomes faithful subjects,
under so good and so gracious a Prince: that we living here in all lowliness
of mind, may at the last day, through thy favor, be lifted up into
everlasting glory; where thou, O most merciful Father, with thy son, and
the holy Ghost, live and reignest one very true and perfect God, for ever
and ever,

Amen.
A thanksgiving for the suppression of rebellion, or insurrection.
O Heavenly and most merciful Father, the defender of those that put their
trust in thee; the sure fortress of all them that fly to thee for succor;
who of thy most just judgments, for our disobedience and rebellion against thy
holy word, and for our holy profession, whereby we have given occasion that
thy holy name has been blasphemed among the ignorant, have of late years
sore abashed the whole Realm and people of England, with the terror and
danger of rebellion, thereby to awake us out of our dead sleep of careless
security; and have yet by the miseries following the same rebellion, most
sharply punished part of our countriemen, and Christian brethren, who have
most neerelie fealt the same: and most dreadfullie have scourged some of the
seditious persons with terrible executions, justly inflicted for their
disobedience to thee, and to thy servant their Sovereign, to the example of us
all, and to the warning, correction, and amendment of thy servants; of thine
accustomed goodness turning always the wickedness of evil men, to the
profit of them that fear thee; who in thy judgments remembering thy mercy,
have by thine assistance given the victory to thy servant the Queen, her
Nobility, and faithful Subjects, with so little, or rather no effusion of
Christian blood; as also might justly have ensued, to the exceeding comfort of
all sorrowful Christian hearts; and that of thy fatherly pity and merciful
goodness only, and even for thine own name sake, without any our desert at
all.

Wherefore, we render unto thee most humble and hearty thanks, for these thy
great mercies showed unto us, who had deserved sharper punishment; most humbly
beseeching thee, to grant unto us all that confess thy holy name, and
profess the true and perfect Religion of thy holy Gospel, thy heavenly
grace, to show our selves in our living, according to our profession; that we
truly knowing thee in thy blessed word, may obedientlie walk in thy holy
commandments; and that we being warned by this thy fatherly correction, do
provoke thy just wrath against us no more, but may enioie the continuance of
thy great mercies toward us; thy right hand, as in this, so in all other
invasions, rebellions, and dangers, continually saving and defending our
Church, our Realm, our Queen, and people of England; that all our posterities
ensuing, confessing thy holy name, professing thy holy Gospel, and leading a
holy life, may perpetually praise and magnify thee, with thy only son
Jesus Christ our savior, and the holy Ghost; to whom be all laud, praise,
glory, and empire, for ever and ever,

Amen.
In time of extreme troubles, by reason of the tyranny of strange and
foreign governors.
ETternall and everlasting God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou that
show mercy, and keep covenant with them that love thee, and in reverence
keep thy commandments, even when thou powrest forth thy hot displeasure, and
just judgments upon the obstinate and inobedient: we here prostrate our
selves before the throne of thy Majesty, from our hearts confessing, that
justly thou dooest punish us, by the tyranny of strangers; and that more
justly thou may bring upon us again, the bondage and the yoke, which of thy
mercy, for a season, thou have removed. Our kings, princes and people, in
blindness have refused the word of thine eternal verity; and in so doing we
have refused the league of thy mercy offered unto us again, in such
abundance, that none can be excused by reason of ignorance. Yet nevertheless,
to the judgment of men, impiety ouerfloweth the whole face of this Realm.
For the great multitude delight themselves in ignorance and idolatry. And such
(alas) as appear to reverence and embrace thy word, do not express the
fruits of repentance, as it becomes the people, to whom thou have showed thy
self so merciful and favorable.

These are thy just judgments, O Lord, whereby thou punishest sin by sin,
and man by his own iniquity; so that there can be no end of sin, except
thou prevent us with thy undeserved grace. Convert us therefore, O Lord, and we
shall be converted. Suffer not our unthankfulness to procure, of thy most
just judgments, that strangers again have empire above us; neither yet that
the light of thy Gospel be taken from us: but howsoever it be, that the great
multitude be altogether rebellious, and also that in us there remain
perpetual imperfections; yet for the glory of thine own name, and for the
glory of thine only begotten son Jesus Christ (whose truth and Gospel,
thou of thy mere mercy have manifested among us) it will please thee, to take
us into thy protection and defense; that all the world may know, that as of thy
mercy thou have begun this work of our salvation, by the publishing and
preaching of thy Gospel among us; so of this same mercy, thou will continue
it, maugre the heads of all our malicious enemies. Grant us this, merciful
father, for Christ Jesus thy sons sake: So be it.

A thanksgiving, after our deliverance from the tyranny of strange enemies;
with prayer for continuance of peace betwixt Realms.
NOW, Lord, seeing that we enioie comfort, both in body and in spirit, by
reason of this quietness of thy mercy, granted unto us, after our most
desperate troubles, in the which we appeared utterly to have been overwhelmed:
we praise and glorify thy mercy and goodness, who pitiouslie lookedst upon
us, when we in our selves were utterly confounded. But seeing, O Lord, that to
receive benefits at thy hands, and not to be thankful for the same, is
nothing else but a seal against us, in the day of judgment; we most humbly
beseech thee, to grant unto us hearts so mindful of the calamity past, that we
may continually fear to provoke thy justice, to punish us with the like or
worsse plagues. And seeing that, when we by our own power were altogether
unable, to have freed our selves from the tyranny of strangers, and from the
bondage and thraldom pretended against us; that of thine especial goodness,
did move the hearts of our neighbors, of whom we had not deserved so much
favor, to take upon them the common burden with us; and for our deliverance,
not only to spend the lives of many, but also to hazard the state and
tranquillity of their Realm and Commonwealth. Grant unto us, O Lord, that
with such reverence we may remember thy benefits received, that after this in
our default, we never enter into hostility against those Realms and Nations.

Suffer us never, O Lord, to fall to that ingratitude, and detestable
unthankfulness, that we should seek the destruction and death of those,
whom thou have made instruments to deliver us from the tyranny of merciless
strangers. Dissipate thou the counselles of such, as deceiptfullie travel to
stir up the hearts of the inhabitants of either Realm against the other. Let
their malicious practices be their own confusion; and grant of thy mercy,
that love, concord, and tranquillity may continue and increase among the
inhabitants of both Realms; especially of this Isle of England, even till the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; by whose glorious Gospel, thou of thy mercy
dooest call us both to unity, peace, and Christian concord; the full
perfection whereof we shall possess in the fullness of thy kingdom, when all
offenses shall be removed, iniquity shall be suppressed, and thy chosen
children be fully endued with that perfect glory, in the which now our Lord
Jesus Christ reigns: to whom, with thee, O father, and the holy Ghost, be
all honor, praise and glory, now and ever,

Amen.
In time of invasion by the Turk and Infidels, that make war in any part of
Christendom; pray and that earnestly, as follows.
OMnipotent and eternal God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ; maker,
preserver, and mainteiner both of heaven and earth, together with thy
coeternall son, and the holy Ghost: we have sinned, O Lord, with our
fathers; we have done amiss, and dealt wickedlie; and therefore we confess,
that by thy righteous judgments we are justly punished, and have truly
deserved, that barbarous nations, and cruel Turks, making invasion into
Christendom, should spoil us of our goods, overthrow Schools, Churches,
Commonweals; make pitiful havoc of the promiscuous, mixed, or confused
multitude of silly weak people, as they were sheep prepared to the shambles,
and carry miserable men from the sweet bosoms of their dear friends, into far
and barbarous nations, to a slavery more grievous than death.

O God, it is thou which have repelled us, yea thou make us a shame to the
nations for our sins, and go not forth to war with our armies. Thou
make us to turn our backs upon our enemies, so that they which hate us,
spoil our goods. Thou let us to be eaten like sheep, and have scattered
us among the heathen. Thou sellest thy people for naught, and take no money
for them. Therefore he the heathen come into thine inheritance; thy holy
Temple have they defiled; they have destroyed our towns and houses, and
brought them into an heap of stones. The dead bodies of thy servants have they
given to be meat to the fowls of the air; and the flesh of thy Saints, unto
the beasts of the land. Their blood have they shed like water on every side,
and there was no man to bury them. We are become an open shame to our enemies,
a very scorn and derision unto them that are round about us.

O Lord, in these mischievous wars, and in the midst of fatal or mortal
punishments, which threaten an horrible mutation of worldly empires, we fly
unto thee, saying; Help us, O God of our salvation; for the glory of thy
name. O deliver us, and be merciful unto our sins. O Lord deal not with us
according to our sins, neither reward us after our iniquities; but have
mercy upon us, and that soon; for we are come to great misery. Look upon
our adversity and misery, and forgive us all our sins. Consider our enemies
how many they be, and they bear a tyrannical hate against us. Thou which
aforetime did remit the offenses of thy people, did cover all their
sins, and did turn away thine heavy indignation from them; turn us, we
humbly beseech thee, O God our Savior, and remove away thy displeasure from
us also, that in true repentance we may please thee, for thy son Christ's
sake. Will thou be displeased at us for ever? Or will thou stretch thy wrath
from one generation to another? Oh let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners
come before thee, according to the greatness of thy power; preserve thou those
that are appointed to die.

Power out thine indignation rather upon the heathen that have not known thee,
and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name; that all nations may
know that thou take vengeance of the blood of thy servants that is shed.
Consider the mortal threatenings of our enemies, that they exercise not their
cruelty upon us, and say triumphantly; Where is now their God? Keep from
our necks the grievous yoke of the Turkish bondage, and repress the
furiousness of all tyrants, which labor to spoil, and make havoc of thy
Church; to abolish true doctrine, prayers, and pure religion; that they may
bring in paganism, and build up idolatry, errors, and blasphemous ceremonies.

Defend our Churches, our politic governance, our Schools and Uniuersities,
our cities and dwelling places. Suffer not (good studies, learning, religion,
and laws being overthrown) these our towns to be reduced into stables, for
savage Mahomets, Turkish tyrants, or other bloody tyrants, which hate thee and
us extremely. Arm the right arm of our gracious Queen, and her Nobles (as
also all other Christian Emperors, Kings, and Potentates) that they may fight
for our laws, lives, and liberty. Teach their hands to war, and their
fingers to fight. Increase in them an invincible courage of mind, that inflamed
through the zeal of thy religion, they may valiantly withstand the Turks,
which are the mortal enemies of thy dear Son, and of his Church.

Guide thou the hands of such as do fight in the cause of thy religion, and
grant them happy success over all their enemies. For a king is not preserved
by his great army, and a giant shall not be saved by the multitude of his
host, nor warlike strength: but the victory proceeds from the heavens. At
thy rebuke, O God, the chariot and horses fall down. Thou shall take away the
courage of princes, and art terrible unto the kings of the earth. O be thou our
help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. Through thee, O mighty
Iehoua, we shall do great acts, and thou will tread our enemies under thy
feet, that they come to naught; through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A thanksgiving unto God, for the Christians victory had against the Turks.
O Merciful Father, O Lord God of hosts, the only protector and defender of
thine heritage; against whom, no might, no power, nor counsel can prevail;
who of thy great mercy, without our merit or deserving, have at all times
protected and defended us, from the cruel hand of our enemies, and mightily
delivered us, even out of the mouth of the roaring Lion: we yield unto thee, O
father, for these thy great goodnesses and mercies, most humble and hearty
thanks; and especially, O father, we praise thy holy name, that at this
present thou have saved and delivered thy people, from the great assaults and
dangers of that same professed and mighty enemy of Christian Religion, the
Turk; and also have given unto the people, which fought thy battles, battelled
under thy banner, and trusted only in thy help, so great and notable a
victory: for the which O Lord God, we do laud and magnify thy holy name for
ever, through Christ our Captain, Redeemer, and Savior; beseeching thee, for
thy merciful goodness, that thou would sheeld us under thy mighty
protection for ever, that we having the fruition of godly peace, through thy
mercy, may the rest of these few days which we have to live, lead a peaceable
and a quiet life, in all piety and honesty, through Christ our Lord, to
whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and praise, for
ever and ever, Amen.

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive;
receive our humble petitions. And though we be tied and bound with the chain
of our sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us, for the
honor of Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and advocate,

Amen.
The end of the Letanie.
Prayers to be used before and after the first and second lessons, the Gospel
and Pistle: and before and after the Sermon or Homily.
Before the first or second lesson, pray:
BLessed Lord, which have caused all holy Scriptures, both in the old and new
Testaments, to be written and red for our learning; grant us, that we may now
in such sort hear them, read them, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them,
that by patience and comfort of thy holy word, we may embrace, and ever hold
fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou have given us in our
Savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
After the first or second lesson, pray:
Gracious God, and most merciful father, which have vouchsafed us the rich and
precious jewel of thy holy word; assist us with thy spirit, that it may be
written in our hearts, to our everlasting comfort; to reform us, to renew us,
according to thine own image; to build us up, and edify us into the perfect
building of thy Christ, sanctifieng and increasing in us all heavenly virtues.
Grant this, O heavenly father, for Jesus Christ's sake,

Amen.
Or thus:
THanks be unto thee, O our celestial father, through Christ our Redeemer;
that thou have so cleerelie by thy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostls, revealed
unto us these so secret mysteries of our salvation in Christ; for whose sake
also, we beseech thee, to give us the very fear and faith in thee; that we
constantly believing thy truth, and following that thou command us in thy
word, may by no means hinder thy glory, or the course of thy word, by our
lewd conversation, but in all obedience help to amplify and increase thy
kingdom, to the perpetual praise of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Before the reading of the Epistle or Gospel, pray.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, who by thy holy spirit in thy
servants the Apostles, and the Evangelists, have left unto us the story of the
doctrine and deeds of our Savior Christ, that thereby, as he is in deed, so
we might believe him to be thy Son, and the Savior of the world, and put our
trust in thee through him; that so believing, we might attain to everlasting
life: grant us, we beseech thee, the same most holy spirit to open our hearts,
and lighten our minds, that by the reading and hearing of the same, our faith
in thee, through him, may continually be strengthened, till we attain to the
end thereof, even the salvation of our souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord
and Savior,

Amen.
After the reading of the Epistle or Gospel.
WE give thee thanks, most merciful Father, for that it has pleased thee in
great mercy toward us, to cause the holy writings and traditions of the
Apostles and Evangelists, to come to this our time, place, and ears; and that
thou have vouchsafed also to open and reveal thy holy will unto them, to
approve thy son so manifestly to the world, and to confirm unto us by them
the truth of thy Gospel, that in the mouth of so many faithful witnesses, we
might have more full assurance in thy merciful promises. Help us O good
Father we beseech thee, that by thy grace we may do in deed, that which we
now by them do understand. And least herein we be, through thy justice, more
greeuouslie condemned and punished, if that we neglect to do thy will, which
through thy grace thou have revealed; grant us the fruit of this thy care
toward us, in the strength of faith, that having read and heard so notable
things in this his holy story, and acts and writings of the holy Apostles,
recorded and left unto us by so true and most faithful witnesses, appointed
and ordained thereunto by thee; we may now, by the effectual working of thy
holy spirit, receive and acknowledge him for thine only son, and our only
savior, to the salvation of our souls, and the glorious praise of thy name;
and so being lead from one witness to another, we may, according to thy holy
word, go from faith to faith, till we atteine to the everlasting life, which
thou have prepared for us in thy son: to whom with thee; O Father, and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and praise, both now and for ever,

Amen.
Before the Sermon or Homily, read some of these sentences of Scripture,
exhorting to the attentive hearing of the word.
Deuteronomie. 18. THE Lord said to Moses, I will raise them up a Prophet from
among their breethren, like unto thee; and will put my words in his mouth, and
he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him: unto him shall ye
harken. And whosoever will not harken unto my words, which he shall speak in
my name, I will require it of him.

Psalm. 119. GReat is the peace they have, which love thy law, and they are
not offended at it.

Proverbs. 8. BLessed is that man or woman that hears me, watching daily at
my gates, and giving attendance at the posts of my doors. For he that finds
me, finds life; and shall obtain favor of the Lord: but he that sins
against me, hurts his own soul, and all that hate me love death.

Proverbs. 28. HE that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayers shall be abominable.

VVisdome. 3. WHo so despises wisdom and discipline, is miserable; and their
hope is vain, and their labors are foolish, and their works unprofitable, and
their wives are indiscreet, their children wicked, and their offspring is
accursed.

Ecclesiasticus. 5. BE humble to hear the word of God, that thou may
understand it, and make a true answer with wisdom.

Be swift to hear good things, and follow the word of peace and
righteousness.

Luke. 11. THE Queen of the South shall rise in judgment with the men and
women of this generation, and shall condemn them. For she came from the
uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon: and behold
(says Christ of himself) a greater than Solomon is here (speaking unto you.

John. 8. HE that is of God, hears Gods word. Ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God.

Revelation. 2. LET him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the
Churches, or congregation, etc.

A prayer for the heedfull hearing of Gods word.
FOR as much, O most merciful God, as faith, without the which it is
impossible to please thee in any thing we do, comes by hearing; and hearing
by the word of God: in so much as he or she that turns away his ear from
hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abominable, and turned into sin:
yea, because also it is a far more blessed thing to hear and keep thy word,
than to have had the honor to have borne or nursed thine own son: grant us
grace therefore, I most humbly beseech thee, in zeal and love to do this one
thing, so acceptable a service to thee, and most needful for us to be done;
even with attentive and desirous minds to hear thy holy word preached, and so
far to exceed the Queen of Saba, and those which have sought for wisdom
from the uttermost parts of the earth, as the wisdom thou offerest us in it
exceeds all other: and so much more redilie to practice it, than they did,
which heard thy Prophets; as thy son is above all the Prophets, that we with
wise Martha making our choice, by thy grace, of the better part, may be made
wise in him unto salvation, and it never be taken from us; but remain with us,
till it put us in possession of that happy life, which in a blessed hope we
look for by it. And grant us so to be careful over our duty, which thou have
commanded, that we especially regarding that which is chiefest with thee, and
most needful for our selves; may thereby declare our selves to be in deed of
God, because we hear Gods word; and to be the true sheep of thy fold, because
we harken diligently to thy voice, and follow thee with Susanna, Ioanna,
Marie Magdalen, and all other godly men and women: and so by this means
finally not fail of thy promises; but obtain, to our endless comfort, and
the glory of thy name, the blessing and gift of eternal life, among all
faithful believers, in the kingdom of heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another very Christian prayer both of the preacher and auditorie present.
OH Lord, how beautiful are the feet of them that bring the glad tidings of
the Gospel of peace, of salvation, and of all good things! Surely, without
preaching we should all perish. Blessed and praised be thou therefore, O
Father, for that thou have given to us thy Gospel, life, food, doctrine and
peace in our time. Blessed and praised be thou therefore, O Christ, because
thou give and renewest often the light of thy Gospel, and maitainest the
ministers of thy word; and preseruest, cherishest, and defendest thy catholic
Church, against the devil, and all thine enemies. Yea blessed, I say, and
praised also be thou therefore, O holy spirit; because thou being powered upon
the Apostles, dooest now also kindle thy light in our hearts, rulest,
instructest, admonishest, helpest us, gouernest and guidest o^^ labors to a
prosperous end, and sanctifiest us to eternal life.

And now, for as much as the chief authority of speaking, is indeed of thee,
O Lord alone, (for a mortal man has but a dead heart,) I humbly beseech thee
to bless this thy preacher here present, with thy divine grace; that he may
do the work of an Evangelist, and make thy Gospel known unto us. Give unto
him the spirit of fear, godliness, fortitude, counsel, zeal, knowledge,
discretion, wisdom, understanding, and constancy; and let him, as he has
received thy gifts, so (like a good and faithful disposer of thy manifold
graces) truly minister the same unto us. Lord, let him come unto us with
abundant knowledge, and ability of the divine mysteries of the blessings of
the Gospel of Christ, to communicate and impart unto us. And now that he is
about to speak, grant that he may speak in thee; that is, by thy help and
grace: and as he is allowed of thee, so to utter the words of God, as he has
received them from thee, that thou in althings may be glorified. Put upon his
heart the breast plate of perfect judgment, the Urim of knowledge, and the
Thumim of holiness and righteousness of life, and purity of doctrine. Let thy
word be in his heart, as a burning fire shut up in his bones; yea let his belly
be as the wine, which has no vent; or like the new bottles that burst: that
being full of good matter, thy spirit within may compel him to speak his mind
effectually. Yea, do thou, O Lord, I say, secretly speak and work in him;
and let thy secret power and virtue be put here unto this action, to this his
labor and exercise of faith, that he may accomplish that thou requirest to be
done, for the conversion and salvation of thy people present. Give him the
earnest-penie of thy spirit in his heart, and open the door of utterance unto
him; that he may make manifest the savor of thy life and knowledge; unto us.
Lord, thou have said; Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Open thou
therefore his lips, that his mouth may show forth thy praise; and show us the
way, wherein we may walk straight to thee. O let his mouth, I say, be filled
with thy praise, that he may preach thine undefiled law, to the converting of
souls, and give wisdom to the simple, and light to the blind. Let utterance
be given now unto him, that he may open his mouth boldly, to publish the
secrets of the Gospel, whereof he is an Ambassador; that therein he may
speak boldly, as he ought to speak, not sparing any man, nor having regard
to please any manner of person. Touch thou, O God, the mouth of this thy
preacher, with the hot glowing cole of thy spirit, whereby he being first
cleansed, may the more fervently and purelie preach thy Gospel unto his
brethren, in the discharge of his duty, as he that first is moved with the
zeal of thy glory, and then touched with a careful affection toward thy
people, as Esaie was. Give unto this thy preacher the audacitie of Eliah and
John Baptist, that like the true minister of God, he may stoutly and boldly,
without any respect of persons, or desire to please men, as he that fears
God more than the faces of men, reprove the people of their sins. Let him, as
thou have given in commendement, cry alowd, and spare not: let him lift up his
voice like a trumpet, and with all diligence and discretion show thy people
their transgressions, and reprove vice unfeignedly. And because, O Lord, in
vain shall he cast the net of thy word, except thou bless the draught; and
his labor yield no profit, unless thou prosper it; do thou therefore
luckily set him on: loose thou his tongue, to speak; and put thou into his
heart what to say. Bless him, that thy word may be with him; that he may be
able thoroughlie to instruct us what is thy will, that he may catch our souls,
and by thy secret and divine power draw unto him the hearts, minds, and ears
of the hearers: so shall he convert and win many unto thy Christ, and thou
thereby be highly glorified. Let thy spirit speak by him, and thy words be in
his tongue; that he utter nothing rashly, or vndiscreetlie; but by the motion
of thy good spirit, speaking sincerely and holilie of thee, as in thy sight.
Give to him, and to all such as bear thy word, and are the ministers of the
spiritual life, such care, zeal, and diligence, that they may endeavor
faithfully and painfully to fulfill their office, to the uttermost. And
finally, let him not defile the evangelical function by any means, no not
with the least suspicion of glory or lucre; neither let his mouth speak
wickedness, nor his tongue set forth deceit: but as he does preach thy
laws, and take thy covenant in his mouth; so grant he himself also may not
hate to be reformed, nor at any time cast thy holy word behind his back.

And now, because thou, O Lord, so mercifully offerest unto us thy salvation;
I am to desire thee furthermore, in the behalf of this congregation present,
that we also, for our parts, may of our own accord willingly receive the same
salvation of the Gospel, now so graciously offered us: that as thy preachers,
for their parts, do publish thy glorious name: so we, as green grass, may
receive the heavenly dew of thy doctrine: and that the barren earth of our
hearts, may be thereby moistened with the lively water of thy grace, and holy
spirit, to fructify in the same. Grant that we may receive these holy things,
high mysteries, and most precious pearls, not as dogs, or swine, to tread them
contemptuously under our feet; as wicked Atheists, and ungodly contemners of
thy Gospel, to our damnation: but as thy children, and those that are of God,
and sheep of his fold, with all meekness, obedience, christian fear and
reverence, grant that we may both hear, receive, and fulfill them; to thy
glory, and our salvation. Furthermore, as thou in mercy openest their mouth
to speak unto us; so give us grace to open our hearts and ears, to receive the
wholesome instructions, and fatherly admonitions, which proceed thereout. O
give us grace, I say, to apply our hearts to instruction, and our ears to the
words of knowledge. Let us be still desirous of thy heavenly kingdom. Let the
holy bread of thy Gospel, and food of heavenly dainties, be only sweet
unto us, and sauorie in our mouths; that we may depart well refreshed, and full
fraught with the largess and plenty of thy word, and Euangelike feast. Make
thou us true Conuerts, and more and more to increase and grow from faith to
faith, and virtue to virtue. Let us never loath this heavenly Philosophy; but
let us be as the learned, that are taught of thee, and made meet by this thy
preacher to receive thy doctrine to our health. The preacher here present is
undoubtedly thy mouth and messenger, whom thou have sent. O therefore let us
not dare either barbarously to misuse our selves toward him, in word, deed, or
thought; or scornefullie disdain to be taught of him: but with all fear of
thy Majesty, and reverence toward him, let us with all attentive and ghostly
greediness mark his words well, to follow whatsoever shall be godly uttered
by him. And finally, touch thou so our hearts, we beseech thee, O God, to
believe thy word, and to repent with speed, that the preaching of thy Gospel
may take place in us, to practice the works of faith, and show forth fruits
worthy the same; so that we, with this and all other thy preachers, and they
together with us, leading a right, virtuous, and godly life, according to the
rules prescribed in thy word, may be brought in the end unto thee, the chief
shepherd of our souls; where we may jointly be partakers of eternal good
things, and most excellent felicity, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another.
IN this great darkness of our souls, O Lord, thou shinest unto us with the
lightsome lamp of thy grace: but in nothing so effectually as in preaching of
thy word. Great is the harvest, as thou thy self have said; and the workmen
are few. The most part of men are ignorant, and wrapped in miserable
blindness; and few there are that teach thy word truly, and as they ought. I
beseech thee therefore, that thou will send forth workmen into thy harvest:
send teachers, O Lord, which are taught of thee, and instructed by thy spirit
of godly wisdom and understanding, which by their preaching will seek not
themselves, but thee, because they are godly; and can so do, because they are
wise, and understand. Give to the preacher of thy word here present, out of
the treasures of thy wisdom, that which he may power upon us to our
salvation. And in us open the windows of our hearts, that they may receive into
them the most holy and wholesome light; and that the good seed, which falls
upon us, be not choked with thorns, or withered away with drought, nor be
devoured by the fowls of the air; but may grow up in good ground, and that
fruitefullie with great increase, to thy glory, and our salvation,

Amen.
Another prayer, to be used of any hearer of Gods word.
I Give thee most hearty thanks, O eternal God, father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; for that it has pleased thee, of thine unspeakable mercy and
goodness, in all ages, continually to send into the world, men wonderful in
the gifts and knowledge of thy will, to be renuers and spreaders forth of thy
truth. Like thanks I ascribe unto thy sacred Majesty, for allowing us
shepherds and preachers, in these our days, for the gathering together of thy
Church out of all mankind, to the building of the body of Christ. Humbly I
beseech thee, gracious God, continue alwaie among us thy pure word, through thy
Ministers; gather unto thy self an everlasting congregation, and so instruct
mine heart with thy spirit of truth, that unfeignedly I may assent to thy
wholesome word, prove a lively member of thy body, and be incorporated into
that society, which both in this world does sincerely confess thee, and
evermore extol thy holy name.

Keep those preachers, which thou dooest and wilt give, in the certain
knowledge of thy blessed will, that they may from time to time both open unto
us thine intent, concerning the repairing of mankind, the salvation and
redemption of our souls, through thy free mercy, and also teach us how to live
in new obedience, and to abstain from carnal desires, which fight against the
soul. Inspire the ministers and preachers of thy word, with thine holy
spirit, that they may utter thy will purelie, as they have received it from thy
hands, reteining the form of whoalsome words, and sounding only that
doctrine, which is uttered by thy son out of thy bosom. For otherwise,
departing from the order of faith, and the rule of thy word, they will greatly
obscure the light of thy doctrine, and obtrude upon us the vanity of their
own inventions. Wherefore let them speak thy word, not deceiptfullie, but
sincerely, even as from thee, and in thy sight.

Grant also, that by transforming thy ministry into policy, they lord not
over thine elect, neither contend about superiority and primacie in the
Church, but only to seek the glory of thy name, and the salvation both of
themselves and us. Give them liberty of speech, boldly without fear, to
blame and rebuke all false doctrine, blasphemous superstition, and abuses in
the Church. Open unto them the door of utterance, that they may speak the
mysteries of Christ, and manifest them as they ought to do; so shall their
doings be profitable unto the godly. Assist them also with thine especial
grace, that they disgrace not their doctrine by impuritie of life, but let
their conversation answer unto the doctrine which they teach and preach: and
especially, for the pastor of this parish, and shepherd of my soul here
present, from whose mouth I learn thy blessed will; I heartily pray, that
thou will keep him in religion sincere, and pure from enorme offenses in
outward conversation. Endue him with a long and healthful life, if it be thy
good pleasure, that many a good day and year he may continue in preaching
the gladsome voice of thy gracious Gospel, among us, without contention and
strife.

And, O son of God, which art the Lord of all the flock, work thou
effectually by thy preachers, speak thou within us to our hearts, the blessed
will of thine eternal father, and confirm thy doctrine in our minds by thine
holy spirit. Grant that we may truly know and discern the same, from the
howling of woolues, and from the enchanted songs of seducing hirelings. And
grant that we may know thee, even as thou know thine, heavenly father; and
to walk religiously and righteouslie in thy sight, showing our selves to be
of that holy seed, which praises thy name for evermore. Come holy spirit,
open mine heart and ears, that I may conceive the profit of thy whoalesome
doctrine, and the sweet comforts revealed in thy holy word, by the preaching
of the Gospel.

O Lord, I acknowledge with tears my sluggishnesse, and carelesnes in seeking
thy truth; and bewail the wretched coldness and hardness of my heart;
beseeching thee to endue me with an unfeigned longing, and an ardent desire of
holy Sermons. Grant that in this life I may worship the feet of the preachers
of peace, and reverence the true dispensers of thy mysteries, thy faithful
ministers, with double honor, and none otherwise to obeie their godly sermons,
than I would, if a voice should sound from the heavens. Let me not, for the
blemishes and imperfections of some particular men, irreverently conceive of
thy whole ministry. Work also within me, that despising thy word delivered
unto us, I never seek after strange revelations, or violent rauishings, both
besides, and contrary to thy word; but bearing always in mind the order which
thou have appointed, may constantly embrace thy word manifested in thy Church.
Finally, impart such grace upon us, that we may imitate and follow the good
works of holy men, casting off the old man, by putting on the new, which is
created after God, in righteousness and true holiness,

Amen.
A prayer, that God would both feed and defend his Church; to be used before
the Communion.
O Heavenly heardman, and nursse of all things living, which of thy mere
goodness satisfiest all creatures that have life; suffer not thy Church to
pine away, and be famished, for lack of the food of thy blessed word, but
feed us continually with thy goodness. Suffer not thou, O Lord, which give
sustenance to all flesh, thy faithful servants to be deprived of perfect
doctrine, and most pure and sound Sacraments, which are indeed the food of
eternal life; but feed us continually with Angels food, that is, with thy
holy word, and with Christ Jesus, whereby our hearts may be made righteous and
strong to him-ward. Let us not like the children of Israel, loath this
heavenly manna, which thou so mercifully and abundantly powrest down upon
us; neither let us lust again after the fleshpots of Egypt, least thy wrath
being kindled against us also, thou cause it not only to cease, and to fall
no more from heaven upon us; but also thou smite us with most grievous plagues,
as thou did the Israelites.

But rather, as newborn babes, remembering how it is written, that man shall
not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God; let us heartily desire the sincere milk of thy word; let our souls
delight in fatness; let us come earelie and late to the waters, to buie, and
eat, to satisfy our hunger and thirst: let us harken diligently unto thee,
and eat that which is good, and labor continually without weariness, for
the meat that perishes not.

O Lord, let us never see the day, wherein thou shall be provoked to send a
famine in our land again; a famine, I say, not of bread; nor a thirst of
water; but of the hearing of thy word, O God. Far be that famine from us, good
Lord. Neither let us any more deserve to be cast out of our own cities,
towns, and houses, and to wander in strange lands, from Sea to Sea, from the
North to the South, from East to West, running to and fro, like hunger-starued
wretches, to seek the food of thy word, as we sometimes have done, O Lord, and
yet not find it; least by that means we do not only perish in body, but
also in soul, for lack of thy word, which is the very food thereof.

But let thy word, O God, be still near us, even in our mouths, and in our
hearts; the word of truth, I say, which now is preached, taught, and received;
and feed thou us, whenever the famine either of body or spirit vexes us. O
our father, give us this day our daily bread, that we may walk in the
strength thereof day and night, until we come to the holy hill of Horeb.
Behold, Lord, according to thy commandment, we do open our mouths wide, fill
thou it full of thy heavenly dainties, as thou have promised. Lord, evermore
give us the bread of life, and of heaven, that we may steadfastly believe in
thee. For behold, O Lord, we come unto thee, as though we were famished; let us
not therefore go away unfed. We are an hungered, let us not be sent away
fasting. Our minds (alas) hunger and thirst greatly after toies, and gauds of
this world; and we have nothing to set before it; because we are poor and
beggarly wretches. But thou, O Lord, art rich in all good things, and the most
plentiful giver of the dainties of heavenly satietie. O therefore, we beseech
thee, give us somewhat to eat; give meat, I say, unto the weary wandering
souls; yet not such as they lust after, but such as is convenient for them,
that being refreshed of thee, which art the living and heavenly bread,
wherewith when we are once well fed, and that our strength is come to us
again, we may ascend unto more high things, and never hereafter hunger or
thirst any more after vanities,

Amen.
Another prayer to be used at the Sermon, before a Communion.
THou use, O most mighty God, to preserve those thy children, whom thou have
lovingly adopted, with no less care and diligence, than if they were sheep:
and the same always fed and led of thee, being their most loving shepherd,
toward their own health, and perfect commodity; who, so long as they have
thee for their Master and Governor, they shall be destitute neither of the
meat nor drink of thy most wholesome doctrine and Sacraments. Whereby it is
manifest, that if we pine away, so long as we live in this miserable and
wretched life, for the hunger and thirst of true and perfect goodness; it
happens for this cause, in that we have forsaken thee, and followed strange
guides; whereof, and of none other, come the great perils and miserable troubles
of mind, which fall upon us.

Wherefore, we humbly beseech thee, O most faithful and loving shepherd, to
call us back from errors, into the right and perfect way. Correct the vices
of the wandering and straieng flock, with the rod and sheephooke of thy
righteousness; so that we may feed at length orderly, purelie, and chastely,
of the most wholesome delicates of thy sacred word, and blessed Sacraments; by
which means the whole head, heart, and all the powers of our mind may be made
fat, and well liking; and we always so underpropped with thy loving mercies,
as we may finally enioie, in thy house, the sovereign delights and deinties
of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said before the Sermons, at the Court.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, who have in thine infinite wisdom
hidden honor in shame, and life in death; that thou might make foolish the
wisdom of this world; and that he that glories, should glory in the Lord:
give us grace, that we stumble not, as some did, at the base estate and small
show that outwardly appeared in thy son: but that rather denieng our own
wisdom, to seek for our salvation, where thou have hidden and laid it up for
us; that is, in the simple ministry of thy Gospel; that it may have such
place amongst us, as it may reform both Kingdoms and Courts, and our private
houses and persons: that we may joy in the present light of that lamp to our
feet, and follow it whither it goes; giving no rest to the dealers of it,
till they have satisfied our hungry souls withal, assuring our selves, that
we shall not want things needful for this life; but shall be nourished by
thee, have thine assistance and help to deliver us from all trouble; and
finally, the enioieng of thy presence, where any trouble shall not come near
us any more: but we shall be satisfied, and have perfect joy in the sight of
thee, our most loving God and Father, in Jesus Christ; to whom with thee, and
the holy Ghost, be praise and glory for evermore,

Amen.
Another.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, who have anointed thy son with
thy holy spirit, and sent him to preach the Gospel; that we, who before were
in prison, and bondage to sin and to death, might by him be set at liberty,
and have our wounded hearts healed by faith of his sweet doctrine: grant us,
that we love not bondage rather than liberty, nor death rather than life; but
that we may so receive his word, as we may attain to everlasting freedom, and
life by it. And for as much, O Lord, as thou declarest, that for contempt of
thy word thou dooest oftentimes withdraw the preachers of it, even from those
to whom they seemed especially to have been sent; grant us so to receive the
teachers of thy truth, as they may be continued amongst us, to our everlasting
comfort in thee; to whom with the son, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory for ever,

Amen.
Another prayer against hardness of heart, and contempt of the word of God.
FOr as much as thy sacred doctrine, O most mighty God, is especially taught
in the sacred Church, whereby both thou thy self art manifestly known,
singularly preached, and highly magnified; and we also thereby still called
to heaven and heavenly things: it behooves us, as many as profess to be of
thy school, greatly to rejoice to be there; and as thy faithful Disciples
with all our hearts to desire for to give diligent ear unto thee alone, and thy
most wholesome instructions. For thou have oftener than once, (as thou did
unto the Israelites) both by thy sacred Scriptures, and also through the
ministers of thy blessed word protested unto us, on this wise: Give ear unto
me, O my people, and acknowledge me truly to be thy God; not in words, I say,
only; but in mind verelie, and with a perfect and most pure worshipping.

But we (alas) have turned our hearts from thy holy words, and so wretchedlie
despised the doctrine of thy sacred law and Gospel; that we have always
hitherto been a slander unto the same. But now are we very heartily sorry for
it; who trusting in the death and bloudshedding of thy son Jesus Christ our
Savior, do with great feruencie, and most earnest prayers, lamentably call
upon thee for pardon of all our sinful crimes. And seeing we acknowledge thee
to be our only God, we earnestly desire thy gracious goodness, to grant us
this request; that we may now, and from hence-foorth for ever, give ear only
unto thy divine Majesty, and honor thee alone; neither make any thine
equal, or prefer any thing before thee.

Suffer not our sinful heart, which of nature is disposed unto evil, to be
hardened at thy fatherly and friendly admonitions: make the same soft, we
heartily pray thee, with the inspiration of thy good grace and holy spirit;
neither suffer us, whom thou, of thine infinite goodness, and not for our
merits sake, have chosen to be thy blessed people, and sheep of thy pasture,
to strive and struggle against thy blessed commandments; like unto the
stiff-necked Jews, who would oftentimes put thereto the traill of thy
mighty power. But grant thou, O most dear and excellent Father, who speak
alwaie peaceable matters, and those things which are for our singular
commodity; that we, which have heretofore been marvelous rebellious,
stubborn, burdenous, and troublesome unto thee; may now become thy tractable,
conformed, and obedient children; and ever hereafter have so great a regard to
thy blessed words, that with very attentive minds we may give good ear to
those things, which thou speak and willest us to do. So doing, we shall
not only be saved, and adorned with glory; but also, every thing of ours
shall be replenished with goodness, truth, righteousness, and peace. Faith
shall abound, and through the same shall we be plentiouslie justified, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy;
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and commandment: good Lord
deliver us.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekelie thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth
the fruits of the spirit: we beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred, and are deceived; to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weake-harted, and to raise up them that fall; and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet: we beseech thee to hear us, good Lord,

Amen.
A very necessary prayer against hypocrites, false teachers, and deriders of
the Gospel.
Whosoever they be, O almighty God, that make a true account of sincere
goodlinesse, and pure religion, are exceeding sorrowful, if they see the sacred
Church scattered, wholesome doctrine derided, the praises of thy divine name
had in contempt; and such things as appertain to a devout woorshipping of
thee, turned unto heathenish gewgawes, and voluptuous pleasures. To the intent
therefore these things may in no wise happen as now unto us, which we see not to
be far off; we power forth daily before thee, with great submission, these
our dolfull complaints. That thou would first, of thine exceeding great
goodness, and loving mercy, blot out all our heinous sins and offenses,
being in a manner infinite and exceeding grievous; committed, not only through
weakness and ignorance; but also done oftentimes both maliciously, and of
set purpose. Be favorable, I say, O God, unto our grievous sins, and turn
away from us, in such sort, the most fierce wiles, and subtle laiengs await of
Antichrist; as thy sacred Church be not deprived of all blessed joy, and
spiritual gladness. O Lord, I beseech thee, show some experiment and proof
of thy self; declare thy name and thy power amongst those thy spiteful
enemies. Bring down Antichrists kingdom, with all his ungodly sects, and
schismatic factions. Certes, ouerlong it has oppressed us; yea, and at this
very day it still lets, hinders, and holds under foot very many,
which else speedily would have run to the kingdom of liberty, and believed
the Gospel. Pull it therefore down, O Lord, with all his stumbling blocks,
evil examples, perverse doctrine; and never suffer it to recover again.

Lord, thou both see, and right well perceiuest, how the cruel, malicious,
and ungodly Antichristians would invade the Church, being so puffed up with
pride, and inflamed with fury, scorning as well divine laws, as humane with
like stateliness and equal contempt; doing nothing with courtesy and
faithfulness; but practicing mischief and naughtiness, and endeavoring so
much as in them lies, that thy blessed word may no where flourish; that true
religion might be utterly extinguished; that the perfect inuocating and
calling upon thy glorious name might be quite rooted out; and to bring all
things to naught by forged tales, men's traditions, politic devises, devilish
deceipts, and very much outrage. But as for thy beloved Israel, since she has
by thy great mercy enioied so long peace, and blessed tranquillity, let her
be joined more and more unto thee her well-beloved, so as she may continually
lay sure hold upon thy worthy praises. Suffer not the mouths of her good and
wholesome instructors to be closed up, and put to silence. Permit not thy due
honor to be had in oblivion, nor yet let the hymns and songs, wherewith thou
art highly praised and celebrated, be usurped of such as will have the same in
derision and scorn. Finally, we humbly beseech thee, O excellent father,
that what wrath or indignation so ever is due unto us, by reason of the heinous
sins we have wickedlie committed, thou would yet, for the glory of thy
famous name, turn it from thy sanctified Church, thy dear spouse; and power
out the same rather upon them, who with an enimielike rage, and most malicious
affection, imagine nothing else, but quite to mar, and utterly lay waste
thy blessed heritage; and in deed be no less adversaries to thy blessed name,
than of our peace and quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer for unbelievers, that all men may embrace the Gospel.
Unto thee do we cry, O Lord, father and maker of all men, which art rich
unto all that call upon thee, and which command the light to shine out of
darkness. For thou will that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth. And therefore, of thy great love thou did call us to the
participation of the lot of the Saints in light, which are by nature the
children of wrath and of death; aliens and strangers from the testaments of
promise, having none hope, and without God in the world, but now are fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the head corner stone, which
susteineth the whole building by his word of power.

Hear us thy servants, making supplication for such as yet have not hard the
sound of thy Gospel, neither know thy name; but sitting in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, have their minds darkened, and are alienated from the
life of God, by the ignorance that is in them, and are carried away unto dumb
idols, and fained gods, even as they are led, and run to worship that which is
no God. Give grace, that thy word may be known among them, and preached in
every land, and the sound there of go out into the ends of the world, that
thou also may be found of them which sought thee not, and famous among such
as never asked after thee. Send forth thy word, that they may be healed, and
walk no more in the vanities of their mind.

O God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, King of glory, give them the spirit of
wisdom and revelation, through the confessing of thee: inlighten their minds,
that they may know what the hope is, whereunto thou have called us, and how
precious the glory is of thine inheritance in the Saints, and how excellent
the greatness of his power is toward us, which believe, according to the
working of his mighty power, which thou have wrought in him, when he was
raised by thee from the dead, and placed at thy right hand in heavenly places,
above all principalities and powers.

Open the hearts of unbelievers, that hearing thy word, they may acknowledge
thee the only true God; and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent; and may
worship thee the father in the son, and the son in thee the father, with
the holy ghost, even as thou have revealed thy self. Take the veil from the
hearts of the Jews, least being blinded in the reading of the old Testament,
they stumble at the stone and rock of offense by incredulity, and hardness
of their hearts; that thy Son Christ crucified and preached, be not unto them
a stumbling block, and thy Gospel the savor of death unto death; but that
being converted by true faith, to the knowledge of thee the father in the
son, their face being uncovered, they may behold thy glory, knowing by the
writings of the Prophets, the Messiah, which thou have appointed to be the
Savior of the world. Likewise, gather thou the Gentiles, to whom the Gospel,
the word of the Cross, is mere foolishness, into thy congregation, that they
may embrace thy ministry, casting off all fleshly wisdom, and lead all
their cogitations captive to the obedience of the Gospel.

Moreover, our prayer and supplication is, not only for those above mentioned,
but also for such as either, although they resist not thy truth and pure
religion openly and obstinately, profess our religion, yet mingled with
many superstitions and abuses, worshipping and calling upon Saints departed
out of this life, or be addicted to outward ceremonies, and rudiments of this
world, burdening their consciences with man's observations, and traditions of
their fathers, or trusting to their own righteousness, or rather to the works
and deeds of the flesh, refuse and make little account of thy righteousness,
which is the true justification; and go about to establish their own
righteousness. But Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to as
many as believe: and another foundation can no man lay, than that is laid in
thy son the Messiah, which is the way, the truth, the life, and the end of
the law. For by his perfect obedience, and fulfilling of the law, by his
innocent and bitter death, he has restored unto us salvation, and perfect
righteousness, that every one which believes on him, might not perish, but
have everlasting life.

O God, the sight of the blind, bring them home again, which through ignorance
either are entangled in doubtful labyrinths, and gross errors, or
countenance polluted religion; that lightened by thy spirit, they may return
into the right way. And such as with impudent faces, and stiff necks, do
obstinately with an affected ignorance withstand thine holy spirit, whose
senses the god of this world has blinded, that the light of thy glorious
Gospel shine not over them; repress and bridle their malice, that by
slaughter and persecutions they neither trouble nor destroy thy Church,

Amen.
After the Sermon, read some of these sentences of Scripture, exhorting to the
diligent observing and following of Gods word beard.
Deuteronomie. 28, verse 1. IF thou shall obeie diligently the voice of the
Lord thy God, walk in his ordinances, and observe, keep, and do all his
commandments, which I command thee this day; then all these blessings shall
come on thee, and overtake thee. Blessed shall thou be in the city, and
blessed in the field, etc. But and if thou will not obeie the voice of the Lord
thy God, to keep and do all his commandments and his ordinances, which I
command thee this day, then all these curses shall come upon thee, and
overtake thee. Curssed shall thou be in the city, and curssed in the field,
etc. as in the whole Chapter.

Ecclesiasticus. 35. WHO so keeps the law, brings offerings enough: he that
holds fast the commandments, offers an offering of salvation.

Matthew. 7. WHO soever hears of me (says Christ) these words, and does the
same, I will liken him to a wise man, which has builded his house on a rock,
etc. But whosoever hears these my words, and does them not, shall be likened
unto a foolish man, which has builded his house upon the sands, etc.

Luke. 11. BLessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

Luke. 12. THE servant that knows his masters will, and does it not, shall
be beaten with many stripes.

Romans. 2. THE hearers of the law are not righteous before God, but the
dooers of the law shall be justified.

James. 1. WHerefore, be ye dooers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves. For if any hear the word, and do it not, he is
like unto a man that beholds his natural face in a glass. For when he has
considered himself, he goes away, and forgets immediately what manner of
one he was. But who so looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues
therein, he not being a forgetful hearer, but a dooer of the work, shall be
blessed in his deed.

John. 15. NOw are ye clean, through the word which I have spoken unto you.
Abide in me, and I in you, etc. I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. For without
me can ye do nothing. If ye abide in me, and my word abide in you, ask what
ye will, and it shall be done unto you.

Revelation. 2. FOR he that overcomes, and keeps my words unto the end, to
him will I give power over nations.

Revelation. 3. REmember therefore how thou have heard and received, and hold
fast and repent. Hold that, I say, which thou have, that no man take thy
crown; and watch.

Then give thanks, and pray unto God after the Sermon, and say:
Immortal praise and thanks be given unto thee, O almighty God, and most
merciful father, who have given us so precious a gift of thy holy word, and
vouchsafed us to hear so glad tidings of thy sacred Gospel, by the hand of
this thy minister, who presently by thy mercy has uttered it unto us. And
seeing thou have dealt so graciously with us, in the free publishing of thy
Gospel, amongst us this four and twenty years; that it seems thou have
even lifted us up to heaven, with the cities, wherein our Savior taught most,
in his being upon the earth; and have now in a manner thrown them down to
hell; and left in them a terrible and a fearful example of thy judgments,
against those that walk not worthy the graces offered unto them. Grant us so
to profit by this their chastisement and correction, that as of thy grace thou
have revealed thy will unto us, which otherwise we could never have known: so
now strengthen us, O Lord, that we never refuse thy Gospel in unbelief, nor
seek in the persons of the preachers of it, any causes and pretenses of our
infidelity; but having thy word always in our hearts, and thy praises in our
tongues, we may walk worthy thy so great graces bestowed upon us, and have
our conversation in heaven, that after we may be taken up thither unto thee,
always to glorify thee, with thy Son, and the holy Ghost,

Amen.
A thanksgiving for the knowledge of God in his word.
WE give thee thanks, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
hid the mystery of thy word, which is the Gospel of our salvation by thy
Son, from the wise, and men of understanding in this world; and have revealed
the same to babes of base degree; certeinlie such was thy good pleasure. Thou
have given us all things in thy Son, whom none knows but thou Father;
neither does any know thee, except thy Son, and he to whom thy Son shall
reveal thee. We worship thee, we praise thee, we glorify thee, we give thee
thanks for the hid wisdom, which thou did determine before the world for
our glory, which was never known to the princes of this world, nor at any
time to the sons of men, as it is now revealed by the spirit; to whom the
communion of the mystery, which was hid from all ages, but is now opened to
thy Saints, to whom thou would have made known, what be the riches of this
glorious mystery. It is thine own working, and of thy free mercy, that we
are made heirs and partakers of thy promise in Christ Jesus, through the
Gospel, which brings us tidings, and full assurance of the everlasting
riches of thine infinite goodness and mercy.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed
us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, by Christ; and has
chosen us in him before the foundations of the world, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him, in love; who has predestined us, to be adopted
through Jesus Christ, unto himself; according to the good pleasure of his
will, whereby he loves us by his beloved, in whom we have redemption in his
blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace,
wherein he has abounded toward us, in all wisdom and understanding; and has
opened unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which
he has purposed in himself, even until the dispensation of the fullness of
time; that he might gather in one all things, both which are in heaven, and
which are in earth, even in Christ; by whom also we are chosen, when we were
predestined, according to the purpose of him which makes althings after the
counsel of his own will: that we might be to the praise of his glory, which
hoping have believed in Christ, when we heard the word of truth, even the
Gospel of salvation. And this grace thou did extend toward us, not by the
works of righteousness, which we had done; but according to thy mercy thou
sauedst us, and did call us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to thine own purpose and grace, which was given to us
through Christ, before all times; and is now made manifest, by the appearing of
our Savior Jesus Christ, which has abolished death, and brought life and
immortality unto light, through the Gospel. To thee therefore, which art of
power to establish our hearts, according to the revelation of the mystery,
which was kept secret since the world began; but now is opened, and published
among all nations, by the Scriptures of the Prophets, at the commandment of
the everlasting GOD, for the obedience of faith; to thee, we say, God only
wise, be praise; through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.

We beseech thee, that according to the operation and working of thy mighty
power, we may continue constant in true faith, and wholesome doctrine: and at
no time forsaking the wisdom opened in the Gospel, may follow the judgment
of worldly reason, and fleshly understanding, which thou have beesotted, and
altogether confounded, in searching thy hidden mysteries. For thy spiritual
wisdom does far exceed all wisdom and understanding of the creatures,
whereunto flesh can not attain: neither can our blood reveal, nor yet the
natural man, although he be endued with great sharpness of wit, and worldly
understanding, perceive the same. Grant, we beseech thee, that we may be thy
simple sheep, and little-ones, receiving from thee the word of truth, without
contradiction and disputation: and that in the articles of faith, we bring not
fleshly wisdom, but being made void of our proper understanding, may bring
our minds into a godly captivity. Let thy Son, which descending from above,
brought with him the eternal wisdom of the Gospel, from thy bosom, and was
made a sacrifice on our behalf; but now exalted to thy right hand, bestows
his gifts: let him, we beseech thee, shine in our hearts. Likewise, cause thine
holy spirit to instill into us his divine light, and breath upon us the new
flame of thine heavenly knowledge; till departing into the eternal life, we
may behold thee the only and true God face to face; which live and reignest
in perpetual glory,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving after the Sermon.
WE render unto thee, O heavenly father, most hearty thanks, for this
spiritual and heavenly nourishment of thy blessed word; wherewith our souls
are not only well refreshed at this present, but also our faith is
strengthened, our love kindled, and our conscience quieted. We most humbly
beseech thee, to give us grace, not only to be hearers of thy word, but
dooers also of the same; not only to love, but also to live thy Gospel; not
only to favor, but also to follow thy godly doctrine; not only to
profess, but also to practice thy blessed commandments; that whatsoever we
outwardly hear, and inwardly believe, we may show forth the same in our
conversation and living, unto the honor of thy holy name, the comfort of our
Christian brethren, and the health of our souls,

Amen.
Another.
O GOD, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers and preachers have
declared unto us, the noble works that thou have done of old time for us. Grant
therefore, we beseech thee, O thou heavenly husbandman, that this seed of thy
word now sown amongst us, may take such deep root in our hearts; that neither
the burning heat of persecution cause it to wither, neither the thornie cares
of this life do choke it: but that as seed sown in good ground it may bring
forth thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold; as thy heavenly wisdom has
appointed, to the glory of thy holy name,

Amen.
Another prayer, or thanksgiving after the Sermon.
I Give thee most humble thanks, Lord Jesus Christ, that thou have vouchsafed
even now, abundantly to refresh and feed us with the food of thy word. And I
beseech thee, that the understanding and knowledge of this thy word, may be
wholesome, comfortable, and effectual in us; that this heavenly seed now
sown, do not die or perish in us without fruit. Keep our hearts, O Lord;
inuiron and compass them about with the enclosure or hedge of thy grace; and
by thy holy Angels preserve and watch over the same, that the infernal foul
bird Satan pull not out thy sacred word out of our hearts. But prepare our
breast, and make apt our hearts unto thee, good Lord, that they may firmly
keep thy word, and that they may alwaie stick, and be as new and fresh in our
memories. Give us also strength, possibility, and power, that our life may
answer to thy doctrine heard. Give increase also to thy word, O heavenly
husbandman, that in us it may augment and grow; and that by thy holy speech
and heavenly eloquence, it may not only bring us to the knowledge of thy
will: but also, that we may execute, accomplish, and fulfill that thou
command and willest; and so perseuering to the end, may at the last aspire
to thy celestial kingdom,

Amen.
Another.
O Gracious God, and most merciful Father, which have vouchsafed us the rich
and precious jewel of thy holy word; assist us with thy spirit, that it may
be written in our hearts, to our everlasting comfort; to reform us, to renew
us, according to thine own image; to build us up, and edify us into the
perfect building of thy Christ; sanctifieng and increasing in us all heavenly
virtues. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ's sake,

Amen.
Another prayer, for the accomplishing of Gods will revealed in his law.
SUCH truly are to be accounted right happy amongst mortal men, O most good
and merciful God, as have thy sacred law alwaie set out before the eyes of
their mind, which they make as a pattern to begin their life by, and as a rule
to proceed by, when they have begun: so that if they shall happen to go
astraie, their fault may both be amended thereby, and they also lead a more
virtuous life, according unto justice. These shall live blameless, and when
their doings shall be examined by upright judgment, they shall not be
ashamed; which will greatly avail, if it be diligently practiced from the
tender age. But I heartily acknowledge, and earnestly confess, O most dear
father, that all man's policy is altogether unprofitable, and none account at
all to be made thereof, unless thou be present with thy blessed spirit, and
dooest direct our minds. For otherwise, what gain may we have, by hearing or
meditating of thy holy law, than a cold and very hurtful knowledge?
Wherefore, my earnest request is, that thou would not only minister
strength unto us by thy grace, for the accomplishing of these things, which
thou command in thy divine law; but also to bring this unto good effect, so
that we may have more felicity in them, than in all our own devises, and take
a greater delight in the continual practice, and due execution thereof, than
in any fleshly or worldly pleasures, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another prayer for strength speedily to accomplish Gods divine law.
WHen as we on the one side, do consider the weakness of our strength, O most
mighty God, and contrariwise, the absoluteness and perfectness of thy
blessed law; we evidently perceive, that for the obteining thereof, thy most
puissant help will stand us in very great steed. First therefore, teach us
the true ways of thy holy commandments; moreover, illuminate in such sort
our mind and understanding, as we may be able to incline, with great feruencie,
unto those things, which thou have both taught and commanded. Furthermore, it
is needful for thee, to grant us power and ability, to perform whatsoever
we have learned of thee; otherwise it shall profit us little or nothing at all,
to have knowledge, unless some part of obedience be either performed, or at
leastwise begun in us, which the lewd inclination of our sinful hearts does
greatly hinder; and finally, our senses and corrupt affections are
wonderful huge adversaries hereunto.

Succor thou us therefore, we humbly beseech thee, with thy good grace, and
abundant favor, forgiving whatsoever we have committed, and do daily, after
a most sinful manner, against thy sacred law; neither let it be imputed unto
us for our eternal destruction. And in the mean season, O good God, quicken
and lift us so up with thy unspeakable loving mercy, which we see offered unto
us in the benign promises of thy holy scriptures, that thou would not
permit us to swerve from thy sacred law, which thou have vouchsafed to set
before us, who do with much feruencie desire to be vnseparablie annexed unto
thee. But grant, that we may execute, with an exceeding fervent desire, the
charge which is left unto us, so that we may marvelous speedily bestir our
steps and feet toward the fulfilling of thy blessed law. Cause thou us, O
excellent father, we humbly beseech thee, to cut off, and cast aside all
delays; and that contrary to the expectation of the ungodly, who always
cast lets to entrap us, we may be obedient to thy sacred precepts, so that all
those, which honor and love thee purelie, may accompany us, that like as the
earth is euerie-where replenished with thy inestimable goodness, so the number
of thy true and faithful suppliants, may be daily more and more greatly
augmented, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A prayer to be used of any excommunicate person, or notorious sinner, before
the doing of open penance in the Church, for true conversion and repentance,
etc.
Eternal and everliving God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, thou that by the
mouth of thy holy Prophets and Apostles have plainly pronounced, that thou
desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may convert and live:
who also have sent thine only son to suffer the cruel death of the cross,
not for the just, but for such as find themselves oppressed with the burden of
sin, that by him and his aduocation, they may have access to the throne of
thy grace, being assured, that before they cry, they shall find favor and
mercy. Unto thee, most merciful God, do I miserable wretch cry, whom for
my filthy life, lewd conversation, and proud contempt of thee, and thy holy
law, thou to the grief and dolor of many good Christian hearts, dooest
justly scourge and punish, by the censures of thy Church, and have woorthilie
cut off, secluded, and rejected, by excommunication from thy mystical body,
making me now a spectacle to God, to angels, and to men.

Unto thee, I say, O Lord, and master of all power, which call offenders
unto thee, by way of judgment and affliction, and know the hardness of
our hearts, which have no power of our selves to return and rise up, do I
come, and that in the name of thy Son, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to
acknowledge before thee, and this congregation, my heinous sins, wherewith I
have too shamefullie polluted my self, and offended thee and thy Church. And
here prostrate at the feet of thy Majesty, I crave mercy and pardon of
thee, and ask forgiveness of all the world, especially of this congregation,
whom I confess I have offended. Most humbly beseeching thee, O father of
mercies, to look upon me with thine eyes of pity, even as thou lookedst
sometime upon the sinful woman taken in adultery, and upon Marie Magdalen in
the banquet, which prostrating her self at thy feet, bitterly did bewail her
wickedness. Likewise favor me, as thou did the Publicane standing a far off
in the Temple, without lifting up his eyes unto heaven for shame, but striking
his breast only, said, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.

And first, O God, that thou will pierce through my hardened heart, and move it
by the power of thy holy spirit, in such sort, that I may come to a true
knowledge of my sins, and feel in my soul and conscience the terror of thy
judgment upon all offenders. Especially, O Lord, that as I have offended thy
Majesty, and a great number of this thy Christian congregation, by my
detestable fact and grievous sin, so (being armed by thy grace to endure
this mortification of my flesh, like as my Savior Jesus suffered for me in his
flesh,) I may now subject my self to the just ordinance of thy Church, and not
refuse openly here to acknowledge and confess my faults (and that with all
Christian patience, and true humiliation, giving to thee the glory of thy
name) before the face of thee and this congregation present, who may be
eie-witnesses of the same.

But because, O Lord, the external confession, and outward acknowledgement of
my sins, without the inward contrition and dolor of the heart and soul,
avails nothing in thy presence, which art the searcher of the heart, and
sifter of the reins; I most humbly beseech thee, that thou will so touch my
heart and conscience, and effectually work in me perfect remorse, and
detestation of my former offenses, that without any hypocrisy, and with true
compunction of soul, and sincere confession of the mouth, I utterly loathing
and condemning mine own impiety, and damning that which the law pronounces
unjust and damnable, may attain to some sense and feeling of thy mercy, which
thou have abundantly showed unto all mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Convert me, O Lord, and I shall be converted; because thou art my God, and
being converted, I will do penance. Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed;
save thou me, and I shall be saved, for thou art my praise. To me, I confess,
shame and confusion of face is due, as I justly suffer this day, but to thee
honor and glory for my redemption, who by thus judging and punishing me,
dooest by little and little give me place to amend, and space to repent; and
have not suddenly, and at unawares taken me away from the face of the earth,
and overwhelmed me by and by through thy justice in my wicked deeds doing, as
I deserved, and thou justly might. For which thy lenity, patience,
long-suffering, and mercy, O thou lover of my soul, I most humbly thank
thee; beseeching thee so to mollify my heart, that I may repent, and esteem
greatly of so great riches, and inestimable treasures of thy goodness.

Moreover, O good Lord Jesus Christ, grant (I beseech thee) that among all the
fears and terrors of my conscience, I may take hold of thee by a lively
faith, which have redeemed me from the curse of the law, and art made for me,
wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption; and may not, in the
fight of conscience, yield my self a slave still to Satan, and despair of
thy mercy; but vpholden by the voice of thy Gospel, may flee unto thee my
mediator, and justified by faith, may have peace with God, that so coming unto
thee by hearing thy word to repentance, the Angels in heaven may continually
have occasion to rejoice; and I avoiding the fearful vengeance, which most
assuredly shall fall upon the inobedient, may be restored into the right of
thy law, and received again into the bosom of thy Church, as a member of thy
mystical body, and from my heart walk in all holy obedience to thee and thy
holy word, to the praise of thy name, the comfort of thy Church, and the
confusion of Satan,

Amen.
A thanksgiving and prayer unto God, of a reconciled offender, or
excommunicate person restored into the Church, to be used after open penance
done at a Sermon, or otherwise.
Heavenly father, fountain of all mercy and consolation, I confess my self
the chiefest of all sinners, and a wretch most unworthy to be counted amongst
thy children, or to be a member of thy Church, if thou have respect to the
corruption of my nature, and horror of my manifold misdeeds. But seeing it has
pleased thy fatherly goodness, not only freely to elect and choose me in
thy dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, by his death to redeem me, by his
Gospel to call me, and by his holy spirit (which both are thine) to
illuminate me: but also that thou have commanded thy holy word and sacred
Gospel to be preached, not only to me, but to all the world, to the end that
the penitent may have an assurance of the remission of all their sins, great
and small, old and new, not only for a time, but even as often as they, from
sorrowful hearts, and broken spirits, in bitter tears, shall bewail the same,
and call for thy grace and mercy.

In consideration of this thy fatherly adoption, and ineffable clemency
showed upon me an unworthy wretch, I can not but highly praise and magnify
thy fatherly mercy. A testimony whereof I not only feel now in my self;
but others also see the same evidently in this my conversion, and confession
of my fore-passed faults; in the which my penance doing, I am assured that I
have not so much shamed my self before this godly congregation, as I have
thereby confounded and overcome mine enemy Satan, who for a time had me in
bondage, and by whose venem and deceiuable entisements, I heretofore have been
very rebellious to the wholesome admonitions of the Church: for the which vile
sins, rebellion, and contempt, I confess I have been woorthilie
excommunicate, and punished by the censures of the same.

But now, O Lord, seeing that the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ has so far
prevailed in me, that by the power thereof I am now set at freedom; and by thy
mercy am returned again to the society of thy Saints, and mystical body of
thy Church; I beseech thee, for the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, so to
accept me sorrowful convert, and to allow of this mine unfeigned repentance and
confession, that my former inobedience and faults be never laid to my charge.
Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy upon me, and absolve me thy poor
creature, not only from the sentence of excommunication, but also from the
sins by me committed, and from all censures of the Church laid against me for
the same, or before: and that Lord, given according to this my hearty and
unfeigned repentance before thee, and all this congregation; and as I heartily
forgive all the world, that in any thing has offended against me.

O Lord, pronounce thou my sins to be cleansed, and they shall be cleansed;
absolve thou me from the chain of mine iniquities, wherewith I am fast tied
and bound, and I shall be absolved; loose thou my sins in earth, and they shall
be loosed in heaven: that being now by thy great goodness and mercy acquitted,
and sent away uncondemned of thee, as that sinful woman taken in adultery
was from her accusers; and received again to the society of Jesus Christ,
into the bosom of his Church; to the participation of his blessed Sacraments;
and finally to the fruition of all thy benefits; I may, by the perpetual
assistance of thy holy spirit, not only more and more be displeased with my
sins, and bridle henceforth my corrupt affections, till Satan be clean
trodden under my feet, by the power of my redeemer Christ: but also be so
conducted in all the course of my life hereafter, that I never fall into the
like sins, impiety, and contempt of God and godliness any more, but that
continually I may be subject to the voice of the Church, and to the ministers
of the same, and proceed daily in all manner of good works, and Christian
obedience, to the praise of thy holy name, and edifieng of thy Church; by
Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost
be given all honor, glory, praise and thanksgiving, not only of me
miserable sinner and unworthy wretch, but also of all men, Angels and
creatures, both in heaven and in earth, from this time forth for evermore,

Amen.
Luke 15, verses 6, 7. Rejoice with me, says Christ. For I have found my
sheep which was lost; yea I say unto you, there is joy in heaven in the
presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents, more than over
ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance.
A prayer to be used for the conversion of any notorious sinner, that does
open penance in the Church.
Pitiful God, omnipotent Lord, and merciful Father; who for that good will
thou bear unto us in Jesus Christ thy dear son, wilt not the death and
destruction of a sinner; but rather that he by the inspiration and moving of
thy holy spirit convert and live, who also do witness, the virtue and
strength of thy word to be such, that it causes the mountains to shake, the
rocks tremble, and the floods to dry up: behold we thy children and people
here prostrate before thee, most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake,
pitifully to look upon all sinners, and especially upon this our sister here
present, who once was baptized in thy name, and has professed her self
subject to this religion, and unto the discipline of thy Church; though Satan
alas now for a while has so blinded her, that wilfully she has contemned
both the one and the other.

But, O Lord, as thou alone know; so may thou alone change and mollify
the hearts of the impenitent sinners: thou, I say, which by the voice of the
prophet Nathan awakedst David from his deadly security; and who without any
prophet did beat down the pride of Manasses in the prison, after that he
had filled Jerusalem with all kind of impiety: thou which turnedst the heart of
Peter at the only look of thy dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, after that
fearfullie with horrible imprecations he had thrice denied, and openly
forsworn thee: thou which openedst the eyes of the blind excommunicate man,
and causedst him to believe thy saiengs; and which forgauest the woman taken in
adultery, and sentst her away uncondemned of thee and her accusers; thou I
say, O Lord, whose mercies without measure endure for ever. To thee do we
pray for this our sister, here presently punished, and doing open penance
for her offenses, earnestly desiring thee, O father of mercies, first so to
pierce and move her heart with the fear of thy severe judgments, which
suffer no child of thine to go uncorrected in this world, to the end they
may escape unpunished in the world to come: and so to open her eyes, that she
may begin to see and understand, how fearful and terrible a thing it is to
fall into thy hands, and to provoke thy wrath and indignation against her.

Let it please thy Majesty, by the virtue of thy holy spirit, so to mollify
her hard heart, I say, that she may now at length feel how greeuouslie she
has offended, both against thee and the Church; and give her thy grace to
acknowledge, accuse, and damn as well before us, whom she has offended, as
before thy presence, this her contempt and sin so notorious and damnable,
least that by her obstinacy and wilful rebellion, thy Church and congregation
being further provoked, be compelled with grief of hearts to cut her quite off
from thy mystical body; whom we, O Lord, unfeignedly desire to receive
within the Church, as a lively member of thy dear son our Lord Jesus
Christ. Hear us, merciful father; call back again this our dear sister
from eternal destruction, where-into Satan would lead her; that we all, who
before thy presence, even for her rebellion and transgressions do mourn, may
receive her again with gladness and joy, and so render praise and honor unto
thee before this thy holy congregation.

We grant our selves, O Lord, unworthy, whom thou should hear; because we
cease not to offend thee by our continual transgressing of thy holy precepts.
Look not upon us, merciful father, in this our corrupt nature, but look
down to thy dear son, whom thou of thy mere mercy have appointed our
head, high Bishop, advocate, mediator, and only propitiator. In him, and in
the merits of his death, we humbly beseech thee, mercifully to behold us; and
suffer not the most innocent blood of thy dear son shead for us, and this
our penitent sister, to be profaned by the tyranny and sleight of Satan: but
by the virtue of the same, let our sister be brought to unfeigned repentance,
and conversion, that so she may escape that fearful indignation, into the
which she appears to have fallen.

Grant I say, O Lord, unto this our sister, the repentance of the heart, and
sincere confession of the mouth, to the praise of thy name, to the comfort of
thy Church, and to the confusion of Satan. And unto us grant, O Lord, that
albeit we cannot live altogether clean from sin, and void of offenses; yet
that we fall not into the like horrible crimes of impiety and contempt, to the
dishonor of thy holy name, to the slander and offense of our brethren and
sisters, and infamy of thy holy Religion and Gospel, which we profess. Let
thy godly power, O Lord, so perpetually assist and strengthen our weakness,
and conduct us in all the course of our whole life; that neither the craft of
Satan, nor the tyranny of sin draw us utterly from the obedience required
in true Christians: but that contrarily being subject to the voice of thy
Church, and to the ministers of the same under thee, by holiness and
innocence of life we may declare to the wicked generation, what difference
there is between the children of light, and the children of darkness; that
all men seeing our good works, may praise thee in the day of visitation. This
we ask of thee, O heavenly Father, in the boldness of our head and mediator
Jesus Christ, praieng furthermore as he has taught us: Our Father, etc.

Another prayer to be said of the beholders of any offender in the Church, or
elsewhere.
Almighty God, and most merciful father, whose judgments are unsearchable,
and whose ways are past finding out; teach us to judge wisely of this our
sister, and all other afflicted with thy hand; not condemning them, but rather
profiting by them, that their example may lead us to repentance, and bringing
forth such fruits, as thou requirest of all those that are planted in thy
Church; least by continuing fruitless, we provoke thee at the last to the
cutting of us down. And because thou have given us a savior able to heal all
our infirmities, deliver us by him, O Lord, from all the bonds of Satan; that
being set at liberty by him, we may foresee the straight door, and enter
into it, leaving the wide gate that leads to destruction, that we may be
saved with those few that are appointed thereunto in Jesus Christ, to whom
with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory, for evermore,

Amen.
A thanksgiving for the conversion of an excommunicate person, or other
public offender after penance.
WE thank the mercy and goodness of our God, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
for the conversion and patient penance doing of this our sister, whereby she
has not so much endured the reproach and infamy of her own sins, as in
deed she has confounded and overcome Satan her deadly foe, who went about to
make her his continual slave: and by whose subtle sleights and evil
suggestions, she has heretofore been disobedient to thy holy laws, and
wholesome admonitions of thy Church. And now, O Lord, seeing that the spirit of
our Lord Jesus Christ has so far prevailed in her, that she is returned to
our society; let it please thee for the obedience of the same our Lord Jesus
Christ so to accept her, that her former disobedience and sins be never laid
to her charge, but that she may increase in all goodness, till Satan finally
be trodden under her feet and ours, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be all honor and glory now and ever,

Amen.
Before the public administration of the holy sacrament of Baptism, the
better to call to mind our own vow and promise made long since unto God, pray
privately to your self, and say:
O Most blessed fore-goer and guide of Christian people, Jesus Christ, who
submitting and humbling thy self, vouchsafedst to be baptized of John in the
river Jordan, and wast not only baptized in water, but also in blood, and in
the holy Ghost: vouchsafe even so to incline, bow and dispose our outward
life, with our inward mind, affects, and desires, in the fulfilling of all
righteousness: so that we being now mortified and dead to the old Adam,
through thy holy witness of baptism, by the working and operation of the
holy Ghost, may alwaie have our holy covenant in remembrance, and before our
eyes, that covenant, vow, and promise (I say,) which we have taken upon us in
our baptism; to the intent that we, as faithful champions, striving against
the world, the flesh, and the devil, may vanquish and overcome them with all
other, which might be noifull and hurtful unto us,

Amen.
Or give thanks for our regeneration and sanctification, as afterward in the
prayer upon Whitsundaie.
Or pray thus for the spiritual washing away of thy sins.
Have mercy on me, O GOD, according to thy great tenderness of heart. For in
wickedness borne I was, and in sins my mother conceived me: so that of
nature all that I am, I am but sin. This my confession of the truth, I know
well, is right acceptable unto thee, whereas in the most part of others thou
have either hid the same, or made it unknown. Purge and sprinkle me with the
blood of Jesus Christ thine unspotted lamb. If thou wash me, I shall be as
white as snow: wash me thoroughlie therefore from mine errors, cleanse me not
only of my sins passed; but also of my whole life to come; so shall I
receive these glad tidings into my heart, that my sins be forgiven me. With the
baptism of spirit in the fire of thine illumination baptize me, which is the
might and efficacy of baptism, which we received in our childhood. Grant that
the same spirit might alwaie conduct us, and let this spiritual washing of
baptism continue with us, until the infection and vice, which we have by
nature of old Adam, be perfectly taken away by the death of the flesh,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Or pray that the benefits of both the holy Sacraments may be applied unto
our souls health.
O Blessed Trinity, and eternal God of one essence; give grace, that in
every combat, and especially at the point of death, being mindful of thy
covenant made with us at our Christening, and of thy most comfortable promise
anexed, He which believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: we may never
doubt, either of thy merciful good will toward us, or of the free remission
of our sins: but by often remembering this sign and covenant, may daily more
and more be confirmed in faith, and hope of perpetual happiness: and apply
thy benefits, which certainly thou have promised, and faithfully wilt
perform unto our selves. For thy promises made to such as believe and trust in
thee, be not vain, and to no purpose.

Likewise uphold our souls by the Sacrament of thy Supper, that strengthened
with the seal of this new testament, we may be the more certain; and
confirmed touching our reconciliation, and everlasting righteousness; and
always bear it fixed in our minds. For if the testament of a man, which is
proved after the death of the Testator, be not small accounted of; much more
should the last testament and holy Sacrament of our Savior Christ remain
pure, and in continual force and remembrance.

Or pray, that we may rightly and truly receive the blessed Sacraments.
O Most merciful God, and loving father, who by thy son Jesus Christ have
abrogated the superfluous ceremonies of the Law, and have delivered us from
the bondage thereof, giving unto us sure and certain seals and sacraments of
thy grace; and our free redemption through the most precious blood of thy dear
Son Jesus Christ. Grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that we may evermore use
them according to thy son our Saviors institution, who has left them as
pledges of his great love toward mankind, and as continual remembrances of
his most precious death, which he suffered upon the wood of the cross for our
redemption: who by the fountain of water has regenerated us, and by his most
precious blood has purged us. Make us therefore to receive these holy
mysteries without corruption, to use them without alteration, to continue them
without superstition, to the honor and glory of thy most holy name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory now and for ever,

Amen.
After public baptism pray, and give thanks secretly to yourselfe, as time
will serve, saying:
WE yield thee most hearty thanks, O heavenly Father; for that it has pleased
thee to regenerate us with the fountain of water, by faith in the blood of thy
son Jesus Christ, and to purge us from that original sin, which we
received of the old Eve. But who is able, oh Lord, to to give thee sufficient
praises? Or who can express thy loving kindness and great mercies toward
mankind, who have not only redeemed him from the yoke of the law, the
bondage of hell, and destruction of the devil: but also like a merciful and
loving father, even in our first entrance into this world, washedst us from
iniquity, and have given us the Sacrament of Baptism, even as a memorial of
our election, in thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, whereby being made thine
adopted children, we may by the sanctification of thy spirit, inherit the
everlasting kingdom, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Or pray for the fruits of Baptism thus.
MOst heavenly and eternal father, we thy humble servants entirely desire
thy fatherly goodness, that as thou have begun in us a new birth, and washed
us with the fountain of regeneration, whereby we are made members of thy
body, and elected into the number and fellowship of thy Church and
congregation: so thou would power upon us the grace of thy spirit, to direct
our lives according to this beginning, in holiness and pureness, that we may
mortify the lusts of the flesh, resist the assaults of Satan, and avoid the
alurements of the wicked world, remembering always that Baptism does represent
unto us our vocation, quenching those sparks of concupiscence that we all draw
from the old Adam, and quickening us in those good fruits of Christ our Savior,
who continually preserve us with his holy spirit for ever and ever,

Amen.
Or pray for the continuance of the true institution of the Sacraments thus:
O Most mighty and most merciful God, by whose power the heavens and earth,
and all things therein, are created; who have placed every thing in a most
excellent order, and have framed man after thine own similitude and image,
raising him from hell to heaven, from woe to joy, from damnation to salvation;
and have given him through thy son Jesus Christ, a most sure bond of thy
promise made in the beginning to mankind for the redemption of the world,
sending thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ to perform the same, who made
one only oblation and sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, and did
ordain and institute two most holy Sacraments to continue the remembrance of
the same; make us ever mindful (we beseech thee) of these thine inestimable
treasures. Continue, oh Lord, this thy favor toward us. Let not tyrants
prevail against thy Church, but let thy mighty power be showed, that the
sacred rites may continue in thy Church, that the enemies may be overthrown;
as the Turk, who would utterly destroy those most holy Sacraments, which
thou have ordained for our salvation; as the Anabaptists, which like heretics,
alter thy most holy institution; as the Atheists, who bred in them great
corruption. Convert them, we beseech thee, O Lord, and establish us in the
truth of thy holy spirit, by thy mighty power, that both now and ever we may
continue in the right institution of thy Sacraments, which thy Son our
Savior Christ has left most perfect unto us, to the endless joy and
consolation of our souls. To whom therefore, with thee, and the holy Ghost,
be all honor, glory, and praise, world without end,

Amen.
Proverbs, 9. verse 1. Wisdom has built her house, and hewn out her seven
pillars; she has killed her victuals, drawn her wine, and prepared her table:
she has sent forth her virgins, and cries upon the high places of the city,
saying: Who so is simple, let him come hither: and to him that is destitute of
wisdom, she says; Come and eat of my meat, and drink of my wine, that I
have drawn. Canti. 5. I AM come (says Christ unto his spouse the Church) into
my garden, my sister, my spouse: I gathered my mirrh with my spice, I ate my
honie-combe with my honey: I drank my wine with my milk. Eat o friends,
drink, and make ye merry o well-beloved. Revelation, 19. Happy and blessed are
they, which are called unto the Lambs supper.
Christian prayers to be said before, at, and after ye receive the holy
Communion, and first: An effectual meditation of the right Christian belief
in the holy Sacrament of the Lords supper, and of the worthy and fruitful
receiving the same, to our comfort and salvation; to be diligently read before
you receive.
O My soul, let us now carefully consider first, whether we be come;
namely, to the celestial table, heavenly banquet, great feast, costly
repast, and sumptuous supper of the most puissant, glorious, mighty, and
magnificent King of kings, and Lord of lords, Jesus Christ thy most merciful
maker, righteous redeemer, sovereign savior, and dear spouse; and that of
necessity, as both forced thereunto by his just commandment, and also allured
and invited by his merciful promises.

Secondly, O my soul, let us rightly know, and diligently mark, what
things are here presently set before us on this holy Table, and provided for
us in this blessed banquet to taste of; namely, that the deintie dishes, and
the refection and meat which we must in very deed seek for only in this
sacred supper, are no vain ceremonies, no bare sign, no untrue figure of a
thing absent, no earthly body, no carnal meat, nor any fleshly substance;
but as the sacred Scripture says, and other holy men do rightly term and
call them, The Bread and Cup of the Lord; a heavenly refection; the sweet
deinties of our savior; the nourishment of our souls; an invisible meat; a
spiritual food; a ghostly substance: which all are here now most
mercifully offered, and exhibited unto us, and all other faithful souls, as
the sovereign preservative against death; the conseruatorie to everlasting
life; the comfortable medicine of the soul; the salve of immortality; the
pledge of eternal health; the defense of faith; the hope of the resurrection;
the memory of Christ; the annuntiation of his death: finally, the communion
of the body and blood of the Lord Jesus, in a marvelous incorporation, which
by the holy Ghost (the very bond of our perfection with Christ) is through
faith wrought in the souls of the faithful, whereby not only their souls
do live to eternal life; but also they surely trust to win to their bodies a
resurrection to immortality. In the which also, we may not only hear, see,
taste, and know the mercy of God our Creator sealed; the sanctification by
Christ our redeemer toward us confirmed; the remission of our sins through
the holy Ghost our comforter and regenerator fully satisfied and established:
but also most sensibly and effectually to our further comfort, in deed feel
wrought in us; the tranquillity of conscience; the increase of faith; the
strengthening of hope; and the long spreading abroad of brotherly love and
kindness, with many other sundry marvelous graces and benefits of God, most
profitable unto us. Which things well considered and weighed, my soul, O with
what fervent affection and earnest zeal ought they now to inflame our heart,
and kindle our mind, greedily to covet and desire the participation of these
most holy mysteries; yea, often to long and hunger after this healthsome
bread, and continually thirst for this divine, heavenly, and blessed food!

Thirdly and lastly, O my soul, let us advisedly call to mind, and well
understand the cause, wherefore we are now come unto this holy table of the
Lord: which indeed is only to this end; that we should now be godly ghests,
not idle gazers; hungry eaters; not steruing lookers on; to feed our selves,
and not to hire others to feed for us: that so we may live by our own meat,
and not perish for hunger, while other devour all. We are come together, I
say, O my soul, with this congregation assembled, presently to celebrate a
sacrifice, not privately in one kind for the dead, nor to make a mystery a
sacrifice, nor of a communion to make a private eating, nor of two parts to
have but one, nor yet to apply it for the dead, and so we to loose the fruit
that are alive. No no, my soul; God forbid that we should come to celebrate
this holy mystery after any such sort, or to any such use or purpose. For
that were to declare our selves unworthy of the Lord, yea to be accursed of
him, for committing such spiritual blasphemy and robbery. But know, that we
are come hither now publicly and openly at this the Lords board, to minister
and do that, which he himself, a little before his death, vouchsafed in his
own person most wisely, kindly, and lovingly to invent, provide, institute,
ordeine, do, establish, and command; as a most necessary way and mean for
it, the better to take some place in us; and not to be frustrate of it end and
purpose. Yea, to do that which his holy Apostles also afterward, together
with the godly fathers in the primitive Church both used, practiced,
authorized, and confirmed; according as it was delivered and given by the first
author thereof only: that is to say, even openly and publikelie to
celebrate, in the Lords most happy commemoration and remembrance, at this his
holy table, the heavenly memory of that most marvelous work, and dear
bought benefit of our redemption and salvation, wrought by Christ Jesus, to our
endless consolation, profit, commodity and eternal salvation, in his (with
all reverence named) most precious death, painful cross, and bloody passion.

And wite thou well, O my soul; that like as Moses, Aaron, and Phinees long
since did sometimes eat Manna in the wilderness, then spirituallie
understanding those visible things: even so now, we in like manner spirituallie
understanding these holy mysteries, (for it is the spirit that quickens and
gives life, the flesh profits us nothing, as says our Savior) must here
also spirituallie hunger, spirituallie taste, spirituallie eat the flesh of
Christ, and spirituallie drink his blood indeed, in these holy mysteries, by
faith only, and assured constant belief; that the blessed body of Christ was
crucified, and his precious blood shed upon the Cross for our salvation. And
so receive this the Lords supper, even for a token, badge, or cognizance of
this faith and salvation in Christ's merits; declaring thereby evermore his death
and passion, with thanksgiving, until he come.

Neither must we now so much as once dream of any gross or carnal eating,
or fleshly feeding; or think that we are come at this present to feed our
senses and belly to corruption, (for that were baselie to abject and bind our
selves to the elements and creatures, and so to declare our selves drowned in
deed in the dirtie lake of blindness and ignorance:) but only and in truth to
nourish and feed our inward man to immortality, and life everlasting: namely,
that as our outward man is nourished by letting in this bodily meat into the
stomach, that is helthsome and sound to be digested; so our inward man may be
spirituallie fed and satisfied, by receiving the meat thereof into our soul
and heart, sound and whole in faith. And therefore we shall not need now at this
present time, in doing these things, to whet our teeth, O my soul; but (as S.
Cyprian says) with sincere faith to break and divide this holy bread. For
surely, without faith, (which indeed is the only instrument most necessary,
in the right use of all these holy mysteries) it is impossible to please God
herein; neither can the unbelievers and faithless folk feed upon the Lords
precious body, nor enioie the eating and drinking of this so high and divine
nourishment of spiritual food. Yea, to have any other eating, than
spirituallie by faith only, is plain idolatry. It behooves us therefore, O
my soul, diligently to ponder, weigh and consider of these things: that now
at the last we may, not only unfeignedly and thoroughlie try, prove, and
examine our selves, our own consciences and lives: but also humbly
acknowledging our faults unto God, heartily repenting our former sinful life,
asking mercy of GOD the Father for Christ's sake, and gladly forgiving all our
offenders, effectually and carefully there withal pluck up, even the very
roots of heathenish infidelity, and all distrust in Gods merciful promises,
to the end we may thereby, in very deed, show our selves lively plants of the
fruitful olive, living branches of the true vine, and worthy members of
Christ's mystical body; even such as have our life, our abiding, our union,
and as it were our incorporation with him.

Finally, O my soul; we must not now, like chattering Iaies, so much regard
or consider these earthly elements, and terrene creatures, which we see with
our corporal eye, and still remain so: but especially and in deed have
respect to the heavenly graces and benefits, which our faith beholds in and
by them. Neither must we by any means cleave to these inferior or base
things, which lie here beneath, and are visiblie discerned: but leaving them
altogether, we must rather resemble and play the parts of the Egles, who fly
and mount up thither, where the dead body lies; that is, giving credit to the
words of Christ, who says: The words that I speak are spirit and life. And
again; remembering that God wills such as will be true worshippers of him,
to worship him in spirit and truth, we must now so behold the bread and wine
with our natural eyes, that we may nevertheless especially lift up the eyes
of our mind to heaven, and look up by faith upon the holy body and blood of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, God and man, as he is there sitting at the
right hand of God his Father, in equal glory, power, and majesty: always
seeking it there, where the sun of righteousness evermore shines;
continually holding fast, and still cleaving by faith only to the rock,
whence we may suck in deed the sweetness of everlasting saluatin. So shall we,
O my soul, now repenting heartily our former foul life, being in perfect love
and charity with all men, maruelling with reverence and fear at these sacred
things; now touching these holy and fearful mysteries with our mind,
receiving them with the hand of our heart, and taking them fully with our
inward man by faith only, be sure at this holy table even now presently to
receive; not only the outward Sacrament; but the spiritual thing also; not
the figure, but the truth; not the shadow, but the body: and that not to
death, but to life; not to our destruction, but to our salvation: which God,
even our own God, for his mercies sake grant us now effectually to do,
through the only merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to whom be all
honor, glory, dominion, power and praise, for ever and ever,

Amen.
The prayer.
Almighty and most merciful God, my heavenly Father; I thy poor child, and
most unworthy bidden ghest to this thy prepared sacrifice and celestial
feast, after due examination of my former life, with an humble and contrite
heart, with a sorrowful and repentant spirit, and with a forgiving and
charitable mind, here prostrate on my knees before thy throne of mercy, with
most lowelie heart, humbly beseech thy Majesty, (even for thy dear and only
son Jesus Christ's sake, whom thou have once for all ever, already given an
oblation and offering for our sins) to have mercy, pity, and compassion
upon me, most vile, wretched, and miserable sinner; and to forgive me all mine
innumerable and horrible offenses, both old and new, committed against heaven
and earth, and against thee. And new I pray thee, sanctify me thoroughly, O
God; and make me, who heartily desire in fear and trembling to please thee in
all things that I do, a worthy communicant, a godly ghest, and fit partaker
here this day of thy heavenly food, in this great and sumptuous Supper of my
Lord and my God: by giving unto me of thine accustomed goodness, the right
knowledge and understanding out thy word, of the thing it self; these holy
mysteries, I mean, and the manifold fruits and benefits thereof, and also by
causing me, through the working of thy mercy and grace, to bring now with me a
true and constant faith, the root and wel-spring of all newness of life, as
well in praising thee, and loving my neighbor, as purging mine own conscience
by earnest repentance, and continual contrition, from dead works and
filthiness of sin; so that, neither the ignorance of the thing, O gracious
God, may cause me to contemn it, nor unfaithfulness make it void of fruit,
nor sin and iniquity procure me thy heavy plagues; but grant that I may, by
faith in knowledge and amendment of life, in faith be here now so united to
thy son Christ my head, and most dearly beloved spouse, in these his holy
and heavenly mysteries, to my comfort both in body and soul, that afterward
I may have full fruition of him in deed, to mine everlasting joy and
salvation in eternal life, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord, blessed for
ever,

Amen.
Another godly prayer.
O Jesus Christ, holy and eternal God, I miserable woman, and wretched sinner,
acknowledge and confess, that I am not worthy the least of all thy mercies,
and most unworthy to receive thee under the roof of my soul, by
participating of thy most blessed body and blood. For horrible and infinite
are the sins, wherewith I am defiled. Woe is me, Lord. For I am a woman of
polluted lips, and dwell among people that have unclean lips. And therefore
the very entrails of my heart are troubled, and my bones do shake, because I
find my soul a most unworthy ghest for so heavenly a supper. And yet
again, mine heart is woonderfullie lightened, when I call to mind, that thou,
the dear son of almighty God, came not into this world to call the
righteous, but sinners unto repentance. For they that be whole, need not the
Physician, but they that are sick. Besides, I know right well, and constantly
do believe, that notwithstanding my filthiness, thou can make me worthy;
which alone can make that clean, which is conceived of unclean seed, and
righteous men of sinners, when thou forgiuest our sins of thy woonted grace,
thine holy spirit being powered upon us. Through which thy power and mercy, I
beseech thee, grant such grace unto me a sinner, that I may woorthilie approach
to this heavenly sacrament; least otherwise by mine unworthiness I be made
guilty of thy body and blood, and so in stead of life, receive my judgment
and condemnation.

Give grace therefore, that before I presume to come unto the participation
thereof, I may examine my self, by calling my sins into mind, searching out
my ways, and by unfeigned and hearty repentance returning unto thee my Lord;
least otherwise, by concealing my sins with Judas the traitor, I eat the
bread of the Lord against the Lord; and by abusing thy gentleness, heap
vengeance unto my self against the day of vengeance. O make me therefore, I
say, to confess my sins, and that with hearty sobs; so thou, being a
faithful and just God, wilt abandon all mine offenses, and cleanse me from my
sins, and wilt not disdain to accept me into favor, when I do not refrain
to acknowledge my wickedness.

Moreover, power into me a true and lively faith, that I never mistrust thy
word annexed to the Sacraments, which promises unto mankind the remission of
sins. For to eat or drink with the mouth only, is to no purpose; but
faith must come thereunto, and apprehend the word with the promises annexed:
for they are the grounds and principles of this sacrament: so that, whosoever
gives credit to these words, Which was given and shead for you, in the
remission of sins; the same man has that, which is promised by them,
namely, eternal life and salvation. For where the remission of sins is,
there likewise righteousness, life and salvation is. But he which doubts of
these words, he without doubt is an unworthy receiver, and comes unprepared.
For the doubting man neither eats the flesh spirituallie, nor yet drinks
the blood; though carnally, and to our eyes he seems to consume the
Sacrament of the body and blood with his teeth and mouth, but his damnation
rather; not because thy supper is poison, but for that an evil man takes a
good thing naughtilie.

Finally, grant also, that receiving this thy Sacrament of the new Testament,
I may put off, according to the former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to the lusts of error, and be renewed in the spirit of my
mind, putting on the new man, which after God is shapen in righteousness and
holiness of truth. And albeit my nature be such, that I can not live without
spots of wickedness; yet so bless me, that I may never offend willingly, but
altogether depending upon thy goodness, whose manner is to pardon the true
penitent, that sinners may boldly approach to thine holy supper; especially,
seeing we have liberty to enter into the holy places, through thy blood, by
the new and living way, which thou have prepared for us, through the veil,
that is, by thy flesh. And seeing we have an high Priest over the house of God,
make us to draw nigh with true hearts, in assurance of faith, sprinkled in our
minds from an evil conscience, and washed in body with pure water. Cause us
to hold fast the profession of the hope without wavering. For he is faithful
that promised: and let us consider one of another, to provoke unto love, and to
good works; not forsaking the assembly of the faithful, as the manner of some
is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more as we see the day
approaching,

Amen.
Another most Christian and devout prayer, to be said before the receiving of
the holy Communion.
O Christ our Lord and Savior, which before thy grievous agony, and heaps of
trouble, thorough the wrath of thine almighty Father lighting upon thee,
commandedst thy Disciples Peter and John to prepare the passover, that together
they might eat the same. Thou longedst for our salvation, and did eat of
the lamb, which was a figure of thy self; and expressedst the image of that
banquet, which thy people the Israelits, under the conduction of thy servant
Moses, about to depart out of Egypt, did celebrate. Having finished the supper
of the old covenant, thou begannest a new covenant, testifieng of thy presence
and benefits in the Church. Move thou our hearts to thankfulness, that with
like desire we may desire to come unto thy table, and seek the nourishment to
eternal life. Suffer us not to loath thine heavenly banquet, as profane and
curious men do, which contend with thee, and contemn the order which thou
have appointed. Amend all abuses and prophanings of thine holy table,
horribly deformed with filthiness; for the which we are punished in all
places with manifold plagues and diseases. By thy wisdom thou healest our
diseases and infirmities, and by the visible signs of Sacraments thou
confirmest our faith. Thou art effectual by them in the believers, according
to thy promise. We bless the bread and wine as thou have willed; and believe
that with them we receive thee in true faith and purity of mind.

Thou declarest by this thy Supper, that truly thou tookedst our flesh upon
thee, for our sakes; even to ingraffe us to thine own flesh, and bring us to
eternal life. This is eternal life, which is begun in this world, whereby
the soul is renewed unto eternal happiness.

Moreover, this blessed meat does witness and testify, that our bodies,
which are replenished with the sense of thy living flesh, shall rise again to
perpetual glory. Increase and nourish, by the profitable taking of thee, this
light within us. Work, that thy Sacraments taken and digested, thou may come
into us, and we into thee. Assist us thy ghests, O sweet householder; that
woorthilie we may feed upon thy meat. Try our soul with earnest and unfeigned
conversion. Let us not play the hypocrites, nor prophanelie dally with thee
and thy holy Sacraments. Cause us rightly to discern thy body and blood
from other common meat. Let us never eat the body of the Lord against the
Lord. Grant in true and unfeigned faith we may enter into this thy sacred
covenant, that we may always abide in thee, and thou in us.

Likewise, by thine holy spirit, which is the bond of love, in this public
and common banquet, join us to thine other members of thy Church. Give grace,
that all which feed of this bread, may be one body, knit unto thee, which art
the head, working all things in all. Let the devil at no time disturb this
pleasant concord between thee and us, as is between the head and other
members of the body.

Let us gather also by the same, the sum of doctrine which is preached in the
Church. Let it raise us up unto thankfulness for thy benefits. Increase our
desire to continual prayer, whereby we crave all things which we stand in need
of. Continue that custom, even till thou returnest gloriously in the clouds
to judgment. Maintain some places for preaching, and godly ceremonies, and
bring in at no time barbarous ignorance.

Furthermore, the doing hereof is a ministry of our profession, against
Satan and all his instruments. Confirm in our minds, by thy spirit, this
sound and pure understanding. Let us not be oppressed with idolatrous
darkness, approouing horrible abuses; in carrieng about, in laieng up, in
offering the hallowed bread without any use: not so much as one syllable of all
these things can be seen in thy first institution. Wherefore, repress the
devil, blasphemouslie dealing with this thine ordinance. And first consume
this world utterly with fire, before we be wrapped again in such horrible
darkness of idolatry and superstition. Mitigate the punishments, sickness,
infections, war and miseries, which for the profaning of this Supper, the
whole world does endure. Let thine Angel spare such, as with grief of heart
bewail these abuses. Feed us, and fill us thy ghests with thy lively
presence. Dwell thou in us. Work in us. Sharpen the remembrance of thy
benefits within us. And finally, at our resurrection from the grave, give us a
place in thy seat; where we shall find a new taste in the kingdom of thy
Father: So be it.

Another prayer to be said before the receiving of the blessed Communion, as
you kneel at Gods board.
O Lord, although I be not worthy to receive thee into the house of my soul,
for mine innumerable offenses and sins done against thy great goodness: yet
trusting, good Lord, in thy great pity and infinite mercy, I come to receive
thy blessed body; as a sick creature, to thee that art the health of life;
unclean, to thee that art the well of mercy; blind by ignorance, to thee that
art the light everlasting; needy of thy grace, and poor in virtue, to thee
that art the King of heaven and earth; naked of good works, to thee that art
the author of grace. I come as a wretch, to thee my Lord and maker; all
desolate and comfortless, to thee my help and succor. For besides thee there
is no consolation. I come as a sinner, to thee that art the mediator and mean
betwixt God and man. I come as a caitife, to thee my most merciful Savior. I
come all sinful, to thee the granter of remission and pardon; dead by sin,
to thee that art the restorer to life; evil, to thee that art all goodness;
hard-harted, to be relieved by the infusion of thy super-abundant grace;
desiring thee meekelie to heal mine infirmities and sickness, to wash away
my sin and filthiness, to lighten my blindness, to reduce me to the right
way, where I am out thereof, to comfort me desolate of goodness. Have mercy
on my wretchedness, pardon my sinfulnes, give me the light of grace (thus
burdened in sin,) that I may receive thee the food of all Angels, the King of
glory, the Lord of all lords, with such chastity of body, with such
pureness of mind, and cleanness of soul, with such contrition of heart, and
abundance of weeping tears, with such spiritual joy and gladness, with such
dread and reverence, with such faith, hope and charity, with such obedience
and humility, with such love, devotion, faithfulness and thankfulness; as it
is beseeming for such a Lord to be received, and to my soul most expedient.

And be not displeased, good Lord, that I a sinner, with an unclean heart and
polluted mind come hither this day, to receive thy precious body in
sacramental bread and wine: but remember, merciful Lord, that thou refusedst
not the sinful Marie Magdalen, being penitent, from the kissing of thy blessed
feet. And in likewise despise me not, nor put me away as unworthy, from the
receiving of thy body in the blessed Sacrament, for my sins and wickedness:
but grant thou me co^punction of heart, plenty of weeping tears, to wash away
my sins and wickedness; so that with a pure heart and clean conscience, I
may this day receive the Sacrament to my souls health; that I may obtain and
possess thereby everlasting life, with all holy Saints in heavens glory; and
in this present life, with the holy spirit to be replenished, and never to
admit other lover besides thee.

Grant me, blessed Jesus, so to receive the Sacrament of bread and wine, that I
may be worthy to be accounted for a member of thy mystical body here in
earth. And though as yet I be not worthy to be numbered among the simplest,
and lowest of thy servants; but rather to be reject and outcast for my
sinfulness: yet, good Lord, of thine infinite power thou may make me able,
equal, and like to the meanest of thine elect servants. Come thou Father of
the fatherless; come thou comforter of the comfortless; come and cleanse my
soul from all contagiousnesse of sin. For it is not convenient, and
according, there to be any uncleanness, where thou, the spouse of virginal
chastity should come in and dwell. Come therefore, and sanctify my soul,
and make it clean by thy gracious presence; that no heaps of soil, or
remnants of sin be to be found in any least cranie or corner of thy
spiritual house or temple, (my body and soul I mean) to offend the
celestial eyes of thy divine Majesty: so shall thy holy hall, which is my
cleansed soul, ring and resound with thy perpetual praises to thy glory.
Come, I say, O God, and apparel my naked soul with the rich ornaments of thy
virtue and grace, and with the white raines of thy righteousness and
innocence; that I may delight thee, therein to abide. And as thou disdainedst
not to touch the sore leapers with thy holy hands: so, good Lord, vouchsafe to
anoint my simple soul, with the ointment of remission and pardon; that in
this life, by steadfast hope, firm faith, and perfect charity, I may so
increase in virtue, from day to day, that I may atteine to the glorious
fruition of thy Godhead in the kingdom of heaven: where I may see thee face to
face, and praise thee with all thine elect and chosen Saints, worlds without
end,

Amen.
Another very devout prayer, before the receiving of the holy Communion.
O Most sweet and loving Lord Jesus Christ, whom now I devoutly and heartily
desire to receive this day: thou know mine infirmities and necessities,
which I suffer; in how many evils and vices I lie, wherewith I am often
grieved, tempted, troubled, and unquieted, and defiled. Unto thee do I come
for remedy, unto thee do I earnestly pray for comfort and help. I speak
unto thee, who know all things; unto whom, even all my very secret thoughts
are manifest; and who only can perfectly comfort and help me. Thou know
what good things I lack before all things, and how poor and beggarly I am in
virtues. Behold, I stand before thee, requiring grace and mercy. Feed and
cherish thy hungry beggar, kindle my coldness with the fire of thy love,
lighten my blindness with the bright cleerenesse of thy presence: turn all
earthly things into bitterness unto me; all heavy, grievous, hard, painful,
and contrary things, into patience to me. Lift up my heart unto thee in heaven,
and suffer me not to wander or go astraie from thee upon the earth. Thou only,
from this time forth for evermore, dooest wax sweet unto me, because thou
only art my meat and my drink, my love, my joy, my sweetness. Oh, would
to God thou would vouchsafe altogether to inflame, burn, and even consume
me with thy presence; and to change me into thy self, that I may be made one
spirit with them by grace of the inward unity, and softning of thy fervent
love! Suffer me not to depart an hungered nor thirsty from them, but work
mercifully with me, as thou have often heretofore maruellouslie wrought with
thy Saints. What marvel is it, if I should be altogether set on fire, and
inflamed with thee, and should fail in my self, and be changed? Since thou art
a fire ever burning, and never failing; a love purifieng the heart, and
lightening the understanding.

Behold therefore, I wretched sinner, not presuming of mine own merits, but
trusting only of thy mercy and goodness, am bold to come in trembling and
fear unto this thy table of most sweet deinties, O most holy Lord Jesus
Christ. For I have an heart and body defiled, marred, and polluted with many
faults and offenses; a mind and a tongue not chastely nor warily kept.
Therefore, O holy Deity, O dreadful Majesty, I wretched caitife, in great
perplexity of mind, taken unawares between many troublsome straights, do now
run again to thee, the fountain of all mercy. Unto thee do I hasten me, to
be healed and cured: under thy protection do I fly. And whom I can not
endure as a Judge, I earnestly desire to have a Savior. To thee, O Lord, do
I open and show my wounds; unto thee do I uncover and detect my
shamefastness. I know that my sins are great, for the which I am sore
afraid; but I hope and repose my trust in thy great mercies, which are
infinite, surpassing number. Turn thine eyes of thy mercy toward me, O Lord
Jesus Christ, heavenly King, everlasting God, man crucified for man; hear me
trusting in thee, and have mercy upon me full of all misery and sin. Thou
which art the flowing fountain, and vndrainable wel-spring of all mercy and
pity, I beseech thee from the bottom of my heart, that thou will forgive me
all my sins, and in this life so to purge away the rust and filth thereof,
that in the life to come they may not be imputed unto me.

O God of unspeakable pity, whose power is infinite, without whom I can not
possibly resist sin, comfort and help me so greatly, that I never
hereafter any more commit any mortal or deadly sin; and from henceforth
may overcome all the temptations of the devil, that I may direct my whole
life, thoughts, words and works altogether unto thee, and that thou may in
the end of my life, so preserve and keep me, that Satan urge me not with his
terrors and fears, and so bring me into desperation. O flowing fountain of
charity, make my mind free from all the creatures, which might draw me from
thy love and favor, that in thy love I may profit, go forward, and prevail;
that now verelie, and in the end of my life, I may worthily receive thee, and
so my soul being powered out of the sack of my body, do thou in mercy bring
it unto the everlasting palace of thy heavenly father, to see and behold the
clear renowned glass of the holy Trinity.

Remember thy creature, O Lord, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious
blood. Woe is me that ever I have offended thee; but now I purpose, by thy
grace, to amend my life. Take from me therefore, O merciful father, all my
sins and iniquities. Cast out of my soul all the filthy foul matter of the
venomous contagion and infection of sin, and by thine ancient and accustomed
mercies, power thy heavenly medicine, and preservative of thy love, into my
wounds, which may refresh and restore me to my former purity and cleanness,
that being purified both in body and mind, I may deserve and be made fit
thorough Christ's merits, woorthilie to taste of these most holy mysteries.

Come this day, O Lord, and minister unto my sick and languishing soul some
heavenly cordial of comfort, not because I am just, but a sinner; because not
the whole, but the sick have need of a Physician. O very true Charity, in
which is everlasting felicity! O the only hope of my soul! have mercy upon
me, and blot out all my misdeeds. Thee does my heart expect and desire, fulfill
my lust and longing, which thou have put in me, even as thou would. I am
thine, O Christ, forsake me not as unmeet, or a stranger. Let thy right hand
alwaie prevent me, and defend me from all evil. Come, O Lord, whom I wretch
have sore offended, and forgive and forget all mine offenses, for the which
thou have shead thine own most precious heart blood. Come, sweet Lord, and give
me the meat of eternal health. Come, O unspotted sacrifice, deliver me from
everlasting death. Come thou Physician of the weak and diseased. Come thou
food of the hungry. Come Lord, visit this house dedicated and consecrated in
thy name. And behold I come to thee, whom with all my heart I covet and desire,
toward whom with all earnest consideration of mind, I aspire, and study to
attain; whom with all mine entrails I heartily love and embrace; whose
blessed body and blood in these holy mysteries I earnestly desire to
receive; that thou may always abide in me, and never forsake me, or depart
from me, O most sweet father: So be it.

Another.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, who most lovingly call us to the
participation of all good things in Christ Jesus, give us also grace woorthilie
to esteem the honor thou vouchsafest us of, in bidding us to the marriage
feast of thy Son, so that we may esteem of nothing in comparison of it. And
seeing few are chosen, though many be called, give us also, O Lord, a lively
faith, working by love, as a seemly garment for so great a solemnity; that
being entered by thy favor into thy house, we dishonest it not, and so
honorable a company as thou have called unto it, by our wicked conversation,
that as unworthy we be not cast out again, but in all our behavior, may do
honor unto both, that we may always remain with thee, and enioie the
happiness thou have prepared for us in thy Son, the full fruition whereof
because thou have deferred to the rising up again of the dead, strengthen in
us, O Lord, the blessed hope of this resurrection, that according to thy
promise thou may make us like to thine Angels that are in heaven, and the
glorious estate of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and the holy
Ghost, be all honor and praise now and for ever,

Amen.
Another.
O Son of God, Lord and Savior Christ, which delightest in those bankets,
whereby men approach to the company of thy celestial welfare; we beseech thee
convert us, O Lord, and we shall be converted. Grant that with Marie Magdalen
casting our selves before thy feet, we may earnestly with tears bewail our
offenses; and again lifting up our hand unto thee, we may lay hold on thee,
and embrace thee as she did. Kiss thou us with thine holy kiss, and by thy
spirit powered into us, stir up in us a new life, which may anoint thee by
true confessing of thy goodness, and delight thee with the sweet savor of
true invocation and new obedience.

Grant also, that in this life we may worship thy feet, which bring tidings of
peace. And forasmuch as in this last age of this world, the messengers of peace
are vitterlie to weep; assist us, that we may be touched with the miseries of
thy Church, and study to our power to mitigate them, and so be made members of
that company, unto whom thou have forgiven much, and which again entirely
does love thee: and again, being called out of the vale of tears, may come to
thy heavenly banquet, which shall be without tears, without grudging, without
grief, sin, and offenses, in the house of thy father, where be many ample
dwelling places,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said a little before you receive the Bread.
O God which art rich in mercy and in all good things, the most plentiful
giver and bountiful bestower of the deinties of celestial satietie and
heavenly repast, give meat to my soul that is weary and faint; not such as
it lusts after, but such as is convenient for it. For lo, I a poor wretch
come now unto thee, which art rich, a sinner unto thee which art merciful. O
let me not return home contemned and despised with nothing. I begin an
hungered, let me not leave off fasting. I come unto thee as though I were
famished, O let me not go away unfed. Although before I eat I sigh and
sorrow, yet good Lord I beseech thee, give me somewhat to eat.

For behold, with that godly heroical matrone of Canaan, Matthew. 15, verse 21.
I come unto thee, and say, Lord help me, according to thy promise: for I
feel the burden of thy displeasure, even my miseries and uncleanness, and
suffer not the sight of mine own unworthiness to withdraw me from thee.
Make me sweetly and reverently to reason with thee, as thy holy spirit
enforced that good woman to do, in these and the like words: I am unworthy,
I am guilty and unclean, I am a dog, I was an outcast from thy house and
courts, I have barked against the glorious majesty of thee and thine eternal
father, I am defiled with the filth of idolatry, with fowlenesse of life, with
the spots of disobedience against thee, but have mercy upon me O son of God,
which appearedst in the flesh, and becamest a worm, to wash us from our sins
which were unclean beasts. Have mercy upon me; O Lord have mercy upon me.
For behold, I am unto thee even as the little whelpe nigh famished for lack of
meat and drink, wearied with seeking about for relief; and almost dead. I
fall down before thy glorious table, where the sweet ypocrasse, and precious
nectar of immortality is tasted. The Fathers and Prophets, Confessors and
Virgins, most excellent lights of thy Church, sit already at thine heavenly
table: they feed upon the meat of eternal glory. O suffer me to eat of the
crumbs. Thou art the bread of life, repel my hunger, satisfy my desire with
thy presence; fill me with thy comfort and spiritual deinties. Make my faith
strong to believe thy word and promises, that being made holy, as thou art
holy, I may now holilie taste and see how sweet thou art in this life by
inchoation, and in the life to come, perfectly, pleasantly, and perpetually
enioie thy heavenly table.

O our Father, give us this day our daily bread, that we may walk in the
strength thereof day and night, until we come to thy holy hill of Horeb. My
sweet Lord, let me feed upon thee. My life enter into my soul. O sweet love, O
loving sweetness, let my belly eat thee, and my soul be refreshed by thee
the heavenly Bridegroom. For thou art the bread and fountain of life, yea all
things indeed whereby the righteous live, which love thee. Thee do I covet,
love and woorship, with whom I shall dwell, reign, and be blessed. Upon thee
do I call for my soul, which thou preparest to receive thee, through the
desire which thou breathest into it. Come therefore, O purger of sins, thou
which art the curer of wounds, the strength of the feeble, the comforter of the
sorrowful, the worship and honor of all them that live, and the only health
of the dead. Come I say, O blessed Trinity, and enter into my soul; come I
beseech thee, and have mercy upon me: make me meet for thee, that thou may
possess that which thou have both made and redeemed, sanctified and preserved,
that I may have thee as a seal upon my heart. Give me thy self O God my God,
restore thy self unto me, for nothing else can suffice thy servant; and
mercifully grant unto me according to the multitude of thy great mercies,
that my baseness may please thy Majesty, and my vileness thine almighty
power.

O sweet Christ, O Charity, my God, dulcet honey, snowie milk, the food of
Angels; make me to grow in thee, that I may eat thee with a sauorie taste.
Make me to overcome the enemy of my salvation, that thou may vouchsafe to
give me (according to thy promise) to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God, and of the Manna that is hid; and that I may
one day or other be called unto the Lambs supper, and eat bread at thy table
in the kingdom of GOD, among the blessed ones. O dear God, I pray thee, let
my mind thus kindeled with the love of thee, fly even till it come to the
beauty of thy celestial house, and to the throne of thy glory, and there let
it be fed at the dining table of the heavenly citizens, in the place of full
feeding, by the plentiful running streams and pleasant pastures. Behold Lord,
I stand at the door and knock; I beseech thee, by the bowels of thy mercy,
wherewith thou being the daie-spring from an high have visited us; open the
hand of thy pity to a wretch that knocks, and vouchsafe mercifully to bid
me enter into thee; that I may rest with thee; dwell with thee, and sup with
thee, and thou with me, and that I may be refreshed to the full of thee, which
art the living sweet white-bread and heavenly repast: wherewith when I am once
fed; and that my strength is come perfectly unto me again, I may ascend unto
the more high things, and never from henceforth hunger or thirst any more so
greatly after vanities: So be it.

When ye are about to receive the bread, lift up your heart and eyes unto God in
heaven, and say:
O Father, I heartily thank thee, who have given thine only begotten son to
take upon him our natural body; which body was once offered to thee upon the
altar of the cross, for the health, wealth, and salvation of all sinners: for
whose sake, O father, I beseech thee, to have mercy upon me; and in
remembrance of whose most bitter death and painful passion, with all possible
thanks for all thy benefits briefly comprised therein; I now in trembling and
fear receive this holy bread, to feed thereby in my soul on Christ's blessed
body, which was given for me, and that only by faith: to mine everlasting
comfort and salvation, and thine eternal glory,

Amen.
Or thus.
O Heavenly Father and blessed God, I render unto thee most hearty thanks for
all thy benefits, which thou have showed unto me most wretched sinner: but
especially for that most sweet smelling sacrifice, which thine only begotten
son offered unto thee on the altar of the cross, by giving his most pure and
undefiled body unto the death, for the redemption of mankind. In remembrance
whereof, according to thy well-beloved sons ordinance, I now receive this holy
bread most entirely, beseeching thee that I may both be partaker of the merits
of thy dear sons body breaking, and also lead a life worthy of so great a
benefit unto the glory of thy name,

Amen.
When you see the wine, behold it with your corporal eyes. For as Christ
says, it is wine: but lift up your soul unto Christ in heaven, whose blood is
there alwaie fresh and lively before the Father, to sprinkle and quicken thee;
and pray, saying:
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living GOD, which being upon the cross, with
thy hands spread abroad for the redemption of all mankind, did drink the
most bitter cup of thy passion: I beseech thee, vouchsafe now to draw the
mouth of the soul that thirsts after thee, unto the high floods and flowing
streams of thine eternal abundance and satietie: yea draw me wholly unto thy
self, which art the living well, to the intent I may according to my capacity
drink of that whereupon I do live.

O my God, my life, thou did say with thy holy and blessed mouth; If any
man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. O well of life, grant unto my
thirsty soul alwaie to drink of thee, that according to thy holy and true
promise, waters of life may flow out of my belly. O well of life, replenish
and fill my mind full of the river of thy pleasures; make my heart to be drunken
as it were in thy love: that after the manner of them that be drunken with wine,
which forget all things save the cup; so I may forget all vain and earthly
things, and continually have nothing else in my remembrance, but thee only;
thy bitter death, thy painful passion, and precious bloud-shedding. Come I
pray thee, into my heart, and make it drunken with the abundance of thy
plentifulnesse, so that I may forget all temporal things; make me, I say,
thoroughly drunken with thy cup, that I may forget even my self, and utterly
renounce all mine own ungodliness and sin.

O Christ, which art the everlasting suffisance that shall be given to the
hungry and thirsty: refresh us continually with the most exquisite and well
furnished banquet of thy blessed Sacraments, and make us drink plentiouslie of
the holy cup of thy blessed spirit and grace. Let the inspiration of thy most
sweet spirit succeed like springs of water; and let not perpetual food be
wanting to our weakness, wherewith to feed and replenish us. Let me taste of
the pleasant rivers of the holy Ghost, that I may be refreshed, and that my
soul may be cooled with the sweet liquors thereof; so that I burn henceforth
with no iniquity or lust to sin. Make me to quaffe heartily the cup of
thanksgiving: yea let my bowels be filled with the pleasant wine of thy love,
and refresh me continually with the most sweet rivers of thy heavenly
consolation.

Thou art my life, whereby I live; the hope that I stick unto; the glory that
I desire. O give me understanding, cheer up my love. Lift thou up my soul,
and draw the mouth of my spirit, which thirsts after thee, up to the water
streams that are above. Uouchsafe, sweet Jesus, in the midst of my monings,
sore complaints, and deep sighs of my heart, to take up my sad and sorrowful
mind to the top of the high mountains, even to the beds of sweet spices,
putting me in a place of pasture by the rivers of sweet waters, where thou
preparest a table, diuerselie furnished for thy friends against they come: to
refresh mine appalled spirits; to cheer up my heavy heart, and make it merry.
Through the which deinties, I being at the length well refreshed, may forget my
manifold miseries, and the vanities of this life; and rest in thee, which art
the true peace everlasting, passing all understanding.

Lord God, which art the sanctifier of the Saints, I beseech thee, consecrate
and make me meet for thy dwelling, and continue thou ever with me: vouchsafe
all to besprinkle me with the blood of thy only begotten son, by which one
sovereign thing both in body and soul, I may be revived with a marvelous
comfortable joy. O Lord, these are thy great benefits, wherewith thou will
relieve the want of thy thirsty children: grant, I beseech thee, that I may
drink on thy cup with a glad mind, willing heart, pure conscience, and cleansed
spirit: and bring to pass by thy mercy, that this drink, which I shall now
drink, may be to my health and salvation. Finally grant, O good God, that I
may, through thy most rich spirit, and his eternal deinties, enioie the
princely palace of heaven, and quaffing very abundantly of the wellspring
of life, which is with thee, I may by the excellent benefit of thy glorious
passion, death, resurrection and light, behold the brightness of perpetual
felicity, and see thee face to face, where my mind may be fed and full satiate
with the meat and drink of life without end. For like as the heart thirsts
after the water springs: so thirsts my soul after thee, O Lord my GOD and
King,

Amen.
When you are about to receive the wine or cup, pray:
I Thank thee, dear father, that thou did not spare thine only and most
deerlie beloved son Jesus Christ, to shed even his most precious blood upon
the altar of the Cross for to wash away our sins. In remembrance whereof, I
now in trembling and dread drink of this cup: humbly beseeching thee, O
Father, that the crucifieng of his blessed body, and shedding of his precious
blood may be meritorious to my salvation,

Amen.
Or else thus.
O Blessed and merciful Father, thy love toward me sinful creature is so
exceeding great and unspeakable, that I can not but give unto thee most humble
thanks: namely, for the shedding of the most precious blood of thy dear son
Jesus Christ; by the virtue whereof, thy wrath stirred up against me wretched
sinner, is pacified, my ransom is paid, the law is fulfilled, mine enemies
are ourcome, and put to flight. In remembrance of this so noble a victory, and
of so great a benefit, I am come unto this thy table, O merciful father, to
drink of this cup; desiring thee, that as my outward man is comforted by the
drinking of this wine: so likewise my inward man may be comforted, and made
strong by true faith in the precious blood of thy most dear son. O Lord, and
my heavenly Father, give me thy holy spirit, which may so rule and govern my
heart, that I never be unthankful, nor forgetful of this thine exceeding
kindness: but to train my life according to thy blessed will, that whatsoever
I do, speak or think, may be unto the glory of thy blessed name, and the
health of my soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
After you have received the holy Communion, give God thanks, and say:
I Thank thee, good Lord, of thine infinite goodness, that thou this day
have fed me with thy blessed body and blood in the Sacrament; desiring thee
meeklie that this Sacrament which I have received, may be to me a purgation and
clensing of my sins; a fortitude and spiritual strength against my frailty; a
sure defense against worldly troubles and adversities; a purchasing of grace
and pardon; a medicine of life; and a continual remembrance of thy blessed
passion: so that in the way it may conduct me; when I stumble it may uphold
me; and when I am fallen it may raise me: so that by good continuance in thy
will, to everlasting glory it may bring me. And so order the tallage and taste
of my heart, that I never seek other sweetness, but thee; that I never seek
other lover, but thee; nor none other comfort beside thee; so that I care for
none other delight, but thee; nor any other honor, but thine. And give me
such perfect love toward thee, wherewith I may come to as great merit in
heaven, as though I had spent all my life days in the remembrance of thy
blessed passion, and graciously deliver me from all tribulations of body and
soul, captivity, anguish and perils. This grant not only unto me, but also
unto all thine elect and chosen Christian people here and elsewhere, for thy
holy name sake,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving after the Communion.
I Thank thee O Christ Lamb of God, for offering thy self upon the altar of
the cross to thy Father an offering and a sacrifice of a sweet savor to God,
for our sins, to reconcile us unto him: for certainty whereof, and
confirmation of our faith, thou have instituted on our behalf this holy
Sacrament of the supper, that as often as we receive the same, we may celebrate
thy memory, and with thanksgiving remember the merit and fruit of thy
passion. I beseech thee by thy bitter death stir up our minds, that by often
receiving this thine ordinance and institution, we may consider how bitter a
death thou did suffer on our behalf, and how great the love was, which drove
thee to take so cruel and shameful a death to save us: and withal
continually yield, as we are bound, hearty thanks unto thee for the same, and
after the like sort answer to our power, that unspeakable good will by our good
life, and careful observation of thy commandments; and may when either
through frailty of our flesh, or by any other fault prevented we sin, run
by and by unto thee by repentance, and through consideration of this new and
eternal covenant, touching the remission of sins made with us, be erected
and vpholden unto a lively and puissant hope.

O sweet Jesus grant, that being fast linked unto thee by this holy mystery, I
may receive power and strength from thee, believing thy promises, and be wholly
addicted thereunto without any doubting, that so my conscience in fear and
troubles may have perfect consolation. Suffer me not to be separated from the
members of thy body, which is the Church; whereof thou art head, fulfilling
all in all: but grant, that abiding in thy word and kingdom, I may be without
fault in the foundation, and without sin against my conscience, and walk
worthy this Sacrament; forsaking utterly, and renouncing the devil, and all
idolatry, all vices and carnal desires, which fight against the soul. For we
cannot be partakers of the Lords table, and of the devils too. Make me also to
remember that by this Sacrament I am bound to do good unto others. For, as
many grains of corn do make one loaf, and many grapes make one wine: so
being many, yet are we but one loaf and one body, in as much as we all
participate of one bread, and drink of one cup. Join us therefore together, O
Savior of the world, at this common banquet, through the band of love, that we
may be fastened unto thee our head, that as thou did die for us, so we again
may not fear to suffer, and to give our lives for the glory of thy name, that
we never be separated from thee neither in life nor death. Make us also
heartily to love one another, like the true and lively members of thy body,
that if need require, we may give our lives for our brethren. Suffer not
concord of minds to be broken. For he that receives the mystery of unity,
and keeps not the bond of peace, he does not receive the mystery for
himself, but a testimony against himself.

Give grace therefore, that leaving aside all wrath, fierceness,
maliciousness and envy, we may forgive one another, even as thou forgiuest
us, and bear one with another for the better avoiding of strife, dissension,
sects and pernicious heresies. Keep this thine ordinance, and right use of
thy Sacrament amongst us evermore, that this good work and divine ceremony
may always be a note and badge of our public profession, whereby we are
known from pagans; and tokens of love, confession and thankfulness. Remove
away all abuses, and prophanations of this holy and sacred supper, together
with the horrible and idolatrous adorations invented by Satan and his members,
to the shameful deforming of thy godly and goodly institution: but
maintain, I humbly beseech thee, the true and unpolluted use thereof, till
thy pleasure is to return in the clouds to judgment with great power and
glory, that it never be out of remembrance; and last of all, at our
resurrection from death, appoint us places of thine heavenly table, where we
may taste the new wine in the kingdom of thy father, abiding with thine elect,
Angels, and blessed Saints for evermore,

Amen.
A meditation of the trust which a Christian soul ought to have in the passion
of our Lord Jesus, with a thanksgiving unto God for the manifold benefits
thereof.
I Might despair verelie, because of my manifold sins and negligences
without number; if it were not that thy word, O God, was made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us. But I can not, neither dare I now despair; because that seeing
when we were enemies, we were reconciled by the death of thy Son, who being
obedient unto thee to the death, yea even to the shameful death of the Cross,
has taken away the handwriting of our sins, and nailing the same to his
cross, has crucified both sin and death. How much more are we now
reconciled, and saved by him? For all the hope, certitude, and surenesse of all
my trust is in his precious blood, which was shead for us, and for our
salvation. In him do I take hartening, and by means of him, who sits at
the right hand of God, and sueth for us, I look back with a careless eye;
and now trusting in him (in whom I am already risen again and received,
already mounted up into heaven, and there do sit among the Angels) I have a
desire to come unto thee, not having mine own righteousness, but that which I
have through the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the which, O most merciful God, and most gentle lover of mankind, we give
thee thanks; who through Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord, when we were not,
did mightily make us, and when we were lost through our sins, most
maruellouslie did deliver and recover us again. To thy goodness, I say,
do I give thanks, and manifold praises do I show forth to thee with all my
heart and mind, which through the unspeakable love (wherewith thou have
vouchsafed of thy marvelous goodness to love us wretches, and unworthy to be
beloved) did send the same thine only begotten Son from thy bosom, unto
our Commonweal, to save us sinners, which were at that time the children of
perdition and damnation. I render unto thee all possible thanks for his holy
incarnation, and nativity, and for the blessed virgin Marie his mother, upon
whom he did vouchsafe to take flesh for us, and for our salvation, to the
intent that like as he is very God of God, so he might be very man of man. I
give thee condign thanks for his passion and cross; for his death and
resurrection; for his ascension into heaven, and his seat of his Majesty on
thy right hand. I give thee thanks, I say, for that most sacred shedding
forth of his precious blood, wherewith we are redeemed; and also for the most
holy and quickening sacrifice of his blessed body and blood, which this day,
and daily in thy Church we feed of, and drink of, wherewith also we are
washed, cleansed, and sanctified, and are made partakers of the only high
divinity. Finally, I give thee thanks for the marvelous and unspeakable
charity and love, wherewith thou did love us unworthy persons, and did
save us by thine only and beloved son. For so thou did love the world,
that thou gave thine only begotten son, to the intent that none, which
truly believe in him should perish, but have everlasting life. And this thing
verily is everlasting life, to know thee, and also Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, to be very God, by an upright faith, and works worthy for such a
faith. Wherefore with all my heart and mouth I do confess, praise, and bless
thee, O God the father unbegotten, and thee O God the son only begotten;
also thee O holy Ghost and comforter. To thee O blessed trinity be all
glory, and praise, and thanks, together with all power, dominion, and might,
in the world of worlds for ever,

Amen.
A meditation to be used after the receiving of the holy Communion, to stir
us up through the consideration and knowledge of so great a benefit, to give
God thanks therefore, and to be grateful for his goodness.
Bless the Lord O my soul, and all mine entrails laud his most holy name.
Forget not O my soul the infinite mercies and continual benefits received of
his most liberal hand; amongst the which, well may thou reckon that which
has been this day given thee, that so infinite a Majesty should vouchsafe to
visit thee, to enter into thy homely habitation, and with surpassing
clemency, wholly to give himself to thee in this most marvelous Sacrament.

O thou incomprehensible God, no less pitiful than puissant, what shall I
say, seeing the depth of thy bottomless mercies has vouchsafed to impart it
self to the depth of mine unspeakable miseries! What thanks can I yield thee
for so great kindness and love, who wot right well, that if all the members
and muscles of my body were turned into tongues, yet could I not condignelie
thank thee for the least of all thy benefits. How much less able shall I then
be with one tongue to laud and thank thee for this present gift, being of so
great and inestimable a value?

If Elizabeth the mother of the forerunner Saint John Baptist, being visited
of the most sacred virgin Marie thy mother, when she perceived thy presence,
illuminated with the holy Ghost, was so astonished thereat, as she cried out
alowd, and said; Whence have I this, that the mother of my Lord does come to
me? How much more justly am I to be astonished, and to cry out; Whence have I
this, that the only son of that most blessed virgin, even my Lord himself,
and Lord of all Angels, heaven and earth, and of all the creatures of the
world, has visited me, entered into me, honored me, fostered me, and filled me
in this most worthy Sacrament? Whence have I this, that a Lord so high, so
puissant, so worthy of all worship, has vouchsafed to come unto me a most
wretched worm; to me the most heinous sinner of all sinners; to me that have
so many times offended him, to me that with my lewdness and abominations
have so often banished and expelled him out of me?

Woorthilie did the holy Prophets Job and David, wonder at thy divine
clemency, at what time they said; What is man that thou so magnifiest him?
What is the son of man that thus thou visitest him? But much greater reason
have we most wretched caitifs to say the same in these our days; What is man
that thou have thus extolled him: as for man, to make thy self man, and to
give thy self in food to man, wherewith he may every day be visited and
refreshed? And albeit all men may marvel at this thy divine clemency used
toward man: much more yet may I marvel, which of all men am the basest and
vnwoorthiest.

If David, when king Saul would have chosen him for his son in law, reputed
himself unworthy, and said; What am I, or what is my life, or my fathers
lineage, that I should be a son in law to a king? How much more cause have I
now to say the same; seeing the King of all kings has admitted me to so high
a dignity? What am I: or what is my fathers offspring? What other am I, than a
vessel of corruption, a sack of doong; and filth engendered of a most vile and
stinking matter, touching my flesh, which ere long shall yield food to woormes:
and am concerning my soul all soiled with sin, fraught with ignorance and
forgetfulness, with many mo defects, and wicked inclinations?

What other is my life than a vanity, a puff of wind, a smoke, and shadow
that quickly vanishes, a confusion and disorder, a continual exercise of
sin and transgressions of thy commandments? Such has my life, mine
exercises, and mine inclinations been; such also is my father Adams offspring,
and all his ancient family; since all that descend of him are generally borne
thus blemished, thus bent, and all like children of a traitor, as he was
adjudged to suffer death.

Wherefore, O most puissant Prince, and dreadful King above all kings, thou
knowing me and my life to have been such, and much worse than I either know
or can imagine, have vouchsafed to receive me; not for a son in law, but for
thine own child, and as a yoonger one right tenderly beloved. For such are
fathers accustomed most of all to cherish; as now thou have cherished and fed
me with this Angels bread, wherein is found all savor, and all divine delight.

S. Luke reports, how one of those ghests, that were at table with thee in a
prince of the Pharisees house, should say; Blessed are those that shall eat
the bread of life in the kingdom of heaven: but much more happy am I, if I
can know it, and gather fruit out of it, which in this life rate the bread,
wherein is the selfsame God spirituallie by faith contained; and therewith
receive a pledge to eat him in his everlasting kingdom. Happy eke are all
those that shall dispose themselves to repair to this most gracious banquet,
wherein are found all sweet tastes and savors, all riches and renown, and all
the things that happily be to be desired.

Yea, what is it that man may long for, that is not here offered him? If he
desire delights and pleasures; here be the sincerest, the choicest, and the
sweetest. If he wish for wealth; behold here the treasure that inricheth both
heaven and earth. If state and souereigntie be sought for, behold here the
highest dignities that can be possibly achieved. Since by means of this most
venerable sacrament the soul is united to God, and rests associated, and
reverenced with quires of Angels that assist about it.

Wherefore, O ye blind beguiled children of Adam, what other pleasure and
profit do you prowle for? Why do you (as Esaie says) spend your money; and
not upon bread? Why imploie you your travel. and not in this that may satiate
and content you? Why loose you such satietie, such sweetness, and such
treasure, as is here contained in this gift? Do not thou so, O my soul, do
not thou so; be not thou henceforth any more blind; see thou seek not any
carnal contentations, having means to be a partaker of this mere spiritual
and celestial delight.

Take no more taste and pleasure in the food of death (whereof thou erst did
feed) having this bread of life given and granted unto thee. Regard not the
pomps, and most vain vanities of this world; seeing thou may enioie in this
Sacrament the true happiness, and good things, which in the world cannot
possibly be atteined. Embrace and keep this treasure, which suffices to make
thee truly happy; possess this good, which exceeds all good; content and
quiet thy self in this repose, which may abundantly satiate thy desire: and
be not ungrateful to this thy benefactor; but yield him hearty thanks, as well
for this, as all other benefits heretofore, from the beginning bestowed upon
thee.

Howbeit, my gracious and merciful Lord, how can I yield thee worthy thanks;
the debt I owe thee being so great, and mine ability to discharge the same so
small? With all my heart, and with all my might, and power, I thank thine
infinite liberality, for having created me to thine own likeness and
similitude, and for having for my conservation created likewise so great
variety of other creatures: and much more do I laud and bless thee, for that
with thy precious death and bloodshed thou have redeemed me: ye a O Lord and
now I do with all my bowels and powers of my body and soul thank thee,
bless thee, and adore thee, for having left us this he auenlie and most
worthy Sacrament; and for giving me miserable wretch, the grace eftsoons to
receive it, that eftsoons I may thereby be made partaker of the fruit of thy
redemption.

And because these my thanks and praises be slender, weak, and unworthy of
such gifts as I have received: I beseech thy sweet son Jesus Christ, to
supply my want. Here vouchsafe to sound perpetual peales of praises for me;
everlastingly to adore thee for me: to reverence thee for me, and to offer
the continual sacrifice of thanksgiving for me. And yet for that, all that I
can do is finite, and is not correspondent to the value of the benefit I have
this day received, being infinite. Those most holy and grateful thanks,
which thou Lord Jesus gave to thy Father, minding to grant us this so
inestunable a gift, even those same, which are infinite, do I offer both to
him and thee together. For verelie believe I, that for this cause did thou
yield them; that so incomparable a gift should not be destitute of condign
graces, and thanks. And now do I humbly beseech thee, of thy most bonntifull
clemency, that seeing it has pleased thee to satiate and honor me with thy
most worthy presence in this venerable and redoubted Sacrament; thou will also
vouchsafe to grant me thy grace to be always grateful, and to answer
woorthilie to this most happy visitation.

This has always been thy wont, my Savior and Redeemer; that where through
thy goodness thou have vouchsafed to enter, there have thou departed of thy
blessings most abundantly; heaping grace upon grace; and mercy upon mercy.
Thou enteredst into Matthew the Publicans house; and from a Publican thou
made him thy Disciple, and an Apostle. Thou enteredst into Zacheus house;
when by and by he was changed from his old custom: and health was given to all
his household. Thou enteredst into Sunon Peter's house, and drauest away the
ague from his wives mother; leaving her whole and comforted. Eft soones did
thou enter into Martha and good Marie Magdalens house; and what tongue can tell
the spiritual riches thou gave to that house; and the ineffable graces thou
endowedst those two sisters with* Finally, the figure of this Sacrament, to
wit, the arc of the old Testament, because it entered into Obed Edoms house,
was cause that thy blessings were powered upon him, and all his, paieng
plentifully for the harborough that in that house was offered thee.

Wherefore, O most sweet and welcome ghest, seeing through thy goodness thou
have vouchsafed this day to enter into my poor cottage, send down withal
thy holy blessings thereon; by means whereof, I may woorthilie answer unto
this thine incomparable mercy. Cleanse and fine this house, Lord, from all the
filth thou see in it. Repair and do some cost on it, least it decaie and
fall to ruin; drive out the darkness in it, with the glistering beams of
thy light; adorn and deck it up with the virtues and graces of the holy
Ghost; that being thus cleansed, repaired, adorned, and illuminated, it may
please thee to dwell therein, and never to depart. Tarry still with me, O
Lord, my comforter; the night draws nigh, and without thee shall I remain in
darkness, and so be sore endangered. O therefore, I say, tarry thou still
with me, and depart not from this lodging. Thou have affirmed, O eternal
truth, how thy whole delight is to dwell with the children of men, and how thou
stand knocking at the door, ready to euter and sup with such as shall open,
and let thee in. Behold how I have given thee free entrance into me; and thou
of thy goodness have admitted me to the sweet supper of thy most sacred body.
Abandon me not therefore my sovereign Lord, ne depart thou from me; draw me
after thee; knit and tie me fast to thee; yea draw me quite out of my self,
since I am much better in thee, than in me. In thee I live, in me I die; in thee
I remain firm and constant, in me I decaie and come to naught.

Renew me therefore, O my sanctifier, and through love transform me into thee,
and grant me so to live in thee, as that I only live to thee, I only love
thee, I only delight in thee, that thou be mine only joy, mine only
comfort, mine only food, wherewith my soul may in such sort be refreshed, as
that all other meats seem loathsome and unsavory to it. This only have I
chosen, this only shall suffice me, with this alone will I live contented,
satisfied, and happy; until the desired day come, when I shall feed of thee
in another form, and enioie thee continually in the company of all the elect
and blessed Saints of the celestial court, where with the Father and the
holy Ghost, thou live and reignest everlastingly,

Amen.
Another fruitful meditation of the Christian soul, exhorting to
thankfulness, newness of life, and holy conversation; in deep
consideration of the great benefits of Christ received in the Sacrament, to be
read after the receiving of the holy Communion in the Church (if time serve)
or at home, especially on Easter day.
THat thou may not doubt, O my soul, of so great wealth and felicity, as is
wrought for thee in these holy mysteries of Christ (whereof now thou have
been a partaker) by his glorious death and resurrection; let us a little
refresh our selves with the contemplation thereof, and as it were chaw the cud,
by calling them often to our remembrance; that so taking great delight in the
sweet taste thereof, we may the less feel or perceive the bitterness of this
miserable life. Go to therefore, O my soul, call to mind now, I say; and we
that therefore thou have received into thine own possession, the everlasting
verity, even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to confirm to thy conscience
the truth of all this matter.

Thou have received him, if in true faith and repentance of heart thou have
received him; if in purpose of amendment of life thou have received him; for an
everlasting gage and pledge of thy salvation. Thou have received his body,
which was once broken; and his blood, which was once shed for the remission of
thy sins: thou have received his body to have within thee the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, for to dwell with thee, to indue thee with grace,
to strengthen thee against thine enemies, to help thy weakness, to possess
thee with peace and gladness, to make thee thankful to thy redeemer, and
careful to lead a godly conversation, and to comfort thee with their presence
in weal and woe: thou have received his body, I say, to indue thee with
everlasting righteousness, to assure thee of perpetual bliss, and life
eternal. For with Christ, by true faith, art thou, my soul quickened again
from death of sin, to life of grace; and in hope translated from corporal and
everlasting death, to the everlasting life of glory in heaven; where now from
henceforth thy conversation indeed should be, and thy heart and desire alwaie
fixed and set.

Doubt not therefore, O my soul, of the truth of this matter; how great and
high so ever these mysteries and things be. For it becomes thy God to do no
little deeds; how impossible so ever they seem to thee. But pray to God
heartily, that thou may have faith to perceive these great mysteries; that by
faith thou may certeinlie know and believe nothing to be impossible with
God. Only bring thou faith, I say, to Christ's holy word and Sacraments, and
thou shall well feel and perceive the benefits of Christ contained therein to
thy comfort. Let thy repentance show thy faith also; let thy purpose of
amendment and obedience of thy heart to Gods law hereafter declare thy true
belief. And now endeavor thy self, O my soul, to say with S. Paul: From
henceforth my conversation is in heaven; from whence I look for a Savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our vile bodies, that they may
be made and fashioned like to his glorious body; which he shall do by the
same power, whereby he rose again from death, and whereby he shall be able to
subdue all things unto himself.

For else, what shall it avail thee, O my soul, to be escaped, and delivered
from the filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of thy Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, if thou be entangled again therewith, and be thereby
overcome again? Certeinlie, it had been better never to have known the way
of righteousness, than after it is known and received, to turn back-ward
again from the holy and most righteous commandments of God given unto thee:
so shall the proverb be verified of thee, where it is said; The dog is
returned to his vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in
the mire again. Oh what a shame were it for thee, O my soul, being thus so
cleerelie and freely washed from thy sins, to return to the filthiness
thereof again? What a great folly were it, thus endued with righteousness,
to loose it again? Yea, what wilful madness were it, to loose the
inheritance that thou art now set in, for the vile and transitory pleasures of
sin? Finally, what unnatural unkindness should it be, where thy Savior
Christ of his mere mercy is come to thee, to dwell within thee as thy ghest;
to drive him from thee, and to banish him violently out of thee; and in stead
of him in whom is all grace and virtue, to receive the ungracious spirit of
the devil, the founder of all unrighteousness, naughtiness and mischief? Oh
my soul, how can thou find in thy heart, I say, to show such extreme
unkindness to Christ Jesus, which has now so gently called thee to mercy,
offered and given himself unto thee, and is now entered into thee? Yea, how
dare thou be so bold, to renounce the presence of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, (for where one is, there God all whole in Majesty together
with all his power, wisdom, and goodness is,) and fear thou not the
danger and peril of so traitorous a defiance and departure?

O my soul, advise thy self well what thou dooest, consider the dignity thou
art now set in, and how thou art therefore cleansed, washed, sanctified, and
renewed, that thou should from henceforth sin no more; but serve God in
true holiness and righteousness all the days of thy life, that in the end
thou may reign with him in everlasting life. If thou refuse so great grace
whereto thou art called, what other thing dooest thou, than heap up thy
damnation more and more, and so provoke God to cast his heavy displeasure upon
thee, and by his just plagues to revenge this thy mockage of his holy
Sacraments, in so great abusing of them? Be very wary and well advised
therefore I say, O my soul, how from henceforth thou dooest behave thy
self; and let not folly loose that thing, which grace has so pretiouslie
offered and purchased. Let not wilfulness and blindness put out so great
light as is showed unto thee, but apply thy self to live in Christ, that
Christ may still live in thee, whose favor and assistance if thou have, then
have thou everlasting life already within thee, then can nothing hurt thee:
whatsoever is hitherto done amiss and committed, Christ (thou see) has
offered thee pardon, and cleerelie received thee into his favor again; in
full surety whereof, thou have him now presently inhabiting and dwelling
within thee. Only take good heart unto thee, show thy self thankful in thy
life, and determine with thy self to refuse, avoid, detest and abhor all
such things in thy conversation, as should offend the eyes of his mercy.
Endeavor thy self now, I say, O my soul, that way to rise up again, which
way thou have fallen into the pit or sink of sin; as if by thy tongue thou have
offended, now thereby rise again, and glorify God therewithal; accustom it
to laud and praise the name of God, as thou have therewith dishonored it. And
as thou have hurt the good name of thy neighbor, or otherwise hindered him; so
now intend to restore it to him again: for without restitution, God accepts
not thy confession, nor yet thy repentance. It is not enough to forsake evil,
except thou set thy courage to do good. By what occasion soever therefore thou
have offended, I say turn now the occasion unto the honoring of God, and
profiting of thy neighbor.

True it is, O my soul, that sin is strong, and affections unruly; yea and
hard it is to subdue and resist thy nature so corrupt and leauened with the
sour bitterness of the poison, which thou receiuedst by the inheritance of
thine old father Adam, but yet nevertheless, be of good cheer, for Christ thy
Savior has overcome the world, and all other enemies for thee. Sin shall not
have power over thee, for thou art now under grace: though thy power be weak,
yet Christ is risen again to strengthen thee in the battle; his holy spirit
shall help thine infirmities. In full trust therefore of this confidence, O my
soul, take a good heart unto thee; I say, be of a good courage in the Lord,
and put upon thee all the holy armor of God, that thou may stand fast
against the enemies, which would again assault and subdue thee, and bring thee
again into their thraldom, slavery, and bondage.

Remember now O my soul, that thou art brought from thy vain conversation,
and that thy freedom is purchased neither with gold nor silver, but with the
dear price of the most precious heart blood of that innocent and immaculate
lamb Jesus Christ. And even now at the least O my soul, begin and take in
hand in the name and fear of God, to purge the old leaven of sin and
wickedness, that corrupts and sowreth the sweetness of thy life, before the
majesty of God, that thou may be as new and fresh dough, void of all sour
leaven of wickedness; so shall thou show thy self to be sweet bread to God,
that he may have his delight in thee; so shall thou declare thy self a worthy
host for such a ghest, and that Christ's gifts and graces have their effect in
thee, and that thou have the right belief and knowledge of his holy mysteries
now received of thee: finally, so shall thou, in applieng thy faith to the
virtue of this holy Sacrament, and in thy life and conversation conforming and
fashioning thy self to the example and signification meant thereby, be most
certain and sure to live in this life happily, and in the world to come to
dwell with Christ (whom thou have now received) in everlasting glory, which
God for his mercies sake, and for the dear and precious merits of his only
Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ's sake grant unto us,

Amen.
The Prayer.
SO great and manifold are thy benefits O most good and merciful God, toward
mankind, as all people in every place ought greatly to laud, woorthilie to
praise, and highly to extol and magnify thy blessed name. For what thing can
be more pleasant to men, than that thou dooest easily hear them at what time
they call upon thee, for such things as they stand in need of? In what other
good things ought we more to rejoice of, than this, for that thou yeeldest thy
self appeased and favorable to our iniquities? Or why be we not right happy
and blessed, whom thou did vouchsafe to annexe unto thy self in thy
sacred congregation, in feeding our hungry stomachs with spiritual good
things, and heavenly deinties, and refreshing us continually with the most
exquisite and well furnished banquet of thy blessed Sacraments, making us to
eat abundantly of thy heavenly Manna and food of Angels, and to drink
plentiouslie of the full cup of thy holy spirit and divine grace, to our
endless comfort and consolation in thee?

Oh Lord, thou dealest favorably even with all other creatures also for thine
elects sake. Thou stablishest the mountains; stillest the raging of the sea;
appeasest the madness of the people, and dooest refresh and lighten with great
joy the uttermost parts of the earth, through the brightness of the heavenly
fires. Thou sendest seasonable weather, and timely showers, whereby only
comes fertility of the feelds, woonderfullie garnished with all kind of
fruits, whereby both men and beasts have abundantly wherewith to feed. Grant
thou therefore thus much also unto us (who art the author of so many good
things) that we may alwaie be mindful thereof, to render most condign thanks
unto thee, and that an alteration of our old leaven being now made through the
virtue of this blessed Sacrament, which we have received, we may like the eagle
from time to time, renew our youth in godliness of life, and use to our health
and comfort those things, which thou so lovingly bestowest upon us, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
At the solemnization of Matrimony, pray thus:
Almighty God, and most merciful father, who have ordained marriage to be
kept without blame or breach to the end, not suffering that any should put
asunder those, whom thou have joined together. Sanctify those, which are
called to this estate of life, to keep it according to thy holy institution
and ordinance. And furthermore, as thou requirest that we should love thee
above all things, esteeming more thy favor, than either the riches or honor
of this world, or life it self: so we beseech thee, O Lord, to teach us how to
use these transitory things, that we abuse them not in setting our hearts upon
them, or delighting more in them than is meet; but that we may so love our
husbands, children, house and lands, and our own lives, or whatsoever thou
give us for our comfort here for a time, that we may keep still the highest
degree of our love for thee our spiritual husband; so that where the question
shall be between thee and any thing else, we may make loss of all things, to
abide perfectly in our love toward thee to the end; to whom, with the
father, and the holy ghost, be all laud and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
Or as at the solemnization of Matrimony in the fifth Lamp.
At the burial of any, meditate and pray, as follows:
O Lord Jesus Christ Son of God, which art the giver of eternal life; we
heartily thank thee, because thou art inwardly touched with mercy toward
us, oppressed both with temporal and everlasting miseries: thou have tasted
death, and with thy flesh thou have touched the grave, and earth, whereby it is
sanctified and made light to the godly, so that it can not keep them in
etternall death. According to thy commandment, there stand the bringers and
ministers of death, even sin and Satan: but thou pluckest the faithful out
of the jaws of death; bring them to a new life; through the comfort of thy
Gospel teach them to speak, and sound forth thy glory; co^mendest them
in this life to the mother the Church, and at length, death and all evils being
subdued, thou will bring them into thy kingdom.

We humbly beseech thee, take mercy upon thy Church in these miserable
days. For she is as a widow destitute of all worldly help, and depends
only upon thy merciful aid and protection. Speak unto her with cheerful
voice, and say; Weep not: power upon thine, the true light of faith and
comfort; lift us up in the mids of death with a confidence of thy presence, and
hope of eternal life. Drive away the guard of death; teach us to set forth
thy truth, and at the length, let us be placed with the sweet mother of all
Saints, in the true country of that happy city Jerusalem, where we shall for
evermore enioie the blessed sight both of thee, and thy heavenly congregation,

Amen.
Another devout prayer at burials.
LORD, thou art God for ever; short is our life; always some of us die; and
other some come into the world: and with thee a thousand years be but one
day, yea as the least minute of an hour. This life passes away as does a
dream, even as grass in the field; green to day, and dry to morrow. If
thou be displeased, then we be lost; if thou chasten, then shrink we for
fear. For thorough sins we be dead unto thee. Certes Lord, if thou have
respect to our sins, who shall continue? Show us how many be the days of
our life, that we may dispend them wisely to the praise of thy name; least
that we falselie, trusting upon long life, might come unto death. Oh good God,
how frail and corrupt a work be we indeed:? Even but very dust and ashes;
and the length of our days be as the flower in the field. No man can deliver
himself from death; no man can save his own soul from the grave: thou
only, O Lord, must do it; namely, to such as believe in thee. O my GOD,
have mercy upon me, and take me not away unprovided, in the midst of my
days; but let me go to my grave in a full age. Let me remember mine end, that
when I shall depart out of this life, I be not deprived of everlasting life.
Let me bear always before mine eyes, the shortness of this life; and what a
vanity, and what a thing of naught it is; as well the men themselves, as all
their things and affairs.

Stay my feet, O Lord, that at no time they slip with some cruel zeal or
envy, that I might have at the ungodly, which for the most part pass their
lives quietly, and die more quietly. I beseech thee, let not thy chosen
persons be discouraged, nor offended, by this thy godly providence, in
ordering of worldly things; nor shrink from thee by reason thereof: but
rather let us remember in what dangers in very deed these ungodly be in; and
with how unhappy a conclusion and term they close and finish their happy
course. And again on the contrary part, what pleasantness of conscience; and
what comfort and quietness shall follow this our unquietness. Finally, O
good God, in the day of my burial, when all my friends shrink from me, do
not thou forsake me: when my father and mother, husband and children forsake
me, vouchsafe thou, O Lord, to take me up, and defend me from the roaring lions,
that wait for their pray; and lead me safely through the unknown country,
and bring me happily to the streets of the heavenly Zion, wherein is the
habitation of all that rejoice in thee; and there set me amongst thine Angels,
before the face of thine own Majesty; where with the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Uirgins; yea and with all my dear parents and
faithful friends, in full measure of happiness, passing excellent glory, and
superabundant joy of thanksgiving and praise, I may magnify thee, my God,
among thy chosen holy ones, for ever and ever,

Amen.
See another prayer in the Lady Aburgauennies prayers.
Another meditation of death.
O GOD, what other thing do we daily in this present life than heap sin
upon sin, and hourd trespass upon trespass? So that this day is worse always
than yesterdaie; by increasing as days, so sins; and therefore thine
indignation, good Lord, against us: but when we shall be let go out of the
prison of this body, and so taken into thy blessed company; then shall we be
in most safety of immortality and salvation; then shall come unto us no
sickness, no need, no pain, no kind of evil to soul or body: but
whatsoever good we can wish, that shall we have; and whatsoever we loath, shall
be far from us. Oh dear Father, that we had faith to behold these things
accordingly! Oh that our hearts were persuaded thereof, and our affections
inflamed with the desire of them! Then should we live in longing, for that
which now we most loath. Oh help us, and grant that we being ignorant of
things to come, and of the time of our death, which to thee is certain, may so
live and finish our journey here, that we may be ready; and then depart, when
our departing may make most to thy glory, and our comfort, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Another sweet meditation, of the longing of the soul to be with God; out of
Saint Augustine.
O Kingdom of all worlds eternal, wherein is joy surmounting all ioies; and
the peace of God, which passes all understanding: wherein also the souls of
all holy folk do rest and reign with thee, O Lord, in everlasting joy,
mirth and gladness. When shall I enter into thee, that I may see my God, which
dwells in thee? When shall I go thither, and behold this great sight? What is
it that holds me back? Woe is me, that my soiourning is prolonged: woe is me;
how long shall it be said unto me; Wait, and wait again? And now to what
purpose is my waiting? My Lord God, do we not wait and watch for the Savior,
our Lord Jesus Christ, to come and repair our base bodies unto the likeness
of his glorious body? We wait and watch, like wise virgins, with our loins
girt, and our lamps burning, for the Lord our Bridegroom, when he should come
from the Bridehouse, to fetch us into his wedding. Come Lord Jesus, and tarry
not: come Lord Jesus Christ; come visit us in peace: come lead us prisoners out
of prison, that we may rejoice before thee with a perfect heart: come our
Savior, thou that art longed for, of all nations and people; come show thy
countenance unto us, and we shall be safe: come my light, and my redeemer, my
GOD, and my spouse, take my soul out of prison, that it may give praise unto
thy name.

How long shall I be tossed in the waves of my mortality, crieng unto thee
Lord, and thou hear me not? Lord hear me how I cry unto thee out of this
huge sea, and bring me to the haven of endless bliss. Happy are they, O God,
which are conveyed out of this sea, and have obtained to arrive at thee, the
safest harborough of all havens. O happy are they indeed, which are escaped
already from sea to shore; from banishment home into their own country; and
from prison into a palace; enioieng their wished rest! Blessed are they that
already have gained the garland of endless glory, which they sought for here
by many tribulations; and joy now in happy mirth for ever. O blessed are
they indeed! O treble, and foure-times blessed are they, which being already
quite rid of all miseries, have atteined to the kingdom of beautifulness, and
everlasting blissefulnesse, and are assured of their vnappearable glory! For
there is joy endless; mirth sorowlesse; health griefelesse; way without
labor; light without darkness; life without death. Happy therefore, I say,
are those, that already have escaped the shipwreck of this present miserable
life, and obtained the grace to come to so great ioies in heaven. But alas, we
are yet still in the waves of the sea, longing for thee, O Lord, the haven of
our sea. O Jerusalem the heavenly country of ours! O quiet country! we look
toward thee, and ken thee a far off. We hale thee from this sea; we sigh
unto thee out of this vale of misery, and labor with tears, if we may by
any means attain unto thee. O Christ, God, and the only hope of all
mankind; our refuge and strength, whose brightness inlighteneth our eyes a
far off, as the beams of the sea-starre does in the mistie darkness of the
stormy sea, to guide us unto thee our haven. Lord, govern our ship with thy
right hand, by the helm of thy cross, that we perish not in the waves; that
the tempest of the water drown us not, and that the deep swalowe us not up:
but with the hook of thy cross, pluck us back out of this vast sea, unto
thee our only comfort, whom we see waiting for us a far off, as the
morning-starre, and as the daiesunne of righteousness, in manner with weeping
eyes, upon the shore of the heavenly country. Behold we, whom thou have
ransomed, do cry unto thee, yea even we, as yet thy banished exiles, whom
thou have redeemed with thy precious blood, do cry unto thee: hear us, O God
our Savior, the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of all them that be in
the sea a far off. We be conversant in a troublesome sea, and thou standing
upon the shore, look at our perils. Oh save us for thy name sake, that we
perish not. And Lord, grant us so to keep our course between Scylla and
Charybdis, and to hold so with thee, that we may escape the dangers of both,
and come safe to land without loss of ship, or freight,

Amen.
Another meditation of the happiness of the good soul hence departing: at
burials.
Happy is the soul, which departing from the earthly body goes directly
into heaven: secure it is and quiet, and fears neither enemy nor death. For
it enioieth continually thy presence, O God, and vncessantlie beholds the
most glorious Lord, whom she has served and loved, and whom now at the length
full ioifullie and gloriously she has attained unto.

And this glory of so great blessedness, neither time shall diminish, nor
any wicked person take away. The daughters of Zion have seen her, and
counted her blessed; even the Queens and the concubines have praised her,
saying: Who is she that comes up out of the desert, abounding in pleasure,
leaning upon her well-beloved? Who is she that looks forth as the morning;
fair as the Moon; pure as the Sun; terrible as an army with banners? How
cheerefullie goes she out, hastneth, runs, when all amazed she hears her
beloved saying unto her on this wise: Arise my love, my fair one, and come
away. For behold, the winter now is past, the rain is changed and gone away,
the floods appear in our earth, the time of the singing of the bird is come,
and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land. The fig tree has brought
forth her young figs, and the vines with their small grapes have cast a savor.
Arise my love, my fair one, and come away; my dove that art in the holes of
the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, show me thy sight; let me hear
thy voice, for thy voice is sweet, and thy sight comely. Come away my chosen,
my fair one, my dove, mine unspotted one, my spouse, come away, and I will
put thee into my bedchamber, because I have longed after thy beauty. Come
away, that thou may triumph in my presence with mine Angels, whose company
I have promised thee. After many perils and labor come away, enter into thy
masters joy, the which no man shall take from thee,

Amen.
Another which may be used on all Saints day.
OH happy are all thy Saints, O Christ, which have passed over the sea of
this mortality, and attained unto the haven of perpetual quietness,
security and peace, where they are at rest, and alwaie ioifull and merry!
Wherefore of thy tender love I beseech thee, O Christ, who art without care of
thy self, be careful for us; who need not to care for incorruptible
glory, have thou a consideration of our manifold miseries. O our God, who have
chosen a people to thy self, and endued them with glory, making them both
immortal of thine immortality, and ioifull through thy blessed sight; I
beseech thee be thou always mindful of us, and help us, who as yet in the
salt seas of this life are tossed with the surges about us. O thou goodly
gate, who art raised into a marvelous highness, help us vile pauement, lieng
much beneath thee; give us thine hand, and raise up such as lie upon the
ground, that waxing strong out of weakness, we may be made courageous in
battle. Make thou intercession for us continually, and vncessantlie pray for
us wretches, and most negligent sinners, that through thy prayers we may be
conioined to the holy company of saints, for otherwise we shall never be
saved. For alas, we are very frail, weakelings of no courage, creatures given
to the service of the belly and flesh, having in us almost no sparkle of
virtue, and yet placed under thy confession. O Christ, we are borne by the wood
of the cross through this great and wide sea, where are things creeping
innumerable, both small beasts and great; wherein the most cruel dragon is,
alwaie prepared to devour us, wherein be the dangerous rocks, Scylla and
Charybdis with other such like innumerable things, whereby the heedlesse and
wavering in faith make shipwreck. Wherefore O Christ pray for us, O good
Christ pray thou (we say) for us; that through thy good prayers and merits,
we may deserve, ship and merchandise being saved, to attain unto the port of
perpetual salvation, quietness, peace and security, which never shall have
end,

Amen.
After the service and common prayer ended, pray thus:
O Jesus Christ, the very true Aaron, and only high Bishop of our soul, which
in thine own name art gone up into the most holy place, and bear our names
before the Lord upon thy shoulders for a continual remembrance. For So Much as
our offerings and sacrifice cannot be so perfect, but that through our frailty
some fault and imperfection shall be found therein in thy sight; vouchsafe we
beseech thee, O holiest of all holies, and our most perfect high priest, in
mercy to bear the iniquities of our public prayers, and common sacrifice,
which we thy people with one accord, by thy grace, have here at this time
made, and offered unto God the Father, in thy name. Pardon, O pardon our
dullness and coldness in devotion; and let this our oblation be always upon
thy forehead, to cause these our burnt offerings to be presented and accepted,
for a sweet savor of rest before the Lord our God; that through thy only
mediation, he being pacified, our sins pardoned, and we graciously
reconciled and sanctified, may be worthy often to have access to thy
mercie-seate, to woorship thee in thy holy Temple; and now as thy servants, to
go in peace, to glorify thee in all holy obedience to thy word, and to do
unto the poor as much as we can, So be it.

Or else thus.
Almighty God, which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee: and dooest promise, that when two or three
be gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their request; fulfill now O
Lord the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come, life everlasting,

Amen.
When the people arise to depart out of the Church, say thus to thy self.
RIse up, O Lord, arise, and let thine enemies be scattered; yea, let all them
that hate thee, and profane thine honor, flee before thee: but gather the
Saints together continually, and let them never depart from thy Church, So be
it.

So soon as you be out of the Church door say:
BLessed be the glory of the LORD out of his place.

Going homeward from the Church, meditate and pray as follows.
O Christ, whose home is heaven, and whose house is a place of ioies eternal;
I thank thee for all thy great mercies showed toward me, especially for
vouchsafing me yet time to repent and live godly: grant also I beseech thee,
that being truly humbled before thee this day, I may by my good life declare,
that I have not come to Church in vain; and that with the penitent Publicane,
I may return home now to my house under thy protection, imbettered and
justified both before God and man, and in all holy obedience glorify thee
both at home and abroad, in my life and in my death,

Amen.
Another.
BEhold me, O Lord, I pray thee, a poor seely woorme here creeping and
walking bodily on earth for a time in this life, (which is our pilgrimage and
passage to our home) and make me more mindful of mine everlasting home, and
very desirous to return to the house of the living: that having mine
affections inflamed by thy holy spirit, I may utterly contemn all earthly
things, and covet evermore to be present with thee: that my conuersatoin may be
in heaven, whither grant me at the length to come, there in my long home with
thy children to be partaker of thy glory, and to rejoice as thy child, because
of this my everlasting home, and the great glory thereof.

For I know, O Lord, that if mine earthly house of this tabernacle (my body)
were destroyed, I have a building of thee, even an habitation not made with
hands, but eternal in heaven; for the which I sigh, desiring to be further
clothed with my house, which is from heaven, that mortality might be swalowed
up of life; because I know, that as long as I am at home in the body, I am
absent from thee; therefore had I rather to be absent from the body, and to be
present with thee, O Lord: nevertheless, whether I be at home, or from home, I
am of good comfort, and always of good cheer in thee: beseeching thee in
mercy to grant me grace, to endeavor my self so to walk by faith in thy
fear, after the inward appearance, that when we shall all appear before the
iudgement-seate of Christ, every one to receive the works of his body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad, I may be found
accepted unto thee,

Amen.
When you enter into your house, pray.
THY favor and grace, O God, being my guide, I enter into this my material
house and home: beseeching thy mercy so to bless and preserve my coming in,
and my going out, both now and ever; that thy peace, O God, which passes all
understanding, may be evermore therein, and that I never turn back, or be
deformedlie scattered abroad from thee, until thou bring me home from this
painful pilgrimage, whereas be the first fruits of my spirit: So be it.

Being come home, pray.
LORD bless us, and make our houses, Churches of thy saints, linked in one
confession and religion, that being by thee made all of one mind in this house,
we may with the devout Galileans praise thee for thy benefits both now and ever.

O Lord, now fashion and conform me by thy holy spirit in this house of my
peregrination; that herein, enioieng the benefit of perfect peace, most
seemly quietness, and comlie order, I may make thy mysteries my songs,
until it shall please thee to lead me upward, unto the peace of thy children;
even into thy holy house, and mansion place, where thou have placed us; and
where we shall will or desire nothing else; but to tarry and remain for ever.
For whilst we are clad with this body, we do as it were go astraie, and are
strangers unto thee, neither have we here any abiding place for ever; but we
must seek for one that is to come. To the which thou bring us, that came
from thence to redeem us, Jesus Christ the righteous; to whom with the Father
and the holy Ghost, be all possible praise, and endless glory, now and for
ever,

Amen.
Prayers before meat on Sundaie.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, who have taught us that outward
things defile not a man; but those that proceed from the heart: grant us so to
esteem clean, that thou pronouncest clean, as that by prayer and
thanksgiving, the use of thy creatures made for our benefit, may be
sanctified unto us: and of the other part, so to abhor the pollusion of
sin, which only thou declarest to be common and unclean, that we may
avoid by thy grace all murders, adultries, thefts, false-witnesse-bearing,
unlawful desires, and concupiscence, and whatsoever thou have forbidden
touching our duty toward men, or service and obedience unto thee: that being
thus sanctified by thy grace, we may always have free access unto thy
sanctuary, in this life; and be received into the heavenly Jerusalem, where
no Canaanite, nor unclean person shall enter in the life to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor,
glory, and praise, for ever,

Amen.
Another.
O Son of God, which by thy miraculous multiplieng of a few fishes and loaves
of bread, did feed five thousand of thy people in the wilderness, both
inwardly with spiritual comfort, and outwardly with corporal food, thereby
showing thy self in deed to be the Creator and susteiner of all things: we
beseech thee, who only give us the breath of life, and know what we
need, and alone can give a reason, why after this manner thou will feed us
with corporal things; and not as thou dooest the startes without any
nourishment. Give unto thy Church, of thy wisdom, such things as are
necessary for the sustentation of this life, wherein the ioies of the life
eternal and to come do begin. And albeit sometime we lack diverse things,
although thine adversary throws stones at us for bread, yet by thy power
strengthen us that we faint not. And that we which live not by bread alone, or
by our own industry; being armed with thy word and promise, (the spiritual
food and sword of our soul) may receive comfort thereby, and being protected
by thee after a wonderful sort, to live and glorify thee both here, and in
the world to come,

Amen.
Another prayer before meat, to be used that day that you have received the
holy Communion.
WE thank thee, O eternal householder, for that after the banquet of paradise
troubled by the devil and man, thou have again of thine infinite goodness,
through thy son, prepared a sumptuous supper, and great feast. And for as
much as thy people, among whom the tower of thy daily iunkets was placed,
together with the most part of the world, do despise thy holy table, and
suffer themselves to be carried about unto the bankets of Satan, and vain
pleasures of this world. Thou have vouchsafed to call us, most unworthy
wretches, being lame, blind, and beggarly in this last age of the world, that
the number of thine elect may be filled: yea, thou compellest some, lieng in
the high ways, and about hedges, by reason of the troubles and decaie of
kingdoms, through the preaching of thy word, to come to the participation of
thy banquet. We humbly beseech thee bring us to thine heavenly table; appoint
us a place therein evermore. Grant that from thy son, which is the bread and
lively wine, we may draw nourishment and juice; that the dryness of our
nature may be watered, and we at length taste of thy supper in the table of
everlasting life, and drink the new wine of thy son, enioieng his visible
sight in the blessed society of all thine elect,

Amen.
When you begin to eat, immediately bless, and say:
LORD God, which art the sanctifier of thy Saints, and the everlasting
suffisance that shall be given to the hungry: bless thou from heaven these
thy good creatures and great benefits, (which thou have created to relieve the
want of thy hungry children, and to be received with thanksgiving) with thy
celestial benediction: that they may be as a healthful medicine or remedy to
our humane nature. And grant that by the invocation of thy holy name, we now
soberlie taking, and temperatelie and thankfully tasting hereof, may
therewithal receive both health of body, and safeguard of soul, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Or else pray thus for the sober using of your meat and drink.
GRant, O most merciful God, that so long as we wander in this wretched world,
we may so take our meat and drink, for the infirmity of our flesh, that we
never be corrupted by fine fare, (wherein the flesh delights) neither yet by
any foolish superstition; nor that we be drawn away at any time from
temperance and sobriety: but let us always remember so to use our abundance,
that when we abound in all things most plentifully, we may give our selves to
moderate abstinence continually; as also that we may patiently bear all
poverty and hunger when it comes: and that we may so use liberty in our
meats and drinks, that always the glory of thy name, O Lord, may be before
our eyes; and that such frugalitie may appear in all our life, that we may
continually seek that satietie and fullness, whereby we shall be satiate for
ever most abundantly, when the glory of thy countenance shall appear unto us
in the heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
When you take salt, meditate a little to your self, and say:
Every man shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be seasoned
with salt. Salt is good; but if the salt be unsavory, wherewith shall it be
seasoned? O God, give us grace to have salt in our selves, and to have peace
one with another; and let all our communication now be so well sauoured and
powdered with salt; that is to say, seasoned with godly wisdom, that we
knowing how and when to speak, all our talk may tend to the glory of thy
name, and the edifieng of our own souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
In the meal time.
LET one of your children or servants, that best can, read this caution
following; and after that, some chapter or portion of the Scripture distinctlie
and reverently, that all at the board may give diligent ear thereunto.

The cautions or remembrances to be said of the child in the meat time.
REmember that these meats and drinks here set before you, are given you of
God to use; but not to abuse in surfeting and drunkenness.

Remember that they are given you to profit your bodies, and not to hurt your
souls.

Remember that they are not given to you alone, but unto others also that need
the same, by your liberality and alms to their relief.

In eating and drinking, remember that you do but feed the woormes, and pamper
the carcass, and ouercharge your soul if ye surfeit with taking too much.

In the midst of your mirth and abundance, remember the poor prisoners, the
sick; and the afflictions of Joseph, and his persecuted members, as though ye
were in their case.

Finally, remember the food of your souls, Christ's body broken, and his
blood shead. Desire the meat, I say, that lasts for ever. Labor for it,
and harken diligently to his word, which now shall be read unto you. And first
let us pray.

A prayer to be said of the child or servant in the meal time, before the
reading of the Chapter out of the Bible.
O Lord, which have provided these earthly creatures for the feeding of our
mortal bodies, direct us carefully to seek, and with delight to taste of thy
most holy word, that we may by that immortal seed be begotten to be thy
children, and thereby be nourished and fed, until we become perfect men in thy
Son Christ Jesus, So be it.

Or else thus:
BLessed Lord, which have not only created all things for man's sustenance, but
also have caused all holy Scripture to be written for our learning, grant us
to be so conversant among these thy gifts purelie and holilie, because thou art
so, that we may in such sort also now both read thy word, hear it, mark,
learn, and inwardly digest this heavenly food of our souls, that being well
refreshed, and virtuously transformed both in body and soul, we may holilie
walk in the strength thereof, to glorify thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
After the Chapter read, say thus:
BLessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. Grant therefore we
beseech thee, O Lord, that we may not only be readers and hearers of thy word,
but dooers and followers also of the same; that being now fed and nourished at
thy hands both in soul and body, we may here be apt and ready to do all
good works, which thou have prepared for us to walk in, and in the life to
come be received to thine eternal kingdom of glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving after the receiving of our bodily sustenance, and
reading of some part of Gods holy word, or spiritual food.
O Lord our God, the only giver of all good gifts, who of thy great mercies
have made us partakers both of the heavenly gifts of thy holy word, to feed
our minds; and of thine earthly creatures, for the necessary sustenance of
our weak bodies: grant we beseech thee, that through thy grace, these thy
gifts may be made perfect unto us. Give strength unto our meat, that it may be
our healthful nourishment, not to breed in us any carnal desire of our vain
life; but to enable our bodies with all good works, during the time of this
present pilgrimage, that so thy good creatures may be our good relief so long
as thou will, and so much as thou know to be expedient for us thy servants
to finish our days, which thou have numbered in the edifieng of thy Saints,
and glorifieng of thy holy name.

And because, O Lord, we know nothing of our selves, but our ignorant hearts
are full of darkness; therefore we beseech thee, that this thy word (which is
thine eternal wisdom) that now we have read (and wherein we have had our
conference) may be in our minds a burning lamp and shining light of thine
only truth in our hearts, and in our souls a fruitful seed of a new birth:
so that thine own image may be happily again restaured in us; that we may
be made before thee a holy and righteous people, by the inward working of thy
gracious spirit, daily strengthening our hearts in earnest love of thy truth,
and careful obedience of thy commandments, through Jesus Christ our only
mediator, who in the sacrifice of his own body, has purchased unto us all
thy favor, and has given us boldness to call upon thee, unto whom, O
father, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world
without end,

Amen.
Another prayer after meat on the Lords day.
SAnctified be thy name, O eternal father, who by thy Son Jesus Christ our
Lord, dooest evermore protect and provide for thy Church both spiritual and
corporal blessings, bestowing most liberally upon us all good things asked
according to thy will. Lift up thine eyes, O Christ, and behold thy miserable
people, which depend altogether upon thy provision, and acknowledge our selves
to be fed, and defended miraculouslie by thee. Assist us, that we also may
withdraw our eyes from the consultations of flesh and blood, and look upon
thee our Lord, by whose blessing we eat and store our selves. And albeit, all
worldly helps do fail, yet be thou a fiery wall still about us, and feed and
defend thy Saints in the feelds of comfort, until thou begin that ioifull
Passover, and everlasting Sabbath, and bring us out of the wilderness, out of
the sea and penury, into the court of joy, wealth, satietie, and everlasting
welfare. In the mean while, make us thankful for the benefits which we
enioie. Let us gather up the remnants or fragments cast from thy sumptuous and
rich banquet unto us. Preserve our baskets, and bless our store, even the arts
and schools of learning, that by them thy doctrine may be spread abroad in
the world. Make us not only to honor thee for these thy corporal benefits,
but much more for giving thy self unto us, which art the bread of life. Be
thou our King, defending us in this life against the power of Satan, and feed
us with thy heavenly bread, which may nourish us to eternal life and
happiness,

Amen.
Another prayer after meat that day you have received the holy Communion.
SEeing that of thy free grace and mercy, O almighty God, thou have made us
partakers this day of all thy riches, both in spiritual and corporal things
in Christ Jesus, who of our selves are unworthy to have gathered the crumbs
under thy table, make us more and more mindful of so great mercies, and
continually thankful to thee for so manifold benefits, and to walk worthy
the honor and dignity thou have done unto us, that we may receive the full
accomplishment of thy love toward us in the life to come, through the same our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all
honor and glory world without end,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving unto God for our food, to be read and meditated upon
after meat.
WE thank thee, O King of glory, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have
from our youth to this present hour, maruellouslie nourished us, giving us
meat, drink, and clothing, with all other things perteining to the
sustentation of this present life. Naked and bare came we out of our mothers
wombs: we brought nothing into the world, but whatsoever we have, thou gave
the same; yea it was before we were borne, and in our mothers womb, did thou
ordeine things necessary for this life, and sufferedst us to enioie all things
abundantly. Alwaie thou have a care of us, as a father uses his children;
neither art thou ignorant that we stand in need continually of thy blessings,
and daily are destitute of new relief, all which thou give after thy
woonted and unspeakable goodness.

We acknowledge that whatsoever we have or possess, it is thy gift, and
confess thee to be the fountain of all good things, and perceive thy
fatherly goodness to be spread, not only over all mankind, but also over the
living creatures. Thou give meat to all flesh, thou give fodder to the
cattle, and feedest the young ravens that call upon thee. For corporal goods
are not distributed among men by chance, or without thy providence; neither be
they atteined by the only industry and power of man. Thou give, and we
gather; thou openest thy hand, and all living creatures are filled with thy
blessing. For without thee all our endeavors be in vain, and if thou bless
not our labors, we do but eat the wind, and receive no profit.

Great is thy mercy, O Lord, which disdainest not to provide for sinful
flesh. O Lord our God, great are thy woonderous works, which thou have done for
us, the which we can not so much as in thought comprehend, muchlesse in words
express. When we would report and utter them, we found them more than we could
recite: but notwithstanding thine infinite benefits can not be comprehended of
mortal man, yet will we not surcease to set forth thy praise, nor hide thy
goodness from the sons of men; but will declare it, and speak of thy truth
from one generation to another.

Blessed art thou, O our God, for ever and ever; all that is either above in
the heavens, or in the earth beneath, is thine. All things come from thee, and
from thine hands we receive whatsoever we possess, and all these things of thy
mere mercy, without our merits or worthiness. Therefore we will magnify
the Lord, which does mighty things in all corners of the earth, which does
nourish us from our mothers wombs, and gives us all good things. Grant us
likewise quietness of mind, and peace in our time, that thy grace may abound
toward us, continue, and defend us while we live.

O almighty and merciful father, by thy breath we take life, the which
through thy blessing does abide in us. In thee we live, move, and have our
being. For man lives not by bread only, or by his own wisdom and forecast,
neither art thou bound with a fatal chain of second causes, but by thy decree
and will we enioie life, and all things created at thy beck, do continue,
while thou think good. Give us not only store of all things to the
necessity of life, but grant also to our meat and drink virtue and power to
relieve and strengthen our bodies. For thou alone vpholdest all things by thy
word of power. Unless thou daily did feed us with the hidden grace, which
thou dooest inspire into the bread to feed us, all the heaps of our yeerelie
increase were to small purpose. For be it, that there be abundance of wheat,
wine, and of all other things, yet unless they be watered by thy blessing,
quickly would all come to naught, and we should perish for lack of food in
all that abundance. For all the substance that we possess, what is it,
without thou prosper and fructify the same with thy blessing?

And albeit we feed on bread, yet we ascribe not our life to the virtue of the
bread; neither is thy power tied to the bread; nor man's life included within
the same, but altogether it depends upon thy will and good pleasure. We
beseech thee for thy most large and bountiful liberality, cast us not off in
the time of our old age; and when our strength fails us, forsake us not.
Likewise, confirm our faith, that we distrust not thy promises; neither be
driven from thee by any means, seem they never so contrary to natural
causes: but give grace that we may withdraw our eyes from all worldly
consultations, and as touching our food, and other necessaries for this life,
may wholly depend upon thee, and at no time go beyond the limits which thou
have prepared, through our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and reigns with
thee for evermore,

Amen.
At noone-tide, or mid-daie, say thus:
O Lord my light, my inlightning, and my welfare, from whence all true
brightness and light does come: grant I beseech thee, that as of thy goodness
thou have given me thus plentifully this corporal light to compass my body
on every side, so of thy mercy give me abundantly the spiritual light of
thy grace and knowledge, which may inlighten my mind, and cause mine age to
appear as clear as the noone day. And because, O Lord, nothing in this world
is so perfect and glorious, but when it is at the full, it will decrease and
wear away: even as we see in the course of this thy glorious creature the
Sun, which now being at the highest, will begin to draw downward. Grant
also, I beseech thee, that when at the age of forty years my body by little
and little shall begin to fade, and the beauty thereof wither, and draw
toward an end, it together with my soul, in the day of judgment, may shine
as bright as the Sun, being now at the highest, does; and may then begin to
be glorified to the full, in the region of the celestial world, where the
Sun of all righteousness, and the brightness of perpetual charity and
felicity does everlastingly shine, and inlighten all the holy company of
heaven,

Amen.
Or else thus:
LOrd let thy favor prevent us, as does the Sun, which being now in the
highest region, spreads his beams over all the parts of the earth. And as
the brightness thereof shines now without the clouds: after the same sort give
us thy cleerenesse, and show thy bright countenance over us, that lightened by
thy word, we may walk this day thorough, circumspectly and warily in the
ways of thy commandments; that being blinded in the mid day, we run not
headlong into darkness, neither grope at noone day as in the night,
wandering from the paths of thy judgments. Open thine eyes, O God, over us,
and be thou unto us a mighty protector this day, a firmament of strength, a
covering against heat and parching, a shadow at noone tide, a defender from
offense, an assister from falling, a comforter of our souls, a lightener of
our minds, and a giver of health and happiness in Christ our Lord,

Amen.
After meat, the better to keep you from vain exercises, and idle
cogitations, and to spend the Sabbath day both wholly and holilie to the Lord
as it behooves; take occasion on Gods name either to cathechise your children
and family, or to pray for the preservation of the Queens most excellent
majesty, or to read devoutly some of these godly meditations and prayers of
Gods works, and feasts following.
On Sundaie. A prayer for the right keeping of the Sabbath or Sundaie.
O Eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which together with thy Son, and
the holy Ghost, did create man, and of thine infinite mercy powredst into
him a similitude of those things, which are most excellent in thee the
fountain of all goodness; and would in that nature, as it were in a Temple
(seeing thine image to shine therein) continue, and celebrate the ioifull
Sabbath. When man had defaced thine image, and was plucked from thee, it was thy
will that the Son of thine own substance should take our flesh upon him, and
be made a sacrifice for the sins of mankind, be crucified, die; yea and on
the great Sabbath day of the law, lie in the grave, where the word after an
unspeakable manner rested, that we may receive again the society of the new
and celestial Sabbath.

We beseech thee grant that thy Son, which is the Lord of that Sabbath, may
begin in this life to rest in us; to heal the corruptions of our nature by his
holy spirit, which is the heavenly fire; to dry up the dropsy of our flesh;
that he may love us, which are bone of his bones, to make us one with him
through his spirit; and finally, to bring us into that glorious company,
where the eternal Sabbath is in such excellency, as can not be conceived by
the heart of man.

In the mean while, let us cease from this hurly burly, this toiling, and
drudging, in the vain trumperie of this world; so as once at last we may
religiously halowe, and keep the godly rest of the new Sabbath, in doing
such things as be allowable and pleasant unto thee, and sanctifieng thee in
true rest and peace. Draw us from the vain fantasies of present things, that
we may attend and await upon thee, and thy ioifull coming. Grant I say, that
we may be humbled under thy mighty hand, that we may know our infirmities,
obeie thee in our crosses and correction, look unto thee in a lively faith
and hope of a ioifull deliverance, which then shall be perfect, when thy Son
by his trumpet shall summon the new Sabbath, and draw unto him on high, where
he sits at thy right hand exalted, thine elect; all thine enemies, which
through beastly arrogancy blushed not to contend and fight against thee,
being subdued,

Amen.
Another.
Almighty God, and most merciful heavenly father, who after that in six
days thou had created all things, did rest the seventh day, and
sanctifiedst it; teach us to keep holy the Sabbath day, not in show and
cercmonie only, but much more in every good work, which thou have
commanded; not in part for fashion sake, but wholly and to the end for thine
own glory sake. And we beseech thee, O Lord, to heal not only our heads
and limbs, but also our hearts and souls; that we may both in the lawful
keeping of thy Sabbath, and all other thy commandments, be obedient unto thee
the Lord of the Sabbath. And as thou have taught us the right keeping of the
Sabbath to stand chiefly in doing of good one unto another, give us grace
continually to keep this Sabbath inviolable, and vnprophaned, that we may
only do those things which are holy and acceptable unto thee, and may cease
from all our lewd works and ways. And especially, O Lord, grant that we may
avoid carefully the first step of the ladder that leads to that horrible
sin of blasphemy, which is not to be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come,

Amen.
Ghostly Meditations, with the which it is meet for us Christians to occupy
our selves once in the day, or at the least (for those, whose leisure will not
serve) once in the week, and that every Sundaie and holy day: which the
Author found in an old and ancient written copy: and for the excellent matter
therein conteind, has thought it good now to publish it, to the glory of God,
and profit of his Church.
FIrst, let us call to our memory the bountiful goodness of almighty GOD,
extended toward us in the creation of the firmament, the earth, the sea, and
all that therein is contained; which he has made for our only comfort, and
the service of us. And let us here with also consider the greatness and
omnipotency of his power, which was able with his word only of nothing to
make althings, and those so wonderful works, that they are not able to be
comprehended within the compass of man's reason. Call we also to mind the
vnsearchablenesse of his divine wisdom, through which in so goodly order
continually he both can, and does conserve all those things: and lastly, let
us not forget his incomparable love toward us, who of his only mere
goodness, without any part of ableness of our deserts, has provided all
these things for our use: and not only that; but has moreover made us of
capacity and understanding to discuss, and know how to use the same, for the
serving of our necessities, as the diversity of times and occasion requires.
Let us not therefore show our selves unto him unthankful.

Nextlie, let us call to mind from how sundry perils, as well ghostle as
bodily, he has and does from time to time preserve us: namely, from perils
on the land, perils by water, perils of fire, perils through sickness, from
imprisonment, from open shame, from slanders, from extreme beggerie, from
famine, from pestilence, and other horrible diseases; from sudden and shameful
death, and sundry other mischiefs, which we may understand to have happened,
and daily do perceive to happen unto others; which should in like sort have
happened unto us, if through his merciful goodness we had not been therefrom
preserved: and herewith let us also call unto mind, our health, our wealth, and
all other Gods good gifts, which he has lent unto us, and render unto him most
humble thanks therefore.

Also, let us think how he has made us of no vile sort nor condition; but
even unto his own likeness, endued with the most precious gifts of reason,
understanding, memory and will; which noble gifts he has given us, to the
intent we should with these honor him accordingly: which if we do not; but
do abuse the same, to worldly, vain, and fantastical delights; we may then
assure our selves, not only to make a straight account thereof; but also to
be most greeuouslie punished therefore.

Moreover, let us call to mind how merciful, and like a most loving Master
and Savior, Christ the Son of God, and second person in Trinity, Lord and
king over all rule and power, descended down from the bosom of his Father,
and from his heavenly throne into this miserable world, and here took upon
him our frail flesh; suffering in the same by the space of three and thirty
years, hunger, thirst, cold, watch, poverty, evil report, hatred, disdain,
slanders, rebukes, checks, taunts, scorns, buffets, binding, beating,
whipping, wrongful accusation, false condemnation; yea, and at the last, most
vile, spiteful, cruel, and shameful death; and that innocentlie and
giltlesse, thereby to deliver us from our gilt, and the eternal death, which
all we, by the transgression of our first parent Adam, had most justly
deserved. And herewith let us also think what reproach and shame it is to us,
to repine or grudge to suffer the like for his sake: since he being both our
Lord and Master, of the singular love he did bear unto us, has suffered all
those for our sakes: should not we then, being but servants (or rather vile
slaves in respect of him) disdain or repine at that, which he, not only our
Master; but King over all kings has not disdained to suffer?

Also, let us consider how that by the merits of his most bitter passion, and
his grace given unto us in the Sacrament of baptism, he has forgiven us,
cleerelie cleansed us, and utterly discharged us of all our former sins.
Hereupon, let us call to mind, how often since that time we have offended him, by
falling again into deadly sin; and therewith let us call to remembrance the
particularitie of our offenses, the greeuousnesse of the same, how long we have
continued in them without repentance taken for them: and then let us weigh the
abundance of his great mercy; first, how graciously he has abidden the time
of our repentance; how ready he has been to forgive us upon due repentance
taken, and perfect confession without dissimulation made thereof unto him.

Remember we also, how lewdlie, how wickedlie, and how sinfullie we have
bestowed the short time, which God has here in this world lent unto us, to
fight and war continually against our most mortal adversaries, the world,
the flesh, and the devil, which travel without ceassing to work our
everlasting destruction, and to bring us to everlasting death; and to beereue
us from the life eternal, and ioies endless. Think we also, if God of his
great mercy had not graciously spared us life, until we had repented that
wickedness; in what wretched condition, and most extreme torments of hell
pains, had we been in now; and so should have continued for ever world
without end? But how dear then should those short pleasures and vain delights
of the flesh have been unto us?

Let us also call to mind the hour of death, the uncertainty of the time
thereof, and that we know not when where, or in what manner it shall be: but
like as we are most certain we can not escape it; so are we as sure, if we
happen then to depart this life in deadly sin, that we shall then not only
die the bodily death; but also the spiritual death, which is eternal death
both of body and soul. Let us therefore endeavor our selves, so to live, as
though every hour should be unto us the last hour; and by that means we
shall not be unready, how suddenly soever death shall steal upon us, nor yet
shall we fear his coming.

Furthermore, let us think what shall become of our wretched bodies, and vile
carcases, which we have sought by all means to pamper; whose ease we have so
much procured; which we have so delicatelie nourished; which we have so finely
araied; whose vain pleasures we have so much followed: doubtless, it shall
then become an abominable stinking carrion; from which, those which be now our
most dearest friends shall be forced to turn away their heads, stopping of
their noses, for the very noisomnesse of the corrupt savor and evil stinch
thereof.

Let us also consider, what shall then avail us for our possessions and
riches, which we have sought for so busily, and so greedily to heap
together. We must then leave behind us, and of them shall carry away nothing
with us, saving a heavy burden of conscience of such part of them, which we
do unlawfully possess, wrongfullie withhold, or else have evil gotten.

Let us then weigh, what shall become of our soul, when it shall leave the
body to rot in the earth, and it self shall be called into judgment before
the high Judge, where it shall be forced to make a straight account of all
works, words, and thoughts. Where it shall be able to conceal nothing; but the
very secrets of all our doings shall then be made open: and that which here
we be ashamed to confess; shall then be manifest; and the book shall be
opened, in which all our deeds and thoughts shall be rehearsed, before the
whole company of heaven, and then shall be said to every one of us: Behold
this man and his works: then shall our conscience accuse us, all our evil
deeds as witnesses shall come in against us. The devil shall be there ready
to draw us with him into eternal perdition, and with the terriblenesse of his
countenance shall put us in horrible fear. Then shall we tremble and quake,
and desire to have respite for the amendment of our former wicked life, and to
repent us of our sinful living: but then in no wise it may be granted us, for
as much as then mercy must give place to justice. Let us now therefore, while
God does lend us time, repent in time; which if we do unfeignedly, then may we
assure our selves to receive mercy and forgiveness of God: for as much as he
wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should convert and live.

Then, let us also weigh with our selves, what a noble thing our soul is, and
how grievous her wounds were: for the curing of the which, our Savior Christ
was of necessity wounded. Yea, if those had not been unto death, and that
death eternal, the son of God should never have suffered. Shall we then
lightly esteem of the loss of the soul, unto whom we may perceive so much
compassion to be showed of so great a Majesty? Then since he has shed his
tears for us, let us likewise nightlie wash our beds with co^punction of heart,
and continual tears, for very heaviness that we have so greeuouslie
offended so loving a Master. And since he has shed his precious blood for us,
shed we ours also in a sort: that is to say, with daily affliction, and
mortifieng of our bodies. And let us not have regard what the flesh desires,
but what is most convenient for our souls health. For then shall our souls be
glorious, when they shall return to our Lord God by true repentance and
penitence.

Let us then call to remembrance the lovers of this world, that were here among
us not long agone, what is now become of them: and that nothing remains of
them but dust and woormes. They have been men as we are: they solicited and
used all kind of mirth; they banketed; they were gorgiouslie apparelled, they
were very pleasant, and led their days in all worldly delights: but
suddenly, and as it were in the midst of their iolitie, death arested them,
and carried them down into hell. Here the flesh of them is appointed to feed
the woormes; and there their souls be evermore tormented in the unquenchable
flame of hell fire, where now they find no profit of all those fleshly
pleasures, worldly reioicings, and evil concupiscence. And for so short and
vain pleasures, what continual torment and misery do they now endure: where
they never see light; never receive ease of their pain, nor comfort of their
heaviness: where the fire continually burns them, and yet never consumes
them; nor by his long burning leeseth any part of his heat? Where the woorms
do gnawe their conscience; where the devils, which are their tormentors, wax
never weary in tormenting of them, or take any pity on them, nor will be
entreated to mitigate any part of their torment. Where nothing shall be heard;
but weeping, lamentation, groaning, and woeful criengs. Where they shall savor
and smell nothing; but horrible stinch and corrupt air. Where they shall see
nothing; but the monstrous shape of the horible tormentors the devils.
Wherefore, let us now advise our selves, whether in following of the vain
worldly pleasures, we will give our souls in like sort to be eternally
tormented; or else in refusing them, for the little times of pains we shall
here suffer, to rejoice with Christ, and to be blessed Saints in heaven for
ever. For whilst we are here in this world, God does set before us both fire
and water; that is to say, salvation and damnation; that unto which we will we
may stretch our hands.

Let us lastly consider what comfort it is, and shall be to all saved souls
to see God, and the brightness of his face; to live with God, to possess God,
which is high and perfect goodness; and where the perfect goodness is, there
is the highest, and most perfect felicity; there is the chief and perfect
charity; eternal surety, and sure eternity; true gladness; full knowledge;
all beauty; all bliss. In this sort shall the man be blessed with God, in
whose conscience shall be found no sin; he shall see God after his own
desire; he shall possess to pleasure, and enioie to gladness; he shall
flourish in eternity; he shall shine in verity; he shall joy in
righteousness; and as he shall have eternity of continuance, so he shall have
facility of knowledge, and felicity of rest. He shall be delighted in God;
whose countenance is amiable; whose face is beautiful; whose speech is
pleasant. He is delectable to behold; sweet to possess; pleasant to enioie. In
him understanding is made clear; affection is purified, that we may love and
know him as he is: so that then we shall not need to seek any thing besides
him. For the whole is found in him, so much as is to be desired, or may
possibly rejoice or delight us.

Let us to conclude, finally think, what madness does then possess us, so
much to thirst after the bitter potion of sin, to follow after vanities of
this world, to suffer the incommodities of this slipperie life, and the
dominion of Satan's tyranny; and not rather to flee up to the felicity of
Saints, to the fellowship of Angels, and to the solemnity of the heavenly
ioies, where we shall see, behold, and enioie the plentiful abundant riches
of the inestimable treasures of Gods goodness, for ever and ever world without
end,

Amen.
A meditation of Gods wonderful works, and a thanksgiving for our creation.
O Most heavenly father, and eternal God, which art neither made, nor
begotten, but before all worlds from everlasting did beget a Son, an
image of thine own substance: we honor thee, we praise thee, we glorify thee,
we yield thee most hearty thanks for all thy benefits, especially for creating
the heavens, the Sun, Moon, and all the stars, by thy lively word, for
governing through thy wisdom, and for thy gracious mainteining them.

The Sun in his vprising does manifest the day, a wonderful work of the
highest. Great is the Lord which made, and commanded the same to take his
course from the top of heaven, unto the end thereof. The ornaments of heaven be
the glorious stars: the Lord on high does lighten the world; at his
commandment they keep their order, and will not fail, nor be weary in their
watch.

O Lord our God, how wonderful is thy name in all the world, which have set
thy glory above the heavens! Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings will thou
be praised, because of thine enemies, that thou may confound thine
adversaries, and him that enuieth thy renown. We see the workmanship of thy
hands, the Moon, and Stars, which thou have ordained; and we will signify
thy glory unto all nations, and among all people will we declare thy
wonderful things. For thou art mighty, O Lord, and worthy to be praised:
great is thy virtue, and thy power wonderful.

We thank thee, holy father, God of heaven; because thou have created by thy
word of power the universal world, with all the creatures, and whatsoever is,
lives, or moves in the same. By thy wisdom thou dooest govern, and by
sending of thy spirit, as yet do uphold, and cherish the same. For all
woods, fruitful trees, stones, grain, flowers, herbs, and all the grass of
the feeld have thou ordained for the use of man. We magnify thee, O God most
wise, for creating the Sea, and springs of water, by the power of thy word; and
for giving them virtue to bring forth fishes of all kind to be eaten of man.
We bless thee, O eternal God, for making the superior and lower regions of
the air, with all birds and feathered fowls of sundry kinds, for the food of
man. We glorify thee, for giving the whole frame of this earth, with all the
creatures in the same, unto mankind; and setting man over the works of thine
hands, have subjected all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and
all the beasts of the feeld, the fowls of the air, and the fish of the Sea,
which walk through the paths of the Sea.

Especially we praise thee, our Lord and maker, for making us thy creatures
reasonable men and women, according to thine own similitude; for giving us
reason, and all the senses; and for preserving us hitherto. Thou did nourish
us, and that woonderfullie, being within our mothers womb, and out thereof
have thou brought us sound in all parts, without imperfection; and yet
continuest thy favor, and dooest keep us against all dangers, and deliuerest
us from all evil: and all these things dooest thou of thy fatherly and divine
goodness, without any merit or desert of ours; for all which we are bound to
thank thee, to praise thee, to serve, honor, and obeie thee.

We extol thy sacred name, O God most high, for separating from the rest a
Sabbath day, that so men (ceassing from their handie labor) might the better
serve and celebrate thine honor.

Who is he that can recite all the power of the Lord, or declare all his works?
Who can number out all his praises? No man can utter all his benefits.
Notwithstanding, although we be miserable men, and wretched sinners, and
therefore most unmeet to extol thee according to thy deserts: yet will we not
be still, we will praise thee evermore to the uttermost of our power. We will
declare thy justice and mercy: and while we live, we remember thy goodness,
and at no time forget thy benefits. O our souls, praise the Lord; we will
praise the Lord during our life; we will sing to the Lord while we have breath.
We will be mindful of our maker, even from our youth, and seek him evermore:
yea even unto our old age, and graie head. O God, forsake us not, until we
have declared thy power unto all nations that are to come. Praise the Lord, all
ye nations; praise him all ye people. For his loving kindness is great toward
us; and his truth endures for ever. Praise ye the Lord in his Sanctuary;
praise him in the firmament of his power; praise him in his mighty acts:
praise him according to his excellent greatness. Let every thing that has
breath, praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord,

Amen.
Another meditation and thanksgiving for the creation of the world.
MOst mighty, most wise, and most marvelous Lord GOD; which of nothing have
created heaven and earth, with all that is therein; and have prepared with due
and new properties, every work which thou have brought forth by thy divine
word and holy commandment; and have ordained and established all the holy
works of thy hands; so that they yet stand and serve to the use and service of
men. For through the course of the heavens, which never stand still, is
ingendered unto us all that ever we have need of; and through the same course
also dies, withers, and rotteth, all that is old; because that for the old
and decayed, there should arise up new and fresh. And this course have thou, O
mighty God, made so maruellouslie, and so agreeably, that man (thorough the
agreeable works of thine hands, without any other external learning,
teaching, or instruction) might come to the knowledge of that, which is
invisible in thee; that is, thy holy, exalted, and everlasting blessed Godhead
and invisible might. Insomuch as there is none that can make himself unguilty,
and inexcusable of misbeleefe or ignorance, how far soever he be departed
from thy holy word. For the very heavens give knowledge enough of thy divine
glory; the which, though they have no tongue to speak, neither do we hear
any thing of their mouth: yet nevertheless their voice is gone out to all
corners of the world, and there is no place, but men hear their voice sounding
in their ears. For no man is so far distant from them, but he both feels
always the benefits that come from the heavens; and also sees continually
thy marvelous handie works, which the firmament does show and declare unto us.

We thank thee, we praise thee, and we laud and magnify thy glorious name, O
most meek Lord, for all thy benefits; especially for that thou have not
thought it enough for thee to have given us the heavens, and earth, and all
that is therein to serve us, and to instruct us; but also have vouchsafed to
send thine only dear beloved Son our Savior Jesus Christ down amongst us
into this vale of tears: and after that he was ascended into heaven, have left
us thy holy word, and sent thy holy Ghost into us, to the intent we should
learn of him all truth, and in thy word might in deed behold more
effectually, better and cleerer thy Godhead. We now also pray and humbly
beseech thee, O most merciful God, that thou will govern us, and drive away
from us all fleshly conversation, to the intent we may henceforth live a
godly and ghostly life; so that we through the flesh may not be hindered to
pass our pilgrimage in such perfection as thou requirest in Christian men: but
that we may know and discern, and use to thy glory the unmeasurable great
good things, which thy large and bountiful hand has given and reached unto
us, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A meditation of man's creation.
O Almighty Lord God, that have created heaven and earth, and all that is
therein of naught; but especially have made man unto thine own godly image,
infunding and creating in him a reasonable soul, not mortal, nor transitory,
as are the souls of unreasonable beasts: but such a soul, as lives like the
spirit or ghost of God for ever. By which soul man knows thee to be his God,
does believe thee, and shall behold thee. And with soul and body together,
thou have made man above all other creatures so much superior: and have so
highly exalted him, that thou have made him prince and chief governor, lord
and captain over all thy other creatures, that be in the earth, and have cast
them all under his feet and subjection.

O most merciful Lord, power into us thy heavenly light, through which we may
ever have in due regard the vile and loathsome stuff or matter that thy godly
hand has made us of; and how thou have nevertheless exalted us so mightily
of misery. Let us know, I say, O Lord, that man is crept out of the dust and
mire; and the woman but out of the rib of her husband; to the end we may not by
any means be puffed up with pride, by vainglory and presumption of the
great glory wherewith thou have vouchsafed to endue and cloth us: but that in
true humility, we may impute and exhibit all things unto thine only
goodness, clemency, grace, and mercy. And that we may be drawn thereby
unto the love of thee, and to kindle the lamp of our souls, which is cold in
thy love, with the light of thy grace; so that we may diligently fulfill and
accomplish all that thou have commanded us, and leave that which thou have
forbidden us, like as it becomes thine obedient children: so that we, both
here in this vale of misery, and also afterward in that heavenly paradise,
being undefiled, and like unto thee, may be found like as thou have created us,
like unto thine own similitude, image, and likeness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
Another meditation of man's creation.
THine almighty hand, O GOD, keeping always at one stay, created the Angels
in heaven, and the feelie woormes upon earth; and yet was neither higher in the
one, nor lower in the other. For like as none other hand could have created an
Angel; so could none other hand have created a woorme: like as none other could
have created heaven; so could none other have created a leaf of a tree: like
as none other could have made a body; so could none other make a hair white
or black; but only thine almighty hand, whereunto all things are possible
alike. For it is not more possible with thee to create a woorme, than an Angel;
nor more impossible to spread out the heaven, than a leaf; nor easier to
fashion a hair, than to fashion a body; nor vneasier to stablish the earth
upon the waters, than the waters upon the earth: but all that thou listest to
do, that have thou done. According as thou listedst, thou have made all things
in heaven and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places: and among all
other things, thou have made me according as thou listedst, could, and
knew how to do it. Certes, Lord, thy hand could have made me some stone, or
some bird, or some serpent, or some beast: and it knew how to have done it; but
it would not because of thy goodness. Why then am I not a stone, some tree, or
some beast? Truly because thy goodness has so ordained it, and because thou
louedst me first.

And why have thou done so to me, O maker of heaven and earth, and of the
bottomless deep, who have no need of me? Whereupon comes it that thou have
thus loved me? For lo, I am, because thou have created me; and the cause that
thou did create me, and account me in the number of thy creatures, was thy
fore-ordinance from everlasting, before thou made any thing, even from the
beginning, before thou did spread all the heavens; when as yet there were no
deepes; neither had thou yet made the earth, nor founded the mountains,
neither were any watersprings yet broken out. Before thou made all these
things, I say, which thou made by thy word, thou foresawest by the most
assured providence of thy truth, that I should be thy creature, and also thou
willedst that I should be thy creature.

And whence comes this to me, O most gentle Lord, most high God, most
merciful Father, and always most meek? What had I deserved? What kindness
had I showed, that it should like thy royal Majesty to create me? I was not;
and thou did create me. I was nothing, and of nothing thou made me
somewhat. And what manner of somewhat? Not a drop of water; not fire; not a bird
or fish; not a serpent, or some of the brute beasts; not a stone, or a block;
not of those sort of things, which have but being only; or of those things
that have but only being and growing; nor yet of those kind of things that
have but only being, growing, and feeling. But above all these things, it was
thy will to have me both of that sort, which have but being only; for I am:
and of those that have no more but being and growing; for I am, and grow: and
also of those kind of things, which have both being, growing, and feeling; for
I am, and also do both grow and feel. Yea, and thou have made small ods
between me and the Angels. For I have received reason to know thee and thy
hand, as well as they.

But I did well to say there was some ods between us. For they have the
happy knowledge of thee already in possession; and I have it but by hope:
they see thee face to face; I see thee in a riddle through a glass: they see
thee fully; and I but partly. Howbeit when the thing comes, which is
perfect, then shall the imperfect be done away, at such time as we shall
behold thee uncovered face to face. And what should let us to be counted little
inferior to Angels; seeing that thou O Lord, have crowned us with the garland
of hope, which is decked with glory and honor; and seeing thou have
inhonoured us exceedingly as thy friends, or rather as fellows and coequals
in all things with thine Angels? Uerelie even so says thy truth; They are
equal with the Angels, and they be the sons of God. And what be they else,
than the sons of God, if they be made fellows with the Angels? They shall be
the sons of God in very deed. For the son of man is become the son of
God. Truly when I bethink me of this, I am bold to say, that man is not
only little inferior to the Angels, yea or haile-felowe with the Angels; but
also superior to them: because a man is God, and God is a man, and not an
Angel. And in this respect I may say, that man is the woorthiest creature,
because the word, which in the beginning was God with God: the word whereby God
said; Let light be made, and light was made: the word, whereby God created
althings in the beginning, even the selfsame word became flesh, and dwelt
among us, and we have seen the glory of it. Lo here the glory, when I
glory discreetlie; lo here the joy, when I joy discreetlie; O Lord my God,
the whole life and glory of my soul!

Therefore I acknowledge unto thee my Lord God, that when thou createdst me
endued with reason, thou did create me after a sort equal with the Angels.
For by thy word I may be perfect, to attain to equality with the Angels; so
as I may have the adoption of thy children by thine only begotten word, O
Lord; by thy deer beloved Son, in whom thou art well pleased, by our only
coheire, which is of the same substance, and euerlastingnes that thou thy self
art; yea even by Jesus Christ our only Lord and redeemer, our inlightner and
comforter, our spokesman with thee, and the light of our eyes, who is our life,
our savior, our only hope, who has loved us more than himself, by whom we
have assured trust laid up in store, and steadfast faith to thee-ward, and
entrance to come unto thee, because he has given them power to become the
children of God, as many as believe in his name.

I will give praise unto thy name, O Lord, who by creating me after thine own
image, have made me capable of so great glory, as to become the son of God.
This truly can not trees do; this can not stones do; this, to speak
generally, can not any of the things do that move or grow in the air, or
in the sea, or on the earth; in as much as he has not given them power by thy
word, to become the sons of God: because they have not reason. For the power
whereby we know, consists in reason. But he has given this power unto men,
whom he created reasonable, after his own image and likeness. Certesse Lord,
it is by thy grace that I am a woman, and by grace I may be thy child, which
thing the other can not be.

Whence have I this, O Lord, the sovereign truth and true sovereign, and the
beginning of all creatures? Whence have I this, O Lord, that I may become the
child of God, which the other things cannot? Thou art he that endurest for
ever, and thou have made all things at once. Thou have made man and beasts,
stones, and green things of the earth all at once. For there went no desert of
theirs before; there went no good turn of theirs before. Thou have created all
things only of thine own goodness; no creature has deserved more than
other: for none of them had deserved ought at all. And why then did thy
goodness show it self more in this creature, which thou have made
reasonable, than in all other that be without reason? Why was not I as all they
be; or why are not all they as I am; or I alone as they be? What had I
deserved, that thou should make me able to become the child of God, and
deny the same ability to all the rest? God forbid that I should think so. It
was thine only grace, it was thine only goodness, which brought it to pass,
that I might be partaker of that sweetness. Of that grace therefore, whereby
thou have created me of nothing, I beseech thee, O Lord, to give me the grace
to be thankful unto thee.

And I thy creature will put my trust under the shadow of thy wings, and in
the goodness wherethrough thou have created me. Help thy creature, whom thy
gracious goodness has created. Let not that perish through my naughtiness,
which thy goodness has wrought. Let not that perish through my wretchedness,
which thy singular mercy has made. For what avails it me that thou have
created me, if I shall sink down into mine own corruption? O God, have thou
made all the sons of men in vain? Thou have created me, O Lord: rule thou
the thing that thou have created. Despise not the work of thine own hands, O
God. Thou have made me of naught, O Lord; and if thou govern me not, I shall
return to naught again. For like as when I was not, thou made me of
nothing: so if thou govern me not, I shall yet again be brought to nothing in
my self. Help me O Lord my life, least I perish in mine own naughtiness.

Lord, if thou had not created me, I should not have been at all: but
because thou have created me, I am. Now if thou govern me not, I am undone.
For it was not mine own merits, or mine own deserts (as I have said) that
made thee to create me; but thine own most gracious goodness and mercifulnes.
That louingnesse of thine, O Lord my God, which made thee to create me, I
beseech thee let the same make thee to govern me. For what booteth it that thy
louingnesse caused thee to create me, if I must perish in mine own
wretchedness; and that thy right hand govern me not? O Lord my God, let this
mercifulness, which caused thee to create that that was not created, cause
thee also to save that which is created. Let the louingnesse, which wan thee to
create, win thee also to save; since it is no less now than it was then. For
thou art the very love and mercy it self, and thou continuest alwaie one,
unchangeable, immortal, and invisible God, blessed and praised for ever and
ever,

Amen.
That God has put all things under the service of man: and that by the
consideration of the temporal benefits, we conjecture the heavenly wisdom
and goodness of God.
THou, O gracious God, have put all things under man's feet, to the end that man
alone should wholly be subject unto thee. And to the end that man should be
wholly thine, thou have made man lord of all thy works. For thou have created
all outward things for his body; his body for his soul; and his soul for
thee; that he might serve thee only, and love thee only, possessing thee to
his comfort, and all inferior things for his servants. For whatsoever is
contained under the cope of heaven, is inferior unto man's soul, which was
made to inherit the sovereign goodness above, and to become happy by
possessing it; whereunto if he stick fast, he shall surmount the need of all
the inferior things which are changeable; and in everlasting immortality
quietly behold the sovereign majesty, whereof he represents the image.
Then shall he enioie those excellent good things in the Lords house, in
comparison whereof, all the things that we see, are counted as nothing. Those
be the things which no eye has seen, nor ear hard, nor heart of man
conceived, which God has prepared for them that love him. And truly Lord
these things will thou give unto my soul: with these dooest thou (which love
men's souls) daily glad the hearts of thy servants.

But why wonder I at these things my Lord God? Thou inhonourest thine own
image, and thine own likeness, whereunto they were created. For to the end
our body (though it be yet corruptible and base) might see, thou have given us
the light of the sky, by the hand of thine unweariable servants, the Sun and
Moon, who according to thy commandment, do continual service day and night
to thy children. To the intent it might breath, thou have granted us the pure
air. To the intent it might hear, thou have given us the diversity of
sounds. To the intent it might smell, thou have given us the sweetness of
sents. To the intent it might taste, thou have given us the qualities of
savors. To the end it might feel, thou have given us the substances of all
bodily things. To help us in our necessities, thou have given us bearing
beasts. To refresh us withal, thou have bestowed upon us the fowls of the
air, and the fishes of the sea, and the fruits of the earth. For every sore,
malady and disease of ours, thou have created medicine, salve, and plaster
out of the earth. And for every several evil, thou have prepared a several
remedy to encounter it; because thou art merciful, and full of compassion,
and thou our potter know of what metal we be made, and how that all of us
are claie in thy hand.

O holy Lord God, our good maker, by these least things we comprehend the
great things: and by these visible things we comprehend thine invisible things.
For if thou send so great and so innumerable benefits unto me for this base and
corruptible body of mine, from the sky, and the air; from the land and the
sea; from light and darkness; from heat and shadow; from dew and rain;
from wind and showers; from fowls and fishes; from beasts and trees; by
diversity of herbs and things that grow upon the earth, and by the service
of all thy creatures serving our turns by course in their seasons, to ease us
of our weariness: how excellent I pray thee, and how great and innumerable
shall those good things be, which thou have prepared for them that love thee,
in that heavenly Realm, where we shall see thee face to face? If thou do so
much for us in prison, what will thou do in thy palace? Great and innumerable
are thy works, O Lord, thou King of heaven and earth. For since that all these
things be exceeding good and pleasant, which thou have delivered to good men
and bad men together in common; what manner of things shall those be, which thou
have laid up in store for good men only? If the gifts be so sundry and so
innumerable, which thou dealest now as well to thy foes as thy friends; how
great and innumerable, how sweet and delightful shall those be, which thou will deal only to thy friends? If thou give so great solace in this time of
mourning, how great ioies will thou give in the day of wedding? If our prison
contain so many delectable things, how much more delectable things contains
our fathers house? O God, no eye without thee has seen the things that thou
have prepared for them that love thee. For according to the manifoldnesse of
thy mighty works, so also is the great abundance of thy sweetness, which
thou keep in store for them that love thee. For great art thou O Lord our
God, yea unmeasurable art thou, and there is no end of thy greatness, nor
number of thy wisdom, nor measure of thy mercy: neither is there end,
number, or measure of thy bountifulness. But like as thou thy self art great,
so are thy rewards great: for thou thy self art both the price, and the reward
of all thy lawful combators. To thee therefore be all honor, glory, and
praise for ever,

Amen.
A meditation of Gods power, beauty, and goodness.
Because thou, Lord, would have us to love thee, not one lie do thou
will, intise, allure, and provoke us; but also do command us so to do:
promising thy self unto such as love thee, and threatening us with dainnation
if we do otherwise. Whereby we may see both our great corruption and
naughtiness, and also thine exceeding great mercy toward us.

First concerning our corruption and naughtiness, what a thing is it that
power, riches, authority, beutie, goodness, liberality, truth, justice
(which all thou art good Lord) can not move us to love thee? Whatsoever things
we see fair, good, wise, mighty, are but even sparks of thy power, beauty,
goodness, wisdom, which thou art. For to the end thou might declare thy
riches, beauty, power, wisdom, goodness, etc. Thou have not only made, but
still dooest conserve all creatures to be (as David says of the heavens)
declarers and setters forth of thy glory, and as a book to teach us to know
thee.

How fair thou art, the beauty of the sun, moon, stars, light, flowers,
rivers, feelds, hills, biros, beasts, men, and all creatures; yea, the goodly
escape and form of the whole world does declare.

How mighty thou art, we are! taught by the creation of the world even of
naught; by governing the same, by punishing the wicked mighty Giants thereof;
by overthrowing their devises; by repressing the rages of the sea, and keeping
it within her bounds; by storms, by tempests, by fires. These and such like
declare unto us thine invisible, almighty, and terrible power, whereby thou
subduest all things unto thee.

How rich thou art, this world, thy great and infinite treasure-house, does
well declare. What plenty is there, not only of things, but also of every
kind of things? Yea, how do thou yeerelie and daily multiply these kinds?
How many seeds do thou make of one seed? Yea, what a great increase do
thou bring it unto? These can not but put us in remembrance of the exceeding
riches that thou have. For if to thine enemies, which love thee not (as the
most part of this world be,) if to them thou give so plentifully thy riches
here: what shall we think, that with thy self thou have laid up for thy
friends?

How good thou art, all creatures generally and particularly do teach. What
creature is there in the world, which thou have not made for our commodity? I
will not say how that thou might have made us creaturs without sense or
reason, if thou had would. But amongst all things none does so teach us thy
great love toward us, as does the death of thy most deerlie beloved son,
who suffered the pains and terrors thereof: yea, and of hell it self for our
sakes. If this thy love had been but a small thing, it would never have lasted
so long, nor Christ would never have died.

Prayers and meditations to be used in the four seasons of the year, and
first: In the Springtime.
Almighty renewer of all things, Lord Jesus, which have made this most goodly
world for our sakes; which have garnished the heavens with so many lights,
unto the use of the day and the night; which temperest the earth with sundry
times and seasons, ordained by thee to be the nourisher of man and beasts: and
now (thou being restored to life) all things renew and confirm to us the hope
of resurrection promised by thee. The meadows before being withered, wax green
again with new grass: the herbs are garnished with diverse gems of flowers:
the corn herbeth: seeds buried in holes shoot forth: trees being dead before,
wax young again with new boughs; and being goodly decked with new blossoms,
give us hope of fruit. The sun it self increases the grace of his light:
briefly, the whole face of nature springing again, whithersoeuer we turn our
eyes, does speak out, and preach thy goodness toward mankind, wherethrough
with sundry solaces thou dooest ease and mitigate to us, being through our
fault driven out of Paradise, our deserved exile. Grant, I say, O good God,
that we which being borne again through baptism, have put off the old man,
made now a new creature, never slide again to old age; but that we may be ever
green with perpetual innocence, by the pleasant breathing on of thy spirit,
that we may be adorned daily more and more with the flowers of virtues,
proceeding to fruit worthy of that Gospel, which with the Father, and the
holy Ghost reign through all worlds,

Amen.
In the Summer.
MOst wise Governor, and Ruler of all things Jesus Christ; behold, the year
obeieng thy commandments waxes hot with the fervor of the sun, preparing
ripe fruits unto the use of thy servants: humbly we beseech thee, which art
our true Sun, without whom nothing is bright in our souls, neither brings
forth any fruit; stretch the beams of thy grace into the earth of our
spirits, that daily they may wax hot more and more with the fire of thy
gracious love, and that they may bring forth sundry fruits of wholesome good
works. For thou have witnessed in thy holy Gospel, that thou art singularly
delighted with this meat and drink. This is the rain that thy fervent love
thirsted for, this is also the meat that the holy Apostle Paul hungered for,
even before he understood and did know what it meant. Thou came into the
world, to send fire among us: neither did thou desire any thing more, than
that it should be kindeled; except our heart be touched with the beams of thy
grace. Increase, Lord Jesus that, that thou have given; finish that, that thou
have begun: until we grow to perfect men, unto the measure of thy fullness.
Thou have put off mortality, but thou have not put off love toward us; but
even now fulfillest the office of a mighty and friendly Advocate for us with
God the Father, to whom equal in power and authority thou reignest with the
holy Ghost,

Amen.
In Harvest.
WE give thanks unto thee most merciful Father, maker of heaven and earth,
that by thy good providence the year is waxen ripe, pouring out unto us
plentious abundance of victuals: grant, we humbly beseech thee, that as thy
bountiousnes ministers sundry and rich abundance of fruits, to the susteining
and nourishment of our bodies: so by the grace of thy spirit, without which
there is no good thing brought forth, is nourished, or lives; let the
affection of godliness wax ripe, and be made up in our minds, that abiding in
the faith of thine only begotten Son, through all our life, we may be
fruitful in good works, and also receive a plentiful harvest in the
resurrection of the just, by the same our Lord Jesus Christ, which lives and
reigns with thee in the company of the holy Ghost for ever,

Amen.
In Winter.
O God, the most wise maker and governor of the world, at whose commandment by
time appointed, course is changed and turned into it self by the same: behold
as it were the old age and death of the year. Winter is come, whose sadness
and incommodities be more easy unto us, because of the plesantnes of the
Spring time, which shall shortly succeed. According to the ensample of the
year, our inward man flourishes in his childhood; is fervent in youth; waxes
ripe in man's age; falls away and dies in his old age: but the hope of
living again asswageth the hour of death, which is sure unto us, even for
this cause, that thy son has promised it, which is the everlasting truth,
which also can no more be deceived or deceive, than he can cease to be thy
son. Through this thy son, our inward man knows no old age or death: but
by his gift it ever flourishes with innocence; it is ever fervent in the
study of godliness; it ever brings forth fruit, and powers out that, that
she has received, upon other: and as much as the bodies courage fails, so
much more the spirit flourishes. We beseech thee, that thou will maintain and
increase those things, which thou have vouchsafed to give us, through thine
only begotten son, which lives and reigns with thee for evermore,

Amen.
Another prayer to be said at all times and seasons of the year.
O Everlasting GOD, Creator of all things, in whose hands lies the disposition
of all times and seasons: qualify we beseech thee, the inclinations of thy
creatures, heaven and earth, with such natural and kindly moderation, as may
most serve to the commodity, health, and welfare of all mankind; that we may
receive the fruits of the earth to our comfortable sustentation, duly honoring
and praising thy holy name therefore. Mortify within us the old roots of our
native iniquity, killing them as it were with the winter of a cold lust to
ensue them. Sow the seeds of thy grace within us, that we may spring up in
all godliness. Send us the feruencie of thy spirit, that we may show forth
the ripe fruits of a lively faith: that when it shall be thy good pleasure to
appoint thy final harvest, thou will vouchsafe to bring us into thy wished
barn, like good and cleansed corn, that is to say, into thine everlasting
kingdom, there to rest with thy chosen, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in all
eternity, So be it.

The song of Anania, Azariah, and Misael; wherein they exhort all creatures,
both in heaven and earth, to praise and magnify the Lord their maker.
O All ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye heavens, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye waters that be above the firmament, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O all ye powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye sun and moon, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye showers and dew, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye winds of God, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye fire and heat, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye winter and summer, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye dewes and frosts, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye frost and cold, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye ye and snow, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye nights and days, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye light and darkness, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye lightenings and clouds, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O let the earth bless the Lord: yea let it praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye mountains and hills, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O all ye green things upon the earth, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O ye wells, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye seas and floods, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord: praise him
and magnify him for ever.

O all ye fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye beasts and cattle, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O ye children of men, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O let Israel bless the Lord: praise him and magnify him for ever.

O ye priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify him for
ever.

O ye spirits and souls of the righteous, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O ye holy and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify
him for ever.

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord: praise him and magnify
him for ever.

Glory be to the Father, etc. As it was in the beginning, etc.
Of the incomprehensible praise due unto God for all his works and benefits.
HOW shall I do, O Lord? Whence shall I have praise to praise thee withal? For
like as thou made me without mine advise, as it liked thy self best; so have
thou praise without me, as it likes thee. Thou thy self Lord art thiue own
praise. All thy works and creatures both in heaven and earth praise thee
according to thy manifold greatness. Thy praise, O Lord, is incomprehensible:
no heart can comprehend it, no tongue can measure it, no ear can receive it: for
these things pass away, but thy praise O Lord, continues for ever. Thoughts
have a beginning, and thoughts have an end: voices make a sound, and forthwith
pass away: the ear hears, and the hearing ceasseth: but thy praise
stands fast for ever. Who is he then that can praise thee? What man is able
to utter forth thy praises? Thy praise is everlasting, and not transitory.
That man praises thee, which believes thee to be thine own praise. The man
praises thee, which acknowledges himself unable to attain to thy praise.

O praise perpetual, which never fadest: in thee is our praise, in thee shall
my soul be praised. It is not we that praise thee, but it is thou thy self
that dooest it both thy self, and in thy self; and we also have praise in
thee. Then have we true praise, when we have praise of thee, when light
allows light: for thou being the true praise, yeeldest us true praise. And
look how often we seek for praise at any other bodies hand than thine, so
often do we forgo thy praise; because the other is shadowish, but thine is
everlasting. If we hunt after the transitory praise, we loose the eternal
praise.

O praise eternal, O my Lord God, of whom is all praise, without whom there
is no praise; I am not able to praise thee without thee. Let me have thee, and
I will praise thee. For what am I of my self, Lord, that I should praise thee?
I am but dust and ashes, I am but a dead and stinking dog, I am but woormes and
rottenness. I! what am I to praise thee, O most mighty Lord God? How can the
breath of no better than flesh praise thee, which dwell in euerlastingnesse?
Can darkness praise light, or death life? Thou art light, I darkness: thou
life, I death. Can lieng praise truth? Thou art truth, and I am a woman no
better than vanity it self. How shall I then praise thee O Lord? Shall my
wretchedness praise thee? Shall stinch praise sweet sents? Shall man's
mortality, which is here to day, and gone to morrow, praise thee? Shall man
which is but rottenness, or the son of man which is but woormes, praise
thee? O Lord, can he praise thee, which is bred, borne, and brought up in
sinfulness? Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner.

O Lord my God, let thine own incomprehensible power, let thy unbounded
wisdom, let thine unspeakable goodness, let thine ouerpassing mercy, let
thy superabundant pity, and let thine everlasting virtue and Godhead praise
thee. Praised be thou by thine own almighty puissance, and also by thy
singular gracious goodness and louingnesse, whereby thou have created us, O
Lord, the life of my soul.

Of Gods manifold benefits generally, with an humble thanksgiving unto his
Majesty for the same.
AND I thy handmaid, whom thorough thy goodness thou have created, will to
the uttermost of my power, praise thee my God, my creator, my preserver, and my
deliverer, with all my heart; and call to mind all the good that thou have done
me from my youth up, to this instant. For I know that unthankfulness does
greatly displease thee, which is the root of all spiritual evil, and a wind
that blasteth and burns up all good, damming up the fountain of thy godly
mercy for ever. Through it, the works that be dead already, revive not: and
the works that be alive, do die out of hand, and recover not again. But I thy
creature will give thanks to thee, O Lord, least I be unthankful to thee my
deliverer, for the delivering of me.

How often had that dragon swallowed me up long ago, but that thou, O Lord,
had plucked me out of his mouth? How often have I sinned, and he stood ready
to snatch me up, but that thou did defend me O Lord my God? When I dealt
wickedlie, and when I brake thy commandments, he stood waiting to carry me
away to hell; but thou withstoodest him. I offended thee, and thou did
defend me. I feared thee not, and yet thou did keep me. I started away from
thee, and yielded my self to mine enemy, and yet thou did fraie him away,
that he should not take me.

These good turns have thou done for me O Lord my God, and I wretch wist it
not. For so have thou often times delivered me out of the devils chaps, plucked
me out of the lions mouth, and many and sundry ways brought me back again
from hell, though I wist it not. For I have gone down to the very gates of
hell, but thou have held me from going in. I drew near to deaths door, but
thou have not suffered it to take me in. Also, thou have oftentimes preserved
me from bodily death, O my savior, when I have been attached with sore
sicknesses: and when I have been in many dangers by sea, and by land, thou
have always stood by me, delivering me from fire, and from sword, and from all
peril, and mercifully preserving me. Truly Lord, thou know, that if death
had dispatched me at that time, hell had received my soul, and I had been
damned for ever: but thy mercy and thy grace prevented me, rescuing me from
bodily death, and also from the death of my soul, O my Lord God. These and
many other good turns have thou done for me I say; and I was blind and wist
it not, until thou inlightenedst me.

Now therefore, O light of my soul, my Lord God, my life whereby I live; the
sight of mine eyes wherewith I see; behold thou have enlightened me, and I
perceive how I live through thee. And I yield thee thanks though little worth
and slender, and far from thy benefits; howbeit yet such as my frailty has
to give. For thou only art my God, and my gracious maker, which love our
souls, and hate none of the things that thou have made. Behold I am the
chief among the sinners whom thou have saved, that I may be an example unto
others of thy most merciful loving kindness. I will acknowledge thy great
benefits unto thee. For thou have plucked me out of the bottom of hell once,
and twice, and thrice, and an hundred times, and a thousand times. Yea, I
always made toward hell, and thou did always bring me back again, when
thou might justly have damned me, if thou had would: but thou would
not, O Lord my GOD, because thou love men's souls, and bear with men's
sins, that they might repent: all thy ways be full of mercy.

Now therefore, O Lord my God, I see these things, and discern them by thy
light; and my heart is astonished at thy great mercy toward me, in that thou
have delivered my soul from the bottom of hell, and brought me back again
to life. For I was stark dead, and thou have made me thoroughlie alive again.
Therefore am I altogether beholden to thee for my life. And whole as I am, I
yield my self wholly unto thee. Let my whole spirit, my whole heart, my whole
body, and my whole life, live unto thee my sweet life. For thou have delivered
me whole, that thou might possess me whole; thou have made me whole new
again, that thou might have me whole again.

And therefore let me love thee, O Lord my strength; let me love thee, O mine
unspeakable joy, and let me live henceforth, not to my self, but unto thee.
All my whole life, which was perished in mine own wretchedness, is revived
again in thy mercy. For thou art a pitiful and merciful GOD, and many are
thy compassions toward thousands, in them that love thy name. And therefore, O
Lord my God, thou my sanctifier have commanded me in thy law, that I should
love thee with all my heart, with all my might, yea even from the bottom of my
heart, at all hours and times, wherein I enioie the benefits of thy mercy. For
I should perish for ever, but that thou rulest me ever. I should ever die, but
that thou ever quickenest me: yea, every moment thou bindest me unto thee, in
as much as every moment thou bestowest thy great benefits upon me. Therefore
like as there is no hour or instant of time in all my life, that I have not
the use of thy benefits: so ought there to be no moment, wherein I should not
have thee in remembrance before mine eyes, and love thee to the uttermost of my
power. But this I am not able to do, except thou make me able; of whom comes
every good gift and excellent gift; in whom there is no change, nor
intercourse of darkness. For to love thee comes not of our own will, or of
our own running; but of thy mercy. Lord, it is thy gift, whose all good
things are. Thou command us to love thee; give us that which thou
command, and command what thou will.

Another meditation of Gods great benefits.
Unto thee, O sovereign light, O ghostly Physician, and the health of my
soul, will I now and ever give praise, with all my whole heart, for all thy
benefits, wherewith thou feedest me from my youth unto mine old age, and even
till my last gasp, I beseech thee by thy self forsake me not. For thou made
me when I was not; thou redeemedst me when I was forlorn; thou inlightenedst
me when I was in darkness; thou raisedst me when I was dead: yea, when I was
both forlorn and dead, thou came down from the bosom of thy Father, to me,
and tookest mortality upon thee. Thou being my King, came down to thy
servant. To redeem thy servant, thou gave thy self: to the intent that I
might live; thou tookest upon thee to die, and ouercamest death. Thou did
set me up again, by abasing thy self low. I was undone; I was gone far
away in my sins; I was sold to sin: then came thou for me to bring me
out again; and thou did love me so well, that thou gave thine own blood
for my ransom.

Lord, thou have loved me more than thy self. For thou did find in thine
heart to die for me. Upon this condition have thou with so dear a price brought
me back again from banishment; ransomed me out of bondage; rescued me from
punishment; called me by thine own name, and sealed me with thy blood; that
the remembrance of thee should be evermore with me, and that he should never
depart from my heart, who for my sake shunned not the cross. Thou have
anointed me with the oil, wherewith thou thy self were anointed, that I
might be called a Christian, after thy name Christ. Behold, thou have registered
me upon thine hands, to the end that the remembrance of me might be always
present with thee: yet notwithstanding, so as if the remembrance of thee, be
always present with me.

Thus then have thy love, thy grace and mercy always prevented me. For thou
have oftentimes delivered me from many and great perils, O my deliverer. When
I went astraie, thou broughtest me back again; when I was ignorant, thou
taughtest me; when I sinned, thou did chastise me; when I have been in
heaviness, thou have cheered me; when I have been in despair, thou have
recomforted me; when I have been fallen, thou have lifted me up; when I have
stood, thou have vpholden me; when I have gone, thou have guided me; when I
have come, thou have received me; when I have slept, thou have watched me; and
when I have cried unto thee, thou have heard me.

O Lord, where shall I have words to utter the signs of thy singular love
toward me; considering thine innumerable benefits wherein thou have brought me
up from the beginning? Namely, even from the benefit of the creation, when at
the first beginning thou made me of nothing after thine own image, in
honoring and advancing me among the creatures, which thou made, and
innobling me with the light of thy countenance, which thou imprintedst upon the
lamp of my heart, thereby disseuering me as well from sensible, as from
senseless creatures, and abasing me but little beneath the Angels. And yet
was all this but a small matter in the sight of thy Godhead. For without
ceassng thou have daily nourished this unprofitable woorme, which stinketh
with sin, with all the singular and exceeding great store of thy good gifts
and benefits: and thou have as it were suckled and strengthened me thy little
tender babe, with the teates of thy comfort. For to the intent that I should
wholly serve thee, thou have appointed all thy creatures to serve me.

These and many other good turns, have thou done unto me, O Lord my God, the
life of my soul: for all which I render unto thee again most humble and
hearty thanksgiving: beseeching thee, O Lord, that it may be a pleasure to me,
wretch that I am, to be always talking of them, always thinking upon them,
and always giving thee thanks for them. O my God, show me, I say, how much I
am bound to love thee; make it appear to me how much I ought to please thee.
Open me the door of thy light, that I may enter in, and both know, and
acknowledge unto thee with my whole heart, that thy mercy is great toward me,
and that thou have delivered my heart from the bottom of hell: so as I might
ever praise thee for all thy good gifts, and love thee with all my heart, and
with all my soul, and with all my mind, and with all my strength, yea and that
with the very bowels and intrailes of my heart, and of all my sinews. O Lord
my God, the blessed sweetness of all that delight in thee: whose name is
wonderful, and praise worthy through heaven and earth: So be it.

Another form of thanksgiving unto God, for all his benefits, and prayer for
grace to confirm and increase the same.
O Most highest, almighty and eternal God, whose glory replenisheth heaven
and earth. If thy holy and celestial powers do never cease in lauding thy
most holy Majesty; how should we cease, earthly and lowly servants, which
are redeemed with the precious blood of thy only son? And for as much as
thy loving kindness and favor in especially works toward us, we also
ought continually to give thanks for thy great goodness; but have mercy, O
merciful father. For the necessity of this life, does not suffer us to
thank thee continually. Wherefore (though not continually as I ought) I
worship thee my maker with trembling and fear; I give thee thanks for all thy
benefits: that when I was nothing, thou made me, gave me a living soul,
quickened with thy holy spirit, formed me with thine own image, that it
might be able to receive thee, which art the high God. By thy providence thou
have brought me to those things that are expedient for me, given to me
knowledge and true faith in thee, and planted a godly mind in me, and
instructed me in the mysteries of thy holy word and Sacraments.

But oh Lord, how dare I recite thy benefits by number; seeing thy loving
kindness is an unsearchable bottomless sea, and an innumerable? For I can not
so soon give thanks for thy benefits showed of old, as new have even
overwhelmed me. Oh Lord, how great a benefit is this, that I may to thee give
thanks? For what fellowship has unrighteousness with righteousness? What
partaking darkness with light? What agreement filthiness with purity?
Folly with wisdom? Mortality, with thee that art immortal? Oh my
vileness! Oh thy goodness! Yea, though the spirit were ready, yet is the
flesh frail: but thou O Lord, if thou will, can make me strong. And so, O
most merciful father, vouchsafe that I may ever give thanks and laud to thee.
For what good gift did I ever desire of thee, but thou first willedst it to me?
Who better knows what is good for me, than thou? And because I need a
mediator, accept thine innocent Son Jesus Christ, with his cross and
passion, bloodshed, death, and resurrection for me. I have not this deserved:
but thou father, of thy mercy and truth have by the same thy dearly beloved
Son, promised and given us thy mercy and favor. Open therefore, O my
merciful Father, for this thy dearly beloved Sons sake, even this day thy
woonted hand of mercy, and fulfill my mind and heart with a good will, and let
thy right hand defend me. And if my sins, which I acknowledge to be great and
innumerable, (therefore I repent and am heartily sorry) do let thy goodness,
O father wipe them away; for this is thy glory, to forgive sins, and
therefore no flesh may rejoice before thee: for thou Lord only art pure, and
without sin. Have mercy upon me thy bondseruant, and upon all people; and O
father, bring them unto the knowledge of thee that art only God, and of Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, the only savior and redeemer, mediator, and
advocate for us: and after this present life, bring us to eternal bliss and
felicity, by the dear merits of thy Son Jesus Christ. For thine is the
power, kingdom, and glory, for ever,

Amen.
Another to the same effect.
Honor and praise be given to thee, O Lord God almighty, most dear father of
heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us, in that it
has pleased thy gracious goodness freely, of thine own accord, to elect and
choose us to salvation before the beginning of the world: and even like
continual thanks be given unto thee, for creating us after thine own image,
for redeeming us with the precious blood of thy dear Son, when we were
utterly lost; for sanctifieng us with thy holy spirit, in the revelation and
knowledge of thy sacred word; for helping and succouring us in all our need and
necessity; for saving us from all dangers of body and soul; for comforting
us so fatherly in all our troubles and afflictions; for sparing us so long,
and giving us so large time of repentance. These benefits, O most merciful
father, like as we acknowledge to have received of thine only goodness, even
so we beseech thee, for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, to grant us alwaie
thy holy spirit, whereby we may continually grow in thankfulness toward
thee, be led into all truth, and comforted in all adversity. Strengthen our
faith, O Lord, kindle it more and more in feruentnesse and love toward thee,
and our neighbors for thy sake. Suffer us not, most dear father, to receive
thy word any more in vain; but grant us alwaie the assistance of thy grace
and holy spirit, that in heart, word, and deed, we may sanctify, and do
woorship to thy holy name, that we may help to amplify thy kingdom, and that
whatsoever thou sendest, we may be heartily well content with thy good will
and pleasure. Suffer us not to lack the thing, O father, without the which we
can not serve thee; but bless thou so all the works of our hands, that we may
have sufficient, and not to be chargeable, but rather helpful unto others. Be
merciful, O Lord, unto our offenses, and seeing our debt is great, which thou
have forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make us to love thee, and our neighbors so
much the more. Be thou, O father, our Captain and defender in all temptations.
Hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we thereby may be delivered from all
inconvenience, and end our lives in the sanctifieng and honoring of thy holy
name, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
On the seventeenth day of November, commonly called The Queens day.
Sundry forms of Christian prayers and thanks-giuings unto God, for the
preservation of the most virtuous Lady Elizabeth, our most dear, and dread
sovereign Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
very necessary to be used, as generally of all faithful subjects
continually, so especially of the Mother and her Daughter, upon the
seventeenth day of November, and every Sabbath and holy day, in honorable
remembrance of that ioifull Sabbath, rest and peace, from careful mourning,
which that memorable seuententh day brought to us the banished exiles of
England, and persecuted members of Christ, by the most happy entrance of her
most royal and excellent Majesty, into this her Imperial Crown and kingdom.
A Psalm.
Mother. COme O all you that fear God, come hither I pray you, and give ear
a while, and rehearse with me ye great benefits that he the Lord has bestowed
upon us.


Daughter. For lo, when the most mighty men gathered their power against us,
and lay in wait for our life, they conspired together to work our
destruction, as though the Lord had determined the same; and exhorted one
another, saying, God has forsaken them, therefore persecute them now flieng
away, and take them being destitute of all help.


Moth. These men, our adversaries I say, wheresoever we removed or went by sea
or by land, lay in wait most diligently for us, yea multitudes of the cruel
enemies did not cease craftily to enuiron and beset us round about, and ran
upon us with gaping mouths, like raging and roaring lions, of malicious minds
to bring us to extremity, and to devour us.


Daugh. For thy sake O Lord alone were we killed every day, neither were we
in any better condition, than sheep appointed of butchers to the slaughter.


Moth. Many of us wandered in the waste wilderness, and sought strange cities
commodious to dwell in, half dead, and killed with famine and thirst,
overwhelmed with the shadow of death, and being cast down by the burden of
our miseries, lay down flat cleaving to the earth.


Daugh. The bands of death compassed us round about, and bound us: most wicked
men like most raging floods made us afraid, enuironing us round about.


Moth. We were snared, and cast fast bound with chains into most dark
dungeons: yea we tasted the heat of the fire, and the force of the water.


Daugh. Then we called upon the Lord in these extremities. We called upon the
Lord, I say, and he heard our voice out of his high palace, and receiving into
his ears the cry that we made unto him, he delivered us from our miseries and
distress.


Moth. He gathered us home which were scattered, from the East and the West,
from the North and South, and brought us from the dungeons of the prisons, and
darkness of death, breaking the fetters and gives of iron in pieces.


Daugh. The Lord has delivered our life from death: he staid the tears of our
eyes, and established our feet, that they did not fall: he has brought us out
of our distress. Hence have we our light, whereby he causes us to shine, and
has driven away our darkness.


Moth. Therefore will we praise thee, O Lord, among the nations, and will sing
lauds unto thy Majesty: yea, we will declare thy power, and will show forth
thy praise and mercy early in the morning; because thou have defended us, and
wast our refuge in extreme dangers.


Daugh. Oh acknowledge, and declare ye openly, that the Lord is good: for his
bountious goodness is for ever. Let all the sincere worshippers of the Lord
now confess, that his loving kindness is perpetual. Praise ye the Lord.


Moth. Glory be to the Father, and to the, etc.


Daug. As it was in the beginning, is now, etc.


The Versicles.
Mother. O Lord show thy great mercy upon us miserable sinners.


Daughter. And grant thine everlasting health and salvation unto us.


Moth. O Lord save Elizabeth our gracious Queen and Governor.


Daugh. Which puts her only confidence in thee, O God, her tower.


Moth. Oh send her still continual help from thy most holy place.


Daugh. And evermore from dangers all, defend thou her most royal Grace.


Moth. O let not the infernal fo have any advantage of her.


Daugh. Nor let the wicked enemy once approach to hurt her.


Moth. Indue her ministers alwaie with righteousness and equity.


Daugh. And make thou thy chosen servants full ioifullie to praise thee.


Moth. O Lord save thy people from all perils, and dow them with thy gifts.


Daugh. And bless thou thine inheritance with all thy bountious benefits.


Moth. In our time, O Lord, give us thy peace, which passes all understanding.


Daugh. Because none other God does fight for us; but only thou our King.


Moth. O soften thou our hardened hearts, and cleanse our filthy souls from
sin.


Daugh. And by thy spirit and gifts of grace, make us a holy life for to
begin.


The prayer.
Mother. O Lord GOD, most merciful father, who as upon this day placing thy
servant our most deer Sovereign, and most gracious Queen Elizabeth, in the
Empire of this kingdom, did deliver thy people of England from danger of
war and oppression, both of bodies by tyranny, and of conscience by
superstition, restoring peace, and true religion, with liberty both of bodies
and minds, and have continued the same thy blessings, without all desert on our
part, now by the space of these four and twenty years. We, who are in
memory of these thy great benefits, assembled here together, most humbly
beseech thy fatherly goodness, to grant us grace, that we may in word, deed
and heart, show our selves thankful and obedient unto thee for the same; and
that Elizabeth our virtuous Queen, through thy grace, may in all honor,
goodness, and godliness, long and many years live and reign over us, and
we obeie and enioie her Majesty, with the continuance of thy great blessings,
which thou hitherto have by her, thy blessed minister, powered upon us her
people. This we beseech thee to grant unto us, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ's
sake, our Lord and Savior.


Daughter: Amen.


Or else say thus:
WE yield unto thee, most mighty and merciful father, immortal thanks, for
that it has pleased thee of thy mere mercy and fatherly bounty, after the
storms of so many troublesome times, to conduct us as upon this day out of
banishment and exile, into the comfortable port of tranquillity, by the hand
of thy most gracious servant and our dear Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.
When we were as sheep wandering astraie in the wilderness, thou ordeinedst
her Majesty to be our shepherd, to gather us again into thy sheepefold.
When we had been long tossed hither and thither with the outrage and cruel
fury of tyrannical persecution, like a poor weather-beaten bark, that has
been continually tormoiled and tossed on the perilous surges of the
outrageous and swelling seas, finding no sure rode nor harborough wherein to
rest; but continually in danger, either to sink into the sands, or to be
overwhelmed with waves, or violently to be dashed in pieces against the maine
rocks. Even then, I say, when we despaired utterly of safeguard, standing still
in fear of the hazard of everlasting confusion, thou co^mittedst the helm to
be guided by her Graces wisdom, who at last conducted us into the haven of
this long desired peace and tranquillity.

Therefore, whereas thou have placed her in the regal throne to be our David,
our Josias, our Samuel; yea to be our shepherd and ringleader in the way of
true holiness and sincere religion. Inspire her mind with the manifold
blessings of thy grace, that she may walk all the days of her life in the
path of thy commandments, and happily discharge her duty in that stewardship
and dispensation, which thou have committed to her Majesty's hands. Inflame her
mind more and more with the love of thy holy Gospel; that all her deeds,
thoughts, and practices may tend to the propagation and planting of thy word,
and Christian religion, in these her Majesty's dominions. Incline the motions
of her virtuous disposition, above all things to seek thine honor and glory;
to sow the seeds of the Catholic faith abundantly in all places; to cut off
the brood of superstition and idolatry; to constitute true preachers of thy
word; and stablish every where thine holy Gospel and true religion.

Preserve her, most merciful Father (as hitherto thou have most miraculouslie
done) from the devilish devises and practices of her enemies, that she may have
a long and happy reign among us, to the advancement of thy glory, and joy
and comfort of all us her subjects. Let her natural disposition continue to
her foes terrible; to her subjects amiable; to her offenders merciful; to the
virtuous bountiful; indifferent to all men, and in all respects parciall in no
point, neither in causes ecclesiastical, nor yet in matters concerning
politic government. Assist her, most merciful Father, with the might of thy
heavenly spirit, to quail the pride of the triple-headed Romish Cerberus, to
banish his beggarly ceremonies, to abridge the term of his reign, and
finally to cut off and prevent the seeds that continually strive to spring up
from abominable superstition and idolatry.

Grant her grace, most merciful Father, to run the remnant of her race in the
right path of thy commandments, declining neither to the right hand, nor to
the left; but so using all times thy heavenly word, as the rule and compass
to direct her course. Preserve her Grace, most merciful Father, in continual
health of body, and quietness of mind, that she may be always able to rule
the bridle of her high charge, and to execute right and justice to all sorts
and degrees; to the advancement of thy glory, and the universal commodity of
her Majesty's subjects. And finally grant, O most merciful Father, that when
it shall please thee to end the term of her days in this world, thou will
make her partaker of the celestial ioies, which are prepared for them that
fear and love thee, since the foundation of the world. Grant this, most
merciful Father, for thy dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with
thee, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all glory, honor,
and praise, world without end,

Amen.
Another thanksgiving and prayer unto God, for the preservation of the Queens
Majesty, and the Realm.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, which in thy great mercies have both
given unto us a peaceable Prince and gracious Queen, and also haft hitherto
very often and miraculouslie saved her from sundry great perils and imminent
dangers; and by her merciful, unbloody, and gracious government, have
preserved us and the whole Realm from manifold mischiefs and dreadful
plagues, wherewith nations round about us have been, and yet be most
greeuouslie afflicted: have mercy upon them, O Lord; and grant us grace, we
beseech thee, for these thy great benefits, that we may be heartily thankful
and obedient unto thee, to fly from all things that may offend thee, and
provoke thy wrath and indignation against us, and to order our lives in all
things that may please thee, that thy servant our Sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth, and we thy people committed to her charge, may by thy protection be
continually preserved from all treacherous deceits and violences of enemies,
and from all other dangers and perils both bodily and ghostly, and by thy
goodness may be maintained in all peace and godliness. Grant this, O
merciful Father, for thy dear sons sake, our Savior Jesus Christ, to whom
with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another meditation to be used especially upon the 17. day of November,
wherein the godly English gives thanks to God, for the Queens most
prosperous government hitherto, and prays for the continuance thereof to
Gods glory.
AMongst other thy benefits great and innumerable (heavenly father our most
merciful Lord and God) by thee of thine exceeding goodness bestowed upon the
children of men, the servants of thy household, dispersed upon the face of the
earth: it has pleased thee, that we thy people of England, living in these
days, should (in abundance, beyond the measure of the graces of our brethren,
and the prosperous course of our fathers,) behold and perceive thine
inestimable good will in the amiablenesse of thy countenance shining upon us;
to whom thou have given thy chosen handmaiden Elizabeth for sovereign Lady
and Governor. For whatsoever is for the glory of thy house, O Lord, for us it
is, which are the issue and slime of the earth, and unworthy to stand and
look up to heaven, made into vessels after thine image that were not, to be
redeemed and borne anew after the second Adam that perishes not, in the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, and sanctification of the spirit that were
utterly lost, to stand fast in thy hands, sealed according to thine eternal
love, and written in the book of life, that daily run headlong to our own
destruction. As the sense hereof reioiceth the hearts of all those, whom thou
have knit into this fellowship of the Saints, and called into the blessed hope
of the eternal kingdom; so again, how ungrateful should we be, to whom
thou have dealt these benefits from thy divine Majesty, by the person raised
up for thine instrument thereof toward us, if we should not in special sort
show our selves thankful unto thee therefore?

And if not to live tearing and eating one the other, like the Giants in the
old world, and every man to do what seems him best in his own eyes; as
when there was no Judge in Israel. If that princes reign, and Governors give
judgment, it is thy gift, and then in the woorst disposition of their
thoughts, for the sins of the people, they are redoubted. Thou, O Lord, have
appointed them, they are sacred. Thou, O Lord, have anointed them, they are
feared; thou changest their hearts, like the streams of waters; they are
honored. Thine own image and likeness, in guiding Angels and all creatures,
is pregnant; and cannot deuaile in them, bearing rule in earth over the
children of men. What praise is due unto thee from those, unto whom thou
leauest not an Anarchie and headless dissolution? As to the Canibals a
monstrous and misshapen government, and fanning with fire, and streaming with
blood, and smoking with mist and darkness of error and ignorance. As to the
Antichrists, greased in the brow with the mark of the image of the great
beast and whore of Babylon: not a waste and barbarous perpetual heathen
contrition, as unto the Tartarian herds of cursed Cham, unto the rustie and
wasted with misery the inhabitants of Meschech; or to the turbulent and
ravenous swarms and hosts of Tubal-gog, or such like as those: but
contrariwise, whom thou leadest like a flock of sheep by the hands of Moses
and Aaron, and have chosen David thy servant, whom thou have loved, to feed as
the people of thine own inheritance, giving unto them for war, peace; for
inciuilitie, society; for ignorance, knowledge; for superstition, religion;
for error, truth; for hunger, plenty; for vnprouidence, policy; for
dissonancie, harmony; for misery, felicity; and making them to dwell in
safety, as under the wings of thy defense, and shadow of thy protection.

Now, such has been thy mercy toward us, that no tongue is able to
express, in giving us in thy gracious pleasure, and thine vnrecountable
largess and liberality, thy select servant Elizabeth, Queen, and supreme
Governor to us, of the legue nations and peoples of her obeisance and
regiment: that as by a star, the light and influence over things beneath from
thee, the first cause and fountain of brightness, not to be attained unto;
and as by a clear river and plentiful brook, the course of the waters from
thee, the everlasting head-spring: even so the shining beams, and flowing
streams of all those thy mercies and good gifts have been and are, sithence
the days of her happy and gracious government, from thee conuaid and
deuolued unto us. And we, that before were no people, not so much in regard of
the estate in which we haled, when we were savage, and wood men, cruel as
men-deuourers, terrible as spirits, brutish as beasts in the old age, at the
first calling home of our grand ancestors to humane civility: but in these
days in few years degenerate from the true knowledge of thee and thy Son
Jesus Christ, unto the consuming nakedness of idolatry, and plaieng
inordinate before the golden calfe of our own making and our Priests.

Now the four and twentieth Sun most happily inuironeth in the firmament,
sithence by the means of a poor vessel of the weaker sex, and a silly
maiden, thou performing the glorious deliverance of thy people, out of the
thraldom and slavery of Pharao and Egypt, did anoint the kings daughter
with an holy oil, setting a crown of pure gold upon her head, and inuesting
her with the purple, and scepter, and regal diadem of the Realm: sithence
which time, O father, we owe to thee and to her, our God, and our Moses, the
breath of our nostrels, the sight of this light, the use of this air, the ease
of our hearts, the peace of our consciences, and the whole work of our welfare.
By her inspired by thee, spreading her beams at her appearing, the bloody
lances, and claunching murreans, and the redoubling sheelds have been
shattered asunder in shiuers, and bated, and foiled into mattockes and spades,
the flames of our furies quenched and put out, and the poole of grace flowed
over the Realm: the Lion reconciled with the Lamb, the wild Ass set to be
pastured with the seely Kid; the abomination of desolation removed from the
holy Temple, and the Son of man exalted and lift up on high in his own
kingdom, for all that were stoong by the fiery Serpent to look upon and be
saved.

In admirable lenity Babylon has put on Zion; Egypt is become our own; Rahab
the harlot denizoned in Jerusalem; we become of the wild olives, the true
garden plants; of Ismael, Israel; of miscreant, christian; of painime,
protesting and professing; of Antichristian Romanists, and heathen idolaters,
faithful, Evangelical, sincerely believing, woorshippers of thee in spirit
and verity, according to thy holy word. Neither has cost been spared, nor
occasion foreslowed, nor time ouerpassed, nor travel intermitted, to raise
that was fallen, to win that was withholden, to call that was straied, to heal
that was wearied, to find that was lost, to restore that was ruined, to repair
that was decayed, to make good and enable that was abandoned. Preachers have
been sent forth plentiouslie, laws have been executed mercifully, orders
have been set down politikelie, dangers have been declined discreetly,
tumults have been appeased victoriously, the whole spacious dominions of both
Isles, and the adjacent lands governed triumphantly: so as it is hard to find
the man that more orderly has managed the charge of any one household, than
the daughter of thy house with her virginal hands has weelded the weighty
scepter of sundry and mighty populous nations.

In her time have been seen the golden years of the reign of her father
David, and the peaceful kingdom of Solomon to have been advanced: the earth
not to have denied her fruitfulness, the sea her increase, the clouds their
drops, the heavens their fairness, the sun his warmth, the year her
goodness: but the valleys stand thick with corn, the wilderness crowned
with gladness, the furrows watered, the mountains laugh and sing, the folds
full of sheep, our sons and our daughters grow up like to the polished
corners of the Temple, our young men see visions, and our old men prophecy,
Jerusalem her light shining unto her, and the glory of the Lord risen unto
her, the Queen bringing her honor unto the City of David, and the nations
walking in the light thereof.

Great is the honor that thou, O Jehovah, have heaped upon us; and honorable
in foraigne regions is the work that thou have wrought by thy chosen, yea and
so much the more has the brightness of this beauty been powered abroad,
that whilst Egypt round about has been darkened, even the whole world in a
manner besides us, whom thou have gathered into pastures of this Gosen, and
the thick mists of error have blinded the eyes of the earth, the cloudie
pillar has not departed from us by the day, nor the fiery flame by night.
Whilst other lands round about have warred to the destruction of one another,
our Moses has guided us in peace. Whilst other nations like Egypt round about
has been plagued by the destroier from the first borne, sitting upon the
princes throne, unto the vassal and slave grinding at the handmill, our Moses
has not diminished of her flock. Whilst the firm lands have been
overwhelmed by the rage of the seas and waters, our Island having dwelt in
peace, has sent her ship into Ophir for gold, and prepared her navy against
the danger of the enemy. Whilst Athalia has murdered her own blood, our
Ioas has learned the law of the Lord of Iehoiada. Whilst Achas consecrateth
his own son in the fire, and Samaria eats her own children on the walls,
our Eliza directs the children of the Prophets in their offices. Whilst
Iezabel sets up Baal, and embrueth Achab with the blood of the Prophets, and
of Naboth, our Elias gathers the people of God to mount Carmel, to behold the
wonder of the fire of God, lighting from heaven upon the sacrifices, and
replenishing the hearts with joy, and tongues, with gifts of languages.

This is then so worthy an instrument of thy goodness, and express image of
thy Majesty, and the ample matter of this days celebritie. And now what does
thy people desire at thy hands; but that first, O Lord, thou give us thankful
hearts, and make us all the days of our lives mindful of this thy fatherly
and gracious bountifulness. Then, as presently the Queens highness has
gloriously atchiued the travel of full three and twenty years, and now the
annual celebritie of our voluntary sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving
therefore returns: so it may by thy benefit full often return, and not once
or twice, but year by year, and year heaped upon year, we and our offspring
may behold this felicity, until we and she satisfied in abundance, the time
draw along which thou have appointed for the veiling of her crown, at the
feet of thy son Jesus; and the course of this earthly pilgrimage ouerrun, we
and she at our determined seasons be taken to reign in the everlasting
kingdom of thy glory.

Again, where much is the mischief of man, great and enormous the rage of
Satan, subtle the practices of Antichrist, evil our deserts, lamentable the
state of things, whilst open coloring hides privy conspiring, poisoned lips
give sugared words, the breath of Cockatrices, the embracings of Scorpions, the
roaring of Bulls, the ringing of Libels, the raging of Rabsake, the sword of
Herod, the destruction of Abbadon has been seen in our streets, has been
heard on our walls, has multiplied before the gates of our Cities, that thou
destroy us not in the midst of the works of thy mercy, to leave us headless
and hopeless, and make us a scorn and proverb to the enemy; but rather to
behold the number of the faithful subjects, in the dread of their souls, and
just gealousie of their common interest, bowing the knees of their hearts for
the long safety of Queen Elizabeth's sacred princely person, rather than in
thy just fury, for auenging of our sins, to suffer the devil with the
wicked to prevail in the unjust zealousnesse of their preposterous vows,
graceleslie swearing the death of thy Saints, and thine anointed.

Lastly, that what remains of the happy building of thy Church, by the
hands of thy dear daughter, thou plentifully power of thy principal spirit
upon her, and ravish her heart with the flame of the love of thee and thy house,
with Moses to lead, and with Joshua to bring into the land of promise, with
Debora to fight the battle; and with Iahel to knock Sisera of Rome in the
temples of his usurped headship, to his utter destruction; with David to bring
home the Arc; and with Solomon to finish and consecrate to eternity thy
Temple amongst the people: on the earth for the time to give largely her
fostermilke to Jerusalem: in heaven at the time in the pureness of her
virginity, to be presented to the lamb, and sing the song of her wedding
day, with thy Angels and thy Saints, to the praise of thy glorious Majesty,
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, in one eternal Deity, for ever
and ever,

Amen.
Another godly and learned prayer for our most gracious sovereign Lady,
Queen Elizabeth.
O Almighty, eternal God, creator, governor and preserver of all things, Lord
of all lords, and King of all kings, who made man like unto thine own image,
that he should honor, serve, and obeie thee only, and that all other thy
creatures should serve to his use and commodity, over whom thou made him
lord and ruler, the forbidden fruit only except: but he most miserable man, by
his own disobedience, in eating thereof, lost not only that kingly
prerogative, but brought himself and all his posterity into the state of
eternal damnation. Yet thou, O Lord, in thine unspeakable mercy, did then
promise, and in time broughtest to pass, that thine only Son became man
like unto us, sin except, and was borne of a pure virgin by thy divine
providence and power, who to restore this now most miserable man, with all us,
whose children by nature we are, unto the state of eternal salvation, did
suffer most shameful, most vile and bitter, yea most cruel and painful
death on the cross, whereon his glorious body was broken, and his precious
blood shead, a sufficient ransom, a full satisfaction, a just recompense of
thy justice and law, for all them that believe, and embrace thy Gospel and
sacred truth.

But O Lord, our good God, be merciful unto us, who by our infirmity (through
the fall of this lordly man, our great grandfather Adam) can not now live in
any peaceable or good condition and state, without Magistrates and Kings to
rule and govern us. We therefore most humbly and heartily beseech thy divine
Majesty, for the love of thine only Son Jesus Christ, to look down with
thy fatherly compassion upon thy servant Elizabeth, our most gracious Queen
and dread sovereign. Graffe in her royal heart, by the working of thy holy
spirit, thy manifold good gifts and benefits, as wisdom, grace, perseverance
in thy truth, increase of faith, and affiance in thee. Defend her, O Lord, with
thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm: grant unto her a most honorable,
long, and prosperous reign over us.

Moreover, O Lord, if the service of golden vessels in thy Temple at Jerusalem,
were acceptable unto thee; vouchsafe this thy servant to be esteemed in thy
sight, as a most honorable ornament in the new Jerusalem, not built with money
by the labor of the servants of the first Solomon; but bought with the
precious blood of the second Solomon, thy Son our Savior. Behold her, and
make her to be, O Lord, as the precious stone or signet of thine own hand, as
the apple of thine eye, as the white lilly and sweet rose of the enclosed
garden, and as the dear dove of thy delights, for thy truth sake: to the
enemies whereof, make her name most dreadful; and to the Church wheresoever
dispersed, most acceptable and ioifull. Confound and put to shame, O Lord, all
those that with or procure any evil to her royal person and heroical
virginity, or diminution of her kingdoms, and imperial dignity over them.

And when for the multitude of our sins, O Lord, thou will punish us with the
wind of thy displeasure, by taking from us this our fragrant and sweet smelling
flower, which we beseech thee for thine own name sake long to defer: then, O
Lord, plant her in the garden and paradise of thy presence, where she may grow
and dwell in felicity incomparable, which the eye has not seen, the ear
has not heard, neither ever came it into the understanding of man, those ioies
which thou have prepared for her, and all thine elect.

Moreover, O Lord, grant thy heavenly wisdom and grace unto all us her
subjects, that we may advisedly consider, and dutifullie call to our
remembrance, the manifold blessings that we so long time have enioied, and do
presently possess through thy mercy, by her ministry, authority, and the
execution of her kingly office, under the which we do not only reap, and
peaceably enioie the fruits of our labors, and other corporal commodities,
but also (that which is more worth than all this) even the freedom and
liberty of conscience, the preaching and hearing of thy most holy word, and
the administration and receiving of thy holy Sacraments. For all which, and
many other thy blessings, O Lord, work in us thy grace, to yield unto thy
divine Majesty all possible and continual praises and thanksgiving, that it
be not said unto us, Are there not ten cleansed? or, Is not England preserved
from all tyranny, and enioie all these benefits? But where are now their
returning to give thanks? Quicken our memories therefore, O Lord, that we never
be forgetful of thy great goodness toward us, and make us more and more, for
thy sake reverently to fear her, dutifullie to obeie her, and faithfully to
love, honor and serve her, as our natural loving prince and mother, and as the
mean by whom we receive all these thy good blessings, that her Majesty
perceiving our diligence, and readiness to obeie and serve her, may be the
oftener put in mind to fear, honor, love, serve and obeie thy divine and
incomparable Majesty.

Furthermore, inspire her royal heart, O Lord, with thy divine grace, that as
she has begun to set forth and maintain thy sacred truth, so she may
zealouslie and boldly increase, persevere, and continue in the same, whereby
the filthiness and nakedness of Antichrist may be more and more revealed,
superstition more and more abolished and removed, and that old lieng serpent,
and roaring Lion satan, our ancient enemy, may be more and more restrained and
kept back from his malicious purpose, in seeking to devour and draw us all in
ignorance and security. Grant all this, O Lord, to our great comfort, her
honor, and immortal fame; yea to the discharging of her own conscience, and
kingly duty, and evermore reward and crown these thine own good gifts in
her, O Lord, not for the work sake, but for Jesus Christ's sake. And when thou
shall, to our great sorrow and loss, but to her great joy and profit take her
from us; crown her, O most merciful God, with a crown of everlasting glory,
and give her the full possession of that eternal kingdom, purchased by the
blood of that immaculate Lamb, thine only Son our Savior and Redeemer
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, three persons and one
immortal and everlasting God be all honor, dominion, praise, and
thanksgiving, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another prayer for the Queens Majesty, and for the state present, and to
come in our posterity.
O Most gracious Lord GOD, and King almighty, just and everlasting, upon whose
will depends the rule, stay and direction of althings both in heaven and in
earth; giving men power and dominion over the people and nations of the world,
to whom being obedient to thy most holy will and commandments, thou give
wise, careful, industrious, virtuous, happy, and prosperous kings, princes,
rulers, and magistrates, to rule and to govern, to the peace, blessing,
comfort and wealth of the same: but the unrighteous people, lascivious,
contemptuous, idolatrous, superstitious, blasphemous, and rebellious against
thy word and Majesty, shall be delivered over to the hands and tuition of
foolish, idle, dissolute, negligent, and unfortunate princes, rulers, and
governors; by whose brutish disorder, looseness, and folly, the state,
beauty, strength and bonds of peace, justice, love and government shall be
neglected, broken, disturbed, spoiled, and by intestine hatred and discords, or
else by foreign vanquishments and discomfitures destroyed: whereby both land and
people are left a pray to the invasion, spoil, and rauine of the greedy and
victorious destroier, who in his merciless rage executes the plagues of thy
just wrath, O Lord; so that man, woman, child, beast, foul, nor fish, scapeth
the stripes thereof. Their countries, towns, cities, and dwellings burnt,
spoiled, rent, torn, and made waste: justice, law, discipline, nurture,
civil fellowship, honest arts and exercises, religion, knowledge, and fear of
thee scorned, banished, and persecuted: and the land being filled with
abomination, beastly tyranny, slaughter, blood, robbery, theeuerie, rapine,
and murder: the people killed, strangled, starued, spoiled, and mocked, bound,
and carried away to be sold (as beasts) in the market; to servitude and
slavery, there to consume their days in miserable thrall and sorows: the
kingdom and inheritance transported to the possession of the destroier, who
raised up in thy wrath, and armed with the power of thy displeasure, ministers
due punishment for the sin and disobedience of each reuolting nation that
falls away from thee, and will not be reconciled to grace: witness of all
the states, empires, kingdoms, tongues, nations, peoples, and kindreds of the
earth from the beginning of the world to this day: but in these latter days,
specially of the Jews, Egyptians, Armenians, Graecians, Italians,
Hungarians, Polonians, and others, whose servile thrall and calamities ought
never to be out of our remembrance, which should move us continually to
behold the blessing of thy love, and the heavy sorrows of thy displeasure.

Wherefore in the abundance of thy mercies and loving kindness, and for love
of thy dear Son, whom through the gift of thy grace we profess in the truth
of his Gospel: we beseech thee, O merciful Father, favorably to look upon
this Realm and people of England. Turn not away thy face, O Lord: take not
thy grace and holy spirit from us: let us still enioie the bliss and comfort
of thy loving countenance: keep us in thy way, and cover us under the shadow
of thy wings: suffer us not to be taken from thee: make us to follow and to
put our whole trust and confidence in thee, then shall we be safe. Thy mighty
hand, O God, gives the victory, and in the power of thy favor shall the
enemy be vanquished, and his strength brought to nothing. Safe is the city
where thou, O Lord, art the watchman: but who so stands out of thy tuition,
he is a ready pray unto ye destroier: therefore go not far from us, O God.
For thine elect sake were the heavens and the earth, with all their implements,
formed and made of nothing: for their preservation and maintenance was rule and
government devised and stablished. And for their sakes are empires, kingdoms,
countries and nations preserved, saved and blessed: and for injury and
ignominy done to them, and to thy truth and holy name are they changed,
plaged, subverted, and destroyed. Great is thy mercy and compassion, O Lord,
long suffering, and ready to forgive: behold us, O Father, and have mercy upon
us, remember not our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers; take
not just vengeance of our sins, neither reward thou us after our deserts.
Spare us, good Lord; spare us: and for thy sweet Sons sake Christ Jesus our
Savior, have mercy upon us. Yea; Lord, have mercy upon us, and upon our
posterity, holding continually thy holy hand over us, and bless us.
Increase our faith, and make our children, and childers children obedient to
thy word; and through holy conversation in thy Son our redeemer, make us and
them acceptable unto thy self, O GOD, that being sanctified in faith and love
toward thy heavenly will and Majesty, we and they may be delivered from thy
wrathful displeasure for evermore.

Power forth abundance of thy grace and blessing upon our Queen, that in the
fullness of thy gracious favor, she may have long life in health and happy
days, aided with faithful, virtuous, and prudent counselors and ministers,
to do all things to the nourishing and maintenance of true religion and
virtue. Increase the light of thy Gospel, and the number of faithful and
godly preachers and ministers of thy word, whose industry and labor by the
peace and tranquillity of thy Church may largely augment the number of thy
Saints to the glory of thy name, and to the joy and blessing of the land and
people. For the preservation and continuance whereof, in the bowels of thy
fatherly care and favor, remember us, O loving God. Leave neither us nor our
posterity headless, neither put us over to the yoke of a strange nor
irreligious Prince; but after the blisse-full days of this thy gracious
handmaid our Queen, (whom, O Father, let it please thee to reserve in happy
and ioifull state to the end) give peace and concord to thy people, with a
virtuous, wise, godly, and fortunate Prince, whose constant zeal, care,
industry, and endeavor toward the cherishing and advancement of thy truth and
glory, may purchase thy fatherly love and furtherance, to fill the land and
people with all manner of blessings, as thy heavenly wisdom knows
necessary, where beautified with virtue and godliness, it shall prosper and
triumph in continual peace and victory, giving honor and gladsome thanks to
thy glorious Majesty, that with thy dear Son our Lord and Savior, and with
the holy Ghost, reignest in unity of power, glory and dominion, praised for
ever and ever,

Amen.
Another very godly prayer meet to be said of all true subjects, in time of
any privy conspiracy, or open rebellion, for our gracious Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth, and for the present state.
O Almighty God, King of kings, Lord of lords, the only God and governor of
all things: thou art he, by whom alone kings do reign. Thou most high bear
the rule over the kingdoms of men. Thou in Christ thine only Son, being the
most gracious Father of thy chosen Church; do for the comfortable nourishing
of it, dispose the royal state among men. Through this thy grace it is come to
pass, that we the English nation, now a portion of the same thy Church, do
enioie the government of Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou have against all
practices of thine and her aduersaris, delivered out of perils, and by thy
mighty hand brought to reign over us. Mercifully guiding her, thou have made
her to us a mother; to thine afflicted flock a nurse, in that benefit which we
have in liberty, in true religion, and common peace: marvelously protecting
her, thou have kept her to defend us, to use and hold this benefit quietly.
And even now in thy mighty marvelous mercy, thou have discovered the
practices of such crafty and cruel enemies, as purposed to spoil her of us,
us of her, and both her and us of thy religion and of peace, determining to
deliver us over to the tyranny of that shameless man of Rome, and the bloody
sword. In which purpose of mischief, if thou had permitted them to
prevail, we had suffered for our sins at thy hand, O Lord, most justly; but
at their hands most unnaturally, and unjustly. For we do offend thy Majesty
many ways: we offend not them any ways: yet such is their wickedness, that
they will hate us, only because we in truth do profess to serve thee. For
this cause they conspire against thee, O God, like hypocrites; against our
Queen, like traitors; against our Commonwelth and country, like spoilers;
against us, even as Cain did against Abel. But thy great goodness has devised
better for us than they do. Thou have spared us, whom they would have spoiled,
thy wisdom has unfolded their wickedness, thy providence has prevented
their purpose. All honor, praise, with thanksgiving in the congregation, and
by every member thereof, be given to thee, O GOD of grace, O Lord of pity, O
Father of mercy, for ever and ever.

And now we beseech thee, O merciful Father, be not provoked with our sins,
to give us over to the lust of our enemies; do not make us a reproach to these
heathen. Let not the Jews, the Turk, the Papist in our overthrow triumph
against thee, saying; Where is now their God? But of thy rich mercy in Christ
forgive our sins; by thy renewing spirit amend us, and work out this good
work, which thou have begun among us. Confound and bring to naught the
attempts of these and the like enemies, as thou did at Babel; infold them in
the folly of their own counsels, as thou did Achitophel; by thine Angel
sinite their force, as thou did to Senacherib; in their desperate attempts
let them be drowned, as was Pharao; in their treasons overtake them, as thou
did Absolon. If any of them are to be converted, turn them, as thou did
Manasses: otherwise let them feel their due punishment, as did Dathan, with
his conspirators, that of these also may be left an example of thy justice to
the posterity.

We do likewise most humbly beseech thee to continue thy goodness toward
us, ever of thine old woonted mercy deliver our Queen Elizabeth from evil,
direct her in the true knowledge of thee, to acknowledge thy benefits toward
her, and her duty toward thee. Kindle more and more in her heart zeal to
serve thee her self, and to have thee served of us entirely. Guide her still
to govern us justly in godly peace. Give unto us also, which are subjects,
thankful hearts to thee; faithful to her in thee; charitable toward all men;
that all which live under her government, counselors, ministers, and every
other in their place and calling, may be thoroughly sanctified in holiness to
live before thee. Thus prolonging her reign over us, do thou in her plant thy
religion among and in us, so that it may with power reform and rule us, and
remain to our posterity after us, that the praise of thy name may continue in
the hearts and mouths of the English nation, that England may say for ever, The
Lord be praised.

A thanksgiving unto God for his benefits bestowed upon this Realm of
England, in suppressing the late Rebellion, with prayer for the preservation
and prosperous estate of our gracious Queen Elizabeth.
Almighty and everlasting God, the maker of heaven and earth, and Lord of all
creatures, by whose mighty hand, the humble and lowly are advanced, and the
proud and stubborn are thrust under foot. We thy servants give thee most
hearty thanks for thy great and bountiful goodness, which thou have of late
without our deserving, bestowed upon us, both in delivering us from the cruel
tyranny and bondage, and persecution, wherewith we were of late oppressed, and
also in restoring us again to our former peace and quietness, and to the free
exercise of our faith, by the direction of thy sacred Gospel still, maugre the
heads of all our enemies, maintained by thee amongst us to our comfort. For
which thy singular benefits, and gracious liberality, O excellent father,
because we are in no wise able to render unto thee worthy thanks; therefore we
make our humble suit and request unto thee, O Lord, that it may please thee for
thy holy name sake, to accept our good wills in this behalf, and to give us
grace all the days of our life, to remember this marvelous work of thine,
that partly by the Christian, devout, and fervent prayers of thy humble
handmaiden our most gracious Queen, and other of thy people, and partly by
the sure confidence and trust that her Grace evermore did put in thee, thou
have without the force or strength of men put down not only her enemies, but
also thine, and all those that did both fight against thee and thy truth, and
traveled by all means to disanull, and quite overthrow the state of the
Church and religion now established: which wonderful and myraculous act, as
thou have most graciously begun, so we beseech thee, for thy tender mercies
sake, to go forward with it, and so to establish it, as thy glory may be
advanced thereby, and all the crafty devises and malicious assaults of the
devil and his ministers clean overthrown and subdued.

And now, O Christ thou King of kings, Prince of peace, and Ruler of Israel,
have mercy upon our most dear sovereign Lady Elizabeth: and grant, that as
thou hitherto have most singularly blessed her, and adorned her Majesty with
many thy special good graces, blessings, and benefits, for thy glory, and to
our comfort: so with all thankefuluesse therefore unto thy Majesty, we
continually, heartily, and faithfully pray thee, that the joy of thy
heavenly countenance may still most graciously shine upon her, to humble her
soul before thee, to be her guide and director, to sheeld, preserve, and
defend her from the will and power of all her enemies, and that both thine and
her adversaries may from time to time be made thine and her footstool, and be
ever kept under her feet, as mire in the streets, or as thin scoom, filthy
foam, light chafe, withered haie, or burnt stubble before the wind. We beseech
thee also, O Lord, thou scepter of Israel, that her scepter may yet grow
green, burgen, fructify, and flourish in the fruits of true happiness, with
glory, victory, princely honor, dutifulness, healthful sweetness,
tenderness, beauty and comeliness, in her most royal state and calling, even
as the Palm Tree safely and well set in a soil of all happiness, and that
her throne regal may steddilie stand for ever without winding, shaking,
swaruing, tottering, or nodding, even as the seat of Solomon; and that the
days of her Graces regiment may be unto us for thy glory, as the days of
heaven, and after this life ended, make her partaker of the brightness of
thine and thy fathers everlasting glory, among thine anointed and elect, in
the celestial kingdom of everlasting renown. Grant this O Christ, thou most
merciful King and Governor, that sit upon the seat of David, and have
obtained an everlasting kingdom for all the chosen Israelites, even for thy
mercies sake,

Amen.
Another prayer for the Queen, and the estate of this Realm.
Gracious Lord, and most merciful Father, we acknowledge thee Lord of lords,
and the King of kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling all things
evermore in heaven and earth, according to thy wonderful wisdom and power,
and our selves to be thy poor servants, the work of thy hands, and the sheep
of thy pasture, subjected to thy high Majesty, and depending upon thy
fatherly providence for all things. Nevertheless, seeing thou in thy wisdom
annointest Kings and Queens, appointing them to rule over the people, to sit
as lieutenants in thy seat, to minister justice, and most of all as fathers
and nursses, to maintain and cherish thy Church, commanding us not only to
obeie and honor them, but moreover to pray for them, as watching over us for
our good. We therefore beseech thee for thy great names sake, and for Jesus
Christ's sake, to show thy mercy to all Kings and Princes that maintain thy
glorious Gospel, but especially we pray thee to bless our gracious Queen
Elizabeth, in all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, and in all temporal
blessings, according to thy good pleasure; that in the great measures of thine
effectual law, she may more and more find great increase of virtue, and
wisdom, and strength, in Christ Jesus, to the faithful and happy discharge
of her duty, that her holiness and joy, and zeal of thy house may be
multiplied and everlasting.

And seeing it has pleased thee of thy singular mercy to give her this
especial honor, first to suffer for thy glorious truth, and afterward
miraculouslie delivering her out of the hands of her enemies, to set a Crown
upon her head, and to make her the instrument to advance thy glory and
Gospel, for which she suffered, and to bring her out of darkness into light;
out of persecution into this great and long peace; as we give thee most hearty
thanks for this singular benefit, so we beseech thee to make her and us
evermore thankful for it, and in thy good pleasure still to preserve her for
the continuance of these blessings toward us with all increase from time to
time, to thy glory, the benefit of thy Church, and her infinite peace in
Christ Jesus the Prince of peace.

And furthermore, we praise thee for her and the estate, that such as be the
enemies of the Gospel, and her enemies also for the defense thereof, may not
despise the peace offered them unto repentance; but that they may account thy
long suffering, and her peaceable and unbloody government an occasion of
salvation to their souls, and unfeigned love to the truth, and their merciful
Sovereign. Otherwise, if they still remain disobedient to thy truth, disloiall
to her Highness, and dangerous to the state; then, O God of all salvation, as
thou have discovered them, so discover them still: as thou have prevented them,
so prevent them still, and let their eyes ware weary with looking, and their
hearts faint with waiting for the coming of that which yet comes not; neither
let it come, O Lord, we beseech thee: but a blessed and a long reign to her
Grace, and and peace to Zion for evermore.

Also dear Father, so bless, so love, so in thy spirit sanctify and keep
her, that she may in the spirit of counsel and fortitude so rule that other
sister also, namely this her Commonwealth, that they may flourish together,
and grow up together as Palme-trees in beauty, and in strength, giving aid
and help one to another; that in the Church the glory of God may appear as
the Sun in his brightness, and that the land may flow with milk and honey,
and true peace abound therein, as in ye triumphant reign of Debora.

These graces, O Lord, are great, and we miserable sinners, unworthy of the
least of them; therefore look not to us, but to thy self; not to our
iniquities, but to thy great mercies; accepting the death and passion of thy
Son as a full ransom for all our offenses, throwing them into the bottom of
the sea, and making his cross and resurrection effectual in us to all
obedience and godliness, as becomes thy Saints; that to all other thy good
blessings toward our gracious Sovereign, this may be added, that she
governs blessedlie over a blessed people, a people blessed of the Lord, and
beloved of the Lord; and that thy graces may abound in the Church and in the
Commonwealth from day to day, till the day of our translation into thy
kingdom, where justice inhabiteth, where we also shall inhabit and reign with
thee, according to thy promise for ever. Grant us these things, O merciful
father, for thy dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, in whose name we
crave them at thy merciful hand, praieng furthermore for them, as he has
taught us to pray, Our Father, etc.

Psalm 72. Another prayer for the prosperous estate and flourishing reign of
our right virtuous sovereign Queen Elizabeth.
O GOD, without whose wisdom no kingdom can stand, who of a special
consideration have ordained this kingdom in the family of David, teach our
Queen Elizabeth whom thou have appointed, the rules of right government:
teach I say, the Daughter of this thy David, whom thou have chosen to thy
self, the rule of righteousness, that she may justly govern not her people,
but thine; especially that she may defend the poor against the injuries of
the mighty: thus the people being scattered here and there in the mountains
and hills, being safe under a just government, shall abound with all the
commodities of peace.

Grant this unto her, that she being far from all tyranny, may be a sure
refuge for the poor, that she may comfort the families oppressed with poverty
and injuries, that she may keep under ye false accusers with most sharp
punishment; so will it come to pass, O Lord, that the state of this kingdom
being ordered by thine authority, all men, as it is meet, shall acknowledge
and fear thee, and not for any short continuance of time, but that the Sun
and Moon shall sooner cease their course, than thou shall fail to be
woorshipped.

And thou again wilt power down upon thy people from heaven all good things,
like a shower coming down upon the new mowne meadows, and none otherwise,
than thou use to water the earth with showers in due season, whilst
Elizabeth reigns thus governed by thy grace and holy spirit, the just shall
flourish, and great peace shall be so continued, as is the firm course of the
stars, and the Queen her self shall have dominion from the one sea to the
other, even from Euphrates, to the farthest coasts of the earth.

The inhabitants of the countries of the desert shall come under her yoke,
falling down under her feet, and her enemies falling down before her, shall
lick the dust of the earth. The kings of Silicia and of the Islands shall offer
presents unto her. The Ethiopians also, and the Arabians shall bring her gifts;
finally, all Kings shall have her in admiration, for her renown and virtue,
and all nations shall reverence her name and majesty. For her righteousness
shall be praised through out all the whole world, because she hears the cry
of the poor, and does defend the needy forsaken of other. She has mercy on
them that are needy, and she refreshes those that are in danger of their
life. She defends the poor against the injury of the mighty, neither does
she suffer the violence done unto them to be unrevenged.

Therefore thou, O God, wilt keep her safe, and gold shall be brought unto her
out of the midst of Arabia: all men shall make prayers for her life and
safety, and shall daily wish all prosperity unto her. And seeing the safety
of all the families of our nation consists in the preservation of her
Majesty, let us heartily (as we have good cause) pray incessantly for her
Grace, and for the safety and welfare of the Church, and of all those that
love and favor her therein. Defend, O God, with thine own hand, this worthy
woman and sacred Queen, whose endeavor thou have used to restore peace to thy
Church, and religion to thy people. O save this worthy Princess Elizabeth, I
say, whom for this purpose thou have endued with most rare and singular
wisdom, power, constancy, and royal gifts of grace. And grant that all men
may dutifullie honor and obeie her, as a prince of peace; a mother of Israel;
a nurse of thy Church, woorthilie for her virtues set over us by thee, O God,
to reign. Finally grant, that in this government of our pastor and chief
shepherd, there may want neither integrity, and uprightness in taking of
counsel, neither wisdom in performing all her enterprises according to thy
will.

Then shall wheat be reaped euerie-where with full handfuls in the very tops
of the mountains; the corn growing as high as the trees of Libanus: and there
shall be such a multitude of inhabitants in the cities, that they may almost
seem like plants springing out of the earth: yea, then shall her noble
memory, and royal fame be for ever, even durable as the sun; and our Queen
Elizabeth be an example of all piety and felicity unto all kingdoms and
nations of the world, which shall accept her blessed among women. But unto
thee, O Lord, the Prince of the celestial companies, and the author of all
things, for so wonderful and rare gifts in her Majesty, shall all possible
praise be especially given: yea, the fame of thy glory be praised and
magnified for ever and ever, and let it fill both heaven and earth. So, even so
let it be, O God,

Amen.
Another daily prayer, for the perpetual happiness of our sacred, and most
gracious Sovereign, and Queen Elizabeth.
O Almighty God, King of kings, and Lord of lords; in thine hand is all power
both in heaven and in earth: thou confirmest kingdoms, and again do alter
them according to thine heavenly pleasure: we praise thee; we magnify thee;
we extol thine holy name, for that it has pleased thee to appoint over us a
good and gracious Queen, which does govern with counsel, and rule with
wisdom. Grant her, we beseech thee, continual peace; long life, and much
happiness, and deliver not her Majesty into the hands of her enemies. Rule thou
her mind, that she may serve thee always in fear, and rejoice in trembling;
let her maintain and embrace pure religion, and defend her people in the
profession of Christ's Gospel against all errors, and superstition whatsoever.
Give her wisdom and understanding to do such things, as are grateful in thy
sight; profitable for us her subjects, and hurtful to none.

O God, eternal Father, hear the petitions of Elizabeth our Queen, in all
her troubles; the name of Christ our Savior glorify her, and the comfortable
aid of the holy Spirit uphold her now and evermore. Be mindful of her grace
for her good; Lord remember all her offerings; make her prayers acceptable in
thy sight. Give to her according to her hearts desire; fulfill all her
petitions, and prosper all her purposes: that we may rejoice in thy salvation,
and triumph in the name of thee our God. Bless her, Lord, evermore, that we
may know that her protector is in the clouds. Harken unto her from thy holy
heavens. Oh send her help from thy sanctuary, and aid her from above by thy
mighty right hand, which brings salvation. Let all her enemies plainly
know, O GOD, that thou will save thine anointed. For though some trust in
horses, and other in chariots; yet will we remember the name of our God: they
shall fall and be overcome; but we courageously will persist.

O Lord, protect her Majesty, and hear us when we call upon thee, that in thy
strength she may rejoice, and mightily triumph in thy salvation. Grant her the
desire of her heart, and deny not the petitions of her lips. For thou have
prevented her with notable blessings, and put a crown of pure gold upon her
head. She has asked life of thee, and thou will give her a long life. Great is
her glory in thy salvation, honor and fame have thou put upon her. Thou have
ordained her for exceeding blessedness, and do comfort her heart with thy
cheerful countenance. And why? Because she delights in Christ; and doubts
not of thine everlasting mercy.

O God, that give victory unto kings, and did deliver David from peril of
the sword; save and redeem our dear Queen Elizabeth, and deliver her from
the hands of the children of another devotion than she is: whose mouth utters
vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood. Yea let her hand, O
Lord, light upon her enemies, and thy right hand find out all such as hate
thee, and envy her prosperity. Put them into a burning furnace in the time of
thy displeasure: the Lord in his anger shall consume them, and fire shall
devour them. Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth, and their seed from
the sons of men; because they intended evil against thee, and imagined
mischief against the innocent, which they could not bring to pass. Therefore
will thou turn them into flight, and bend thy bow against their faces.
Triumph, O Lord, in thy virtue, and we will sing out thy glory, and commend
thy power. Save our Queen, O merciful God, in despite of all her enemies,
which either secretly or openly go about to bring her life to the grave, or
her glory to the dust. Lord, shield our Sovereign; exalt thine anointed; let
thine hand assist, and thine arm strengthen her. Never let her foes prevail
against her, nor the child of wickedness bring her to destruction. Banish from
her Court all her privy enemies, and preserve her evermore from dissembling
friends.

Mercy and judgment be Queen Elizabeth's song: unto thee, O Lord, let her
sing thy magnificall mercies. Work in her royal heart an endeavor to be fully
instructed in the perfect way of thy royal laws: for so much as thou have
made her Queen over this Relme. With thy grace open her heart; instruct her,
and lead her up and down in the midst of her people in perfectness of heart.
Let her never set before her eyes any devilish thing. Cause her to detest the
work of backsliding from God: let that take no hold in her. Drive far away
from her, the men of froward hearts: let her not once be acquainted with evil
persons. Who so privily slandereth his neighbor; let her destroy him. Who so
has also a proud look, and an hautie stomach, cause her to loath him. Settle
her eyes upon such in the land as are faithful, that they may dwell with her.
Who so leads a godly life, men of good conscience; let such be her servants.
Let no deceitful person have any place in her house: him that tells lies,
or is a revenger of blood; cause her speedily to cast out of her sight.
Finally, grant her will and power, O Lord of hosts, daily to suppress all
the ungodly in the land, that she may root out from the city of God all
wicked dooers.

Queen Elizabeth has done that is lawful and right: wherefore, O Lord, leave
her not to such as do offer her wrong. For thine own goodness sake, take her
thine handmaid unto thy protection: let not the proud oppress her with wrong.
Deal with thine handmaid according to thy loving kindness, and teach her thy
statutes. She is thy servant, grant her understanding, that she may know thy
testimonies. Thy testimonies contain woonderous things, therefore cause her
heart to be zealous in keeping of them. The first entrance of thy words will
illuminate, giving understanding even unto the simple. Work in her heart so
fervent desire of thy word, that through affection thereto, she may be like one
that pants, and opens his mouth for breath. Look thou upon her, O Lord,
and be merciful unto her, as thou use to do unto them that love thy name.
Direct her steps in thy word: and so let no wickedness have dominion over her.
Redeem her from the fraudulent dealings of men, and cause her to keep thy
commandments. Make the light of thy countenance shine upon our Queen
Elizabeth thine handmaiden, and teach her thy statutes.

Hear my prayers, O God, and give good ear unto mine intercessions. For
behold, from the ends of the earth I call unto thee, for our dear Sovereign
Lady, Queen Elizabeth: whenever her heart is in heaviness, oh set her up upon
the rock that is higher than she. For hitherto thou have been her defense,
and a strong tower for her against the face of the enemy. Let her dwell. I
beseech thee, in thy tabernacle for ever; let her trust be under the covering
of thy wings. For thou, O Lord, heardst her desires, and have given her an
heritage over those that fear thy name. O grant unto the Queen a long life,
that her years may endure many generations. Let her dwell before the Lord for
ever. O appoint thy loving mercy and truth, that they may preserve her: so
cause her always to sing praise unto thy name, that she may day by day
perform her vows, and keep thy heasts.

Finally, give thy judgment, O Lord, unto her Grace, and thy righteousness
unto her Counsel, that they may judge the people with justice, and the poor
with equity. Let the mountains bring peace, and the little hills righteousness
unto the people. Let them judge the afflicted among the people, and save the
sons of the poor: make them to destroy the backe-slider, that he persist
not to afflict the miserable, and such as trust in thy mercy and protection:
so shall quietness and peace abound among us like the hillocks on the earth.
Cause her enemies to fear her, so long as the sun and moon shines, from
one generation to another. Water her with thy grace from heaven, as thou did
Gedeons fleece of wool with dew, and as thou refreshest with drops of rain the
new cut grass upon the earth. In her days let the righteous flourish, and
great abundance of peace, so long as the moon is in the firmament. Defend the
dominions that thou have given her within the seas, and from the flood unto the
end of the earth. Cause her foes to kneel down before her, and her enemies to
lick the dust of her feet. Give her a long and prosperous reign; indue her
with abundance of riches and wealth; heap glory and honor upon her head, and
let her be partaker always of the prayers of the just, and be daily blessed.
The Lord, even the God of Israel, which only works woonderous things,
bless our gracious Queen Elizabeth: and blessed be the name of his Majesty,
for ever: yea, let all the earth be filled with his glorious praise, Amen. And
she shall magnify thee, O Lord, her King, and she shall praise thy name for
ever. Every day let her give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and praise thy name
for ever and ever. Grant this, O most merciful Father, for thy dear son our
Savior Jesus Christ's sake:

Amen, Amen.
Another prayer for the Queens most excellent Majesty.
Wonderful, O most excellent and almighty GOD, is the depth of thy
judgments. Thou King of kings, Lord of lords, thou which at thy pleasure do
take away and transpose; root out and plant; confound and establish kingdoms.
Thou of thy singular goodness have delivered our gracious Sovereign Queen
Elizabeth thy chosen Handmaid, when she was almost at deaths door; yea thou
have delivered her out of prison, and settled her in her fathers throne: to thee
therefore do we render thanks, to thee do we sing laud and praise, thy name
do we honor day and night.

Thou have restored again the liberty of our country, and the sincerity of
the doctrine, with peace and tranquillity of thy Church. Thine, thine, O Lord,
was the benefit; the means, the labor and service was hirs, a burden too
heavy alas for a woman's shoulders, yet easy and tolerable by thy helping
hand. Assist her therefore, O most merciful father, neither respect her
offenses, or the deserts of her parents, or the manifold sins of us her
people; but think upon thy woonted compassion always at hand to thy poor
afflicted.

Preserve her kingdom, maintain religion, defend thy cause, our Queen
Elizabeth, us thy sheep and her people; scatter thine enemies, which thirst
after war, let them be ashamed and confounded that woorship idols; let us not
be a pray unto foreign nations, nor to the people that know not thee,
neither call upon thy name.

Strengthen and confirm, O Lord, the good work which thou have begun; inspire
our gracious Queen thy servant, and us thy poor flock, with thy holy
spirit, that with vncorrupt life we may join purity of religion, as we may
not yield and bring forth wild and bastard fruits, but mild and sweet grapes
and fruits beseeming a lively faith and true repentance, and meet and
convenient for thy Gospel, to the intent we may enioie this immortal
treasure, and that living and dieng in thee, we may finally possess the
inheritance of thy heavenly kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. For thine
is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever,

Amen.
A form of blessing or prayer for our most gracious Queen Elizabeth Christ
his dear spouse, out of the Scriptures.
COme down O Lord, come with thousands of thy Saints, and appear graciously
unto thy Church of Saints. Come visit the people and congregations of Jacob
whersoeuer assembled, whom thou so tenderly love, and which are humbled at
thy feet, to yield thee thanks for all thy blessings and benefits received.

Come down I say, O God of Jacob, and bless Israel, yea come and bless thy
chosen and dear beloved servant Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou have set up a
mighty Prince and mother, over thy people and City Zion, and made the chief
governor among the nations.

O let Elizabeth live, and not die: neither let her honor be any thing
diminished for our sins and offenses.

Hear, O Lord, the voice of her humble and daily prayers, and let her
continue a Prince of peace, royal Ruler over thy people. Her hands shall be
good enough for her, if thou help her still, as thou have done against her
enemies.

Right and light be with thine holy handmaid, whom thou did prove with
great temptations and trial, as thou did Joseph, before thou did anoint
her Queen, and whom hitherto thou have preserved a pure and undefiled virgin,
to promote thy glory, as thou did David.

She that in all her manifold afflictions has more esteemed the serving of
thee her God, than saving of her self, and loved not her life so dear as she
loved thy law, yea that preferred thine obedience before sacrifice, and all
things in the world beside, O let her, our gracious Queen Elizabeth, I say,
who has thus don her duty, be plentifully rewarded therefore of thee her God
from heaven, with the perpetual crown of glory, and palm of victory.

She, even she has taught Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: she has
put incense before thy face, and the burnt offering upon thine altar. She, even
she, O God, has with Hezechias restored thy sincere religion, and woorshippeth
thee aright, with every one that is godly in thee.

Bless therefore, O Lord, her substance, and first fruits, and accept the
works of her hands.

Smite through the loins of them that rise up against her, and of them that
hate her, that they rise not again.

O let the beloved of the Lord dwell ever in safety by thee, yea do thou Lord
vouchsafe still to be her vale and defense all her life long, and dwell with her
here in the Church as her beloved spouse, head, and governor.

Lay thy left hand under her head, and let thy right hand embrace her, that
she may find continual comfort in thy presence.

O fountain of the gardens! O well of living waters! Arise O North, and come O
South, and blow on thy spouse, which is as a goodly and pleasant garden
enclosed, and as a fountain sealed up for thy self, and water it with the
springs of Lebanon, that it may grow great, and that the sweet spices and
smell thereof may flow out into thy nostrels, and thou eat of the pleasant
fruit in her.

Kiss her with the kisses of peace and righteousness, and let her two breasts
satisfy thee, and be like two young roes that are twins feeding upon the
lillies.

Set her as a seal on thine heart, and as a signet upon thine arm, and let the
lamp of her love be a very vehement flame unquenchable.

Let her be a sure wall or foundation, whereupon thou may build a golden
palace; and let her breasts be as towers vnassaultable, that she may be meet
for thee her spouse to dwell in, and be in thine eyes as she that finds
perpetual peace and quietness.

O God, in whose sight her fathers did walk; thou, O God, which have fed her
all her life long unto this day, and delivered her hither to from so many,
not evils, but deaths; bless her still, even with the blessing of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, with all the blessings of thy mercies
promised unto her father David.

In her let Israel also be blessed: in her let thy graces so plentifully and
manifestly appear, that the people may thence take a pattern of blessing
thee, and teach their posterity to bless and praise thee for thy goodness
and mercy, both toward her and them.

For she is to us thy might, thy strength, the nobleness of dignity, and the
excellency of power.

She as a lioness is laid down and couched safely after the spoil. Who
shall stir her up? Her enemies do all fear her. And do thou still charge the
daughters of Jerusalem, that they stir not up thy love, nor awake her, by
troubling her quietness and peace, until she please.

Her fellow virgins praise her: her hand shall be in the neck of her enemies,
her fathers people do bow down unto her, saying, Good luck have thou with
thine honor: Ride on, because of the word of truth, which thou embracest with
meekness.

O let not the brethren of evil, the reuengers of blood, nor the instruments
of violence and cruelty be in her court and habitation! O let not cruelty or
falsehood come into her soul! Into their secrets let not her soul come,
neither let her glory be joined nor stained with the assembly or damned crew
of the wicked.

Curse them that curse her; and bless them that bless her; divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, which shamelessly in their rage dare
cruelly attempt any treacheries or treasons against her innocent and royal
person: yea, let them be condignelie punished, whosoever go about to trouble
the state, or overthrow her kingdom.

Let not the scepter depart out of her hand, nor her kingdom be diminished;
but let this thy most wise lawe-giuer, our meek Moses, continue amongst us
with honor, to judge thy people, and gather them unto thee long in rest and
peace, even until Silo our Savior Jesus, the giver of all prosperity, come
to crown her in his everlasting kingdom with his salvation.

Let her see that rest and peace is good, and that it is thou that have made
her to overcome all her enemies at the last.

Bless her Lord, with great increase of all manner of good, profitable, and
pleasant things. Her bread let it be fat, that she may give pleasant gifts
worthy such a Queen.

Let her be as an Hind sent unto us from thee for a precious present, giving
goodly words to her people.

Let Elizabeth be the daughter of increase, and like a flourishing and
fruitful palm tree by the waters side, whose small branches, or virgins may
run and spread themselves fruitfullie also, and show very green upon the walls
of thy house.

The archers her enemies have greeuouslie provoked her, and shot against her
with venomous darts, they have hated her to her hinderance and grief: great
and many have been her afflictions and persecutions.

But her bow abode fast and strong, and the hands of her arms were
strengthened by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Her deliverance was even
by the stone of Israel, by whom she is appointed a mother in Israel: even by
the God of her father, who has helped her, and by the almighty, who has
blessed her with heavenly blessings from above; with blessings of the deep
that lies beneath, and with blessings of the breasts, and of the womb.

The time now is come, that the blessings of GOD showed unto her father shall
take effect, and be stronger in her than the blessings of her elders. Unto the
uttermost ends of the hills of the world, they shall all be blessings upon the
head of Elizabeth, and on the top of the head of her that is separate from her
birth, and consecrated from the womb to dignity and honor far above her
fellow virgins, and made the anointed of the Lord, to bear rule, and to have
dominion over men.

Even as the morning light, when the sun rises gloriously without clouds in
the fair morning; so she being just, and ruling in the fear of God, let her
house grow, and be with thee, O God, that it may continue perfect in all
points; sure and everlasting, according to thy covenant and promise made to her
father David: and not as the grass of the earth is by the bright rain, which
grows quickly, and fades sooner.

Her beauty and glory let it be like the first borne bullock, and her
strength as the Unicorne: with the horn of her power let her smite the people
together, even the ten thousands of Ephraim, and the ten thousands of Manasses.

Bless her in her going out and coming in, and prosper her at home and abroad
in all her affairs by land and by sea.

Make her glad, ioifull, and willing to call thy people unto the holy hill of
Zion, and there in thy Church to offer with them together the offerings of
righteousness, that she and they may suck of the abundance of the sea, and of
the treasures hid in the earth.

Bless her, O Lord, that she may dwell as a Lion that catches for a pray,
the arm with the head, and be most victorious over her enemies that hate her,
and despise thee.

Bless her with thy graces, that she may look well to her self, as in the
beginning, when she was a portion of thee the lawe-giuer, hid and reserved for
us thy people, that she may now come with the heads of the people, and execute
the righteousness of the Lord, and his judgments with Israel.

A lions whelpe let her be to leap from Basan, and make her strong enough to
defend her self from Balaks curse, and against all the treasons of Zimri and
Achitophel.

O satisfy her with thy favor, and fill her with thy blessings: let her
possess both the east, west, south, and north parts of the earth.

Bless her with people, and make her acceptable unto her brethren and sisters,
and to dip her feet in oil.

Her shoes let them be iron and brass, and her glory, health, wealth, and
strength continue as long as the sun.

Who is like thee, O God of Israel, which though thou sit upon the heavens, and
ridest upon them as upon an horse; yet art thou her helper and Savior, whose
glory is in the clouds and celestial places.

The eternal God be still her refuge; and under the arms of the everlasting
God let her live for ever: he shall cast out the enemy before her face, and
shall command her to destroy them.

That then Israel, as even now at this present, may still dwell alone in
safety; and the fountain of Jacob be plentiful in issue, in the land of
wheat and wine, and the heavens drop the dew of thy blessing plentifully upon
her, and her country.

Happy and blessed art thou, O Israel, that have such a Queen! Who is like
unto thee, O people, saved by the Lord, which is the shield of thy help, and
sword of thy glory? Therefore thine enemies have lost their strength to thee
ward, and be subjected to thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places.

Bless her still, O Lord, and give power unto thy Queen, that she may be
strong to keep the feet of thy Saints within the walls of thy Church, and to
cause the wicked for ever to keep silence in darkness,

Amen: Amen.
A prayer to be said mentallie or alowd of all true hearted English men and
women, for the Queens Majesty, when she rides by them at any time.
GOd save your royal Majesty; The GOD of gods preserve your noble Grace; Good
luck have you with your honor, O you the fairest among women! Ride on, O
Queen, according to the great worship and high renown, wherewith the King of
kings has innobled you; because of the word of truth, of meekness and
righteousness, which you profess: so shall your right hand teach you terrible
things. The Lord himself be your keeper, and preserve you from all evil. The
Lord of heaven and earth be your defense on your right hand, and on the left.
The Lord preserve your going out, and your coming in, from this time forth
for evermore: so that the sun shall not burn you by day, neither the moon
by night. The King of kings have pleasure in your beauty, and make you his
daughter, his spouse, and virgin most glorious within. The most mighty Iehoua
establish you in his seat of judgment, even in the throne of your father
David, that you may become an old mother in Israel. Peace and prosperity be
unto them that love your honor; but horror of conscience, and confusion of
face be unto all those that hate you: for your indurable gifts of Gods graces,
all people do highly praise you; and for your zeal to Zion, all the world
does honor you: therefore for Zions sake also we wish you all manner of
prosperity: yea, because of the house of the Lord, which you have reformed,
and his religion, which your Grace has restored, we will continually triumph
in his mercy, and pray still for the renown of your most royal name and
Majesty, that your fame may more and more be universally spread over the
earth, and be remembered from one generation to another. For the Gospels sake, I
say, which your Majesty does maintain, we will incessantly praise God for
you, and with loud voices cry, and say: God save our most gracious Queen
Elizabeth; Jesus bless your Highness; The holy Ghost from heaven comfort and
conduct your Majesty in all your wais; Bless our sovereign Lady, O blessed
Trinity; Heap glory and honor upon Elizabeth our Queen, O glorious Deity;
Bless her sacred Majesty, I say, O God, from this time forth for evermore.
O King of heaven receive our Queen; receive and embrace this thy most glorious
virgin and dear daughter, accompanied with her fellow virgins, the princes
daughters, and honorable women into thy tuition and protection. With joy and
gladness, I say, let her, the lively image of thy princely Majesty, be
brought safe and unhurt home again unto her iuorie palaces; and at the last
enter into the Kings court, her fathers house, where she may enioie a
perpetual crown and everlasting kingdom, and rejoice in thee her God, her
spouse, and her Savior for ever and ever; so shall she and we her people, give
thanks unto thee, O Lord, world without end,

Amen.
A compendious form of prayer for the whole estate of Christ's Church,
necessary to be used of all estates at time convenient, especially every
Sabbath or Holidaie in the Evening, by the Mother and Daughter, and their
family.
A Psalm preparing the heart to prayer.
Mother. O Come, let us search out, and try our ways: and turn again unto
the Lord.


Daughter. Let us seek the Lord while he is to be found: let us call upon him
while he is near.


Moth. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands, unto God in the heavens, for we
have sinned, and have rebelled: therefore will he not spare us.


Daugh. But even the crown of our head will he cast down: woe now therefore
unto us that we have sinned.


Moth. Our iniquities are sealed up as in a bag: he has set our misdeeds
before him, and our secret sins in the light of his countenance.


Daugh. We are weighed in the balance, and are found to lack weight: we are
altogether lighter than vanity.


Moth. Though he has chosen us to be his heritage, yet are we unto him as a
Lion in the forest: we daily cry out against him, therefore has he hated us.


Daugh. But will the Lord absent himself for ever? will he show no more favor?


Moth. Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore?


Daugh. Has God forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercy
in displeasure?


Moth. Uerelie this is the fruit of our infirmities: but yet the right hand of
the Lord can amend all this.


Daugh. Therefore will we leave our complaint upon our selves, and we will
speak in the bitterness of our souls.


Moth. And we will say unto God, Condemn us not: neither cast thou off the
work of thy hands.


Daugh. But rather turn thou us unto thee, and we shall be turned: renew our
days as of old, for thou have banished us long enough, and have been sore
displeased at us.


Moth. Now are we poor and needy, O God, make haste unto us: thou art our
helper and redeemer, O God, make no tarieng.


Daugh. O let not the oppressed return ashamed: but let the poor and needy
praise thy name.


Moth. That we which now do sow in tears, may hereafter reap in gladness.


Daugh. Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest O Lord, and teach him in
thy Law.


Moth. That thou may give him rest from the days of evil, whilst the pit
is dug for the wicked.


Daugh. Blessed is the man whom thou correctest: therefore will we not refuse
thy chastisement.


Moth. For though thou make a wound, yet thou give a plaster; and though
thou smite, yet thy hands make whole again.


Daugh. Therefore O Lord, open thou our lips, and our mouth shall show forth
thy praise.


Moth. Bow down thine ear, O Lord, and consider our complaint: hearken unto
us for thy truth and righteousness sake.


Daugh. Amen.


A prayer to be heard, and to obtain favor.
Mother. SEeing that it has pleased thee, most merciful Father, so
favorably to consider the weakness and unworthiness of mankind; that
whereas we could of our selves, neither lift up our eyes unto thee, because of
our weakness; neither yet hope for any good thing at thy hands, because of
our unworthiness, even in this extreme misery have given unto us thy
well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, in whom we are not only made able to lift up
our hearts unto thee, but also may assure our selves, through his merits and
passion, of thy favor and mercy, in what so ever we shall ask agreeable to
thy good will and pleasure.

As we do first from the bottom of our heart yield unto thee all thanks,
honor and glory, for this thine inestimable goodness bestowed on us thine
unworthy servants: so do we likewise (being assured of thy mercy promised
in Christ) daily present our selves before thee, to the intent that through
our faithful prayers, we may daily more and more receive the fruits of this
thy merciful goodness, to relieve our continual necessities withal. We are
here, O Lord, in a strange country: our enemies are on every side: which
way so ever we turn us, we see nothing but either continual conflicts, or
else utter destruction. Thou therefore, O holy Father, that have given us
thine only Son Jesus Christ, to the intent that in his name we might call
upon thee; vouchsafe likewise to hear us, what time soever we call unto thee
in his name; that since it has pleased thee, to exercise us with continual
tribulation, for our trial, through him we may obtain such patience and
strength, that we may continually stand strongly, to the maintenance of thy
cause, to thy honor and glory; and let not our deserts so much provoke thy
displeasure against us, that therefore thou cease to glorify thy holy name in
us; but rather of thy goodness forgive thou our sins, which to the
hinderance of thy honor and glory we have committed: and give us grace,
heartily to repent us of our misdeeds, in such sort, that we may henceforth
seek thy face, and walk before thee in newness of life, seeking thy honor
and glory above all things; that as it has been hitherto hindered by us to
our shame, so now it may by all means be furthered, even by us likewise, to the
unspeakable comfort of us all, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Daughter: Amen.


For the Church universally.
Mother. AND for because we are fallen into these dangerous days, wherein all
goodness decaieth, and sin abounds: we humbly beseech thee, mercifully to
behold the perilous estate of this age, and in this general confusion of the
whole world, to multiply thy graces and blessings on thy Church, that for as
much as through thy mercies it is not of the world, it never be defiled with
any corruption, either of the world, the flesh, or the devil, neither yet
that it perish eternally with the world.


Daughter: Amen.


For Civil Magistrates.
Mother. BE merciful therefore, O Father, unto all the states and members
thereof, unto Kings, Princes, and all civil Magistrates, and namely to thy
servant Elizabeth our Queen and Governor, that they may every one in their
several charges, maintain their scepters in truth and righteousness, that
they may beat down sin, and advance virtue: that they may humbly submit
themselves, and all their power, unto thy good will and pleasure, and that in
all things they seek continually the furtherance of thy Gospel, and to do
that that shall be most to thy honor and glory.


Daugh. Amen.


For Bishops and all spiritual Pastors.
Mother. Unto Bishops, Preachers, and all spiritual Pastors, that as thou have
appointed them to be watchmen unto thy flock, so they may endeavor themselves
(all other business set apart) faithfully to execute their charge, in
gathering together thy wandering flock, in feeding them with the bread of
life, in confirming their doctrine with godly conversation, in defending them
from ravening woulfes and thieves, in diligent and fruitful watching over them
both day and night, and finally, in careful avoiding of all things that may
give occasion to forget or neglect their charge; for because it cannot be but
very ill with the flock, whenever the shepherd sleeps.


Daugh. Amen.


For inferiors, and subjects.
Mother. Unto us all that are inferiors and subjects, that we may willingly
and gladly love, honor, serve, and obeie all superior powers in thee, and for
thee, that we may ioifullie receive thy Gospel, plentiouslie bring forth the
fruits thereof, and in all things chiefly apply our selves to the maintenance
of thy true worship, and setting forth of thine honor and glory.


Daughter: Amen.


For the ignorant.
Mother. Unto the ignorant also, that their eyes may be opened; that it would
please thee to show thy countenance unto them, that they may know thee, and
thy Church, which they condemn as errors, because their eyes are closed up in
darkness, that as their zeal is now in simplicity without knowledge, so they
may have in stead of it, a godly zeal, grounded on perfect knowledge, so that
thy Gospel may fructify in them also, to the glory of thy holy name.


Daugh. Amen.


For the malicious persecutors.
Mother. Even unto the malicious persecutors also, that they may either at the
length receive thy grace so often, and so mercifully proffered unto them, and
so acknowledge their malice, and return unto thee, to thy great honor and
glory, when thou shall be praised even by the mouth of thine enemies; or else
if they have utterly given over themselves unto continual hatred of thee and
thy word, and utterly rejected all kind of discipline, that then thou take them
away from among us, to thy great honor and glory also: when as thy little
flock, being delivered from their tyranny and oppression, shall ioifullie
sing unto thee, of thy continual goodness and wonderful deliverance.


Daughter: Amen.


For those that are afflicted for Christ's sake.
Mother. Unto us all that are troubled, persecuted, and cruelly handeled for
thy name sake: that although it please thee to make a sharp trial of our
faith, that our enemies may be either ashamed or confounded thereat; yet that
thou leave us not so much destitute of thy grace, that we be not able to stand
to the uttermost proof thereof. Consider, O Lord, the greatness of our
infirmities. And although our sins have deserved thy wrath, yet let the equity
of the cause (which is thine) for the which we are troubled, purchase unto us
thy favor and mercy. Give us therefore grace to continue to the end,
willingly and ioifullie to bear whatsoever cross it shall please thee to
lay upon us, and always to be ready to defend, and set forth thine honor
and glory, in whatsoever trial it be. And if we must needs drink of the cup
of trial, yet give leave unto thy chosen to drink the flower of it, and
reserve the bottom and dregs thereof for the proud and obstinate enemies of
thy Gospel, according to thy mercies promised in Jesus Christ our Lord.


Daughter: Amen.


For all estates in general.
Mother. AND finally, be thou merciful unto us all, that are of the household
of faith, of what estate or calling soever we be; that we all remembering to
what end thou have created us, and how dangerous a thing it is to walk so
far unworthy of our vocation, as we now co^monlie do, may heartily repent
us of our licentious, dissolute, and wicked life, and ever cry unto thee for
pardon of the same. And grant, O heavenly father, that the denieng, or
unfruitful receiving of thy word be not laid to our charge, to our utter
confusion; but that now at the length we may not only receive it, but
speedily learn to bring forth the fruits of the same: that applieng our
lives to the exact rule thereof, and walking before thee in holiness and
righteousness, with continual thanks and praise for all thy mercies showed
unto us, ever seeking thine honor and glory in all our doings, may at the end
of this our short and weary peregrination, be taken up unto thee to
everlasting rest and quietness, prepared for all believers, through the merits
of Jesus Christ our Lord.


Daughter: Amen.


For increase of true preachers, complaining of the lack herein.
Mother. AND now, O heavenly Father, according as we are taught by thy son,
we humbly beseech thee, mercifully to bow down thine eyes, and to behold how
great and plentiful thy harvest is, and even now ready to be cut down. O
thrust thou forth good and faithful laborers into it, to reap and gather it
into thy barns. For though thy harvest be great, yet are the laborers very
few. Behold, O Lord, the miserable estate of these days, how thy seely sheep
wander up and down without a shepherd. Every one (almost) goes by, about his
own priuaite imaginations, accounting it no part of his duty or charge to be
moved thereat, or to take pity on their great misery. The better sort see it,
and lament it. But Lord, how few are those that busily seek the redress
thereof, their own private commodities set apart? Surely thy sheep, even thy
sheep, O heavenly shepherd, are in perilous case: they are gone astray
every one after their own ways, even to their own destruction; they are on
the barren mountains, almost utterly famished for lack of food, and of
themselves are not able to return to the fold. And in all these things, even
they to whom thou have given the charge of them, can for the most part, either
sleep sweetly, or if they awake, then can they be content other ways to
occupy themselves. But, O Lord, will thou also always sleep, and never arise
up to be revenged on these so manifest injuries? Will thou never displace these
careless hirelings, and raise up in their places such as shall be vigilant
pastors over their charge, although our sins deserve no redress? Neither yet
give us any hope to find mercy in this matter? Yet for thy name sake, and for
thine honor and glory, O Father, we cease not daily to present our selves
before thee, as even now at this present, humbly beseeching thee, in the name
of thy son Jesus Christ, to raise up among us (like as thou have begun) many
good shepherds, such as will not let for any pains, or discomfiture, to
seek out thy wandering sheep, and to defend us from the bloud-thirstie jaws
of the ravening woolues. Good guides, such as will both show us the way, and
they themselves lead it unto us: yea and carry home the poor and faint upon
their backs. Good and faithful distributers of thy word and mysteries; such as
will give us food in due season, breaking unto us the living bread, and giving
us to drink of the water of life. That whereas now many of us are almost
perished with famine, and therefore are become loathsome, and ill liking in thy
sight: we may thereby (through thy help) be recovered from all lothsomnesse and
ill liking, and be restored again to our former plight and beauty, that we
may be strong, and grow in all grace and godliness. And altogether in the
safety of thy fold, with one heart and voice declare thy mercy and goodness,
and woonderous works, and sanctify thy holy name for ever. Grant thou this, O
heavenly Father, and Lord of the harvest; not for our sakes, but for thy name
sake, and through the merits of Jesus Christ our only guide, and chief
shepherd, who lives and reigns with thee, and the holy Ghost, now and ever.


Daughter: Amen.


For all Universities and Schools.
Mother. Bless thou therefore, O Lord, with the dew of thy spirit all
Uniuersities and Schools; that since it has pleased thee, that from them (as
by thine appointed means) we should have our preachers and teachers, they may
be there instructed in all godly knowledge and learning, and be made fit to
walk woorthilie in their vocation, at what time soever it shall please thee to
call them forth. Grant, we beseech thee, that as they ought to be lights and
nursses unto their countries; even so they may give unto them a godly and
perfect life, and nourish them up in good and sound doctrine, to thy glory,
our comfort, and the discharge of their duties. And for because that now a
days charity waxes cold, and the number of covetous worldlings is much
increased; which seek rather to keep back their livings, and to pluck away
from them, rather than to bestow any thing to the maintenance of their
study: bless thou them therefore with all things sufficient, to the service of
thee, and increase of good learning; that the lack thereof be no hinderance to
the building of thy house, and to the setting forth of thine honor and
glory. And remove from among us, most merciful Father, whatsoever is
occasion of let or hinderance unto all those that covet knowledge, to the
sanctifieng of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


Daughter: Amen.


For the good estate of this Realm.
Mother. BEcause also thou have commanded us to call upon thee in the day of
troble, promising that thou will hear our prayers: we therefore humbly
beseech thee to be favorable unto this our Realm; and not to visit our
offenses so sharply, neither to give us to drink of so bitter a cup, as unto
our judgment it seems thou have prepared for us. What are we, O Lord, that
we may abide the force of thy judgments? We deny not, but that we have most
woorthilie deserved whatsoever punishment thou have ever hertofore powered forth
upon any other nation. But since thy name is now called on among us; since we
make no account of any help, but only in thee; since we acknowledge our
offenses, and humbly desire pardon for the same in Jesus Christ: O let not thy
just judgments lay hold upon us; if it be expedient for us, and more to thy
honor and glory, that we taste of thy mercy. Thou have hitherto dealt
exceeding mercifully with us; thou have planted among us a goodly vineyard,
and that of the best plants: thou have walled it round about, and watered it
plentifully with the dew of thy blessing; in so much that thou could have
done no more for us, than thou have done; neither have thou dealt so with other
nations. But we (alas) wretched sinners, contrary to the deserts of this thy
loving kindness, have brought forth wild grapes, which thou hate; in steed
of good and sweet grapes, which thou look for. We have taken thy word into
our mouths; but we have hated to be reformed thereby: yea we have utterly
despised thy holy word, and had the preachers thereof in derision, and so have
we made open the ready way unto all our damnable works, blasphemy,
idolatry, murder, adultery, pride, covetousness, disobedience, sensuality,
unmercifulness, oppressions, slanders, unthankfulness, and whatsoever else
our corrupt natures, casting aside grace and discipline, is wont to bring
forth. And whilst we did all these things, thou heldest thy peace, and
winkedst thereat: therefore did we foolishlie imagine, that thou art like unto
us, and delighted with sin, as we are. And thus have we in all our works
provoked thy divine Majesty to grievous displeasure against us. But now, O
holy God, seeing that by thy long sufferance, thou have so mercifully stricken
our hard hearts with secret consideration of our miserable estate: we beseech
thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to give us likewise a repentant heart, sorrowful
for all our former misdeeds; that thereby we may also attain to the promises,
which thou have annexed thereunto, namely; that thou break not down the wall
of this thy vineyard; that thou suffer it not to be eaten up, or trodden down;
that thou lay it not waste, so that briers and thorns grow up therein. And
that thou command not the clouds not to rain upon it; neither that thou turn
our root into rottenness; neither yet that thou make our buds to rise up like
dust, because we have cast off thy law, O Lord God of hosts, and contemned thy
word, O holy one of Israel. O make us not a byword unto our neighbors, and a
scorn unto those that dwell about us; but rather grant, we beseech thee, that
henceforth we may heartily repent, and walk before thee in newness of life,
to thy honor and glory, to the example of our neighbors, to the conversion or
confusion of our enemies, and to our everlasting comfort, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.


Daughter: Amen.


A prayer for repentance.
Mother. ALthough our infirmities do evidently appear, and by diverse ways
show forth themselves unto us, almighty and most merciful God; yet in
nothing more than that we cannot perceive and behold our own wickedness, in
such sort as it is indeed. With our tongs we can not but confess (because thou
thy self have said it) that we are altogether unrighteous, that there is not
one of us that does good, and that we all imagine mischief. But although we
are driven by thine eternal truth, outwardly to confess the same; yet have
we no such inward feeling thereof as we ought to have: because we are
altogether closed up in our own stubbernesse and self-love. Wherefore it
comes to pass, that we can neither repent us of that we should amend,
neither yet heartily acknowledge that we certainly know to be within us. But,
O holy God, how long shall we be clean without understanding? How long shall
our flesh have dominion over thy good spirit in us? How long shall the cloud of
our insensibleness darken and blemish our inward sight? Uerelie our sins
have deserved, that not only thou hide thy face away from us for a time; but
that thou should utterly cast us off from thy favor and grace, to eternal
damnation. But since that thou art wont to deal more mercifully even with the
sons of men, and unto us also have given a good likelihood thereof, in that
that now thou have stricken our hearts with some feeling of our own
wretchedness, which puts us in good comfort and hope, that thou have done
it to this end, to the intent that thou may bestow larger graces on us also:
therefore we are somewhat emboldened (although we are but dust and ashes)
humbly to desire of thee, that in the name of thy son Jesus Christ, even now
at the length, thou will vouchsafe to give unto us the grace of hearty
repentance, that as we know, so likewise we may acknowledge unto thee, all
our unrighteousness, and henceforth labor the more busily, without any
delaie, to amend those things wherein we have hitherto offended thee. We know,
O Lord, that this is the only time of mercy, in so much that if we obtain
it not, during this our mortal life, there remains nothing for us to be
looked for, but a fearful and a rigorous sentence of judgment. Grant
therefore, we beseech thee O merciful God, that since we are now in a most
damnable estate, by the reason of our continual disobedience, out of the which
we can by no means recover our selves, but by thy merciful gift of
repentance, that we may even now obtain at thy hands not only it, but all
other thy graces annexed thereunto, such as are most needful for us, to the
accomplishing of thy will, and to the setting forth of thy honor and glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord and savior, who sits at thy right hand even
now and ever, to make intercession for us.


Daughter: Amen.


For the authority of discipline to be established in the Church.
Mother. BEcause that crookedness and disobedience have taken so deep root
in all estates, that now adays many dare boldly refuse all Ecclesiastical
censure, to the great hinderance of the course of the Gospel; grant therefore
we beseech thee, that like as thou have dealt with other nations, even so may
it please thee now at the length, to extend thy like mercy unto this Realm
also, and all others that are in the same necessity; that the authority of
Ecclesiastical censure and discipline (which for our sins thou have hitherto
kept back from us) may be placed in the Church, to the due punishment of
sinful life, and contempt of thy word, in such sort, that it may extend
indifferently unto all estates both high and low, as well to the terror of
the ill, and comfort of the good, as also to the speedy and perfect
reformation of all such things as are yet disordered in this thy Church;
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name, for these and all things
else expedient for us, we lift up our hearts unto thee, saying as he has taught
us:


Mother and Daughter altogether. Our Father, etc.


Mother. Into thy hands, O Lord, do we commend our selves wholly, both body
and soul: vouchsafe to receive us, Lord God of mercy.


Daughter: Amen.


Mother. In thee, O God, have we trusted, let us never be confounded.


Daughter: Amen.


Mother. Deliver us, we beseech thee, from the power of darkness of this
world, the flesh and the devil.


Daughter: Amen.


Mother. Lord let it be done unto us, as we do put our trust in thee.


Daughter: Amen.


Mother. We believe, O Lord; Lord help and make perfect our unbelief.


Daughter: Amen.


The conclusion of all things else expedient for us.
Mother. THese, O merciful Father, and all other thy graces, such as be most
agreeable to thy will, to the setting forth of thy honor and glory, and to
the assurance of our salvation, grant thou unto us (we beseech thee) in the
name of thy son Jesus Christ. And that we may utterly cast off all sinful
affections, and henceforth lead our lives in holiness, righteousness, and
innocence, yielding unto thee continual thanks, for all thy benefits and
mercies: we beseech thee send down into our hearts thy holy spirit, to
prepare, instruct, and guide us in all our thoughts, words and works, to the
fulfilling of thy good will and pleasure; to whom, the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, of eternal and infinite majesty,
be all praise, thanks and glory, at all times, in all places, in all things,
above all things, and even so in us all now and ever.


Daughter: Amen.


Mother. Blessed be the Lord.


Daughter. Thanks be to God. If, when we are desirous to commend the Church
unto the blessings of God (which in our daily prayers we ought to do)
necessary business will not well impart so much time, as the form of these
prayers require; then after good consideration, both of Gods former benefits
toward us, and of the manifold infirmities of the Church, we may do it in
these few words.




Mother: O Lord hear my prayer.


Daughter: And let my cry come unto thee.


Mother. TO thee, O heavenly Father, be all thanks, honor and glory, for
because it has pleased thee, through the merits of Jesus Christ, to deal so
mercifully with us. For look how high the heaven is in comparison of the
earth, so great has thy mercy been toward us, at all times, and in all
things, much beyond that that our foolish hearts could wish or desire. For the
which, as we do yield unto thee all possible thanks, from the bottom of our
hearts; even so do we humbly beseech thee, with thy fatherly goodness, to
supply all our infirmities wherewith we daily offend thee. Bless thou
therefore, and be merciful unto thy Church universally, and to all the
members thereof, and namely unto all Princes and civil Magistrates, that by
their government thy name may be always sanctified, and thy glorious kingdom
faithfully prepared. Unto all Bishops and spiritual pastors, that they may
diligently execute the charge committed unto them. Unto all subjects and
inferiors, that they may in thee, and for thee, obeie, serve, love, honor all
superior powers. Unto the ignorant, and such as are not yet brought to the
knowledge of thy truth, that their eyes may be opened, to the utter abolishing
in them, whatsoever is not of faith. Unto the malicious persecutors also, that
either their hearts may be turned, or else that thou take them away from among
us. Unto the persecuted and afflicted, that they may end their conflicts with
victory, whether it be by death or deliverance. Unto thy harvest, that it
perish not for lack of reapers. Unto Uniuersities and Schools, that they may
attain to ripeness of good and godly knowledge, and use the same to the
furtherance of thy kingdom. Unto this our Realm, that we may heartily repent
us of all our sins; that thou may also repent thee of the punishment, which
thou have prepared for us, and ever continue thy goodness toward us as thou
have begone. Giving unto us, among thine other benefits, such authority of
the ecclesiastical sword, to the amendment of all things, and reformation of
all estates, as may be most to the propagation of thy truth and true religion.
Finally, unto us all that are of the household of faith, that all other things
set apart, we may only seek thee and thy kingdom, and ever sing praises
unto thy holy name. These, O Lord, and all other graces agreeable to thy holy
will, and expedient for us, grant unto thy servants in the name of Jesus Christ
our Lord, to whom, with the holy Ghost, be all thanks, honor and glory, now
and ever.


Daughter: Amen.


Christian prayers, and divine meditations, as generally to be used at all
times, so especially and properly upon all the holy Feasts and Saints days
throughout the year, as they fall in order, and are commonly kept here in the
Church of England and Ireland.
And first, upon the principal Feast days of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, that is to say:
On Aduent Sundaie. In memorial of Christ his First coming in the flesh.
Christmas day. In memorial of Christ his Nativity and birth. On New years
day. In memorial of Christ his Circumcision. On Twelfe day. In memorial of
Christ his Apparition. On Ashwensday the 1. day of Lent. In memorial of Christ
his Fasting. On First Sundaie in Lent. In memorial of Christ his Temptation. On
Maundie Thursdaie. In memorial of Christ his Last Supper. On Good Fridaie. In
memorial of Christ his Passion. On Easter day. In memorial of Christ his
Resurrection. On Ascension day. In memorial of Christ his Ascension. On
Whitsundaie. In memorial of Christ his Sending of the holy Ghost. On Trinity
Sundaie. In memorial of Christ his The blessed Trinity. On Every Sundaie,
holieday and working-day. In memorial of Christ his Last coming to judgment.
1. On Aduent Sundaie. Of the coming of Christ in the flesh.
The Preface.
BE of good cheer, and fear not (O you that are of a fearful heart,) for
behold your God comes his own self to take vengeance on his enemies, and
will deliver you: Hosanna to the son of David.

O daughter Zion be glad; O daughter Jerusalem rejoice. For lo, the King
comes unto thee, even the righteous, thy Savior, lowly, meek and simple;
riding upon the fool of an ass, and bringing his recompense with him: Blessed
is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

Out of Zion has God appeared in perfect beauty: Hosanna in the highest.

Remember me, O Lord, according to thy favor that thou bear unto thy people.
O visit me with thy salvation. Hosanna.

Show me thy ways, O Lord, and teach me thy path: Hosanna in the highest.
Hosanna.

The prayer.
THE time is now at hand, when the Church calls into mind the benefits of the
son of GOD, which taking upon him our frail nature, appeared to the world,
and came to visit us in great humility. And at the last day and resurrection
of all mankind, will come again in his glorious Majesty, to judge both the
quick and the dead; and show himself both to punish his enemies with
everlasting pains, and to adorn his Church and chosen people with eternal
glory. Wherefore, O Son of God, Lord and Savior Christ, which as this day,
in royal pomp did enter into the holy city Jerusalem for a public
testimony of thine appearing: remove all impediments, we pray thee, that may
hinder thy coming, and make a plain, and most easy way for thy self unto
us. Gather us, we beseech thee, into that company, which are prepared to
receive thee the King of all kings, and which set forth thy glory in
spiritual songs, (not only this day through all the world, but also
continually) and bear palms of victory before thee, and spread their
garments in the way for joy of thy coming.

Assist us, that being greatly separated from the damned crew of devils, and
wicked persons; we may sound and set forth thy truth, in perfect confession,
and righteousness all the days and time of our life. Be thou our King, both
here in this world, and hereafter in the world to come: replenishing us against
all the wicked enterprises of thine enemies, and making us (though babes and
littleones) to extol and magnify thy name for ever. Keep us thy weak
children depending upon thee, and running unto thy lap, even as infants unto
their parents. Make us to follow thy words, which through thy spirit do sound
within us, and power thy wisdom into us miserable men and women, that the
pride and power of thine enemies may be confounded.

Grant that with grateful minds we may publish abroad thy glorious victory,
according to our calling and ability; cherish thy ministers, and venture both
our life and living for the maintenance of thy truth. Moreover, bless us, O
thou blessed seed of Abraham, by the virtue of thy presence: number us among
thy chosen, which have their names from thee. And finally, give us grace now
in the time of this mortal life, so to cast away from us the works of
darkness, and to put upon us the armor of light; that in the last day of thy
second coming in the clouds, we may rise through thee, to life immortal: and
so, being adorned with that glory, which thou have received from thine
eternal Father, we may perpetually praise and extol thy Majesty, both here
in this world, and for evermore in the world of worlds to come,

Amen.
Hosanna to thee O son of God in the highest. Hosanna.
2. On Christmas day. Of the nativity and birth of Christ our Savior.
The Preface.
A Child is borne unto us, and a son is given unto us. Glory be to God on
high.

Unto us is borne this day, in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord. Halleluiah.

The Lord sent a word unto Jacob, the same is come into Israel, an everlasting
Prince of peace. Halleluiah.

Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each
other: truth shall flourish out of the earth, and righteousness has looked
down from heaven upon us, to speak peace unto his people, and gladness to
his Saints. Halleluiah.

Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne, and in Zion shall I make
the horn of David to flourish. Halleluiah.

The Sun comes forth of (his tabernacle) the heavens, as a bridegroom out
of his chamber, and reioiceth as a Giant to run his course. Halleluiah.

He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways:
they shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. Halleluiah.

For thou art fairer than the children of men: full of grace are thy lips,
because God has blessed thee for ever: yea God, even thine own God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Halleluiah.

Therefore in this day of thy power shall the people offer the free will
offerings with an holy worship; because the dew of thy birth is of the womb
of the morning. Halleluiah.

Glory be unto God on high, in earth peace, and good will toward men:
Halleluiah, Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

The Prayer.
NOW is the ioifull time, wherein all Saints both in heaven and earth do
magnify and praise almighty God, for the incarnation of his only begotten
Son our Savior Jesus Christ; who as this day was borne of the pure Uirgin
Marie, the which also the holy Angels of the Lord did celebrate with a most
heavenly song. And no doubt, the blessed company of the elect departed out of
this world, enioieng the comfortable sight of God, replenished with eternal
wisdom, light and righteousness, yield most humble thanks unto the Son of
God their Savior and Redeemer, for his incomprehensible goodness declared
unto mankind, in the order of their redemption, for the infinite benefits of
their salvation, and for taking our frail nature and miserable flesh (subject
unto all calamities and destruction) upon him, and carieng the same and us
therewith unto eternal life.

We therefore living in this veil of wretchedness, lift up our heads unto
thee, O notable Silo, which art the fruit of the Uirgin; and separate our
selves from the detestable and damned crew of vnpure spirits; and of men
pouring out blasphemous outcries against thy truth and glory. From our hearts
we pray thee regenerate and make us thy children by adoption and grace, and
daily renew us by thy holy spirit, to glorify thee. For of our selves we are
nothing but flesh and corruption, as they that are borne of flesh, and can not
become thy children, except we be begotten and borne again by a new birth of
the holy Ghost. Therefore we beseech thee renew us, I say, daily by thy
mighty power from above, that being borne of the spirit, our hearts and our
hands, our deeds and devises, and whatsoever is in us, may be spiritual as
thou art. Join us to the society of thine holy Angels, which sing glory to
thee on high; and make us members of that congregation, which is knit unto thee
by an indissoluble bond of everlasting peace, with grateful minds to record
and celebrate thy benefits.

We thank thee for saving mankind from eternal damnation, and for making the
atonement between thy father and us, through thine incarnation, For so it was
expedient, according to the order of justice, that the punishment of a
guiltless man, should quit mankind guilty; and that a sufficient satisfaction
might be made, it was required that he which would be the mediator, should be
God. God, I say, to abide the intolerable burden of Gods displeasure, to
vanquish death, and to restore unto man life and salvation, to enter into the
most holy place, and be an eternal Priest. God, to understand the secret
counsel of the father, to be privy unto the cogitations of hearts, to hear
the groans of all men, to be the King of his flock, defending the same against
the power of satan and his members. Finally God, to place his Church raised
from death, in the eternal kingdom of his most glorious father. Now,
forasmuch as the nature of man was not able to bring these things to pass, we
thank thee O our savior, being the word, the express image, and interpretor
of the father, for vouchsafing to take the office of a mediator between God
and us.

Begin in us, we most humbly beseech thee, this so great a benefit. We are
weak, we are foul and filthy; but as thou wast brought into this miserable
world, borne a weak infant, and that in a pinching time of the year, swadled
with wretched bands, endued with the rags of a miserable nature, and laid in a
manger among the brutish kind, being notwithstanding the very wisdom of
thine eternal father. So let thy wisdom appear in us miserable men and women
in this woeful darkness of ours, among the black clouds of this doting age,
amongst these troubles and destructions of Commonweals. Kindle in us the
sparks of that wisdom, which shall be perfect in the life to come, and join
us to the fellowship of thy Saints. Grant that from the heart, and ioifullie we
may ascribe all glory, fame, and honor unto thee the true God, which art wise,
righteous, almighty, pure, liberal, and merciful, according to the rule
described in thy commandments, which did send thy Son to bring us to that
glory; whereof we were deprived, and to restore us again to our first
integrity, which was lost through sin.

O Son of God, confirm thou, and seal these things in our hearts by thy
holy spirit powered upon us, which may work within us unfeigned
righteousness; that by the same thy spirit shining in the nature which thou
tookest upon thee, we may be committed to thee, vpholden, quickened, and
brought by thee unto eternal life: that that league made between God and us,
may eternally be confirmed, and we loved in the beloved; and the eternal
Father may love us with that love, wherewith he loves thee the substantial
image of himself. Suppress the devil, that he break not this wonderful
and profitable peace: and suffer us not hanging on thy neck, running to thine
arms, seeking thy favor, to be plucked out of thy hands. Keep us, we beseech
in thy lap, as a loving shepherd cherishes and bears about his tender lambs.

And forasmuch as the first tidings of thy nativity were brought by the Angel
of the Lord unto shepherds; grant that shepherds of the souls, that is, the
ministers and teachers may faithfully testify thy benefits unto mankind, and
publish abroad what they see and know, spreading forth thy fame, and
glorifieng God for the peace, which he has eternally concluded with us; and
finally may bring thy sheep to thy stall, that is, to the congregation of the
faithful. Open before us thy swaddling clouts, which is thy word, that in this
life it may cry within us, and we thereby may feel the sense of thy most
sweet promises, which thine eternal Father has uttered of thee; Blessed are
all they, which put their trust in him.

Furthermore, our petition is, that thou will bless us and our country, with
all Commonweals. Increase among us daily ye number of the faithful; prosper
the course of the Gospel, and suffer not the light thereof, by the malice of
Satan, to be extinguished. Likewise uphold those kingdoms, which minister
relief unto thy Church. Repel from the borders of thy servants the rabblement
of Turks and Infidels, which threaten the decaie of thy Church, and destruction
of kingdoms. Bless the labors of our hands; keep us from the contagious
diseases: and last of all make us and ours the vessels of mercy, and
profitable instruments to thy Church and Commonweal,

Amen.
Glory be to God on high.
Or thus.
Almighty God, and most merciful Father, who according to the prophesies
spoken long before, have given us thine own Son to be conceived of the holy
Ghost, and borne of the blessed virgin, that in thy nature and ours he might be
our holy, and true Emanuel, and Savior, and Sanctifier of those that trust in
him. Touch our hearts with thy holy spirit, that considering this so great love
of thine, to abase thy Son to take upon him the form of a servant, to make
us sons and heirs to thee, that our souls may magnify thee, O Lord our
Savior, and bless thee the Lord GOD of Israel, for thus visiting and
redeeming thy people: and grant us also the fruit of this thy mercy, that by
his holiness our uncleanness may be done away, and our corrupt nature
sanctified by his holy birth and nativity; that we putting our trust in him,
may by him be delivered both from all our sins, and all our enemies, and
attain to the fruit of this his infinite love and goodness, even to serve him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, through the same thy
dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be
all praise, honor and glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Glory be to God on high.
Another Meditation of the marvelous incarnation of the word, which is Christ,
by whose means it pleased God to help mankind fallen from him.
BEhold now, O almighty God, the viewer and searcher of mine heart. Like as
with heart I believe (which is counted righteousness unto me) so with mouth do
I confess before thee (which is to my salvation) after what sort and manner
thou did vouchsafe in the end of the world to succor and aid mankind. Thou
in deed only, O God the Father, art not read at any time or in any place to
be sent; but of thy Son, the Apostle says; When that the time was fulfilled,
God sent his Son. In that he says (he sent) he does sufficiently declare,
that he being sent came into this world. When as he being thy Son, O our God,
and a gentle and kind lover of mankind, did take upon him to be the seed of
Abraham, not of Angels, and so taking man's nature, not Angels, did vouchsafe to
humble himself to be borne a very perfect man of blessed Marie a pure virgin;
and so being made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted, (for he was
the very lamb without spot that took away the sins of the world) did
appear and show himself in the similitude of flesh subject to sin, that he
might condemn sin for sin, and that we might be made the righteousness
in him.

But what is that, which he that is the chief of the Evangelists does say? He
was in the world, and the world was made by him. Thither truly was he sent by
his humanity, where he always is, and alwaie has been by his divinity. The
which sending or embassage, I believe with all my heart, and confess with my
mouth, to be the consent and work of all the whole Trinity. I believe also,
that his manhood being in this my nature, during his infancy, was trobled with
creeping and scrallings, and was wrapped in cloths after the manner of other
children, and was vexed in his youth with labors and troubles. I believe, I
say, that the Godhead, which was sent of them, did take upon him mine
humanity and nature, to the intent he (the Son of God) being made man, might
cure mine infirmity, and redeem the sins of sinful man.

Therefore do I bless thy name everlastingly, and glorify the same with all
mine heart, O almighty and merciful Lord, for that unspeakable and marvelous
conjunction of Godhead and manhood together, in the unity of a person: and not
after this sort, that the one should be God, and the other man; but one and the
same was both God and man, man and God. Nevertheless, although by thy
marvelous will the word was made flesh; yet neither of both the natures was
changed into other substance. In the mystery of the Trinity there is not a
fourth person added. For the substance of the word of God and of man was united
and knit together; but not confused and mixed, that that thing, which was taken
of us, should be turned into God; and that which never had been before that
time, that is, his flesh and manhood, should be the same that had been ever
without any beginning, that is, his Godhead.

Oh marvelous mystery! Oh unspeakable fellowship! Oh marvelous meekness of
the heavenly mercifulness, which is ever worthy marueling, and ever to be
loved! We were but vile servants; and behold, we are made the sons of God,
yea and heirs of God together with Christ. From whence came this goodness?
And who brought us to this state? But I require thee, O most merciful Father,
by thine inestimable pity, goodness, and charity to make us worthy of
these many and great promises of the same thy son our Lord Jesus Christ. Send
forth thy strength, O God, and establish the thing that thou have wrought in
us; make perfect that, which thou have begun, that we may be able to come unto
the fullness and perfectness of thy pity. Make us through the holy Ghost to
understand, and through thy son to desire, and with due honor alwaie to
worship this great mystery of thy pity in Christ his blessed nativity, so
manifest in our flesh; that as thou have given us him, thine only begotten
Son I mean, to take our nature upon him, and this day to be borne of a pure
virgin: so we being regenerate, and made thy children by adoption and grace,
may daily be renewed by thy holy spirit, to glorify thee from our birth,
through the same thy dear Son, our sovereign Lord, and sweet Savior Jesus;
to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be immortal praise and thanksgiving,
now and for ever,

Amen.
A meditation concerning the true knowledge of Christ's incarnation.
THE knowledge of the truth is, first to know thy self, and to endeavor to be
that which thou ought to be, and to amend that which ought to be amended.
And secondly to know and to love thy maker and creator, for that is the whole
happiness of a christian man or woman.

See then how unspeakable the gracious goodness and entire love of God toward
us is. He has created us of nothing, and given us all that we have: but alas,
forasmuch as we have loved the gift more than the giver, and the creature more
than the Creator: therefore we are fallen into the devils snare, and become his
bondslaues. Nevertheless, God being moved with compassion, sent his most dear
and only Son to redeem us slaves, and his holy spirit to make us his
sons and daughters again. He has given his Son, I say, even his best
beloved child, to be the price of our ransom; the holy Ghost as an assurance
of his love; and to be short, he reserueth himself whole for us, to be the
heritage of our adoption. And so almighty God, according to his exceeding
gratiousnesse and mercy, has for very love and good will to mankind,
bestowed not only his benefits, but also himself upon him to recover him
again; not so much to himself, as to him. To the intent that man might be
borne of God, God, I say, was first borne of them.

O then who is so hard-harted, that he will not be softened by the tender love
of God thus preventing wretched man, with so great, hearty, and unspeakable
good will, in that he vouchsafed to become man for man's sake? Yea, who can any
more find in his heart to hate man or woman, whose nature and likeness he or
she so plainly sees in the manhood of God? Doubtless, he or she that hates
from henceforth a man or a woman, hates God, and so loses all his or her
labor, whatsoever taken under pretense of Christianity. For God (as is said)
became man for man's sake, that he might be a redeemer as well as a creator; and
that man might be ransomed with his own goods, and that one man and woman
might love another the more heartily. God, I say, appeared in the shape of a
man, to the end that both body and soul might be made blessed, by renewing
the eye of the mind in his Godhead, and the eye of the body in his manhood; so
that whether man went in or out, he might find food in him laid up in store by
him in his humane nature. Most injurious therefore is that man or woman to Gods
divinity, that so by hating of their brethren and sisters, their own flesh,
contemn Christ, and offend his humanity.

The Thanksgiving.
ILift up my heart unto thee, O God; for it is very meet, right, and my bounden
duty, that I should at all times, and in all places, give thanks unto thee, O
Lord, holy father, almighty, and everlasting God: because thou did give
Jesus Christ thine only Son to be borne as this day for me and all mankind,
who by the operation of the holy Ghost was made very man of the substance of
the blessed Uirgin Marie his mother, and that without all spot of sin, to
make us clean from all sin. Therefore, with Angels and Archangels, and with
all the holy company of Saints and Uirgins in heaven, I laud and magnify
thy glorious name: evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of hosts, heaven and earth are full of thy glory: Glory be to thee,
O Lord, most high,

Amen.
3. On Newyeares day. Of Christ his circumcision in the flesh.
The Preface.
CIrcumcise the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiffenecked. Deuter. 18.

Be ye circumcised in the Lord, I say, and cut away the foreskin of your
heart, and evil affections, all ye inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. Iere. 4.

For the circumcision of the heart, which consists in the spirit, and not in
the letter, is the true circumcision, whose praise is not of men, but of God.
Romans 4.

Yea we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Philip. 3.

For circumcision verelie avails, if thou keep the law; but if thou be a
breaker of the ordinances of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision,
etc. Romans 2.

Oh that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes, so
shall I not be confounded! Order my steps in thy word, and so shall no
wickedness have dominion over me.

I will keep thy ceremonies, O forsake me not utterly. Halleluiah.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, we thank thee, forasmuch as
after thy decree concerning the redemption of mankind, from the beginning thou
have been present with thy Church outwardly by speaking unto her by thy
ministers, and inwardly by kindling thy light and righteousness in the hearts
of the faithful. Thou have ratified thy promises by outward signs and
ceremonies, whereby every man may apply the benefits unto himself. So did
thy burnt offerings and sacrifices testify of thee, which afterward should be
slain. The flames of fire, which from heaven did set on fire the offerings,
did witness of thy presence, that as many as should behold thy benefits with
a true faith, thou would quicken with the sacrifice of thine holy spirit,
which inflameth true knowledge and good motions within the godly.

That life was given to them of thy mere mercy, the first parents did know
full well, when it was said, that a woman shall bring forth. And because the
mediator was called that seed of the woman, and withal, promised to be the
subduer of Satan, they knew that he should be both God and man. The same
promise was repeated unto Abraham, the father of the faithful. And forasmuch
as restraint was made unto a certain nation, thou did add a new rite of
circumcision, whereby not only the posterity of Abraham was discerned from
other nations, but also it was a testimony admonishing of the seed to come,
which was Christ, who should take our weak flesh upon him, and bear our
nature, and bring both Jews and Gentiles unto eternal felicity.

Wherefore, we yield thee humble thanks, forasmuch as hitherto thou have
continued this sound of thy person and office, notwithstanding the great raging
of thine enemies: for appearing at the length in the flesh, for giving thy
self unto us for a Newyeares gift of inestimable price, for being made under
the law, and a curse to save us wretches from the curse of the law, and to
restore us unto innocence lost through sin. For which cause, thy blessed
will was, as upon this day to be circumcised in the flesh, and now first of
all to shead thy precious blood for us that are of uncircumcised hearts and
lips, and all to show that thou came in deed of the very seed of Abraham,
and wast subject to the law, curse, and condemnation for us; and that our
corrupt nature, by thy holiness might be sanctified, and have through thee, an
obedience to answer the same withal.

We beseech thee therefore, grant us the true circumcision of the spirit, that
our hearts and all our members being mortified from all worldly and carnal
lusts, we may in all things obeie thy blessed will, and here stay our selves,
and put our trust in thee, that thus have humbled thy self so low for us,
that we may be exalted by thee. And from our hearts we pray thee join us to
that holy company, that did wait for thy redemption before it came, and do
rejoice in it now it is come and performed, and with the sacred host of Angels
to give all glory and renown unto thee, for bringing thy peace, which passes
all understanding, upon the earth, and declaring so great kindness and good
will toward us, as to give thy self, and thereby everlasting joy and bliss
for a Newyeares gift of worthy memorial, and inestimable value, to be our
own for ever and ever.

Speak henceforth to our hearts with thy lovely voice. Lighten the lamp of
our minds with thy heavenly knowledge. Confirm us with thy blessed
Sacraments, which are the certain tokens of thine undoubted regeneration and
quickening of us. Oh take away the curse, the wrath of God, damnation, the
works of the flesh and the devil. Grant me, I beseech thee, that thy grace may
daily mortify my concupiscence of pleasures in things of this world, that is,
of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of men, meats, drinks, apparel,
ease, yea and life it self: that the horror and impatiencie of more grievous
things may be weakened, and I accustom my self to deny my will in more easy
and pleasant things of this life, and for ever become obedient and ready in
all Christian patience, to do thy good will in all things, heartily and
willingly to serve thee, and do whatsoever may please thee.

Make me, I say, through the effectual power of thy grace and holy spirit
working in me most miserable wretch, to hate, abhor, fly, and subdue all
adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence,
inordinate desires, wantonness, tenderness, delicatenes, idleness, dronkennes,
gluttony, slothfulnes, distrust, despair, ignorance, weakness, wilfulnes,
idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy, heresy, error, sects, variance, strife,
wrath, envy, slanders, lieng, swearing, curssing, vainglory, pride,
covetousness, theft, deceit, flattery; and whatsoever else, O Lord, fights or
rebelleth against thy holy spirit. And strengthen me so with thy might, that I
may not only draw all these mine earthly members and horrible vices before
rehearsed, under my feet; but also fight continually against them, and subdue
them, so that they may all turn to the best for me, as meet matter whereon I
may exercise my faith, power forth hearty prayer, and give thee most hearty
thanks for victory. Finally, work in me thy blessing, with all the fruits of
the spirit, righteousness, peace, love, joy in the holy Ghost, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekenes, temperance, strength, patience, and
such like. Grant us the remission of our sins, righteousness and life. Restore
in our minds thy law, and begin such a new conformity, this new year in this
our life and conversation, as may be perfect in the life to come. Be thou our
savior by thy power and merit, that in our minds we may perceive that thy
Father is at peace with us through thy death, and find thee dwelling within us
to eternal life and happiness,

Amen.
Halleluiah.
4. On the Epiphanie, or twelfe day. Of the apparition of Christ, and the
three Kings, and their offerings to Christ.
The Preface.
GET thee up beetimes, and be bright, O daughter Jerusalem. For thy light
comes, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

Lift up thine eyes, and look round about thee. For behold the Gentiles shall
come to thy light, and kings to the brightness that springs forth upon thee.

The multitude of camels and dromedaries that bring the riches of the Gentiles
shall cover thee: all they of Saba, Mada, and Epha shall come bringing gold,
incense, and showing forth the praise of the Lord.

All these gather themselves and come to thee: thy sons shall come unto thee
from far, and thy daughters shall gather themselves to thee on every side,
from the east, and from the west.

The isles also shall wait for me, and specially the ships of Tharsis, that
they may bring thy sons and daughters from far, and their silver and their
gold with them, unto the name of the Lord thy God, unto the holy one of Israel
that has glorified thee.

Strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall do thee service; yea
kings, princes, and the host of the Gentiles shall see and arise, and worship
thee. For I have made thee the light of the Gentiles, that thou may be my
health unto the end of the world.

Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and kings breasts shall feed thee:
kings, I say, shall be thy nursing fathers, and Queens shall be thy nursing
mothers.

And those shall come kneeling unto thee that have vexed thee, and all they
that despise thee shall fall at thy feet before thee, with their faces flat
upon the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.

Yea, every people and kingdom that serves not thee shall perish, and be
destroyed with utter destruction, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, the
Savior and Redeemer, even the mighty one of Jacob: and that whosoever puts
his trust in me shall not be confounded.

They that dwell in the wilderness, I say, shall kneel before the Kings son:
his enemies shall lick the dust.

The king of Tharsis and of the isles, shall give presents; the kings of Arabia
and Saba shall bring gifts.

All kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall do him service.

He shall live, and unto him shall be given the gold of Arabia.

Prayer shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised.

The Lord declared his salvation, his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the heathen.

All the world shall worship thee, O God; sing of thee, and praise thy name
most high.

The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof; yea the multitude of isles
may rejoice and be glad thereof.

Bring therefore unto the Lord, O ye mighty: bring presents and gifts unto the
Lord, O ye kindreds and nations of the world. Come, I say, into his courts
with praise, and speak good of his name.

Ascribe unto the Lord, only the strength, power, kingdom and glory:
worship God, I say, O ye gods, kings, judges, and rulers of the earth: worship
him with an holy worship, and give him the honor due unto his name. O make his
praises to be glorious in your lives and conversation. For he it is that has
exalted you, and is himself exalted far above all gods, and his praise and
glory is above heaven and earth. Halleluiah.

The Prayer.
OEternall God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which after a wonderful
manner reuealedst thy self at the baptism of Christ standing in the water of
Jordan, at such time as thou did testify of thy son; and the holy Ghost
appeared in the likeness of a dooue: govern us by thine holy spirit, that in
true faith we may obeie thee; kindle in our minds a true knowledge of thy
benefits; bring to pass, that approaching unto thee in our prayers we may
discern thee, the true God, above all feined gods, and in mind turn our
selves into that bank of the water, into the company of those godly auditors
and beholders, before whom this noble appearing was made. Speak unto us by thy
son in the holy Ghost, and turn us unto true obedience. And as thou
broughtest godly auditors unto the sight of Christ, which taking our flesh
upon him became our mediator; and thou eternal Father spakest out of the
cloud, and the holy Ghost appeared in the likeness of a dooue: so bring to
pass, that in this life we may depend upon the benefit of thy soon, which
coupled our nature unto his, to make an eternal covenant with us. Cause the
heavens in like manner to be opened unto us, that we may hear thy voice, and
thy spirit rest upon us. Work in us the beginning of eternal life, until in
thy visible presence we shall be hold thy diuinivntill in the heavens, not
darkly and in a cloud; but face to face, being made like thy son.

And as those Christian Magicians or Philosophers of Persia, some remnants of
the school of Daniel, by the conduct and leading of a star, came from far
to see thee, and gave a notable testimony of the birth of Christ Jesus our
Savior: so maintain evermore for thine own glory sake, some congregation,
which may set forth and celebrate thy benefits. Grant that that luckie star,
the light of faith, may rise unto us, which seeks thee in Bethlem in a
manger, in thy word revealed in the ministry, that we wander not from the
right way, neither seek fained bywaies of humane opinions and service. Suffer
not the lamp of thy light to be extinguished, either by the darkness of
hypocrites and idolaters, or by the rage of tyrants, which wage mortal battle
against thee: but grant, that endued with new light from thee the true Sun of
righteousness, we may rejoice from our whole hearts, and acknowledge thee to
be our captain, which wilt govern thy people in truth and equity. Let the
light of thy grace, I say, lighten the darkness of our conscience, O merciful
Jesus, our true and bright loade-star of the world; and by thy ioifull
apparition, give unto us the full knowledge both of thy self, and of our own
selves, that within we may see thee, and inwardly find thee, and that there we
may continually offer unto thy holy Majesty, the mirrh of sincere faith, and
inward contrition, and the frankincense of devout prayer and invocation, and
the gold of love, righteousness, and patience in trouble; and so ascribing unto
thee the honor of a King, and the service due unto God, may show all true
liberality with the godly, both unto thee, and thy poor Church, and bear
sufficient testimony to the world of thy kingdom, divinity, priesthood,
humanity, cross, death, and burial, and take hold of the manifold benefits
thereof, and outwardly also may in our places, office and calling, help to
maintain thy ministry, to the uttermost of our power. And grant that as thou
(after thou had revealed and manifested thy self unto the three wise men, by
the leading of a star) causedst them to return another way into their own
country: so we, (which by the way of darkness and offenses have retired and
gone back from the supernall country of blessedness, thou, the bright
daie-star of the world being our guide) may return unto the same by the way
of truth and grace; and that now knowing thee by faith, when we depart out of
this life, we may be brought into that kingdom, where thy divinity shall
shine without mists or mysteries, and there have the fruition of thy glorious
Godhead, and woorship thee, and praise thee for ever and ever,

Amen.
Halleluiah.
5. On Ashwednesdaie, or first day of Lent. Of Christ his fasting forty days.
The Preface.
LEt the Bridegroom come forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her
closet, and let all sinners weep before the Lord, and say: Turn thou us, O
good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favorable O Lord, be favorable to thy
people, and spare us, which rent our hearts and not our garments, and turn to
thee in fasting, weeping and praieng. For thou art a merciful God, full of
compassion, long suffering, and of great pity. Thou sparest, when we deserve
punishment, and in thy wrath think upon mercy. Oh spare thy people, good
Lord; spare them, and let not thine heritage be brought to confusion. Hear us,
O Lord; for thy mercy is great, and after the multitude of thy mercies look
upon us. Have mercy upon us, O God, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

Here say the seven penitential Psalms following, and other prayers, for
contrition and repentance, as you think good.
The Prayer.
O Lord God Jesus Christ, our only redeemer, which tookest upon thee our
sinful flesh, and liuedst therein a life most holy in all righteousness for
our example, and did through the power of thy Godhead and divine nature, most
reverently obeie in all things the will of thine heavenly Father, with
subduing in this flesh, with great triumph, glory and majesty, the power of
the devil, the world, and the flesh; that only in thee, the spirit of
sanctification might myraculouslie appear, and bear swaie with fullness in
the sight of all flesh, during the course of this life, and for ever after to
remain with power in glory, very God with very God, in the kingdom of God
the Father. We beseech thee most humbly, O Lord Jesus, which hate nothing
that thou have made, and dooest forgive the sins of all them that be
penitent, to have compassion upon us in our weakness and infirmity; that as
thou have for our safety taken upon thee our flesh, and for our sakes did
fast forty days and forty nights, and have diversely in thine own person
felt as a man, the frail state of our mortal nature, and how inclinable it is
without thy divine power, to fall from the obedience of thy will that is
heavenly, to the suggestions of satan the old enemy, and to the allurements
of things earthly, vain and transitory. So we beseech thee, O our God, to
grant unto us thine holy spirit, that by the strength thereof in us proceeding
from thee, we may in our weakness have power, that our enemy may be
resisted, the world defied, the flesh vanquished, and our spirit quickened;
whereby we may most gladly obeie thy godly will, and turn unto thee with all
our hearts, both in unfeigned repentance, in hearty contrition, and earnest
confession, and also in true fasting, in competent feeding, in faithful
praieng, in charitable dealing, in chaste looking, in reverent beholding, in
godly hearing, in fruitful speaking, in holy thinking, free from
flattering, void of detraction, slander, lieng, false accusation, blasphemy,
outfacing, idle talk, or filthy communication, and to tread steadilie in all
things the steps of true holiness before thee, as thou have most graciously
lead us, and taught us the way, that with all simplicity, both outwardly and
inwardly in body and soul, and in all parts and members of them, our fast
this Lent and ever may not be profane, earthly, hypocritish, superstitious,
or carnal, to the view of the world; but holy, heavenly, and spiritual to
thee. Give us grace, I say, not so much to abstain from meats, as from ill
manners; nor from flesh, as from filthy cogitations. For as thou, O God, wilt
be worshipped in spirit and truth; so the spiritual fast it is which pleases
thee. Suffer us not, gracious God, to abuse thy good creatures immoderatelie,
to the hurt both of our bodies and souls, but temperatlie, the better to serve
thee, and as soberlie to take our food, so carefully to abstain from sin.
For otherwise, to abstain from meat, and not to refrain from pride,
covetousness, concupiscence, lewdnes, and such like vices, it shall but hurt our
bodies through an hypocritical abstinence, and cast away our souls through
our exceeding impiety. Assist us with thy secret grace therefore, we beseech
thee, to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we
may ever obeie thy godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to our
reioicing with peace of conscience; and that obteining of thee the God of all
mercy, perfect remission and forgiveness, with abundance of thy grace, we may
show forth fruitfullie thy glory all the days of our lives, and after this
life ended, reign with thee for ever, in thy glorious kingdom, where all holy
folk do rest, and which by thy blessed nativity, holy circumcision,
fasting, temptation, cross, death and passion, thou have alone so dearly
purchased for us, to the perpetual praise of thine eternal name,

Amen.
I have sinned, I have sinned, have mercy upon me.
6. On the first Sundaie in Lent. Of Christ his temptation in the wilderness,
and most glorious conquest over Satan.
The Preface.
MY son, if thou will come into the service of God, stand fast in
righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul to temptation, for he that is
not tempted, what is he?

Remember alwaie the Lord thy God, which lead thee forty years in the
wilderness for to humble thee, and to prove thee, and to know what was in
thine heart, whether thou would keep his commandments or no.

He humbled thee, and suffered thee to hunger, and fed thee with Manna, which
neither thou nor thy fathers knew of, to make thee know that a man does not
live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the
Lord, does a man live.

To day therefore if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in
the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness, when your
fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said; It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways: unto
whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try out my reins and my heart. For thy
loving kindness is ever before mine eyes, and I will walk in thy truth. I have
sinned, have mercy upon me.

The Prayer.
THE cause of thine appeering in the flesh, O Son of God, Lord and Savior
Christ, was to destroy the works of satan, which our first parents did. The
devil, through hatred of thee, and of thine eternal father, encountered in
visible form. He soaked into their minds certain suspicions and doubtings of
thy will, and pricked them on, with a desire of a more excellent nature, being
themselves of all the creatures the most excellent. He tickled them with the
spur of pride and ambition, and so by his subtlety carried them headlong with
himself, being withdrawn from thee, into the bottomless pit of eternal
destruction. But thou incensed against him, through the infinite and
unspeakable good will, which thou bear to mankind, tookest us miserable
wretches out of the insatiable jaws of our mortal enemy; and in thy flesh at
length, when he dreaded not to assail thee our Captain, thou put him to a
shameful flight, and drauest him from thee and thine: so that at any time,
through thy small assistance, we may both repel him, and prevail against his
fierce assalts of temptations.

Unto thee, O almighty God, and victorious Captain, with godly groans do
we cry, requiring at thy merciful hands to be made of the number of thy
celestial soldiers, parteners of thy glorious victory, and enioiers of thy
happiness. Arm us with thy heavenly armor, that is, with the knowledge of thy
word and spiritual consolations, whereby we may be able to repel the fiery
darts of that foul feend.

Against thy Church in all ages has this enemy of thine set himself, and
brought these engines to their overthrow, which he used against thine own
person, at such time as thou wentest from thy baptism to preaching, knowing
that thy prosperity would be his decaie; and yet through the will of God, did
not acknowledge thee to be the Messiah. He troubled thee, being in the
wilderness without worldly power, aid, wealth and riches; with horrible
cogitations did he vex thy soul, and troubled thy heart with grief
unspeakable. At this time thy Church lies in the wilderness, poorly and
miserably does she lie oppressed with wrongful injuries, and mighty
troubles. He laugheth thereat, derideth the Saints standing under the cross,
he bids stones to be made bread, he contemns their misery, and casts in
their teeth the glory and wealth of his kingdom. Assist us, that in these
temptations we may lay hold of the armor of proof, and behold this noble
answer of thine, Man lives not by bread only.

We knowledge thee, with the everliving Father and the holy Ghost, to be a
true and almighty God, giving us the bread of life, and so ordeining, that
with corporal things we are fed and sustained in this life, O eternal Father,
which know what we need, and alone can give a reason, why after this
manner thou will feed us, and not as thou dooest the stars without corporal
things. Give unto the Church of thy wisdom such things as are necessary for
the sustentation of this life, wherein the ioies of the life eternal and to
come does begin. And albeit sometimes we lack diverse things, although thine
adversary throws stones at us for bread; yet by thy power strengthen us that
we faint not. Thou art our maker, we are thy workmanship. In thy hands is the
whole frame of this world. We live not by bread alone, or by our own
industry, neither art thou tied with a fatal chain of second causes, but by
thy decree, by thy will do we breath, in thee we live, move, and have our
being. At thy commandment we take life, and when thou biddest, we leave this
world.

Wherefore, if so it please thee, we shall live as do the birds of the air,
which have no protection, or as the child in the mothers womb, which knows
not how he lives. And as he, albeit lieng in great darkness, and covered in
secret parts, receives nourishment after a marvelous manner from his mother,
and at length by the course of nature comes safe and sound into this world:
so we, notwithstanding our living in palpable darkness of this life, and
wrapped in the miseries of this world, among the pack of thine enemies, yet
armed with thy word and promise, do receive comfort thereby, and are protected
by thee after a wonderful sort, and at length trust to be delivered out of
this body of sin, and to come to a better life, which never shall have end.
For we are not made to live always in this world in misery, but thou have
prepared a more glorious life for thy servants, the sweetness whereof begins
in this world. Thy word is our life, O eternal Father. Thy Son is the word
speaking to us both inwardly and outwardly. Outwardly by his ministers he
utters from thy bosom thy will and commandments, and inwardly he speaks
to our souls, raising up godly cogitations and manners pleasing thee; so that
a double life is reserved for us, to wit, a corporal and a spiritual, not
through bread, not through our own merits, but through thy will revealed by
thy Son.

Furthermore, for so much as satan uses another kind of weapon to the
destruction of the godly, when thy Church enioieth quietness and peace, by
stirring of excellent and good wits, and teachers armed with public
authority, unto curiosity and ambition, whereby through envy and hatred,
vain contentions are moved, famous men cast themselves from the pinnacle of
the Temple, and heresies do arise: we humbly beseech thee in this respect
also, because it is more hurtful than the former subtlety of satan, repress
thine enemy which corrupts thy word, and uses the same for the confirmation
of damnable opinions. Quench all the flames of ambition, pride and curiosity.
Lead us not into temptation, neither suffer us to tempt thee, to contend with
thee through pride, in setting our own wisdom and subtlety against thee,
which was the overthrow of our first parents. Suffer us not to forsake thy
word, neither permit that foul and lieng spirit to falsify the same in us;
but make us constantly to rest upon thy promise, as to a sacred and sure
anchor, setting it against all the motions of curiosity and pride.

Last of all, remove from us that horrible torment of idolatry. The world at
this day is wrapped in idle service, yea unwittingly the whole world is full
of idols, to the great dishonor of thy name. Fained gods are erected,
superstitious inuocations are confirmed, idolaters swim in wealth and rule
the roast, thy glory is defaced, thy majesty blasphemed, the devil rages and
reigns, he gives kingdoms, and disposes the goods of this world, if his
words be true, as he lies shamefullie. For thou it is, and thou alone, which
alterest Empires, and confirmest them at thy pleasure. If order be observed,
thou causest it, but all misorder is raised by the devil, for the which he
shall be punished of thee with pains eternal.

Wherefore have mercy on us, O God, have mercy on us; deliver us from the
thick mud of idolatry; make us to lift up our eyes unto thee the son of
glory, that abhorring all feined service and ceremonies contrary to thy word,
we may acknowledge, serve, and sanctify thee the true God, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, which by and for thy Son dooest deliver us from the power of
Satan, and make us heirs of thine everlasting kingdom, which alone know
the hearts and groans of all creatures, which only wilt be called upon in the
name of thy Son, and hear us only for his sake. Wherefore unto thee, O our
God and Iehoua, do we speak; thee only through thine; assistance will we
serve, and never give thy glory to another. Take up that impudent thief
Satan, which would steal away thine honor; banish him far from thy Church.
But guard both our bodies and souls with the guard of thine holy Angels, which
may pitch their tents about us, and encounter with Satan, which besetteth us
on all sides. Deliver us out of his hands from all miseries of this life, and
last of all passing out of this world, carry our souls unto the society of
thy Saints in life eternal,

Amen.
I have sinned; I have sinned; have mercy upon me.
Of the Devil, and his manifold temptations.
THere wanted a tempter, and thou were the cause that he was wanting: there
wanted time and place, and thou were the cause that they wanted: the tempter
was present, and there wanted neither place nor time; but thou hold me back
that I should not consent. The tempter came full of darkness as he is, and
thou did harden me that I might despise him. The tempter came armed and
strongly; but to the intent he should not overcome me, thou did restrain
him, and strengthen me. The tempter came transformed into an Angel of light;
and to the intent he should not deceive me, thou did rebuke him; and to the
intent I should know him, thou did inlighten me.

For he is that great red dragon, and that old serpent, called the devil and
Satan, which has seven heads, and ten horns, whom thou have created to take
his pleasure in this huge and broad sea, wherein there creep living wights
innumerable, and beasts great and small: that is to say, diverse sorts of
fiends, which practice nothing else day nor night, but to go about seeking
whom they may devour, except thou rescue him. For it is that old dragon, which
was bred in the paradise of pleasure, which draws down the third part of the
stars of heaven with his tail, and casts them to the ground; which with his
venem poisoneth the waters of the earth, that as many men as drink of them
may die; which triumphs upon gold as if it were mire; and is of opinion, that
Jordan shall run into his mouth: and which is made of such a mould as he
fears no man.

And who shall save us from his chaps? Who shall pluck us out of his mouth,
saving thou, O Lord, who have broken the heads of the great dragon? Help us,
Lord: spread out thy wings over us, O Lord, that we may fly under them from
the face of this dragon that pursues us; and fence thou us from his horns
with thy sheeld. For his continual endeavor and only desire is, to devour
the souls which thou have created. And therefore we cry unto thee our God,
deliver us from our daily adversary, who whether we sleep or wake; whether
we eat or drink; or whether we be doing any thing else, presses upon us
by all kind of means; assaulting us day and night with trains and policies,
and shooting his venomous arrows at us, sometime openly, and sometime
privily, to slay our souls: and yet are we most lewdlie ouerseene, O Lord, in
that whereas we see the dragon continually in a readiness, to devour us with
open mouth: we nevertheless do sleep and riot in our own slothfulness, as
though we were out of his danger, who desires nothing else, but to destroy us.

Our enemy, to the intent to kill us, watches continually, and never
sleeps, and yet will not we wake from sleep to save our selves. Behold, he
has pitched infinite snares before our feet, and filled all our ways with
sundry traps, to catch our souls. And who can escape them? He has laid
snares for us in our riches; he has laid snares in our poverty; he has laid
snares in our meat, in our drink, in our pleasures, in our sleep, and in our
waking: he has set snares for us in our words, and in our works, and in all
our life; but Lord, deliver us from the net of the fowlers, and from hard
words, that we may give praise to thee, saying: Blessed be the Lord, who has
not given us up to be torn with their teeth. Our soul is delivered, as a
sparowe out of the net of the fowler; the net is broken, and we be escaped.

Against the temptation of Satan, pray thus:
O Lord Jesus Christ, the only stay and fence of our mortal state; our only
hope, our only salvation, our glory, and our triumph: who in the flesh,
(which thou had for our only cause taken upon thee) did suffer thy self to
be tempted of Satan, and who only and alone of all men did utterly
overcome and vanquish sin, death, the world, the devil, and all the kingdom
of hell; and whatsoever thou have so ouercommed, for our behalf it is, that
thou have ouercommed it; neither has it been thy will to have any of thy
servants keep battle and fight with any of the foresaid evils, but of
purpose to reward us with a crown of the more glory for it; and to the intent
that thou might likewise overcome satan in thy members, as thou have before
done in thine own person. Give thou, we beseech thee, unto us thy soldiers, O
Lion most victorious of the tribe of Judah, strength against the roaring Lion,
which continually wandereth to and fro, seeking whom he may devour. Thou
being that same Serpent, the true giver of health and life, that was nailed on
high upon a tree, give unto thy little seely ones, wiliness against the
deceiptfull awaitings of the most subtle serpent. Thou being a Lamb as white
as snow, the vanquisher of satan's tyranny, give us thy little sheep the
strength and virtue of thy spirit, that being in our own selves weak and
feeble, and in thee strong and valiant, we may withstand and overcome all
assaults of the devil, so that our ghostly enemy may not glory over us: but
being conquerours through thee, we may give thanks to thy mercy, which never
leauest them destitute that put their trust in thee, who live and reignest
God for evermore, world without end,

Amen.
7. On Thursedaie next before Easter, commonly called Maundie Thursedaie. Of
Christ his last feast or institution of the Sacrament of the Supper, and of his
great humility in washing his disciples feet afterward.
The Preface.
I (Says Wisdom) have killed my victuals, drawn my wine, and prepared my
table.

Come now unto me all ye poor in spirit, that are empty and an hungered: come
ye fat and rich also upon earth, that go astraie and faint for thirst.

Come, I say, O friends, eat of my meat woorthilie, and worship me: drink
of my wine purelie, and glorify me. Make ye merry at my table holilie, and
praise me O well-beloved.

For it is I that satisfy the mouth with good things, and fill the hungry
soul with spiritual deinties.

Yea my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed, which I have
provided for my people, and he that eats me, even he shall live by me.

Happy and blessed therefore are they that are called to the Lambs supper: for
they shall eat Manna, even Angels food, in the kingdom of heaven.

Lord bid me unto this feast, and grant that I may sup with thee, and thou with
me.

Lord wash not my feet only, but my hands and head also: for I am altogether
unclean; and if thou wash me not, I shall remain filthy still.

O wash me therefore thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my
secret faults, and purge me from my presumptuous sins.

For I have sinned, I have offended, oh forgive me, and have mercy on me.

The Prayer.
O Blessed Savior, and dear Redeemer Jesus Christ, which in the holy mystery
of thy last Supper, with thine Apostles, did deliver thy blessed body and
blood under the form of bread and wine; and ordeinedst, that as thy body was
broken, and thy blood shead for us, so we should thankefullie celebrate and
keep a solemn memory of thy death, till thou come. Grant us, we beseech
thee, ever steadfastly to believe, and kindly to acknowledge thine infinite
and almighty power, thine incomprehensible love toward us, and that we may
alwaie worthily receive the same blessed Sacrament, according to thy holy
ordinance, that thereby we may obtain increase of all goodness, in unity of
spirit with thee our head, and by thee and thy spirit, with all the company of
them that be truly thine, which be thy spiritual and mystical body, and our
spiritual and Christian brethren and sisters.

Suffer us not also, we beseech thee, to fall into any slothful and careless
negligence, whereby we should unkindly forget so inestimable a benefit; but
rather at all occasions, with minds woorthilie prepared for so holy an action,
thankefullie to renew the memory of thy so infinite love toward us, and to
receive the grace which thereby is offered unto us, to the ioining of us
continually nearer unto thee, till we be joined without any separation unto
thee through thee.

Finally, as in thine own blessed person thou have given an example of
perfect love, whereby in humbleness and meekness we should serve one
another, as thou being the Lord and master of us all, did vouchsafe, after
thy last Supper, to wash the feet of thy disciples and servants; grant us that
loving and meek spirit of thine, whereby we may be far from disdain, and
despising of our brethren, and ready in all good things to be dutiful and
serviceable unto them in thee and for thee, that as thou have left us in
commandment, we may love one another as thou have loved us, and thereby be
known to be thy disciples, especially O Christ, that we may be faithful in
our love toward thee, who for our sakes wast content to be vnfaithfullie and
unfriendly betrayed of him, that had lived familiarlie with thee, that thou
might thereby assure us of thine everlasting love and mercy. To thee
therefore, with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor and glory
now and for ever,

Amen.
I have sinned, I have sinned, have mercy on me.
8. On Good Fridaie. Of Christ his passion and shameful suffering for our
sins.
Leuiti. 23, 27, etc. THIS is the day of reconciliation, to make an atonement
for you before the Lord your God: therefore shall it be an holy convocation
unto you. And you shall humble your selves this day in fasting and prayer, and
offer sacrifice made by fire unto the Lord. And whatsoever soul it be that
thus humbles not himself this day, even he shall be cut off and destroyed
from among his people. Let this be a law and ordinance in your generations,
and in all your dwellings for ever, says the Lord.

The Preface.
CHrist now once in the end of the world, through the eternal spirit, offered
himself a Lamb without spot to God; suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust; died for all, and was killed upon the altar of the cross, as
perteining to the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit, to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself. Woe and alas that ever I sinned!

Christ became sin, and a curse for us, to redeem us sinners from the
curse of the law, and to reconcile us unto the blessing and favor of God his
father, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him. Woe and alas that
ever I sinned!

Christ was obedient unto the death, even unto the most vile and shameful
death of the cross, to deliver us from death, hell, and damnation, and to
translate and bring us into the kingdom of God his father. Woe and alas that
ever I sinned!

Christ being in the form of God, took on him the form of a servant, and
made himself of no reputation: but for the joy that was set before him,
endured such blasphemy, railing, and evil speaking against him of shameless
sinners; and when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered,
threatened not: but committing the vengeance to him that judges righteouslie,
despised the shame, and endured the cross, and suffered for us wretches:
leaving us an example that we should likewise follow his steps; by whose
stripes we are healed. Woe and alas that ever I sinned!

Oh my soul, come therefore let us lay away that that presses down, and
the sin that hangs so fast on; and let us run with patience unto the
battle that is set before us, loking up unto Jesus the captain and finisher
of our faith, and only rejoice in the cross of Christ.

And seeing we have redemption by his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins
past, present, and to come: and for as much as we know how we are redeemed
from our old vain conversation, not with corruptible things, as silver and
gold; but even with the precious blood of Christ, who in his own self bare
our sins in his body on the tree, that we being delivered from sin, should
live unto righteousness; who suffered also for us in the flesh, that we
henceforth should live, as much time as remained in the flesh; not after the
lusts of men, but after the will of God; and rejoice only in the cross of
Christ.

Let us take heed we walk not with those that are enemies to the cross of
Christ, and crucify him daily afresh by blasphemy, and all manner of
ungodliness; whose belly is their God; whose glory is their shame, and whose
end is eternal damnation, both of body and soul: but rather with those that
have their consciences purged from dead works to serve the living God. Let us
now pass the rest of the time of this our abode here in trembling and fear:
and ever rejoice in the cross of Christ. For it is sufficient for us, that we
have spent the time that is past of this life, after the will of the Gentiles,
walking in wantonness, in lusts, in excess of wines, in excess of eating and
drinking, and in excess of riot and abominable idolatry.

Therefore I cry woe and alas, that ever I sinned: out upon me wretch that thus
greeuouslie have offended. O God my God, I ask thee mercy: have mercy upon
me, O Lord; have mercy upon me: woe is me that ever I transgressed.

Oh my soul, let us now esteem to know nothing, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. Yea, God forbid that we should rejoice in any thing, but in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified to us, and we
unto the world, that being crucified with Christ, we may live with God.

And having now liberty to enter into the holy place, in the blood of Jesus,
by the new and living way which he has prepared for us, through the veil of
his flesh: let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works,
and draw nigh with a true and penitent heart, in assurance of faith, sprinkeled
in our hearts from an evil conscience, to meditate daily of his mercies: and
to give him thanks continually for the benefits of his passion, and our
eternal redemption, and still to rejoice in the cross of Christ Jesus our
Lord, and say:

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, both with mouth and hearty
affection we glorify thee, and praise thy name with immortal thanks; for
that of thine infinite good will toward mankind, thou vouchsafest to become an
intercessor for us unto thine heavenly Father, for bearing his horrible wrath
conceived against us through our sins, and for offering thy self to death to
adorn us with eternal glory.

Thou wast hanged on the cross, made a curse for us, overwhelmed with sorrows
too heavy for flesh and blood to bear. Thou sufferedst the displeasure, which
is a consuming fire of GOD. Thou shedst thy blood from thy whole body, at thy
death thy members being pierced. Oh Christ, oh sweet Jesus, thou shedst thy
precious blood, I say, six several times from sundry parts of thy blessed
body, before and in thine execution for us miserable sinners: as namely, first
in thy Circumcision, which was the beginning of our redemption: secondly in
thy prayer in the garden, which was for the earnest desire of our redemption:
thirdly, in thy whippings: and fourthlie, in thy crowning with thorns, which
was for the reward of our redemption, for by thy stripes were we healed:
fiftlie, in thy crucifieng and nailing on the cross, when thy hands and feet
were bored through to fasten thee thereon, which was the price of our
redemption: sixtlie and lastly, in the wounding and piercing of thy blessed
side, yea of thy very heart, thou hanging dead on the cross, which was the
true sacrament of our redemption, whereby we are cleansed, purified and washed
from all our sins. Among these thy diverse torments both before and in thy
execution, thy spirits being resolved through the sense of the infinite
anguishes which thou sufferedst and enduredst, oh Christ, thou vtteredst diverse
words, partly by reason of intolerable grief, and partly of thine
unspeakable goodness. Oh teach us by thy wisdom reverently to listen unto
them, and to put them carefully in the bottom of our minds.

At thy death mankind was severed into two parts. Thou the head of the pensive
Church hangedst upon the cross ready to yield up the Ghost. Under the cross
stands thy loving mother Marie, a few godly women, and John, thy weak
disciples moorning, through the rage of the Jews hide themselves. Nichodemus,
and Joseph of Aramathie, to the great grief of their minds, are feign to hold
their tongs, and to wink at the outrageous cruelty of their nation against
thee. The graceless Jews, the ungodly soldiers of Pilate and Herod lay
hold on thee, mock thee, blindfold thee, buffet thee, pierce thee, and play
for thy garments. The epicures and tyrants, the high Priests and their
parasits, have thee in derision, and laugh in their sleeves to see how thy
death is conspired, and they may walter in all superstition and wickedness.
All this while the multitude of Ethniks in all quarters of the world celebrate
their filthy and ungodly feasts, in the great dishonor of thy name.

Thou beholdest this diversity of men, which see all things both in heaven
and earth, and being in deed humble and meek in heart, thou powredst out a
most charitable prayer on this wise: Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. These be the words of thy priesthood. Thou which art the
chiefest Priest, bedewed with thine own blood, entering into the holiest of
holy places, touchest the breast of the Father, and searchest enen his secret
counsel. Thou praiest not only for thy weak auditors to be strengthened, but
also for thy very enemies, which put thee so shamefullie to death, if they
will return unto repentance: yea and for all mankind thou praiedst; and
namely, for all and every one which should believe in thy name.

O most merciful intercessor, we include our selves in these thy general
prayers, recited before thine agony, repeated on the cross, yea uttered from
the beginning of the world, and standing at the right hand of thy Father making
intercession for us, sounded continually in the ears of God. Work so, that
we be not found in the number of those, into whom satan has entered, which
blaspheame thee, despise thy benefits, and destroy themselves utterly.
Increase our faith and knowledge of thee, that the eternal Father through thy
sacrifice being pleased, may forgive all our sins, and receive us into that
company which is glorious in thine eyes.

Under the cross stands thy noble but sorrowful mother, her sister, and
other good women, with thy disciple John, whom thou louedst. O bless us, and
of thy goodness join us to that company. In thy mother there shines a notable
light and strength of faith; she beholds in thee her Son those sights, than
which none could be more grievous in this world; she saw the rage of thine
enemies, and thine intolerable torments; yet she believed, notwithstanding the
greeuousnes of thy pain, the shedding of thy precious blood, the flight of thy
disciples, the cruelty of thine enemies, and the odiousnes of thy death; she
believed, I say (O the force of faith!) that thou wast God by nature, and
should rise again and reign everlastingly, overcome death and the devil,
and subdue all thine enemies.

O Son of God, kindle within us we pray thee the like sparks of faith: give
us grace with thine elect never to be ashamed to stand under thy cross. And as
thou, even of an entire good will, mercifully among thy servants did speak
unto, and comfort thy pensive and moorning mother, so speak unto us and thy
troubled Church; in misery comfort her with thy sweet voice and presence.

Thou commendedst thy mother to thine Apostle. Make us vnfeignedlie to love the
Church thy sweet and true mother, and grant that every of us may cherish the
same lovingly, and maintain it to the uttermost of our powers. Especially
guide the Preachers, that they may love the mother; nourish the unity of pure
doctrine; avoid the seed of heresies, and remove all stumbling-blockes, all
occasions of hindering of faith and prayer in young Christians.

At thy sides hang two thieves, punished for their sins, according to the
law and their deserts; whereof one desperately pouring out blasphemous
speeches, the other godly requiring thy favor, he ended his days. All
mankind, Lord, do likewise hang in miseries for their sins, whereof some are
so captiued in their minds, that at the point of death they scoff, blaspheme,
and desperately, to their utter condemnation finish their days: but give us
grace, we beseech thee, that we may imitate the example of the gracious thief,
which before his passage out of this life, moved by infallible arguments of
thine almightinesse and mercy, required pardon of his offenses, and obtained
the same according to his request. Give grace that we may imitate his hearty
repentance, his sorrow for sin, his notable faith, his zealous confession, and
other good works of his.

We beseech thee merciful Lord be mindful of us. O Lord be mindful of us.
Thou sit in the kingdom of thy Father, we are in the miseries of the world:
but be thou mindful of us. Begin thy kingdom in us here in this world, and
in every combat of our conscience, especially at the point of death
pronounce to our hearts this comfortable absolution, This day shall thou be
with me in Paradise. Show unto us thy paradise, that departing out of this
life, we may find rest for our souls. Open to our souls the gates of
Paradise, place them in the seats of immortality, and state of bliss, where
thy Father, together with the blessed company of Angels and men, shows
himself even as he is.

In the mean, while thy combat is not yet finished, thou criedst in most
pitiful manner, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Thy divinity was
not then separated from thy humanity, which never lost that which once it
took, neither surcessedst, nor dooest thou surcesse at any time to be equal
and one with thine eternal father; but then was the hour of thy humiliation,
wherein after a wonderful and unspeakable manner, thy divinity hid it self
as it were, and would have this obedience to be shown, and thought not best to
destroy the Jews thine enemies and murderers. Yea it hid it self, that the
streams of Gods displeasure against the sins of men should so fall upon thee
O Christ, that they should wrestle with extreme torments, such as for a
certain space thou perceiuedst no comfort, notwithstanding thy divinity
confirmed thine humane nature, which was to suffer all the passions. For thy
divinity could not suffer any passion at all, and therefore it confirmed the
same, that there might be a sufficient satisfaction for the sins of men. For
they which have endured most grievous torments, could never abide these: for if
God comfort us, we may abide the punishment of men, and then it may be said:

Though bodies grief did feel,
Yet had their souls great joy,
And virtuous hope did strengthen so,
That pains did naught annoie.
But intolerable is it for a creature to suffer the punishment of God, and be
saved thereby.

Wherefore, O Son of God, in displeasure be mindful of thy mercy, be thou
our protection, that the wrath of thine eternal father do not destroy us.
Even a little taste of Gods displesure bursteth in pieces all the bones of men
like a lion. And therefore by and by after thou vtteredst the like complaint,
saying, I thirst, thy soul languished through the greatness of thy pains.
Thy spirits were resolved through thy wonderful grief of heart. Thy bowels
dried away, and no moisture abode in them, and therefore truly did thou
both inwardly thirst and desire some virtue and comfort from thy Father, and
outwardly to have thy body refreshed.

O Jesus Christ, which art the fountain of eternal life, giving the water
which quenches all thirst, from whose belly springs the well of life,
suffer us not to taste such a grievous thirst, as did that merciles rich
glutton in hell, which never was quenched, but with the godly to say, My
soul stuck unto my jaws, I had no quietness in my bones, Lord in thy
judgments correct me, not in thy fury, least I come unto nothing. If thou
obseruest iniquities, O Lord; Lord, who shall be able to abide? Thus do thy
Saints cry, I say, in their troubles. Wherefore kindle not thy wrath
altogether against us. Cease not to comfort our weak nature striving against
thy judgments, with the juice of thy word, and comfortable waterings of thy
spirit.

Unto thee did thine eternal Father manifest his presence and comfort for our
sakes, when some while after being better quieted thou saiedst, It is finished.
Thou gave thanks to thine eternal father, for helping thee, whereby the
sacrifice of welfare to the elect for evermore was fulfilled. Oh most sacred
Priest, imprint within us this celestial conclusion, this notable finishing of
thy sacrifice, that undoubtedly we may think, that by this sacrifice the
remission of sins and life eternal is purchased for us.

Afterward, being delivered from all fears, thou criedst with a great voice,
Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. Grant that in our departure out of
this world, we may utter the same words. Make us to feel the presence of thy
father comforting us, being pleased through thee, and may know that with our
bodies our souls do not perish: let us not jest as Epicures do, saying: O
fugitive, flattering, pale, cursed naked soul, whither go thou? Thou have
prepared for us, O Son of God, a large and a pleasant place: In thy Fathers
house are many resting places. We fear no torments. Thou have delivered us
from the pains of hell. There is no purgatory. Thy Father embraces our
souls in his merciful arms, lays them in Abraham's bosom, replenisheth
them with quietness, with light and joy unspeakable, till our bodies also
raised again, appear with them in his everlasting kingdom. In this faith
give us grace to leave this world, and to rest with thee for ever and ever,

Amen, Amen.
I have sinned, I have sinned, my God my God have mercy upon me. God forbid
that I should rejoice but in the cross of Christ, whereby the world is
crucified to me, and I unto the world.
Or thus: A fruitful meditation upon the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ,
to be read often.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the everliving and almighty God by whom
all things were made, be ruled and governed; thou the lively image of the
substance of the Father; the eternal wisdom of God; the brightness of his
glory; God of God; light of light; coequall, coeternall and consubstantiall
with the Father: thou which of the love thou had to mankind, when he was
fallen from the fellowship of God, into the society of satan, and all evil,
did vouchsafe for our redemption to become a mediator between God and man,
taking to thy Godhead our nature as concerning the substance of it, and so
becamest man: also the heir of all, and most merciful Messiah, which by the
power of thy Godhead, and merits of thy manhood, have made purgation of our
sins, even by thine own self, whilst thou wast here on earth, being now set
on the right hand of thy Father for us, even concerning our nature, in
majesty, in glory and power infinite. I pray and humbly beseech thy mercy
to grant me at this present, to rehearse some of thy passions and sufferings for
me the last night, that thou wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit
might thereby be effectual to work in me faith, as well for the pardon of my
sins by them, as mortification of mine affections, comfort in my crosses, and
patience in all afflictions, Amen.

IN the midst of thy last Supper with thy dear Apostles, these things could
not but be before thee, namely, that they all would leave thee, the most
earnest would forswear thee, and one of the twelve should most traiterouslie
betraie thee, which were no small crosses unto thee. Judas was admonished of
thee to beware; but when he took no heed, but went out to finish his work,
contemning thine admonition and counsel, he could not but vex thy most loving
heart.

After supper, there was contention amongst thy disciples, who should be
greatest after thee, yet dreaming carnally of thee and thy kingdom, and
having this affection of pride and ambition busy amongst them, notwithstanding
thy diligence in reproouing and teaching them.

After thine admonition to them of the cross that would come, thereby to make
them more vigilant, so gross were they, that they thought they could with
their two swords put away all perils, which was no little grief unto thee.

After thy coming to Gethsamane, heaviness oppressed thee, and therefore thou
would thy disciples to pray. Thou did tell to Peter and his fellows,
that thy heart was heavy to death. Thou did will them to pray, being
careful for them also, least they should fall into temptation. After this,
thou wentest a stones cast from them, and did pray thy self, falling flat
and groueling upon the earth: but alas, thou feltest no comfort, and therefore
thou came to thy disciples (which of all other were most sweet and dear unto
thee) but lo, to thy further discomfort, they pass neither of thy perils, nor
of their own, and therefore sleep apace. After thou had awaked them, thou
go again to pray, but thou foundest no comfort at all; and therefore did
return again for some comfort at thy dearest friends hands, but yet again
(alas) they are fast asleep, whereupon thou art enforced to go again to thy
heavenly Father for some sparkle of comfort, in these thy wonderful crosses
and agonies. Now, here thou wast so discouraged, and so comfortless, that
even streams of blood came running from thine eyes, and ears, and other parts
of thy body. But who is able to express the infinitenes of thy crosses, even
at thy being in the garden? All which thou sufferedst for my sake, as well to
satisfy thy Fathers wrath for my sins, as also to sanctify all my
sufferings, the more gladly to be sustained of me.

After thy bloody prayer thou came, and yet again foundest thy disciples
asleep; and before thou can well awake them, lo, Judas comes with a great
band of weaponed men to apprehend thee as a thief, and so does, leading thee
away bound to the high Bishops house Annas, and so from him to Caiphas. Here
now to augment this thy misery, behold, thy disciples fly from thee, false
witnesses be brought against thee. Thou art accused and condemned of
blasphemy. Peter even in thy sight forsweareth thee. Thou art unjustly
stricken for answering lawfully. Thou art blindfeeld, stricken and buffeted all
the whole night in the Bishop Caiphas house of their cruel servants.

In the morning betimes thou art condemned again of the Priests of blasphemy,
and therefore they bring thee before the secular power to Pilate, by whom thou
art openly arraigned as other thieves and malefactors were. And when he saw
that thou wast accused of malice, and that his wife had sent a messenger unto
him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered
many things this day in a dream by reason of him: yet he did not dismiss
thee, but did send thee to Herod, where thou wast derided shamefullie, in
coming and going to him and from him all the way wonderfully, especially
after Herod had apparelled thee as a fool.

Before Pilate again therefore thou wast brought and accused falsely, no man
did take thy part, or speak a good word for thee.

Pilate caused thee to be whipped and scourged, and to be handled most
pitifully, to see if any pity might appear with the Prelates, but no man at
all pitied thee. Barrabas that notable thief and murderer was preferred
before thee: all the people head and tail was against thee, and cried out
Crucifige, hang thee up. Uniustlie to death wast thou judged. Thou wast crowned
with sharp thorns that pierced thy brains. Thou wast made a mocking stock.
Thou wast reviled, beaten, scourged, spit upon, and most miserably handled.

Thou wentest through Jerusalem to the place of execution, even to the mount of
Caluerie: a great cross to hang thee up was laid upon thy back, to bear and
draw as long as thou wast able.

Thy body was racked to be nailed to the tree. Thy hands were bored through,
and thy feet also. Nails were put through them to fasten thee thereon. Thou
wast hanged between heaven and earth as one spued out of heaven, and vomited
out of the earth, unworthy of any place. The high Priests laughed thee to
scorn. The Elders blasphemed thee, and said, God had no care for thee. The
common people also laughed and cried, Out upon thee. Thirst oppressed thee, but
vinegar only and gall was given thee to drink. Heaven shined not on thee; the
Sun gave thee no light; the earth was afraid to bear thee; satan even then
tempted thee, and thine own humane senses caused thee to cry out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me?

Oh wonderful passions, which thou sweet Jesus sufferedst for me and all
mankind. In them thou teach me; in them thou comfortest me; for by them God
is my father; my sins are forgiven me. By them I should learn to fear God,
to love God, to hope in God, to hate sin, to be patient, to call upon God,
and never to leave him for any temptations, but with thee to cry, Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit,

Amen.
The prayer wherein we confess our selves to be the very cause of all these
Christ his passions.
WHat have thou committed oh Lord, that thou should be so judged? what have
thou offended that thou should be so cruelly handled and ordered? what was
thy fault? what was thine offense? what was the cause of thy death? what was
the occasion of thy condemnation? I, Lord, I am the cause of thy sorrow, the
fault is in me that thou wast killed; for I have deserved thy death. I
committed the offenses that were aduenged upon thee. Oh marvelous kind of
judgment, and unspeakable disposition, or ordering of mysteries! The unjust
man offends, and the righteous is punished. The guilty does evil, and the
innocent is beaten. The evil does trespass, and the good is condemned. That
which the evil man deserves, the same does the good and just suffer. That
which the servant does amiss, the master makes amends. That which man
trespasseth, God suffers it.

Oh thou which art the Son of God, how low did thine humility descend? How
greatly did thy charity even as it were wax hot, and burn toward us? How
far did thy pity exceed? Whither did thy benignity and gentleness grow and
extend? How far did thy love stretch? How far came thy compassion? For I did
wrongfullie, and thou wast punished. I committed the mischeeuous deeds, and
they were aduenged upon thee. I did the fault, and thou submittedst thy self
to the torments. I was proud, and thou wast humble and meek. I was swelled and
puffed up, thou wast extenuate and appaired. I was disobedient, nevertheless
thou being obedient, barest the pains and punishments of disobedience. I
obeyed, and was as it were a servant to all excess and gluttony, and thou
wast punished with scarsitie, and lack of food. The tree did draw me in my
grandmother Eve, unto unlawful concupiscence and desires, but perfect charity
led thee unto punishment, and to endure the torments upon the cross. I
presumed being forbidden, but thou did smart therefore. I took my pleasure
with delicateness, thou wast vexed with the cross. I abound, and have plenty
of all pleasures, thou art all to torn with nails. I do taste the pleasant
sweetness of the apple, and thou the bitterness of gall.

Behold O king of glory, mine iniquity and ungodliness, and thy pity and
goodness is manifest. Behold mine unrighteousness, and thy justice is plainly
declared. What thing O my God, and my King, shall I render unto thee for all
these things, which thou have bestowed upon me? For nothing can be found in the
heart of man, that may worthily recompense such rewards. Can man's wit
excogitate or imagine any thing that is worthy to be compared unto thy
divine mercy? Neither is it the office of a creature to go about to recompense
fully and justly the aid and help of a Creator.

There is truly O Son of God, in this thy marvelous dispensation and
appointments, some what, in which my frailenesse may help a little; if so be
that my mind once pricked and stirred by thy visitation, do punish the flesh,
with the vices also and evil concupiscences thereof. And this thing if thou will grant and give me grace to do, then shall it begin as it were to suffer
and sustain sorrows and greefes, because that thou also did vouchsafe to
die for my sins, and so by the victory of the inward man, it shall be armed
(thou being a captain) for the external and outward victory; forasmuch as
the spiritual persecution once overcome, it shall not be afraid for thy sake
to be obedient unto the material sword and cross of this world; and so the
slenderness of my state and condition, if it please thy goodness, shall be able
according to the little power thereof, to answer unto the greatness and
excellency of my Creator.

And this is ye heavenly medicine O good Jesus; this is as it were a
preservative of thy love; this I beseech thee, by thine accustomed and ancient
mercies, to power into my wounds, the foul and filthy matter of the venomous
contagion and infection once cast away, which may refresh and restore me to my
former purity and cleanenesse; that when I have tasted of the pleasant
sweetness, which is, to abide in thee, it may make me to despise, and utterly
set naught by the entisements of this world, and to fear for thy sake none
adversities thereof, and that I remembering thine everlasting nobility and
excellency, may always abhor and disdain the troubles of this transitory
world.

And as thou, O Lord, wast crucified for me, so I beseech thee crucify me with
thee, that I may rise again with thee to everlasting life. Thy flesh was
crucified for me, crucify with thee, O Christ, the kingdom of the flesh,
which has dominion in me, that I may put off the old Adam, and by newness of
life, may be transformed into thee the second Adam, sin, infidelity, and the
whole tyranny of satan being vanquished and overcome. Bring to pass, O Lord,
that by thy cross and painful suffering, thy yoke may be to me made light,
and thy burden easy, that willingly and gladly following thee, I may come
whether thou art gone, that is, to thy father, most blessed and immortal, from
whom nothing shall afterward be able to separate us,

Amen.
I have sinned, I have sinned, my God my God have mercy upon me.

God forbid I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

Galath. 6.
Another prayer to Christ crucified, wherein we devoutly call to mind what
great things he has done for us, and what benefits we reap by the remembrance
of his holy wounds.
EXceeding greatly have I sinned against thy Majesty, O Lord, and mine own
conscience finds me guilty of many offenses; and yet do I not despair,
neither will I in any thing at all be doubtful, because that whereas sin
has abounded, there has thy grace O God, ouer-abounded. He that despaireth of
the forgiveness of his sins, denies thee O God to be merciful. Yea great
wrong does he to thee, O God, which distrusteth in thy mercy. For (as much as
in him lies) he denies thee to be loving, true and mighty, which are the
things wherein my whole hope consists, that is to weet, in the love of thy
adoption, in the truth of thy promise, and in the power of thy redeeming.

Now let my unwise imagination murmur as much as it lists, and say, Who art
thou? how great is thy glory? and by what deserts hopest thou to obtain it?
and I will answer boldly; I know whom I have credited, and that thou of
thine exceeding great love, have adopted me to be thy child; that thou art
southfast of promise; that thou art mighty of perseverance, and that thou
may do what thee lists. I can not be feared with the multitude of my
sins, if I bethink me of the death of thee my Lord, because my sins are
not able to overcome thee. Thy nails and thy spear cry unto me, that I am
thoroughly reconciled to thee O Christ, if I love thee. Longius has opened me
thy side dear Jesus with his spear, and I am gone into it, and there do I
rest in safety. He that is afraid, let him love, for love drives fear out of
the doors. There is no remedy so mighty and effectual against the heat of
leacherie, as is the death of thee my redeemer. Thou stretchest out thine arms
upon the cross, and thou hold out thy hand in a readiness to embrace us
sinners. Between the arms of thee my savior mind I to live and die; there
shall I sing safely; there will I glorify and exalt thee, O Lord; because
thou have taken me up, and have not given mine enemies their pleasure over me.

Thou, O our Savior, have bowed down thy head at thy death, to receive the
kisses of thy beloved, and so often do we kiss thee, O Lord, as we be
thoroughly touched with the love of thee, who for love to mankind, being God,
came to man, came into man, and becamest man; who for love, being an
invisible God, becainest like thy servants, and who for very love, wast
wounded for our sins; and in those wounds of thine O my Savior, is the safe
and quiet rest of us weakelings and sinners: there do I dwell at ease, and by
thy wounds have I a way in unto the bowels of thy mercy. Whatsoever is
wanting of my self, that do I borowe out of the bowels of thee my Lord: for
in them is abundance of mercy, and there want no holes for it to flow out at.

By the holes of thy blessed body are opened unto me the secrets of thy heart,
a great pledge of thy kindly love, even the bowels of the mercy of thee our
God, whereby the day spring has visited us from aloft. Thy wounds, O sweet
Jesus Christ are full of mercy, full of pity, full of sweetness, and full of
love. They bored thy hands and thy feet, and pierced thy side with a spear. By
these holes may I taste how sweet and mild thou art in deed, and how merciful
thou art to all that call upon thee in truth, to all that seek thee, and
cheeflie to all that love thee. Plentious redemption is given unto us in thy
wounds O sweet Savior Jesus Christ. Great abundance of sweetness, great plenty
of grace, and great perfection of virtues is given us in thy precious wounds O
sweet Savior Jesus Christ.

O most bountiful Jesus, grant therefore I humbly beseech thee, that
whenever any foul thought assaulteth me, I may forthwith run to thy
wounds O Christ. When my flesh presses me down, I may rise up again by
remembering thy wounds O Lord. When the devil lays wait for me, I may flee to
the bowels of thy mercy O Jesus, so shall he quickly depart from me. Or if at
any time the heat of lechery provoke my members, let it be quenched I pray
thee, by calling to mind thy wounds O Son of God. Finally, in all mine
adversities, let me find no remedy so effectual as thy wounds O Christ. In
them, I say, let me sleep without care, and rest without fear. Thou, O
Christ, have died for us, and now is there nothing so bitter to the death,
which is not swallowed up by thy death, O sweet Jesus. All my whole hope
therefore is and shall be in thy death O Lord my God. Thy death is my desert and
my refuge, my welfare, life, and resurrection; and thy mercifulness O Lord is
my merit. I am not poor of merit, so long as thou the Lord of all compassions
failest not. As long as thou art manifold in mercy, so long am I also manifold
of deserts. The mightier thou art to save, the more am I without care.

Wherefore O most excellent goodness, withdraw not thy mercy; O most mighty
maker, despise not thy work; O most prudent redeemer, suffer not to perish the
price of thy redemption: O most gentle, ghostly, and heavenly host and
ghest, purify, save, dress, and keep thy house and dwelling place, the which
thou dedicatedst and sanctifiedst to thee in the sacrament of Baptism. O most
blessed, most charitable and sweet Jesus; O most bounteous, excellent and
glorious Jesus; O most innocent, merciful, meek, loving and dear Jesus, have
mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, and forgive me all my sins. When shall I
love thee? When shall I be sorry for my sins? When shall I loath and forsake
my sins? When shall I detest and abhore my sinful life, and turn unto thee
by grace? When shall I remember thy benefits, thy meekenes, thy poverty, and
bitter passion, thy patience, thy obedience, thy love, and thy charity? When
shall I sanctify, worship, magnify, and love heartily thee in heaven, and thy
Saints on earth, and celebrate thy feasts accordingly; that is to say, thy
incarnation, passion, resurrection, ascension, and such other, with due
reverence, and Christian devotion. If thou be the most dreadful master, where
is my dread Lord Jesus? If thou be the most loved Father, where is my love? If
thou be my Lord and my Redeemer, where is my service? If thou be mine host,
and dwell in my soul by thy grace and mercy; where is my chastity, purity
and cleanness meet and according to such an host? If thou be the life of
Saints, the fairness and beauty of Angels, where is my thanking? Now
therefore good Lord Jesu Christ, wound my heart with thy most holy wounds, moist
my mind with thy most precious blood, that whither soever I turn me, I may
behold above me thee crucified, and whatsoever I see, it may appear to me
ruddie with thy most precious blood, that thus be holding, I may fix my sight
in nothing but only in thee, which live and reignest one God world without
end, So be it.

I have sinned, I have offended, my God my God have merceie on me.

A prayer, wherein through commemoration of Christ's passion, we desire pardon
of our sins, and continuance in virtue and godliness.
BEhold O pitiful Father, thy most pitiful Son, which suffered for me being
so wicked. Behold O most merciful King, who suffered; and remember as thou art
loving and kind, for whom he suffered. Is not this O my Lord that innocent,
who^ although he were thy Son thou did deliver to redeem and ransom a
servant? Is not this the author and beginner of life, which being led as a
sheep to be killed, and being made obedient to thee, even unto death, was not
afraid to take upon him the most cruel and sharp kind of death* Call to
remembrance, O thou distributer of all health, that this is he, whom although
thou did beget him by thy power, yet notwithstanding thou would have to be
made partaker of thine infirmity and weakness. Truly this same is thy God
head, which did take upon him thy nature, which was hanged upon the gibbet of
torment or cross, which in the flesh which he had taken upon him, did suffer
sorrowful punishment.

Turn the eyes of thy Majesty O Lord my God, toward the work of thine
unspeakable pity. Look on thy dear Son, whose whole body is stretched
forth. Mark the harmless hands and pure, which do drop and distill down
innocent blood. And I beseech thee be pacified, and pardon the wicked deeds
which my hands have committed. Consider his bare and naked side, being thrust
through cruelly with a spear, and renew and wash me with the holy fountain
or well, which I believe did flow from thence. Mark the unspotted feet, which
have not stood in the way of sinners, but always have walked in thy law, how
they are pierced through with sharp nails; and make perfect my steps in thy
paths, and make me of thy loving kindness to hate all ways of iniquity.
Remove from me the ways of iniquity, and make me of thy mercy to choose the
way of truth. I beseech thee, O King of holy men, by this holy one of all
holy ones, and by this my redeemer, to make me run the way of thy
commandments, that I may be united and knit unto him in spirit, which did not
disdain to be clad in my flesh.

Do thou not look upon and mark O pitiful Father, the head of thy most
dearly beloved Son, a young man, how it leaned upon his shoulders when it
was past the most precious death? Behold O my most gentle creator, the
humanity and gentleness of thy beloved Son, and have compassion upon the
feeblenes of thy weak and feeble handie-worke. Behold O most glorious parent,
the torn and rent members of thy most kind and loving child, and remember
gently what substance I am of. Behold the pains of him that is God and man,
and release and loose man, which is thy creature, out of misery and bondage of
sin. Behold the punishment of him that did redeem, and pardon the offenses
of them that be redeemed. This is he, O Lord, whom thou did strike for the
sins of the people, although he be thy well-beloved, in whom was found no
guile, and yet nevertheless, was he reckoned amongst them that were full of
iniquity. Look down therefore, O Lord, thou lover of laboring and laden
hearts, with the eyes of thy pity, see the altar of the cross, where thy
son, thine only beloved babe is slaughtered. Behold O father of heaven, this
thy bleeding babe, whom for our sakes thou had made under the law a curse
thereof, in giving him to the death, even the acursed and shameful death of the
cross, that he might thereby redeem us wretches that were his enemies from
the law, and from the curse and condemnation of it. O look upon him, I say,
which is the savior of the world, and who in his sufferings, and in his life
and death has fulfilled all the prophesies; behold him, that was made a
castawaie of the Jews, and a scorn of the Gentiles, which endured treasonable
hate of his friends, and deadly terrors in his troubled soul, that we might
have peace of conscience, and be reconciled unto thee. And let his shame and
ignominy, I pray thee, be our honor and triumph; his wounds our medicine,
his curse our bliss, and his death our life: finally, so lighten our minds, I
beseech thee, with thy holy spirit, that we may be able to conceive and
understand the height and depth, the length and breadth, and by all means the
infinite measure of this so exceeding love toward us, that the sight and
knowledge of so great love, may so inflame us with the love of thee again,
that all our thoughts, and deeds may wholly be set upon thee, showing our
thankfulness unto thee in all obedience unto thy word, and glorieng in nothing
but in thy Christ, and him crucified, that in the end we may inioie the full
fruit of all his passions, and of this thine unspeakable love toward us in our
everlasting salvation, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and redeemer, to
whom with thee O father, and the holy Ghost, be given all praise, honor, and
glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
Another godly meditation or prayer, wherein we declare unto God the Father,
that the passion of his Son before rehearsed, was for our reconciliation and
atonement with God.
BEhold, O almighty God, Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, I beseech thee of thy
benignity and gentleness to have mercy upon me, because of the most precious
thing that I could find, the same I have offered devoutly unto thee; the thing
of most estimation that I could imagine, I have presented humbly unto thee. I
have left nothing, but I have declared it unto thy Majesty. There is nothing
remaining that I may add more, because I have committed and betaken my whole
hope unto thee. I have sent unto thee mine advocate and spokes-man, even thy
well-beloved Son Jesus. I have sent thy glorious child to be a mediator betwixt
me and thee. I have sent, I say, an intercessor, by whom I trust to get
pardon and forgiveness of my sins. In a word, I have sent the word: which
word, as I have said, was sent for my misdeeds.

And behold, I have rehearsed unto thee the passion of thy most holy Son
Jesus Christ, which passion, I believe was suffered for me; I believe that the
Godhead which was sent of thee, did take upon him mine humanity and nature,
in the which he thought not scorn to suffer buffets, bonds, spittings, mocks,
yea, he took upon him to suffer the cross, nails and dart. I believe also
that his manhood, being of this my nature, during his infancy, was troubled
with creeping and scrallings, and was wrapped in clothes after the manner of
other children; was vexed in his youth with labors; made lean with waking and
fastings; wearied with iournieng; afterward whipped and all to torn and rent
with diverse kinds of punishments, reckoned among the dead, and when it was
endued with the glory of resurrection, he carried it into the ioies of heaven,
and placed it upon the right hand of thy Majesty.

This I say, he is my manhood, way, and means of pacifieng and appeasing
thee, and the way and means of having mercy upon me. Mercifully look upon
me, hear the wretch whom he did redeem, and the bond-seruant whom he
delivered. Behold him a Creator, and do not despise a creature. Receive the
shepherd, welcomed with a gentle and loving countenance, and mercifully
look upon the sheep which he has brought home upon his own shoulders. This
is that most faithful shepherd, which by many and diverse labors and travels
over steep hills, and through headlong and deep valleys, did search for his
own sheep that was straied away, which also when he had found it faint and
almost dead through long wandering, gat himself under it with great reioicing,
and making it fast unto him with a marvelous bond of charity, lifted it up
out of the deapth of confusion, and brought it home to the ninety and nine.

Behold O King, my king and God almighty, behold a good shepherd, which
rendereth to thee that which thou committedst to his charge. He took upon him
through thine ordinance to save man, whom he has delivered unto thee clean
and pure from all spots, through the washing in his blood. Lo thy most dearly
beloved Son has reconciled unto thee thy handie work, which was gone
astraie far out of the way. Lo, a gentle shepherd brings home again to thy
flock, her that the violent pirate and robber had driven away. He has
brought unto thy sight the servant, whom her own conscience had made to run
away; that she which by her self had deserved punishment, by thy Son being
her solicitor, has deserved forgiveness, unto whom also for her offenses,
everlasting fire was due: nevertheless, being a subject under such a prince
and captain, she does hope to be brought home to her own country.

I was able, O holy father, by my self to offend thee, but I was not able of
my self to pacify and appease thee. Thy well-beloved Son, O my God, was made
my helper, by taking upon him mine humanity, to the intent he might cure mine
infirmity, that whereof the first occasion of thy wrath did spring, of the same
he might offer up to thee a sacrifice of praise, and that he might render and
make me also well-pleasing to thy goodness, by that thing, in the which he
sitting now at thy right hand, did always show and declare himself to be
equal with my substance, and as it were fellow with the same.

Lo, my hope, behold in whom is all my trust. If thou despise me (as it were
meet) for mine iniquities, yet look upon me (at leastwise) mercifulle, for
the charity of thy well-beloved Son. Give heed to thy Son, whereby thou
may have mercy upon thy bond-seruant. Look upon the sacrament of flesh,
and pardon the offenses of flesh. How often soever thou do remember the
wounds of thy blessed Son, so often, I beseech thee, let mine iniquity be hid.
And because flesh has stirred thee to wrath, let flesh I beseech thee move
thee to mercy; that like as flesh has seduced and led me to sin, so flesh
may get and obtain for me remission.

For certainly, it is much that mine iniquity has deserved, but much more it
is that the goodness of my Redeemer may even of right require. Mine
unrighteousness is great, but his righteousness is bigger. For look how much God
is superior unto man, even so much is my malice and evil inferior unto his
goodness, both in quality and quantity. For what have I sinned being a man,
that the Son of God being made man has not redeemed? What pride could be in
me so exceeding high, but such humility as was in him should bring it down?
What power of death was there in me so great, but the punishment, which the
Son of God suffered upon the cross, might deface it, and utterly destroy
it? Truly my God, if the sins of sinful men or women should be weied in a
just and equal balance, with the love and favor that was in our redeemer
toward us, the East is not so far distant from the West, nor the innermost
part of the earth so much separated from the uppermost part of the heaven, as
they should be unlike, so much less should mine iniquity be than is his
goodness.

Now, O most noble Creator of light, now pardon mine offenses, for the
unmeasurable travels and pains that thy beloved Son did sustain. Now I
beseech thee let his goodness be set against my wickedness, his modesty and
temperance against mine ungracious frowardnes, and his meekenes against my
fierce cruelty. Let his humility recompense my pride, his patience mine
impatience, his gentleness mine unkind churlishnes, his obedience my
disobedience, his quietness mine unquietness, his pleasant towardnes my bitter
frowardnes, his sweet facility and gentleness mine angry and fretting fumes;
to conclude, let his charity make amends for my heinous and detestable
cruelty,

Amen.
I have sinned, I have sinned, my God my God have mercy on me. God forbid that
I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of Christ, whereby the world
is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, So be it.
9. On Easter day. Of Christ his resurrection, and the Passover of Christians.
The Preface.
CHrist is risen again from the dead, and now dies no more. Halleluiah.

Death from henceforth has no more power of him. Halleluiah.

Christ is risen again, the first fruits of them that sleep. Halleluiah.

By Christ, all men that were dead in sin, are restored to life. Halleluiah.

In thy resurrection, O Christ, both heaven and earth do rejoice and say.
Halleluiah.

Thanks be unto God which gives us victory thorough our Lord Jesus Christ.
Halleluiah.

Who having spoiled all principalities and powers, has made a show of them,
openly triumphing over them in his own person. Halleluiah.

Awake O my Christ; awake up my glory, and sing Halleluiah.

For Christ our passover is offered up, and as this day revived, rose again
for our justification. Halleluiah.

Let us rejoice therefore, I say, O my soul, and keep it holidaie to the
Lord. Halleluiah.

Not with old leaven of maliciousnes and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of pureness and truth. Halleluiah.

That when we awake up after his likeness, we may be satisfied with his presence
in righteousness and glory. Halleluiah.

And be blessed and holy with those that have part in the first resurrection,
and on whom the second death has no power, but sing Halleluiah.

O death where is thy sting? O hell where is thy victory? Halleluiah.

This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad
therein, and evermore sing Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

The Prayer.
OF thy wonderful victory and resurrection from death, and glorious kingdom
O Son of God, it was said, In that day the root of Iesse shall stand to be
a sign to the people; unto him shall the nations fly, and his rest shall be
glory. Thou art that blessed branch of David; thou tookest man's nature upon
thee, and came of the line of David: but in the time of thy humiliation thou
wast but a sprig as it were in a dry ground: a notable and heavenly plant,
but oppressed with miseries. Thy soul dried away, being beaten with the
mighty tempest of Gods displeasure against our sins: notwithstanding, that
goodly root through the power of thy divine nature was not utterly choked.
Thou art delivered from the midst of death, and by thy divine power thou
stand victoriously over thine enemies, and art ready to bring us thy
soldiers from all evils, and make us partakers of thy most glorious conquest
in thy kingdom, which is altogether otherwise than the triumph and glory of
this world. Death ends all the pride, power and pomp of this world, but thy
death and rest is glorious; thy kingdom and glory begins when our life is
ended.

O Christ Son of God, how wonderful was thy rest? Man at the first was made
to be a noble and holy Temple, wherein a perpetual Sabbath should be
celebrated, and a divine nature should abide, filling and comforting him with
plenty of heavenly riches. But this rest was turned into unquietness, and this
joy into sorrow, through the hatred of satan thine enemy which profaned
this temple and sabbath, and brought in an horrible misorder and wickedness.
Wherefore it pleased thine almighty Father of his goodness to send thee his
only Son, from his own bosom, to restore again this Sabbath. Hence it
was, that after a wonderful manner, in the day of the great Sabbath
according to the law of Moses, thine humane nature (through death which
separated the soul from the body) rested in the sepulcher, and the word
(which forsook not that nature, no not at the grave) revived that flesh the
third day, and so thou rosest again, when the time of our redemption was
expired, victoriously unto thy kingdom, and give an eternal Sabbath and
rest to such as fly unto thee.

O Son of God, call thou sinners, even us miserable and unclean persons,
unto that sacred feast, which in this world through thee the chief Priest is
begun, and shall be then made perfect, when the elect for evermore shall
follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he go. Put on us the festival garment, the
garment of thy righteousness and benediction, that we putting away the leaven
of malice and wickedness, may celebrate the feast in the sweet bread of
sincerity, and serve thee in pureness of living and truth.

This year from thine incarnation 1582. are passed 3091 years, since the
first passover which the Israelites did celebrate going out of Egypt; so long
have thou preserved thy Church, and we beseech thee preserve it everlastingly,
notwithstanding the rage of the devil and his ministers. And as thou
defendedst thy people which eat of the Lamb; and moreover, going through out
Egypt, slaiedst in thy righteous judgments all the first borne in the land; so
assist us, that with a lively faith we may feed on thee the true Lamb. Keep
us among all the miseries of this last age of the world. The carcases
remaining, were cast away and condemned; but thy oblation is grateful in the
sight of God, it appeaseth the wrath of the eternal Father, and by the eating
of thee, which art the Lamb of God taking away the sins of the world,
righteousness and life is given to believers. The word raises again and
quickneth the flesh, that unto us ingraffed thereunto by faith, the like life
may be given, and the body of sin mortified in us, and thou live and reign
in us for evermore, wherefore let thy glorious rest be in us.

We are made of earth, and after sin, our bodies were appointed to the earth;
yea the ungodly shall abide for ever in the earth, and never appear in thy
glorious heaven. But after thou touchedst the death with thy lively flesh,
thou made it light, thou tookest away the heaviness thereof. Through the
blast of the first serpent many times, even man's flesh is turned into very
serpents. And in the grave of the wicked, more horrible is the filth of
spiritual dragons and serpents which devour them everlastingly, and keep
them in perpetual death. But thou, O Son of God make the graves of thy
saints even pleasant chambers as it were. Thou driuest far away from thence
all filthiness of satan. Thou set about them the watchmen, even thy pure
Angels, which bring their souls into paradise, commending them into the hands
and bosom of thy Father, and keep also their ashes, which both were and shall
be at thy return the house of the holy ghost.

Beautify us in like manner with this thy glory of true knowledge and calling
upon thee. Be present with us at the point of death; receive our souls at
their departure into thine hands, show thou thy comfort and joy, till at the
resurrection of mankind thou crown thine elect with perfect and endless
glory, a taste whereof might be seen in those forty days after thy
resurrection. Never was there so goodly a world as that was, when thou rosest
from death, and broughtest out of their graves a great company of thy Saints,
as the Scripture plainly (but breeflie for the ungodly) does testify.
Familiarlie did the holy fathers and matrones remain with thy sweet mother
and Apostles. Pleasant speeches and much talk was made, no doubt of the
miseries of man, of the unspeakable benefits gotten by thee, and of the glory
of eternal life.

O Lord, raise thou up our hearts, that with a true desire, we may long to come
into this fair company. Let us turn our selves in cogitation unto that holy
assembly. Let us hearken unto and learn thy wisdom revealed in thy word. In
this life thy Church is in darkness, in miseries; men are occupied in the
observation of outward ceremonies, as those godly women; they will anoint thy
body. Many times thy Church seems to be deprived of thy sweet presence, and
utters these sorrowful words: They have taken away my Lord, and I can not
tell where they have laid him. But O Son of God, amend the mortal darkness
within us; kindle in our soul thine inward service which pleases thee;
manifest thy self unto us in affliction; speak these comfortable words in our
calamity unto us, Weep not; that even in death we may think with our selves
that thou art present, and after death rise again to the fruition of eternal
life, with thy blessed Saints,

Amen.
Another.
Almighty God, and most merciful heavenly Father, who have raised up thy
Son for our justification, as thou gave him to death for our sins, grant
that thy holy spirit may work that faith in us, whereby we may be made
partakers of that righteousness, which he has for those that trust in him. And
because without the blessed hope of rising again from the dead, our faith is
in vain, and we are yet in our sins, therefore we beseech thee to confirm
and strengthen it in us, that as thou have already raised up Christ our head,
so we may be assured thou will also raise us up, that the body may be joined
to the head. And furthermore, as thou have left this holy story of thy Son,
that we might believe in him, and by faith obtain everlasting life; so we
beseech thee work the fruit of it in us, in constant faith, to the salvation
of our souls, and thy everlasting glory, to whom with the Son and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, praise and glory, now and for ever,

Amen.
Another.
Almighty God, and most merciful heavenly Father, who according to all that
had been written before in ye law of Moses, and in the Prophets, that it
behooued the Savior of the world to suffer death, and to rise again from the
dead the third day, and that repentance and forgiveness of sins should be
preached amongst all nations in his name, and so from point to point have
fully accomplished all these things in Christ Jesus thine only Son, whom
thou did raise from the grave, as this day, not only to live again in this
world, but even to sit at thy right hand, and providing for our infirmity,
have given us a great many of witnesses, both of holy men and women upon the
earth, and of Angels from heaven, to confirm the truth of this matter unto us,
that we might have strong assurance of salvation in him through faith. Open our
minds to understand the holy Scriptures, and grant us steadfastly to believe
this thy Gospel, that by this faith, being made one with him, we may receive
the forgiveness of our sins, and the estimation of righteous men in thy sight,
through him. And furthermore also grant, that by this his mighty conquest,
whereby he has triumphed over the last enemy which is Death, in raising
himself again unto life, we may both rise with him from the death of sins,
to the life of grace, by leading a new conversation, and sit with him at thy
right hand in hope, having our life hid in him, that when he shall appear to
come to judgment, our life also here being led in the obedience of faith, may
then be made manifest, and we receive that which we now in faith possess, and
in a blessed hope look and wait for at his coming, which is the salvation of
our souls, to the glory of thy name, to whom, with the Son, and the holy
Ghost, be all praise and honor now and for ever,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving.
WE lift up our hearts unto thee, O Lord; for it is very meet, right, and our
bounden duty, that we should at all times, and in all places give thanks unto
thee O Lord, holy Father, almighty everlasting God: but chiefly we are bound
to praise thee for the glorious resurrection of thy son Jesus Christ our
Lord. For he is the very paschall Lamb which was offered for us, and has
taken away the sins of the world; who by his death has destroyed death, and
by his rising to life again, has restored to us everlasting life. Therefore
with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of heaven, we laud and
magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee, and saying: Holy holy
holy Lord God of hoasts; heaven and earth are full of thy glory; Glory be to
thee O Lord most high, So be it.

10. On Ascension day. Of Christ his glorious ascending into the heavens, in
the sight of his Apostles.
The Preface.
GOD is gone up with a merry noise, and the Lord with the sound of the
trumpet, Glory to God on high. Halleluiah.

He humbled himself unto the death, wherefore God also has highly exalted
him, and set him on his right hand in heavenly places, far above all powers
and dominion. Halleluiah.

God is gone up on high, and hathled captivity captive, and received gifts for
men. Halleluiah.

He that descended first into the low parts of the earth, is even the same
also that ascended up, far above all heavens, to fulfill all things. Halleluiah.

God is gone up with a merry noise; the Lord is ascended in great triumph.
Halleluiah.

Lift up your head O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, that the
King of glory may enter in. Halleluiah.

Yea, be thou exalted Lord in thine own strength, so will we praise thy power
perpetually, and evermore sing, Glory to God on high, Halleluiah.

The prayer.
THou, O Christ son of God, forty days after thy resurrection, continuedst
in the world to the unspeakable comfort of thy Church, which being expired,
thou ascendedst gloriously in the sight of thy Saints into the heavens. We
yield thee most hearty thanks for this thy benefit, beseeching thee most
humbly to number us among the saints and soldiers which wait upon thee
triumphieng. The handwriting depends on the testimony of our guilty
conscience, to our condemnation; but by thy death, the sentence of condemnation
is abolished, and thy blood washes us from all our sins. The enemies of thine
elect, even the devil and death, are lead bound, and the whole company of the
saints both in heaven and earth, is filled with joy, and speak of thy
victory and benefits. Thy Saints in heaven visiblie do behold thy glorious
victory. Thy Saints in earth are saved by faith, for the ornament and glory
of the kings daughter is glorious within.

In the sight of many godly auditors of thine, and of thy holy mother the
blessed virgin Marie, thou wast carried visiblie from the earth in the clouds
into heaven. Thou gave a taste of eternal life to thine Apostles wondering
at thy departure, and preachedst to them of thy return into judgment. Thou
have glorified thine humane nature with unspeakable glory, and placed the same
on the right hand of thy Father, upon the throne of triumph and victory, as
having for our sakes, vanquished all our enemies. But thine humane nature is
not only above, as be thy Saints, but is exalted also to such a light, as
cannot be attained to by any creature. Thou reignest visible with the Father,
replenishing the whole celestial congregation with righteousness and divine
glory. Govern thou also in this mortal life, outwardly in thy ministry,
and inwardly in our minds. Thou have ascended on high, and lead captivity
captive, to bestow thy benefits upon man.

Before thy departure thou renewedst the institution of thy ministry, thou
gave thy disciples a commandment to preach to all nations; for which thy
goodness, we give thee most hearty thanks: for thereby thou have called us to
the society of thy Saints. Assist us with thy spirit, that we may believe the
Gospel, and keep for evermore the covenant which in our baptism we have made
with thee. Thou adornedst thine Apostles which were to carry a new doctrine
over the face of the whole earth, with singular testimonies of miracles, that
the Church might assuredly know they erred not. Continue among us in like
sort thy ministry, together with the purity of thy word. Send among us
Evangelists, pastors and teachers, which may join themselves to the doctrine
of the Apostles, and diligently spread the same abroad, and speak thou which
art the head of the ministry within to our hearts, and raise up godly motions
through thy spirit.

Thou art ascended on high to be the head of thy Church, filling all things;
finish thy work in us; ingraffe us to thy glorified body, and power upon us
from thy divine nature a like spirit, which may intermingle it self with our
soul, and begin while we here live, in us an eternal life, which may create
in us a new man, fashioned accordingly to thy similitude and likeness. And
inspire in us such a perfection and righteousness, as thou shall think meet
and convenient for our weak and frail nature; and let holy motions agreeing
to thine heavenly will be planted in us. Drive away the darkness of our
minds, extinguish the wicked affections of our heart, and let the new man daily
prosper and increase in perfection. Defend thy Church by thy mighty right
hand, against all the power both of man and devils. Fill our flitting souls
with a taste of a new life, receive them into thine hands, and grant that at the
resurrection and glorification of thy Church, we may ioifullie behold thee,
returning and triumphing gloriously, and so be placed in that kingdom, which
thou will deliver to thy Father, for their everlasting happiness,

Amen.
Halleluiah. Glory be to God on high.
Anotherverie devout meditation and prayer, wherein the mind is very much
moved, and plentiouslie stirred to contemplation of heavenly things, if it be
said in quietness.
MOst mighty King, my very good, gentle, and loving Lord Jesus Christ, which
of thine inestimable charity and unspeakable pity, taking upon thee to be the
seed of Abraham, not of Angels, did vouchsafe not only willingly to suffer
for our sins both bonds, cross, wounds, yea death and sepulcher, and after
three days (death being overcome) did rise again for our justification,
wast seen of thy disciples, reforming their hearts, and establishing them that
were almost declining from thee: but also after thou had glorified our
mortal nature with the stole of holy resurrection and immortality, the
fortith day after thou in the sight of thy disciples, did with the triumph
of thy glory, gloriously ascend into heaven, and cariedst it above the
heavens, and above all the melodious company of Angels, above Cherubin and
Seraphin, placing it upon the right hand of God thy Father, where the Angels
do praise that same humane nature of ours, and all the powers of heaven do
even tremble to see a man to be God over them, and where thou O Lord sit
and live everlastingly now, and reignest throughout all worlds.

Behold, I thy seely creature, which with the weight of my frailenes am drawn
ever downward, and so not able to live holilie, virtuously, and as I ought to
live, without thy continual help, whereunto I think it necessary for me to
stick and cleave, most humbly beseech thee to draw me upward toward thee,
that I may run after thee in the sweet savor of thine ointments. Let me
run, and not faint, when thou drawest me and leadest me running. Draw the
mouth of the soul that thirsts after thee, unto the high floods and streams
of thine eternal abundance and satietie: yea draw me wholly unto thy self,
which art the living well, to the intent I may, according to my capacity,
drink of that whereupon I do live.

O my God, my life, thou did say with thy holy and blessed mouth; If any
man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. O well of life, grant unto my
thirsty soul, alwaie to drink of thee, that according to thy holy and true
promise, waters of life may flow out of my belly. O well of life, replenish
and fill my mind full of the river of thy pleasure. Make my heart to be droonken
as it were in thy love, that after the manner of them that be droonken with
wine, which forget all things save the cup, so I may forget all vain and
earthly things, and continually have nothing else in my remembrance, but thee
only, according as it is written; I remembered God and was delighted. Give me
the holy Ghost, whom those waters did signify, which thou did promise to
give to them that thirsted after thee.

Grant I beseech thee, that I may assaie to go with my whole desire and all my
study toward that place, unto the which I believe thou did ascend the
fortith day after thy resurrection, that in this present misery I may be
only in body, but in thought and desire always with thee, that my heart may
be there whereas thou art which art my treasure, worthy to be coueted, and
much to be loved, wherewith no treasure is worthy to be compared.

Bring to pass, O Lord Christ, that through thy gift I may be stirred and
carried upward: for I fervently desire to ascend, yea I make certain
ascensions in my heart, lifting it upward, and sing the song of stars. With
the lamp of thy love, I say, am I kindled and moved to go with thee thither,
whereas thou my portion reignest, and I believe to reign; thither, whereas
thou my flesh art glorified, and I believe to be glorified; thither, where thou
my blood rulest, and I perceive me to bear rule, that is, even unto the peace
of Jerusalem, to Jerusalem I say which is my country; to Jerusalem which is
my mother, would I now go upward. For when I remember Jerusalem, I extend and
stretch forth toward it the senses of my heart, and toward thee, O Christ,
which art a King over her; her light, her father, her defender, her patron,
her governor, her keeper, her chaste and strong delight, her only and whole
pleasure, and of whom all her goodness and felicity comes, because thou art
the chief good, and the true good: and I will never turn back, until thou
bring me home from this pilgrimage, in which I am deformedlie scattered abroad,
unto the place of my dearly beloved mother, whereas be the first fruits of my
spirit; and until thou, O God, which art my mercy, fashion me, and confirm
me for ever. Whither go we now upward? to the peace of Jerusalem? Because I was
glad and reioiced in those things which were spoken unto me, therefore will I go
into the house of the Lord, there has he placed us, there will he give us all
good things, therefore will I will and desire nothing else, but to tarry and
remain there before the Lord for ever. But, oh Lord, forasmuch as whilst we
be clad in this body, we do as it were go astraie, and are strangers unto
thee; we have not here an abiding place for ever; but we seek for one that is
to come: our abiding place is in heaven, whither thou art ascended. Therefore
thy favor and grace my guide, I enter into the chamber of my heart, and sing
unto thee songs of love, my King and my GOD, mourning with marvelous sighings
in this place of my peregrination, whereas thy justices are my songs, and
whereas I am tossed with storms on every side. For in this great flood of
this life, there is no steadfast standing, or place high enough above the
waters; no not for the foot of a dove to rest upon. In this life, I say, there
is no safe or quiet peace; no where any sure rest; euerie-where battle and
strife; euerie-where enemies and fightings without doors, and frights and
fears within doors.

And for as much as the one part of us is heavenly, and the other earthly; our
body which is corrupt, does laden, and is burdenous unto the soul: therefore
my mind, which is my fellow and friend, being weary with wandering forth of
the way, is sick, and lies all to torn and rent of those things, which it
has passed by. It hungreth and thirsts greatly after vanities, and I have
nothing to set before it, because I am poor and a beggar. Thou, O Lord my God
art rich in all good things, and the most plentious giver of the deinties of
heavenly satietie. Give meat unto the weary; not such as it thirsts after,
but such as is convenient for it. Gather together the dispersed; renew and
refresh the torn. Lo, he stands at the door and knocks. I beseech thee,
by the bowels of thy mercy, wherewith thou being the daie-spring from an high
have visited us; open the hand of thy pity to a wretch that knocks, and
vouchsafe mercifully to enter into thee; and that I may rest with thee, and be
refreshed of thee, which art the living and heavenly bread, wherewith when I
am once fed, and that my strength is come to me again: I may ascend unto more
high things, and be lifted up out of this vale of misery and tears, and with
the wings of my godly desires I may fly up unto thee, and the heavenly
kingdom.

Let my spirit, O Lord, I beseech thee, take wings as an Egle, and fly without
fainting: let it fly up, and come to the beautifulness of thine holy house,
and to the place of heaven, where thy glory dwells; whereas upon the
meate-tables of thy supernall citizens, it may be fed full of thy secrets in
the place of thy pasture by the most plentiful rivers sides. Let mine heart
rest in thee, my God; my heart, I say, which is as though it were a great sea
swelling with waters. Thou did rebuke the winds and the sea, and there was
made streightwaies a great calm: O come and wake upon the fluds of mine heart,
that all things which belong unto me, may be made calm and clear: that I may
embrace thee, which art mine only God, and that I may behold thee, which art
the sweet light nf mine eyes without any blind darkness of troublesome
cogitations and thought. Let my mind fly, O Lord, under the shadow of thy
wings for meat, that it being covered with the temperatenesse of thy pleasant
coolness, may sing ioifullie, and say; I will lay me down, and rest in
peace. Finally, let my memory sleep, O my God, I beseech thee, from all
evils; make it to hate iniquity, and to love righteousness. For what can be
better, or more delectable, than in the mids of the darkness of this life,
and among the manifold and bitter miseries of the same, to desire fervently
heavenly sweetness? To covet everlasting blessedness? Or our mind to be held
ever there, whereas we may be most sure to have infallible and true ioies?

Oh Lord, which for thy loving kindness art most worthy to be desired, and
coueted of all things: when shall I see thee? When shall I appear before thy
face? When shall I be satisfied of thy glory? When will thou bring me forth
of this dark prison, that I may confess thy name, so that afterward I be no
more pricked? When shall I pass, and go to that marvelous and beautiful
house of thine, whereas the voice of gladness and reioicing does sound in the
tabernacles of just men? Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, O Lord;
they shall praise thee ever world without end. Blessed are they, yea blessed
indeed, whom thou have chosen, and taken into that heavenly inheritance.
Behold, O Lord, thy Saints flourish before thee, like unto lillies. For they
are replenished with the plentiousnesse of thine house, and thou dooest give
them to drink of the flowing river of thy pleasure, because thou art the well
of life, and in thy light and brightness they do see light; and that so
greatly, that they themselves, which are a light, and are made bright by thee,
O Lord, which do give them light, do shine like unto the sun in thy sight.

O how marvelous, how fair and beautiful, how acceptable are the mansions
and dwelling places of thine house! O Lord of powers, my sinful soul does
covet to enter into them. O Lord, I have loved the comeliness of thine house,
and the place where thine honor dwells. I asked one petition of the Lord,
and the same will I require; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life. Like as the Heart coueteth to go unto the water brooks; even
so does my soul desire to come unto thee, O Lord. When shall I come and
appear before the face of my Lord? When shall I see God, after whom my soul
longs very sore? When shall I see him in the land of the living? For in this
land of the dead he cannot be seen with mortal eyes.

What shall I do wretch that I am, which am fettered with the heavy gieues of
mortality? What shall I do? Whiles we continue in this body we go astraie
from the Lord: we have here no abiding place for ever; but we labor for one
that is to come. Our free city is in heaven. Woe is me; me think I dwell among
the barbarous nations and infidels, and not amongst the faithful Israelites. I
lead my life in the tents of Cedar. My soul has dwelt too long with them that
hate peace and quietness. Who will give me wings as a dooue, that I may fly
away, and rest me? There is nothing that I desire, or delight so much in, as
to be in my Lords company. It is good for me to cleave unto God. Oh grant me,
O Lord, whilst I am in these frail members, to stick unto thee, as it is
written; He that cleaves unto the Lord, is all one spirit with him. Give me
therefore, I beseech thee, the wings of contemplation, wherewith when I am
apparelled, I may fly upward. And for as much as every unlucky and
unfortunate thing lies beneath: do thou, O Lord, hold up my mind, least it
fall headlong into the lowest bottoms of the dark vallie, and least the
shadow of the earth should come between and separate it from thee, that art
the bright sun of righteousness; and least it once hid with the clouds of
darkness, should not have liberty; but be let to look for heavenly
things which be above.

Therefore I do assaie to go upward unto the ioies of quietness and peace,
and unto the delectable and pleasant state of light. O hold mine heart with
thine hand, because it cannot be drawn unto high things without thee. Thither
do I make haste, whereas most chief and principal peace reigns, and
continual quietness shines forth. Hold and govern my spirit, and take it
according to thy will, that thou being a guide unto it, it may ascend into the
region and country of plentifulnesse, whereas thou feedest Israel
everlastingly with the food of truth, to the intent, that there at the
leastwise with my swift cogitation and thought, I may come nigh thy wisdom,
which remains above all things, ouerpasseth all things, and governs all
things.

But alas, there be many things, which when my soul would fly unto thee, do
cry out upon it. Command them all, O Lord, to hold their peace, and speak not
unto me. As for my soul it self, let it give never a word to answer. Let it
pass by all things. Let it clime above althings that be created, and come unto
thee. And that it may fasten the eyes of faith upon thee, which art the only
Creator of all things. Let it covet unto thee, and be bent toward thee. Let it
think upon thee by meditation and contemplation; let it lay thee before her
eyes for it self. Let it roll and toss thee in her heart; thee, I say, which
art the true and chief goodness, and the joy that will remain without
ending.

There are surely many contemplations, in the which man's soul is
maruellouslie fed of thee; but in none of them is my soul so much delighted,
or yet has so good rest in, as in thee, and when as it thinks upon thee, and
has thee only in contemplation. Oh how much is thy sweetness, O Lord! How
maruellouslie dooest thou inspire the hearts of them that love thee? How
delectable is thy love, the fruition whereof they have that love nothing but
thee; they seek nothing else; they covet nothing else: happy are they, whose
only hope thou art; which have no trust, but in thee only, and all their
whole work is prayer. Blessed is he that sits solitary alone, and holds
his peace, and stands upon his ward, that he is set to keep continually
day and night, that yet whilst he is in this frail body, he may be able to
taste somewhat thy pleasures.

I require thee by those thy wounds, which bring health unto us, which wounds
thou sufferedst upon the cross for our health; out of the which thy precious
blood (wherewith thou redeemedst us, did distill and drop down,) wound this my
sinful soul, for the which also thou did vouchsafe to die: wound it, I say,
with the fire and mighty dart of thy great charity. For the word of God is
lively and effectuous, and more pearcing and sharp than any two edged sword.
Thou, O chosen dart, and most sharp sword, which art able by thy power to
pearce through the hard shield, or buckler of man's heart, fasten and strike the
shaft of thy love in mine heart, that my soul may say unto thee; I am wounded
with thy charity, so that forth of that same wound of thy love, tears may
flow most plentiouslie both day and night.

Strike, O Lord, strike I beseech thee this most indurated and hardened heart
and mind of mine, with the sharp dart of thy love, and pearce it deeper and
deeper into the innermost parts thereof, by thy mighty power, and so bring out
of my head abundance of water, and out of mine eyes a very well of tears,
continually running, through the great affect, and marvelous desire to see
thy glory, that I may moorne day and night, without taking any comfort in
this life, until in thy heavenly wedding chamber I may see thee my well-beloved
and beautiful spouse, my God and my Lord, and that there when I see thy
glorious, marvelous, and beautiful face full of all sweetness, together with
them which thou have chosen, then I say, I may worship humbly thy Majesty,
and there at the last being replenished with heavenly and unspeakable
reioicing of everlasting gladness, I may ever cry out with them that love
thee, saying: Behold, that which I have long desired, now I have obtained, for
I am joined in heaven unto him, whom when I was in earth, I loved with all my
strength, with all my charity. I embraced him, unto whom with all my love I
did stick and cleave. Him do I praise, bless, and woorship, that lives and
reigns God world without end,

Amen.
Another prayer to Christ, ascended and reigning in glory.
OH good Christ, our first begotten brother, and tender-harted Joseph! Oh
natural Son of that father, to whom we are made children of adoption
through thee! Oh our head, reigning on high in glory, forget not us thy poor
members here on earth, where-into abasing thy self, thou cammest down, and
sufferedst for us most cruel death! Out of this thy throne of majesty and
glory thou put us in assured hope and confidence, that we also shall
atteine to this blessed place, whither thou art gone before to take possession
for us. Oh our strong tower of defense and succor, what can hurt us now
trusting in thee? Most unhappy are they which are ignorant of thee, and most
happy are they which always behold thee. Blessed are they which have known
thee here in the days of this mortality: but more blessed are they which see
thee in the heavens, and shall see thee reigning with thy Father in ioies
incomparable.

Oh Lord, the only joy and comfort of our souls, show us thy loving
countenance, embrace us with the arms of thy mercy. Receive us, O good Joseph
thy younger brethren, with the kiss of comfort. Power into our hearts thy holy
spirit. Pluck us up from the earth and earthly things. Open our eyes, and
lift them up unto thee. Open thy mouth, and call us unto thee. Open our ears,
that we may hear thee, so that whatsoever we do speak or think, it may be
directed unto thee alone our redeemer, mediator and advocate,

Amen.
Another.
THou Lord did put away Marie Magdalen from thee kissing of thy feet,
because thy flesh was not yet exalted, and she knew not yet the dignity of
thy clarified body, and beautified with the glory of immortality, but was
addicted only to thy bodily presence. She yet sought thee living among the
dead; neither was it known to her that thou wast equal with thy Father:
wherefore thou would not suffer her so much as to kiss thy feet, because it
was a thing unworthy for thy Majesty.

O thou mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah; thou conqueror of hell and death,
everliving and immortal; thou art now risen from death for us. Thou art now
ascended to thy Father and our Father, and sit at the right hand in glory:
grant that we also in heart and mind may thither ascend, and with thee
continually dwell. Suffer us to come near unto thee, that we may kiss thee.
Yea Lord, thou lover of our souls, come thou rather unto us, and kiss us with
the kiss of thy mouth, that we may be glad and rejoice in thee. Draw us, that
we may run after the savor of thy sweet ointments, that we may behold thee
in righteousness, and when thy glory shall appear, we may be satisfied. For in
thy presence there is fulness of joy, and on thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore, So be it, Halleluiah.

A Thanksgiving.
WE lift up our hearts unto thee, O Lord God: for it is very meet, right, and
our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and in all places, give thanks
unto thee O Lord holy Father, almighty everlasting God, through thy most
dear beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who after his glorious resurrection,
manifestly appeared to all his Apostles, and in their sight ascended up into
heaven, to prepare a place for us, that where he is, thither we might also
ascend to reign with him in glory. Therefore, with Angels, and Archangels,
and with all the company of heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious name,
evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy holy holy, Lord God of hoasts,
heaven and earth are full of thy glory, Glory be to thee O God most high, So
be it.

11. On Whitsundaie, or the feast of Pentecost. Of the sending of the
Comforter, even the spirit of truth.
The Preface.
THE spirit of the Lord fills the round compass of the world, and vpholdeth
all things. Halleluiah.

The spirit of wisdom is loving, and will not absolve him that blasphemeth
with his lips. Halleluiah.

The holy spirit of discipline flies from deceit, and withdraws himself
from thoughts that are without understanding. Halleluiah.

This therefore is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness more than light. Halleluiah.

But O Father, leave us not comfortless, but come unto us, and give us the
Comforter, even the holy spirit of truth, which the world can not receive,
that he may abide with us, and dwell within us for ever. Halleluiah.

Come holy Ghost, and teach us in all thy ways, and bring all things to our
remembrance whatsoever God has commanded unto us, that we may speak with new
lips, and magnify God, according to his will. Halleluiah.

Make me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me. Halleluiah.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.
Halleluiah.

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free
spirit. Halleluiah.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the world, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee. Halleluiah, Halleluiah.

The Prayer.
IF ye love me, keep my commandments, and I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, etc. Oh heavenly speech to be
had in perpetual remembrance! Thou O Christ promisest such as keep thy
commandments, such as in faith and a good conscience obeie thee, to be loved
entirely of thy Father, and their breasts to be the inhabiting place of thy
divinity. Nothing is more lamentable, than to be cast from God into fear and
fire unquenchable; nothing more comfortable; than to have thy favor, and to be
loved of God. This so excellent a benefit thou do promise to thy disciples,
wherefore ingraffe us to the blessed company which thy Father does love, whose
sins are forgiven through thy deserts, and they are received into mercy, and
the inheritance of eternal life through thy death. Neither is it thy will to
have us present in love, and by the imputation of thy righteousness only, but
also by a natural participation and real conformity with God in deed.

Man deceived by the devil, forsook God his governor, and conceived so
highly of himself, that he would rule himself without God. Let God defend
thy life, the rest seek from thy self, say the wise men of this world; and
they commend that man whose only hope depends upon himself. But O
lamentable darkness, how shamefullie does man fall without God assist! How
miserably does he perish, whom God forsakes! Wherefore taking pity on our
wretched state, thou restorest the ancient order, interrupted through sin,
and wilt that the hearts of the faithful shall again be made ye dwelling
place, and temple of divinity.

The Godhead in deed is every where, upholding as long as he thinks good,
the whole frame of the world, and the substance of every particular thing
therein: and again destroieng all when he thinks good so to do;
notwithstanding, he abides only in the soul, which receives Christ: into it
do the Father and the word breath of their spirit, and link it to themselves
in like light, righteousness and life. In the Son the glory of the Father
does shine, and fills that humane substance, which the word, through an
eternal covenant, coupleth to himself with the same spirit, and powers it
into the hearts of believers, to make them like unto him. For the word, through
the same spirit, quickens both his own and our flesh. And this is the
beginning of eternal life in this miserable world. This spirit imprinteth the
image of God, which the word (present in our minds) does speak in our soul,
kindeling a light and knowledge conformable to the Gospel, turns us to the
true service of GOD, and stirs up in our wills so holy motions, agreeing to
the law of Christ, as shine in that humane nature of Christ now glorified, who
cures our infirmity.

He comes from the Father sent by the Son to renew us according to the
image of Christ. He returns to the Son and Father to couple us unto God; to
make intercession for us with groans unspeakable, and to move the heart of
eternal God unto mercy and compassion toward us. Such is our nature, that
through Gods spirit we reason christianlie, and think godly: then how can it
be, but that the spirit must raise godly cogitations and good motions in our
minds, which is by nature a God, and therefore substantiallie does he mingle
himself with our spirits, springing in our nature, but regenerated by him to
imprint in us another light and newness, than is natural wisdom and
righteousness; and therefore many sighs do we fetch, even these deep
sighs.

And thou word dwelling in our minds, be thou present, and kindle our hearts by
thy blast. Convert us, Lord, and we shall be converted. Turn us to the
acknowledging of our sins; erect us by the preaching of the Gospel, and
grant that through faith we may receive the promise of the spirit. Strengthen
us, that we may retain so excellent a gift, and at no time be entangled in the
snares of Satan, neither yet forgo so noble a ghest, for our wickedness, Make
us to walk circumspectly, not as fools following our vain concupiscence; to
shun all occasions of falling, and evermore to crave at thine hands, that this
precious gift may from time to time continue with us, and increase.

And as upon this day thou have taught the hearts of thy people, by the sending
to them the light of thine holy spirit; so grant us by the same spirit, to
have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort. Let the same spirit bring into our memory, that which thou have said;
make it firmly to retain the foundation of sound doctrine, uttered from the
bosom of the Father, and at no time to seek new revelations, as do the
Enthusian heretics, both without and beside the warrant of thy word. Let us
never invent fained gods, and false worshippings; but follow only and
sincerely that, which thou have said and taught.

The world follows vain pleasure, seeks prosperity, and hunteth after
wealth and worship, especially the last age of this world does so: it
altogether doteth, and is become secure; but fill thou our hearts with true
peace, wherewith we may stay our selves in the combat of conscience, fighting
before the judgment of God. And in our agonies, when a separation shall be made
both of soul and body; then give us grace to be mindful of this thy saying;
Let not your hearts be grieved; I go, and come again unto you.

Let not thy comfortable presence depart from our soul: thou will certainly
come again, even to raise us from the dead, to place us in thy kingdom.
Wherefore we rejoice at thy departure unto thy Father. For the Father is greater
than thou. Thou have prepared a place, and blessed mansion in the house of thy
Father, exalted to the right hand of the Father, and have respect of the person
sent even till the consummation of the world. Cease not to apply the merits of
thy sacrifice unto us, make continual intercession for us. Thou abidest our
King and Priest, until thou deliuerest the kingdom to thy Father. And
therefore as a Mediator thou do verelie obtain those good things, which
thou have promised to all believers.

Thou valiantly did conquer Satan, to make us parteners of thy victory.
Thou willingly gave thy life, that it might satisfy for many. Thou wast
obedient to thine eternal Father, in the race of thine humiliation, that by
thy death we might live. Wherefore, seal within us this faith and
righteousness; grant that continually we may retain thy saiengs in our
minds; that we may enioie thy peace, and keep a place for thy divinity in our
hearts, while we live in this world, through our first fruits, and so hereafter
in the life to come, we shall attain the tenths, and be made like unto thee,
beholding God face to face: So be it.

Another meditation and thanksgiving, for the good effects that the holy
Ghost works in us by his coming.
AL possible praise and thanks I yield unto thee, O God heavenly Father, and
unto thy dear Son Jesus Christ my Savior, for sending down thy spirit of
truth our comforter, sanctifier, and regenerator, the holy Ghost into this
world. The which thing verelie I believe thou did for this only end and
purpose, that because the grape of thy son our Savior Christ's flesh was
carried to the wine press of the Cross, and there being pressed, yielded
forth the sweet wine of his Godhead: it pleased thee therefore of thy great
mercy to send the same thy holy Ghost, to make ready the vessels of men's
hearts, that the new wine might be put into new vessels: first to season their
hearts from marring of the wine that should be put into them, and afterward to
hoope them well for leaking, when the wine was powered into them: that is to
say; to cleanse them from delighting in sin, and to bind them from delighting
in vanity. For that which is good, could not come in, till that which is
evil, was first rid out.

Oh wonderful work! Oh unspeakable benefit of thy surpassing goodness and
mercy, most worthy of all praise, that man on earth, or Angels in heaven may
give or render! The holy name of thy sacred Majesty be therefore blessed,
magnified, and extolled, for ever and ever, Amen. And now, O gracious God, and
good Father, I most humbly and entirely beseech thee, that for as much as
delighting in wickedness (which is to love sin) does defile us, and make our
vessels foul; yea leads to death: and that the delighting in vanity (which
is to be in love with transitory things of this world) sheddeth out, and
makes the vessel of our bodies full of crannies and rifts, yea intiseth and
deceives us to our destruction; it may please thee therefore of thine ancient
and accustomed mercy and goodness, to give me grace to cast out the thing
that is evil in me, that I may be fit to take in and receive the thing that is
good in thee, and so to power out all sowernesse of sin and wickedness, that
I may be filled with the sweetness of all virtue and godliness.

Yea, do thou thy self, O gracious Father (even with the same thy blessed
finger, and mighty power, wherewith in times past by thy son Christ Jesus
thou did rebuke and throw the devils and unclean spirits forth of those
that were possessed,) vouchsafe also I beseech thee, of the same thy singular
love and pity, to cast out of me the foul spirit of the devil, which works
delight in wickedness, and is the occasion of faults: yea so, and in such sort
to abandon him, that he, nor any of his, may ever return into my vessel any
more to dwell therein. I beseech thee furthermore, to expel forth of my
vessel, the spirit of this world, which works delight in vanity, and is a
fault of it self; that I be never intised, nor deceived any more therewith
hereafter. Finally, I humbly pray thee to throw out of me all other evil
and unclean spirits whatsoever, which are noisome enemies to my soul and
salvation: and grant that thy spirit, O God, even the holy Ghost, I mean,
with all the fruits, gifts, virtues, and graces thereof, may vouchsafe to come
and enter into the tabernacle of mine heart and mind, to work in me good
delights, and good love, whereby the love of the world, and the love of sin,
may be utterly driven away from me for ever: and my mind be continually
enlightened; my conscience still cleansed; mine heart ever gladded; and thou thy
self, my GOD, my Sanctifier and Savior, be more and more showed, and made
manifest unto me,

Amen.
A Thanksgiving unto God for our regeneration and sanctification, not improper
to be used also at public Baptism.
O God the holy Ghost, which proceedest from the Father and the Son, and
with them art woorshipped and glorified in the unity of the true and eternal
Deity, and art also the substantial amity between the Father and the Son,
we worship thee, we praise and glorify thee, and with our whole heart we thank
thee for all thy benefits, especially for calling us by the voice of thy
Gospel, unto the Christian congregation, for illuminating us with thy gifts;
for sanctifieng us with a steadfast faith; and for keeping us hitherto in the
same. For by the fount of the wholesome lauour, that is, by the water of holy
Baptism, being powered into us, thou dooest continually work in us
regeneration and renewing of the inward man. Harken, we beseech thee, unto our
supplication, and teach us miserable women, which by the proper strength of our
only reason, can by no means trust in, or approach to Christ our Lord and
Savior: teach us, O our God, what thy pleasure is, and lead us into all
truth. For without thine assistance, none can say that Jesus is the Lord.

O blessed Lamp of light, fill the inward parts of the faithful with the
holy oil of thy manifold heavenly gifts and graces, without the which
nothing is light and pleasant in man, but every thing dark, obscure, and
hurtful. Wash thou that is filthy; water that is dry; heal that is wounded;
bow the obstinate; cherish the frosen; and reclaim them which wander. Give to
the faithful trusting in thee, the reward of well-doing, the entrance into
happiness and everlasting comfort. Thou in thy gifts seauen-fold, which art the
spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord;
inspire into us through the preaching of the Gospel, thine heavenly wisdom
about thine essence and dinine pleasure, which is hid from the world. Grant
that we may know the Father and the Son by thee, and may always believe
that thou art the spirit of them both, and so worship one God in Trinity, and
the Trinity in unity, whose will is, that not one should perish, but be
converted and live; and that as many as believe in the Son, should have
everlasting life. For the Father sent the Son, not to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved.

O lightener of the mind, power upon us thy new light, and purge the horrible
darkness of our minds, so that we may see and know our chief Father, whom
pure eyes only do behold. O thou heavenly comforter, give unto us a
testimony, and grant unto our minds a token of the certainty of our belief,
so that we doubt not, neither waver about thy divine goodness toward us. Make
our hearts quiet and secure, that with a full trust and confidence we may
approach to the throne of thy heavenly grace, receiving by adoption the right
of children; and inflamed with spiritual joy in all boldness and liberty,
may cry Abba, Father.

Thou most faithful advocate, strengthen us against all the assaults and
temptations of satan, so that we may never doubt of thy divine providence and
predestination, whereby we are chosen and called in Christ unto everlasting
life; and never being stricken with a servile fear, and oppressed with
dreadful doubtings, may in a rage flee and forsake our God. O surpassing
comforter, leave us not destitute of thine aid and patronage; but vouchsafe
evermore to be present with us in our crosses and troubles, least otherwise we
faint: but rather make us to rejoice in tribulations, knowing that a crown of
life is laid up for such as love him. O thou teacher of men, instruct us how,
and what we ought to pray for, according to thy will, that we may be heard;
and make thou intercession for us with sighs that can not be expressed.

O thou cleanser of the heart, give us the simplicity of mind without gall and
bitterness, which descendedst in Jordan upon our Lord and Savior Christ in the
likeness of a dooue, that we may be void of bitter envy and contention in our
hearts, and have no root among us, that brings forth gall and woormewood. O
thou substantial flame, proceeding from the breast of the Father, and his
eternal Son, lighten our hearts with the fire of chaste and burning love.
Thou which appearedst as upon this day at the feast of Pentecost unto the
Apostles in cloven tongs like fire, see our coldness, and comfort us with thy
quickening heat and breathings, that we may receive thy chrisme and
annointment. O thou ghest of the soul, make thee a mansion place within the
secret parts of our hearts, that we may be an house for thy divinity, which
may dwell perpetually in our members, and never depart from us, through our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A thanksgiving.
WE lift up our hearts unto thee, O Lord GOD. For it is very meet, right, and
our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and in all places give thanks
unto thee, O Lord holy Father, the almighty, everlasting GOD, through Jesus
Christ our Lord; according to whose most true promise, the holy Ghost came
down this day from heaven, with a sudden great sound, as it had been a
mighty wind; in the likeness of fiery tongues, lighting upon the Apostles, to
teach them, and lead them to all truth, giving them both the gift of diverse
languages, and also boldness, with fervent zeal constantly to preach thy
Gospel unto all nations, whereby we are brought out of darkness and error
into the clear light and true knowledge of thee, and of thy Son Jesus
Christ. Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and with all the blessed
company of heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising
thee, and saying, Holy holy holy Lord God of hosts: heaven and earth are
full of thy glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most high: So be it.

12. On Trinity Sundaie. An acknowledgement of the almighty Trinity, and his
undivided Godhead, essence, power and majesty.
The Preface.
WHen Jesus was baptized in the water; lo, the heavens opened, and the spirit
of God descended like a dooue, and lighted upon him: and behold, there came a
voice from heaven, saying; This is my deerlie beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased.

Holy, holy, holy; Lord God almighty. Halleluiah.

There are three, which bear record in heaven; the Father, the Word, and the
holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Holy, holy, holy; Lord God of Saboth. Halleluiah.

The Prayer.
O Most high Trinity, one only power, and undefiled majesty, our God, God
almighty, the beholder and searcher of mine heart, I the abject and hindmost of
all thy servants, confess and acknowledge thee, and being the least member of
thy Church, I woorship thee with a due sacrifice of praise, for so much as I am
able and can, according to that which thou have vouchsafed to endue me withal.
And forasmuch as I am destitute of outward gifts to offer unto thee, those
vows of praise which I have of the gift of thy mercy, behold willingly and
gladly I offer them unto thee, which be an unfeigned faith, and a pure
conscience.

I believe therefore with all my heart, O king of heaven, and Lord of the earth,
and with my mouth do I confess thee, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, to be three persons, and one in substance; the true and very God
almighty, of one simple, incorporall, and invisible nature, incomprehensible,
and of such a nature, as is not in a place as other natures be, and that thou
have nothing superior or above thy self, or lower, or any thing bigger than
thy self, but in all manner of means perfect, without all spot of deformity.
And that thou art great without quantity; good without quality; everlasting
without time; life without death; strong without infirmity or weakness; true
without lieng; present in every place without any situation, or being placed
in any place, to be all every where without place; fulfilling all things
without stretching forth thy hand; going every where without any
contradiction or gaine-saieng; passing over all things without moving; abiding
in all things without any kind of proportion; making all things, having need
of nothing; governing all things without labor; giving all things their
beginning, having no beginning thy self; making all things mutable and
variable, thy self being without all kind of mutabilitie and variableness.

I confess thee to be in greatness without measure; in power almighty; in
goodness the chief and best; in wisdom inestimable; in counselles, intents,
and purposes terrible and fearful; in judgments most upright and just; in
cogitations and thoughts most secret; in words true; in works holy; in mercies
abundant and plentiful; toward offenders most patient; toward the penitent,
and those that be heartily sorry for their sins most gentle and loving;
always the same, everlasting, and continually continuing, immortal, and
incommutable, impossible to be changed or altered.

Whom neither the amplitude or largenes of places does make bigger, nor the
shortness or littleness of places make lesser, nor any places or corners can
contain or press together. Neither does thy will or intent vary or alter,
nor familiarity or acquaintance corrupt thee, nor sorrowful things trouble or
amaze thee, nor glad things make thee pleasant or frolike as a man would say.
For from thee can forgetfulness take nothing, nor mindfulnes or remembrance give
any thing. Neither are things passed unto us, passed also unto thee; nor
things which to us are to come, to come toward thee. For neither beginning
does give any beginning to thee, nor time any increase, nor yet chance gives
thee any end; but before all worlds, and in all worlds, and by worlds into
everlasting thou dooest live, and thou have continual praise and perpetual
glory; most high power, and singular honor; everlasting kingdom, and rule,
and empire without end, through the infinite, and vnwearie, and immortal world
of worlds.

Another meditation of the right belief in the unity of persons and
plurality in God.
THese, and much mo things have I learned of the holy mother the Church,
whereof through thy grace I am made a member. Of her have learned how thou the
alone and true God, both have no body, and also art vnsubiect to passions, and
how nothing of thy substance or nature is any way violable, or changeable, or
compounded, or created: and therefore certain it is, how thou can neither be
perceived by any bodily eyes, nor could ever be seen in the proper nature of
any mortal man. For hence it may evidently be gathered, that where Angels
do now behold thee, there we also after this life shall see thee, naie, the
very Angels neither are able to see thee as thou art in thy self, naie to
conclude, the almighty Trinity is known to none but only to thy self, O
blessed Trinity.

And thou, an unity of the Godhead, through the plurality of persons
manifold, art in number infinite, and therefore measurablie unmeasurable, and
waightily vnwaiable. For we knowledge no beginning of the sovereign goodness,
the which thou art, of whom, through whom, in whom are all things, but
through participation thereof we say all good things are. For thy divine
essence has always been, and yet is without matter, although it lack no
form, to wit, informed, the form of forms, the most welformed form, the
which while thou imprintest as a seal to every particular thing, thou make
them doubtless to differ from thy self, without any either of your
augmenting, or diminishing, but whatsoever is in the world it is thy creature.

O simple Trinity, and triple unity, God, whose almightinesse both
possesses, and rules, and replenisheth all things which thou have created.
Neither in saying how thou fillest all things, mean we that they contain
thee, but rather that thou conteinest them; neither by parts fillest thou all
things, nor yet may it be thought, that every thing, according to the
greatness of the portion it has, receives thee, that is, the greatest thing
more, and the smallest thing less, thou rather being in all things, or more
truly, all things in thee, whose omnipotency includes all things. Neither
can any man find a way to escape thy power. For whosoever has not thy favor,
can by no means avoid thy displesure, as it is written, Neither from the East,
nor from the West, nor from the South, but God is the judge. And again,
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I go from thy presence?

The immensitie of thy divine greatness is this, that we know thee to be
within all things, not as included; and without all things, yet not as
excluded. And therefore thou art within, that thou may contain all; and
therefore without, that all things may be comprehended within the immensitie of
thine uncircumcised greatness. So then by that thou art within, thou art
known to be a Creator; by that thou art without, we perceive how thou art the
governor of all things. And least all things, which are created might be
without thee, thou art within and without, that all things may be included of
thee, not by local greatness, but by thy mighty presence, who art
euerie-where present, and all things present before thee: although some
understand these things, yet some do not.

The unity then of thine inseparable nature, can not have separable persons;
because, as thou art a Trinity in unity, and an unity in Trinity; so can
you not have a separation of persons. Sometimes indeed, those persons are
particularly named; but so thou would, O God the Trinity, declare thy
self inseparable in persons; that there is no name in any one person, but may
be referred unto another, according to the rule of relation: as the Father unto
the Son, and the Son unto the Father; so has the holy Ghost true relation
both unto the Father and the Son. Also, those names, which signify either
your substance, O GOD, or person, or power, or essence, or else what, which
properly is called God, do equalliie agree to all the persons: as great God,
almighty, eternal, and generally all things, which naturalle are spoken of
God. So that there is no name of nature, which so may agree unto thee, God the
Father, but the same also may fitly be referred unto the Son, and holy
Ghost.

We say how thou the Father art naturally God; so is the Son naturally
God, and the holy Ghost naturally: and yet not three Gods; but one God
naturally, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And therefore, O God
holy Trinity, in persons thou art inseparable; in sense are they to be
understood, though in sound you have separable names. For you receive no
plural number in the nature. For hereby it is declared, how the persons in the
holy Trinity, which is one very God, can not be divided: for that the name
of every person, respects alwaie another person. If I say the Father, I
point unto the Son; if I name the Son, I presuppose a Father; if I mention
the holy Spirit, I must necessarily understand of whom he is the Spirit;
namely, of the Father, and of the Son. For this is the true faith,
proceeding from sound doctrine: this undoubtedly is the catholic and right
faith, which God of his goodness has taught me in the bosom of the mother
Church.

The faith or belief of a true Christian, concerning the blessed Trinity,
most notably described.
O My light, I praise thee for inlightening me, whereby I know thee; but how
do I know thee? I know thee to be God alone, a living God, a true God, my
Creator. I know thee to be the maker both of heaven and earth, of all things
visible and invisible, a very GOD, almighty, immortal, invisible,
vncompassable, vnlimitable, everlasting, to whom none can approach unto, nor
comprehend, nor find out; who art unchangeable, unmeasurable, infinite, the
beginning of all creatures, be they visible or invisible, by whom all things
were created; through whom all the elements do consist: whose majesty, as it
never had beginning; so it shall never have end.

I know thee to be one God alone, the true God; namely, the eternal Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; three persons indeed, but one simple substance, and
vnparted nature; the Father made of none; the Son of the Father alone; the
holy Ghost of the Father and of the Son; always without either beginning or
end. A Trinity, yet but one only, and very God, omnipotent; the only
beginning of all things, maker of all creatures, both visible and invisible,
spiritual and temporal, which by thine almighty power at the beginning
did of nothing make together, both creatures, spiritual and corporal,
that is to say, Angelical and worldly, and after the humane, as a middle
nature consisting of body and spirit.

I know and confess thee GOD the Father, to be unbegotten; thee God the
Son, to be begotten of the Father; thee God the holy Ghost the comforter, to
be neither made, nor begotten. With mine heart I believe unto righteousness,
and with my mouth I confess unto salvation, this holy and single Trinity, in
the three coequall, consubstantiall, and coeternall persons, to be a Trinity
in unity, and an unity in Trinity.

I know thee Jesus Christ our Lord, to be a true God, the only begotten Son
of God, and the Creator, Savior, and Redeemer, not of me only, but also of
all mankind: whom I acknowledge to be begotten of the Father before all worlds,
God of GOD, light of light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, being
of one substance, and coeternall with the Father and the holy Ghost, by whom
all things at the beginning were made: steadfastly believing, and truly
confessing, that thou Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, for our
salvation, by the consent of the whole Trinity tookest flesh; and were
conceived by the holy Ghost, of the virgin Marie, and were made very man, of
a reasonable soul, and humane flesh subsisting.

Thou, for so much as in respect of thy Godhead, being the only begotten
Son of God, thou could neither suffer, nor die, through thine exceeding
love, wherewith thou have loved us. Thou, the very same Son of God, for all
that, becamest subject to sufferings, and mortality, in respect of thy
manhood: and, O only Son of God, for the salvation of mankind did suffer
death upon the wood of the Cross, to save us from everlasting death. Thou, the
author of light, descendedst into hell, and like a glorious conqueror, rosest
again the third day, taking to thee again thy sacred body, which for our
sins had lien in the sepulcher; and quickening it according to the scripture
the third day, that thou might place the same at the right hand of the
Father.

For thou, the very Son of God, taking again unto thy self the substance
of our flesh, that is to say, the soul and humane body, which thou tookest
of the glorious virgin, art ascended up above all the heavens, and mounted
above the orders of Angels, where thou sit at the right hand of God the
Father, and whereas the fountain of life is; the light which none can attain
unto: and the peace of God, which passes all understanding. There we do
worship thee; there we do believe thee to be the very God, and very man;
confessing God to be thy Father, and from thence we look, that thou will come
a Judge in the end of the world, to judge both the quick and the dead, and to
render to all men, good and bad, according to their deeds, which they have done
in this life, either reward or punishment, according as every one is worthy,
rest or torment. For all men, even as many as have received souls in their
humane flesh, which they had in this world, shall rise at that day, through
the sound of thy power: that whole man may receive either the glory of heaven,
or the pain of hell, according to his deserts. Thou art our resurrection, and
the life it self, whom we look for; even the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior,
who shail change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body.

I know thee the holy Spirit, both of the Father and of the Son, to be one
God, and a very GOD, proceeding alike from them both, of one substance, and
coeternall with the Father and the Son, our comforter, and advocate: which
came down in the likeness of a dooue upon the same God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, and shewedst thy self upon thine Apostles in fiery tongues: which
also even from the beginning have instructed, with the gift of thy grace, all
the Saints and chosen of God; and opened the mouths of the Prophets, that they
might declare abroad the wonderful mysteries of the kingdom of God; who also
together with the Father and the Son, of all the Saints of God art worshipped
and glorified. Among whom I thine handmaid do glorify thy name, because thou
have enlightened me. For thou art the very light; the true light; the fire of
God; the master of spirits, which by thine ointment teach us all truth, the
Spirit of truth, without which it is impossible to please God. For thou thy
self art God of God, and light of light, vnspeakablie proceeding from the
Father of lights, and from his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom thou
reignest and art glorified most singularly, being of one substance, coequall,
and coeternall with them in the essence of one and the same Trinity.

I know thee Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to be one, a living, and a very
God: three I confess in persons, yet but one in essence; whom I acknowledge,
worship, and glorify with mine whole heart, being the true God, the only God,
holy, immortal, invisible, unchangeable, whom no man can either attain unto,
or find out. This God I acknowledge to be one light, one sun, one bread, one
life, one happiness, one beginning, one end, one Creator both of heaven and
earth, by whom all things do live; by whom all things subsist; by whom all
things are governed, ruled, and quickened, both the things in heaven, and the
things in earth, and things under the earth: besides whom there is no God,
neither in heaven, nor in earth.

Thus know I thee, O blessed Trinity, my Lord God, who know me. Thus know
I thee, through the faith, which thou have inspired to me. I know thee O my
light, the sight of mine eyes, O Lord my GOD, the hope of all the ends of the
earth: the joy reioicing my youth, and the good susteining mine age. For in
thee, O Lord, all my bones rejoice, saying; O Lord, who is like to thee? Among
the gods, who is like to thee? Not that whom the hands of men have made; but
thou who have made the hands of men. The idols of the nations are silver and
gold, even the works of men's hands: so is not he which made man. All the gods
of the people are idols; but the Lord made the heavens. Let those gods, which
made not the heavens, and the earth, perish from the earth, and from under
these heavens; but let both heaven and earth praise him, which created both
earth and heaven,

Amen.
A zealous prayer unto the blessed Trinity.
WHerefore, O Lord, my faith, which thou have given me to my salvation, calls
unto thee. For the faithful soul lives by faith; he enioieth in hope, which
one day he shall behold in thee. O my God, unto thee cries my pure
conscience, and the sweet love of my faith, which the darkness of ignorance
being driven away, thou have brought unto the knowledge of the truth: which
also thou have plucked from the foolish bitterness of this world, and made
comfortable and pleasant to me through thy sweet love.

Unto thee, O blessed Trinity, does the clear voice and sincere love of my
faith call, the which nourishing the same from the cradle, thou have enlightened
alwaie by the light of thy grace, and confirmed mightily in me through the
instructions of our mother the Church. Unto thee do I call, O happy, blessed,
glorious, and single Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; God, Lord, and
Comforter; love, grace, and communion; the begetter, the begotten, the renewer;
the very light of the very light, the very illumination, the spring, the
flood, and the watering: of one, all; through one, all; in one, all things: of
whom, through whom, and in whom are all things. The living life, the life
from the living, the quickener of such as live. One of himself; one of one;
one of two. A being of himself; a being of another; a being from both. The
Father is true, the Son truth, and the holy Ghost truth: so that the Father,
the Word, and the Comforter, are one essence, one power, one goodness, and one
blessedness; of whom, through whom, and in whom, all things be blessed,
whatsoever things are blessed. I beseech thee therefore, that as thou have
given me grace, by the confession of a true faith, to acknowledge the glory of
the eternal Trinity, and in the power of the divine majesty, to worship the
unity: so grant, that through the steadfastness of this faith, I may evermore
be preserved, comforted and defended in all my troubles and adversities; which
live and reignest, three persons and one God, blessed for ever,

Amen.
Another devout prayer to the holy Trinity.
WIth all my heart and mouth do I confess, praise, and bless thee O God the
Father unbegotten, and thee O God the Son only begotten, also thee O holy
Ghost and Comforter; to thee be glory in the world of worlds, Amen.

O blessed Trinity, thou three coequall and coeternall persons, and one very
God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, who dwell alone in euerlastingnes,
and in vnapprochable light, which have founded the earth by thy mighty power,
and rulest the whole world by thy wisdom. Holy holy holy Lord God of
hoasts, dreadful, strong, righteous, merciful, marvelous, praise-woorthie,
to be beloved, one God, three persons, one being, power, wisdom, goodness, and
one unspeakable Trinity: I cry unto thee. Open me the gates of righteousness,
and when I am come in, I will praise thee O Lord. Behold, I poor beggar knock
at thy door; O sovereign householder, command the gates to be opened at my
knocking, according as thou have said; Knock ye, and it shall be opened.

For truly, O most merciful Father, the desires of my groaning heart, and the
cries of my weeping eyes, do knock at thy door. All my desire is before
thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Lord turn not thy face any more
away from me, neither fling thou away from thy servant in a fume. O Father of
mercies, hear the howling out of thy Ward, and reach her thy singular good
helping hand, that it may draw me out of the deep waters, and out of the lake
of misery, and out of the mire of filthiness, that I perish not; thy pitiful
eyes seeing it, and the bowels of thy mercy beholding it, but that I may wade
out unto thee my Lord God, so as I may see the riches of thy kingdom, and
always behold thy face, and sing praises to thy holy name, O Lord, which
workest woonders, which cheerest my heart with remembering thee, and which
inlightenest my youth: despise not mine old age, but make my bones to rejoice,
and my hoarie hears to wax fresh again as the Eagle.

A Thanksgiving.
WE lift up our hearts unto thee O Lord, for it is very meet, right, and our
bounden duties, that we should at all times and in all places give thanks to
thee O God almighty, and everlasting God, which art one God, one Lord; not one
only person, but three persons in one substance. For that which we believe of
the glory of the Father, the same we believe of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, without any difference, or inequality. Therefore with Angels and
Archangels, and with all the company of heaven, we laud and magnify thy
glorious name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy holy holy Lord God
of hoasts; heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to thee O Lord
most high, and in earth peace, good will toward men. We praise thee, we bless
thee, we woorship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks to thee for thy great
glory, O Lord God heavenly King, God the Father almighty, O Lord the only
begotten Son Jesus Christ. O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father, that
take away the sins of the world, have merry upon us. Thou that take
away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Thou that take away the
sins of the world, receive our prayers. Thou that sit at the right hand
of God the Father, have mercy upon us. For thou only art holy, thou only
art the Lord, thou only O Christ, with the holy Ghost, art most high in the
glory of God the Father; to whom be all kingdom, power, honor and glory
world without end,

Amen.
13. On every Sundaie, holidaie, or weekedaie. Of Christ his second and last
coming to judgment.
The Preface.
THE kingdom of heaven is near at hand, even at the doors. Take heed, watch
and pray.

The son of man shall come as a thief in the night suddenly and unawares, at
an hour that ye know not. Take heed, watch and pray.

Even Jesus, which was taken up from us into heaven, shall so come again to
gather us unto him, as he was seen to have gone into heaven. Come Lord Jesus.

Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, yea even they
which pierced him through, and all kindreds of the earth shall veil before
him. Come Lord Jesus.

Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: there shall go before him a
consuming fire, and burn up his enemies on every side: the hills shall melt
like wax at the presence of the Lord, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred
up round about him. Come Lord Jesus.

He comes, he comes to judge the earth, and with righteousness to judge
the world, and the people with equity and truth. Come Lord Jesus.

Therefore yet a very little while O my soul, take heed, watch and pray; and
he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Come Lord Jesus.

Surely I come shortly says Christ, and my reward is with me, to give to
every one according as his works shall be, either good or bad. For I am Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last. Blessed are they
that watch; and keep my commandments unto the end. Come Lord Jesus.

Even so says the spirit and the bride. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly:

Amen, Amen.
Halleluiah.
The prayer to have Christ's sudden coming, even in our remembrance, and that
we may be in a readiness against his most glorious appearing. The Preface, Vt
supra Jesus. The Prayer.
BEholding, O heavenly Father, the day of accounts over all flesh to be even
now at hand, namely the last day, the day of judgment, the great and
notable day of the Lord, wherein the whole generation of mankind, from the
beginning of the world, shall rise again, and shall appear both in body and
soul, before the presence of the most just judge thine eternal Son, and our
righteous God, to receive their own doom for weal or woe, for life or death,
for joy or pain, and that eternally with the saints in heaven, or for ever
with the devils in hell: we beseech thee most humbly, O gracious God, to have
mercy upon all thine inheritance dispersed in these our evil and dangerous
days, in the midst of this wicked, most sinful, and untoward generation, upon
the face of the earth, amongst whom we are most miserably entangled,
contemned, cruelly dealt withal, and stirred to all abominations.

O heavenly Father, we acknowledge before thee, in our selves the greatness
of our own frailty, our corrupted lust to lewdness, the fullness in our
selves of our own iniquity, and our accustomed inclination at all times to
wickedness. O Father of mercies, tender us in our weakness; have compassion
upon our infirmities, pardon our sinfulness, and grant unto us thine holy
spirit, to work speedy mortification in us, to keep low the pride of our
flesh, to humble our souls in thy sight, to strengthen us in righteousness,
to fear always thy judgments, to think upon thy wrathful indignation, and
upon the hour of the vengeance to come, when thou for our wickedness shall
turn away thy face from us.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us, for Christ Jesus thy Son
sake; and so prepare all our hearts, souls, and bodies, to the necessity of
the time, that we may have therein good regard to our selves, that our hearts be
not ouercharged with excess of eating, surfeting, and drunkenness, or
otherwise vexed with the cares of this wretched world, to hinder us, and to
draw us back from our careful attendance, or diligent waiting for the Lords
sudden coming to judgment; but that we may continually attend, wait, watch
and pray for the speedy appeerance of his glorious Majesty, that when he
shall at the rising again of all flesh, by the sound of the last trumpet, come
to judge both the quick and the dead, we may be then in a readiness to meet
him above in the heavens, and there to stand before his presence, to behold the
glory of his most gracious countenance, to see how in mercy he shall separate
us from the wicked, as sheep from the goats, to set us also on his right
hand, to give the sentence of blessing upon us, and to commend us unto the
kingdom of thee his heavenly Father, which he himself has prepared, and so
pretiouslie purchased with the price of his own blood, there with him, with
thee, O Father, and with the holy Ghost, to live in everlasting joy and
felicity. Grant this, O heavenly Father, even for the only merits sake of
that thy dear Son, and our Savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Another meditation of the signs, which shall appear before the end of the
world.
IT is thy saying, O Son of God, that in the last and doting age of the
world, both greater, and more grievous miseries and confusions among men should
be, than ever were; and also for all that, that thou which art the defender of
thy Church, in the midst of such calamities and cruelty of thine enemies, wilt
preserve some remnant of the faithful, that thy service be not utterly
extinguished before the end of this world. Wherefore being oppressed, through
the intolerable burden of miseries, heaped therefore upon us, because the sins
of this withering world, are most grievous and lamentable: but especially for
that Satan thine enemy sees the day of judgment to be very nigh at hand,
wherein his abomination shall openly be laid before all thy chosen creatures,
and he be cast hedlong into eternal torments; which makes him extremely to
rage against thy chosen flock, and to seek by all means that possibly he
can, to withdraw us from thee, and to make us blaspheme thy sacred Majesty.
We, as it stands us upon, fly unto thee with all humbleness of mind in
these our extremities. The whole frame of this world groaneth also with thine
elect, and earnestly desires to be renewed.

Therefore, according to thy gracious admonition, we call into mind the signs,
which shall come before the final destruction of this world, and thank thee
for thy goodness in foretelling us of them. We lift up our heads unto thee,
which art aloft on the right hand of the eternal Father, and in faith and
prayer look for that ioifull day, when thou will appear most gloriously in
the clouds, for the deliverance of thy people out of these calamities. Govern
us by thy word and spirit, O most mighty protector, that we may be
watchful, and shun the cares of this transitory world, which withdraw the
mind from the exercise of godliness, and choke all virtuous motions raised by
thine holy spirit; and fly from wantonness, bellie-cheere, and unlawful
pleasures, which both cause thy spirit to forsake our minds, and make our
bodies the receptacles of vnpure spirits, whereby we are carried, being secure,
unto abominable wickedness, and from thence unto everlasting destruction.

Finally, purge thou our hearts by thy spirit, and let thy knowledge appear in
us, which may both expel our gross darkness, and inflame in us godly
motions, that all the days of our life we may continue in the true and sincere
confession of thy name. And for so much as thou have promised to defend us, and
to mitigate our pains, grant that we may both escape evils to come, and stand
ioifullie before thee at thy return,

Amen.
Another.
Almighty God, and most merciful heavenly Father, as in the destruction of
Jerusalem thou have left a fearful example of thy horible judgments against
the contempt of the Gospel, and the wickedness of men; and threatenest such
plagues to come for like wickedness upon the world, as shall cause men to die
for fear of them before they come: grant us so to read thy truth, and to be
obedient unto it, that when the signs of these things shall come, which shall
astonish the wicked, we may hold up our heads with comfort, waiting for our
redemption so near at hand; watch with continual prayer, that we may escape
all these things which shall come upon the world in that day, and that we may
stand before thy Son, when he shall come to judgment, and be received of him
to everlasting glory; to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor,
glory, and praise, for ever and ever,

Amen.
A godly meditation of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the reward
both of the faithful and unfaithful.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the everliving God, by whom althings were
made, are ruled, and governed; as of thy love for our redemption thou did
not disdain to be our mediator, and to take upon thee our nature in the womb
of a virgin, purelie and without sin, by the operation of the holy Ghost,
that both thou might in thine own person woonderfullie beautify and exalt
our nature, and work the same in us also: first abolishing the guiltiness of
sin by remission, then sin it self by death; and last of all death, by
raising again these our bodies, that they may be like unto thine own glorious
and immortal body, according to the power wherewith thou art able to subject
all things unto thee. As, I say, of thy love for our redemption thou becamest
man, and that most poor and afflicted upon earth, by the space of three and
thirty years at the least, in most humility, and paiedst the price of our
ransom, by thy most bitter death and passion; for the which I most heartily
give thanks to thee: so of the same thy love toward us, in thy good time, thou will come again in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory, with
flaming fire, with thousands of Saints, with Angels of thy power, with a
mighty cry, showt of an Archangell, and blast of a trumpet suddenly as a
lightening, which shines from the east, etc. When we think least, even as a
thief in the night, when men be a sleep: thou will so come, I say; thus
suddenly in the twinkeling of an eye; all men that ever have been, be, and
shall be, with women and children, appearing before thy Tribunal judgment
seat, to render an account of all things, which they have thought, spoken, and
done against thy law, openly, and before all Angels, Saints, and devils: and
so to receive the just reward of thy vengeance, if they have not repented, and
obeyed thy Gospel, and so depart from thee to the devil, and his angels: and
all the wicked, which ever have been, be, or shall be, into hell fire, which
is unquenchable, and of pains intolerable, endless, hopeless; even from the
face of thy glorious Majesty, and mighty power.

But if they have repented, and believed thy Gospel; if they be found watching
like wise virgins, with their lamps and oil in their hands; if they be found
ready apparelled with the wedding garment of innocence; if they have not
hardened their hearts, and hourded up the treasure of thy vengeauce, in the day
of wrath to be revealed: but have used the time of grace, the acceptable time,
the time of salvation; that is, the time of this life, in the which thou
stretchest out thy hand, and spreadest thine arms, calling and crieng unto us,
to come unto thee, which art meek in heart, and lowly. For thou will ease all
that labor, and are heavy laden. If they have visited the sick and
prisoners; comforted the comfortless; fed the hungry; clothed the naked;
lodged the harbourlesse: if they have not laden their hearts with gluttony, and
surfeiting, and carfulness of this life: if they have not dug, and hid
their talent in the ground, doing no good therewith: but have been faithful
to occupy thy gifts to thy glory, and have washed their garments in thy blood
by hearty repentance; then shall the Angels gather them together, not as the
wicked, which shall be collected as fagots, and cast into the fire; but as the
good wheat that is gathered into thy barn.

Then shall they be caught up to meet thee in the clouds; then shall their
corruptible body put on incorruption; then shall they be endued with
immortality and glory; then shall they be with thee, and go whither thou
go, then shall they hear these ioifull words: Come ye blessed of my Father,
possess the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning, etc. Then shall they
be set on seats of Majesty, judging the whole world; then shall they reign
with thee for ever; then shall God be all in all with them, and to them; then
shall they enter, and inherit heavenly Jerusalem, and the glorious restfull
land of Chanaan, where it is always day, and never night; where is no manner
of weeping, tears, infirmity, hunger, cold, sickness, envy, malice, nor
sin: but always joy without sorrow, mirth without measure; pleasure without
pain; heavenly harmony; most pleasant melody; saying, and singing; Holy,
holy, holy; Lord GOD of hosts, etc. Finally, the eye has not seen; the
ear has not heard; neither has it entered into the heart of man, that they
shall then inherit, and most surely enioie; although here they be tormented,
prisoned, burned, solicited of Satan, tempted of the flesh, and entangled with
the world, wherethrough they are enforced to cry; Thy kingdom come. Come Lord
Jesus etc. How amiable are thy tabernacles? Like as the heart desires the water
brooks, so longs my soul after thee O God. Now Lord let thy servant depart
in peace. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. We moorne in our
souls, waiting for the deliverance of our bodies, etc.

Oh gracious Lord, when shall I find such mercy with thee, that I may repent,
believe, hope, and look for these things, with the full fruition of those
heavenly ioies, which thou have promised and prepared for all them that fear
and love thee, and so rest with thee for evermore?

Amen.
2. Peter 3, 10, 11, 12. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the
night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the element
shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein shall be
burnt up.

Seeing therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons
ought ye to be in holy conversation and good lives, looking for the hastening
unto the coming of God, by the which the heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with heat!



Other godly Prayers to be used upon every Saints day, as they fall
orderly in the year; And first,
1. On Saint Andrews day. My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready
prepared to seek thee, and to follow thy Law: O let me not go wrong out of
thy commandments.
WE thank thee, O Son of God, head, and keeper of thy Church, for gathering
to thy self out of the unclean company of men, an holy Church, which is
knit to thee in true confession, righteousness, and life. Many times did
thou repeat thy promise touching the bringing of man fallen, into thy favor
again, and by the continual preaching of thy Ministers, have given us the
light thereof. Thou did in like manner appoint a tower, and ordeine the
Commonwealth of Moses in the midst of that part of the world inhabited, from
whence it might be heard of all mankind. At the length, thou appearedst in the
flesh, brakest the bands of the old testament, and entredst into a new covenant
with us, and calledst thine holy Apostle Andrew, and the rest, to be the
publishers and witnesses of thy truth, and gave them authority to preach,
and sufficient testimony, that they publish the truth. Maintain among us this
light, that we may give credit to thy Ministers and their writings, as to a
voice sounding from heaven, that we may be citizens of that company which is
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, in which building
thou art the corner stone, bearing the whole house by the word of thy power.
Grant that imitating the examples of Saint Andrew, and the rest of the holy
Doctors and Apostles, who by thy grace readily obeyed the calling of thy
Son. Jesus Christ, and followed him without delaie, we also being called by
thy holy word, may likewise forthwith give over our selves obedientlie to
follow thee and thy holy commandments. Of them it it is said, They went
forth and sowed their seed with tears, but they shall return with joy. Give
also to thy Church in all ages for evermore, faithful and holy teachers,
which may be fishers of men; retain the form of sound doctrine; dispense thy
mysteries faithfully, and gather to thy kingdom great companies, till the
number of thine elect being filled, the net shall be cast off, and thy whole
Church enioie thy visible and blessed sight for evermore,

Amen.
2. On Saint Thomas day. I believe, O Lord, help mine unbelief, and increase
my faith.
Loathsome is the darkness, and horrible the streams of diffidence and
mistrust, even in the elect, as the Apostle Thomas, albeit he had sensibly
heard the voice of the Son of God, and seen the miracles which bare
testimony that he taught and preached the truth: yea albeit in mind inwardly
he beheld the presence of his Lord, yet believed he not the resurrection of
Christ, which is the principal article of our faith, neither gave he credit to
such as had seen the Lord living again: which doubting thou did suffer in
him for the more confirmation of the faith. But confirm thou us, as thou did
confirm this thy weak disciple Thomas, and grant us so perfectly, and
without all doubt to believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, that our faith in thy
sight never be reproved. Strengthen our frailty by thy lively presence.
Appear to us in the night, that humane darkness do not extinguish the light
in us. Bring thy gifts into houses shut up, into our poor cottages, which are
in great danger, by reason of thine enemies. Speak thou unto us with thy
blessed voice, outwardly by thy word, and inwardly by thy spirit working thy
peace within us, that filled with the sense of thy presence, we may rest,
coupled through thee in the spirit unto thine eternal Father. Take us up being
frail and fallen down in this life. Show us thy woonders, that in the fight
of our conscience with the displeasure of thine eternal Father, we may
remember thy merits. Lay us miserable and weak ones in thy side and wounds,
that we may be hid and covered from the wrath of God, and suck from thy body
the water which washes all our uncleanness, and the lively nourishment of
thy blood, which may strengthen us into everlasting life, that we be not
unbelievers, but in the number of the faithful, and from our heart may imitate
that noble confession of this thine Apostle Saint Thomas, and against all the
blasphemous spirits, and thine enemies, acknowledge that thou art the Lord, and
our God, even that God, which from the beginning has been present with his
Church, both externallie by his Ministers, and inwardly by the secret working
of his holy spirit, which may evermore defend his Church against the rage of
his enemies, and by a covenant with mankind, knitteth the faithful to his own
flesh. Grant O Son of God, and mighty Iehoua, that firmly we may believe
this thy promise, depend upon thee, hope of thine aid against hope, and begin
our salvation from thy word revealed, that believing in thee our Savior, which
art Christ our high Priest and King, we may find eternal life in thee,

Amen.
3. On Saint Steeuens day; Who was the first that was martyred, and shed his
blood for Christ crucified. They gather themselves together against the soul
of the righteous, and condemn the innocent blood.
O Christ our Lord and savior, which with grief of heart did bewail the
ingratitude of the Jewish nation, which both unkindly contemned thy benefits,
and killed thy Prophets most cruelly; we beseech thee make us evermore to have
in mind, and acknowledge the greatness of thy love toward mankind.

Thou art that natural hen. Thou begettest to thy self a congregation by the
egg, and singular seed of thy first promise made in Paradise. Thou gatherest
such as believe and depend thereon under thy wings; by thine intercession,
against the wrath of God, which is a consuming fire; and by thy lively heat
thou nonrishest them, pouring upon them thy spirit, which is a substantial
fire flowing from the breast both of thee and thine eternal Father, expels
the coldness of our nature, and quickneth such as are ingraffed in thee unto a
new life. Thou encounterest with Kites, ravening birds, raging spirits, and all
the mortal infernal enemies, for the safeguard of thy poor chickens.
Wherefore keep us, we humbly pray thee, among thy chickens, which with a
wonderful and entire affection acknowledge thy voice when thou call, which
cover themselves under thy wings, and draw from thy breast most godly comfort
in their grief of heart, and strength against all enemies.

And, O comfortable ghest of the soul, leave not our houses desolate, cease
not to fill us by thy continual presence, with thy life and righteousness:
give us the true comfort of mind, that before all worldly things we may prefer
the confession of thy truth, even as that reverend old man Zachary father of
John Baptist, between the temple and the altar with his blood, as with a
precious burnt sacrifice, did confess thee to be the Messiah sent from thine
eternal Father. Save us from bloud-shedding, O Lord our Savior, that we wrap
not our selves in pains most intolerable, wherewith thine enemies, which have
defiled themselves with the innocent blood of thy martyrs, are oppressed.

And as thy glorious martyr and trusty Deacon of thy Church Steeuen, when most
heinous faults were laid upon him, as though he had proclaimed defiance both to
God and his Church, did continue constant in thy faith; using a most excellent
and effectual form of prayer for his enemies thy persecutors, containing the
sum of true doctrine; saw the heavens open, and thee, O Son of God,
standing on the right hand of thy Father, to whom at the point of death he
commended his soul: so assist us with thy grace, that we by his example may
learn both to love, and pray for our enemies, and that we fear not the
perverse opinions of the wicked world. Be thou with us in trouble according to
thy promise; open to us the heavens; show us thy lively countenance by thy
good presence; comfort our sorrowful minds; make it known unto us, that thine
eternal Father is pacified through thee. And finally, when our souls shall
depart from our bodies, receive them, we heartily beseech thee, into thine
almighty hands. Give grace, that quietly we may rest, and fall asleep, till
at the resurrection of mankind, thou bring thy Church and chosen to thy
visible presence in the heavens, where thou remainest, and watching full
tenderly over thy flock, thou placest the same at the right hand of thy
Father,

Amen.
4. On Saint John the Evangelists day: Being the Disciple whom Christ so
deerlie loved, and who at the resurrection of Christ was 22. years old, and
lived in all eighty nine years. With the bread of life and understanding
shall the Lord feed him, and give him the water of wholsowe wisdom to drink.
O Son of God, full sixty and seven years did thy beloved disciple John,
among great miseries, and grievous combats, spread abroad thy Gospel in Asia
the lesser, where much idolatrous service, curiosity, and Greekish lightness
was used. He rested himself not only corporally upon thy bosom or
shoulders, being conversant with thee in the earth, and loved of thee as thy
kinsman; but spirituallie also drue from thy breast the spirit of wisdom,
replenishing his mind and heart with heavenly light, strength of faith, and
celestial virtues. He saw the woeful destruction of his country, and beheld
the tragical overthrow of his nation. He saw the decaie of that
Commonweal, that was ordained of God; and of that temple, which in all the
world was the only temple of God. He encountered with Ebion and Cerynthus,
most wretched heretics, which were the trumpets of Satan to blow abroad
damnable opinions; which as the first Cain, by the provocation of the devil,
did contumeliously deal with the Son of God, and derided his promise. And as
afterward the nations by their monsterous multitude of feined gods did reject
Christ, and his benefits: so in a desperate boldness did they set themselves
against heaven, and blasphemouslie detract from the Son of God his divinity.

But thanks be to thee, O Son of God, which art the substantial image and
word of the eternal Father, thou have by the doctrine and authority of this
thy blessed Apostle and Evangelist S. John, not only enlightened thy Church
greatly with the bright beams of thy heavenly light of divine knowledge; but
also by the testimony of thy judgment, with horrible punishment cut off those
blasphemers and heretics that troubled thy Church, and delivered the truth of
that article unto us. O preserve this light among us henceforward, that we may
attain thereby to thine everlasting gifts, and suffer us not to be wrapped
any more in idolatrous darkness and superstition, which is contrary to thy
glory.

Mo enemies also, Lord, has Satan stirred up to deface this thy truth and
glory, even the horrible power of the Turks, which with brazen faces, both
blasphemouslie deal with thee, and persecute thy Church, confessing thy truth:
but suffer not, O Son of God; suffer not, we beseech thee, the true knowledge
of thee, by the power of Satan, and his ministers, to be blotted out: but
keep for thy self an holy seed among us, which against all the gates of hell
may profess thee to be the eternal Son of the everliving God, to whom the
whole society of Saints with one consent does ascribe all power, all
knowledge, all heavenly virtues, and wills all prayers and supplications to
be directed to thee alone, which art God alone. Maintain also among us the
true sense of the difference between humane righteousness and thine. Grant
that willingly we may obeie thee, leading us unto the exercises of true
repentance, unto the cross, unto troubles, and unto death, where our will is
truly bound, and obeieth altogether. Give grace likewise, that we move not
unnecessary strife, through pride, ambition and curiosity, as did
Samosatenus, Arrius, and many mo; but may follow thee, and in our vocation
both in teaching, and learning, and living, may continue in the truth of
doctrine; that we may be found in that company, which thou love entirely,
and wilt provide for, until thou return,

Amen.
5. On the holy Innocents day: Which washed their garments in the blood of
the Lamb even in their infancy, by the cruelty of Herod. The souls of the
righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch them.
O Son of God, in the time of thine humiliation, even from thy nativity and
infancy, truly did thou taste the stream of man's misery. Poorlie thou
wast borne; naked and despised in the straw wast thou laid, and among the
beasts did thou send forth thy cry. The seed of David had almost withered
away. Thy good mother, that blessed virgin Marie, nursed and nourished thee up
as a spring in a dry land, among much troubles; and in thy tender age, what
with the tyranny of Satan, and the cruelty of Herod, into a far country
thou wast exiled. The good old man Joseph, thy fosterfather, and thy blessed
mother Marie, at the commandment of the Angel astonished, through the fear of
danger at hand, in the night stole away with thee, and took a long journey,
even with grief of heart. An hundred miles traveled they through the desolate
wilderness, by the craggie and solitary places of Arabia, even through that
nation, which alwaie for theft, robbery, theeuerie, and cruelty, has been
most infamous, and at length they brought thee into the province of the
Emperor of Rome, whom God would should be thy protector. The watch of Angels
did defend thee with thy blessed mother; they were thy leaders, and companions
of thy banishment, and drove away the cruel thieves always from thee.

Hereby have thou, O Son of God, put us in mind both of our misery, and of
thy benefits. For mankind was banished out of paradise, from the state of
happiness and joy, into the miseries of this life. Yea, thy Church in this
world is in banishment, and oppressed with men of might. The most excellent
members of thy Church, most commonly are pursued to the death; but taking
compassion on our miseries, of thine own accord thou becamest an exile for our
sakes, and an intercessor for mankind. Thou made thy self of no reputation,
thou tookest upon thee the miserable mass and skin of our nature: thou wast a
pilgrim in this world; thou had not a place to hide thine head in; thou
vsurpedst none authority without calling: after a wonderful manner did the
word lurk, thy flesh suffering and dieng, and all to bring us again into our
native country indeed, from whence our beginning was, and where our city is.

Wherefore from the bottom of our heart we beseech thee Son of God, instill
into us a true love of that celestial country; kindle within us a true desire
of thy company; comfort us in this our banishment; and send thine holy Angels
to protect us, and to drive away the tyranny of Satan, and of thine enemies.
Finally, when our souls shall depart out of this vale of miseries, place
them, we beseech thee, in the tower of our true country. And as thou sauedst
thy Church, notwithstanding the raging tyranny of cruel Herod, when both thou
with thy careful parents tookedst thy flight into Egypt; and John the Baptist
was hid in the desert beyond Jordan: so hence forward defend us against the
fury of devils and men.

Oh Lord, from the breasts and imbracements of their tender mothers, did the
cruel and wicked servants of bloody Herod the tyrant, as this day, pluck
away the young infants. And such is the outward state of thy Church many
times, that of her it may be said; Rachel would not be comforted, because her
children were not left alive unslain: yet maintainest thou for all that, some
remnant, and castest thine enemies into eternal damnation.

Wherefore, as thy praise was this day confessed and showed forth, not in
speaking, but in dieng, by the young babes, infants and innocents, who washed
their wounds, and tender skins in the blood of the Lamb, and bare witness of
thy coming in the flesh by their death; the which are exalted into a far
better life, where thou wipest all tears from their eyes: and at the
glorifieng of thy Church, wilt place before all thine elect this sweet company
in unspeakable glory; and rebuke to their utter confusion the devil and his
instruments hired for their wickedness: so mortify and kill all vice in us,
that in our conversation, our life may express thy faith, which with our
tongues we do confess: and keep us in the profession of thy truth. Mitigate
the troubles of thy Church, that it perish not altogether, and being delivered
from this sorrowful banishment; join us to the citizens of thy kingdom, which
follow the Lamb whither soever he goes, and cheerfullie sing; Glory be to
God on high:

Amen.
6. On the day of Saint Paul's conversion, from a persecuter, to an Apostle.
Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words into the ends of the
world.
WE yield thee most hearty thanks, O Lord Christ, Son of the living God, for
gathering always to thy self a Church out of mankind, through the voice of
the ministry, and especially at this time, for sending thine elect vessel
Paul thine Apostle, to spread forth the memorial of thy benefit among the
Gentiles and people, whose life at that time was most filthy under that
monster among men Nero the Emperor. Great was the benefit which came by his
preaching, and as great was and is the commodity which they did in foretime,
and we in these last days of the world do reap by his godly and heavenly
writings. We beseech thee even with deep sighs, continue oh continue among us
thy light inflamed through the ministry of this heroical Doctor. And grant,
that as thou have taught all the world, through the preaching of this thy
blessed Apostle; so we which have his wonderful conversion now in
remembrance, may follow and fulfill the holy doctrine that he taught. Grant
that many laborers mightily may be thrust into thy vineyard, and faithful
obseruers of the doctrine of Paul, earnest seekers of the advancement of thy
truth, right diuiders of the word of life, learned in showing the difference
between the Law and the Gospel; wise in comforting the troubled conscience
of the wicked, patterns of the faithful in word and conversation; such as may
become all in all, to win many to the glorieng in afflictions; fearing
neither the hatred of men, nor the ingratitude of the world; showing constancy
unto the death in the confession of the truth.

Bless also the hearers of Saint Paul's preaching, that they may prove the
true followers of Paul, fighting a good fight, keeping faith and a good
conscience, casting off the old man, and putting on the new, even thee Jesus
Christ, being renewed by thy spirit, unto a true light and life, truly touched
with a desire of thee, truly coveting to be dissolved, and to be with thee,
that translated out of this darkness into thy wonderful light, they may see
thee face to face, and know the causes of secret things, which are hid from us
in this life.

And forasmuch as in this world thou will have the beginning of thy wisdom to
be learned, and biddest us to draw our water from thee the fountain, grant
that herein also many may imitate the faithfulness and labor of thine
Apostle: make them as diligent in reading and preaching, so in brideling and
chastising their bodies, painful, and constant in thy service, till they be
brought unto thy school, where all thy Saints in a clear and perfect light
shall behold thee,

Amen.
7. On the feast day of the purification of Saint Marie the virgin, and mother
of Christ. The word became flesh, and dwelt among us: Halleluiah.
O Eternal Father of thine only Son our Lord and Savior Christ, which in
the Commonwealth of Israel (ordained according to thy wisdom, and adorned
with excellent statutes necessary for the state of mankind, and signifieng
secret and heavenly things) did make diverse laws concerning uncleanness,
and the keeping of women with child, and another for the first borne; and that
not only to put us in mind of order in this life, and thankfulness toward
thy ministry; but also to teach, that this our guilty and polluted nature,
like the foul and menstruous cloth of a woman, is washed by the blood of thy
Son, which is thy first borne, thy substantial image, and the word sounding
thy will, whom from the heavens thou command to be harkened unto.

Govern us by thy first and only begotten Son. Give us thy holy spirit,
that earnestly we may bewail our uncleanness and pollusion; ask help at
thy merciful hand, be purified by the blood of thy Son, and be redeemed by
him unto true integrity and cleanness, which pleases thee, that for his sake
we may be adopted into thy children, and find favor in thine eyes.

And as that good old man father Simeon, notwithstanding that publikelie little
or no talk was used of thy benefits, by reason of the manifold sects then
sproong up, and horrible tyranny of Governors; yet was confirmed by thy holy
spirit in the truth, and received a singular promise, that he should see the
Messiah: so by the same thy spirit kindle in us faith, whereby we may escape
the palpable and curssed darkness of idolatry, which in the world welnigh is
used. And grant that we may apprehend thy Son, who as this day was presented
in the Temple in substance of our flesh, and in his arms depart in peace, and
be presented unto thee with pure and clean minds. Assist us, that from our
hearts, as did good father Simeon and holy Jacob, we may firmly keep him
among the fears of conscience, and pangs of death. Grant that he may be our
light, inflaming the darkness of our feeble minds with the brightness of his
glory. Blot out all our doubtings; heal the diseases of our soul; and kindle
that benefit and excellent light of true religion, that being made followers in
the spiritual society of thy people Israel, whose glory is thy Son,
witnessing, that among that people the promises and revelations of the essence
and will of the true God were made, we may also come to thy glory, which our
nature needs, and be adorned by thy Son, with the heavenly blessing of the
forgiveness of our sins, and receiving righteousness and eternal life,

Amen.
8. On Saint Matthias day. Thou have exalted one chosen out of the people, to
publish thy law: blessed be thy name, O Lord.
Almighty God, and most merciful heavenly Father, who (because the Scripture
must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost, through the mouth of
David, spoke before of the Traitor Judas, who was guide to the Jews that took
Jesus thy dear Son our Lord, and who now in reward of his iniquity, for
betraieng thine innocent Son his Lord and Master, went and hoong himself in
the feeld of blood called Acheldama, till he burst asunder in the midst, and
all his guts and bowels gushed out) did afterward, at the earnest prayers and
petition of the rest of thy disciples, choose thy faithful servant Matthias
out of all the company that followed thee, or had their conversation with
thine Apostles, to be of the number of thy twelve Apostles, and ordeinedst him
to be a witness with them of thy Sons resurrection, as it is written in the
109. Psalm, Let his habitation be void, and no man be dwelling therein, and
his Bishoprike or charge let another take: grant we beseech thee, that thy
Church being alwaie preserved from hirelings, traitors, and false Apostles, may
be ordered and guided by godly, faithful, and true pastors and ministers.

O Christ Son of God, greatly did thou rejoice at the gathering of the
Church; and high thanks did thou yield to thy Father, because he had chosen
an holy seed out of mankind, and suffered not their pains to be altogether
frustrate. We thank thee also from our hearts, for reioicing at our well-doing,
and for repressing the devil by thy power, that some may be saved. Gather
hereafter, we beseech thee, from among us a righteous people pleasing thee.
And although miserable and ouglie be the outward show of thy Church, and they
which seem to be the light of the world, despise thy wisdom; even as neither
Tiberius the Emperor, with the Senate of Rome, neither the Princes and Priests
of the Jews would vouchsafe to hear thee wandering with thy Disciples and
Christian auditorie: yet assist us, that these sinister judgments of the world
do not dismaie us, but that we may bring our minds into a godly captivity,
acknowledge thee by a true and lively faith, to be the Son of thine eternal
Father, and receive the words from thee, which from the bosom of thy Father
vtterest the counsel concerning the restitution of man, to whom all things
both in heaven and earth are given for us, which are thy parteners.

Lead us by thine hand, by thy word and spirit, before the presence of thy
Father: show us in a new light inwardly in our souls the presence of thy
Father, which is pleased with us for thy sake. Abide thou among us. Power on us
by thy spirit the beginning of that light and righteousness, which appears in
thee, being the light of light, lightning the darkness of our nature.

Behold O good Samaritane, and Physician of our souls, to thee do we lift up
our hands: we are wounded: we labor and are heavy laden: thine enemy has
spoiled us, and wounded us to the death. We are so burdened with the weight
and greeuousnes of sickness, that our soul is comfortless, ready to faint
and fall into death and damnation. Wherefore comfort our miserable soul with
thy ioifull wine and oil, with thine heavenly and quickening balm raise us
from death: utter thy comfort to our hearts, and grant that our souls may find
rest and gladness in thee.

Put on us thy sweet yoke: tame our flesh by thy spirit. Raise up in us new
motions, and holy cogitations agreeable to thy will and word. Thou art meek
in deed, not desirous of reuengement. Thou have not thrown miserable man into
everlasting damnation, as thou did the devils, but have suffered punishment
for us in thy body, and prayed for thine enemies. Thou art meek and lowly in
heart. Thou flangest thy self under all angels and men; thou tookest our frail
and foul flesh upon thee; thou she wedst not the power of thy divinity in the
time of thy passion, but hidst (if it might be) thy divinity, after a
wonderful and unspeakable manner, that thy humane nature might suffer and die.
Quench also in us by thy spirit merciless fires of hatred, and desire of
revenge (which as worldly men do say, is sweeter than life it self) with
all the flames of pride. Grant that acknowledging our filthiness prostrate
before thy face in true lowliness, we may ask thine help, and being healed,
may persevere in the imitating of thy perfect example. Assist us, that while we
live in every trouble and temptation of ours, we may draw the water of
comfort from thee, which art the well of life, and afterward enioie perfect
ease, and a ioifull sabbath, and feastfull holidaies in the heavens, at such
time as thou will show thy Father to thine elect, where each shall behold the
other face to face,

Amen.
9. On the feast day of the annuntiation of the blessed virgin Marie. Show us
thy mercy, O Lord, and grant us thy salvation.
BY thy wisdom, O eternal God, are the times distinguished, whereby we are
certified of thy benefits, and everlasting bliss, which after this life, and
destruction of the world, is prepared for thine elect. Now are there passed
5543 years, since the creation of heaven and earth, of thine Angels, and of all
creatures. By thy word thou made man out of the slime of the earth; thou
breathedst on him the breath of life, and inspiredst into him a soul adorned
with perfect wisdom and righteousness.

Afterward thy Son did utter a secret decree about the restoring of man,
fallen through sin out of thy favor into everlasting death. About the same
time of the year was innocent Abel murdered, which was a figure of the
sacrifice to come, whose blood indeed cries unto thee Father in heaven, and
beggeth the forgiveness of sins to all believers. In the like time was Isaac
carried to be offered: and thou commandedst the people of Israel to keep
holy these days, in which thou would have thy benefits to be spoken of.
Likewise on this solemn and ioifull day of the Equinoctial spring time,
which sithence is 1582 years, thy Son, as the Angel Gabriel signified to
Marie the virgin, by the working of the holy Ghost, coupled the humane nature
to himself, after a wonderful and unspeakable manner. The same day 1549
years sithence, thy Son, redeemer of mankind, in his weak and bloody flesh
hoong upon the Cross, being the true Silo. And when the sun going between
Orion and the Pleiades leeseth his light, he left his life through intolerable
sorrow and torments. And an old saying it has been, that about this time of
the year, our Lord and Savior Christ will return in the clouds, both to
vanquish his enemies, and to exalt his Church and chosen most graciously unto
a new and eternal kingdom.

O Son of God, stir us up unto the consideration of those so excellent
mysteries, and work thou so in our hearts by thy grace, that as we have known
thy holy incarnation by the message of an Angel, so by thy cross and passion,
we may be brought unto the glory of thy resurrection. Through the protection
and watch of thine Angel, the holy families of chaste virgins and matrons
remained safe and unspotted among infinite dangers: by thy spirit the truth was
sealed in them, that they could not be subdued by the errors of the Pharisees
and Saduces. Preserve likewise in this last age of the world, some holy
assemblies, and suffer not the whole world, before thy coming again, to
become blasphemers. This shall be the wisdom of eternal life, in which thou will open the causes why thou would after this manner restore mankind, and
how God the word could couple our flesh to himself.

Assist us, that in this life we may learn the elements, and in true faith be
joined through the holy spirit to thy body, which thou tookest from the
sanctified body of the sacred virgin. And as thou cariest, and live in the
same flesh; so make us branches of the tree of life, and fruitful vine, and
replenish us with like light, life, and glory. Be thou our Savior through thy
merit and virtue. Thine eternal Father has placed thee in the throne of
David, that thou may be the head of the Church, working all in all; and the
giver of all good things, and of the blessings promised to David. Thou reignest
in this life by thy ministry, gathering to thy self an eternal Church, and
repressing thine enemies by thy mighty power. Thou sit exalted in light,
and incomprehensible glory at the right hand of thy Father, making always
intercession for us, until thou bring thy Church unto thy self in glory at
the generail resurrection, and shine in them visiblie, and for ever.

O Son of God, we are bone of thy bones, and flesh of thy flesh. Thou
broughtest not thy flesh from heaven, neither was the same borne of the
substance of thy Father; but truly thou tookest thy flesh from the seed of
Abraham, out of the sanctified womb of the holy and blessed virgin S. Marie.
This nature did the word couple to himself by an eternal covenant, and
adorneth the same with surpassing glory, which thou she wedst not in the time
of thine humiliation. Therefore in truth did blessed Marie bear God, even that
person, in which two natures, that is to say, the word and flesh were united
together, and that without any confusion; even as the soul and body are
coupled in us men.

Wherefore we come unto thee our Mediator, God and man; and respecting thy
promise in a lively faith, we beseech thee have mercy upon us; wash us with
thy blood, and make us members of thy body and nature. No man at any time
has hated his own flesh: make us to stick unto thee by the same spirit, and
to draw from thee the juice, which may strengthen us to eternal life,

Amen.
10. On Saint Marks day. Thou have made them princes in all lands, therefore
shall they remember thy name, O Lord, from one generation to another.
O Eternal, omnipotent, and everliving God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which together with the Son and the holy Ghost, have not only created the
whole frame of this world, with all things therein contained; but also
appointed thy Son the word, to be a Mediator for us men, and for our
salvation: we beseech thee, most humbly from the bottom of our hearts, thou
which art the good husbandman, ingraffe us in thy Son, which is the true
vine: make us branches of his body; purge us from the horrible corruption of
our nature; give us grace to continue in the vine, that being delivered from
sin, we may bring forth abundance of fruit to thy honor and glory.

O Christ, thou art the vine, we are the branches, through thy grace, not of
our own goodness; graciously behold us, we beseech thee, that evermore we
may cleave to thee. For (alas) without thee, what can we do that good is?
Abide thou in us, that we may abide in thee; give us of thy virtue; let thy
light shine in our hearts, to the extinguishing of the foul darkness of our
filthy flesh: and quicken us to the bringing out of that fruit, which both may
please thee, and profit thy Church: so shall we escape the unquenchable fire,
into which they which depart from thee are cast, and be sure to obtain
whatsoever we shall ask at thy merciful hands in true faith and fear. For
thy Father is glorified through our willingness, which is also his gift to
obeie him. Furthermore, as thou have instructed thy holy Church with the
heavenly doctrine of thine Evangelist S. Mark: give us grace likewise, that
we be not, like children, carried away with every blast of vain doctrine; but
firmly to be established in the truth of thy holy Gospel.

And thou holy Ghost, come thou incessantly into our hearts: first to instruct
our minds with thine heavenly and eternal will, and being instructed,
confirm us in the fear of thy Majesty, that at no time we depart from the
path of thy commandments. For our continuance in the race of the commandments
of God, is a special argument, that we love God unfeignedly, whom we see not.
And secondly, that we may find joy and comfort in all our troubles, crosses,
and persecutions whatsoever; that in this life we may always abide among the
company of the regenerate, and in the other be made partakers of eternal
happiness ordained for the elect, before the beginning of the world,

Amen.
11. On Saint Philip and James day. The heavens declare the glory of God; and
the firmament shows his handie work.
O Son of GOD, whom truly to know is everlasting life, and without whom no
man comes unto the Father: grant us perfectly to know thee to be (as thou
have said of thy self) the way, the truth, and the life, as thou have taught
Saint Philip, and other the Apostles. Bring us wandering travelers into the
way of salvation; show unto us thy truth; quicken us by thy spirit; lead us to
thy Father, that by thee, and thine humane flesh now exalted and glorified, the
light and life of thine heavenly Father may be spread in us. Make us, miserable
exiles, citizens of thine everlasting kingdom; prepare us places and mansions,
where we may draw from thee, which art the true vine of eternal life, in the
house and table of thy Father, the new juice of heavenly comfort, and may
continually be there, where thou art; that truly thine eternal Father may be
glorified in us,

Amen.
12. On Saint Barnabas day. Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all
his benefits.
O Christ, Son of GOD, which art perfect charity, loving us to the end, and
sufferedst upon the altar of the Cross a most shameful death for our sakes,
to deliver us from death and damnation, and to allure us by that thine example
unto mutual amity and good will: we beseech thee, inflame our cold hearts with
the burning affections of hearty love. And as thou have endued thine holy
Apostle Barnabas with singular gifts of the holy Ghost: so let us not be
destitute of thy manifold gifts, nor yet of grace to use them alwaie to thine
honor and glory, as he did. Give us grace, I say, first above all things to
love thee the true and only God, with the Father and the holy Ghost, with
all our hearts, with all our soul, and with all our strength, that continually
we may cleave unto thee with full purpose of heart, as this thine holy Apostle
exhorts. Raise up secondly a desire of brotherly good will toward our
neighbors; that we may help one another, and as members of one body, have a
mutual compassion each of other, so that we may love among our selves
unfeignedly, and abound in mutual good will, that our hearts may be unblameable
in holiness before God.

Inflame our breasts, that by thine example we may love even our very enemies,
and bless them, which curse us; do good to them, which hate and hurt us,
leaving reuengement always unto thee. For he, which loves not his brother,
knows not God; but abides in death, and does vainelie boast against the
truth. Wherefore, let not the Sun go down upon our wrath; but make us quiet,
putting on tender mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, and above
all, charity, which is the bond of perfection; the end of the commandments,
and fulfilling of the law: so that by love our faith may be fruitful, and we
at no time severed from thee. For thou art love, and he that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him: so that we shall be no more servants, but
friends, in doing the will of the heavenly Father, through the gracious
good will of thee his only begotten Son our Savior, which have chosen us
to bring forth fruit, whereby we shall so please his and thy sacred Majesty,
that we shall be sure to obtain whatsoever we ask at his hands through faith
in thy name,

Amen.
13. On Saint John Baptists day. I give mine own self the blame, and take
repentance in dust and ashes.
O Eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we yield thee most hearty thanks
for gathering to thy self, for and through thy Son, an holy company,
praising and celebrating thy goodness for evermore. Also for sending from time
to time teachers adorned with excellent gifts and warrants from heaven, to
spread forth and publish the truth to mankind, among whom, we know right
well, that the famous fore-runnner of thy Son, even the holy and reverent
Saint John the Baptist excelled. He by thy providence was woonderfullie borne,
and sent to prepare the way of thy Son our Savior, by preaching repentance.
He was the first publisher of the new Testament; the first purger of the
Gospel from the gross errors of the superstitious Pharisees; the spreader
abroad of the articles of our faith, and the imprinter of Jesus Christ the
Son of God in the hearts of men.

We humbly beseech thee, gather from among us an eternal Church. Teach our
hearts by thine heavenly spirit, that vnfeignedlie we may listen to, and love
the doctrine which John sounds to the world. Make us so to follow his
doctrine and holy life, I say, that we may truly repent according to his
preaching, and after his example constantly speak the truth, boldly rebuke
vice, and patiently suffer for the truth sake, as he did, that being ingraffed
into thy flock, we may become his disciples, and bring forth fruit worthy
repentance, and behold the divinity which he saw; so shall we be delivered
from the wrath of God, and admitted into the fellowship of eternal life,

Amen.
14. On Saint Peter's day. Their speech is gone out into all lands, and their
words into the ends of the world.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, which art the word of the eternal Father,
and the Ambassador sent from the beginning unto thy Church, speak thou
inwardly to our hearts thine heavenly wisdom: lighten our nature and
understanding with thy new light, that being demanded in every anguish, we
may truly acknowledge and confess that thou art the Son of the living God
our King and Savior. And for as much as great is the rage, and mighty the
power of thine enemies, which fight against the truth, mercifully defend thy
Church, sounding forth this thy wisdom, defend the same we beseech thee
against the very gates of hell.

And as thou have given to the Apostle Saint Peter many excellent gifts, and
commandedst him earnestly to feed the flock, whereby at the infancy as it
were of thy Church, he was a glorious light of the Gospel, and publisher of
the truth: so keep among us thy ministry, and send godly preachers, which
may godly and rightly use the keys in comforting and correcting. Make, we
beseech thee, all Bishops and pastors diligently to preach thy holy word, and
the people obedientlie to follow the same, that in this life we may be, and
abide citizens of the blessed fellowship, which thou dooest protect, and
receive the crown of everlasting glory, as heirs of thine eternal kingdom,

Amen.
15. On Saint James the Apostles day. When my father and my mother forsake me,
thou, O Lord, take me up: therefore I made haste, and prolonged not the time
to keep thy commandments.
O Son of God, Lord and Savior Christ, which came into this world to give
thy life for many, stir up our hearts unto the true cogitation of thy
benefits and obedience, which was a sufficient ransom for the sins of all
mankind, pacifieng the wrath of God, and giving everlasting life to as many
as approach unto thee in true faith. We beseech thee, for so much as in us does, as
in thy disciples did, stick great uncleanness; heal our minds by thy spirit.
Quench in us our vain desires of superiority, which maruellouslie do boil
within the hearts of men. Grant that the ministers may know rightly the
difference between civil policy and religion, that they cast not unto thee
in mockery, purple; neither prick thine head with a crown of thorns: but
may serve thy Church in humility, as faithful dispensators of thy mysteries,
following thine example, in whom perfect humility appeared, when thou flangest
thy self down under Angels and men. Assist us also, that we may drink of thy
cup, and be baptized with thy Baptism in true calling upon thee, and perfect
patience in all our adversities. And grant, that as thine holy Apostle James,
leaving his father and all that he had without delaie, was obedient unto thy
calling, and most willingly followed thee: so we forsaking all worldly and
carnal affections, may be evermore ready to follow thy commandments, till
thou draw us up unto the sight of thy visible kingdom, which is ye right hand
of thine eternal Father,

Amen.
16. On Saint Bartholomew the Apostles day. I believed, and therefore will I
speak, that I may walk before the Lord in the land of the living.
O Christ Son of God, great was the weakness and sluggishnesse of thy
disciples, both in thy last supper when they contended about superiority, and
worldly government, and in thine agony, when they slept: and as great is the
wickedness and security of this last age, which making war for wealth, under
the cloak of favoring the Gospel, seeks after honor and promotion, sleeps
soundly, and is nothing moved with the blasphemous idolatry, wherein the
whole world is wrapped, to thy great dishonor: yea the grievous punishments
which thou sendest euerie-where, do nothing terrify them from their sin.
But, O Son of God, break our deadly sleep; teach the hearts of our
ministers, that they must not be ambitious, neither strive about excellency,
nor transform the Gospel into civil policy: but assist us, that we may all
think of thy commandment, which is, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly
in heart. Power upon us such virtues as thou have in thy self most
abundantly. Thou destroiedst not mankind, which had offended thee, but
flangest thy self under all Angels and men, and tookest this miserable flesh
of ours upon thee, and that to save, and serve us truly in great humility.

Thou, O Son of God, which have given grace to thine Apostle Bartholomew,
truly to believe, and to preach thy word, grant we beseech thee unto thy
Church, both to love that he believed, and to preach that he taught. And as
thou sit for ever at the table of the Father, in which all heavenly
wisdom does abound; so place us miserable ones in the lowest seats of that
thy table, where thine Apostles and teachers, which have instructed many unto
righteousness, do shine as the lights of the Church, and differ in
wonderful glory from other inferior members: albeit, it suffices us, so we
gather crooms from thy table, which fills such as eat and digest them with
everlasting joy,

Amen.
17. On Saint Matthewes day. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness.
IT was thy saying O Christ Son of God, that the sick need the Physician:
wherefore we humbly beseech thee, heal us miserable folks with thine
heavenly Physic. Be merciful unto us sinners, and feed us with the deintie
dishes of thy spiritual comfort. Have mercy on the Church, whose whole body
is greeuouslie afflicted through manifold diseases and evils. The teachers sit
as do the merchants for gain: they transform the Gospel into an outward
pomp, and bait for preferment. Wherefore keep thou some sound part, which may
vnfeignedlie acknowledge thee to be the only and best Physician, which have
delivered us from the curse of the law, and restored us to life and
righteousness. And grant O blessed Son of God, that as thou did call
Matthew from the receipt of custom to be an Apostle and Evangelist; so give us
grace to forsake all covetous desires, and inordinate care of riches, and to
follow thee in all things thou have commanded.

Furthermore, thou O Christ have taught, that the church of the new testament
is not tied unto the Mosaicall government, neither unto the ceremonies and
traditions of man, and have reproved also the Pharisaicall error, which in all
ages has shamefullie obscured the light of thy Gospel, that ceremonies are to
be preferred before the works of the moral law. Continue this light among us.
Grant that we may woorship thee, not in the works and precepts of men, but in
observation of thy commandments, and woorshipping thee in spirit and truth.
Work, O work within us an obedience answering to thy laws in both tables,
that retaining faith and a good conscience, we may sit with thee for evermore
in thy celestial kingdom after our resurrection,

Amen.
18. On Saint Michaels day, and all Angels. O praise the Lord ye Angels of
his, ye that excel in strength, and fulfill his commandment.
O Almighty, everlasting, and everliving God, which before all times did
beget a Son in thine own image, in whom shines the heavenly light, which
no creature can apprehend, as it is in deed, albeit some taste and spark
thereof thou bestowest upon men, by lightening them by thy Son to unfeigned
repentance, and sorrow for their sin. Thou commandedst that light should be
made, and so not only bodies shining with noble light yet unreasonable were
made, but besides also other spiritual natures, as Angels, were brought
forth, into which thou powredst the beams of thy light, of thy wisdom, of
thy righteousness and life, and appointedst a company of them, which remained
in their innocence to everlasting righteousness and life, that always they
might behold the countenance of the eternal Father, being replenished with
perfect goodness.

Thou have ordained and constituted in a wonderful order, that most excellent
nature of all Angels, to serve thy Church, to defend the weak and feeble
company of men, which in this life turn unto thy Son our very Michael.
Thou command those heroical and valiant spirits, to protect thy Church,
kingdoms, and godly schools, and places where thy Church does abide, calling
upon thee in fear, and continuing in thy service. We thank thee from our
hearts for this great and unspeakable benefit; beseeching thee most humbly
mercifully to grant, that they which alwaie do thee service in heaven, may by
thine appointment succor and defend us here in earth.

Convert us, O Lord, and we shall be converted, teach us to confess this thy
goodness, and following the example of thine holy Angels, to serve thee and
thy congregation in true and sincere humility. Compass our Churches,
Commonweals, and houses, with the watch of thine Angels: drive away from us
and our houses, devils thine enemies, lieng, blasphemous, cruel, murdering,
and incestuous spirits, which through extreme hatred of thee and thy Son,
torment man, laboring to bring it about, that all flesh may blaspheme thee.
Repress the rage of them in their members, in false teachers, in the enemies
of thy truth, in Turks, and other tyrants, which persecute us. Help us in this
world, being ingraffed into that Church, which thou dooest protect, and may
continue faithful unto the death, and afterward being translated into eternal
life be like the Angels, yielding immortal thanks unto thee for thine infinite
benefits,

Amen.
19. On Saint Luke the Evangelists day. It is neither herb nor emplaster that
restores us to health; but thy word, O Lord, which heals all things.
O Omnipotent, almighty, and everliving God, which calledst Luke the
Physician, whose praise is in the Gospel, to be a Physician of the soul; it
may please thee by the wholesome medicine of his doctrine, to heal all the
diseases of our souls. And as by thy Son our Lord and Savior Christ, thou
have commanded us to pray, that laborers may be thrust into thy harvest: so
grant unto us, for the same thy son, Bishops of thine own instructing, good
shepherds, sound preachers, faithful workmen, and godly ministers, which may
faithfully ouersee, and by thy word of salvation prosperously govern thy
Church, being deerlie bought with the precious blood of thine only Son.
Give unto us such teachers, as are both learned in thy word, and commended for
their good living: direct them being illuminated with thine heavenly light,
that they may rightly deliver, and divide unto us the principles of good
doctrine, the word of truth, and the Gospel of life, and open the difference
between the law and the Gospel: teach us to beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and the contagious doctrine of man's traditions; inform us in all
spiritual wisdom, and bring us by the operation of thine holy spirit unto
perfection, both in the eyes of God, and sight of the world. Grant that their
labors may take good success, to the increase of thy celestial harvest. Give
them grace to continue constant in their profession, fearing neither the
hatred, nor ingratitude of this world, believing certainly that such as
despise them, are despised of thee, and that thou neither wilt of thine
holiness, nor wilt of thy justice suffer such blaspemous impiety to go
unpunished,

Amen.
20. On Simon and Iudes day Apostles. Thou have made them princes in all
lands: therefore shall they remember thy name, O Lord, from one generation to
another.
Almighty God, which have builded thy congregation upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone: grant
us so to be joined together in unity of spirit by their doctrine, that we may
be made an holy temple acceptable to thee. And, O Lord Jesus Christ, which
after this manner did comfort thine Apostles, whom the world would hate and
abhor, saying; I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates
you. Separate us, we humbly beseech thee, from the darkness, idolatry, and
wickedness of this world, and join us to that company, among which thy
Godhead does dwell. Grant that in true love we may be joined unto thine
eternal Father, through thy spirit, which is the bond of peace. Make us
nothing to dread the sinister judgments of the world, neither yet for any
perils to forsake thy truth: but patiently suffer the injuries, from which thy
self wast not free. Let us always think, that the servant is not greater
than the master; and so together with thee and thine Apostles, suffer those
troubles and crosses, which of God for our sins and amendment shall be laid
upon us,

Amen.
21. On All Saints day. Let the righteous be glad, and rejoice before God: let
them also be merry and ioifull.
WE thank thee, O almighty God our heavenly Father, for that of thine
infinite mercy, through our Lord and Savior, and working of thine holy
spirit, thou gatherest out of mankind an everlasting Church, and have knit
together thine elect in one communion and fellowship in the mystical body of
the same thy Son Christ our Lord, and defendest the same mightily against
the rage of the devils, and tyranny of his members: yea, and have promised one
day by thy Son to raise the same from death, and to adorn it with
unspeakable glory. We beseech thee have mercy on us, for the sake of the same
thy Son our Mediator and Savior; and grant us grace so to follow thy holy
Saints in all virtue and godly living, that we may come to those unspeakable
ioies, which thou have prepared for them that unfeignedly love thee. And gather
from among us evermore some religious company, which may serve thee in faith,
and a good conscience. Assist, that in this life, that benefit of eternal life
may begin, that we may in a contrite heart obeie thee, patiently suffer the
troubles, which accompany thy Gospel, show our selves meek, and merciful,
hungring and thirsting from our heart after thy righteousness, and seeking for
the food of our soul above all things. Make our joy perfect, and rejoice in
deed, looking through faith upon that blessed company of Angels and men, which
enioie thy visible presence, among whom thy Son is, whom they see face to
face: and filled with unspeakable delight, here discoursing of thy wonderful
wisdom, both in gathering and preserving thy Church; bring us, gracious Lord,
unto the blessed company of thy Saints in this world, and afterward make us
citizens of thine eternal kingdom, together with all thine Angels and men. O
Lord, blessed are they, which dwell in thine house, forever and ever they will
praise thee,

Amen.
See another, page 622.
THE DOLEFVLL DOOVE, Or
David's penitential Psalms, very necessary to be used (as most effectual
prayers) of all godly and devout Christians, especially when being afflicted
and chastised of the Lord for their sins, either by sickness or otherwise, in
body or mind, they feel Gods heavy hand, and fear his dreadful threats,
whereby they are moved, not only truly to convert and turn unto him by
hearty repentance, earnest contrition, and humble confession of their faults
and infirmities; but also by earnest and fervent petitions in fasting, weeping,
lamentation, and mourning, most desirouslie to crave at Gods hands, as well
mercy and forgiveness of their sins; as also mitigation of their present
miseries, and deliverance from all evils bodily and ghostly. There with all
inwardly thirsting and longing in soul, not only to be restored to Gods
grace and favor again; but also to be governed by his holy spirit, the
better to spend the rest of their life in the true fear and service of God, as
David that holy man, and his chosen vessel did, to the glory of God, and our
everlasting comfort.
1. Domine ne in furore. Psalm. 6.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me. For my bones are
vexed.

My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord, how long will thou punish me?

Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: Oh save me, for thy mercies sake.

For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the pit?

I am weary of my groaning, every night wash I my bed: and water my couch with
my tears.

My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

Away from me all ye that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

The Lord has heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer.

All mine enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.

2. Beati quorum. Psalm. 32.
BLessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is
covered.

Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin: and in whose spirit
there is no guile.

For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily
complaining.

For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the
drought in summer.

I will knowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hid.

I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgauest the
wickedness of my sin.

For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found: but in the great water-fluds they shall not come
nigh him.

Thou art a place to hide me in; thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with sons of deliverance.

I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

Be ye not like horse and mule, which have no understanding: whose mouths
must be holden with bit and bridle, least they fall upon thee.

Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but who so puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

Be glad O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be ioifull all ye that
are true of heart.

3. Domine ne infurore. Psalm. 38.
PUt me not to rebuke O Lord in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

There is no health in my flesh because of thy displeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones by reason of my sin.

For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden too
heavy for me to bear.

My wounds stink and are corrupt: through my foolishness.

I am brought into so great trouble and misery: that I go moorning all the
day long.

For my loins are filled with a sore disease: and there is no whole part in my
body.

I am feeble and sore smitten: I have roared for the very disquietnesse of my
heart.

Lord, thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

My heart pants, my strength has failed me: and the sight of mine eyes is
gone from me.

My lovers and my neighbors did stand looking upon my trouble: and my kinsmen
stood a far off.

They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that went
about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and imagined deceit all the day
long.

As for me, I was like a deaf man and heard not: and as one that is dumb,
which does not open his mouth.

I became even as a man that hears not: and in whose mouth are no reproves.

For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shall answer for me, O Lord my
God.

I have required that they (even mine enemies) should not triumph over me: for
when my foot slipped, they reioiced greatly over me.

And I truly am set in the plague: and my heaviness is ever in my sight.

For I will confess my wickedness: and be sorry for my sin.

But mine enemies live, and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfullie, are
many in number.

They also that reward evil for good, are against me: because I follow the
thing that good is.

Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou far from me.

Haste thee to help me O Lord God my salvation.

4. Miserere mei Deus. Psalm. 51.
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according unto the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saiengs, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with hysope, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter than snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free
spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from bloud-giltinesse, O God, thou that art the God of my health:
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips O Lord: and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest
not in burnt offerings.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God,
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious to Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

5. Domine exaudi. Psalm. 102.
Hear my prayer, O Lord: and let my crieng come unto thee.

Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: incline thine ears unto
me when I call, O hear me, and that right soon.

For my days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are burnt up as it
were a firebrand.

My heart is smitten down, and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat
my bread.

For the voice of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

I am become like a Pellicane in the wilderness: and like an Owl that is in
the desert.

I have watched, and am even as it were a Sparowe: that sits alone upon the
house top.

Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me.

For I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drink with weeping.

And that because of thine indignation and wrath: for thou have taken me up,
and cast me down.

My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grass.

But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever: and thy remembrance throughout all
generations.

Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea the time is come.

And why? thy servants think upon her stones: and it pitieth them to see her
in the dust.

The heathen shall fear thy name, O Lord: and all the kings of the earth thy
Majesty.

When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glory shall appear.

When he turns him unto the prayer of the poor destitute: and despises not
their desire.

This shall be written for those that come after: and the people which shall be
borne, shall praise the Lord.

For he has looked down from his Sanctuary: out of the heaven did the Lord
behold the earth.

That he might hear the mournings of such as be in captivity: and deliver
the children appointed unto death.

That they may declare the name of the Lord in Sion: and his woorship at
Jerusalem.

When the people are gathered together: and the kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.

He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.

But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy
years they endure thoroughout all generations.

Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the earth: and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.

They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they shall all wax old as does a
garment.

And as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou
art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand fast
in thy sight.

6. De profundis. Psalm. 130.
OUt of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord hear my voice.

Oh let thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint.

If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: oh Lord, who may
abide it?

For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

I looked for the Lord, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust.

My soul flies unto thee Lord: before the morning watch, I say before the
morning watch.

O Israel trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him
is plentious redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his sins.

7. Domine exaudi. Psalm. 143.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy truth and
righteousness sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty
land.

Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit wareth faint: hide not thy
face from me, least I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul
unto thee.

Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I flee unto thee to hide me.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

Quicken me, O Lord, for thy name sake: and for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.

And of thy goodness slaie mine enemies: and destroy all them that vex my
soul, for I am thy servant. Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the
holy Ghost. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world
without end,



Amen.
Hereunto you may add (as occasion and time will serve) these select and
notable Psalms of David, as they are at large in the Psalter, that is to say,
the 5, 7, 13, 17, 22, 25, 31, 35, 42, 43, 55, 56, 57, 69, 71, 77, 86, 88.
Other Psalms or Prayers, compiled out of holy Scriptures, very necessary
to be used of the afflicted soul, for obteining the remission of sins, and
mitigation of miseries.
O Lord of lords, GOD almighty, great and dreadful, which by thy word have
made heaven, earth, the sea, and all things contained in them.

Nothing is able to resist thy power: thy mercy is over all thy works.

All things be under thy dominion and rule: both man and beast, and all living
creatures.

Thou art merciful to whom thou will: and have compassion on whom it
pleases thee.

Thy counsel shall stand for ever: and whatsoever thou will, shall be done.

Power, dominion, and glory, is thine: which art above all things, and in all
things, and in us all.

Thou art Father of mercies, and God of all grace, peace and comfort: which
wilt not the death of a sinner, nor delightest in the damnation of souls.

O Lord God, which art rich in mercy, and of thine especial love toward us,
even when we were thine enemies, did send into the world thine only
begotten Son Jesus Christ; that whosoever believes duly in him shall not
perish, but have everlasting life.

Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, according to thy great mercy.

And according to the multitude of thy mercies, put away mine offenses.

O God most holy, wash me from my wickedness, and make me clean from mine
uncleanness.

For I acknowledge, O Lord, my heinous sins: and accuse my self of mine
unrighteous deeds.

I confess against my self the wickedness of mine heart, which has been
ever unfaithful, and rebelling against thy precepts.

I have been an untrue and froward child to thee, and have provoked thee with
my vanities.

O holy Father, I have offended thy divine Majesty, and am not worthy to be
called thy child.

Because I provoked thee to anger through the multitude of my sins: and have
not exercised my self in thy righteous laws.

I have turned back from thy ways, and done evil before thee.

I have done wickedlie, and unjustly behaved my self, leaving thy
commandments, and murmuring against thy correction.

I have turned my self away, and not kept my promise made unto thee: I have
walked in an evil way after mine own thoughts and fantasies, choosing the
things that thou would not.

O Lord God almighty, I have not feared thee, nor showed due reverence unto
thee: but I have been disobedient and stubborn unto thee.

As a common harlot is without shame, even so am I without shame of my sins:
for behold, I speak unto thee, and yet I sin more and more.

I have left that which is good, and gone back from thee: and I have not put
my trust and hope in thee, my maker; but have sought for help and safeguard
otherwise.

I have ploughed wickedness, and reaped iniquity, and eaten the fruit of
lies: because I have trusted in mine own way.

I have cast thy laws behind my back, not regarding thy commandments, nor
leaving mine own lewd customs.

I have not given my heart to return to thy paths: for I would not know thee,
but have fallen through mine iniquity.

I never unto this day turned truly unto thee with all my heart: but as a
woman that breakech her fidelity and promise unto her husband: even so, O LORD
God, I have broken my promise unto thee.

For I have lived abominably, and have had no remorse, nor repentance for my
evil deeds, but have run from sin to sin, following the lewd desires of my
heart.

Thou know all things, O Lord, how I have provoked thee to displeasure by my
lewd inventions: and none of all my sins be hid from thee.

I hated thy discipline and correction: and regarded not thy words and saiengs.

I have not done penance for my malice: but have increased in much vanity.

Mine heart has been void of truth: and my hands have wrought unrighteousness.

My tongue has spoken sinfullie, and I have labored with the imaginations of
mine heart, to find out lies and deceits, and no truth has been in my ways.

I have accustomed my tongue to speak trifles and vanities, fulfilling my
fleshly desires and thoughts, my purposes and inventions have been contrary
to thy will, whereby I have offended the eyes of thy Majesty.

Thou have seen all these things, O Lord, and have holden thy peace: and yet
they were evil in thy sight, and displeased thee.

In thine anger thou have cast me away, and art divided from me now many
days.

Thou have given me up to the desires of my heart: to do the things, which be
not seeming.

Woe I am, that I have gone from thee: great is my misery, that I have led my
life in sin.

Woe is me, that I have forsaken thee to do my devises: not after thy mind, to
accomplish my thoughts, which have not proceeded of thy spirit, but have heaped
up sin upon sin.

Mine infamy and reproach is daily before mine eyes: and for shame I dare not
show my face.

And now, O Lord God, why forgettest thou me? Why keep thou away so long
thy mercy from me?

Hear now my cause graciously, although thou have been displeased with me a
great while: for thou art merciful; be not angry always, I beseech thee.

Cast not away a contrite and penitent person, a wretch, and an abject, which
humbly calls upon thy name.

Turn again a little toward me, O Lord God, and forgive me my mischievous
deeds.

Order me not according to my sins, nor punish me as my wickedness deserves.

Show not forth thy power against a poor wretch: persecute her not so sore,
which is without all strength.

Turn not thy face away from my prayers: but according to thy promise, take
me again unto thy favor.

For I am thine, O righteous Father, whom thine only dear Son has redeemed
with his precious blood.

And now my soul abhors mine old conversation: and of thee, which art judge
of all men, I ask mercy.

I do submit my self unto thy mighty hand: for after thine anger thou
show mercy, and in the time of tribulation thou dooest forgive sins.

I acknowledge, that I am a sinner, beseeching thee, Lord God almighty, of thy
goodness to do with me according to thy great mercy.

I am confounded, and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee: for my sins are
ascended up unto thy sight.

Against thee, O Father, against thee have I sinned, and done evil before
thee: thou see that mine iniquity is great.

Truly I have been an offender against thee, even from my cradle: and since I
sucked my mothers breasts, I have not ceased to do evil.

Behold, I was begotten in iniquity: and my mother brought me into this world
defiled with sin.

For the corn of an evil seed is sown in mine heart, and how much wickedness
has sproong thereof unto this day, thou know, O Lord.

I can not shake off my sins and offenses; but I carry still with me the
infamy of my youth.

Behold Lord, I am sold under sin, and in my flesh I find not that which is
good.

For the good that I would, that do I not; but the evil that I hate, that I
do.

All the thoughts and imaginations of mine heart have been set to do evil,
ever since I was young.

O why do I die in my sins, Lord God: seeing thy will is not, that a sinner
die, but return from his sin and live?

For thou art good and merciful, and according to thy great mercy, sauest
them that be unworthy.

For albeit no man is able to bear the punishment, which thou do threaten
against sinners, yet the mercy, which thou have promised, is great and
unsearchable.

Thou have showed mercy a thousand times heretofore: to make the same
glorious, as it is even yet still.

The old fathers in their necessities cried unto thee, and thou did deliver
them: they put their trust in thee, and they were not confounded.

When they were at their wits end, and wist not what to do: this was their
only refuge, to lift up their eyes to thee.

Thou did save them for thy name sake, to show in them thy might and strength.

Many a time they provoked thee through their iniquities, and stirred up thy
goodness to displeasure.

Yet when thou saw their tribulation, and their lowly submission unto thee;

Thou did remember thy promise, and by and by had pity and compassion
upon them: according to the multitude of thy mercies.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord God omnipotent, have mercy upon me: for I am a
miserable and a wretched creature. Make me whole, I beseech thee, whom thou
have stricken for my sin and iniquity.

My soul is troubled greatly: and how long, O Lord, will thou not look
toward me?

How long will thou reject my prayer, thus crieng out unto thee? Will thou
hear me at no time? How long will thou turn away thy face from me?

Where be thine old mercies, O Lord, whom thou have stablished in thy truth?

Will thou now, O Lord God, cease to show mercy? Or will thou withdraw thy
goodness in displeasure?

Have thou cast me away for ever, that thou will never hereafter be pleased
with me?

Thine hand is not weakened, but it may help: and thine ears be not stopped,
that they refuse to hear.

How long shall my mind be troubled with painful and heavy thoughts? How long
shall sorrow torment mine heart?

How long shall mine enemy have the upper hand of me? Look toward me, Lord
GOD, and hear my prayer.

Give light to mine eyes: for I have slept too long in death, and my sins
have prevailed against me.

Turn again, O Lord, turn again, and deliver my soul: and save me for thy
great mercy sake.

Lo, now is the accepted time: now be the days of health and grace.

In death, who shall remember thee? In hell, who shall laud or praise thee?

He that lives, he that lives shall praise thee: and shall make thy mercy
known.

Lord rebuke me not in thine anger: nor punish me in thy great displeasure.

Cast not thy darts at me: nor lay not thy heavy hand upon me.

For I have borne thine anger a long while: and of the cup of thy high
displeasure I have droonke very deep.

There is no health in my flesh, for fear of thy displeasure: I have no peace
nor rest, when I behold my sins.

Mine iniquities be gone over mine head: and like an heavy burden they daily
press me down.

The wounds in my soul do fester and stink, even through mine own folly.

I am a wretch cast away from thy favor and presence, and go moorning all the
day long.

My soul is full of filthiness, and no part of me is whole and sound.

Wherefore mine enemies do persecute me the more, the greatness of my pain
makes me to rore and cry.

My heart faints and trembles within me, and my strength is gone away.

O Lord, thou know my desire, and thou see my necessity.

Forgive me all my sins, O Lord God almighty, for thine own sake, and put
out of thy sight my heinous offenses: for according to thy goodness thou have
promised forgiveness of sins to them that do penance.

Have mercy on me Lord for the glory and honor of thy name, and be no longer
displeased with me, and then thou shall surely be known to be just and true
in thy words, and shall overcome when thou art judged.

For by this, thy great grace shall be known: that thou take mercy on them,
which have not whereof they may glory in thy sight.

And all the dwellers on the earth shall learn and know thy goodness, when
thou shall confer and give thy benefits to us for thy great name sake, and not
after our evil ways and wicked deeds.

Uerelie Lord God, except thou show unto us thy manifold mercies, the world
shall not have life, nor they that dwell therein.

And if thou help us not with thy goodness, how may they which have offended,
be raised up from their sins?

Have mercy on me, O good Father, have mercy on me, and for thy glorious
name, be no longer angry with me.

Take me a sinner unto thy mercy for the name of thy holy Son Jesus, whom
thou have sent to be the obteiner of mercy for our sins, through faith in
his blood.

Behold holy Father, behold thy child, whom thou have chosen: behold thy
well-beloved Son, in whom thy soul delights: upon whom thou have put thy
holy spirit, and sent him to preach the Gospel to the poor; to heal them,
which for their sins be sorrowful and contrite: to comfort them that mourn,
to preach pardon to the prisoners, and sight to the blind.

Behold thy little one, which was borne for us; behold thy Son, which is
given to us, whom thou have not spared, but given to death for us all, to be a
sweet offering and sacrifice to thee.

Uerelie he took upon him in his body our infirmities, and he bare our pains.

He was made weak for our sins: and he was wounded for our offenses.

The correction for our peace was laid upon him, and by ye strokes that he
suffered, our wounds were healed.

All we went astraie like sheep, every one follows his own way, and thou,
O Lord, put on him our iniquity, striking him for the offenses of thy
people.

He gave his body to be beaten, and his cheeks to be stricken, he turned not
away his face from them that scorned him.

Through his love and mercy, he has redeemed them that were lost, and by his
blood shead on the cross, he has pacified all things in heaven and earth.

He gave himself to death, and made his prayers for them which were offenders.

Look O merciful Father, and consider who it is that thus did suffer: and
remember, I beseech thee, for whom he has suffered.

For this is that innocent, whom thou gave to death for us, even then when
we were sinners: and shall we not, being now justified by his blood, much
rather be saved from wrath through him?

If we, when we were yet enemies, were reconciled to thee by the death of thy
Son, shall we not being reconciled, much rather be saved by his life?

Behold that pure and immaculate Lamb, which takes away the sins of the
world, by whose precious blood we are redeemed from our iniquities.

Look upon that most meek innocent, which like a Lamb was led to his death:
and being most cruelly entreated, once opened not his mouth.

Behold thine only Son, whom although thou begattest of thine almighty
power, substance and nature; yet thou would he should be partaker of mine
infirmity.

Which being God in nature, thought it no rauine to be equal with God, but
made himself low, taking upon him the shape of a servant, and coming in the
similitude of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh, submitting himself
unto thee, O Father, even to the death of the cross, and there put out the
handwriting that was against us contained in the law written, and taking it
out of the way, fastened it to his cross, on the which he spoiled potestates
and powers, and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them in his
own person.

Turn the eyes of thy Majesty, O Lord God, and look upon the work of thine
ineffable goodness.

Behold thine own sweet Son, how all his body was drawn and stretched
forth on the cross.

Look upon all the parts of his body, from the crown of the head, unto the
sole of the foot, and no pain shall be found like unto his pain.

Behold, O loving Father, the blessed head of thy dear Son crowned with
sharp thorns, and the blood running down upon his godly visage.

Behold his tender body, how it is scourged: his naked breast is stricken and
beaten: his bloody side is thrust through: his heart pants: his sinews be
stretched forth: his godly eyes dazell, and leese their sight: his princely
face is wanne and pale: his pleasant tongue is inflamed for pain: his inward
parts wax dry and stark: his arms both blew and wanne, be stiff: his bones
be plucked one from another: his beautiful legs be feeble and weak: and the
streams of blood issuing out of his body, ran down apace upon his feet.

Look, O my Father, upon the humility and gentleness of thy dear Son: and
pity the infirmity of thy weak handie-worke.

Behold, O glorious Father, the body of thy dear Son, all to rent and
torn: and remember I beseech thee, of how small substance I am.

Look upon the pain of him that is both God and man: and release the misery
of man whom thou have made.

Behold the grievous suffering of the Redeemer, and forgive the sin of her
that is redeemed.

Keep me from all evil ways: and teach me by thy holy spirit, to choose the
way of truth.

I beseech thee, O thou king of holiness, by him that is most holy, by this
my Redeemer Christ, that thou bring me again into the right way, that I may
be united, and made one with him in spirit, which abhorred not to be united
with me in flesh.

Make me to go perfectly in thy paths, and to hate all wicked ways.

Wash my heart from malice, and cleanse me from my secret sins.

Cleanse me, O holy Father, with the blood of the new testament of thy
well-beloved Son, which has loved us, and washed us with his blood from our
sins, and has redeemed us from all iniquity.

Purify my heart by the sanctification of thy spirit, and the sprinkling of
the blood of thy Son, from all filthiness of sin, and evil conscience.

O God almighty, be merciful unto me a sinner: for thy glorious name sake,
and remember my sins no longer.

For thou art God, gracious, and merciful, and patiently dooest suffer us:
and would that no man should perish, but yt all men should return to
penance.

Make me, O Lord God, to return from mine evil ways and wicked thoughts.

Remember not the sins and abominations of my youth: according to thy
mercy, be mindful of me for thy goodness sake O Lord.

Look not upon me with a grienous countenance: for there is no man that dare
speak for me.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for if thou accuse me, I shall
never be quit.

For if thou, O Lord, mark my sins and iniquity, who shall not fall before
thee?

This is certain and sure, that then in thy sight no man living shall be
justified, seeing thou have found iniquity even in thine Angels.

How much rather in man, which is abomination and filthiness, and dwells in
the earthly house of his body, and drinks iniquity as it were water?

Who is clean from filthiness, when all be corrupted? truly not one: no
though he have lived but one day on the earth, and though his months may be
easily numbered.

Of a truth there is no mortal man, which has not done wickedlie; nor there
is any righteous on earth, which does good and sins not.

Yet because mercy is in thy hand, O Lord, although thou be dreadful, my hope
is in thee, in whom my soul trusts.

My soul looks for thee, because mercy and plentiful redemption is with
thee.

For this I know assuredly, that thou will not cast me away for ever: but
although thou cast me away for my sins awhile, yet thou will have mercy
upon me again, according to the multitude of thy mercies.

For thou, O Lord, art full of pity and mercy: and wilt not turn thy face
away from us, if we will return to thee.

Thou art our God, full of sweetness, verity, and patience, and disposest all
things by mercy.

The fountains of thy goodness be ever full, and flow over: thy grace never
decaieth.

All thy ways be mercy and truth, to them that seek out thy covenant and
testimonies.

How gentle and loving the father is to his children, so gentle and loving art
thou O Lord, to them that fear thee, and for the abundance of thy mercy thou
dooest pardon our infirmities.

Thou know thine own handie-worke, thou remembrest what we are: thou see
we are flesh, and of no strength.

Thou have not forgotten, that this world is full of unrighteousness and
wickedness: and that it is wholly set and bent on evil.

Yea, nevertheless thou art merciful and full of grace, and like a merciful
Lord, forbearest to punish sinners when they repent themselves, and return
from their sins.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord God my savior, for the glory of thy name: and
deliver me, and forgive me my sins for thy name sake.

O righteous Father, look not straitelie upon the multitude of my sins: but
look on the face of Jesus thy holy Son, which being without sin, bare our
sins in his body on the tree of the cross.

Turn away thy face from my sins: and put out all mine iniquities.

Make a clean heart in me, O God, and renew me with a right spirit.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy spirit from me.

Give me again the comfort of thy help, and stablish me with thy mighty
spirit.

Mollify mine heart, O Lord GOD, that I may return to thy paths: for I have
wandered over long in the way of error.

Turn me to thee, and I shall be turned: for thou art my maker, and I am the
claie and work of thine hands.

Turn not thy face away from me, nor go not from thy servant in thine anger.

Be mine helper, and forsake me not: despise me not, O Lord, which art my God,
and my health,

Amen.
Another Psalm for the remission of sins.
O Most mighty GOD of Angels and of men: whose judgments be unsearchable, and
whose wisdom is profound and deep.

Near the prayers of thy servants: and cast not away the humble suits of thy
poor creature and handie work.

For as long as I shall live, I will speak unto thee: and I will not hold my
peace, so long as the breath is in my body.

I do turn my soul unto thee, and I set mine eyes directly upon thee.

Let thine anger be turned away from me, I beseech thee, and grant that I may
find grace and favor in thy sight.

According to the greatness of thy mercy, forgive me all my sins.

Pluck me away from mine heinous offenses: and heal my soul, which has
offended thee; make me free from the guilt of my transgression: for I
acknowledge mine iniquity, and am sorry for my sins.

I have forsaken thy way; and I, knowing thy commandments, have done all
things contrary to them.

I have broken the covenant that I made with thee: and have despised to keep
thy law.

Uerelie I have sinned against thee, O Lord GOD, and the blemish of my sin
abides still with me, even unto this day.

I have forsaken thee, O God my maker, and gone away from thee my Savior, and
have rebelled against thee, like an ox that winceth and strives when he
should be yoked.

I have hardened my heart against thee: and I have lifted up my neck proudly
after my sin.

I have trusted in lies, and through deceit would not knowledge thee: but I
have followed the lewdness of mine heart.

My pride and arrogancy have beguiled me: and the foolish boldness of mine
heart has brought me into desolate ways.

Mine own counsels and aduises have brought me these things: such is the
malice and rebellion that possesses the hearts of men.

My soul is put from quietness and rest, and I can not think of any good
thing.

The yoke of my sins is waxed very heavy: it is lifted up and fastened
about my neck.

Thou have spoken to me, but I would not hear; thou have called me, but I
would not answer: I believed not thy words, nor would abide thy counsel.

I regarded not thine holy word: and I gave not my mind to thy saiengs.

Thou have stricken me, but I would not know the cause thereof: thou have
corrected me, but I would not take thy discipline.

I did not consider in mine heart, that thou would not forget my sin and
malice.

With my mouth and my lips I glorified thee: but mine heart was far from thee.

I hid my sin as Adam did: to the intent to have mine iniquity unknown.

I asked not counsel of thy mouth: and I would not follow thy law.

I have sinned before thine eyes, and therefore my soul is made unstable.

I forsook thee, which art the fountain of continual springing waters: to
the intent to dig to my self muddie pits, which have no water.

In all these things I am not returned to thee: nor I have not prayed unto
thee, that I might leave my wicked ways.

See Lord, and behold how vile I am made, all the beauty of my soul is
perished and gone: in so much that now I dare not in any wise behold and look
upon thee.

And there was no cause why I should forsake thee, and vainlie follow vain
things.

Lord have mercy upon me, and hear my prayers: for thou art my God, and there
is no Savior besides thee.

Turn away from me thy heavy displeasure: and destroy me not for the sins
of my youth.

I humbly beseech thee, O Lord, forgive me: forgive me for thine exceeding
mercy.

O Lord God of hosts, if thou be determined to save, who can let orresist? If
thou stretch out thine hand, who shall turn thee away?

Thou may do to me, as the potter does to his pot: for behold, I am in thine
hand, as the claie is in his.

Amend me, O Lord, but in mercy, not in thine anger, least thou utterly
consume me: make me to understand and know how hurtful and deadly a thing it
is to forsake thee, my Lord GOD, and to cast away from me, the fear of thee.

There is no man that can heal me, nor cure my plague: no man can deliver
me, but thou O Lord, which woundest, and make whole; which strikest, and
healest again.

My destruction comes of my self: my help and salvation stands only in
thee.

For none is like unto thee: thou art mighty, and great is the name of thy
strength.

Turn me to thee, O Lord, and I shall be turned: take away from me this
sinful heart, that thy law may bring forth fruit in me.

Remember me, Lord, for thy goodness sake: and for the great love thou bear
toward me.

O Lord God, behold, thou have made both heaven and earth by thy great might:
and nothing is hard to thee.

Thou art that puissant and mighty, whose name is the Lord of hosts: great and
marvelous in thy counsel.

As soon as thou have spoken the word, all things be done: as soon as thou
have commanded, things be: and thy word returns not to thee void, and without
effect.

Thou, O Lord GOD, she west mercy unto all, for thou can do all: and thou
make as though thou saw not the sins of men, because they should do
penance, and amend their lives.

For thou love althings that be, and hate nothing that thou have made: for
nothing thou made, or have ordained of any hatred.

Thou sparest and tenderest all men: for all things be thine, and thou love
the souls of men.

Thou do minister mercy, equity, and justice in the earth: and therefore
in these virtues thou greatly delightest.

Truly, O Lord, thou art righteous and gracious, notwithstanding I have
offended thee, transgressing thy covenant, and trespassing against thee.

O Lord, thou have seen all mine abominations: look on my cause, and
consider how vile and wretched I am: see and behold my great confusion.

In the time of reconciliation hear me, and in the day of salvation have
mercy on me.

Be merciful unto me, and have mercy on me, which have none other help but
thee: whose will nothing can resist, whenever thou do purpose to save.

Hear me, which am a wretch making supplication unto thee: make me to trust in
thy name, and deliver me by thy power.

Have regard to me from heaven, O Lord, and look down from thine holy
habitation, and from the throne of thy glory.

Destroy me not because of mine iniquity: but remember the sorrow and pain
that I suffer.

Be not still angry with me, O Lord, forget all my sins, and remember them
no longer.

Let my prayer ascend up unto thee, say unto my soul, Behold I am come to
thee, thy health, and thy salvation,

Amen.
Another Psalm for the remission of sins.
O GOD eternal, just, and holy, which keep covenant and mercy with them
that love thee, and keep thy commandments.

Look at me, and have mercy upon me: for I have trespassed against thee, and
done evil in thy sight.

Show forth upon me the tender affections of thy mercy, that thy servant may
have an heart to pray unto thee.

I humbly make my prayer before thy face, not trusting in mine own
righteousness, but in thy great mercies.

For I am unclean and filthy: and all my righteousness is like a foul
bloody clowt.

Unto thee, O Lord, be justice, mercy, and pity: but unto me be confusion and
shame for mine iniquities.

Certainly, even from my beginning I have used my self proudly against thee,
doing wickedlie, and not ceasing.

O Lord, thou have redeemed me, and yet I have not ceased to offend thee, and
mine heart has not been straight in thy sight.

Thou have taught and instructed me, and stablished my power, and I have been
evil affected toward thee, being like a deceitful bow.

My pride and presumption accuse me to my face, I am overthrown in mine own
wickedness: I do seek thee, O Lord, I beseech thee that I may find thee:
thou art separated from me, for I have greedily followed filthiness.

Yet will I accuse mine own sinful ways before thee, O Lord, until thou
have mercy upon me, and receive me again into thy favor.

God forbid, that ever I should depart from thee again, and not diligently
seek for thy promises.

I will never hold my peace, nor keep silence: until thou have established
that covenant with me, which thou have made and ordained in times past.

That is to say, like as the justice of a just man shall not deliver or save
him, what time soever he shall offend: so the wickedness of a wicked man shall
not hurt him, what time soever he shall return from his wickedness.

In hope of this, O Lord God, I will tarry thy pleasure: for thou art good to
them that trust in thee, and to the soul that seeks thee.

Thou keep thy truth for evermore: and the words which issue forth of thy
mouth, shall not be void, and of none effect.

Destroy me not good Lord, for my sins: nor reserve not eternal punishment
for me.

Open thine eyes, and behold the greatness of my pain and mine affliction:
for mine iniquity is great in thy sight, and my sins have brought me into
this trouble.

Destroy me not utterly, nor leave me in my sins: for thou art God of
mercy, and very gracious.

Execute not the punishment upon me, which thou had purposed: do to me
according to thy name, although my defaults and sins be many.

O Lord, thou art my God; and thy name has been put upon me: leave me not in
the deepenesse of my troubles.

Thou have chastised and reformed many, and have strengthened the weary hands;
thy words have set up him that staggered, and thou have made straight the
crooked knees.

Wherefore I will seek thee O Lord God, which have wrought great things,
unsearchable and innumerable.

Thou have taken up the poor out of the dust, and have exalted them, which
were abiects.

For thou dooest deliver the poor in his misery out of the strait and
bottomless pit of tribulation: and out of the wide mouth of anguish and
affliction, into rest and quietness.

Thou art gracious and merciful, for that thou show mercy to them, which
be not yet come into the world: and thou art very merciful to them, which
diligently observe and keep thy laws; and thou dooest patiently suffer
sinners, giving them time and place, whereby they may be changed from their
malice.

Hear me poor wretch making supplication unto thee, for in thee and thy name
I have put my trust and affiance.

Take me thy servant unto thee, and make me good, and let me not be
disappointed of that that I look for.

Come again O Lord God, and save my soul: destroy me not, whom thou have
redeemed by thy great might and power.

Look not upon the hardness of my heart, nor upon my sins; but like as thou
have many times showed mercy, so now be merciful, and forgive me.

Hear me, O Lord, and be pacified: regard my prayer, and do according to thy
great name.

O Lord, I look to have help and salvation from thee: and this is my daily
meditation and exercise.

For thy mercies be great: and thy goodness is inestimable.

Hear me now favorably: and withold thy mercies no longer from me.

In the way of thy judgments I will look after thee: my soul desires to
magnify thy name, and to have thee in memory.

Incline my heart to do thy commandments: and direct my ways evermore in thy
sight.

Let me never hereafter go away from thy ways: nor leave me not now in the
deepenesse of my troubles.

Turn not thine eyes away from me, but teach me, O Lord, to do those things
which are pleasant in thy sight.

Make a perpetual league and covenant with me, that thou will put thy fear
into my heart, that I never swerve from thee in all my life.

Withdraw not thy goodness from me for ever, but keep thy promise and
fidelity.

Be good unto me with benevolence and favor: for thou art merciful, and thy
displeasure continues not for ever.

Remember me with favor and kindness: and visit me with thy salvation.

I know, O Lord God, that thou art gracious and merciful, patient, and of
great mercifulness.

Thou art good and merciful, thou keep covenant and mercy with thy
servants, which walk before thee in their whole heart.

There is none other God but thou, which regardest and carest for all.

For thou have been ever very merciful to me, delivering my soul from the
deep hell.

Let thy goodness, O Lord, be ever with me, for all my wealth rests only in
thee.

In the time of tribulation, I call upon thee, O Lord, for thou art nigh unto
them, which call upon thy holy name.

Succor me, O God, and look merrily upon me: show me the light of thy
countenance, in thee my soul trusts, and my heart reioiceth.

Let my prayer come unto thy throne: bow down thine ear unto my cry.

Hear me now being penitent, O Lord, whom thou have hitherto patiently
suffered: to the intent I should repent and amend my life.

O God, I have opened unto thee my life: save me for thy name sake, for my
trust is in thee.

What care I for worldly things: this one thing only I need and desire, that
I may find grace and favor in thy sight.

Wherefore I beseech thee, O Lord, take away from me this pain and sorrow:
or at leastwise mitigate and assuage it, either by comfort, or by counsel, or
by what means soever it shall be seen good to thee.

Another Psalm, or complaint of a penitent sinner, which is sore troubled and
overcome with sin.
O Lord God merciful and patient: and of much mercifulness and truth.

Which for thine abundant charity, and according to thy great mercy, have
taken us out from the power of darkness: and have saved us by the fountain
of regeneration and new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost: whom thou
have shed upon us abundantly by Jesus Christ our savior.

If I have found grace and favor in thy sight, suffer me to speak a word unto
thee, and be not displeased with me.

Why dooest thou ever forget me, and leauest me in the midst of my troubles
and evils?

Where is become thy zeal and thy strength? Where is the multitude of thy
tender affections, and of thy mercies?

O Lord, may not he which is fallen, rise up again? Or may not he which has
gone away from thee, return to thee again?

Shall my sorrow ever endure? Shall my wound be incurable and never healed?

How comes it to pass, that I turn still away from thee? My sin daily
increases, and of my self I can not return.

In as much as it is not given to man to direct his own ways, neither to make
perfect his own proceedings.

For in thy hand is the life of every living thing: and the spirit also of
every man.

Thou show thy mercy to whom thou will: and thou art gracious to them
whom thou fauourest.

Thou dooest kill, and thou dooest quicken: thou leadest down to hell gate,
and bring up again.

Thine eyes behold the ways of every man: and thou searchest the hearts of men.

There is no place so secret or dark, wherein sinners may hide themselves from
thee.

Nor any man may so lurk and hide himself in caves, but thou shall see him,
which dooest fulfill both heaven and earth in every part.

Why have thou cast me away from thy presence, and take me for thine enemy?

Why have thou laid upon my head the heavy weight of my sins, seeing no man
is able to bear thy displeasure?

What means it, that thou show thy power against a wretch? Why destroiest
thou me for the sins of my youth?

If I have sinned, what shall I do to thee? And if my sins be increased,
what shall I do?

If I do justly, what shall I give to thee? Or what shall thou receive at my
hand?

My wickedness shall hurt my self: and my righteousness shall profit me.

The life of man is a temptation upon the earth: and if I have sinned, as all
men have, what may I do?

Shall any man be found clean, and without sin before thee? Or shall any
man be without default in his deeds?

How may a mortal man be pure from sin in thy sight? Or how may he, which is
borne of a woman, be righteous?

Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, that thou have made me of the earth: and
that thou shall bring me again into the dust of death.

My days pass and vanish away like smoke: they waste daily, there is no
tarieng.

My life flies away as the wind: and considers not that which is good.

I was but lately borne into this world, and shortly I shall be taken away
hence by death: I never continue still in one state.

The days of my life be few, and short: thou have appointed an end, which I
shall not pass.

Naked and bare I came out of my mothers womb: and naked and bare I shall
return again, truly all men living are vanity.

Have pity, O Lord, on them that are in misery: and despise not the works of
thy hands.

Though we sin, yet are we under thee; for we know thy power and strength:
and if we sin not, then are we sure that thou regardest us.

Cease thine indignation, O Lord, and turn it from me: and cast all my sins
behind thy back.

Take away thy plagues from me, for thy punishment has made me both feeble
and faint.

For when thou chastisest a man for his sins, thou causest him by and by to
consume and pine away.

Whatsoever is delectable in him perishes, like unto the cloth that is eaten
with mothes.

Would God I had one to defend me a while, until thine anger were turned
away: or that thou would set me a time, in the which thou would remember
me.

I am clean cast away from thy presence: shall I never hereafter see thy
face again?

Behold, I have opened the griefs of my soul: the days of my sorrows have
taken me.

The floods of tribulation compass me round about, and the streams of thy
fury run over me.

And I cry unto thee, O Lord God, but thou hear me not: I ask mercy, but
thou reiectest my prayers.

Why thrustest thou down a poor wretch from thy presence? Or why forsakest
thou me so long time?

Why take thou not away mine iniquity? And why put thou not away the
wickedness of mine heart?

Arise, and tarry no longer, O Lord: arise, and reject me not for ever.

Have me in remembrance, I beseech thee: for I thoroughlie tremble and shake
for fear.

Yet I will not hold my tongue, but cry still unto thee with a moorning and an
heavy heart.

Turn away the stroke of thy vengeance from me: bring my mind out of troubles
into rest.

I am here no long continuer, but a pilgrim, and a stranger, as all other
mortal men be.

And what is man, that thou should be angry with him? Or what is mankind,
that thou should be so heavy Lord unto us?

What? Will thou bring sorrow upon sorrow? I pant for pain, and find no rest.

My sorrow greeueth me, when I should eat, and sudden sighs ouerwhelme mine
heart.

I am as if my bones were all to broken, when I hear mine enemies rail upon
me, and say to me day by day; Where is thy God?

Why turnest thou thy face away from these things, O Lord? Why have thou no
regard of my trouble?

I earnestly make my prayers daily in thy sight, and the heaviness of mine
heart I do show unto thee.

My spirit is careful and troubled within me: and desperation has entered
into mine heart.

Is it thy pleasure, O Lord God, to cast away thine own handie work?

Deliver my soul from corruption, and my life from everlasting darkness.

What avails it me that ever I was borne, if thou cast me straight into
damnation, seeing that the dead shall not praise thee: nor any of them that go
down to hell?

I have sinned, what shall I do to thee? Why have thou put me to be contrary
to thee? I am weary of mine own self.

Why searchest thou out my sins so narrowly: when there is no man that can
take out of thine hand.

If I would say, that I were righteous and without sin: then thou might
woorthilie condemn me to the fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

But I confess that I am a sinner, and do humble mine heart in thy sight.

Surely, if any man would stand with thee in judgment, he shall not be able
to answer one word to a thousand things, wherewith thou might charge him.

This makes me to fear all my deeds: knowing that thou sparest not him that
offends.

If I look upon thy power, O how mighty and strong art thou! If I shall call
for judgment, who shall defend my matter, or speak for me?

To thee O Lord, I call and cry: to thee, my God, I make mine humble suite.

Turn away thine anger from me: that I may know that thou art more merciful
unto me, than my sins deserve.

What is my strength, that I may endure? Or what is the end of my trouble, that
my soul may patiently abide it?

My strength is not a stony strength, and my flesh is not made of brass.

There is no help in my self, and my strength flies away from me.

Although thou hide these things in thine heart: yet I know that thou will
remember me at length.

For thou art true and just, O Lord God, thou dooest not condemn unjustly:
which rewardest man according to his deserts.

All this is come upon me, because I have forgotten thee: and not used my self
truly in thy testament.

Mine heart has turned backward: and I have followed the desires of my flesh.

And thou have surely known this thing: which know the secrets of the heart.

Lay not against me, O Lord, the sins of my youth: nor have in remembrance
mine old injuries done against thee.

Daily sorrow overcomes me: and sadness possesses mine heart.

I look after peace, but I can not have it: I look for a time of health; but
my grief continues still.

When the time of thine anger is past, let mercy come: yet am I unhappy more
and more.

Woe and alas that ever I sinned! mine heart therefore mourns and is sad, all
mirth and joy be banished from me.

How am I wasted? How miserably am I confounded, because I have forsaken and
cast away thy law?

Death has ascended up by the windows; pearcing the inward parts of mine heart.

When I daily one while muse secretly with my self, another while with loud
voice cry out and complain, the mean time my life draws near to the pit.

Who shall give me a place to rest in from all my griefs and troubles? And I
will forsake all men, and get me away from them.

Who shall give me water to mine head, and a fountain of tears to mine eyes,
that I may bewail my sins both night and day?

And I will look for him, which may save me, and deliver me from the wrath to
come.

I have no trust neither in life nor death: but I fear thy judgment, O Lord,
and the pains prepared for wicked sinners.

The fear of my sin makes me careful: and the burden of my conscience
oppresses me sore.

O GOD, which tenderly love mankind, and art a most rightful judge: spare
me now, I beseech thee, and show me some favor while time is.

Forgive that, which I fear; put away that, which I dread: before I depart
hence, and shall not return again.

My sins do vex and trouble me sore: they be so great that none can be
greater.

Alas my fall! alas my misery! alas the grief of my plague and stroke!
certainly my sin is the cause of all this, and so I will take and suffer it.

A very devout and effectual prayer unto Christ, for mercy and grace, to be
heartily said, and often used, especially when ye fast, or prepare your self
to receive the Communion.
O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living GOD, which being upon the Cross, with
thine hands spread abroad, for the redemption of all mankind, did drink the
most bitter cup of thy passion, I beseech thee that thou would vouchsafe to
give me help this day (or night) and ever. Lo, I a poor wretch come unto
thee, which art rich; a sinner unto thee that art merciful: let me not
return home contemned, and despised with nothing; I begin an hungered, let me
not leave off fasting; I come unto thee, as though I were famished, let me not
go away unfed. Although before I eat, I sigh and sorrow: yet after my sorrow,
give me somewhat to eat.

First of all, good Jesus, I acknowledge before thy Majesty mine
unrighteousness toward thee. Behold, O Lord, I was conceived in sin, and
borne in the same; and thou did wash them off from me, and sanctified me;
but I afterward defiled my self with bigger, and more grievous sins. For I
was borne in sin of necessity, because I could be borne none otherwise: but
afterward I rolled my self willingly in sins. Nevertheless, thou O Lord,
being mindful of thy pity, did take me out of the house of my carnal
father, and out of the tents of the ungodly, and have inspired me, and put me
in mind to follow thee with the generation of them that seek thy face, of
them that walk in the right path of purity; of them that abide and continue
among the lillies of virginity and chastity, and of them that sit down
together with thee at supper of most scarsitie and least excess.

But I an unkind wretch, forgetting so many great benefits, after that I was
entered into thy service, have committed many unlawful things. I did offend
wonderful vngratiouslie, doing many a foul sin. And where I should of
right have amended mine evil life, and left my sins, I heaped sins upon
sins. And these be the evils, wherewith I (whom thou did create after thine
own similitude and likeness) have dishonored thee, O Lord, and have spotted
and defiled my self: namely, with idolatry, superstition, pride,
vainglory, covetousness, and other many evils and foul vices, wherewith
mine unlucky soul is vexed, punished, torn, and destroyed.

Behold, O Lord, mine unrighteousness is gone over mine head, and is like a
sore burden over heavy for me to bear: and except thou, whose property is
ever to have mercy, and to forgive, do lay under me the right hand of thy
Majesty: I shall be constrained miserably to sink into the deep, and be
drowned. Give heed, O Lord God, and behold, because thou art holy: look how
mine enemy assaulteth me, saying; GOD has forsaken him, I will persecute him,
and catch him, because there is no man that will deliver him; but thou, Lord,
how long? Turn again and deliver my soul, oh save me for thy mercies sake.

Have mercy upon thy daughter, whom thou have brought forth with no small
sorrow and pain, and be not so intentive unto mine euilnesse, that thou
forget thine own goodness. What father is there, but he will deliver his
child? Yea, and what father is there, that will not correct his child, and
chasten it? But with the rod of pity. Therefore, O Father and Lord, although I
be a sinner, yet can I not choose but be thy daughter, because thou have made
me, yea and made me again when I was mard with sin. Repair and amend me now
evermore, O Lord; but first of all, I being mended and chastised as thy child,
with thy gentle scourge, deliver me to thy Son.

Can a mother forget the child she bare of her womb? And surely although she
sometime be forgetful, yet thou, O Father, have promised not to forget us.
Behold I cry, and thou dooest not hear me; I am vexed with sorrow, and thou
comfortest me not. What shall I say? Or what shall I do most wretched caitife
that I am? I being desolate of so great comfort, am cast out tro^ the sight of
thine eyes. Woe be unto me! From how great goodness into how great a mischief
am I fallen? Whither purposed I to go? And whither am I come? Where am I? And
where am I not? Whom did I labor to attain unto? And what evils have I
obtained? I sought for good things, and behold I have found trouble, anguish,
and care. Behold now I am in a most miserable case, even in the state of death
and damnation. For Jesus is not with me; my Jesus is departed from me: and
surely it were better for me to have nothing at all, yea no being at all, than
to be without Jesus. It is better not to live, than to live without life.

And thou, O Lord Jesus, where be thine old mercies? Will thou absent thy self
for ever? Will thou be angry toward me a wretch for evermore? O be pacified
I beseech thee, and have mercy upon me! Be pacified I say, and turn not thy
face away from me, which to the intent thou might redeem me, did not
turn away thy face from them that rebuked thee, scorued thee, and spitted
upon thee. I confess and acknowledge that I have sinned, and my conscience
deserves damnation, and the penance that I am able to do, is not sufficient
to make amends for mine iniquity: but sure and certain I am that thy mercy
exceeds all offenses that a man can do.

Oh do not I be seech thee, most pitiful Lord, write my heinous sins
against me, that thou should enter into judgment with thy servant; but
according to the multitude of thy mercies now have mercy upon me, and cross
and blot out all mine iniquities, before I depart hence, and shall be no more
seen in this world. For else, woe be unto me wretch that I am, when the day of
judgment comes, and the books of consciences shall be laid wide open: when
it shall be said of me, Lo, look upon this woman and her works, how wicked she
is, and abominable they are. What shall I do then, I say, O Lord my God,
when the heavens which I have offended, shall reveal and show forth mine
iniquity; and the earth which I have polluted, shall arise up and testify my
manifold misdeeds against me? Behold, I shall be able alas to give never a word
to answer, but to stand in thy presence, trembling, quaking, utterly
confounded, and holding down my head for shame, as condemned also by the
testimony of mine own guilty conscience, unto eternal damnation.

Alas wretch that I am, what shall I say? I will cry unto thee O Lord my God.
Why am I consumed and fretted with holding my peace? But if I should speak, my
grief would not cease: and if I hold my peace, I shall be most bitterly vexed
within. Go to therefore O my soul, moorne and lament as a widow for her
husband that she had in her virginity. Howl wretch and cry out with weeping,
because thy spouse Christ has forsaken thee. O caitiffe cry alowd in the
ears of thy God, and say, O God almighty, let not thine anger fall upon me.
Deal not with me after my sins, neither reward me after mine iniquities,
because that if thou lay so much to my charge as is due for my sins, it is
so much that I cannot receive it; surely Lord, my power is not able for to
suffer or bear it.

Wherefore, O Lord, have mercy upon me, least I despair: but in despairing I
will take heart to me, and be somewhat comforted. For although I have committed
so much, that thou may condemn me woorthilie, yet thou have not lost that,
wherewith thou wast wont to save sinners: neither dooest thou rejoice at the
destruction and loss of them that die. Yea to the intent that dead men might
live, thou thy self did die, and thy death did kill the death of sin: and
if they were revived again, and did live by thy death, I beseech thee let not
me die now that thou live. Send down thy hand and power from high, and
deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies, that they rejoice not over me and
say, Let us devour him.

Who ever, O good Jesus, needed to mistrust of thy mercy, which when we were
thine enemies, did redeem us with thy blood, and reconciled us unto God?
Behold therefore, I being hid under the shadow of thy mercy, do come unto
the throne of thy glory, requiring: and I do run crieng and knocking,
until thou take pity upon me. For if thou did call us to pardon and
forgiveness before we labored for pardon, how soon shall we obtain
forgiveness when we ask it? Do not remember, O most bountiful Jesus, thy
justice toward a sinner; but think upon thy liberality and gentleness
toward thy creature. Do not remember thine anger toward the guilty, but
remember thy pity and mercy toward a wretch. Forget me, in that I proudly
did provoke and move thee unto wrath, and look upon a wretch that calls
upon thee. For what is Jesus but a Savior? Therefore O good Jesus, for thine
own sake, arise and help me: and say unto my soul, I am thy health and thy
safeguard.

Thus I presume much, and am very bold of thy goodness, O Lord, because thou
dooest teach us to ask, to seek, and to knock: wherefore, I being admonished
by thy word, do ask, seek, and knock. And thou O Lord, that command us
to ask, make me able to receive. Thou that give counsel to seek, grant
that I may find. Thou that teach us to knock, open to me when I knock,
and confirm me which am unstable and wavering. Restore me that am lost, raise
me that am dead: and vouchsafe to direct and govern in thy favor, all my
senses, my thoughts, and doings, that from henceforth I may serve thee, I may
live toward thee, and that I may commit my self unto thee. I know, O my Lord,
that through this that thou have made me, I owe and am in debt unto thee even
mine own self: and because thou have redeemed me, and wast made man for my
sake, for this I owe unto thee more than my self. Lo, I have no more, neither
can I give that which I have unto thee, without thee; but do thou take me, and
draw me unto thee, that I may be thine in following and loving thee, like as I
am thine in condition and creation, which live and reignest one God in
blessed Trinity, worlds without end,

Amen.
The PSALTER, which S. AUGUSTINE composed out of every Psalm of David a
verse, for the use of his Mother.
O Lord God almighty, and king of eternal glory, who dooest acknowledge him
to be a blessed man, that abhors the way of sinners, and does meditate in
thy law day and night.

Teach thou me a wretched sinner, faithfully to serve thee with fear and
trembling of the heart.

And seeing with all humility of heart I do call unto thee with my voice,
hear me, have mercy upon me, and so harken unto my prayer, that neither thou
for thy part rebuke me in thy wrath, nor that old enemy to mankind, lieng in
wait for his part to devour my soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while
there is none to help.

But Lord, whose name is excellent in all the world, turn thou mine enemy
back, that he fall again, and perish at thy presence.

Let him not entrap my soul with his fiery snares, and suffer not brimstone
and stormy tempests to torment me.

But for the oppression of the needy, and for the sighings of the poor, now
thou dooest arise; behold and hear me, O Lord my God, because thou art the
counsel and trust of the poor.

Make me to walk vprightlie, and to work righteousness, that thy favorable
kindness may be the portion of mine inheritance.

Keep me as the apple of thine eye. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
because thou art my strength, my rock, and my refuge.

Cleanse me from my secret faults, and keep thy servant from presumptuous
sins.

Send me help from thy sanctuary, and give me mine hearts desire.

Save me from the Lions mouth, and lead me in the paths of righteousness, that
I may ascend into thy mountain, and stand in thine holy place, having
innocent hands, and a pure heart.

Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions.

Gather not my soul with the sinners, neither give me unto the lust of mine
adversaries.

But so favorably harken thou unto the voice of my petitions, that calling
upon the glory of thine holy name, thou do hear me, and have mercy upon me.

And so trusting in thee, let me never be confounded: but forgive the
punishment of my sin.

Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon me, as I trust in thee, and delivering me out
of all my fear, say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

And because I trust under the shadow of thy wings, give me mine hearts desire,
and haste thee to help me, O my Lord, my salvation.

Lord, let me know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is, let me
know how long I have to live.

Incline unto me, and hear my cry: bring me out of the lake of misery, out
of the mirie claie, and set my feet upon the rock, and order my goings.

Deliver me in the time of trouble, that I may go into thy glorious house: for
thou art the God of my strength.

Let not my steps go out of thy paths, that I may love righteousness, and hate
iniquity.

Be thou mine hope and strength: for thou art a great King over all the earth.

Thou which art a God for ever, deliver my soul out of the power of hell: for
it has received thee.

And when thou shall appear to judge us, have mercy upon me, according to the
multitude of thy mercies, and take not thine holy spirit from me.

O most gracious GOD, in that hour hide thy face from my sins, and put away
all mine iniquities.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, renew a right spirit within me, that I may
appear like a green olive tree, in the house of my God, and there with Jacob
rejoice, and everlastingly be glad with Israel.

Save me, O God, by thy name, and by thy power judge me.

Hide not thy self from my supplication; but be merciful unto me.

Send thou from heaven, and save me from the reproof of them that would
swalowe me up.

Break their teeth, O God, in their mouths: break the jaws of the young
lions, O Lord.

Thou art my defense, and my merciful God.

Help me with thy right hand, and under the covering of thy wings let me be
protected, when thou art to render every man according to his works.

While my soul thirsts for thee, hide me from the conspiracy of the wicked.

Since all flesh shall come unto thee, put not back thy mercy from me.

Neither take from me thine holy spirit; but cause thy face to shine upon me.

Send me a good passage, O our God, which sauest us, that the deep swallowe me
not up, nor the pit shut her mouth upon me.

Be thou mine helper and my deliverer; O Lord, make no tarieng.

Since in thee, O Lord, I do trust; let me never be confounded, when thou
shall judge the people.

Lo, they which withdraw themselves from thee shall perish. Oh let not me
oppressed return ashamed!

Because thou art a righteous judge, thou make low, and thou exaltest: and
who shall stand in thy sight when thou art angry?

Thou art the God that dooest woonders.

As thou nourishedst thy people with bread in ye wilderness, and did not
turn them from their lust: so let thy grace refresh me an hungry soul; make
haste, and let thy tender mercies prevent me.

And thou my defender, give me the bread of tears, and the bitterness of a
troubled mind, in the time of tribulation; and grant withal, that from the
honey of the rock, I may taste the sweetness of inward consolation.

O God, who iudgest between the innocent and the sinners; who alone art the
most high over all ye earth, have mercy upon me, and give grace and glory,
who have ordained a law.

Forgive the iniquity of mine heart; cover all my sins, and save thou thy
servant that trusts in thee.

O God, who laiest the foundations of thy Church upon the holy mountains,
incline thine ear unto my cry.

Let thine hand therefore establish me, and turn me not unto destruction; but
deliver me from the snare of the hunter, from the pestilence, and from the
plague that destroieth at noone day: that being planted in thine house, I may
flourish like a palm tree, and grow like a Cedar in Libanon, bringing out
fruit even in mine old age; because holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for
ever.

Be thou my refuge, O my God, the rock of mine hope: for thou Lord art a great
God, and a great King above all gods.

When thou will judge the world with righteousness, and thy people in truth, I
shall enioie light with the righteous, and joy with the upright in heart.

Let thy right hand, and thine holy arm preserve me.

Thou which sit upon the Cherubims, make me to come before thy presence
with ioifulnesse, that I may walk in the uprightness of mine heart in the
midst of mine house.

Let a froward heart depart from me, but cause mine eyes to be turned unto the
faithful, that I may sit with them walking in a perfect way, when through thy
judgment thou shall cut off all the workers of wickedness from the city.

O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.

Hide not thy face from me in the time of trouble: incline thine ears unto me.

Pardon all my sins, and redeem my soul from destruction.

Satisfy my longing with good things, thou which look upon the earth, and
it trembles; and broughtest forth thy people with joy, and thy chosen with
gladness.

Make me to keep judgment, and to work righteousness at all times.

Bring me out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death, that with a
prepared heart I may sing and give praise.

Save me, O Lord, according to thy mercy, that in the glory of Saints, in the
assembly and congregation of the just, my righteousness may endure for ever,
and mine horn be exalted with glory.

That while thou raisest the needy out of the dust, and liftest up the poor
out of the doong, making Judah thy sanctification, and Israel thy dominion, I
may bless thee, O Lord, from henceforth, and for ever: then shall I walk
before the Lord in the land of the living.

Break thou my bonds, and confirm thy mercy toward me: when I call upon
thee in my trouble, O Lord, hear me, and set me at large.

Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, that I may live, and keep it unto
the end.

Give me understanding both to search thy law, and to observe it also with
mine whole heart.

I have gone astraie like a lost sheep: O seek thy servant, and deliver my
soul!

Preserve my going out, and my coming in, that my feet may stand in the courts
of Jerusalem.

I lift up mine eyes unto thee that dwell in the heavens.

Deliver my soul out of the snare of the foulers, least I put forth mine
hands unto wickedness.

Fill my mouth with laughter, and my tongue with joy: replenish my longing
with good things, that thy beloved may find rest, and bless me out of Sion,
that I may see the wealth of Jerusalem, having escaped the cords of wickedness.

Let thine ears attend unto the voice of my prayers, O Lord.

Let not mine heart be hautie, nor mine eyes lofty; but give me grace to think
humbly, until I find a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God
of Jacob.

There the Lord has appointed the blessing, and life for ever. There will I
lift up mine hands to thy sanctuary, and praise thee, who iudgest thy people,
and art pacified toward thy servants.

O God of gods, and Lord of lords, now weeping and worshipping toward thine
holy temple, try me, and know me, mark and consider my paths, and lead me
in thy way for ever.

Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man, and preserve me from the cruel man.

Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, in thy righteousness, and enter not into judgment
with thy servant.

Hear me speedily, O Lord, least my spirit fail me: for thou God art my
refuge and my deliverer.

And forasmuch as thou art great, and most worthy to be praised, and thy
greatness is incomprehensible, raise up the crooked, loose the shackeled, and
give sight to the blind, thou which dooest build up Jerusalem.

And when thou have made the bars of thy gates strong, let me be coupled to
thy children within.

As the Angels and all the powers in the kingdom of heaven do praise thee,
there let me triumphing gloriously in the congregation of the Saints, with the
sounding Cimbals of my lips praise and magnify thy name, the which is holy
and glorious, and reigns now and everlastingly,

Amen.
Shus-hanna her Psalter, containing very devout prayers for remission of
sins; for the avoiding of all kind of sin, and for the leading of a godly
life.
O Almighty and everliving GOD, thou God of al power, before whose eyes all
things be naked and bare: O Lord, thou great and terrible God, I say, that
keep covenant and mercy with them that love thee, and do thy
commandments; Let thine ears be open, that thou may hear the prayers of
thy servant, which I make before thee at this time, and let them ascend up
before thy presence, and be accepted in thy sight, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Have mercy upon me thy poor creature, and work of thine hands. For I have
sinned, and done wickedlie, and have offended thy Majesty greeuouslie, in that
I have gone back and departed from all thy precepts and judgments, and have
not followed thy servants the Prophets, that spoke unto me in thy name; but
have from day to day provoked thy just wrath and indignation against me.

O Lord, I acknowledge and confess unto thee my manifold sins and
wickedness, the which I have vnrighteouslie and most greeuouslie committed
against thee in thought, word, and deed, from my youth up until this day: for
the which I am now taught by thy word and grace to be heartily sorry, and do
unfeignedly repent, purposing evermore, through the assistance of thy grace, to
walk in a new life. Desiring thee for the precious bloud-shedding of Jesus
Christ, thy dear Son our Lord, to have mercy upon me, and forgive me all
those mine offenses, according to thy great mercy and promise, which have
said; At what time so ever a sinner does repent him of his sin from the
bottom of his heart, I will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance.

O Lord remember not therefore the multitude of my misdeeds, I beseech thee:
but according to thy great mercies think upon me.

Call to remembrance for Christ's sake thy loving kindness, and thy tender
mercy, the which has ever been of old.

Hide not thy face from me, nor cast not off thy servant in thy displeasure.

For thy mercies sake deliver me from all my sins, and make me not a scorn
unto the foolish.

Turn not away thy mercy from me, but let thy most loving kindness and
truth alwaie preserve me.

Help me for thy name sake, and deliver me in thy strength.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and consider the words of my mouth, for my misdeeds
prevail against me: O be thou merciful unto my sins.

Let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoner come before thee, O Lord, and
comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee do I fly for succor.

Satisfy me with thy mercy, and that soon, so shall I rejoice and be glad in
thee all the days of my life.

Look not extremely what is done amiss in me, for I have sinned against
heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy child: yet
Lord, of thy great goodness power down some of the crumbs that fall from thy
childrens table, and make me as one of the least of them.

Reward me not according to my deseruings, for then I must needs perish, for
unto me pertains nothing but open shame, confusion, and damnation, but with
thee there is mercy, forgiveness, and plentious redemption.

Therefore I come unto thee, O Lord, thou lover of souls, not hoping in mine
own righteousness, but trusting only in the multitude of thy great mercies,
which thou have made and laid forth before the eyes of all people, offering
salvation to the whole world, and have promised, that whosoever he or she be of
the whole generation of man, that will receive grace, repent and turn
vnfeignedlie from his sins, shall have free remission and forgiveness,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, which is our only advocate and mediator, in
whom our salvation lies, and of whom thou have said, This is my dear Son,
in whom I am well pleased and well pacified.

For this thy Sons sake (by whom I am bold to come unto thee, which
appears now in thy sight, making continual intercession for us) have mercy
upon me, O thou mighty God: cleanse me from all my sins, and do away all
mine iniquities.

Oh let me feel thy mercies toward me, for I do confess my sins unto
thee, O Lord, and hide not mine unrighteousness. I do acknowledge mine
offenses, and accuse my self before thee of all my misdeeds.

Help me, O God my savior, for the glory of thy name: O deliver me, and
forgive me my sins for thy rich mercies sake.

Remember not the offenses of my youth, O Lord, but think upon thy great
mercies and covenant made unto me in Christ Jesus.

For thy tender mercy sake, lay not my sins to my charge, but forgive that
is past, and give me grace to amend my life, to decline from sin, and incline
to virtue, that I may walk with an upright heart, a clean conscience, and
single eye before thee this day (or night) and evermore.

Put me not from thy presence, oh thou God of all comfort, but incline thine
ear unto my calling.

Strengthen thy servant with the power of thy right hand, and help thine
handmaiden.

Comfort my soul with thy sweet promises, and let thy mercies cover mine
infirmities.

O most merciful Father, consider mine infirmities, I say, which are many
and great, and bear with mine imperfection, for thy Son my savior Jesus
Christ's sake, which had good experience of our infirmity, that he might be
merciful unto all them that are afflicted.

Consider the enemy has gotten an open way into my flesh, wherein I confess
that there dwells nothing but sin, wretchedness, and misery. Yea O Lord,
I acknowledge that I was borne in sin, and conceived in wickedness, and am
by nature a child of wrath. For in my flesh dwells no good thing, and of my
self I am not able to think a good thought, much less do that thou in thy
law requirest of me to be done, which have said, Cursed is he that continues
not in all things that are written in the law to do them. Again, the law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.

Therefore O Lord my God, I call unto thee for grace (which have said, Ask,
and ye shall have; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you) to prevent and draw my will to all goodness: for none can come unto
thee except he be drawn; and except we be borne from above, we cannot see the
kingdom of God.

Assist me therefore, and guide me with thy holy spirit from time to time.
Draw me, and I shall run after thee, and give me strength and ableness
through Christ our Lord, to accomplish and fulfill thy righteous will, and to
stand against all the assaults of the devil, that they may have no place in
me, but that the old man which I bear about in my body, may be crucified, and
daily die in me; that the lusts of sin may utterly be destroyed; that I may
evermore be renewed in the spirit of my mind; and that the life of Christ may
always appear in me.

Good Lord for thy great mercies sake, deliver me from all kinds of evil,
namely, from the spirit of pride, boasting, vainglory, hypocrisy,
wantonness, haughtiness of mind, presumption, self-love, and make me poor
in spirit, humble, meek, gentle, and low in mine own sight; that I lift not
up my self above my brethren and sisters; but esteem my self to be as a
servant and hand-maiden to all men and women, to do them good, after the
example of Christ, who came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, who also
has said, Blessed are the poor in spirit. Again, Thou resists the proud,
but give grace to the humble.

Take from me my stony, unbelieving, blind, doubtful, unfaithful, and
unthankful heart; and give me an heart of flesh, to love and incline to thy
will; my carnal, secure, and impenitent heart take away from me, and give me
an heart to fear, love, and obeie thee; write thy law in my heart; grave it in
my mind, that I may believe, trust, and live in thee for ever.

Take from me the wicked spirit of suspicion, envy, hatred, variance, strife,
sedition, sects, evil gealousie, vain surmises, murmuring and grudging,
backbiting or slandering of any, especially such as be in authority, and
ministers of thy holy word.

O Lord keep me from all wrath, malice, and hastiness, all respect of persons
in the faith, all idolatry, superstition, vanities, lieng, evil words,
debate, contention, murder, theft, false-witnesse-bearing, flattering,
dissimulation, hypocrisy, blasphemy, and vain swearing by the name of God,
his works or creatures; from all lightness, idle words, and all unstableness
of heart.

Oh Lord deliver thou my heart from all surfeting, drunkenness, gluttony, and
leacherie, and from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, from all unclean
thoughts, and unlawful desires, evil concupiscence, fornication, adultery,
and lusts of the body.

Take utterly from me also covetousness, and inordinate care of riches, all
deceit and guile, or doing of wrong to any in my calling and office: all
idleness, sloth, and beastly security, and give me not over unto an
unshamefast and obstinate mind; but hold me always unto thy nourture and
correction, and bow my heart always unto thee, that I may serve thee all the
days of my life, in such holiness and righteousness, as is acceptable before
thee.

Give me thy grace, oh Lord, that I may have thee always before mine eyes;
that I may also have a respect unto thy judgments, that whatsoever I say,
think or do, it may be agreeable to thy holy will and word: that I be not
minded, as the ungodly and wicked men and women are: let me have no pleasure
in such things as please them; and grant, that whenever I be overtaken with
any kind of sin and wickedness, either in thought, word, or deed, or that
I feel mine own infirmity and weakness, I may immediately with hearty
repentance return to thee again, and not to lie still in the security of
sin.

Make me able and contented with patience to hear all occasions of offense,
when they be offered or given me, and not to recompense evil for evil, and
suffer me not, good Lord, to give occasions of evil to any man, and if I do,
make me willing to confess my fault, and to amend it.

Give me grace that I never envy any good man's love or woman's, because they
do either love God and his people more than I, or else that they be beloved of
him or his more than I. Make me to rejoice in other men's gifts, and not to
envy them, because they be better than mine, but rather to give thanks for
them with all my heart, desiring that they may be increased in them and in me.

Increase my faith, O Lord my savior, in thee and in thy Christ, and make it
strong to believe thy promises.

Increase my love, O my redeemer, to thee and to thy righteous people, and make
it perfect, true, and unfeigned to all virtue and godliness.

Increase a sure hope in me of my salvation, O my iustifier, without doubt or
wavering in adversity, and without pride or presumption in prosperity, so
that I may serve thee with reverence and godly fear all the days of my life.

Increase in me strength to resist sin, and to get the victory and masterie
to stand against all evil temptations and assaults of the flesh, the world,
and the devil, that they may have no place in me, and that according to thy
promise I be never further proved nor tempted than thou will give me strength
to overcome.

Increase in me, O Lord, all other virtues agreeable to a godly life: for I
come unto thee my God, as unto the well and everlasting fountain of all health
and salvation.

Good Lord give me grace therefore all the days of this my pilgrimage, to
walk with a good conscience and pure mind both before thee, and toward all
men in my doing: that I be not a reader of thy holy word, and a talker only,
but that it may appear also in my life and conversation.

Regenerate my heart with the spirit of grace daily more and more: give me an
inward taste and feeling of thy favor and mercy toward me in Christ Jesus our
Lord, that I may know thee to be my God and Father, and my self to be thy
child for evermore.

Assist thy servant against this world, with the vain pomp, pleasures, and
beauty thereof, that it may be unto me as vile dust, filth and slime; that I
may use it, as though I used it not, and that it may serve me, and I not it;
that I may take my part thereof unto my necessity with thanksgiving; that I
do not use thy creatures voluptuouslie, but that I may live soberlie and
godly in this present life to thy glory.

Preserve and defend thy servant from all false opinions, that I be not
deceived and carried away in the error of the wicked, but that I may grow in
grace and knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.

O Lord give me wisdom, knowledge, and understanding to perceive those false,
lieng, and flattering spirits, which do deceive the hearts of innocents, and
begile unstable souls.

Give me also, O Lord, a right, a reverent, and a pure judgment and
understanding of thy holy word, and to avoid all rash judgments, and
perverse interpretations, that I may never swerve from the true sense and
meaning thereof; and grant, that my cheifest felicity may be in the same thy
holy word, in hearing, reading, and talking of it, and in watching, prayer,
fasting, mortifieng mine own will and members.

O Lord, plant in me true obedience to thy law, and let not the cares of this
world choke thy word in me.

Make me to lift up my heart oftentimes to thee, and if I chance to fall or
slip, make me to think on thee, and to be sorry with a steadfast purpose of
amendment.

Oh Lord, I offer up my self wholly with all my crooked and corrupt nature,
so much as it is, in will and works, unto thy mercy to be corrected, and
reformed at thine own will and pleasure.

O let not the hand of the ungodly cast me down, but save my soul, O my Lord
God, whither it be through prosperity or adversity, loss or gain,
sickness or health, life or death.

Aid, strengthen, succor and defend thy servant in all adversities,
tribulations, and temptations, and suffer me not to be tempted above my
strength.

Increase my joy and comfort in thee and thy holy spirit, that I may rejoice
in all trouble and affliction, and embrace the same to my consolation and
comfort, and think my self happy, when I am counted worthy to suffer any
trouble for thy name sake.

Take from mine heart the thoughts of earthly comforts, only set before mine
eyes the joy of the cross of Christ, that I may take comfort therein, and
despise the shame, for the great reward that is laid up in heaven for all
those, that with patience suffer in adversity, and continue in well-dooing
unto the end.

Oh Lord, take from me, I say, a careful heart in all worldly things: let
them be vile unto me for thy sake, and grant that neither poverty oppress me,
and drive me to despair or falsehood, neither wealth and prosperity lift me up
to forget thee, or my self, but that in prosperity I may be thankful, and in
adversity patient and humble.

Lord, let me be merry without lightness; sad without mistrust; sober without
dullness; fearing thee without desperation; trusting in thee without
presumption: let me not be merry with the joy that is without thee, and let me
desire nothing besides thee.

Good Lord give me ioifulnesse of heart, and peace of conscience, continual
gladness and consolation in thy word and promises, that I may evermore be
thankful unto thee, and praise thy name for ever.

Let thy kingdom come unto me, which is righteousness, peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faithfulness, meekness,
temperance, strength, and patience, with all such like virtues as are
prescribed unto me in thy holy word.

Grant me, O God, a tender, loving, and merciful heart toward my brethren,
long amity, and perfect patience, to bear all things well that thy providence
shall see meet to lay upon me.

Of thy fatherly mercy, O God, leave me not to my self; but stand thou
always by me. For I am too weak of mine own power to do any thing that is
good; but my righteousness and strength lies only in thee. Therefore, O
Lord, I come unto thee, requiring mercy in thy sight, and the assistance of
thy grace, that I may be strengthened with power in the inward man, and be
armed at all assaies with thine holy complet armor, which is the breast plate
of righteousness; the sheeld of faith; the hope of salvation for an helmet,
and the sword of the spirit, which is thy holy word: that I may stand perfect
in all that is thy will, and be found worthy through Christ to receive a
crown of life, which thou have promised to all them that love thee in
pureness of mind.

Now therefore, O Lord, I give over my self into thine holy hands, desiring
thee for Christ's sake, that I thus armed may remain under the protection and
strong defense of thy power, and that thine holy Angels may pitch their tents
round about me, and compass me always.

And I beseech thee, O Lord, give unto thy servant the strength of thine holy
spirit to subdue this body of sin, with the whole lusts thereof, that it may
be made obedient, both in will, mind, and members, to do thine holy will:
that when thou shall appear to reward every one according to their deeds, I
may rejoice, and not be ashamed of thee at thy coming.

Moreover, O Lord, I beseech thee think upon all thy people, which are straied
here and there from the farthest part of the earth, which be entered into
covenant with thee, and are minded to walk after thy will. Grant, O Lord, that
we may grow together in love, through the knowledge of thy word: to keep the
unity of the spirit through the bond of peace, to the utter confounding of
error, and all false opinions, and to keep us clean from all hypocrisy and
superstition, and to make us strong in all trouble and affliction.

O heavenly Father grant unto me and all other, I say, wheresoever they be
dispersed throughout the universal world, which profess thy holy word, so to
live, that we may die to sin, and lead a godly conversation, walking
innocentlie before thee.

Rule and confirm our hearts with thy spirit, O Lord; lighten our minds, and
guide us always with the lightsome lamp of thine holy Gospel. Govern and
preserve thy Church, and defend those Realms and Cities, that give succor and
harbor to thy people: make us all diligent and happy in the works of our
vocation; take into thy custody for ever our souls and bodies, our lives, and
all that ever we have.

Be gracious and favorable, oh Lord, to all men, and even to our very
enemies, and according to thy good will and purpose, forgive them their sins:
convert unto thy truth all those, whom thou have appointed in Jesus Christ to
salvation.

Be merciful, O God, to all our brethren and sisters, that suffer any kind of
persecution or affliction, whether in mind or in body, especially such as
suffer for thy name and Gospel: give them patience, constancy, and steadfast
hope, till thou send them full and good deliverance of all their troubles.

Be gracious to all those, whom thou have coupled and linked to us in love and
friendship, whose hearts thou have moved to pray for us, to wish us good, to
succor and help us in our necessities: grant us all thy blessing and holy
spirit, to sanctify us in the unity of faith, and dwell in us for ever.

Finally, oh Lord, have mercy upon mine husband, children, and family, which
thou have given us; make me to be content with him as thy gift, and increase
thy fear in our hearts, that we may truly love thee, and one another of us in
thee: so that we may be pure both in soul and body, and may godly live
together, according to thine holy ordinance.

Give him an heart of wisdom and understanding, and set thy fear alwaie
before mine eyes, that as Joseph cast off all surmises of the mis-behauiour of
Marie his spouse, and obeyed the word of thine holy Angel; so he may bear
with mine imperfections, and be obedient in word, deed, and thought, to all
that is thy will.

Oh Lord, give us the power of thy spirit to govern our selves holilie, and to
rule and bring up these our children and family, in all godly fear, nurture,
information of the Lord, and knowledge of thy holy word, and that we may be
always unto them an example in all godliness and virtue, to the praise of
thine holy name.

Plant in mine heart all virtues that be necessary and requisite in a Christian
woman, and give me grace so to use them, and all other good gifts, which I
have received at thy merciful hands, as may be most to thy glory and praise,
to my consolation and salvation, and to the profit of thy Church.

Behold Lord, although I am but dust, earth, and ashes; yet I have taken upon
me, and am bold to come and make these petitions and requests unto thee, not
trusting in mine own worthiness or righteousness, which I do acknowledge
with the Prophet to be stained and defiled; but only in thy great mercy and
promise, and through the merits of Christ's death and bloud-shedding, to lay
mine humble prayers before thee, requiring mercy, pardon, and forgiveness of
all my sins, and also the assistance of thy grace, to do thy will all the
days of my life, and to obtain all these my petitions.

O therefore hear me speedily, good Lord; forgive me favorably, O Lord, and
tarry not ouerlong; but for thine own sake do it, and for thy dear Son
Jesus Christ's sake, in whom all thy promises are Yea and Amen, which is our
only Redeemer, Mediator, Savior, and Iustifier; to whom with thee, O Father,
and the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory, and praise, now and ever,

Amen.
Another good and godly prayer, to be said at all times of every Christian,
both man and woman.
O Almighty, and everlasting GOD, Father, Son, and holy Ghost: thou that
have made heaven and earth, and all things in them contained; have mercy upon
me poor wretched sinner, daily assaulted with all kind of misery and
wretchedness. I beseech thee O Father, for the love of thy Son Jesus Christ,
consider my weakness, frailty, and imperfection, and have mercy upon me.
Increase thy graces in me, my sovereign Savior, my dear Redeemer, and mine
only Iustifier. For I come unto thee O Lord, according to the words of our
Savior Christ, who has said; Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden,
and I will ease and refresh you. Oh most merciful Father, ease me of and from
the great burden of my sin, which I have vnrighteouslie committed against
thee, either in thought, word, or deed; and refresh my soul daily with thy
mercies. Sprinkle me with the sweet hysop of thy mercy, and then shall I be
clean: wash me, and then shall I be whiter than snow. Power upon me joy and
gladness, and make my bones rejoice which thou have smitten. Turn thy face
from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds. Make me a clean heart, O God, and
renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take
not thy holy spirit from me. Oh give me the comfort of thy help again, and
stablish me with thy free spirit. Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked,
that sinners may be converted unto thee. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O
God, thou that art the God of my health, that my tongue may praise thy
righteousness. Open my lips, O Lord, then shall my mouth show forth thy
praise.

Consider mine imperfection, and help it with thy mercies. Remember thine old
woonted mercies, and faithful promises made unto our forefathers, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and all other Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and
other thy Saints, in our Savior Christ Jesus, who being compassed with
infirmity, and weakness of the flesh, came unto thee, O Lord, as unto the
well and everlasting fountain of their health and salvation, and thou
mercifully susteinedst them, keepedst them, and deliueredst them in all their
temptations and tribulations. If their feet at any time slipped, or went out of
the way, and committed sin against thee; yet thy mercy was always ready,
so that thou by thine holy spirit did procure them to repentance, so that
they turned again unto thee; which conversion and turning again thou
mercifully acceptedst at their hands. For because they were desirous to live
perfectly in thy sight, thou preseruedst them, so that they were found
faithful before thee.

O Lord, thou art the same, and thy years endure for ever. I beseech thee, O
Father, bear mine imperfection, and help it likewise with thy mercy, if at
any time I happen to fall, and commit sin against thee, as thou saiedst by
thine holy Apostle Paul; Let thy grace at all time be sufficient for me in
such wise, that I may immediately turn again by true repentance unto thee,
which conversion and turning again, accept always at mine hands for Jesus
Christ's sake; so shall I be found perfect before thee. For although the spirit
be willing, yet is the flesh untoward and weak.

Therefore do I not leave mine own righteousness before thee. For I know
and confess in me, that is to say, in my flesh is nothing but plain misery,
wretchedness and sin. Therefore do I come unto thee, and beseech thee for
Christ's sake to extend thy merciful hand toward me, and to do away mine
offenses. For I know, O Lord, that all grace and goodness comes of thee,
and therefore art thou praised, loved and feared in the congregation among the
Saints. For thou art only he that give victory, O Lord of hosts, and that
as thou say by thy Prophet, neither through an host of men, nor through
strength, but through thy spirit. Therefore, I beseech thee, give me not only
strength and knowledge of thee, but also a ready earnest purpose and will to
subdue mine imperfections, and grace at all times to live as thou in thy holy
word have prescribed unto me.

Moreover I beseech thee, make me perfect in thy sight, that I may render
continual thanks by Jesus Christ to thee. And where I have not hitherto
endeavored my self, according to that power, which thou have given me to live
after thy will, I pray thee forgive me for Jesus sake. And now I protest
before thee, through the help of the spirit, to order my life from hence
forth according to thy word, and to walk perfectly before thee:
nevertheless I beseech thee for Christ's sake, at all times to bear the
imperfections that shall or may at any time be found in me, and deliver me by
thy power and mercy.

Increase my faith O my savior; increase my faith O my iustifier; increase my
faith O my redeemer; increase faith, hope, and charity, and all other virtues
in me, consonant and agreeable to a godly life. For I come unto thee the well
and everlasting fountain of all health and salvation. O my heavenly Father,
let me and all other men and women live in thy sight, which seek thy word, to
the intent to forsake sin and all ungodly living, and to walk in a godly
conversation innocentlie before thee.

And I thank thee, O Lord, with all my heart and mind, that it has pleased
thee of thy great mercy and goodness to create and form me of the mould of
the earth, and given me all my members requisite and needful to the body, and
that it has pleased thee to preserve all that which thou have created in me,
since the time of the creation until now, and that it has pleased thee to
defend me this day (or night) and all the days and time of my life hitherto,
from all hurt and perils, and delivered me from the hour of temptation and
tribulation, as well when I was asleep and forgetful, as when I remembered and
called upon thee. And that it has pleased thee to minister to my necessity,
meat, drink, and clothing, inward reioicing, quietness of mind, health of
body, and such like, and that it has pleased thee to give me this man, and my
brother in profession T. B. to be my husband, veil, remedy, consolation, and
comfort in my necessities. Grant me grace in him, O Lord, truly to honor,
love, serve, and obeie thee: for I know, whatsoever I do to him, be it good
or evil, it shall be rewarded of thee. Lighten us daily with thy grace, that
we may govern our selves, the household and children which thou have given us,
in the true faith, fear and knowledge of thee, so that it may be an acceptable
sacrifice unto thee by Jesus Christ our Lord.

And seeing it has pleased thee O Father, to lighten the inward eyes of my
mind with thy grace, and to call me from the great blindness of ignorance and
sin, wherein all men are borne, to the knowledge of thee; let it now more (as
S. Paul says) please thee to preserve me and all other whom thou have
called, which are daily oppressed by sin, which desire to turn, and to come
unto thee, of what tongue or nation soever they be through the whole world.

And seeing it has pleased thee to call me by grace to the knowledge of thy
word, and given me a will to seek it, to love, and believe it: let it be thy
will to direct my ways, that I err not. Oh stay my feet with thy holy hand,
and preserve me with thine arm, for I am else far too weak, without thee I
can do nothing.

Oh let me live in thy sight, O Lord, and put me not from thee, but give me a
new heart, and a new spirit, yea a pure mind, and a clean conscience make thou
in me, then shall I be perfect before thee. Then shall I call upon thee in time
of my trouble, and offer acceptable sacrifice unto thee by Jesus Christ, even
the fruit of these lips, which confess thy name, and patiently receive the
cup of health at thy hand; and call upon thy name in time of adversity.

Oh hear my prayer, I beseech thee: let my power and pleasure alwaie be in the
tree of life, and in the fruit thereof, which stands in the midst of the
Paradise of God. O accept this voluntary sacrifice at my hand, as the sweet
smell of incense, and let the lifting up of my heart with my hands be an evening
sacrifice, pleasant and acceptable unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom be everlasting praise, honor and glory now and ever,

Amen.
Another Christian prayer for grace and remission, to be daily used.
O Most mighty God, merciful and loving Father, I wretched sinner come unto
thee in the name of thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ my only savior
and redeemer, and most humbly beseech thee for his sake, to be merciful unto
me, and to cast all my sins out of thy sight and remembrance, through the
merits of his bloody death and passion.

Power upon me, O Lord, thy holy spirit of wisdom and grace. Govern and
lead me by thy holy word, that it may be a lamp unto my feet, and a light
unto my steps. Show thy mercy upon me, and so lighten the natural blindness
and darkness of my heart through thy grace, that I may daily be renewed by the
same spirit and grace: by the which, O Lord, purge the grosenesse of my hearing
and understanding, that I may profitablie read, hear, and understand thy word
and heavenly will, believe and practice the same in my life and conversation,
and evermore hold fast yt blessed hope of everlasting life.

Mortify and kill all vice in me, that my life may express my faith in thee.
Mercifully hear the humble suite of thy servant, and grant me thy peace all
my days. Graciously pardon mine infirmities, and defend me in all dangers of
body, goods and name, but most chiefly my soul, against all assaults,
temptations, accusations, subtle baits, and sleights of that old enemy of
mankind Satan, that roaring Lion, ever seeking whom he may devour.

And here, O Lord, I prostrate with most humble mind crave of thy divine
Majesty, to be merciful unto the universal Church of thy Son Christ. And
especially, according to my bounden duty, I beseech thee for his sake to
bless, save, and defend the principal member thereof, thy servant, our most
dear and sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: increase in her royal heart true
faith, godly zeal, and love of the same, and grant her victory over all her
enemies, a long, prosperous, and honorable life upon earth, a blessed end, and
life everlasting.

Moreover, O Lord, grant unto her Majesty's most honorable Counselors, and
every other member of this thy Church of England, that they and we in our
several callings, may truly and godly serve thee. Plant in our hearts true
fear and honor of thy name, obedience to our Prince, and love to our
neighbors. Increase in us true faith and religion. Replenish our minds with
all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same till the end of our
lives. Give unto us a godly zeal in prayer, true humility in prosperity,
perfect patience in adversity, and continual joy in the holy Ghost.

And lastly, I commend unto thy fatherly protection all that thou have given
me, as husband, children, and servants. Aid me, O Lord, that I may govern,
nourish, and bring them up in thy fear and service. And forasmuch as in this
world I must always be at war and strife, not with one sort of enemies, but
with an infinite number; not only with flesh and blood, but with the devil,
which is the prince of darkness, and with wicked men executors of his most
damnable will: grant me therefore thy grace, that being armed with thy defense,
I may stand in this battle with an invincible constancy against all
corruption, which I am compassed with on every side, until such time as I
having ended the combat, which during this life I must sustain, in the end I
may atteine to thy heavenly rest, which is prepared for me, and all thine
elect, through Christ our Lord and only savior,

Amen.
Another prayer for mortification and holiness.
O Lord our God, most gracious and most merciful, I do acknowledge before
thee that I am unworthy to appear before thy high Majesty, to offer up unto
thee a sacrifice of prayer, being full of sin and corruption, naturally glad
of evil, and unprofitable to good: yea, being so miserable, that I see not my
misery, I feel it not, I bewail it not as I ought to do, but multiply mine
iniquities, provoking thy just judgment against me. My zeal is cold, my love
feeble, my exercises of religion faint and few, and I take no way but that
which leads from evil to worsse, and finally, would lead me from sin, to
the reward of sin. All this is true, dear Father, yet my heart is not moved
with fear; all this true, yet I do not sorrow for it, but walk with joy,
where I must (if I continue) reap affliction. Therefore, be merciful unto me,
and bless me: be merciful unto me, and in Christ Jesus wash away all mine
iniquities: be merciful unto me, and create in me a new heart, and prepare it
to prayer, and to thy holy service. For thou alone, O Lord, art my hope, and
the mighty God of my salvation. Thou have given me a desire to serve thee, O
teach me that I may do it! and the good work which thou have begun, make it
perfect in me, that I may no more love goodness, and yet follow vanity; but
that my good desires in thee may be increased, and all of them accomplished, so
shall I praise thee, and magnify thee for ever. For there is no honor but thy
honor; no glory but thy glory, O Lord. It is in vain to trust in princes,
but truly to trust in the Lord, brings plentiful salvation. From age to age
it has appeared, that thou O Lord God art merciful, and that in thy courts
there is nothing but truth and holiness. This world is full of vanity, full
of pride, full of rebellion, and the flesh also. The world has many baits to
destruction, and the flesh does delight in them, they are sworn together to
betraie us to Satan, yea we betraie our selves. Therefore, dear Father, by the
cross of Christ, mortify in us the deeds of the flesh, and crucify both us
to the world, and the world to us, that our souls may live.

In our general calling make us obedient to serve thee in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life: in our particular callings also make
us faithful, that we may neither put away a good conscience, nor make
shipwreck of faith. I believe; O Lord, help mine unbelief. In the day of
peace and prosperity make us sober; in the day of trouble and adversity make
us to look up, and cheerfullie to wait and trust in thee for our deliverance,
that our enemies mouths may be stopped by our godly conversation, and their
hearts pricked with zeal to turn unto thee.

Neither do I pray, O Lord, for my self alone, but for the whole body, unto
the which I am ingraffed by Christ Jesus; that is, for thy Church, O God; for
thine inheritance, that thou would increase it from one end of the world to
another, that all nations may worship before thy footstool. Especially, O
Lord, I pray for them that profess thy Gospel: as for this our nation, that
thou would be merciful unto it, turning our hearts to thee; for our gracious
Sovereign the Queen, and for all her Counsel, that thou would power thy
graces upon them, to the discharge of their duty, and our peace: for all the
holy teachers of thy Church, that thou would bless them and their labors;
for the peace and full beauty of this Church; for the peace and wealth of the
Commonwealth. We pray thee also for to bless the means to bring this to
pass: also we pray thee for our parents; for all others to whom we owe
especial love or service; but principally we beseech thee, to show thy
compassion upon all that are in persecution for thy Gospel: O Lord, increase
and renew their strength, give them victory, and turn their adversaries
hearts, if they apperteine to thine holy election; otherwise, O Lord, bring
upon them the confusion, that they would bring upon others; and into the pit
that they have dug, let them fall, and never rise up again. O Lord, hear
us in these suits, pardon our dull spirits in prayer, and give us these and all
other graces needful for us, and thy Church, to thy glory, for our Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, in whose name, as he has taught us, so we pray, saying: Our
Father, etc.

After that, you may ad any morning or evening prayer.
Another very devout prayer for grace and mercy.
O Lord God almighty, three in persons, yet but one GOD, who both art in all,
and wast before all, and wilt be in all things, a blessed God for evermore. Now
and always into thine hands I do commend, both my soul, my body, my sight,
hearing, tasting, smelling, and feeling, with all my cogitations, affections,
actions, outward and inward things, my sense, and understanding, my memory, my
faith and belief, and perseverance, that thou may keep them day and
night, every hour and moment.

O sacred Trinity hear my petition, and save me from all evil, from
offending, and from sinning any manner of way; from all snares and pursuits of
Satan, and of enemies visible and invisible. Expel far from me the
hautinesse of mind, and increase within me the sorrow of heart; diminish my
pride, and establish true humility within my breast; fetch tears from mine
eyes, mollify mine hard and stony heart, and save Lord both me and my soul
from all traps of the enemy, and continue me in thy pleasure. Teach me to do
thy will: for thou art my God. Give me perfect sense and understanding, O Lord,
that I may be able to conceive the deepnesse of thy mercy. Grant me grace to
beg that at thy hands, which may both be ioifull for thee to grant, and
behoofull for me to receive. Make me unfeignedly to be wail my sins, and
manifold offenses. Hear O my Lord and my God; hear O light of mine eyes;
hear my petition, and grant, that what I request, I may obtain. If thou
despisest me, I am utterly undone; if thou hear me I take heart again; if
thou examinest my righteousness, lo, I stink like a dead carrion: but if in
mercy thou respect me, thou raisest him that stinketh out of the grave. What
thou hate in me, remove far from me, and ingraffe the spirit of chastity,
and of a clean life in my mind, that in asking any thing at thine hands, I
may not offend thee in asking the same. Take from me whatsoever is hurtful to
my soul, and give whatsoever is behoofull. O Lord, give me a salve to heal my
grievous wounds.

Indue me, good Lord, with thy fear, with sorrow of heart, with humility of
mind, and with a pure conscience. Give me grace, Lord, to keep brotherly
concord evermore; to remember my transgressions; not to meddle with the dealing
of other men or women. Pardon my soul; pardon my sins; my wickedness
pardon; O pardon mine offenses: visit me that am weak; cure me that am sick;
heal me that do languish, and raise me, which am dead. O Lord, give me both
an heart to dread thee; a mind to love thee; sense to know thee, ears to hear
thee; eyes to see thee. Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; look upon
me from the holy seat of thy Majesty, and illuminate the darkness of mine
heart with the beams of thy brightness. Give me wisdom, O Lord, to discern
between good and evil, and grant me a watchful understanding. Forgive all my
sins, I beseech thee, and in this time of necessity and trouble, be thou
good and gracious to me, I only beseech thee. After thy woonted mercy, and
most loving kindness, O Lord, I beseech thee vouchsafe to give me the life,
which ever shall endure.

O Lord Jesus Christ, give both to thy ministers unity of mind, and to
magistrates judging vprightlie, peace and tranquillity. Furthermore, O Lord,
my request is for the whole catholic and holy Church; for men and women; for
religious, and for secular men; for all Christian governors and people
believing in thy name, which labor for thine holy love, that they may have
grace to continue in well-dooing. O Lord, eternal King, give to virgins,
chastity; to the unmarried, continency; to the wedded, purity; to repenters,
mercy; to widows and orphans; comfort; to the poor, protection; to
travelers, a safe return; to mourners, consolation; to seafaring men, a
ioifull haven; to the good, zeal to persist, to the well inclined, a mind to
prove better; to the wicked and sinful, as to me a wretch and chief of
sinners, grace with speed to repent.

O sooeete Lord, and most merciful Jesus Christ, Son of the living God,
redeemer of the world: I acknowledge that among all, and above all sinners, I
am most wretched; but thou most gracious, and high Father, who take mercy
upon all, can not suffer me to be utterly destitute of thy mercy. O thou
Lord, King of kings, who grantest truce of life, stir in me a mind alwaie, and
above all things to seek, to desire, to love, to fear thee, and to do thy
will, who art euerie-where all whole, a Trinity, and but one God. Especially,
O Lord holy Father, who art blessed and glorious for evermore, I beseech thee
in most humble sort, vouchsafe to govern and keep them from destruction, who
either do make mention of me in their prayers, or have commended themselves to
mine unworthy supplications, or have done good, whether it be unto my body
with temporal benefits, or to my soul with profitable instructions; or be
linked unto me either in kindred, friendship, or good will. Furthermore, both
for all Christians, which are alive, I pray thee stand thou at their elbowe to
assist them: and for such also as are dead, and everlastingly do rest from
their labors, I yield thee immortal praise. Finally, this one thing more
grant me, O Lord, I do earnestly beseech thee, who art Alpha and Omega, that
when the uttermost day and end of my life shall come, thou will be a merciful
judge to me, against that malicious accuser the devil, and that thou will
continually protect me against the snares of the old Serpent; and finally
conduct me into the society of Angels, and of all Saints in thine holy
paradise, who art blessed now and evermore,

Amen.
Another prayer for grace and newness of life.
O Lord my God, give me grace from the very bottom of mine heart to desire
thee; in desiring to seek thee; in seeking to find thee; in finding to love
thee; in loving utterly to loath my former wickedness. O Lord my GOD, give I
beseech thee, to mine heart repentance; to my spirit contrition; to mine eyes a
fountain of tears; to mine hands liberality unto the poor. O my King,
quench in me the desires of the flesh, and inflame within my breast the fire of
thy love. Drive away from me the spirit of pride, O my redeemer, and of thy
mercy bestow upon me the treasure of thine humility. O my Savior, remove
from my mind the rage of wrath, and graciously give me the sheeld of patience.
Pluck even from the very root of mine heart the rancor of malice, O my
Creator; and make me to enioie the sweetness of a quiet mind. Give me, O most
loving Father, a sound faith, a right hope, and a constant love.

O my governor, drive away far from me all vanity, and suffer me to have
neither an unconstant, nor a wandering heart; nor a scurrilous mouth; nor a
proud look; nor a greedy belly; nor a slandering tongue; nor itching ears
after curiosity; nor a covetous mind after riches; nor polling hands to abuse
my power; nor ambitious motions to get vain glory: let both cursed
hypocrisy, and poisoned flattery, and proud contempt of the poor, and
violent oppression of the weak; let both burning covetousness, and cankered
envy, with damnable blaspheming of thy name be always far from me thy
servant. O my maker, make a large distance between me and rashness; between
me and wickedness; between me and frowardness; between me and unquietness;
between me and idleness; between me and drowsinesse; between me and
blockishnesse. Grant that mine heart prove not blind; my senses obstinate; my
manners savage: but let me delight in goodness, and follow counsel, and never
loose the bridle to my tongue; nor cruelly make a pray of the poor; nor
violently oppress the weak; nor unjustly slander the innocent; nor
negligentlie regard inferiors committed to my charge. Finally, let me use
neither cruelty toward my servants, nor treachery toward my friends, nor
violence upon my neighbors.

O my God, my merciful God, even through thy beloved Son, I beseech thee
give me grace to exercise my self in the works of mercy, and in godly
cogitations; namely, to weep with them that weep; to instruct such as go
astraie; to help the afflicted; to cherish the poor; to comfort the
sorrowful; to relieve the oppressed; to nourish the hungry; to refresh them
which mourn; to forgive my debtors, to pardon them which have hurt me; to love
them which hate me; to render for evil good; to despise none, but to honor
all; to imitate the virtuous; to shun the wicked; to embrace virtue; to flee
sin: in adversity to be patient, in prosperity to be continent: to set a
watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom before my lips: to despise
earthly, and to covet after heavenly things.

Thus, my maker, I have asked much, and yet have deserved naught, I confess;
yet alas I confess that not only I deserve not those blessings which I do
require, but also do deserve many and exquisit torments: notwithstanding even
publicans, harlots, and thieves, who in a moment plucked from out the jaws of
the enemy, are taken into the arms of the shepherd, do embolden me to do
as I do. Wherefore have mercy upon me, O good Lord I beseech thee, and
vouchsafe favorably to hear me, and grant my requests, So be it.

A prayer called, o bone Jesus: necessary to be said at all times for mercy
and grace.
O Bountiful Lord Jesus Christ, O sweet Savior, O Christ the son of God,
have pity upon me, mercifully hear me, and despise not my prayers. Thou have
created me of nothing: thou have redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death,
and hell, neither with gold nor silver, but with thy most precious body once
offered upon the cross, and thine own blood shed once for all for my ransom.
Therefore cast me not away, whom thou by thy great wisdom have made;
despise me not, whom thou have redeemed with such a precious treasure, nor let
my wickedness destroy that which thy goodness has builded. Now whilst I
live, O Jesus, have mercy upon me. For if I die out of thy favor, it will be
too late afterward to call for thy mercy. Whilst I have time to repent, look
upon me with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchsafe to look upon Peter
thine Apostle, that I may bewail my sinful life, and obtain thy favor to
live and die therein.

I acknowledge, that if thou should deal with me according to thy justice,
I have deserved everlasting death: therefore I appeal to thy high throne of
mercy, trusting to obtain thy favor, not for my merits, but for thy merits,
O Jesus, who have given thy self an acceptable sacrifice to the Father, to
appease his wrath, and to bring all sinners truly repenting and amending their
evil life, into his favor again. Accept me, O Lord, among the number of
them, whom thou have in Christ elected and chosen to salvation: forgive my
sins, give me grace to lead a godly and innocent life: grant me the
heavenly wisdom, inspire my heart with faith, hope, and charity: give me
grace to be humble in prosperity, patient in adversity, obedient to my
rulers, faithful unto them that trust me, dealing truly with all men, to live
chastely in wedlock (or in this my single life) to abhor adultery,
fornication, and all uncleanness: to do good after my power unto all men, to
hurt no man, that thy name may be glorified in me during this present life, and
that I afterward may atteine everlasting life, through thy mercy, and the
merits of thy precious death and passion,

Amen.
A form of prayer, containing a paraphrasis of these words of David in his
119. Psalm: Order my steps in thy word, and so shall no wickedness have
dominion over me.
O Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which with thine only
begotten Son, and the holy Ghost, art the maker, preserver, and helper of
all creatures. Upon thee do I call, in the name of Christ the Mediator. Help
and govern me with thy holy spirit, that with a steadfast purpose I may
constantly clean unto thy word: that my steps, my thoughts, intents,
purposes, actions, and all the course of my life, may be directed and made
conformable to thy commandments and promises, and that I may ever have thy
word before mine eyes, to follow it as the only and most infallible rule of
my life, and lightsome lamp to my feet.

Order my steps in thy word, that I may fear in my heart thy great wrath and
threatenings against sin, and quake and tremble at the dreadful examples of
punishments, which therefore from the beginning, thou have published in the
world against all the wicked and ungodly ones, that have and do contemn thy
word, and that I may acknowledge those punishments to be forewarnings of thy
judgments to come, in the which this most dreadful sentence shall be
pronounced against all the ungodly, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Order my steps in thy word, that in true fear and awe of thy Majesty, I may
tame my mind, bridle my lusts, keep under mine affections, rule mine
imaginations, restrain my thoughts, repress and stop all vicious motions,
shun all wickedness, and kill the life of sin in me.

Order my steps in thy word, that in frights and fears, in terrors and
temptations, in all astonishments, troubles, afflictions, distresses and
dangers bodily or ghostly, with fixed eye and firm faith, I may behold and
look upon thy grace and mercy, which for thy son our Lord Jesus Christ's
sake is showed and declared unto us in thy Gospel; and never seek thy will
any where else but in thy word, and surely persuade my self that truly to
be thy will, which in thy word and promises is revealed and set forth. Help
me also, O God, I beseech thee, that in all mine agonies and fears, I may
cheer and raise up my self with the heavenly comfort of thy word, and so
with a constant faith in thy merciful promises that I find there, I may repose
my trust, and quiet my conscience in Christ my merciful Mediator, assuring my
self undoubtedly that for his sake I shall be both heard, received, helped,
delivered, and saved.

Order my steps in thy word, that in all this short course of my life I may be
obedient unto thee, and serve thee faithfully and diligently in my vocation:
that I may keep my self within the limits of my charge, and serve thee truly
in those works which thou requirest of me in my several calling.

Order my steps in thy word, that this knowledge of thy word in me be firm,
constant, certain, immovable, and unchangeable, that my mind waver not, nor
wander to and fro, neither be carried hither and thither inconstantlie with
every blast of opinions.

Order my steps in thy word, that in the race and course of this life, there be
no obstacles, lets, or vain strife and contention between flesh and blood, to
burst the bonds of my vocation; but let it be constant, healthful, happy and
prosperous to the end, and help me therein, that I may persevere in a right
course, and win the goal; and make me an instrument and vessel of mercy,
caring and ministering healthful and good things both to my self and to
others, that I may be comforted in this thy promise, which saiedst, Thy labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord, and all that thou dooest shall prosper.

But alas, sin dwelling and sticking in this our corrupt nature, does too too
much trouble, and hinder our steps. Our untamed lusts, vncomlie affections, and
inordinate desires, even like furious mad men, do solicit us, vex, disquiet,
and torment us, and quite draw, drive, and carry our steps forth of the true
way, which thy word shows, into the bypath, and strange ways that are
most perilous, dangerous, pernicious, and lead to destruction, Yea alas (such
is the misery of our corrupt nature) that sin, a thing most horrible and
detestable, does smile upon us, and is become very delightful and pleasant
unto us, and most willingly and gladly we obeie, and are ready to follow
the flickering intisements and vain allurements of all manner of vices. Yea so
great and lamentable is the weakness and imbecillitie of our nature thus
corrupted, that quickly and easily we suffer our selves continually to be
more and more removed, driven back, and distracted from the right way that
leads to thee.

Order my steps therefore in thy word, O Lord I beseech thee, and so rule,
direct, govern and help me, that sin neither dwell in me, nor have dominion
over me in action nor to damnation. O let not sin reign in me, I say, to
action, as it did in David, by forcing me to follow the sugared suggestions of
Satan, the delightsome vanities of the world, nor the brittle and short
pleasures of the flesh, nor by compelling and driving my deeds and actions to
obeie clean contrary to my conscience. Neither let sin reign in me to
damnation, as it did in Saul, by not regarding thy word, by fury, wrath,
malice and contempt of thy commandments: that I be not overwhelmed in terrors
and wonderful great furies, nor drowned in eternal damnation; but help me,
that in temptations I may constantly stand, and valiantly resist, and in all
dread and distress be lifted up, and comforted with the voice of the Gospel,
as it is written: Sin shall not bear rule over you, for you are not under
the law, but under grace. So shall it come to pass, that though this tyrant
sin rob and rage never so cruelly, yet I through faith embracing the sweet
comfort of the Gospel, and believing surely that it is pardoned, and the
terrors of the law overcome, by the conquest and triumph of our mediator and
Lord Jesus Christ, it shall not overcome me; but I it in him, through the help
of his holy spirit, power and grace, which grant unto me, O Lord I beseech
thee, for thy holy name sake,

Amen.
Meditations after prayer.
O Lord God heavenly Father, which to declare thy readiness in hearing of
sinners, most mercifully have said, that before they cry, I will answer, and
whilst they are yet in thinking what to speak, I will hear: vouchsafe, we
beseech thee, for the same thy great mercies sake, favorably to hear our
requests, and graciously grant all these our poor petitions, which we have
asked of thee, not trusting in our own righteousness, which we acknowledge
with the Prophet to be stained and defiled, but only in thy manifold mercies
and promises. And grant, that at what time soever thy good spirit does move us
to call upon thee, we may ask such things, and in such sort as thou requirest,
to thy honor and glory, our neighbors profit, and our own souls health,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Or thus, for a conclusion of the whole prayers.
O My good God, which have commanded all men to call upon thee in all their
troubles, need and necessity, and have promised so to hear them, and deliver
them, that they shall praise thee: and have promised to be pressed and ready at
hand to all such as fear thee, and call upon thee faithfully, and that thou will fulfill their desires, and help them: now I have called upon thee, not in
mine own worthiness, for to me belongs nothing but wrath, shame and
confusion: but in the name and worthiness of thy sweet Son Jesus Christ
mine only mediator and advocate. For unto thee belongs mercy and
forgiveness.

Oh dear God, I beseech thee for his sake forgive me all my sins; increase
my faith; purge my corruption; help mine infirmity; confirm mine hope, and
grant me all those things that I have prayed for, and all other things, that
thou know to be most necessary, profitable, and expedient for me, and thy
whole Church, (although mine infirmity dare not, and my blindness can not
ask them) so as the same may redound to thy glory, and profit of thy Church,
the reformation of my life, and mine assured salvation and consolation in thy
Son Jesus Christ mine only Lord, Mediator, and Savior, in whose name I
beseech thee: Our Father which art, etc.

EVENING prayers, and first, At the Sun setting pray.
O Sun of righteousness, evermore arising, and never going down. O
brightness of perpetual charity, ever shining, and never darkened. In this
Evening now the Sun has run his course, and is going down; and the day
being far spent, it draws toward night. I pray thee de part not thou from
us, neither let the Sun of thy grace set, or cease to give light unto our
souls: but that in thee we may abide, and always have day light most
cleerelie in our minds, to know, love, and praise thee perpetually in the
vision of that light, where thou the Sun of all glory dooest everlastingly
shine upon thine elect, making them to shine as the Sun before thee, and
where the Sun shall not go down by day, nor the Moon lie hid by night. For
there shall be no night, neither light of the Sun or Moon: but thou, O Lord
our God, shall be our everlasting light, and inlighten us with unspeakable
glory for ever, Amen.

Lord let not the Sun go down upon our wrath: but make us to fear thee as
long as the Sun and Moon endures.

Meditation.
Think now of the brittle state of the world, the glory whereof, like the
Sun or Moon, is very unconstant, variable, and now up, now down: but the
goodness of God only is permanent, and endures for ever.

Think also, that as it is no grief for us to see the Sun to set, because
we expect his arising again in the morning: no more ought we (as men without
hope) to be sorry for the death of the body, knowing that in the morning light
of the resurrection it shall eftsoons arise, and receive the soul again to
joy, or pain eternal.

When the candles or lamps be light, pray:
THanks be given to thee O Lord, which after day, when night comes, have
given us for the remedy of darkness this artificial light of the candle or
lamp, whereby we see and discern those things in this night of our bodies,
which are expedient for us to use. But especially we render immortal praise
unto thine holy Majesty, for the light of thy doctrine, which thy Son
against the horror of sin and ignorance, has brought unto us for a remedy
against death eternal. Grant, we beseech thee O Lord of light, and Master of
all truth, that the most thick and obscure clouds of our minds may be so
driven away and expelled by the lamp of thy grace, and candle of knowledge
and right understanding, that in body corporally, and in soul spirituallie,
we may ever see by both these lights to glorify thee, both in our lives and
in our deaths.

Thy word, o Lord, is a lamp to our feet, and a light unto our paths. O light
thou our candle, and make our darkness to be light, that with our lamps ever
burning, we may still watch for thy coming!

Amen.
Meditation.
Think now, that as without this material light of the candle all would be
horror and uncouth darkness: even so without the spiritual light of Gods
divine word and wisdom, all our light is darkness; our knowledge error; and
our life death and utter confusion.

Think also, that as the candle is not put under a bushel, but set on a
candlestick to give light to all in the house: so likewise ought we to let the
light of our faith shine bright before men, that other seeing our good works
may therefore glorify God.

Evening prayers for Sundaie to be said kneeling by the bedside, before you
make you unready. Here you may say one of the confessions for the Sabbath
day, as before, page 384, 387.
WE render unto thee everlasting praises, most merciful Father, for that of
thy gracious favor and love toward us, thou have vouchsafed to preserve us
this day, and the rest of our life hitherto under the shadow of thy most
merciful protection, beseeching thee also to take us into thy tuition this
present night and ever, that we be not tempted with any suggestion of Satan;
but being thoroughlie armed with the holy Ghost, we may have power and force
to resist his assaults, by a sure faith and confidence in the blood of thy
blessed Son our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Give us grace to repent us of
our sins unfeignedly; to crave remission of them vncessantlie; to embrace thy
holy word and commandments sincerely; and to express them in our living
effectually: whereby we may walk vprightlie in our conversation, with sure
and certain hope of the resurrection to eternal life, by the merits of Christ
Jesus, that with the wise virgins we may be found waking and watching for his
coming, when he shall come to judge the world with equity, and to reward
every man according to the works of his body. Grant us grace, most merciful
Father, to behave our selves so vprightlie in this life, that then we may be
made partakers of thy kingdom with thine elect, there to live in eternal joy
and felicity, world without end,

Amen.
Another Evening prayer on the Lords day.
O Almighty and eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which together
with thy Son and the holy Ghost, did create man after thine own
likeness, and breath into him the breath of life, the which through thy goodness
continues at thy pleasure. Thou have made of one blood all mankind, and
assigned times, and length of our life in this world: thou give life to the
people on the earth, and breath to the walkers therein, which if thou take
away, they shall depart, and be turned into dust. We bless thee heavenly
Father, and with all our hearts give thee thanks, not only for saving us this
day from dangers: but also from our cradles for defending both our souls and
bodies from death. Wherefore magnify the Lord, O our souls, and our spirits
rejoice in God our Savior. For he has looked upon the baseness and
afflictions of his servants. He that is mighty has done for us great things,
and holy is his name. Wherefore we will praise the Lord for evermore, because
his mercy endures from generation to generation on such as fear him. We will
show forth his power in the evening, and when we go to bed, we will remember
his mercy. Arise now our souls in the night, praise your God. In the
beginning of the watches power out your hearts like water before the face of the
Lord. For the Saints will be ioifull with glory, and sing loud upon their
beds. Wherefore we also will praise thee continually, and will confess thy
name for evermore. For thou art the God, which delights our hearts, and makes
our souls merry. Therefore in the night we will think upon thy benefits, and
our spirits shall consider of thy woonderous works. For thou have commanded
that thy mercy be celebrated in the day time, and thy truth in the night
season.

O our Lord, and God of mercy, gentleness, patience, pity, and truth, which
she west mercy unto thousands, and blottest out all our offenses: we lift up
our souls unto thee, and from our hearts we pray thee, put not before thine
eyes the horrible confusion, uncleanness, and wickedness of our minds, being
replenished with loathsome darkness and ignorance, full of doubtings and
errors. Our hearts and will are turned from thee our God, and all the powers and
strength both of our souls and bodies are defiled, and filthilie weakened: but
Lord, of thy great merice blot out our offenses, look upon the troubles and
dolours of our hearts, and forgive all our sins. For lo, our souls are
wounded, and can not be helped, but only through mercy. There is no health
in our flesh because of thine anger, neither is there rest in our bones,
because of our sins. For our iniquities have gone over our heads, and as an
heavy burden have pressed us down. Our wounds are putrified and corrupt,
because of our foolishness. Assuage thine anger, and turn from thine
indignation. Pardon our faults, remit all punishment, and restore in us the
light of thy goodness, which was lost. O Lord hear; O Lord forgive; harken O
our God, for thine own sake. For thy name is called upon by us.

O God of heaven and earth, in this evening tide do we call unto thee, that
remitting our sins, which this day especially we have committed against
thee in breaking thy Saboth, and profaning this our holy day with our
unholy deeds, speech and cogitations, thou would receive us into thy
protection, and keep us and all ours this night, that the devil have no power
over us. Be thou watchful over us, O eternal Savior, least the subtle
tempter apprehend us. For thou art made for us an everlasting protector. For
behold, whether we sleep or wake, whether we live or die, we are thine: thou
art our Creator and redeemer. Stand therefore on our behalf in the watch with
the army of thy celestial warriers thine Angels, which being filled with
perfect goodness, and perpetual integrity, behold thy face always in the
heavens. Expel from us and our houses wicked spirits, which be our mortal
enemies, that they damage us in no case, and deliver us from persecutors, which
lay snares for our destruction. Turn not away thy mercy and truth from us. O
God assist us, that peaceably we may rest, and sleep in quiet. We will lay
us down in peace, and sleep. For thou Lord alone make us to dwell in
safety without danger. Hide us in thy tabernacle, O Lord, that sitting in thy
secret place, and abiding under the shadow of thy wings, we may say unto
thee; Lord, thou art our keeper, and our refuge. O God, we will trust in thee,
and will fear no danger. And although we were in extreme darkness, yet will
we not fear. Though we should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, yet
will we dread none evil, for thou art with us; thy rod and thy staff they do
comfort us. Let thy mercy, O God, follow us all the days of our life, that
we may dwell in thy house in longnesse of days, praising thee evermore with
the Son and holy Ghost one true God, reigning worlds without end,

Amen.
Another more large Evening prayer, with Confession.
O Lord God, Father everlasting, and full of pity, we acknowledge and
confess, that we be not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy Majesty, with confidence that thou will hear
our prayers, and grant our requests, if we consider our own deseruings. For
our consciences do accuse us, and our sins bear witness against us; and we
know that thou art an upright judge, which dooest not justify the sinners and
wicked men, but punishest the faults of all such as transgress thy
commandments. Yet most merciful Father, since it has pleased thee to command
us to call on thee in all our troubles and adversities, promising even then to
help us, when we feel our selves as it were swallowed up of death and
desperation: we utterly renounce all worldly confidence, and fly to thy
sovereign bounty, as our only stay and refuge, beseeching thee not to call
to remembrance our manifold sins and wickedness, whereby we continually
provoke thy wrath and indignation against us: neither our negligence and
unkindness, which have neither woorthilie esteemed, nor in our lives
sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy Gospel revealed unto us, but
rather to accept the obedience and death of thy Son, who by offering up his
body in sacrifice once for all, has made a sufficient recompense for all our
sins. Have mercy therefore upon us, O Lord, and forgive us our offenses.
Teach us by thy holy spirit that we may rightly way them, and earnestly
repent for the same; and so much the rather, O Lord, because that the
reprobate, and such as thou have forsaken, can not praise thee, nor call upon
thy name, but the repenting heart, the sorrowful mind, the conscience oppressed,
hungering and thirsting for thy grace, shall ever set forth thy praise and
glory. And albeit we be but woorms and dust, yet thou art our Creator, and we
be the work of thy hands: yea thou art our Father, and we thy children; thou
art our shepherd, and we thy flock; thou art our redeemer, and we the people
whom thou have bought; thou art our God, and we thine inheritance. Correct us
not therefore in thine anger, O Lord, neither according to our deserts punish
us, but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly affection, that all the world
may know, that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from
the bottom of his heart, thou will put away his wickedness out of thy
remembrance, as thou have promised by thy holy Prophet.

Finally, we humbly thank thee, O merciful Father, by thy dearly beloved
Son Jesus Christ our Savior, for all thy benefits bestowed upon us from the
beginning of the world to this time, for our election, our creation, our
redemption, our sanctification, and continual preservation; and namely, for
that of thy mercy and goodness thou have preserved us this day, and all the
time of our life hitherto, from all misfortunes, hurts and dangers bodily and
ghostly. And for so much as it has pleased thee to make the night for man to
rest in, as thou have ordained him the day to travel, and that whither we
sleep or wake, live or die, we are always thine: grant, O dear Father, that
we may so take our bodily rest this night, that our souls and hearts being
kindled with the light of thy countenance, may continually watch for the time
that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear for our deliverance out of this
mortal life. And in the mean season, take thou, O God, care and charge of us
and all ours, that we perish not in the works of darkness, and that we (not
overcome by any fantasies, dreams, or other temptations) may fully set our
minds upon thee, love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee. Furthermore, that our
sleep be not excessive or overmuch, after the insatiable desires of the flesh,
but only sufficient to content our weak nature, that enioieng sweet sleep
and comfortable rest both in body and mind, we may healthfullie and ioifullie
rise again, and be the better disposed to live in all godly conversation and
perfect obedience of thy word, to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of
thy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord, in whose name we furthermore make
our humble petitions unto thee, not only for our selves, but for all others,
whom thou would we should continually pray for, saying as he in his holy
word has taught us, Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

O Lord increase our faith, strengthen it in thy manifold sweet promises, and
grant us a perfect continuance therein to our lives end, whereof we humbly
make our confession, saying: I believe in God, etc.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still our defense;
thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son our salvation; thy
true and holy word our instruction; thy life and holy actions our imitation;
thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and consolation unto the end and in the
end: and the blessing of God almighty, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be with
us, and remain with us now and ever,

Amen.
A form of general prayer, to be used in private houses and families every
Evening. O Lord prepare our hearts to prayer: for if we pray with our lips
only, our prayers are abominable. O teach us therefore by thy holy spirit to
pray rightly, according to thy will, and give ear graciously to our calling.
O Gracious Lord and loving Father, according to thy commandment we do here
present our selves before thy Majesty, humbly prostrating our selves before
thy throne of mercy, acknowledging and confessing from the bottom of our
hearts, that we be miserable sinners, daily breaking thy commandments both in
thought, word, and deed, wherein we justly deserve everlasting damnation, and
to be utterly thrown from thy presence. Yet, O Lord, we see thy goodness
again toward us, who not suffering us thus to perish in our sins, have sent
thine own dear Son Jesus Christ, to take upon him whatsoever is due, to
reconcile and make us at one with thee again. In him therefore, good Lord, and
through him do we come unto thee, beseeching thee for his sake, that we
feeling the greeuousnesse of our sins, and groaning under the burden of them,
may feel the release and ease of them, in that we be through thy holy spirit
assured, and steadfastly believe, that Christ has borne the burden of them
even for us. Grant O Lord, that we being assured hereof in our conscience, may
through thy holy spirit be renewed in the inward man, to hate, detest, and
abhor sin, and to study to live acording to thy blessed will during this
whole life.

We do not only pray for our selves, O Lord, but also for all the whole
Church, especially such as be persecuted for thy word: grant unto them, that
whither it be by death or life, they may glorify thy name to their lives end.
Be merciful to this Church of England and Ireland we beseech thee good Lord,
and preserve every part and member of the same, especially thy servant
Elizabeth our gracious Queen and Governor. Grant her all such gifts as be
needful for so high a calling, to the advancement of thy glory, and the
benefit of this Commonwealth: to the establishing of a perfect government of
thy Church, according to the prescriptrule of thy blessed word, to the rooting
out of all superstition, idolatry, and relikes of Antichrist, to the governing
of her subjects in all peace and tranquillity. Defend her, O Lord, from all
conspiracies, treasons, and rebellions, and so work in the hearts of all her
subjects, that knowing her authority does come from thy heavenly Majesty,
they may with obedient hearts humbly obeie her in thee and for thee. Preserve
the whole Counsel and the Magistrates of the Realm, that being lightened by
thy holy spirit, they may defend the truth, suppress wickedness, and
maintain equity. Behold all the pastors and preachers of thy word: bless
their labors, increase the number of them; place over every Church a
painful watchman: remove all idle lubbers, and confound the power of
Antichrist, and turn the hearts of the people, that they may be obedient to the
truth. Bless the two Uniuersities, Cambridge and Oxford, and all the students
of the same, with all the Schools of learning. Behold all those that be
afflicted with any kind of cross, that they may profit by thy correction in
newness of life.

Lastly for our selves here gathered together, we render most hearty thanks
to thy Majesty, O Lord, which have hitherto from our infancy preserved us by
thy mercy, from all perils and dangers both of soul and body, whereunto
frail man is subject, that thou have sent unto us all things necessary for
this present life, as health, food, apparel, and such like, which many of thy
dear children do want, being notwithstanding as pretiouslie bought with the
precious blood of thy dear Son as we be, and yet lie in misery and
calamity, oppressed with poverty, nakedness, imprisonment, and banishment;
in which case also dear Father, thou might have brought us, save only that
thou dealest herein more favorably with us than with them. For the which thy
loving kindness, we give thee hearty thanks, desiring thee, that as thou have
hitherto thus favorably in mercy preserved us by thy protection, and even
presently this day have brought us past all the dangers thereof: so we
beseech thee good Lord, in like favor behold us this night, that we taking our
natural rest and quietness, may through thy protection be so defended, that
our bodies resting, our souls may be occupied in beholding thy favor and
mercy toward thy children, still looking for the coming of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, for our full redemption. Grant that our sleep be not
immoderate, according to the lusts of the flesh, but as much as is sufficient
to refresh our weak nature, that being thus refreshed, both the body and the
mind may be more able to do their several office and function in that
vocation wherein thou have placed us. Grant, that we laieng our bodies down
to rest, may be thereby put in mind of our long rest of death: that as we do
lay down our bodies in bed, so we may be thereby admonished, that hereafter
they shall be laid down in grave, to be consumed to dust, earth, and ashes,
from whence they were taken, that we having this before our eyes, may be
stirred up in mind warily to walk in this our pilgrimage, not knowing when
the time shall be of our departure, but always be found ready with our lamps
of pure faith clearelie burning, that we may be accepted to meet the bride
groom, when our mortal, earthly, and corruptible bodies shall be made like
to the glorious body of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, there to reign
with him in perpetual joy and consolation, together with all the elect
children of GOD, continually lauding with all the heavenly multitude the
glorious Majesty of thee our Lord God and heavenly Father, in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. In whose name for these thy mercies, and whatsoever else
thou know to be needful for us, and thy whole Church, we pray unto thee,
as he himself has taught us, saying: Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us, and
grant us his peace.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, and the most
comfortable fellowship of the holy Ghost be with us, preserve and keep us this
night and evermore,

Amen.
When you unclothe yourselfe, and make you unready to bedward, pray:
THis our life and weak knit body by reason of sin, by little and little
shall be dissolved, and so shall be restored to the earth, from whence it was
taken: then will be an end of this vanity, which by our foolishnes we have
wrought to our selves. O most meek Father, so do thou untie and loose me (for
thou have knit me together) that I may perceive my self to be loosed and
dissolved, and so may remember both of whom I was made, and also whither I go,
least I be had unprepared unto thy tribunali and judgment seat. And as I
willingly now put off my garments, which in the morning I shall put on again:
so let me not unwillingly put off this my body, whenever by death it shall
please thee O God, to call me; especially for that I know that after the
night of this world is expired, I shall receive it on again in much better
light to immortality: So be it.

Put off the old man with his lusts and concupiscences, and be content with
Joseph to put off your prison apparel, that you may put on new.

I have put off my clothes: how shall I put them on? O Lord, I will confess my
wickedness, and that of my self I have nothing.

Cant. 5, 3.
When you wash your feet, pray thus to your self.
O Most meek and loving Jesus, the perfect pattern of all humility, who being
Lord of heaven and earth, did not disdain to wash thy Disciples feet, and
wipe them clean with the towell wherewith thou wast girt, and that for our
example to teach us to love and serve one another in thee: have mercy on me a
miserable sinner, which from top to toe, both within and without, am altogether
polluted and defiled with sin in thy sight. And with Peter I humbly beseech
thee, vouchsafe now to wash me in the sweet bath of thy precious blood, from
all the filth and pollusions of my sins, that I may be whiter than snow.
Wash thou, I say, not my feet only, O Lord, but my hands and head: yea my
very heart, soul, and conscience also. For if thou wash me not, I shall have
no part with thee; but if thou wash me, I shall be clean every whit in all
parts, yea cleaner than the glass. O wash me therefore clean from mine
uncleanness, and do away all my sins, negligences, and ignorances: yea so
purge and scowre all mine affections by thy grace and mercy, that with both my
feet, that is to say, with perfect love to thee, and true charity to my
neighbor, I may walk in the paths of thy peace by the direction of thy spirit,
and at the last come pure and clean unto thee my purifier, to the confusion
and shame of mine enemies, which in the day of my death shall most busily
watch to trip and overthrow me: so shall I bless and praise thee, with thine
elect and holy Saints in everlasting happiness,

Amen.
I have washed my feet: how shall I file them again. Cant. 5, 3.
Another.
O Most merciful Jesus, which gently sufferedst that sinful woman Marie
Magdalen to approach unto thy presence, and to wash thy blessed feet with her
tears; to wipe them with her hear; and to kiss and anoint them with costly
oil, and did greatly commend this her fact to all posterity, have mercy
on me a more sinful woman in thy sight; and grant me grace likewise
continually to wash thy feet with the tears of true contrition; to wipe them
with the hear of mine obedience; to kiss them with the kisses of fervent love
of thee and thy Saints, and to anoint them with the sweet oil of devout
prayers, confessions, and thanksgiving, that I may obtain by thy mercy
forgiveness of all my manifold sins, and feel my self much bound unto thee
for my salvation. Finally, let me thine handmaid be a servant, I pray thee,
to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord: make me I say, of the number of
those holy matrons, that willingly wash the feet of thy Saints, that minister
unto them that are in adversity, that are continually given to every good
work, and be well reported of for their virtues, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before mine
eyes: cease to do evil, and learn to do well. Esai. 1, 16.
When you enter into your bed, pray:
I Enter into my bed, and lay me down to rest, in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost. The Lord Jesus Christ, which was crucified,
dead, and buried for me, bless, preserve, and keep me both body and soul,
and raise me with him, at the last day by the power of his glorious
resurrection to life everlasting, Amen.

And grant, O God, I beseech thee, that as I am not afraid now to enter into my
bed, and to dispose my self to sleep: so I may not be afraid or loath to die;
but rather cheerfullie prepare my self thereunto, and evermore desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ my Savior,

Amen.
Being new laid in your bed, say this Psalm.
O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me, thou know my down lieng,
and mine vprising, thou understand all my thoughts long before.

Thou art about my path, and about my bed, and spiest out all my ways. For lo,
there is not a word in my tongue; but thou, O Lord, know it altogether.

Thou have fashioned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. Such
knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me, I can not attain unto it.

Whither then shall I go from thy spirit? Or whither shall I go from thy
presence?

If I clime up into heaven, thou art there: if I godowne to hell, thou art
there also: if I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost
parts of the sea; even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand
shall hold me.

If I say, Peradventure the darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be
turned to day: yea the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is
as clear as the day: the darkness and light to thee are both alike.

For my reins are thine: thou have covered me in my mothers womb. I will give
thanks unto thee, for I am fearefullie and woonderfullie made. Marvelous are
thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

My bones are not hid from thee, though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being imperfect, and
in thy book are all my members written, which day by day were fashioned,
when as yet there was none of them.

How dear are thy counselles unto me, O God? O how great is the sum of them?
If I tell them, they are more in number than the sand, when I wake up, I am
present with thee.

Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart; prove me, and examine my
thoughts; look well if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me
in the way everlasting.

Let me never imagine mischief upon my bed, as do the ungodly that set
themselves in no good way, and can not sleep before they have done some
harm; but make me to abhor the thing that is evil, and to commune with mine
own heart, and in my chamber to be still, that with the Saints I may be
ioifull with glory, and rejoice on my bed with them that praise thee day and
night.

Finally, grant that I may behold thy presence in righteousness, and when I
awake up after thy likeness, bring to pass that I may be satisfied with it,
and glorify thee eternally,

Amen.
The Prayer.
THE day now ended, men give themselves to rest in the night, and so this life
finished, we shall rest in death. Nothing is more like this life than every
day; nothing more like death, than sleep; nothing more like to our grave,
than our bed. O Lord our keeper and defender, grant that I now laieng me down
to rest, being unable to keep my self, may be preserved from the crafts and
assaults of the wicked enemy: and grant furthermore that when I have tun the
race of this life, thou would of thy mercy call me unto thee, that I may
live and watch with thee for evermore. And now, O gracious God, give me to take
my rest in thee, and bring to pass that thy goodness may be even in sleep
before mine eyes, that sleeping I be not absent from thee, but may have my
dreams to draw me unto thee, and so both in soul and body may be kept pure
and holy for ever,

Amen.
I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety. Psalm. 4. 9.
Another prayer to be used of the husband and wife so soon as they are laid in
their bed.
O Lord our GOD, our protector and defender, which did graciously preserve
and keep thy servant holy Tobie, when he lay with his wife Sara, by the guard
of thine holy Angel, so that Satan was bound, and had no power over them,
keep us also, O King of kings, and Lord of lords this night and evermore, that
that subtle Serpent by no means have power to vex or grieve us; but that we
may sleep this night in the remembrance of thee, into whose tuition and keeping
we commit us both body and soul, which have bought and redeemed us with the
precious blood of that immaculate Lamb thy dear son, and our dear beloved
Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with the holy Ghost be all honor and glory,

Amen.
Meditation.
REmember now, that you be nearer your end by one days journey than you were
in the morning.

Also that this troublesome day is past, and night come; and there withal
rest, quietness, and pleasant sleep, which makes most excellent princes and
poor wretches all alike for the time: even so, after the tumults, troubles,
temptations, and tempests of this life, if we believe in Christ, we have
prepared for us an haven and rest most pleasant, ioifull, and perpetual.

When you put out the candle, say:
THE light of the ungodly shall be put out, and the light of his candle shall
not shine: the light shall be dark in his dwelling, and his candle shall be
put out with him: yea full often shall the candle of the wicked be put out, and
their destruction shall suddenly come upon them, so that all shall be horror,
and full of darkness with them. O Lord, let not our candle be put out, nor the
light that is in us be turned into darkness: but lighten thou our candle, and
make thou our darkness to be light: yea lighten thou our darkness, we beseech
thee O Lord, that we sleep not in death, and by thy great mercy defend us
from all perils and dangers of this dark and dreadful night, and lighten and
illuminate thou every dark corner of our habitation with thy light, that our
candle go not out by night: for the love of thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ:
So be it.

A little while after say.
O God, although we were in extreme darkness, yet will we not fear: and
though we should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, yet will we dread
none evil. For thou art with us, thy rod and thy staff do comfort us.

Now therefore that we lie in darkness, be thou our protector, bring us to thy
light, and save us from utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of
teeth: that we may behold thee in that clear light of the perpetual morning,
where shall be no darkness, no night, nor need of any candle or material
light: but thou, Lord wilt inlighten us with unspeakable glory, So be it.

When you feel sleep to be coming, and dispose your self to rest, pray.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my watchman and keeper, take me to thy care, grant that my
body sleeping, my mind may watch in thee, and be made merry by some sight of
that celestial and heavenly life, wherein thou art the King and Prince,
together with the Father and the holy Ghost, where thine Angels and holy
spirits be most happy citizens. Oh purify my soul, keep clean my body,
that in both I may please thee sleeping and waking for ever,

Amen.
Lord, into thy hands I commend my spirit. For thou have redeemed me, o Lord
thou God of truth. Psalm. 31, 6.
Another prayer to be said last of the husband and wife, before they give
themselves to sleep.
O Lord assist us, that peaceably we may now rest and sleep in quiet. Let our
eyes sleep, but let our hearts wake unto thee. O lighten thou our eyes, that we
sleep not in death, that Satan hurt us not, and our enemy say; I have
prevailed against thee: but watch over us, O eternal savior, least the
subtle tempter overtake us, and we sleep a perpetual sleep, and wake no
more. For thou art made our everlasting helper and protector.

Give us this night a good sleep, that quietly without cares and anguish of
mind we may take our rest. Let not troublesome dreams, and vain fantasies and
apparitions of the night nor the devil disquiet us. Defend us this night from
unclean and troublesome spirits, let not their rushings, ragings, and misrule
disquiet us. Keep us, good Lord, from sights of Satan, from snares and
illusions of the devil.

But admonish our souls of miseries to come, even as thou did arm the
Patriarchs and Prophets by dreams and visions in the night, when sleep came
upon them, from dangers nigh at hand, through thine heavenly oracles; so
govern and preserve us in sleep, that our souls come not into danger,
danger, neither fall upon the sword and pit of perils.

Let us not sleep in sin and contempt of salvation, as do the children of
night and darkness, but make us of the number of those which sleep in Jesus,
and whom thou, O Lord, in the resurrection of the just, and coming of thy
Son, shall not suffer to be prevented with sleep, but wilt bring with thine
elect to meet him in the clouds, that whether we wake or sleep, we may live
together with him, and obtain everlasting salvation, through the merits of his
death and passion.

In thy name, O sweet Jesus, will we give sleep to our eyes, and slumber to our
eye lids. O Savior of the world: save us Lord watching, and keep us sleeping,
that in peace we may both rest and wake; and let our sleep be sweet and
healthful to our bodies, that waking in the morning, we may rise in good
health, and delight in thee our God.

Grant also, that both being in bed asleep, and awake, we may always remember
our death, which is a passing to an immortal life, and withal our ioifull
resurrection to everlasting glory.

Finally, at our last gasp, when our hearts pant, our strength fails, our
sight departs, our hearing is deaf, our mouth dumb; when our feet cannot
go, nor our hands feel; when all our senses forsake us, give us, O blessed
Trinity, some sense of eternal life, that we may taste in this world the
beginning of thine everlasting joy, and at our departure out of this world,
behold by faith thy divine presence, and so sleep quietly to eternal life,
Amen, Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord into thy hands we commend our souls, because thou have redeemed us.

Lord Jesus receive our spirits.

At midnight, if you happen to awake, pray:
Have mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

I will remember thee, O God, in my bed, and think upon thee now that I am
waking, because thou have been mine helper.

Even now in the night season, while thou hold mine eyes waking, I say,
will I think of thee my creator, and make my prayers unto thee my redeemer,
and God of my life, that my soul may not refuse her comfort.

In my bed now by night will I seek thee whom my soul loves: O let me find
thee, and my soul embrace thee.

For with my soul do I desire thee now in the night season, and with my
spirit within me will I seek thee in the morning.

Yea at midnight I will arise up to give thanks unto thee, O Lord, because of
thy righteous judgments, and in the night watches I will lift up my hands
toward thy holy place, and bless thee, and power out my heart before thee,
and say:

Have mercy upon me, O God, have mercy on me a most miserable sinner.

From the snares of the devil, O Lord deliver me: from the midnight evil
defend me, and in the hour of death, help me.

Our father which art in heaven, etc.

Meditation.
AT midnight there was a cry made; Behold the bridegroom comes, go out to
meet him: blessed are those virgins, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find
waking.

O my soul, let us therefore take heed, watch and pray, that we may be found
prepared with our Lamps burning, ready to enter with our spouse and Lord Jesus
unto the wedding.

In the night, when you hear the clock strike, pray:
THE clock of our conscience does ring every minute the hour of death to be
at hand. O merciful God, grant unto me therefore I beseech thee a happy
hour, and blessed departure out of this life, whenever it shall please thee
to call me hence, and cause my soul to fly out of this body. Be merciful
unto me, O God, be merciful unto me a most miserable sinner, and deliver me
from the hour of temptation, death and damnation, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
Meditation.
HE that has ears to hear, let him hear. The day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night.

Watch therefore; because ye know neither the day, the time, nor the hour
when the son of man will come to judgment.

When you give your self to sleep again, and commend your self last to
God, Pray:
INto the hands of thy unspeakable mercy, O Lord, I commend my wretched soul
and body, my senses, speech, counsel, thoughts, works, and all things
belonging unto me, my lieng down, and rising up, my faith and conversation,
the whole course and end of my life, the day and hour of my departure out of
this world: finally, my death, burial, rest and resurrection; beseeching
thee, O Lord, now suffer mine eyes to sleep, and mine eye lids to slumber, and
the temples of my head to take some rest, that my bed may comfort me, and my
couch give me some refreshing. Grant that I may so sleep, govern, and end my
life, that I may sleep in peace, and rest in thee. Stick thou to me, O my
God, even to the end, that sleep with rest, and rest with quietness, and
quietness with euerlastingnesse, may receive me. For lo, I give my self once
again to sleep and rest in the name of thee, O Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, evermore crieng and saying, Have mercy on me, O glorious Deity; Have
mercy on me, O triumphant humanity; Have mercy on me, O blessed Trinity, and
receive my spirit (yea rather thy spirit) into thy holy hands, and send me a
ioifull resurrection with all thy Saints, and elect people:

Amen, Amen.
The Conclusion.
NOt unto us O Alpha, not unto us O Omega; but unto thy name O Iehoua be given
all the glory, for thy loving mercy and for thy truths sake. For thou have
directed the thoughts of our hearts, and prospered the works of our hands upon
us; even thou I say, O Lord, have governed all our counsels and enterprises
from heaven, and have graciously wrought all our works for us. O let our
mouths therefore be filled with thy praise, and make us continually
thankful, that we may give worthy honor and glory to thee for so great
graces and manifold benefits bestowed upon us.

And now, for so much as thou have given every one of us that portion of thy
graces that has pleased thee, and have commanded us to occupy and use them to
thy honor, till thou come: grant us, whether we have received little or much,
that we do not idelie or slothfullie neglect our duty herein. Suffer us not I
say, O sweet Christ with the rest of the world; to fall asleep in the pleasant
vanities of this life, and to forget the waiting for thy coming: but rather
stir us up by thy holy spirit faithfully to use thy gifts given unto us,
and in all wary watching, fasting, and earnest prayer continually to prosper
and go forward in our holy calling, provoking one another by good example to
follow thee in true worship, and due obedience: and grant that all ambition,
vain glory, hypocrisy, and dissimulation being removed, our chief care may
be in all our doings, studies and labors, ever to seek the increase of thine
honor, and the advancement of thy kingdom; and so with a single eye respecting
the praise which is of thee, look and wait for the reward and recompense of
our labors, not of men but of thee; that in that day of thy second coming,
which shall be sudden and fearful to the wicked, we may with joy and comfort
meet thy son in the air; and when thou shall hear our accounts, we may also
receive of thee through our redeemer Jesus, not only praise and commendation,
as thy good and faithful servants, whose lives are hid in thee; but also
obtain the final end of our faith, and all holy exercises of the same, even
the salvation of our souls, to thine everlasting praise, high glory, and
perpetual renown, now and for ever, Amen.

(I say) To God only be given all the Glory.
FINIS.
A Table of all the principal prayers and meditations contained orderly in
this fourth Lamp of Virginity, and first
Morning prayer before you arise.
So soon as ye first awake pray, Page. 363. Being well wakened, and before
you arise, pray and meditate, page. 364. Hearing the clock strike, pray and
meditate, 365. So soon as ye see the day break and light to appear, pray
and meditate, 366, 367. At the Sunrising; pray and meditate, 368, 369.
Putting off your nearest garment, meditate, 369. Beholding your nakedness,
meditate, 370. Putting on your nearest garment, meditate, 371. Being about to
rise out of your bed, pray and meditate, 372. In your arising pray, 373.
After you are up, and before you be made ready.
Being risen, bless and pray, 374. In apparelling your self, pray and
meditate 375. In easing your body, meditate, and consider the corruption
thereof, 375. Washing your hands, pray and meditate, 376, 377
After you be ready, before you go about any thing.
A premeditation before prayer, 378, 379. Confessions of sins, and prayers for
mercy and grace, 379. 380, 387, 389. A Confession of sins proper for
Sundaies, 382, 384. Morning prayers and meditations, etc. 392, 394, 397.
Of going to church.
Sentences of holy scripture, exhorting all to the diligent frequenting of the
Church and Gods divine service therein used, 401. An exhortation to be used of
masters and dames to their families every sunday morning. 402. Prayers and
psalms to be learned by heart, and used by the way as ye go to church, 403,
405, 406, 407. When you enter into the church, etc. 408, 409, 410. As you pass
by the people into your pewe, salute the congregation, etc. 410.
Private prayers to be used both before and after common prayer.
A salutation or first form of prayer to be used at your first kneeling down
in the church, 417. Sentences of holy scripture, exhorting to the reverent
behavior in Gods house, the church, 411. Meditations wherein is showed how we
ought to be very attentive to the public prayers and psalms in the church,
411, 415. A prayer that God would vouchsafe to hear the prayers of the
congregation afflicted, etc. 418. A psalm of preparation to public prayer in
the morning, 419. A psalm of preparation to puplike prayer in the evening,
420, 421, 423. A psalm of exhortation to the worship of GOD, morning or
evening, 424. A psalm exhorting all creatures to praise God, 425. A psalm of
Gods presence in the church, 427. A psalm of the beauty of gods house, etc.
427. A psalm for the prosperity of the church, and that all people may praise
and bless the Lord, 429. A prayer for a pure and clean soul, etc. 431. A
prayer to serve God sincerely in the church, 433. Meditations exhorting and
showing how the soul should rightly worship and praise the Lord, etc. 434.
Another very forcible prayer or meditation to move the mind, etc. 439. A
complaint that we be not moved or pricked in our contemplations and prayers
like as the Angels be which tremble at the sight of God, page. 440. A very
devout prayer for grace to praise God, etc. 442. A godly meditation of the
ioies of the celestial paradise, 448. Another divine meditation of the
happiness of the souls that are departed, etc. 450. Other meditatio^s of
desires or longings of the soul after the ioies of heavenly Sion, page. 451,
452. A godly and christian prayer for the church and congregation, etc. 455. A
prayer for the church universal, 456. Another godly prayer for the
preservation of the universal church, 458. A prayer for unity in faith and
religion, 461.
The Letanie.
Collects and prayers to be used after the letanie as occasion serves for
sundry purposes page. 469, 470. For the Queens majesty, 470. For bishops and
curats, 470. For rain in time of drought, page. 471. For the fruits of the
earth, 473. For fair weather, 475, 476. In time of thunder, lightning,
tempest, and unseasonable weather, 477. In the time of dearth and famine page.
480. In the time of any common plague, sickness, war, penury or scarsnes,
480, 481. A godly and fruitful form of prayer to be used of householders and
their families in time of the plague, 482. A psalm commonly used in public
prayer in time of the plague, 490. A prayer in time of immortality, 498. A
psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague or any other kind of
sicknesses, 498. A prayer at the appeering of monsters, or in any earthquakes,
etc. 498. In the time of any general earthquake, 500, 503. At the sight of
any blasing star or other meteors or prodigious signs of Gods judgments in
the heavens, pray to prevent the evils foreshewen thereby, 504. In time of
war, 505. In time of rebellion or civil war, 505. A thanksgiving for the
suppressing of rebellion, 508. A thanksgiving after our deliverance from the
tirranie of strange enemies, with prayer for continuance of peace between
realms, 511. In time of invasion by the Turk and infidels, etc, 513. A
thanksgiving unto God for the christians victory had against the Turks, 516.
Other prayers and meditations to be used in the church.
Before the first or second lesson, 517. After the first or second lesson read,
588. Before the sermon or homily sentences of scripture exorting to ye
attentive hearing of Gods word, 519. A prayer for the heedfull hearing of Gods
word, 521. A prayer both for the preacher and auditors, etc. 522* 526. Another
prayer to be used of any hearers, etc. 527. A prayer that God would both feed
and defend his church, to be used at a sermon before ye communion, 530, 532 A
prayer to be said before the sermons at ye court, 533, 534 A prayer against
hardness of heart, and contempt of the word of God, 535. A prayer against
hipocrits, false teachers, and deriders of the Gospel, 537. A prayer for
unbelievers, and that all men may embrace the Gospel, 539.
After the Sermon.
Sentences of scripture exhorting to the diligent keeping and following of the
word of God heard, 542. A thanksgiving and praise to be used after the sermon,
543 547, 548, 549. A thanksgiving for the knowledge of Gods word, 544. A prayer
for the accomplishment of Gods will reauealed in his law, 549. A prayer for
strength speedily to accomplish Gods divine law, 550.
At excommunication and public penance doing in the congregation.
A prayer of any excomunicate person, or notorious sinner, doing open
penance in the church, etc. 552. A thanksgiving of a reconciled offender, etc.
555. A prayer of the beholders in the behalf, and for the conversion of any
notorious offender, etc. 558, 561. A thanks giving for the conversion and
repentance of any public offender, 561.
At public Baptism.
Before the administration of the sacrament, etc. 562. Anothor prayer for the
spiritual washing away of sins, 563. Another that the benefits of both the
holy sacraments may be applied unto our souls health, 564. A prayer that we
may rightly and truly receive the blessed sacraments, 565. After public
baptism, a thanksgiving, etc. 565, 838. A prayer for the fruits of baptism,
567. A prayer for the continuance of the true institution of the sacraments,
567.
At the holy communion and ministraion of the sacrament.
At a sermon before the communion, 532. Before ye receive the holy communion
an effectual meditation, etc. 563. Prayers to be used of every co^municant
before they presume unto the Lords table, 574, 575, 578, 931. When you kneel
down at Gods board, 580, 583, 547. A little before you receive the
sacramental bread, 588. When ye are about to receive the bread, 591, 592. When
you see the sacramental wine, 592. When you are about to receive the cup of
wine, 595. After you have received the holy communion, 596 Another
thanksgiving after the communion, 597. A meditation of ye trust which a
christian soul ought to have, 599. Another effectual thanksgiving or
meditation after the receiving of the holy communion, 601. Another fruitful
meditation of a christian soul, etc, 668 The prayer, etc. 603.
At the solemnization of matrimony.
A godly prayer to be used of any christian in the church at the solemnization
of matrimony, 615. See more in the first lamp, 48, 41, 50.
At Burials.
After a funeral sermon, 450. A meditation and prayer to be used at burials,
etc. 615. Another devout prayer or meditation of the brevity and misery of
man's life, 616. Another meditation, 618. Another sweet meditation of the
longing of the soul to be with God, 619. Another very godly meditation, etc.
621, 622.
After common prayer ended.
A prayer of Christ our high bishop, etc. 634. That God would vouchsafe to
hear graciously our prayers, 624. When the people arise to depart out of the
church, 625. So soon as ye be out of the church, etc. 625. Going homeward,
625, 626. When you enter into your house, 627. Being come home, 627.
Before meals.
Before meat pray, 628. Another that day that you receive ye communion, 629
In the meal time.
When you begin to eat, 630 For the sober using of your meat and drink, 630.
When you take salt, 631. Cautions or remembrances to be said of the child in
the meal times, 632. A prayer to be used before a chapter be read at meal
times, 622. A prayer to be used after the chapter read, 633.
After meat.
A thanksgiving after our bodily sustenance and reading some part of Gods
word, page. 634. Another prayer after meat on the Lords day, 639. Another
prayer after meat that day you have received the holy communion, 636.
Another more general thanks giving for our food and sustenance, 636.
At noonetide.
A prayer to be used at mid-daie, when the sun is at the highest, 639, 640.
On Sundaie before or after noone.
A prayer for the right keeping of ye Sabbath holy: clean to the end, 6416,
42. Ghostly meditations meet for all christians once in the day, or at least
once in the week, 643. A meditation of Gods wonderful works, etc. 650. A
thanksgiving for the creation of the world, 653. A meditation of man's creation,
654, 655. A meditation of the creatures put in subjection by GOD under man's
dominion and service, 661. A meditation of gods heavenly power, excellent
beauty, and surpassing goodness considered, etc. 661, 664.
Meditations to be used in the four seasons of the year.
In the spring time, 665. In summer time, 666. In harvest time, 667. In winter
time, 668. At all seasons and times in the year, 669.
Praises and thanksgiuings to God on Sundaies.
The song of the three children in the fiery furnace, etc. 669. A meditation of
the incomprehensible praise due to God for all his works, 671. A meditation of
Gods manifold benefits, etc. 673. Another meditation of Gods great benefits,
676. Another form of thanksgiving to God for all his benefits, etc. 679.
Another to ye same effect, 681.
Prayers and meditations upon the principal feast days in the year.
On aduent Sunday, 747, 748. On Christmas day. 750, 751, 754, 755, 758, 759.
On New years day. 760. On twelfe day, 764, 766. On Ashwednesdaie, 768, 769.
On the first sundaie in Lent, 771, 772, 776, 777. On mau^die thursday, 775, 780
On good friday, 782, 784, 791 795, 798, 802, 805. On Easter day, 809, 810,
etc. Ascension day, 816, 817, etc. On Whitsundaie, 430, 831. 835, 837, 840.
Trinity sundaie, 841, 843, 846 850, 852, 853. On every sunday and holy day,
page. 854, 857, 858, 859.
Prayers and meditations upon the Saints days.
On S. Andrews day, 863. Saint Thomas day, 864. Saint Steeuens day, 864. S.
John's Evangelists day, 868. The holy Innocents day, 870. The day of S. Paul's
conversion, 872, The purification of our Lady, 874. Saint Matthias day, 876.
The annuntiatio^ of our Lady page, 878. Saint Marks day, 881. S. Philip and
James day, 883. S. Barnabas day, 883. S. John Baptists day, 885. Saint
Peter's day, 886. Saint James day, 887. Saint Bartholomews day, 888. Saint
Matthews day, 889. S. Michaels day, 890. S. Simon and Iudes day, 893. On all
Saints day, 893. On the 17. day of November commonly called Queen
Elizabeth's day, etc. 683. to page, 728. For the whole state of Christ's church,
etc. 729, 745.
The doleful Dooue or penitential psalms of David.
The first, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, Psalms from page, 895, to 902. Other psalms and
prayers for the remission of sins, etc. page. 903, 916, 920, 925. A devout
prayer for mercy and grace, etc. 931. S. Augustines psalter, etc. 937. Susannas
psalter, etc. 943. Other devout prayers to be daily used, etc, 956, 960, 963 A
prayer for mortification, 962 Another for grace, etc. 968. The prayer for
mercy and grace called, o bone Jesus, 970. A paraphrasticall prayer, 971.
Meditations after prayer, 975. A conclusion 975.
Evening prayers.
At ye sunsetting, etc, 976, 977. When the candels or lamps be light, 977.
Evening prayers for sundaies, page, 978, 979, 982. A form of prayer to be used
in private houses, etc. 985. When you unclothe your self page, 988. When you
wash your feet, page, 989, 990. When you enter into your bed, 991. Being new
laid in your bed, page, 991, 993. Another prayer to be used of the husband and
wife, 993. When you put out the candle, 994. A little while after, 995. When
you give your self to sleep, 995. Another to be used of the husband and wife,
995. At midnight if you wake, 997 Hearing the clock strike in the night, 998.
Commending your self last to God, 999. The conclusion of all, 200.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 413. 20. Wherein, Whereby. 415. 20. Without,
With. 473. 31. Enioieng, Abiding, 480. 33. Repentance, Resistance. 521. 24.
Martha, Marie. 568. 24. In the sacrament, In receiving the sacrament, 574. 15.
Sacrifice, Banquet, 597. 1. Merit, Joy. 623. 33, 34. We may deserve, ship and
mercha^dize being saved, to attain, We may (ship and merchandise being saved)
attain. 649. 14 We may stretch out our hands, (add) Through his grace
preventing us. 662. 4. Thou inhonorest, Thou honor. 764. 24. Wait for me,
Wait for thee. 787. 35. Thy sweet, Our sweet. 827. 12. Wound, Pearse. 833. 22.
By nature a God, and therefore substantiallie, By nature God, and therefore
effectually. 843. 25. Of her have I learned how thou, Of her have I learned,
by thy word, how thou. 954. 32. Surmises of the misbehauiour. Surmises of any
misbehauiour.


