OVID'S WALNVT-TREE transplanted.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Milbourne 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL his ever honored Mother the Lady MARIE HATTON.
THe native soil of this tree is Italy, whereby the hands of the Latin Muses
it was planted above sixteen hundred years ago: being of so excellent vigor
and durance, that no revolution of time could bring it to decay. It seems the
Nymphs of the woods gave to it a special boon of protection against old age,
more than they have afforded to the oaks of Hauering Park, Which, when I walk
among them, seem from their doted tops and empty trunks to say to more, that
heart of ak^ is no armor of proof against the sith of Father Time.

This our tree, standing in open and unfenced ground, I have made bold to seize
upon and remove hither: By which transplanting of a stock so grown and
conveyed so far, it is no marvel if it now droope in our cold English soil;
especially by reason of the unskillfulness of the gardner, Who being but a
fresh apprentice to the translating trade, may justly fear that this Latin
plant will be thought more rudely battered by his rough English pen, then
ever it was by the staves of Rustic Passengers.

Thus with presentment of all filial duty, I crave acceptance of you, my
dear Mother: in hope that you will vouchsafe to look upon this tree, set in
our fields at home, on purpose for your own view: though you are like to find
very little fruit upon it worthy your tasting.

So wishing an happy New year to you; and humbly craving your Motherly
blessing, I always rest

Lambith this first of January, 1624. Your obedient eldest Son, though but a
poor planter in this kind, RICHARD HATTON.

OVIDS WALNVTTREE transplanted.
I The poor nuttree, joining to the way,
Offend not any: and yet every day
By idle trauailers, that pass along,
Each stone or cudgel at my pate is flong.
Thieves lead to hanging often are stoned, they say,
When peoples fury brooks not laws delay:
I never offend, unless it seem a crime
To yield my owner yearly fruit in time.
But heretofore, when fruit was more respected,
Good trees were cherisht, barren ones rejected:
Good planters then, when store of fruit was borne,
Were wont their Gods with garlands to adorn.
Thy grapes O Bacchus often thou did admire,
Myneruas olives were admi'rd by her:
And apples had their mothers limbs down torn,
If props and shores had not her arms vpborne.
All wives did then by our example bear,
And in those days all matrons mothers were.
But when the fruitless sycamores were held
The best of all the trees dame earth did yield,
We bearers (if my self I may so call)
Brought them broad leaves but little fruit at all.
Our bearing now scarce holds two years together:
And that which comes is blasted by the weather.
To bear a child by her that would seem fair,
Is thought too base: true mothers now are rare.
If fruitless; then thus hapless were I not
In wretched mother Clytemuestra's lot.
If vines knew this, no grapes then would they bring,
Nor from Mineruas tree would olives spring:
Tell this but to the pear, or apple tree,
They then will stint, and always barren be:
The cherrie tree, that bears blush-coloured fruit,
Would be a barren stock, if that she knew't.
Nor do I envy them, though barren stocks
Stand fast and are not hurt with any knocks.
Behold that row of trees stands whole and sound,
Which nothing bear for which men should the wound.
But I am hurt, no man my boughs does spare,
My bark is slayed, my wood and heart lies bare.
Hate is no cause of this, but hope of gain:
Let other trees bear fruit, and they will complain.
Half hanged is he, that has much wealth and ground:
Who has no fleece, will scarce be guilty found.
Thieves he may fear, that laden is with gold,
An empty purse makes Journey safe and bold.
So am I set upon, because I bring
Good store of fruit: leaf bearers safely spring.
Nay and poor shrubs sometime, that neighbor me,
Are banged and ^orne, as pity is to see.
Yet to be beaten for, they fruit have none*
Ill neighborhood does send them many a stone.
And trust me not, if proof do not it show:
For other trees stand sound which farther grow.
If trees were wise and knew where best to root,
They would be sure to stand hence forty foot.
Wretch that I am, who thus with loss abused
Am hatefully for neighborhood accused.
But see, my owners care and bounteous hand,
Who gives me but the ground in which I stand.
I without setting spring and grow apace,
And next the way is often my homely place.
The fruitful fields do me so harmefull think,
That I am shouldred out to the utmost brinke:
My shadie branches never pruned hang rude
And at my root this soil is nere renude.
Though by the sun I often scorched be,
There Is none with watring that refreshes me.
But when my nut with ripeness cleanes her hull,
Then comes the Pole and threats my crown to pull.
And least of stones I only might complain,
With staves my laden boughs they bruise again.
My pulpe for second course men use to have.
A thriftie housewife does my choice nuts save.
These are the tools of boyes-play, Cockvpall,
Cobnut, and Five holes trundling like a ball:
And Castle nut, where one on three does sit,
He winnes the four, that any one can hit:
Another down a steep set board does throw,
And winnes by hitting any nut below:
Another Odd or even plays a game,
At which he winnes that can the number name.
Others chalk figures in triangle fashion,
Much like great Deltas starrie constellation,
In which, the walnuts set in distance like,
One throws and winnes all that his stick does strike.
Sometime in distance set a part does stand.
In which one throws a nut with luckie hand.
Happy that tree, that grows in private fields:
She all her tribute to her master yields,
She neither outcries hears, nor rumbling wheels,
Nor from the neighboring way the dust she feels.
All that she bears must for her master be.
Which she at once in complete troop can see.
But I never keep my fruit till it grow ripe:
To soon they rob my boughs with many a stripe.
My shell but soft, my kernel milk as yet,
My nuts for any use can never be fit:
(...) My fruit is common, some perhaps will say,
Get it who can, it borders on the way.
If this be law, your neighbors barley mow,
Pluck olives, let not his poor pothearbs grow:
Let forragers invade your City gates,
And rattle London walls upon your pates:
Let it be lawful made, or thought a trifle,
To rob your Goldsmiths shops and Jewels rifle:
Let roisters snatch your coin, and precious stones,
Or what goods else they can, and make no bones.
But all is well: God bless our good Kings life,
Who keeps us safe from robbery and strife:
His awful scepter does our City guide
In blessed peace, and all his Realms beside.
What good get I poor nut by this, though peace
Be over the world, if my blows cannot cease.
Therefore the frighted birds dare build no nest
Upon my arms, nor perch here for their rest.
If on my forked boughs there rest a stone,
He sits as if he thought the town his own.
They that for other faults are often accused,
Will stand in it it was not they, they are abused:
But they that rob me, cannot well deny it:
Written upon their fingers you may spy it.
That which I brand them with, is my dear blood;
Wash while they will, their washing does no good.
Weary of loathed life how often have I
Wished my root withered and my branches dry!
How often with whirlewinds to be ouerturned,
Or with a flash of lightning to be burned!
O that a storm would dash them to the earth
Or could I cast them by abortiue birth.
The cause withdrawn, past is all dangerous doubt.
The hunted Beauer so his stones bites out.
What heart have I when clownes do cudgels take,
And prye where they their battry best may make.

