A True Report of the Great overthrow lately given unto the Spaniards in
their resolute assault of BERGEN OP ZOAM, in the Low Countries.

AT LONDON Printed by G. E. and are to be sold by John Hodgets at his shop in
Paul's churchyard. 1605.

The copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman to his worshipful friend in
England, containing a true report of the Aslault given upon Bergen op Zoam by
the enemy the 19. of September last past, in the night. 1605.
Well-beloved Sir,
you shall understand by these my letters, what course the Enemy took very
lately to assault our Town of Bergen.

On Monday being the ninetene day of September last, about 2. of the clock in
the night, the Enemy came before the Town, and settled his Forces in a place
called Denbeel.

There were of them five thousand Footmen My Masters, it had been better for
you to have gone on pilgrimage, and visited our Lady, Saint Mary Acuti-collis,
for here the Goodman of the house is at home, and here is meat enough for you
ready dressed: here is a little sauce for you, but it is very sharp, yet if
you lack Beer, we have enough laid in for you against your coming: those
knaves those thieves, your leaders and commanders have brought you hither to
the slaughter (take heed all your throats be not cut, before you depart.) This
was the common note and continual cries that we sent them, which they might
hear very easily every word.

Whiles we thus labored to call unto them, and were busied in discharging our
Ordinace upon them, the enemy had set a Petarre to the gate which was next to
the town, for with a ladder which was an hundred foot long, (which they
could draw out in length or shorten, as occasion should require) they had
gotten passage over the Flood gates, when the fire brake out of the Petarre, it
came with such a force, that all the bars flow out of their holds, the gates
were shaken open, and the draw bridge fell down, I standing aloft, thought
that the whole gate had fallen, there were such a number of Tyles and stones
that flewe in our faces. Then the enemy gave a horrible showte, to encourage
one another that they might have entered the Town at one pushe: but we
immediately came down from the wales with might and maine and forestalled
them, making all the provision we could to hinder their entry; so little did we
desire to have their company.

There is another gate in the Town, which is not very strong, wherefore to
help that, we brought and laid to it the greatest pieces of timber that we
could get, and trees, and wagons, and whatsoever came first to hand, and in
the end we dug up the stones and pauements in the street, and heaped them
together to hinder their entry.

Our men that tarried yet above, hurled down stones, and cast fire upon them,
and used all the means they could devise for defense, as the present occasion
and urgent necessity required.

In the end, about a quarter of an hour after this, they were so scarr'd and
frighted, that for fear they began to retire; but they that had next place
unto the Gate and came first thither, had much ado to get out, for they that
came after kept them so fast in that they could not easily turn back again.

In the end when they saw our resolution, that they were thus manfully
resisted by all the means that might be devised, they were enforced with their
great damage, and loss of many Soldiers, to shift for their lives, and get
away.

In the mean time we drew up the Bridge again, and fortified that Gate by
which they intended to have entered with their Horsemen.

When they saw this, that they had spent all their time here to so little
purpose, they made in all haste toward the water side, unto the place where
they had been before: so did they also to the Northwarde, and many went with
their Bridges and other provision to the Southwarde.

But when they saw such good provision upon the sudden, and so great
fortifications, both in the Bulwark, and in the place which is commonly called
De Polder, beyond all men's expectation, they left their bridge behind them,
with their Dragges and other warlike provision, together with a company of
their men slain, to the number of two and twenty, and so flew away.

The Petarre which they had fastened upon the Gate which is toward
Sattenhimbuse to blow it open, brake not, but they had laid Bridges there, by
which some of them had gotten passage over; But in the mean space, we were so
sharp set, and came upon them with such violence, that with the loss of ten
men only, we enforced them to retire, in more haste then they came thither,
and then we heard it strike four of the clock, but before the hindmost of
them were gone, it was almost five of the clock, such was their amazement, and
so little mind they had to tarry one for another.

Think with your self now good Sir, how we were toiled and wearied from
two of the clock till this time, I my self was so moiled and wette, as if I
had been but newely drawn out of the River.

But God be blessed, who always defends his people, and has thus preserved
us from the hands of such bloody and merciless people, and gave such
boldness and courage unto our whole Company, as I would never have believed
it, if that I had not seen it: For both the Citizens and the Soldiers were so
valiant in fight and so resolute to die, if need had been, as it was very
strange to behold.

In this exploit the women also played their parts, (for the custom of that
sex) for they brought us great abundance of straw, which we presently set on
fire, and cast down over the wales, whereby we were the better able in the
darkness of the night to discern the enemy at the wales and about the gate.

We were much helped also by the Caltroppes and pitchbals, which we cast
abroad and scattered here and there. And this also was a worthy sight, to
behold how the women and the children little and great, young and old, one
with another, came to the Wales, where the greatest trouble was, and spoke most
cheerfully to us, and asked us, saying, well done my hearts: what, do ye
lack any thing? do ye want any powder, or short, or matches? or any thing
that may do you, and our Town good? and they brought us also a great number
of Baskets full of stones; that every man might have somewhat to entertain
them withal.

Many also brought us the straw that was for the horse litters, when they saw
what use we had of it: and others brought us such abundance of Beer, that we
were not able to draw it all out, and drink it. This kindness and
liberality pleased the Soldiers very well, who courageously cried out
continually, and encouraged the Townsmen, saying: be of good cheer, ye honest
Citizens; be of good comfort, and have a good heart, and then the day began to
break, and we had some light; which we were very glad of.

The enemies, as we were given to understand afterward, had not an end of
their troubles thus, but were put to the sword, and spoiled for the space of
three days after.

Now blessed be God; we had but one man slain, and he was a common Soldier:
six only were wounded, and the most hurt that was done, was done by Gunne
powder.

There were of the Enemies slain threescore and ten, whereof many were of
their best and chiefest men, and principal officers.

The Enemy, as we understood by the husbandmen of the country, and the
intelligence that was given to the Governor of the town, carried away six
and thirty Wagons laden with dead men, and such as were wounded in the
attempt: so that we may be certainly assured that he lost then at the least a
thousand men.

When the Soldiers of their side heard that they were determined to make his
attempt upon the Town of Bergen, they had much a do to draw them to the
Town, they were so loath to come there: fearing their welcome: at last for
their better inducement, they gave out speeches, that the greatest part of the
Town was confederate with them, and would presently join, but in the end, the
event fell out otherwise.

We do not as yet certainly know how many of their heads and chief
commanders of the enemy are slain: they have left behind them many of their
Ladders, Bridges and Wagons covered with Leather or Canuasse, and much other
such baggage.

There came a messenger but even now unto the town, who brings news that
their General has both his legs stricken off with a piece of Ordinance; and
that many of their principal officers are either slain or wounded.

Some of them were driven into the water, and so drowned: So that as yet we
have no certain intelligence what number of the^ are slain, but so many as
we can find in several places, dispersed, amount to the number of three
score and ten.

The Governor of the Town gave comsword (...)


