THE DVMBE DIVINE SPEAKER, (*) OR: Dumb speaker of Divinity.

A Learned and excellent Treatise, in praise of Silence: showing both the
dignity, and defectes of the Tongue.

Written in Italian, by Fra. Giacomo Affinati d'Acuto Romano. And truly
translated by A. M.

AT LONDON, Printed for William Leake, dwelling in Paul's churchyard, at the
sign of the Holy Ghost. 1605.

To his most respected, and very dearly esteemed kind friend-Master John
Stermyn, a true lover of learning, and furtherer to all studious endeaueurs.
SIR, having acquainted you with this long and laborious translation (a subject
so learned and excellent as in any language (I think) the like is rare to be
found) And finding you willing to give it entertainment: I discharged my
affections from all great men of the world, such as look on learning awry, and
asquint, or with a nod, or, I thank ye, requite great studious labors, And
made choice of you, whom I know not only capable of greater matters in your
self, but a most kind favorer of any pains this way employed.

The Author in Italian calls it: Il Muto che Parla Concetti Scritturali. And
the best English title I could give it (in my mind) is, The dumb Divine
Speaker: or, dumb Speaker of Divinity, because the whole course of matter is
thereon absolutely grounded, and in silent dumbness, delivers an exquisite
method for the government of our speaking.

Take you the honor of my pains, as one whom entirely I affect, with you, I
give the world my labors best benefit: expecting from you but your wonted
kindness, And if the world give me good words, it is all I ask of it.

Yours in all true affection, A. M.

Fra. Giacomo Affinati to the Reader, yielding a reason for the title of his
Book.
HE knows my heart, that rules the affections of every soul, how desirous I
have been from time to time, to be any way helpful to my neighbor, to
declare my self no unfruitful tree, planted within the flourishing bosom of
the Church. And therefore with the occasion of a most gentle spirit, bemoaning
the infinite vain travails of many, such as (indeed) deserve no
acknowledgement of the world: I imposed an eternal silence upon my self, and
to assist the world (thereby) so much as lay in me, and to raise it up from
those weighty oppressions of wicked molestatio^s (according to the ability of
mine own weak strength) First I published the Mount of holy tribulation, and
now my Dumb divine Speaker, in praise of Silence, So called, because I approve
by authority of sacred Scripture, that whenever we speak well, and as
becomes us: it is not we that speak, but the holy ghost, which then moves
the organe of our speech. Non enim vos estis qui loquimini, sed spiritus
patris vestri qui loquitur in vobis.

Hereupon, Christ casting forth the devil that was dumb, out of the
possessed body, the holy Euangeliste tells us, that the dumb spoke. Erat
Jesus eijciens Demonium, and illud erat mutum. Et cum ciecisset Demonium,
loquutus est mutus. Wherein we have to noate, how the Evangelist says, that
the devil was dumb, who being cast out of the possessed body, he does not
say, that the devil spoke which was dumb, but he that was possessed:
referring the dumbness, not to the devil as first was affirmed, but to the
body possessed, which (having been dumb) spoke. Et cum eiecisset Demonium,
loquutus est mutuis.

Now although the right sense be, that he who first was dumb, spoke, the
devil being thrown out: yet notwithstanding, agreeing with the hidden voice
of the letter, it is true that the dumb spoke, abiding also in his dumbness,
because he spoke well, as the Evangelist notes; Et loque. batur recte: he
being dumb, and yet speaking by the means of the holy spirit, therefore we
also are silent, and God speaks in and by us, when we speak well and
decently, and thus is it true that the dumb man spoke.

This have I set down in favor and defense of the title of this Treatise,
wherein I purpose to deliver the excellency of Silence, and how it is much
better to keep silence, then to talk, in regard of the numberless offenses,
that men do fall into by their tongues only. Which labor, if I may perceive the
world gratefully to accept, or the least apparent sign of thankfulness to
proceed from thence: I promise, that speedily I will deliver to the Press,
another as excellent and profitable a work, entitled: The world turned topsie
turuie: or, the vpside downward; discoursing of God, of the Angels, of the
heavens, of subluna^ie things, and of Microcosmus, or the little world man,
approouing how they are all ouerturned.

In the mean while, vouchsafe with gentleness to read this treatise, which
may the more speedily hasten on the other. And pray unto the Lord for me, that
I may be a diligent lige^t obseruer ofsile^ce, which is full of al security and
safety, and abounding in all sacred blessings. Whereupon David said, that the
Israelites rejoiced when they were quiet, which made them afterward be brought
to the port of their own pleasures. Laetati sunt quia siluerunt, and deduxit
eos in portum voluntatis little. For great joy have they that keep silence,
because thereby they offend not god, but in their silence they do always
contemplate their cheefeste happiness, and (even as in a safe harbor) have
perpetual quietness.

FINIS.
The chief heads and Arguments, that are discoursed on in this labor: and
the several application of Scriptures to them.
Of truth and Of Lying. 96. If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me.
John. 8.46. When he speaks a lie, then speaks he of his own. John. 8.44.
Of Silence. 22. 42. He rebuked them, and suffered them not to say that they
knew him to be Christ. Luke 4. 41.
Of Flattery. 81. They answered Jesus, and said; we cannot tell. Mat. 21. 27.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly, etc.
Math. 22. 16.
Of Wisdom. 54. Be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves. Math. 10. 16.
Of Murmuring. 137. 147. 156. But they that were Scribes and Pharisees among
them murmured, etc. Luke. 5. 30.
Of the double tongue. 166. This people draws near unto me with their mouth,
and honoreth me with their lips; but their heart is far off from me. Mat. 15. 8.
Of the dumb Devil. 111. Then he cast out a Devil, and he was dumb. Luke.
11. 14.
Of the Angels speaking. And when the Devil was gone out, the dumb spoke. ibid.
Of the gift of tongues. 112. And they were filled with the holy ghost, and
began to speak with other tongues. Act. 2. 4.
Of Hypocrisy. 166. 173. 182. When ye fast, look not sour as the hypocrites
do, for they disfigure their faces, that they might seem unto men to fast Mat,
6. 16.
Of Repentance. 127. When I held my tongue my bones consumed, through my daily
complaining. Psalm. 32. 3.
Of Mercenaries 190. But an hireling, and he which is not a shepherd, neither
the sheep are his own, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and
flies. Ioh. 10. 12.
Of Blasphemy. And men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the name of God
etc. Apoc. 16. 9.
Of the excellency of the word of God. 69. And they said; Thou have a Devil.
Ioh. 7. 20. Never was man heard to speak the like. John. 7. 46. And the people
preased upon him, to hear the word of God.
Of rash judgment. 151. Judge not according to the appearance. John. 7. 24.
Of vain glory. 182. I am not like other men, etc. I fast twice in the week: I
give, etc. Luke. 18. 11. 12. The foolish virgins took their lamps, but took
no oil with them. Mat. 25. 3.
Of the mystery of opening the mouth. O Lord open thou my lips, and then my
mouth shall show forth thy praise. Psalm. 140. 9 Jesus opened his mouth, and
taught them. Mat. 5. 2.
Of brotherly correction. If thy brother offend against thee; go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone, etc. Mat. 18. 15. 16.

A MOST EXCELLENT AND LEARNED DIALOGVE, IN PRAISE OF SILENCE: DECLARING BOTH
THE DIGNITY AND DEFECTES OF THE TONGVE.
The Speakers in this Dialogue, are the right reverend Lord Count Claudio,
Bishop of Placentia: and the most honorable Lord Lodouico Rangone his brother,
Marquess of Gibello, etc.
The Argument.
It is here discoursed in a pleasing controversy, whether Silence or speaking,
merits most praise. And, the one contrarying the other very familiarly, each
strives to maintain his cause by soundest reasons: sometimes producing
authorities from holy writ, and other whiles from the auncientest Philosophers.
At length (after a sweet and sententious arguing) they conclude, that there is
more security in silence, then indiscreete talking: in regard, that while
each man strives to speak best, his own conceit does soonest deceive him.
And this is confirmed by divine proofs, witty sayings of Philosophers, and
natural reasons.

Chap. 1.
CLAVDIO. The sweetness of humane conference is so pleasing, The Induction to
this discourse.
gladsome and delightful, as I receive no mean injury (my Lord) by your
silence. This taciturnity of yours, is such a mighty affliction to me, as I can
better forbear my daily food, then to be thus deprived of your speech.
Seeing, to a heart downe-pressed with sorrow (as mine is) much more avails the
sweet language of a true friend, then the physic of a skillful doctor to an
infirm body, and more virtue have friendly consolations, to free the heart
from all oppressing passions, then physics sweetest sirrops, Variety of
sentence.
in restrayning the fury of a Fever. And yet do you hold your peace? may it
not suffice you, that you have so long time forborne to answer my letters, but
now likewise to ouercharge my thoughts with this insupportable silence? The
occasion of your denying answer to my writings, as also your enioyning me to
silence, have equal reason to this your obstinacy. But albeit you kept me so
long from your desired lines, yet now deny me not the benefit of your
speech. A friendly enforcement, to urge an answer.
Dumb, and silent still? What are you made of stone, that you have a head
without a tongue, or a tongue immooueable without speech? Or, being
ouercharged with the greatness of mise^ies (as Paul the Apostle was) you know
not how to express them? Or by the multitude of matters, which trouble your
senses, are you robbed of the means for their deliverance, Sentence.
as, if abundance made you the poorer? Or, as the man deeply pondering on
celestial causes, becomes (by carnest apprehension) so obliuious and
transported from himself, Similie.
as (not remembering where he is) a sweet deceipte persuades him that he is in
heaven, yet afterward (as a frail man) finds himself to be upon the earth?


Lodouico. He knows enough, Sentence.
that truly knows how to hold his peace.


Claudio. But silence is sometimes the occasion of much hurt; One sentence
quitted with a contrary.
and therefore is to be suspected.


Lodouico. Every word should not be answered: and sometimes, The nature of
questioning, and answering.
quiet silence is much more commendable, then tedious and prolixious speech:
but your Lordship (being assured of my love) might rest so satisfied, and
(with my delight) to delight your own self: so much the rather, because it
passes for a general proverb, that deeds are men, and words women. Proverb.



Claudio. It Is true, but yet it was no lie that Solon said, Solons opinion of
speech.
that speech or words are the image of deeds, as also the figure of humane
life: and a Glass does not more lively express the shape of the body,
Socrates concerning speech.
then speech does the true form of the mind: whence, Socrates reputed
speech, as a thing most necessary, whereby to know the quality of humane
nature. Hereupon was it, that a friends son of his being sent unto him,
Example.
that he might gather, what aptness remained in him toward Philosophy and
study of humanity, he said unto him: Tell them (if thou will) that I shall
know thee. The tongue then is as a touchstone, Sentences.
whereby to know a man: for, the vessel will savor of the wine contained in
it: and, by the breath (sometimes) may be gathered what meat has been eaten.
Psalm. 45. 1. 2.
To this end also David said: Eructauit cor meum verbum bonum; dico ego opera
mea regi. Lingua mea calamus scrib^ velociter scribentis: My heart will utter
forth a good matter, I will entreat in my works of the king. My tongue is as
the pen of a swift writer. Allusion.
As if he would have said, because my heart is so good, as it can contriue
no evil, therefore (by the tongue) it sends forth good and holy words,
whereby my deeds are correspondent to my heart, so that they fear not to
approache the presence of the highest king, moving the tongue with equal
readiness, as the pen of a swift scribe stirs it self. And questionless
I take it to be so, because, it is as kingly a matter to move the hand to
work, Sentence.
as the tongue to speak, whence grew the proverb expressing a mind constant:
Proverb.
The word of a King. If then your honor will but grant thus much, as to
resolve me, Deeds, or words which are of most esteem, and how they differ.
which is in most esteem, deeds or words, the one I will not deny to be of
great price, by how much the more it expresses the conceits of the heart,
and reueales the passions of the mind, or else we must give no credit to
Aristotle, who plainly says, that Aristotle's opinion of words.
Voces sunt notae earum quae sunt in anima passionum.


Lodouico. To observe a time for silence, has evermore been held a
commendable quality. S. Grego Nazian his judgment on words, and comparison of
them.
Saint Gregory Nazianzene says, That words have the proportion of
merchandise, and the voice is like a ship. Therefore when the merchandise of
my speech, which from the close storehouse of my breast, would be transported
to the city of your mind; suddenly from the port of my mouth, it gettes
carriage (by the ship of my voice) and with the wind of breath, Allusion.
glydes through the sea of the air, delivers her lading in the haven of your
ea^es, and thence presses on to offend the heart. Hereupon (perhaps) it
was, that Solomon called the tongue, Allusion to the words of Solomon.
a reward given unto man, to the end, that therewith he should praise his
Creator, and, in recompense of so many blessings given him by God, he should
return him the praise of a holy confession. Dedit enim mihi Dominus lingu^m
mercedem meam, Eccle. 51. 30.
and in ipsae laudabo eum. A Similie to sound purpose, comparing speech with
mercha^dise, and answering that of Greg. Nazian.
The Lord has given me a tongue for my reward, wherewith I will praise him.
But, as it is not always a time for navigations, or spreading forth sail to
every wind that blows, but rather to expecte a prosperous gale, for making
of a secure voyage, without hazarding the ship against a rock, whereby both
goods and merchaunte may mimiserably perish: even so, ought we not to launche
forth from the port of the mind, the merchaundise of words by the vessel
of our voice, at every rash and unadvised season, but rather to awaite the
opportunity of occasion. For, he does not thrust himself to so manifest
peril of life, that adventures on the glib waters of the Sea in a little,
frail, and slender wodden bottom: as he may be said to do, who is hourly in
danger of death, by speaking carelessely and indiscreetely. Therefore said
the wise man; Vita and mors in manu linguae; Prou. 8. 21.
Life and death are in the power of the tongue. Much better then is it to be
silent, then lavish of speech, because to speak well, Of speaking well and
ill.
is the work of a wise and very sensible person, and every man is not able to
speak with security, for speaking otherwise, his speech does but offend the
ears of others.


Claudio. If life and death lie in the hand and power of the tongue, An
Objection concerning life and death, consisting in the power of the tongue.
then one may be as guilty of death that says nothing, as he that speaks
overmuch. And David complained hereof, repenting that he had held his peace:
whence may be gathered, that if the bones be decayed, which signify the
powerful virtue (for as the bones support the body, Similie.
so does virtue the soul) what shall we say then of these words: Quoniam
tacui, inueterauerunt ossa mea. While I held my tongue, Psalm. 31. 3.
my bones consumed? Likewise, Esaye the Prophet was sorry he had been silent,
Esaias. 6. 5.
and therefore lamenting said: vae mihi, quia tacui: woe be to me, because I
held my peace. Now on the contrary, Job. 39. 38.
Job, that admirable spectacle of patience, repented himself because he had
spoken, saying: Vnum loquutus sum, quod vtinam non dixissem: Once have I
spoken, but I will answer no more. Then as well may he err that speaks not
in time, Observation for a time to speak, for avoiding of error in either.
as he that is silent when he should speak, and therefore I may count him
a fool, that makes no observation of a time to speak, which made the wise man
say: Stultus caeditur labijs: the foolish in talk shall be beaten: Pro. 10. 9.
Meaning (in my mind) thus, the foolish man that observes no time of speech,
takes occasion from his own lips to be silent, when he should speak, A
fool speaks most, when he should do it least.
and talks liberally, when he ought to be silent: therefore let him bear
blame from an others tongue, and stripes from other men's hands, because in
every thing there is time to be observed. Eccle. 3. 1. 7.
Omnia tempus habent: tempus tacendi, and tempus loquendi: To all things there
is an appointed time, a time to keep silence, and a time to speak.


Lodouico. Well, admit that by silence a man may run into some defect, yet
nevertheless, beyond infinite comparisons, and with out all question, far
greater defects and harms ensue by speaking then silence. How a fool may
appear to be wise.
For if a foolish man would appear to be wise and sensible, the best counsel
I can give him is to be silent. Because, as Cicero says in one of his
Epistles, Cicero in Epist. 40.
The trial whether a man be good or evil, is gathered by his actions: but to
know whether he be wise or foolish, is best discerned by his silence or
speaking: for by holding his peace, he may appear to be wise, even in the
eye of a learned man. And if we will credit what Solomon says in his
Proverbs, Prou. 17. 29.
he there affirms: Stultus quoque si tacuerit, sapiens reputabitur, and si
compresserit labia sua, intelligens: A fool when he holds his peace, is
accounted wise: and he that stops his lips, prudent.

Did you never see a notable Idiote intrude himself into a grave public
disputation? A Similie of a fools outward show of wisdom, or appearance of
folly.
where, if he stand listening with great attention, it seems to the beholders,
as if he perfectly understood all there spoken, although (indeed) he be
capable of just nothing; but if perchance he fall to babbling, his poverty of
understanding is soon discovered, and manifestly then his ignorance appears:
this is a case so plain and apparent, as multitude of proofs are needelesse
in it. But if a testimony out of holy Scripture may pass for payment, listen
then to Job, Jobs advise to his friends, how to seem wise.
that great Prince of the East, who desiring that such friends of his, as came
to visit him in his bitter affliction, might show themselves to be wise and
discreet, said: Vtinam taceretis, vt putaremini esse sapientes: Oh that you
would hold your tongue, Job. 13. 5.
that it might be imputed to you for wisdom. This often comes to pass,
because foolish men can hardly hold their peace.

Solon the Philosopher, Example.
the very wisest amongst all the Grecians, seeing himself in company of many
busy talkers, sat very still and silent, Perianders words to Solon,
concerning his silence.
whereat Periander (a man of great wisdom, and king of Corinth) marueiling,
thus spoke. Among so many men that confer together, wherefore does Solon
only hold his peace? Is it because thou art a fool, or want thou words to
express thy mind? Whereto Solon answered: Solo^s answer.
A foolish man cannot sit silent.

It is likewise written of Zeno the Philosopher, Example.
who being invited to a sumptuous banquet, which the Athenian Senate made for
certain Ambassadors of Licaonia, and arguing pleasantly, as often we see
it frequented in banqueting: he alone spoke never a word, The Ambassador of
Lycaonia h^s speeches to Zeno, and his reply.
as being the wisest of them all, whereat the Ambassadors wondering, said to
Zeno. What shall we answer to our king, if he demand of us concerning
thee? Whereunto Zeno thus wisely replied; Say to your king, that you saw a man
in Athens at a costly banquet, round engirt with cups, yet not drink, with
delicate vtandes, yet eat litile; in company of many that talked, yet he only
kept silence. I seek not by this example to persuade you, that I am wise,
because of holding my peace, but it rather contents me, not to be esteemed
foolish, by overmuch prattling: in regard that there is no proof so perfect,
of knowing a wise man from a fool, but only by the liberalitye of the tongue.

Plato (on a time) being demanded, Example.
what course or observation were best to be kept, for soundest and truest
knowledge of men? answered thus. Platoes opinion how men are soonest to be
known.
Men are soonest approved by their sound, as vessels or glasses made of earth
are: for as the pot or glass is known by sounding, whether it be broken or
whole, so are men by the sound of speech known, either to be good or bad.
For, the proud man (willingly) talks of nothing but ambition or superiority:
the rich man, of gold and wealthy possessions: The different nature of men in
their talking, according to their own inclination.
the quarreller, of fightes, braules and contentions: the glutton, of feasts
and banqueting: the envious, of malice: the slothful of soft beds, ease and
idleness; the player, of varieties of sportes and delights: the detractor, of
murmuring and slanders. Wherefore I hold it better to be silente, then
talkeatiue.


Claudio. But how can a man be silent, if he have a tongue to speak, as he
has eyes to see, ears to hear, nostrilles to smell, hands to work, feet
to go, and all his body to use sensibly?


Lodouico. The greater difficulty any work endures in the attayning, A very
sententio^s answer.
so much the more honor crowns the atchiuemente thereof, and therefore it is
written of virtue; that it is to be gotten by sweat and labor: Virtutem
posuere Dei sudore parandam. Pythagoras held silence in so high esteem, that
Atheneus relates in his seventh book, The reckoning that Pythagoras made of
silence.
that of some beasts he would taste moderately, and offer others in sacrifice
to the Gods: but in all his life time he would never touch a fish, because he
made some reverend reckoning thereof, as observing some divine quality therein
(what I know not) only for taciturnity.


Claudio. What divine matter could the Philosopher note to be more in the
fish, then in any other brutish creature? this seems to me a certain solemn
foolerie, especially in so ancient a Philosopher.


Lodouico. Every creature ordained for food to man, All creatures have a kind
of voice, but the fish only.
has (how much or how little it matters not) some kind of voice, except the
fish only, which has no voice at all: whereupon, this Philosopher observing
a perpetual silence in fishes (as a matter meerelye divine) he respected them
with a very great opinion. And hence it may be (according to the Poets
opinion) that fishes are called Ellopes, Plin. lib. 9. cap. 17.
quasi vocis inopes. Assuredly, there is nothing more dangerous, then
loquacity, nor any thing more easy to be imagined (without offense) then
silence: Ciceroes commendation of Cato.
which made Marcus Tullius Cicero to commend Cato infinitely, who spoke always
so wisely, that never any word came from him, the speaking whereof he
afterward repented.


Claudio. Diogenes the Cinick was contrary to Pythagoras, for he not only
made no respect at all of fishes, but (belike) was so well pleased with them,
that he sedde very heartilye on them. Nor can the opinion of that great wise
man ouersway me, because any extreamitie cannot be free from enormitie:
Sentence.
and as blameworthie do I hold it, not to speak when need requires, as to
speak ouer-largely when silence were better. Let me allow the counsel of
Cato, Cato his advise in speaking.
to speak nothing, except it have bin well spoken before, whereon repentance
never ensues. But I know you will tell me, that every man cannot be a Cato:
therefore it behooves him rather to be silent, then venturing upon the peril
of speech, to fall thereby into defect. And should it be so, the tongue then
might be sorry, Pythagoras in teaching silence, did not will perpetual silence.
to be given us but in vain, nor was Pythagoras himself always silent, but
took sometime delight in speaking, and as he was a Philosopher that taught
many Scholars, so it was very necessary he should speak unto them. Now
among other things which he taught them, silence (you say) was the
principal instruction, and not to speak till a certain time.

Saint Jerome speaking (of him) upon Ecclesiasticus, Saint Jerome his words
concerning Pythagoras.
says: Pythagoricorum disciplina est tacere per quinquennium, and postea
eruditius loqui. Others say, that only for two years he imposed silence on
his Scholars, and not five: but let it be howsoever, it suffices that this
so long silence was to no other end, but to teach them to speak the better,
and with wisdom, so that his intent was not they should be always silent,
Others opinion of Pythagoras teaching of silence.
but whenever they spoke, to speak wisely. Some others do hold that he did
not altogether prohibit them of speech, but because he would not have a
new-come Scholar, to demand the occasion of such things as they then read
in the school: which by good reason he might do, in regard the Scholar
ought to credit the Master, if he mean to receive any profit at all by him:
for if he give no belief to the Master, he will never be capable of learning
any thing. This made Aristotle say; Aristotle's lesson to young learners.
Addiscentem oportet credere: so much the rather, because for many things he
can render no other reason, but only the rule of the first instructor.

Small profit were it to the child, who, while he ought retain the Alphabet
in his memory, for the better combining of words, and reading perfectly; to
waste the time in frivolous questions, demanding importunatly of the master,
upon what occasion A was called A, and B named B. and why not either of them H
or P? whereof no other reason can be yielded, but only the will of the first
teacher. A defense of Pythagoras silence.
And if it be so, Pythagoras had reason, to cause his Scholars to observe
silence, to the end they might learn (in time) to speak the more perfectly.
Eccle. 15. 18.
The same did Solomon also teach: Antequam loquaris, Sentence.
disce: Learn before thou speak: The man that speaks without premeditation,
oftentimes falls into an vnthought-on repentance, and gladlye would return
his words back again, when it is ouer-late to do it.

Of this opinion likewise was Lacedemon Chilo, Chilo, concerning the tongue.
of whom Diogenes Lacertius reports, that he used often to say: It ought
never to be permitted, that the tongue should go before the mind, as
meaning, that whatsoever was to be spoken of, it ought to be very well
thought on first. The like did the blessed virgin, before she would answer
the Angel Gabriell: Luke. 1. 29.
Cogitabat qualis esset ista salutatio: She thought what manner of salutation
that should be. Let it suffice then, that silence is not better then speech,
though more commendable is it for a man to hold his peace, then speak
peremptorily without judgment, because unapt speaking merits as great a
check, as unnecessary and ill shapen silence. This made Cicero say; Sentence.
Tacere noli vbi non oporiet: and Cato the Vtican confirmed the same, Cicero,
and Cato Vtica, their several opinions of silence and speaking.
saying; Tum demum silentium abrumpito, cum ea loqui poteris, quae sunt indigna
silentio. And often times it happens, that stricte silence may occasion more
inconveniences, yea, some whiles greater, then liberal speaking.


Lodouico. A man may be doubtful whether he speak wisely or no: and
presupposing that he talks always reasonably, many times is deceived in his
own opinion, and becomes worthy of very much blame. Moreover, albeit he
speak nothing but the truth, The rash speaking of truth may cause danger to
life.
yet often it falls out, to endaunger life: as a thousand examples do give
faithful witness of the same, wherein I account it may best to be silent,
and more safety shall I thereby gain, then (perhaps) by reporting them,
considering (as has bin already said) as to speak wisely, Sentence.
so to be silent, best declares what the man is.

David knowing how hard a thing it was to speak without blame, Psalm. 140. 3.
desired the Lord: to set a watch before his mouth, to the end he might let
no words pass, but such as were to the praise of God, David's desire for
assistance in his speaking.
the profit of his neighbor, and good of himself. He desired also, that he
would keep the door of his lips, that he might speak with wisdom, and
utter nothing which was not to be spoken: Pone Domine custodiam ori meo, and
ostium circumstantiae in labijs meis. Psalm. vt sup.
David desiring to speak, yet so strongly watched and defenced, it is a sign
sufficient enough, that to speak well, is a matter very hard. And so could his
Son Solomon say: Omnis labor hominis in ore eius: Eccle. 6. 7.
All the labor of man, is for his mouth. David speaking further of this
burdenous task, says of talkatiue men; Labor labiorum ipsorum operiet eos:
David's opinion of such as are talkatiue.
The labor of their lips shall be so great, as to cover them. As if he
would have said (in mine opinion) that the fruit of vain labor, in speaking
among the wicked, shall be their pains eternal, whereon follows: Cadent
super eos carbones, in ignem deiicies eos, and in miseriis non subsistent: Upon
them shall fall hot burning coals, and the Lord shall send them into
unquenchable fire. If this be so, is not stricte silence better to be
endured, then by speaking wickedlie, to incur such danger?

Solomon was the only wise king, Solomon his care for his speaking.
that ever in this world lived among men: yet found he such difficulty in
speaking vnreprooueably, and the forward tongue so hard to be brideled, as in
bitter sighing he said. Quis dabit ori meo custodiam, and super labia mea
signaculum certum, Eccle. 22. 2^.
vt non cadam in ipsis, and lingua mea non perdat me? Who shall set a watch
before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, Chrysostom concerning
the office of the tongue.
that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not? S. John
Chrysostom says: that like office as the door has of the house, has the
tongue (in the mouth) of the mind. And Hugo, Hugo in lib. de 12. abu.
in his book of the twelve abuses, says. We ought to remember, that David and
Solomon desired a watch and a door, not a wall, because if a wall should be
placed there it would debar the power and liberty of speech: The reason why
David and Solomon desired a watch and a door, and not a wall before their lips.
but setting a dooore there, to be opened and shut as time requires,
signifies, that there is a time to speak and a time to be silent, yet ever to
have this care in our conuersing, to keep the door of our mouth closed,
because we are always in peril of corrupt speaking. Furthermore he adds,
that we should open the door of our mouth at meet and lawful hours: as in
the Church, at prayer, in our Studies, at our books, and in our bed-chambers,
at private meditation. The Church ought to be free, from all vain babbling and
arguing, our studyes void of corrupt reading, and our Chambers, sole
sanctuaries for divine meditating.

So then we ought to keep the door of our mouths close shut, The mouth is
to be kept shut but to religious offices.
but only to religious and holy occasions, because it is hard to fall in
arguing, without offense to God or our neighbor: therefore I judge it more
meet to be silent, then (by talking) to have the mind in peril of dangerous
compassing, Periander his Sentence.
and me thinks Periander said very well; Audito multa, loquere pauca; Hear
much, but speak little.


Claudio. I deny not, that we ought to hear much, and speak little: but I
say, that the impeaching of a man's speech, is a matter as hurtful as any
talking.


Lodouico. You shall find few of the ancient or modern Philosophers, but they
have much more commended silence, then speaking having absolutely set down,
that greater hazard is in speech, then taciturnitie. Cleobulus, concerning a
wise man.
Cleobulus Lindus, one of the Grecian seven Sages, said, A wise man is more
sollicitous to hear, then to talk; for by hearing he learnes, but by talking
loses: Audiendi, quam lo quendi studiosior esto. Who hears much, and
speaks little, may best discern falsehoode from truth, and err very
little, if he be not blinded in reason, and robbed of understanding.


Claudio. Yet I find it written, that hearing and listening much, Much
listening to others speech, bewrayes a weak wit.
is the sign of a young green head, which perhaps he may the rather do,
through the slender experience he has in matters; and then I count it better
to be mute, knowing nothing, then by speaking unwisely to offend the ears of
others, for in speaking wittily, few words are needful. Adolescentis scito
esse (says a learned man) audire quidem multa, loqui autem paucis, prudentis.


Lodouico. Perhaps his reason may iumpe with that of Zeno Elateus, Zeno his
reason, why Nature gave a man two ears, and but one tongue.
to weet, because Nature has given him one tongue only, and two ears,
therefore he should speak little, but hear much, his words are these:
Aures tibi ^b id scito binas esse, and os vnicum, vt plurima audiens, loquaris
paucissima. This Philosopher was such an especial lover of silence, Example.
that his country being usurped by a mighty Tyrante, and he much laboring
for the liberty thereof, was by the Tyrant committed to prison: where, being
put to grievous tortures, and insupportable torments, only for discovery of
the private coniuration, he (to sree the rest from being revealed) with his
own teeth bit forth his tongue, and spat it afterward in the bloody Tyrants
face, as contented rather to endure eternal silence, then (by his tongue) to
injury his countries lovers, and copartners.


Finis Cap. 1.
The Argument.
Proceeding further on, it is here approved, that the first instruction a man
ought to have, is to speak discreetely, without offense to any. Here (in an
ample discourse) the negligence of Fathers in their families is much reproved,
for not instructing their children in silence, whereby they may attain to a
perfect order of speaking. For which purpose, many curious sentences of the
ancient Philosophers are herein entercoursed, beside diverse other out of holy
Scriptures.

Chap. 2.
CLAVDIO. Epaminondas, Epaminodas his advise, to hear more then speak.
that mighty Duke and glory of the Thebanes, commending silence, said: that
a man should be more desirous to hear, then to speak: Audiendi potius quam
loquendi cupidum, te ipsum praebeto. Prouer. 10. 20.
And to this purpose the wise man wrote: In multiloquio non deerit peccatu^:
qui aut e^ moderatur labia sua, ^rudentissimus est: In many words there cannot
want iniquity, but he that refraineth his lips is wise. Sentence.
He cannot be far from error, that delights in much talking; therefore a wise
man thinks much more then he speaks.


Lodouico. Such was the counsel of Pittacus the Mitylenian, one of the Grecian
seven wise men, Pittacus his counsel, not to let the tongue run before the
mind.
adding further: Lingua non praecurrat mentem: for when the tongue gads before
the minds preconceit, the discourse cannot pass vnguiltie of error.


Claudio. Me thinks then the tongue should be commanded to silence, and the
mind to forethinke: Imperalinguae, said Sasiades.


Lodouico. In the time of Aristotle, A notable Example, how Isocrates taught a
talkatiue Scholar to learn silence, or to speak well.
there lived an Athenian Sophister, a learned Doctor, called Isocrates, who had
many Scholars in the art of Oratorie: among the rest, a young man (very
talkatiue) came unto him, being named Careo and entreated, that he would
accept of him among the rest of his Scholars, only to learn the art of
Rhetorique, whereto he condiscended: but couenaunting about the price,
Isocrates demanded double salarie of him, beyond any other Scholar: He,
desirous to know the reason thereof, and alleging great injury offered him
therein, Isocrates thus answered. You speak much, and very evil, wherefore to
teach you to speak well, I must labor you with two faculties, one, how to
hold your peace, the other, how you ought to speak: which double pains makes
me to demand double wages.


Claudio. An excellent answer (in good sooth) worthily beseeming such a
Philosopher and Orator, and very apt to check the bablarie of young heads
now in these days, who are very prodigal in speech, whereof they ought to
be much more sparing, Apollonius judgment of Ioquacitie, and silence.
in regard (according to Apollonius) loquacitie is full of errors, and
silence most secure. In every degree (to speak little) is best beseeming, but
in youth (above all other) it is most necessary: and in a young man it is an
ornamente so fair and beautiful, as the curling hayres do not more
embellishe a delicate virgin, the chain of gold about her neck, the
pendentes at her ears, How comme^dable silence is in a young man.
the bracelettes about her wristes, the jewel on her breast, and the
invaluable gemme on her finger; as gracious modesty, and sweetly beseeming
silence, does decorate and set forth a civil young man.

Every one should be very niggardlie of speech, and youth not speak at
all, except they be questioned. Adolescens (says Solomon) loquere in tua
causa vix cum necesse fuerit, Eccle. 32. 8.
Thou that art young, Seneca approves seldom speaking a great quietnelle to
the mind.
speak if need require, and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked. Because
(says Seneca) there is not any thing, that renders a more commodious quiet to
the mind, then seldom or little speaking, and taking liberty to think on how
much soever. Therefore the sweetness of conuersing, and the delicacie of
reasoning, is some kind of viandes, so relishable and pleasing, or, as a
sallade, so agreeing with the appetite: that (by little and little) it guides
men to the discovery of great secrets, little less, or no otherwise, then as
wine and love does, from whence (without order) grows a thousand scandals and
vexations.

Hereupon we read, Anacharsides, his witty and judicious sentence.
that Anacharsides, (a learned Philosopher and an honorable Scithian, brother
unto Cadnidus king of Scithia,) in a fair Quadrant, wherein his own picture
was curiously painted, wrote this sentence: Continere a lingua, gula, and
venere: as meaning, that the sin of the tongue was no less, then that of
gluttony or luxury.


Lodouico. Nay rather greater, if there need any degree of order: for, placing
the continency of the tongue in the beginning, he alludeth thereby, that the
sin thereof is worse then that of gourmandise or luxury: which, if in every
man it be unseemly, in young men then above all other it is most contemptible.
The first lesson for parents to teach their children, according to the rule of
David.
The first precept therefore, that parents should teach their children, is, to
speak modestly, and under controwlements.

David had many sons, whom he instructed from their infancy in divine
precepts, and that which he taught them fust of all, was, to praise God, and
speak holylie: for being exalted to the kingdom, and lying upon his royal
bed, he called his children about him and said: Psalm. 112. 1. 2. 3. 4.
Laudate pueri Dominum, laudate nomen Domini. And they, with obedient childrens
voices, in true and holy simplicity, said. Sit nomen Domini benedictum, ex hoc
nunc, and vsque in saeculum. A solis ortu vsque ad occasum, laudabile nomen
Domini. Excelsus super omnes gentes Dominus, et super caelos gloria eius.
Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. The Lords name
is praised from the rising of the Sun, The honor and praise of God, is that
which Parents ought to teach th^^ children first of all.
unto the going down of the same. The Lord is high above all nations, and his
glory above the heavens: with all the rest that follows. These divine
praises were the first documents which he taught them to speak, and this ought
to be the first instruction of every faithful father or mother, to teach
their children in their very tenderest years, to move their lips first in
laud of their maker.

The vine, the Iuie and the mellone are plants alike, which of their own
nature will not exalt themselves: but if by chance they find any tree near
neighboring, then they will claspe and wreathe about it, and (by the help
thereof) attain to such strength, as oftentimes they go beyond them in
height, which of themselves they were not else able to do, but continually
should (else) creep along upon the ground. An Allusion to the former natural
Example: how children do imitate their parents behavior.
Even such (perhaps) might prove the condition of young children, of
themselves knowing nothing, they would remain dumb as it were: but following
the steps of their parents, and learning by them to talk, hearing
murmuring, cursing, swearing and unseemly speeches in their parents, their
weak and naked understanding begins even then to apprehend the same, and often
times, before they know well how to call for bread, can readily blaspheme God,
swear, curse and speak evil.

So on the contrary, by the Parents good example, they may increase in virtue,
make profit of holy exercises, and learn to live christianlie: but if they
show them wanton and lascivious sportes, banquets, uncleanly actions of life,
frayes, disorders and such like, then shall ye hear from them nothing but the
fruits of such instruction, blasphemies, oaths, reuilings and false
forswearings, in which corrupt course and wicked qualities, they learn many
times to outgoe all other lewd children, yea and perhaps their bad Parents
themselves.


Claudio. Assuredly it is most true, and to this purpose I can tell you a very
pretty story. An historical example, declaring the natural inclination of
children after their parents course of life.
In the Sea (among other kind of fishes) there chanced to be some commonly
called Crabbes or Creuisses, which had many feet, and always used to go
backwarde, quite contrary to all the rest among whom they lived. Their father
and mother seeing them go thus backward, began to reprehend them for it, in
this manner. My children (quoth the father) we have begotten you, and brought
you up hitherto with no mean care, and now in recompense of our great
travail, will you so shame us, that being grown to indifferent stature, you
have not yet learned how to go, but shape your course quite contrary to all
other that live among us? You see that we are in a dangerous place, where the
greatest fishes do eat up the smaller fry, therefore to prevent the subtle
wiles of our enemies, labor your selves to go forward, and not backward:
otherwise, if you hold on still this gate, you may meet with our adversaries,
and so be most pitifully devoured by them.

The young ones hearing this, began to be very sorrowful, and practiced to
go otherwise so well as they could but still it fell out to be backward, What
is engraffed by nature can never be altered.
as indeed by nature they could do no otherwise, which when the Parents again
beheld, they said unto them. Fie fie children, go not so, for this is the
only way to fall into our enemies mouths: whereon the children replied. We
pray you, that you would go before us, that by your example we may learn our
footing. Then went they forth, and going backwarde as they before had done,
the children thus spoke. Would you have us go forward, and you your selves
do nothing but come backwarde? How can we (without your instruction) learn
to go aright, but even (as your selves do) must keep on in this wrong course?

In like manner, The Allusion of the ^xample, to the good or bad presidents of
parents to their children.
as (at first) good documents are easily put into the childrens understanding,
and as they hear honest and decent speeches from the lips of their parents;
even so do they learn and practice the like or the contrary. Better were it
for such parents, if they had bin borne dumb, then give such evil example to
their children, whereby God is highly dishonored, and their neighbors much
offended.


Lodouico. A Boue maiore discet arare minor, says the ancient Adage. A true
proverb.
As by divine precepte the Son ought to obey the Father, so the Father ought
to bring up his Son in good education: and the first lesson of all should
be, to glorify God, and then, how to speak with wisdom and government.
Plutarche shows in his book of education, Crates the Philosopher, his
speeches concerning parents.
that Crates the Philosopher was so grieved at negligent parents, such as
plainly declare themselves to have no care at all for the instructing of their
children, that he was wont to say. If it were lawful for me, to ascend into
some eminent place of the City, where I might as easily be heard, as seen:
with a bold and resolute courage, I would cry out; Oh men, into what a
bottomless depth do you fall? bestowing all your study, in scraping riches
together for your children: and of those children to whom you would leave it,
you have not so much as one just thought or respect. Quorsum euites hommes,
qui omne in comparandis diuitiis vestrum studium ponitis, filior^m vero, The
words themselves out of Plutarch.
quibus ea relinquatis, nullam curam suscipitis? And truly Crates spoke with
very great reason.


Claudio. Such kind of men are like to them that take great care for a close
neat shoe, and regard not how much it wringeth or paineth the foot. They are
very industrious and careful to hoorde up bags for their Sons, A good
lesson for rich men.
but what they should most regard, they least respect: they torment
themselves for vain commings in, but hardly will spend a crown on a good
Schoolmaster, that might bring them up in holy and virtuous behavior.


Lodouico. Upon this occasion was it, A worthy example fort covetous fathers
and necessary in these days to be regarded.
that Aristippus the Philosopher, grew into great rage against a father of a
family, who being desirous to have his son virtuously brought up, found out
a master meet for the purpose. Demanding of him, what he would de require
for his sons instruction, the master answered. Sir, you shall give me a
thousand drachmaes. The covetous father, falling into an inconsiderate
admiration, replied. By God Hercules (Sir) you ask too much, with a thousand
drachmaes I can go buy a servant. Sir, said the Philosopher, for this thousand
drachmaes, you shall have two servants, to weet, him that you would buy, and
your son to.


Claudio. Very wittily answered, seeing no man can be truly said to be free,
Plutarch his amazement at the great negligence in parents, toward their
children.
but only he that is virtuous, and by his virtues resists all vices
whatsoever. Which made Plutarch not a little amazed, as may evidently be
discerned by this sentence. Canere discunt homines, saltare, and equo insidere,
and tamen tanta est mult orum dementia, vt literarum studiis non curent
instituendos liberos. Men are apt and diligent to every thing, except living
virtuously, and will dispend much in any other matter whatsoever, to please and
content their children: but to train them up in virtuous life, which ought to
be their very cheifest endeauoure, thereof they have no care at all.


Lodouico. But Philip king of Macedon, Philip of Macedon, rejoiced that his
son Alexander was borne in the time of Aristotle.
father to Alexander the great, he did not so, for when Alexander was borne,
he gave thanks to the Gods, that his birth happened in the time of Aristotle
the excellent Philosopher, who might instruct him, and to whose dilligent care
he wholly committed him. It suffices brute beasts to have their ordinary
sustenance, not knowing any other good belonging to them: but viands only are
not sufficient for man, for his desire stretches into hidden virtues, which
beautify and ennoble his mind.

They that provide nothing else for their children, but the goods of Fortune,
Of the goods of Fortune, and an apt resemblance.
which are subject to all casualties and injuries of time: do nourish and
bring them up no otherwise, then as if they were Dogs, Goats, Oxen and such
like beasts, whose special care is all for victualles, and not for virtue,
which sin ought rather to be imputed to their parents, The reason why
Diogenes did beat a Schoolmaster.
then to themselves. Upon this occasion was it, that Diogenes the Cinick,
(seeing a dissolute boy abuse himself in the street as he went) knowing the
Schoolmaster to whose charge he was committed, calling him aside, he did well
fauoredly beat him, saying: Why have thou brought up this boy no better?

Plutarch he would hauc the Father, mother and master, not only to give
example to their children of not sinning, Plutarchs advise to Fathers and
mothers.
but likewise to be patterns to them of commendable, good and worthy actions:
to the end, that they (beholding their children as in a most clear glass) may
not only restrain them from all lewd and wicked attempts, but also forbear
indecent and dishonest speeches, practicing nothing else but deeds of virtue.
For, as a weak sucking child, will receive any wholesome medicine, Similie.
being mingled by the nurse among his milk: even so do children (by their
parents) apprehende either good or evil behavior. But you have some Fathers,
For cockering parents.
so nice, and tender in bringing up their children, as (not to offend or
displease them any way) they leave their lewd and naughty qualities
vnchastised, and so they grow on in all wickedness whatsoever.


Claudio. It fares with them, as it happened to that mother, whose Son (by
some mishappe) was fallen into the River, Example of an ouer-foolish mother.
and so standing by, seeing him ready to sink, was afraid to help him, not
daring to fasten on his locks to pulle him forth, least in so doing she
should hurt him: but stood fondly crying out in foolish compassion, till her
Son was utterly drowned in deed. Or as it befell to Helie, Example of Heli
the priest and his bad children.
the Priest and Judge of the Hebrewe people, who through neglecte of
reprehending his two sons, was the cause, that God suffered them to be
slain miserably by the Philistines in war: and himself perished by sudden
death, falling back from the seat whereon he sat, breaking his neck in the
fall. Or as it fortuned to king David, Example of king David, and Amnon his
Son, and afterward of Absolons rebeilion against him.
who not reproouing Amnon, for the unchaste act committed with his own sister
(as loath to displease him, because in deed he dearly loved him) procured
God, to let him be slain by his own brother Absolon, in the merry sporting
time of a sheepshearing banquet: and that Absolon should likewise rebel
against him, chase him forth of his own kingdom: and that Solomon should
also become an Idolater, so that all his sons (almost) dyed miserably.
Therefore the holy Ghost said well: Qui parcit virgae, odit filium suum: qui
autem diligit eum instanter erudit.


Lodouico. Such Fathers may be compared to the Iuie, An excellent Similie, with
the allusion thereof.
that hugs so close to the tree, and pretending to beautify and adorn it,
winds and writhes it self so fast about it, as in few months it makes it
dry and dead. The very like does that father and mother, that is too nice and
fond of their child: with kisses they kill it, with sweet meats they poison
it, and with cockering make it unapt to any virtuous action. An especial
matter to be noted.
Therefore it was the pleasure of God, that such as were appointed for the
service of his majesty, they should be trained up from their very childhoode,
Leuit. 26.
in the divine worship of him, as we may read in Leuiticus. Hence was it that
the wise man said: Curua ceruicem filij tui ab adolescentia sua. Eccle. 30. 12.
Bow down the neck of thy son while he is young. And he gives a reason for the
same, in another place of that very Chapter: Eccle. 30. 8.
Equus indomitus euadet durus, and filius remissus euadet praeceps: An untamed
horse will be stubborn, and a wanton child will be wilful.

It is ouerlate to resist the enemy, when he has already surprised the
City: A sententious allegation, and to good purpose.
and little auayles it, to cast salt upon the flesh, that before is putrified.
Instruction (then) is most needful for children, and without all doubt, the
first virtue that Parents or Schoolemasters ought to teach youth, is to
restrain the tongues liberty, and to speak under correction, Cato his advise
for a child's first instruction.
and, if we will credit moral Cato, he says: Virtutem primam esse put a
compescere linguam. The first virtue that a Christian child should be taught,
is to be silent, or to speak under chastisement, which virtue is of such
excellency, as it makes us near neighbors, or like unto God: Proximus ille
Deo est qui soit ratione tacere, says the same Cato.

David in a dialogue which he composed, where the speakers are only God and
himself, falling into questions with the Lord, he says. Lord, Psalm. 15. 1. 2.
3.
who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and who shall rest upon thy holy mountain?
David's Dialogue between God and himself: agreeing with the former sayings of
Cato.
The Lord answers: He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness
speaks the truth in his heart, and has no deceit in his tongue. Here may be
apparently discerned, how conformably Cato spoke with David, considering, that
he that thinks the truth in his heart, and offends not with his tongue, he
shall dwell nearest unto God: it is even all one with his words, to weere, he
that refrayneth his tongue, and knows reason when to be silent, is near unto
God.


Claudio. Nay more, he is like unto God, for he that speaks the truth with
his mouth, and in his heart thinks no deceit, is like unto God, who is the
same truth. Therefore Solomon said well, that life and death is in the power
of the tongue: Both life and death is in the tongues power.
because he that delights to speak always the truth, is in true life with
God, that gives life to all things: and he that delights in lying and
deceipte, is contrary to God, Prouer. 18. 21.
and so consequently is dead from him: Mors and vita in manu linguae.

As, Similie and Allusion.
among all things that are to be desired, there is nothing more affected then
life, even so all our daily labor and endeavor is the more willingly
pursued, for the maintenance of this present life: which we do hold in so dear
respect, and are so much enamoured thereof, as although we know there is
another life, much better and no way subject to death, yet does this life so
highly please us, and inexorable death is so horrible to us, Men would gladly
taste of immortal life, but are loath to leave this frail transitory life.
as we would gladly take any pains whatsoever, to transporte us quickly to
that other life, without touch or taste of the sting of death, or deprivation
of these earthly goods and spoils. Oh, we would feign be soon clothed with
immortality. If then we would hunt this track with such earnest desire, we
should be somewhat mindful of our tongues custody, which is the laylor (as it
were) and keeps the key both of life and death; The tongue is the Iaylor, that
keeps the key of life and death.
with all our hearts we should love the truth, which is the only occasion of
life, and, with the swift celeritie of an Heart, fly from foolish talking, lies
and vain babbling, the very begetter and nourisher of most horrid and
abominable death. 2. Cor. 5. 4.
Nam qui sumus in hoc tabernaculo, ingemiscimus grauati, eo quod nolumus
expoliari, sed superuestiri, vt absorbeatur quod mortale est a vita: For indeed
we that are in this tabernacle sigh and are burdened, because we would not be
unclothed, but would be clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of
life, thus spoke the Apostle to the Corinthians.

If then life and death be in the hand and power of the tongue, you see what
an especial care should be had thereof, because in no part of the body can
we carry any greater peril of life, then in the tongue, The tongue is the
gate, whereby life passes forth, and death enters in.
which is the gate (as it were) whereby life passes forth, and death enters
into us. A bad creditour is this tongue with so rich a treasure, as is the
precious and invaluable jewel of life: it being a member so voluble, soft,
unstable, without boane (which might give it more firmness) and hazarding
life continuallye to infinite dangers. Well did the Apostle know this, when
he said to the same Corinthians: 2. Cor. 4. 7.
Habemus autem the saurum istum in vasis fictilibus: But we have this treasure
in earthen vessels. Since then the custos of our soul is so frail, we go in
daily dread of loosing the treasure of celestial grace.

What thing can be more frail then the mouth? which by a turn of the tongue,
may make shipwreck both of temporal and eternal life; offending with
blasphemies the majesty of our omnipotente God, and by one injurious word
(oftentimes it comes to pass) life is miserably lost: for, a generous mind is
more aggreeued at an injurious word, An excellent and witty Sentence.
then is a slave or villayne by the stroke of a weapon.


Lodouico. Perhaps this is the true sense and meaning of that sentence of
Solomon, because, in effect, a pleasing word is sweet, and much contents a
man's mind, and a bitter sharp taunte mooues much strife and discord. Pro.
15. 1. 4.
So says he: Responsio mollis frangit iram; sermo durus suscitat furorem: A
soft answer puts away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. And again
he says: Lingua placabilis, lignum vitae: quae autem immoderata est, conteret
spiritum: A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but the frowardnes thereof is
the breaking of the mind.

Cain offended God more with his tongue (denying so presumptuously the divine
mercy: Ge^e. 4. 13.
Mayor est iniquitas mea, quam vt veniam merear: Caine offended God more with
his blasphemous tongue, then he did with his murdring hand.
My sin is greater then can be pardoned) then he did with his hand in killing
his brother Abel. For with his tongue he uttered most horrible blasphemic, and
with his hand he but committed a murder: with his tongue he offended God, with
his hand his neighbor: with his tongue he did contrary to the first table,
with his hand to the second: with his tongue he flatly denied Gods mercy, with
his hand he took away unjustly the life of his brother: by his tongue he
deprived himself of pardon, and by his hand, his brother of life.


Claudio. The wicked wretch lied, because it is proper to God, to pardon, Caine
lied, in regard that Gods mercy, is greater the^ his justice.
and he never chastises, but when our obstinacy provoke him to just
displeasure. The Church therefore observes a good Collect: Deus cui proprium
est misereri semper, and parcere, etc. O God whose nature and property is ever
to have mercy and to forgive, etc. Likewise, by the infiniteness of his mercy,
as by the most effectual means of all: he shows unto us his omnipotency,
ruling and reigning over al, and pardoning every one whatsoever, that truly
repents him of his sins. Therefore says the Church: Deus qui omnipotentiam
tuam, parcendo maxim, and miserando manifestas, etc. Worthily therefore did
Cain taste the justice divine, for denying so impudently the sovereign mercy
thereof.


Lodouico. Moreover, Lucifer fell not from the supreme pole, neither by
avarice, Lucifers proud words threw him down into hell.
nor gluttony, nor luxury, but fell only through the proud words which
he uttered against God, when he said: I will ascend above the height of the
clouds, and exalte my throne beside the stars of God, I will sit upon the
mount in the congregation of the North, Esaias. 14. 12. 13.
and I will be like to the most high. Therefore very deservedly, he that said,
he would ascend up into the highest place, fell down into the bottomless
depth, and he that would needs be like to God himself, became a most
loathsome and venomous Serpent, that he might no more exalte himself aloft.

The rich glutton, Example of the rich glutton.
without doubt had many sins, because being one given and addicted to the
pleasures of the body, he could not choose but commit many errors: and among
the rest, the Evangelist shows, that he was so wretched and inhumane, that
he permitted his very dogs to go beyond him in compassion, Luke. 16. 21.
for they licked the sores of the poor beggar Lazarus, but himself denied him
the very least crumme of bread. He was dedicated to delights, for every day
he made sumptuous banquets and dainty feastings. He was proud in his
garments: for albeit he was no King, yet notwithstanding he wore royal purple
and rich silks, and although he had not a kingdom to govern, yet would he
go like a King in his clothing. The glutton complained most of his tongue in
hell torments.
Nevertheless, being cast into the burning flames of hell, he complained of
nothing so much, as of his tongue, because therein he suffered insupportable
anguishe: so that he begged of good father Abraham (with maine instantnesse)
nothing else, but that he would send Lazarus to cool his tongue, to dip his
finger in cold water, and therewith but touch his burning tongue.

The reason hereof (perhaps) may be, that he had committed greater sins in
talking, then by his eyes in seeing, by his hands in working or playing, A note
for beleie Gods and banquetters.
or by his mouth in eating. For it is a matter very usual at banquets, that
there are not so many dishes fed upon, or quaffing carowsing glasses drunk
off: as liberty of talk passing through the table, dishonest speeches,
backbiting of friends and neighbors, and infinite other irksome annoyances.

In war they can kill no men but such as are present, but at banquets they
murder them that are absent: How men are murdered, and yet not being present.
they fley off the very skins of the dead, yea, a many years after, only to
kill them afresh, and wound both present and absent persons, with the keen
edged sword of the tongue: Psalm. 56. 6.
Lingua eorum gladius acutus, venenum aspidum dum insanabile, so speaks the
Prophet David of the wounding tongue.

Therefore well and worthily was the biting tongue of the glutton tormented,
more then any other member of his body. And justly ought the tongue to suffer,
The just punishment of the Gluttons tongue.
which (as an unfaithful retayner of life and death) permitted death to enter
by unadvised speeches, and banished life away by the self same occasion: and
deseruedlye is the tongue made unworthy of pity, which (being defeated
thereof) could cry: Luke. 16. 24.
Pater Abraham miserere mei, and mitte Lazarum vt intingat extremum digiti
eius, and refrigeret linguam meam: Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may dippe the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue;
a just recompense, for that which was pleasing to his own taste, and which he
did deny to miserable Lazarus. Thus therefore may you see it to be most true;
Vita and mors i^ manu linguae, Pro. 18. 21.
both life and death is in the power of the tongue.


Claudio. A populous city, abounding in all wealth, cannot be exposed to the
subtilties of a besieging enemy, The soul is in more danger by the tongue,
then a citic by enemies.
by so many dangerous and perilous ways, as is the soul of him that has
no restraynt of his tongue. Sicut vrbs patens, (says the wise man) and absque
murorum ambitu: ita vir, qui non potest in loquendo cohibere spiritum suum;
Pro. 25. 29.
A man that refrayneth not his speech, is like a City which is broken down,
and without walls. Therefore we have great reason to say with David: Psalm. 140.
Pone Domine custodiam ori meo, and ostium circumstantiae labiis meis: Set
awatch (O Lord) before my mouth, and keep the door^ of my lips.


A city (without guarde) in time of suspicion, stands evermore in danger,
Sentence, and Allusion.
and the man that has no government of his tongue while he is in this world,
can want no enemies, but howrely goes in peril of his death. The Church
commending her spouse, faith in the Canticles: Cant. 4. 3.
Sicut vitta coccinea labia tuae, and eloquium tuum dulce: Thy lips are like
athreed of scarlet, and thy talk is sweet. As if the holy ghost would have
said: Because thou delightest me my love, thy lips are like to ribands of
scarlet die, and thence it ensues, that thy speech is sweet, even as if
there were milk and honey under thy tongue.

Lodouico. What similitude has a riband of scarlet die with the lip? I
understand not this similie.


Claudio. It is a goodly similitude, and very commendable unto our purpose. It
was a custom among beautiful young Damosells, A custom observed by young
beautiful maidens in elder times.
with ribands or strings of silk, to gather their locks of hair together, and
make a comely ornament thereof, tressing and plaiting all the scattering
stragglers among them, to the end they should not hang loosely about their
shoulders, but stand very galla^tly creasted on the head, and most commonly the
band was of the scarlet dye or color. Now, this was not done for pride, but
herein co^sisted their moral signification;

The band of the scarlet die, The moral signification of the custom, worth
observation.
figured divine love, wherewith they bound up the lips of the celestial
spouse, to weet, a holy and religious soul, to the end, that from thence
should issue forth no disordered talk or speech: either of wicked envy, as
did Lucifer to Eve: or of proud presumption, as he also did against God: or
of avarice, as did the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 12. 19.
who said, Anima mea, habes multa bona pofita in annos plurimos: requiesce,
comede, bibe, spulare; My soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years:
live at ease, eat, drink and take thy pleasure. Or of vaineglory, as did the
Pharisey in the Temple, who vaunted of his prayer and fasting: or of unchaste
inciuilitie, and such like other vices. But all their words were bound together
with the band of seruent charity, and hereof it bare the very name. By
means whereof, they placed and ordered their speeches so decently, as the holy
spouse might become enamoured of them, and it proved a very hard matter for
them to break silence, for they remained as ravished with his divine voice:
Sonet vox tua in auribus meis, Cant. 2. 14.
vox enim tua dulcis. Let me hear thy voice, for they voice is sweet.

But the indiscreete man, Of the indiscreete man's behavior in talking, to the
danger of his own soul.
that has not this ligament to stay his lips: speaks, and afterward
thinks thereon, whence (often) ensues repentance for so rash speaking. This
band is a most excellent restraynte, least the tongue should err at random,
and it is a thing very highly pleasing to God, when the tongue utters no
immodest speeches, but such as are full of heavenly love, to the honor of his
name, to the edification of our neighbor, and profitable to whosoever shall
converse with us: for the lips being bound up in this manner, are at
heavenly liberty, and frees the soul from all anguishes whatsoever,
according to the wise man's saying; Prouer. 13. 3.
Qui custodit os suum, and linguam suam, custodit ab angustiis animam suam; He
that keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from destruction.


Lodouico. It is so certainly. Oh in how many perilles, and in how many
narrow straytes, does he find himself, that has no bridle for his tongue,
S. Augustine approoueth them most guilty, that crucified with their tongues our
Savior Christ.
in whose power remains both life and death? Saint Augustine, upon the
Psalms, says, That they were more faulty, who crucified Christ with their
tongues, crying; Crucify him, Crucify him, then they that were guilty of his
death, or they that fixed him fast to the Cross with nails: for they had not
fastened him to the Cross with their hands, till the other had first crucified
him with their tongues.

And hence (perhaps) ensued the difference between the Evangelists, Mark. 15.
25.
about the hour of Christ's crucifying: for Saint Mark says, that when the
ministers crucified Jesus it was the third hour: Erat autemhoratertia, and
crucifixerunt cum. Nevertheless S. John says: John. 19. 14.
Erat autem fere hora sexta. But the resolution is this, that from the third
hour, A note worthy to be remembered.
the Jews crucified him with their deuilish tongues, desiring of Pylate, that
he would let him be crucified, and at the sixth hour, they made him fast with
nails to the Cross.


Claudio. Oh detestable tongues, tongues more sharp then nails: Psalm. 56. 6.
Lingua eorum gladius acutus: because they pierced further, then the other had
power to penetrate. Many sins had the Babylonians, after they became
Idolaters worshipping the Image Bell. Proud were they that by a Tower would
ascend up to heaven, as if it were to take the kingdom from God himself: The
builders of Babell were Heretics, in tweening to resist God by their tongues
which drew the confusion of tongues among them, albeit God had many other
means to have punished the^ by.
they were heretics in thinking to make resistance against God, and by that
exalted tower to escape from death. Notwithstanding, God inflicted no other
punishment upon them, but set a division of diverse languages among them, so
that one understood not what another said: but in the time of their building,
if one called for water, he should have stones brought him, and when he
would have stones, then they would bring him lyme.

God could have chastised them in diverse other degrees, but it pleased him
only to divide them by their tongues: as being (perhaps) more offended at
the proud words they uttered, then with the tower which they builded, and
surely they dishonored God more in their speeches, then they could do with
their manual labor. Gene. 11. 4.
Venite, faciamus nobis ciuitatem, and turrim, cuius culmen perting at vsque ad
coelum, and celebremus nomen nostrum, antequam diuidamur in vniuersas terras.
Come, let us build us a city and a (...), whose top may reach unto the
heaven; that we may get us a name, least we be scattered upon the whole earth.
If God should always chastise the murmuring tongue against his glory, in this
manner: men would be far greater lovers of silence then they are, and better a
duised in their speaking.


Finis Cap. 2.
The Argument.
Here are delivered many examples of worthy men, true affecters of silence:
And in this Chapter, they discourse on the four excellent qualities of
silence, and how they do adorn a man; a very sweet and profitable Dialogue,
for such as desire to talk discreetly.

Chap. 3.
LODOVICO. Silence in time beseeming seeming it, Sentence.
is much more prays-worthie, then a choysely decked Oration, To speak according
to time and place, is the testimony of a wise man.
because to speak with an adorned, polished and smoothe style, is the office
of a Rhetorician: but to talk according to apt time and place, is the apparent
sign of a wise man. Therefore very wittily answered Acaticus the Philosopher,
Acaticus the Philosopher.
to such as demanded of him, what was the reason why he spoke so little in the
frollique season of a costly banquet: I have consumed much more time (quoth he)
in learning to know when I should be silent, then to speak curiously, and upon
no occasion. The saying of learned Omulus.
And Omulus was wont to say; when thou entrest into an other man's house, show
thy self more ready to dumbness and deafness then to talk or babbling, and
covet to hear the deeds of others: because he that is talk atiue, offends
many ears, but he that receives example by other folks murmuring, may take
the less occasion of sinning. S. Hierome wrote, Sentence.
Non esset murmurator, si de esset auditor.


Claudio. There is no higher philosophy in the world, then to be silent, and
know how to restrain the tongue: which the more glib and ready it is to
moving, Job spoke in the bitterness of his soul. Ioh. 10. 1.
so much the sooner it becomes a sower of discords. When Job spoke, his
speeches were in the anguish of his soul, as one that was a dear friend to
silence, for thus says he: Loquar in amaritudine animae meae: I will speak
in the bitterness of my soul. And this is an especial grace which God
bestows upon his dearest children, An especial gift of God to his dear
children.
that albeit in speech they cannot master men, yet by silence (says Plutarch)
they come near unto God.

Thomas Aquinas, a great Doctor of the Church, was such a lover of silence and
taciturnitie, as his Scholars were wont to term him the dumb Ox. He
holding conclusions in the presence of Albertus Magnus his master, Thomas
Aquinas termed by his master Albertus Magnus, the dumb Ox.
to the amazement of all the bystanders, being very profounde in learning, as
also short and sententious in his answers: his Master thus presaged of him;
thou shall henceforth Thomas be called the dumb Ox. But yet this Ox, when
he saw his time, made so loud a bellowing, as it was heard almost the whole
world over: and yet his voice is audibly heard universally in the Schools, as
a Father of great reading and worthy memory.

I read of Agatonus a learned man, Agatonus and Theodanas, two memorable
lovers of silence.
who for thirty years space, carried continually a stoane in his mouth, only
for instruction how to hold his peace. Theodanas like wise a religious Father,
it is written of him that thirty years together he was silent: not because he
knew not how to speak (for he was most skillful in the Latin, Greek and
Hebrew) but in regard he very well knew, how many inconveniences do proceed from
the tongue.


Lodouico. I call to mind (very aptly for this purpose) how I have read in the
holy Scripture, Numb. 19. 15. Gods commandment concerning unclean vessels.
that God expressly commanded: Vas quod non habuerit operculum, necligaturam
desuper, immundum erit: The vessels that be open, and have no covering fastened
upon them, shall be unclean. This law god made, because what vessel soever,
that had no couerture, or not bound above with some cloth or paper: it could
not choose but be the receptacle of al uncleanness, flies would get into it,
dust would fill it, and it could contain no liquor, but it would corrupt it.

Much more then should we be careful of the vessel of our heart, An
excellent allusion, framed upon the former place of Scripture.
which is in the upper part of our body, to weet, the mouth: if that be not
kept close: it will soon become a receptacle for deuilles, for vain thoughts
and all other filthiness. And if it be not bound with some scarlet band,
whereof we have already spoken a little before, restraining and busying our
lips in holy reasonings, and virtuous exercises, which may be to the glory of
God, and our neighbors edification: the heart will be (as in a vessel of
uncleanness) most filthy and to Gods eyes very abominable, the lips will
utter nothing else but detractions, murmurings and blasphemies, and the mouth
shall be as a forge for all vileness, a stinking sepulcher of corruption.

David speaking of the like unclean mouth, Psalm. 5. 11.
says: Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum, linguis suis dolose agebant: Their
throat is an open sepulcher, and they flatter with their tongues. It behooves
us then, to close the upper part above, of this vessel of our heart, which is
our tongue: least it fall to be unclean, and loose the little goodness
remaining in it, before it be filled up with the dust of vanitic.


Claudio. The only best couerture for this vessel, is silence, Silence is the
only best couerture for the vessel of the heart.
which is the guarde of the conscience, a bridle from insolence, the beauty of
innocence, and a sign of sapience. Silence is the guarde or watchman of the
conscience, because ouerlauish talking cannot be without some defect: In
multiloquio non deeru peccatum, Prou. 10. 20. Similie.
says the wise man: In many words there cannot want iniquity. And as that
treasure cannot be safe, which is in a chest without a keye: even so the
invaluable riches of grace and virtue, Allusion.
have no securitye in an immoderate man of speech, for very quickly is the
conscience offended. Example.
In the time of war, men gladly will abide in the City well walled,
furnished with artillerye, and strongly guarded with Soldiers: Allusion.
even so a wise man makes known his security in the strong castle of God, which
is walled round about with silence.


Lodouico. Assuredly, 1. How silence is the guarde of the conscience, with a
most excellent comparison of the tongue.
whosoever does but observe the great workmanship of the tongue, may almost
compare it to a city or a very strong Castle, wanting neither able walls,
munited rampires, and very artificial counterskarfes. For it is bound together
with very strong nerves, after the manner of a city well foundationed, seated
alost in the cheifest part of the body, environed with teethe, as if they were
so many armed Soldiers, kept in with the lips, as strong defensive
Bulwarks: but if the keye of silence want, then all is in vain. Therefore
said the Prophet Esaias: Esaias. 30. 25.
In silentio and in spe ^rit fortitudo vestra. In quietness and in hope shall
be your strength. In silence and hope, Silence and hope the strongest defense.
because they that observe the divine precepts, awaiting in patience and firm
hope, without any murmuring: the heavenly bounty will fortify them in such
manner, as no disasters shall overcome them.

Epaminondas a most excellent painter, was a man curious enough in seeing of
the world, but very sparing of his speech: who being urged by the Rhodians, and
very earnestly entreated, that he would tell them what excellent and worthy
things, in his voyages by Sea, and travails on the land he had seen, answered
them very wisely. I have sailed by Sea two years (quoth he) to learn how to
catch fish: Epaminondas his discreet answer to the Rhodians, concerning what
he had seen in his travails.
I have abode six years in Asia, to learn the art of painting, and eight
years I lived in Athens, to learn how to hold my peace. And I tell you of a
truth, that I have not gained so much by fishing and painting, as silence only
has been beneficial to me, therefore (I pray you) trouble me not with talking.


Claudio. This painter, without knowledge (perhaps) what the conscience was,
kept it well enough by the gift of silence. Now to follow the order already
begun, 2. The bridle of insolence, with a very apt comparison, and Allusion.
in praise of this virtue, it is secondly the bridle of insolence. You know,
that on goodly and worthy horses, they use to bestow costly bridles: but on
Iades, or such as are of no esteem, a halter or horse collar is sufficient to
hold him withal. Even so just men, ennobled by their virtues (who bear Christ
the Monarche of the world by their obedience, of whom the wise man says; Sap.
7. 12.
Anima iusti seeds est sapientiae:) they have in their mouths the bridle of
silence, wherewith they check al unprofitable speeches, and are guided by the
way of virtue, forsaking indiscreet and unseemly language, doing according to
the saying of Solomon: Verbis tuis facito stateram, Eccle. 28, 29.
and fraenos ori tou rectos: weigh thy words in a balance, and make a sure
bridle for thy mouth.


Lodouico. If Prince Pitheus had had this bridle in his mouth, Example of
Prince Pitheus.
he never had so obscured his victories by unadvised talking, as Pliny shows
in one of his Epistles: for this is the common bane of overmuch prating, The
words of such men are little credited. What more famous Orator ever lived,
Example of Cicero.
then Cicero, an especial friend to his countries common wealth? Yet Mark
Anthony caused him at length to be slain, for no other occasion, as is said,
but only the want of this bridle, else had he not so wretchedly ended his
days.

The horse having the bridle in his mouth, A good note for such as are
slaunderers and backbiters.
can eat no kind of proue^der, nor bite any beast near him: even so, the man
that has the bridle of silence, cannot bite his neighbors good fame, nor
co^taminate the ears of others with lewd speeches.

Phormio the Philosopher fled the concourse of men, especially the Monks of
Egypt, making his abode altogether in the deserts, and being demanded the
reason thereof, he returned this answer. Beasts do offend men, The reason
why Phormio the Philosopher sled the company of men.
either by biting with their teeth, smiting with their horns, or kicking with
their feet: But men injury one another, by their eyes gazing or staring; their
hearts dangerously contriuing; their fistes walking; their feet pursuing;
and their tongues defaming. Therefore it is better living harmless, among
b^ute beasts in the woddes, then among evil tongues (helpelesse) in the walled
city.


Claudio. We see then that silence is the only means to escape these evils,
for first it is not only the watchman of the conscience, secondly, 3. The
beauty and glory of innocence, with a singular example to approve the same.
the bridle of insolence, but thirdly it is the beauty or glory of innocence,
preserving us from offending both God and our neighbor.

Valerius Maximus, In his seventh book and eleventh chapter declares, that
Xenocrates the Chalce donian Academicke Philosopher, Scholar with Aristotle to
Plato, perceiving himself to be present at a serious arguing, where was much
babbling and offensive speeches: he sat him down, and spoke never a word at
all. And being asked, why in such an especial time of conference, he sat thus
silent among so many, Xenocrates his witty answer.
discreetely thus he replied. Because I have diverse times repented me for
talking, but it never grieved me that I held my peace: Quia dixisse me
altquando poenituit, taeuisse ver^ nunquam.


Lodouico. The wise man speaks little, but a fool opens his mouth without
judgment: Several Sentences, whereto is added their proper Allusions.
dry wood without moisture, makes a far greater noise in burning, then that
which is green: a vessel empty, soundes alowde being smit on, but one that is
full, makes no noise at all: So he that has little wit in his head, it is no
marvel if he be heard loud enough; but the wise man, that knows what
inconvenience attends on the tongue, he weighs every word in the balance,
before he will let them pass his lips. For, as the Prophet Esaias says: Esaias.
32. 17.
Cultus iustitiae silentium: The beauty of justice is quietness. If then the
ornament of justice be silence, and the honor of a just man consists
therein: it may easily appear, in what estate they are that talk at large and
indiscreetly.


Claudio. Of talkeatiue men there is no more account made, then of unjust men.
A singular Example.
And hence it may be the Philosopher grounded his reason, when it was told
him that a prating fellow had spoken evil of him, he made answer, That he
cared not: for, quoth he, Auditus debet esse robustior lingua, The ear ought
to be stronger then the tongue.
cum singulis hominibus sint singul^^ linguae, and aures binae: The ear should
be stronger then the tongue, for every man has two ears, and but one tongue.
This is a lesson for many, to hear much, and speak but little, because we
speak but with one tongue, and hear with two ears. Wherefore a Philosopher
reproved very well a great talker, in these verses following.


Cum nihil auscultes, sed plurima vana loquaris,
Vna tibi melius auris, quam or a duo.
Nam geminas aures nobis Deus, os dedit vnum;
Nos audire decet plurima, pauca loqui.
Lodouico. Lastly, 4. The badge or sign of wisdom.
this moderate silence is the sign or badge of wisdom, which made holy Job
say to his friends: vtinam taceretis, vt putaremini esse sapientes: I would
you would be silent, that you might be accounted wise. Job. 13. 5.
When the water in a flood or river is deep, A Similie to approve his
assertion.
it makes no loud noise, but where it is shallowe, it runs with the more
audible murmr. Therefore it was wont to be said, that the little perling
brook ran with a far more delicate noise, The Allusion.
then the deep channel: whereby we may gather, that the deeper a man is
grounded in learning, so much the more he sauoureth of silence. Prou. 18. 4.
And so says Solomon in his Proverbs: Aqua profunda verba ex ore sapientis
viri: The words of a wise man's mouth, Sentence.
are like deep waters, therefore where is much prating, there can be but
little prudence. There is a saying used (almost) generally through the world,
Proverb.
when we see a man of many words, we say, he has more words then money.
Which proverb was received from Solomon, Proverb. 14. 25.
for he affirms. Vbiplurima sunt verba, ibi frequenter egestas: where many
words are, there want attends.


Claudio. Undoubtedly it is so. An example comparatiue wise, between a poor
trader, and a rich merchant, with the allusion thereof.
For a poor traffiquer passing through a city, with his poor stock of
commodities, stepping up on a bulk, having a garment on his back hardlye
worth three pence, may prate and chat there long enough, but no body respects
either him or his trinkets. A rich merchants case is quite contrary, he shall
scarsely need to open his mouth, but they will entreat him to let them have
his commodities. So fares it with the head that has little wit in it, the
tongue of such a one is ever gadding, therefore the prince of the Peripatecians
said: Sentence.
Adpauca respicientes, de facili denunciant; a wise man has none but well
weighed words: Esaias. 8. 6.
Aquae Siloe curru^t cum silentio.


Lodouico. It suffices then, that the few words of a wise man, are far
more acceptable then the braying of a fool, whereupon the wise man said:
Eccle. 9. 17.
Verba sapientium audiuntur eum silentio, plus quam clamor Principis inter
stultos: The words of the wise are more heard in silence, Breuity more
commendable then tedious circumstance.
then the cry of him that rules among fools. The brevity of speech has
been always more gracious, then tedious prolixitie: but in these our days,
it is most of all esteemed, and thereon has risen the proverb: Proverb.
Gaudent breuitate moderni: for the cheifest grace consists not in multitude
of words, but in speaking little and with wisdom, whereupon the Poet wrote,
Scire loqui decus est, decus est and scire tacere,
Haec duo si poteris scire, peritus eris.


If the Orator be brief, An example of a pleasing Orator to his Auditory.
it is much commended in him, and this breuitye rayseth a new desire in his
audience to hear him again: but if he be ungracious, presently every one
says, God be praised, that yet he has (at last) found the way out of his
il-pleasing argument. So that a man cannot deceive himself by using few words:
for by prolixe arguing, the very perfectest Orator may appear tedious.

There came to a king of our time, two Ambassadors, and the first of them made
a long and tedious Oration, An example of two Ambassadors sent unto a king of
late days.
so that the king turned and shifted himself many times about in his Chair as
he sat, only being wearied with so large a circumstance. At last, when
himself pleased, he came to a conclusion, not without great marvel in the
bystanders, who admired not a little at the great patience of the king. Now
while he prepared to hear the other, fearing mightily he would fall into the
former man's fault: this second Ambassador, being no less tired with the
others talk, then the king himself was, honorably spoke these few lines
following. Sacred Majesty, this my companion has dwelt so long upon his
Oration, An apparent testimony of a wise man.
as there remaynes nothing else form to say: but only to exhort your
highness, to grant what he has required in his speech, for our good and
your own: otherwise, expect an Oration as long again. Highly was the king
pleased with this second Orator, and falling into a princely smile, took
order: that whatsoever the first Ambassador had desired, should be forthwith
executed, to cut off all occasion of any more hearing him.


Claudio. Not much unlike to this Orator, was the Ambassador sent from the
Abderites, Example of Agis king of Lacedemon, and the Abderites Ambassador.
to Agis king of Lacedaemon, who making likewise (before that state) a very
long Oration, at last required an answer to his Embassy, whereto the king thus
graciously replied. Return home to Thrace, and tell the men of Abdera, that
you stood so long upon your Oration, as I had no time left to make answer to
it. Verily, so long a tale (without wisdom) is not to be so much wondered at,
as that he to whom God has given legs to walk away, will yet sit still to
listen such frivolous babbling.


Finis Cap. 3.
The Argument.
Herein is handled, which is the hardest matter for a man, either silence or
speaking. And to this purpose each one alleges several reasons, with many
examples out of the ancient Philosophers, as also authorities out of the
sacred Scriptures: they show likewise, many inconveniences which arise by the
tongue. A discourse very excellent, curious and sententious.

Chap. 4.
LODOVICO. In regard of what has been said already, I hold it much better
sometimes to be silent, then talk with tediousness to the hearers, For such
as take delight to hear themselves talk.
and no credit at all to the speaker: but men are commonly so addicted to
their own private conceits, that they think themselves to suffer great
violence, if they talk not.


Claudio. In your judgment then, which do you hold as the hardest matter for a
man, to talk, or to hold his peace?


Lodouico. It is as difficult a thing to open the mouth well, Sentences
answering each other.
as it is to know, how to close it again: because we find fair silence as
commendable, as is the very comliest speaking. David called very instantly to
the Lord: Psalm 140. 3.
Pone domine custodiam orimeo, and ostium circumstantiae in labijs meis:
Example of David's care in speaking.
Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. At an
other time he prayed: Domine labia mea aperies, Psalm. 50. 16.
and os meum annunciabit laudem tuam: Open thou my lips O lord, Psalm. 119. 131.
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. Again he said: Os meum aperui and
attraxi spiritum: I opened my mouth and panted. And another time, dumbely as it
were: Ego autem sicut mutus non aperiens os suum: Psalm. 38. 13.
I am as a dumb man that opens not his mouth. A time for speaking, and a
time to be silent.
And the reason of all this was: because it is as hard to speak well, as it
is to be silence: Tempus tacendi, and tempus loquendi.

He that would not fail in his speaking, should pray unto the Lord that he
would first inspire him with what he should say, and afterward he may the
boldlier speak: Sentence.
learn first to be silent, and then prectise how to talk. So did holy David,
he prayed in silence to the Lord, that he would instruct him what he should
say, and the Lord answered him: Psalm. 81. 10.
Dilataos tuum, and implebo illud. What can we otherwise gather hereby, but
that questionless, it is as great a labor to speak well, as likewise it is
to bind the tongue to silence, being naturally as procliue to talking, as the
eyes to seeing, the feet to walking, and the hands to working? This great
pain of ours in silence or speaking, Eccle. 6. 7.
Solomon declared, when he said: Omnis lab or hominis in ore cius: All the
labor of a man, is for his month.


Claudio. What labor is it for a man to hold his peace? Let him but keep
close his mouth, He can do little, that cannot hold his peace.
and it suffices. Says not Ovid: Quis minor est autem, quam tacuisse labor?
To talk well, is another manner of matter: it behooves the Orator to busy
himself not a little, in searching his topics, for neat terms, quaint
course, significant words and proportionate conceits, to amplify and adorn
his Oration, least it come short of his hearers lyking. The reason why so many
Schools were erected for learning.
For this purpose were so many Schools erected, of Grammar, Rhetorique and
Philosophy, not only to teach an order in discourse without error: but also
how a man should hold his peace, wherein there needs no other study or pains,
but only closing of the mouth.


Lodouico. But this closing of the mouth, The close the mouth is harder then to
speak.
is as laboursome, as it is to speak, and harder too. I deny not, that for
comely speaking, good study is requisite, and only learned wise men know
that course of speaking: but I tell you again, that absolutelye it is a more
difficult thing to be silent, then to talk. We see such as are dumb, Example
of such as are dumb.
to labor themselves much by signs because they cannot retain the motion of
nature, hindered by the tongue: therefore they make a shift with gestures, such
as in the tongue are meerelye forbidden. Conceptum sermonem tenere, quis
poterit? Who can withholde himself from speaking? Job. 4. 2.
said Eliphaz the friend of Job. Who can refrain his tongue, and not thrust
forth the conceit of his mind? surely no man (I think) without great
difficulty.

Such is the power of nature, gadding to sound the thoughts of others, as it is
able to make the dumb to speak, if we dare credit the opinion of Herodotus.
Herodotus his example of Atys the dumb Son to Croesus king of Lydia.
For he tells us, that Atys the Son to Croesue king of Lydia, having never
spoken before in all his life time, so soon as he saw one lift up his armed
right hand, to take away the life of his father, upon the surprising of the
city, so much prevailed the natural instinct of speaking, (accompanied with
grief and childlike pity, which gathered strength to break the controwling
ligament, that till then had denied the passage of speech) that crying out
alowde, he said: Oh dear Father, take heed. Conceptum sermonem tenere, quis
poterit?


Claudio. This perhaps may be more attributed to the love of a Son to his
father, and the entire respect of his iniuried begetter, then to the voluntary
torrent of nature.


Lodouico. Both to the one and other may we most truly refer it, The
attribution both to the one and other.
because both the one and other are of like equality in power: yet we may
rather conduce it to the violent torrent, in the very swiftness of his course,
then to the conceit of the mind, the other being the way-gate for passage of
speech. Example of Philippides the Poet, and kind Lysimachus.
Philippides the Poet was very gracious in the eye of Prince Lysimachus, so
that he offered to grant him whatsoever he would desire of him, and would
needs urge him to request some thing: the Poet replied. I desire nothing, in
reward or gratitude of all my pains, but only that you would never acquaint me
with any of your secrets.


A man is ever so forward in disclosing his conceytes, that Architas the
Tarentine said: Example of Architas the Tarentine.
If one were in heaven, to consider the beauty of the stars, the wandering
order of the Planets, the variable influences of the celestial spheres, and
the goodly disposition of the inferior creatures; all these would seem
nothing sweet unto him, except he had a kind companion, with whom he might
confer upon them. Conceptum sermonem tenere, Example of the law among the
Lydians for silence.
quis potest? It is such a hard thing to keep silence, that although there was
a law among the Lydians, that such, as talked overmuch, should be either
condemned to the Gallyes, or learn with others to practice silence for a
certain time: yet more would willingly go row for many years on the Seas,
then converse among the Citizens to learn silence, this does Plutarch
testifye to us. Quintilian concerning silence.
Quintilian wrote: Nullam difficiliorem esse puto, quam tacendi virtutem: There
is no virtue more paynefull to be followed, then silence, this silence is a
marvelous hard matter.

Tiberius taught a talkeatiue Senator silence, Example how Tyberius taught a
talkatiue Senator silence.
for the space of a whole year together: but to behold his antique tricks and
behavior, was admirable, for he did more harm by his nods and foolish becks
then others did by talking to him: such strong impressure suffered natural
use, as gestures seemed odious, in regard of the tongue, and were sufficient to
have softened the severity of Caesar: which being so, Conceptum sermonem tenere,
quis potest? Mydas had the ears of an Ass, as the Poets tell us, but he
covered them so cunningly under his royal crown, Example of the Barber to king
Mydas, unable to contain the kings deformity.
with a fine nightcap, as none knew his monstrous deformity save only his
Barber, who was prohibited from disclosing it, upon the severe penalty of
death. But he, being not able to withstand the natural enforcement of
revealing the same, went into a hollow cave of a forest, and there he cried
alowd many times to himself, Mydas king of Phrigia has the ears of an Ass.

Of the holy Apostles themselves it is written, Example of the Apostles, and
Christ himself.
that they could not retain within them, the high celestial secrets, revealed
to them by the holy ghost, and Christ himself: Non possumus quae vidimus, and
audiuimus non loqui: For we cannot but speak the things which we have heard
and seen. Act. 4. 20.
Howbeit, it is a higher mystery in the Saints: and this which in the Apostles
was a virtue, to other is given by natural instinct. How can an Organe but
sound, A very apt Similie to this purpose.
the bellows feeding it with breath, and the Organists fingers playing upon
it? Non possumus quae vidimus, and audiuimus non loqui: it is not possible to
be silent, but only by the especial grace of God.

Claudio. Silence is no greater a gift of God, Silence is no greater a gift of
God, then wise speaking.
then speaking with wisdom, and the flowing eloquence in the Apostles, was
the work of the holy ghost, not the heat of Nature. But albeit silence is such
a hard imposition, yet a wise man finds it no difficultye at all in him, who
by the compass of reason measures all his words.


Lodouico. Alas my Lord, do you not know, that Solomon himself was of my
mind, reputing it so impossible a thing to order the talking tongue, that he
said: Domini est gubernare linguam: The answer of the tongue is of the Lord.
Proverb. 16. 1.



Claudio. This saying, that God only has the government of the tongue, God
only has the government of the tongue.
approues not so much the difficulty of silence, but likewise of speaking. And
if so many examples by you alleged, may make men believe, that it is a matter
almost impossible for a man to hold his peace: I can produce as many men more,
who not only have spoken little, but (in a manner) have been always silent.
Moreover, some of those men by you rehearsed, were taken for indiscreet persons
and worthy of reprehension, and namely Eliphaz, who said, Conceptum sermonem
tenere quis potest? But they whom I will speak of, were men of wisdom, and
worthy of praise, as already we have delivered many others.

You read of Pambus the Abbot, Example of Pambus the Abbot, concerning the
best lesson that ever he learned.
a man of great holiness, who by the same of his goodness, procured a
reverend Bishop to come and visit him: but in all the time of his being
with him, he would not speak one word. His attenda^ts taking it in very evil
part, imputed it to him as inciuility, discurtesie and vnmanlinesse, to be
silent in a time so much beseeming speech. The patient man said unto them: My
sons, I could never read a better lesson, nor learn at any time a dostrine
more profitable, then to be silent. And of this mind he still continued,
until it pleased the Lord to send for him. Socrates wrote a book, Socrates
his book to teach silence.
wherein nothing else was read or taught, but only silence. If there were
Schools in the city, for instruction of silence, how many would quickly learn
to speak very eloquently? Then all iangling, corrupt talking, murmuring,
detracting, blaspheming and lying, would soon cease. Sentence.
He knows not how to speak, that knows not how to be silent, so said
Socrates to his Scholars. But Plutarch is repugnant to Socrates, for in his
book de educatione liberorum, he has set down: Plutarch contrary to
Socrates.
That he which talks little has need of a little reading.

As the vessel is known by the sound to be full or empty: Similie.
so by talking is a wise man and a fool discerned. Esaias. 8. 6.
Aquae Siloe currunt cum silentio. Job. 39. 37, 38.
Job spoke once, and repented himself; Vuum loquutus sum, quod vtinam non
dixissem, and alterum, quib us vltra non adam. Manum meam ponam super os meum,
Talking delivers a sign of lightness.
because talking gives a sign of lightness, as himself confesses, for if he
had held his peace, then he had wanted the cause of repentance. Qui leuiter
loquutus sum, respondere quid possum? David (as already has bin declared) to
receive no cause of repentance by speaking, prayed the Lord to set a watch
before his mouth. And Job councelled his friends to silence, because they might
appear to be wise: Job. 13. 5.
Vtinam taceretis, vt putaremini sapientes. If then silence be so commodious
for a fool, Silence beneficial for a fool.
to keep his folly from discovery: how much more is it beneficial for a
wise man?


Lodouico. Taciturnitie is very necessary in a fool, Difference of silence in
a fool and a wise man.
for manifesting his folly: but in a wise man contrarily is speech necessary,
for apparancie of his wisdom: otherwise, how could it be known which is
wisest, if both hold their peace?


Claudio. The fool holds his peace, Answer to the question. Similie, and the
allusion thereof.
only to seem wise, but the discreet man does it, because he is so indeed.
As sweet liquor being put into an uncovered vessel, loses his perfection,
and the goodness thereof quite vanishes, as appara^tly may be noted in wine:
even so a man of a many words, who has his mouth still open to talking,
loses the sweet savor of devotion, and the goodness of al perfection
vanishes quite from him. Seneca sent sundry writings, and many books full of
great learning to Lucullus: but last of al he sent a letter, registered in the
fifth book of his Epistles, Seneca his letter sent to Lucullus.
and it is the 40: where he writes, that the sum of all he had so learnedly set
down, was, that he willed him to be slow in speaking: Summa ergo summarum
haec est, tardiloquum te esse iubeo.

Vincentio Belnacens, of the order of Preachers, sets down in his looking
Glass, Vincentio Belnacens, his answer to Foelix the Doctor.
that being asked by Felix the Doctor, if he should praise his neighbor or
no, answered, like a lover of silence: that it was good to praise him, but much
better to hold his peace. The reason hereof I guess to be this, that because
it often happens, by the mutability of a man's mind, if once we have commended
a man, it may fall out afterward, the same person may commit some act worthy of
reprehension, and sufficient to disgrace the former praise: therefore I judge
it better to commend a man's neighbor after he is dead, The time when a man may
best be commended, according to Solomon.
when neither he that praises, may be taxed of flattery, nor the party
praised (by the blemish of elation) may be further tempted. And Solomon
speaks to the same purpose: Ante mortem ne lauds hominem quemquam, quoniam
in filiis suis agnoscitur vir: Judge no man blessed before his death, Eccle.
11, 30.
for a man shall be known by his children. Eccle. 11. 2.
And again: Non laudaueris hominem in vita sua; Commend not a man in his life
time. Even as if he would have said, A man is so unstable by nature, that
he has no certainty, therefore least those praises bestowed on him at any
time, should fall afterward into check and reprehension: I hold it best, not
to commend him while he is living, because he may commit some act
deserving blame, and obscure thereby all the former praises.

Wherefore it is best commending, Praise is then best beseeming when one action
is not to be contraried by another.
when there is no peril that one action may contrary another, which is, after
death, when every thing is secure and out of danger; when he has attained the
long wished port; when he is certain of triumph; when neither (for passed
occasions) there is any greeuing, nor fear of misfortune, by any thing that
can happen. Sentence.
Let it suffice then, that it is better to be silent, then talkeatiue, and as
easy is silence to a wise man, as taciturnity is difficult to a fool:
therefore it shall very well become us, to make bars and doors for our mouths,
to open and shut at meet times, for fear of failing, according as the wise man
says: Eccle. 28. 25.
Fac ori tuo ostium and seram: Make a door and a bar, and a bridle for thy
mouth.


Lodouico. In such manner (belike) was silence figured by our elders. Example
of our first mother Eua, and of Lucifer the proud Angel.
If Eua and Lucifer had had this bar neither the one nor other had uttered such
lies against the divine honor as they did: Eua in weening to beguile the divine
commandment, and Lucifer in thinking to abate the greatest glory by his
foolish presuming. She could tell the devil, Gene. 3. 2. 3. 4.
that God had commanded, that not only they should not eat of the Apple, which
he urged to her, but much less, they should not have the boldness to touch
it, least they died. And the other audaciously affirmed against the divine
precept, that they should not dye at all, but presently become as Gods, knowing
both good and evil: Ne quaqua^ morte moriemini sed eritis sicut Dii, scientes
bonu^ and malum. If they had bin mute and silent, much better had it bin both
for them and us.


Claudio. A greater lie was that of the woman, The woman's ly was greater then
that of the Devil: for she was the inuentresse of lying, and taught it to the
devil, by two several lies.
then the other of the devil, for the woman was the inuentresse of lying, and
taught it the devil. The devil went but to tempt the woman, when he said:
Cur praecepit vobis Deus vt non comederetis ex omni ligno paradisi? As yet the
devil had uttered no lie at all. But the woman answered, and in her answer
toulde two several lies. De fructu lignorum quae sunt in paradiso, vescimur.
De fructu ver^ ligni, quod est in medio Paradisi, praecepit nobis Deus ne
comederemus: we eat of the fruits of the trees of the Garden. But of the fruit
of the tree, which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said; Ye shall not
eat of it. Hitherto she spoke truth, but presently after these words, The two
lies.
followed two lies: Et ne tangaremus illud; neither shall ye touch it, there is
one; Ne forte moriamur; least that ye dye, there is the second.

For God commanded not, but that they might touch the fruit of the tree,
only his charge was, that they should not taste thereof. Neither did God put
death to the transgressors for touching, in the precept, Genesis 2. 17.
but absolutely said: In quacunque enim dic comederis ex eo, morte morieris: In
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. The devil hearing, and
fastening hold upon these two lies; of himself (like a good scholar) he
ioynes two worser unto them: The devil, like an apt Scholar, ads two worse
lies to the woman's.
one, in denying death named to the offenders, the other, in making promise of
a divinity: Nequaquam moriemini, there is the first; sed eritis sicut dit,
there is the second. Thus became the woman Schoolemistresse to the devil, and
from these two persons (as from a fountain) sprung all other lies by imitation.


Lodouico. If they had bin silent, much better had their condition been, and
such a pernicious evil had never been instructed to us.


Claudio. But if such harm do ensue by the tongue, wherefore did God then
bestow it upon man? A demand worth the observation.
and why did Christ restore the dumb to speech? Had it not been much better
for us, to have been borne dumb, then by having a tongue, to put our selves
in peril, of committing therewith a thousand guilty sins?


Lodouico. Because as much good as evil may come by the tongue, according to
the use thereof: Answer to the demand by an apt comparison.
therefore the tongue may be compared to riches, which are good and naught,
according to the use and abuse. Therefore said Christ: De sermonibus tuis
iustificaberis, and de sermonibus tuis condemnaberis: Math. 12. 37.
By thy words thou shall be justified and by thy words thou shall be condemned.
Hence was it (as I think) that David called the tongue a sword: Psalm. 56. 4.
Lingua eorum gladius acutus: Their tongue is a sharp sword. The sword is a
weapon offensive and defensive, according to the use: Comparison between the
tongue, and a sword.
(not as the Mo^io^, shirt of maile or Corslet, which are arms only defensive)
and so is the tongue good or evil, as it is used.

We have already said, that the wiseman is like a covered vessel, which lets
not fly from him, or vainly breaths forth the liquor of discretion. Sap. 8.
Quasi vas auri solidum, ornatum omni lapide pretioso. The fool is like a
vessel too, Comparison of vessels for proof of a wise man, and a fool.
but there are some vessels of honor, others of ignominy, some most noble,
others vituperous, according as their uses are: even so is it with the tongue,
good and bad, according as it is wrought withal, the empty and foolish are
vessels, but broken ones, loosing all, and not knowing how to retain the
licquor of wisdom. Eccle. 28.
So spoke the holy spirit hy Solomon: Cor fatui quasi vas confractum, and omnem
sapientiam non tenebit.

The Prophet David in one of his Psalms, calls the tongue the pen of a ready
writer. Comparison of the tongue to a writers pen.
The pen is an instrument for writing, which being put into the hand of a
skillful scribe, makes a fair character: but in the hand of a bad writer,
makes a letter loathsome to be looked on. Psalm. 44. 2.
Lingua mea calamus scribae velociter scribentis. With the pen may be written
both good and evil: An excellent Allusion, worth the regarding.
the holy ghost moving the pen of our tongue, it writes in the hearts of the
faithful, the words of eternal life: but being guided by the hand of a
wicked sinner, it makes brutish letters, of lying, slaundering, blaspheming and
evil speaking.

One friend having invited another to sup with him, he commanded his servant,
Example of the goodness and badnesse of the tongue.
that he should go buy the very best thing in the market, to make his supper
the more honorable. He went, and according to the charge of his master, he
bought a tongue, which being brought home to the house, the master fell into
choler, and because he had dallyed with him diverse times so before, he
said unto him. Thou ever do the contrary to what I command thee, I charged
thee to buy the best thing in the market, and see, thou have bought the woorst,
never fulfilling what I enjoin thee to do: therefore since thou take a
delight in thwarting me, go buy the woorst thing that is to be sold in the
market. The servant went again, and bought an other tongue, whereat the
master chafing much more, the servant said (and I think it was Aesope) There
is nothing better or worse in the whole world, A witty sententious answer of
a Servant.
then the tongue, which is the cause both of much good, and much evil: a
sentence not so excellent as true, and agreeable to that of the wise man, Pro.
13. 21.
Vita and mors in manibus linguae.

Seeing then the tongue is the cause of much good, To what end God gave the
tongue to man.
to that end God gave it: but as it is the mean of many euilles, it ought to
be bridled, and talk but at due times. Homo sapiens tacebit vsque ad tempus:
Eccl. 20. 7.
lasciuus autem and imprudens non seruabit tempus: A wise man will hold his
tongue till be see opportunity: but a fool and a trifler will regard no time.
Eccle. 28. 22.
Multi ceciderunt in ore gladij, sed non sic quasi interierunt per linguam
suam: Of the evil tongue.
There be many that have perished by the edge of the sword, but not so many as
have fallen by the tongue. And so discoursing on still of the wicked tongue,
Eccle 28. 16. 17. 21. 18. 25.
that it has broken down strong cities; overthrown the houses of Princes;
driven nation from nation; depressed the strength of the people, and telling an
infinite number of euilles more, at last he says for a conclusion: Mors illius
mors nequissima, and vtilis potius infernus quam illa: The death thereof is an
evil death, hell were better then such a one. Could he speak worse, what a
wretched thing then is a wicked tongue? Flagelli plaga liuorem facit, plaga
autem linguae comminuit ossa: The stroke of the whip makes marks in the
flesh, but the stroke of the tongue breaks the boanes.

As many other goodnesses do ensue, by the tongue of a just and prudent man, An
excellent Similie.
whose sweetness cannot be declared. It is a heavenly thing to hear the
delicate sound of musical instruments: but much more delightsom is the harmony
which a holy tongue makes. Tibiae and psalterium suauem faciunt melodiam, and
super vtraque lingua suais. The pipe and the psalterion make a sweet noise,
Eccle. 40. 21.
but a pleasant tongue is above them both. The powerful and precious virtues
of a good tongue.
For it prayseth God, conuerteth souls, curbs the devil, opens heaven, shuts
up hell, appeaseth the Judge, comforts the offendour, admonishes the sinner,
counsels the doubtful, pacifieth the unquiet, satisfies the afflicted,
corrects (with love) the falty, encourages the weak, instructs the
ignorant, extolleth virtue, condemns vice, and performs an hundred thousand
other good offices. This tongue is silent, and speaks in meet time, and
although at some season it appears to be dumb, yet (another while) it
declares it self to be very eloquent. Est autem tacens, and non habe^s sensum
loquelae: and est tacens, sciens tempus apti temporis: Some man holds his
tongue, because he has not to answer: and some keep silence, waiting a time
convenient.

Therefore it is good to speak, and as good to be silent: hard is it to keep
silence, Sentences coupling together.
but much more hard to speak with wisdom. For the tongue being the
Ambassador of the heart, it is most certain, that if there be love in the
heart, the tongue will manifest love (as Minas the Philosopher writes) If there
be hatred, Minas the Philosopher, his conceit of the tongue.
it will publish disdain, if sorrow, it will utter lamentations. Which
oftentimes is the cause of many evils, because not all things concealed in the
heart, ought the tongue to discover, and therefore it is far better to be
silent, according as Ovid counsels.

Eximia est virtus praestare silentia rebus.
Atque grauis est culpa tacenda loqui.

Claudio. Nevertheless Aristotle says, Aristotle concerning the difficulty of
silence.
That it is far more difficult to hold ones peace, then to speak: whereupon,
being asked, which of these two things seemed to him the hardest, replied, to
conceal a secret. As I was one day talking with Signior Cipriano Calphurnio an
especial friend of mine, he made proffer of telling me a very great matter, An
Example of himself.
provided that I would lock it up hidden in my heart, but I answered him
according to Aristotle's opinion. Good Sir (quoth I) do me so much courtesy, as
not to bind me to that, which you cannot do your self: you cannot keep so great
a secret concealed, and yet will you tie me to strict retaining it?


Lodouico. Aristotle says, To be silent is the hardest matter, Aristotle.
That to be silent, is the hardest matter, because silence is the ground of
prudence, and prudence is an beroycall virtue, not to be imitated of all, for
many learned men have bin imprudent. Plato writes, Wisdom consists in
silence, Plato.
That a man cannot be wise, except he be able to retain a secret. And yet your
Honor would not be bound to silence, not because wisdom is contained in every
part thereof, but in regard of the binding diverse other, to keep in silence a
like secrecy, which may prove a matter very perilous. An example to sound
purpose, concerning the disclosing of a secret.
A man may perhaps (under deep charge) manifest a secret to a friend of his,
and (with the like prouizo) reveal it to diverse other beside, which passing in
that order among so many, may prove in the end to fall out damageable: and
then, he not perfectly remembering to how many he told it, may unjustly tax his
very truest friend of unfaithfulness. Therefore, much better is it, not to know
another man's secrets, then by knowing them, to oppose himself to so manifest
peril, when as others being therewith likewise acquainted, they may escape
free, and he only be blamed.

But silence is a thing so noble, One man's blame may light upon an other.
that it is very highly pleasing to god, as may be easily gathered, if we but
consider, that his divine Majesty would not have his secrets known to any
person whatsoever: whereby we may see, God jealous of his secrets.
that he would not admit the knowledge of what he would do in a day, nay, much
less, what he intended in an hour. Most secret is God in all his affairs,
whereupon the Prophet spoke not at random, Esaias. 45.
saying. Secretum meum mihi, secretum meum mihi: My secrets I keep to my self,
etc. And Cato likewise said: Proximus ille Deo est, qui scit ratione tacere: He
is likest unto God, that knows with reason how to hold his peace.


Finis Cap. 4.
The Argument.
Wherein is declared, how God spoke so little, as he spoke but once or twice
only: And how man ought to keep an eternal silence, otherwise, he that
always talks, sins. Who was the first that brake silence, as well in
heaven, as in earth. How it is to be understood, that God only is truth, and
every man a liar: considering that many have spoken the truth, as well
Philosophers of the Gentiles, as also many Christians: A discourse full of
learning, and pleasing curiosities.

Chap. 5.
CLAVDIO. Well then my Lord, if God be so jealous of his secrets, and has so
little revealed them: it behooves us in this case to confess, that he speaks
much less, and is very spaing of his speech.


Lodouico. God is so abstinent of his speech, God spoke but once or twice
only, according to David*
as I find but that once or twice only he spoke: nor is this any once it of
mine own, but the Prophet David witnesses it, who speaking of God, Psalm. 62.
11.
says: Semel loquutus est Deus, One time only God spoke, and two things only
he said: Duo haec audiui, quia potestas Dei est, and tibi Domine mifericordia,
quia tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera sua. These two I heard, that power
belongs unto God, and to thee O Lord mercy, for thou rewardest every one
according to his work. Jobs proof of the same.
This is also confirmed by the authority of Job, who maintaining God to be a
lover of silence, Job. 33. 14.
says: Semel loquitur Deus, and idipsum sermo non repetit; Can there be found
any greater taciturnity then this?


Claudio. God speaks very little, if he never spoke but once or twice. But, A
demand urging the contrary to the former objection.
how can this agree with the blessed S. Paul, a preacher to the people, a
vessel of election, and the trumpet of the holy ghost? For he writing to the
Hebrews, says. Multifarie, multisque modis elim Deus loque^s patribus in
Prophetis. Heb. 14. 2.
Nouissime diebus istis loquutus (...) no other end, was made speech,
conjoined with the eternal word active: Omnia per ipsum facta sunt: All things
were made by it: but to agree with the passive of our humanity: John. 1. 3.
Passus sub Pontio Pilato, Of the eternal word active, conjoined with the
passive of our humanity.
It suffered under Pontius Pilate; by means of the verbal conjunction of his
substance only; neither for any other end did it assume flesh in the chaste
virgins womb, then to declare, thereby, the word spoken at first.

Moreover, what Christ did and said in the world, was a manifesting of what the
Godhead had in his mind, as is witnessed in the words of the Evangelist Saint
John, where most highly he says: Quod factum est, John. 1. 4.
in ipso vita erat. Which more clearly he replicateth in his wonderful
Apocalips, Apoc. 4. 11.
saying: Quia tu creasti omnia, and propter voluntatem tuam erant, and creata
sunt: For thou have created al things, and for thy wills sake they are, and
have bin created.


Claudio. If they have bin, A School-like cauile, for further resolution.
how are they now created? If now they be created, then before they were not:
it seems repugnant to say, that first they have been, and yet afterward
they are now created.


Lodouico. As if your Honor knows not, A sententious and learned answer.
that before the Architect builds a palace, he has the Idea shaped thereof.
They were first in the diuinities mind, and afterward they were created: not
that first of all they were in Potentia, and afterward in act, or so to be
expected from God: because in God there is no such power, which is called
defective, but every thing in him is perfectly in act. In us, between the deed
and the act (according to the ancient Adage) is a great alteration: In God,
between doing and speaking, is no difference.
but in God, between doing and speaking, there is no difference at all. Ipse
dixit, and facta sunt; ipse mandauit, and creata sunt. And, to return to our
argument first of all begun, Psalm. 48. 10.
God is said to speak unto us, always eternally in the heart, by his holy
law, and by his creatures, which serve unto us as so many tongues, as David
distinctlye speaks in his 48. Psalm, and as the three children, in the
fierye furnace of Babylon, do affirm in their song.

It shall be necessary therefore for us, to be always silent, because he that
always speaks, The divine word is the living conceits of the Father
understanding.
spoke but two things only, as before has bin declared, and so we may say,
Semel loquutus est Deus. The divine word is the living conceit of the Fathers
understanding, which becoming flesh, expressed the conceit of the Godheads
mind: Ipse enarrauit, John 1. 14.
and docuit omnia. Also himself said to his beloved disciples: Omnia qua
audiui a patre meo, John 8. 38.
nota feci vobis. So that whatsoever he said, it was to express the eternal
will, and though they may seem to be sundry discoursings, yet in substance
they are all but one: whereupon it may be truly said, Semel loquutus est
Deus.

And because it is a word eternal, it would therefore have an eternal
silence, which made David say: Te decet silentium.
hymnus Deus in Sion. As if he would have said, A venerable explication of the
lngly Prophets words.
it is a matter most commendable (O Lord) that to thee should be given an
eternal silence, because thou speak eternally: for it is not lawful, that
while thou speak, we thy creatures should likewise be talking, but to stand
in humility listening to thee: Te decet, etc.


Claudio. By your favor my Lord, if it be a matter of duty, to stand always
mute and hushed in silence: wherefore do you then reason so much, and not
observe the same in silence, which you preach unto me?


Lodouico. These words of mine, are my silence, and the word of God also: An
excellent answer, well worthy the noting.
my silence they are, because while I speak unto you of matters divine, I hold
my peace, and God speaks by me. An unhappy wretch were I, if I should
speak, as of my self, because I should then tell nothing but lies, and be a
manifest breaker of silence. Do not you know: Psalm. 115. 2.
Omnis homo mendax: Every man is a liar? And how greatly God does punish
lying: Perdes omnes qui loquuntur mendacium: Psalm. 5. 6.
Thou shall destroy them that speak lies.


Claudio. Why then belike I am a liar. I thank you for your kindness.


Lodouico. Who makes any doubt of that? are not you a man?


Claudio. I make no question that I am a man: but (by your leave) I am no liar.


Lodouico. You are a liar, God is only truth, and al men liars: how understood.
because you are a man, if you will give credit to Saint Paul, who, confirming
the former saying of the Prophet David, wrote to the Romans: Est autem verax
Deus, omnis autem homo mendax: Let God be true, and every man a liar. If God be
only true, Romans 3. 4.
and every man a liar: you being a man, are also a liar, except (from the
community of men) you know how to divide your self.


Claudio. I know very well that I am a man, and yet no liar, because I have
always delighted in the truth.


Lodouico. If the truth be so pleasing to you, and yet you are a man: it is
because you have no knowledge of your self, nor of your own excellency.
Though all men be liars, as being the sons of me^, yet truth makes them the
sons of God, and so no liars.
For though every man be a liar, yet in thus much you are not a liar, by how
much you are not the son of a man, but the son of God: because, Mendaces
filii hominum in stateris; The children of men are vanity, the chief men are
liars, to lay (...) upon a balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity.
Then, in speaking the truth, and delighting therein, and not being a man, but
the child of God, you are no liar. Deus de Coelo prospexit super filios
hominum, vt videat si est intelligens, aut requirens Deum. Omnes declinauerunt,
Psalm. 61. 9.
simul inutiles facti sunt non est qui faciat bonum, non est vsque ad vnum.
Psalm. 52. 1. 2.
God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were
any that would understand, and seek God. Every one is gone back, they are
altogether corrupt, there is none that does good, no not one; but if one, it
was Christ, who being a man, was God also.


Claudio. Whence proceeds it, that al men were liars, and unprofitable?


Lodouico. Because it pleased him to become both God and man, How God gave
power unto men, to become the sons of God and be no liars.
it was to divert man from infinite former euilles, and to heal him of as
infinite infirmities, particularly those of the understanding, to the end he
should not be a liar: but by delighting in the truth, he gave power unto men to
become the sons of God. Dedit eis potestatem filios Dei fieri. So by the
means of this singular grace, Lying ceased in men, John 1. 12.
because they ceased to be the sons of men. Moreover, Psalm. 81. 6.
they are said to be Gods: Ego dixi Dij estis, and filii excelsi omnes. I have
said you are Gods, and you are al children of the most high. If then they are
Gods, Romans 3. 4.
God is truth: Est autem Deus verax, Then are they truth as he is: as Gods by
participation, redeemed by grace of the Savior, Venerable Bede, his words of
the children of God.
bought with the price of the blood of Jesus Christ, borne again with the
water of holy Baptism, and made eternal heirs of the kingdom of heaven:
this is venerable Bedes opinion, upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans.


Claudio. I dare say nothing against so great a Doctor: but if (for further
instruction) it be lawful to ask, I would gladly know of you: A question of
very great import, concerning those that are to be termed the sons of God
only.
if only those men, which are called the sons of God, or Gods by
participation (how many soever they be) be true, and all other men beside are
liars; as for example the Gentiles, deprived of faith, separated from the
Church, sons of the devil, yet they speaking sometimes truth, in that many
of them (by their writings) have given occasion to us Christians, to know the
truth, yea, and by some of their compositions? And if the adopted Sons of God
only be true, it is then most clear, that not all Christians, that know and
speak the truth, are the sons of God, in forsaking their father Christ, and
making themselves (by sin) the sons of the devil. How then do only the
sons of God, and not the sons of men, speak the truth?


Lodouico. I answer, The former demand.
that inasmuch as the Gentiles, and Christians (only in name) speak the
truth, they are true, by how much they participate of the first truth,
Learnedly answered.
God himself: but for the rest, by that which is to be expected (as of their
own nature) they are false and liars. Psalm. 43. 3.
Hereupon was it that David said: Emitte lucem tuam, and veritatem tuam, ipsa
me deduxerunt, and adduxerunt in montem sanctum tuum, and in tabernacula tua:
Send thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy
holy mountain, and to thy Tabernacles. Similie and the Allusion thereof.
As water (of it self) has no color at all, but is so much the more
colored, as color comes upon it: even so man, insomuch as he is of
himself, is a liar, but insomuch as he partakegth of the chief truth, to
weet, God the only author of truth; so much is he true.

Another answer (in declaration of David's words) can I make you, An answer
to the other saying of David: Omnis homo mendax.
as thus. In David's saying: Omnis homo mendax, is as much to say as that a man
partaketh more of his not being, then of his being: therefore in saying, that
every man is a liar, and a lie being the denial of the truth, is the truth
spoken, and the ends of both are conuertible, since that Bonum, verum, and ens
conuertuntur, according as the Philosopher says. The difference between the
truth, and a lie.
All that which is true, is good: and all that which is good, is true: then
that which is a lie, has neither being, nor goodness, but only may be
termed, a privation of being, of truth, and of goodness. Psalm. 5. 6.
When David says; Omnis homo mendax, he means, that man is nothing as of
himself, and into nothing shall he return, without the only truth, God
himself. As (to the same effect) he speaks in another place: Psalm. 38. 8.
Veruntamen vniuersa vanitas omnis homo viuens: Surely man in his best estate
is altogether vanity, which is even as much, as when he says; Omnis homo
mendax.

And the more that we consider a man in this manner, How to consider man, as he
is of himself, and as he is of God.
the more we shall find him to be a liar and nothing, be he a still fitter, a
trauailer, or how else to be comprehended: but considering him as partaking
with the truth it self, and his infinite goodness and essence, we shall
find him to be true, good, and that he has a perfect being. Omnis homo
mendax, Marcilius Ficinus upon Plato.
is likewise as much to say (according to Marcilius Ficinus upon Plato) that a
man knows much more by negation, then by affirmatio^, because lying is a
negation of the truth: so, in David's saying, Every man is a liar, imports,
that so far as a man's own knowledge exte^deth, Of man's knowledge, and how far
it extends.
he knows more by denying, the^ by affirming. I know that God is not a stone,
wood, not a star, and yet I know not directly what he is. I know that the soul
is not a body, nor mortal, but yet cannot so readily tell what it is indeed.

Heereto will I join another description, which perhaps may better fit you,
because it comes from an Angell-like doctor, and very hetoycall in all his
doctrine, The opinion of a learned Father in comparison of the truth.
and thus it is. The truth (says he) imports a certain adequation or
leuelling of a thing with the understanding: but things do appear one way to
our apprehension, and quite contrary to the divine intelligence, because that
our understanding takes his cognition of the thing: therefore the being of the
thing, is the cause and measure of the truth thereof. By things that are, or
are not the truth is soonest discerned.
Hereupon said the Philosopher, in his first book called Periermenia, and the
Chapter treating de oratione: Exeo quod res est, and non est, oration dicitur
vera, vel falsa. Then thus it comes to pass, that our intelligence may be
true and false, according to the thing equalled, or not equalled.

But because that which may be, and not be, has need of another superior
agent, to the end it may be, and without which it remains in it self,
Similie of the Air, and our understanding.
as nothing; as the Air without light, should remain always dark: Even so
fares it with our understanding, except it be illumined by the truth it
self, it continues evermore (even in his very best condition) in lying.
Therefore (herehence) it may well be said, that for so much how-euer* as is to
be expected of man in himself, every one is a liar, according to his own best
intelligence: and he is only true in no more, then he partaketh with the only
chief truth. Psalm. 33. 3.
We ought to say with David to God, Emitte lucem tuam, and veritatem tuam, for
he is the truth it self, and the divine intelligence is the cause and
direction of things: because of himself he is indeficiently true, How any
thing is truly said to be true.
and every thing (in so much) is said to be true, by how much, it is conformed
to the divine understanding.

In like manner, if we take the truth from part of a thing, man of himself
has not the truth, because of his own nature he becomes nothing, Man (of
his own nature) becomes nothing.
even as of nothing he was created; But the divine nature only has of it
self the truth, which neither is of nothing, nor can be converted into
nothing. Your honor then, and every man else, is a liar, as of himself; but
yet do speak the truth, in so much, as you or they partake of the only
truth. He that will speak then, The eternal wisdom, the best
schoelemaster in speaking.
must first learn, and let him have no master but the eternal wisdom, the
word, the perfect truth, to the end he become not woorthye of
reprehension: tghen shall our discoursing never break silence, because it will
be the eternal word that speaks, and not we our selves: our speaking will
be but ministerially, not originally, instrumentally, not casually. Non enim
vos estis qui loquimini, Math. 10. 20.
sed spiritus patris vestri qui loquitur in vobis: For it is not you that
speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks in you.

Saint Stephen spoke in such manner as none could convince him, Example of S.
Stephens speaking to many Nations.
in disputing among so many sects of the Cilicians, Alexandreans, Cyrenaicans,
and Asians: but in what sort? Non poterant resistere sapientiae, Act. 6. 10.
and Spiritui qui loquebatur: They were not able to resist the wisdom and the
Spirit, by which he spoke. I do not say, that they could not resist Stephen in
himself, but the wisdom and Spirit whereby Stephen spoke. Non poterant
resistere sapientiae and Spiritui qui loquebatur. For Stephen said nothing of
himself, S. Stephen spoke nothing of himself, but the holy Ghost spoke by him.
but the holy Spirit did speak by the mouth of Stephen, and other of the
Prophets: and albeit some of them were sinful men, yet they spoke not
accordingly, neither did they so understand and themselves, because they spoke
not, but the divine word; Non enim vos estis qui loquimini, sed Spiritus Patris
vestri, qui loquitur in vobis. Mat. 10. 20.


Do you think, Example of Caiphas the high priest.
that the high priest Caiphas understood himself, when (in Council) he
foretold of Christ: Expedit vt vnus moriatur homo pro populo, ne tota gens
pereat: It is necessary that one man die for the people, John 18. 14.
and not that they al should perish? Assuredly no; Non enim sciebat quid
diceret, Caiphas spoke as Balaams Ass did.
but spoke even as Balaams Ass did, that understood not him self.


Claudio. And did Balaam understand him self, Example of Balaam.
or his own Prophecy, when he foretold of Christ: Orietur Stella ex Jacob, and
consurget virga de Israel? Numb. 24. 17.
There shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall arise of Israel, etc.


Lodouico. Assuredly, Of the man that fears the Lord.
I think he understood not his prophecy, but spoke accordingly as his Ass
did. The man that fears the Lord, says Solomon: In medio ecclesiae aperiet
os cius, and implebit cum Dominus Spiritu sapientiae and intellectus, Eccle.
15. 5.
and stola gloriae vestret illum: In the mids of the congregation shall he open
his mouth, with the Spirit of wisdom and understanding shall be fill him,
a^^^loathe him with the garment of glory. Heereuppon was it that God said to
David Dilata os tuum, Psalm. 41. 10.
and implebo illud: Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. Luke 21. 15.
And Christ himself said to his disciples: Ego dabo vobis os and sapientiam,
cui non pot erunt resistere and contradicere omnes aduersarij vestri: I will
give you a mouth and wisdom, where against all your adversaries shall not be
able to speak nor resist.

When we tell a lie, When we tell a lie, we break silence, as (...) Caiphas did.
because, Ex propriis loquimur, we break silence, as Caiphas did, when he
said of our Savior: Blasphemauit: quid adhuc egemus testibus? Vos audistis
blasphemiam. Reus est mortis: Mat. 26. 65. 66.
He has blasphomed, what have we any more need of witnesses? now you have
heard his blasphemy. He is worthy to die. At this very instant he brake
silence, because he spoke of himself, and told a great lie, and spoke much
evil, therefore, Omnis homo mendax. Silence, silence, O man, since thou art
like an infant, that knows not how to speak, Man is like an Infant, that
knows not how to speak.
but only mutter and mumble: therefore hold thy peace, for fear of being
disgraced, suffer God to speak, listen then, and attend well what he says
unto thee, and that is sufficient: Te decet silentium Deus.


Claudio. Seeing then that man has such need to speak with much discretion,
seeing also he ought not to break silence, and in regard sometimes he
speaks, Silence broken, and yet not broken by speaking.
yet silence is not broken, and otherwhiles he speaks, and then it is broken:
I have a desire to know, who was the first that ever brake silence in the
world?


Lodouico. In heaven, it was Lucifer, on earth, it was Eua. God spoke with his
omnipotent voice, Who were the first that ever brake silence, both in heaven
and earth.
and the first that offended his majesty with breach of silence, after he had
uttered, Dixit, and facta sunt: was Lucifer, when, with presumptuous speeches,
standing in the imperial place, and seeing himself endued with excellent
gifts, Esaias. 14. 13. 14.
he said. In Coelum ascendam, super astra Dei exaltabo solium meum, sedebo in
monte testamenti, in lateribus Aquilonis. Ascendam super altitudinem nubium,
similis ero Altissimo. I will ascend into heaven, and exalt my throane, above
beside the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in
the sides of the North. I will ascend above the height of the clouds, Lucifers
reward for his proud breach of silence.
and I will be like the most high. But as a just punishment to such pride, he
was cast headlong from the imperial seat, into the infernal bottomless
depth. Veruntamen ad infernum detraberis, Esaias. 14. 15.
in profundum laci: But thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides
of the pit, with infinite ignominies, as Esaias in a long style declares. And
Saint John likewise in the Apocalips: Apoc. 12. 9.
Proiectus est Draco ille magnus serpens antiquus, qui vocatur Diabolus: And
the great Dragon, that old Serpent, called the Devil, and Satan was cast out.

The second that brake silence, Genesis 3. 2. 3.
but on earth, was Eua, when she said to the Serpent: How our mother Euc became
the second breaker of silence.
Defructu lignorum que sunt in paradiso vescimur: De fructu vero ligni quod est
in medio Paradisi praecepit nobis Deus, ne comederemus and ne tangeremus illud:
We eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit of the tree
which is in the mids of the garden God has said, you shall not eat of it,
neither shall you touch it; Perceive ye how mightily he missayed, and with what
importunity he spoke?


Claudio. Oh, how much ouer-licentiously, and with what indiscretion he spoke?
Silence in her had bin much better.
She might yet have held her peace, and not broken silence, or if she would
needs speak, at least have avoided lying: for God never commanded that they
should not touch the tree. He commanded them indeed, Of one commandment she
made two.
not to eat thereof: but this little command seemed so stange to them, that
being but one, yet she would needs make two of it, as already you have said
before: Mentita est iniquitas sibi.


Lodouico. If she had rehearsed only that which God had commanded them, she had
not broken silence at all; because there was nothing that he had spoken, but it
was in compass of the divine word, which evermore we ought to have in our
mouths, She brake not silence, till she spoke of her self.
for Spiritus and vita sunt. But when she spoke of her self, she spoke very
evil, and brake silence, whereupon she was punished very severely.


Claudio. She would needs talk, yet knew not with whom she talked, not
considering, The woman knew not with whom she talked.
that the very first time of her talking, it was with a liar, with a
three-mouth'd tongue, that never spoke truly: the father of lying, the
inuenter of lies, the accuser of our brethren: Accusator fratrum nostrorum,
Apoc. 12. 10.
qui accusabat illos ante conspectum Dei nostri die ac nocte: The accuser of
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.

And because he had too long a tongue, The Devil had too long a tongue.
he was thrown forth of the glorious Palace of heaven, even, Quando factum
est praelium magnum in Caelo: when there was a great battle fought in heaven.
Apoc. 12. 7.
And he brake silence, Esaias. 14. 14.
and said in proud words: ponam sedem meam ad Aquilonem, ero similis
Altissimo. And with the rumor of the weapons: Dum Draco committeret bellum cum
Michaele Archangelo, and Draco pugnabat, and Angeli eius. Apoc. 12. 7.
And there was a battle in heaven with Michaell the Archangell, and the Dragon
fought and his Angels. She did not note his variable and unused habit, his
dissembled speech, with so many impertinent pratlings, and all but lies?


Lodouico. She made more account of a ianglers words, covered with a little
sweet taste of honor, The woman covetous of honor.
weary of their present estate, and coveting to be Gods and immortal, then of
the infallible truth of God.


Claudio. And yet she might very well have discerned by his curious
questionings, an apparent sign of his malice, and that his words were full of
treachery, fraud and dissimulation. The woman might have said to the Serpent:
How the woman might have answered the Serpent.
What have thou to do, to know the occasion of the divine commandment? Is he
not God, and my Lord? all that he does, is it not just? Is it not in him to
command, and is it not our duty to obey?


Lodouico. Behold, how much the custody of the tongue imports: if our first
Parents had not erred, we should never have fallen into so many intricate
labyrinthes.


Finis Cap. 5.
The Argument.
Declaring, what custody we ought to have of our tongue, to avoid error in
our speaking. Of the several ways, where by the tongue passes, when we
talk: which although they be four in number, yet one only guarde is
sufficient for them all.

Chap. 6.
CLAVDIO. A very singular document does the kingly Prophet David give us, King
David's lesson, for custody of the tongue.
upon the custodye of the tongue, and it is in his thirty eighth Psalm:
Dixi, custodiam vias meas, vt ^on delinquam in lingua mea, Psalm. 38. 1. 2.
Posui ori neo custodiam, dum consist eretpeccator aduersum me: I said, I will
take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I will keep my mouth
bridled, while the wicked is in my sight. Eue^ as if he had intended to say; I
will have a special respect of my life, that I fall not into error by my
tongue, there being so many ways of failing thereby. An application to the
Prophets words.
Therefore have I set a good guard upon my mouth, the wicked standing always
ready against me, to noate, if I speak any thing which I ought not. Psalm. 38.
3.
Wherefore, to prevent failing: Obmutui, and humiliatus sum, and silui a bonis,
etc: I was dumb and spoke nothing, I kept silence, even from good, etc.


Lodouico. What ways are those, which make such necessity of being well kept
by us, His demand concerning the meaning of the Prophets speeches.
to preserve the tongue from erring in talking? what has the tongue to do with
ways? Is there any walking for the tongue? By the way we go, and by the tongue
we speak: by the one we have the use of our feet, by the other we declare the
conceit of the mind, and the thoughts of the heart. What may David's saying
signify: I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. Me
thinks he should rather have said, I will take heed to my ways, that is, I
will consider, which is the good way, to the end my feet fail not in going;
or I stray from the right path wherein I ought to walk: or that I stumble
against some stone or stumpe; or unadvisedly fall into some pit. But, saying I
will take heed to my ways because my tongue shall not err: I know not what
ways those should be.


Claudio. I answer, An answer to the demand by a familiar Similie.
that as the feet goes by many and sundry ways, now upon plains, then down in
valleys, now on steep mountains, then by humble hillocks and flowring meadows,
now this way now that way: Even so does the tongue go by sundry ways, which
ought very well to be looked unto, The four sundry ways of passage, for the
tongue in speaking.
to the end the tongue err not. And very co^pendiously are they reduced into
four cheef or principal ways, to wit, the way of the understanding; the way of
the will: the way of the power irascible, and the way of the power
concupiscible. It behooves that these ways should be direct, clean, void of
all filth of error, and purged from all dust of humane spotted affections* if
the tongue, and the words issuing from it, shall come forth free from the
stayne of error.

And first of all, 1. The way of the understanding; and how to purge it.
it is needful for the understanding way, to be purged of al faults, because
if the understanding falter not in his conceit, by apprehending wrong and
falsely: then the tongue cannot fail (by him) in pronou^cing his words, for the
tongue is the ambassador of the understanding. Hence is it, that the divine
understanding, being incapable of transgression in his conceit, Psalm. 119. 86.
can likewise commit no escape at all in delivery of his words, therefore
David said: Omnia mandata tua veritas: All thy commandments are true. Moreuer,
Of the blessed and celestial Spirits, and how they err not.
the celestial spirits and blessed comprehenders, because they are united in
an ineffable manner with the eternal truth of god: by continual splendour of the
blessed light of glory, they cannot err at all in their conceits, and therefore
much less in their words. And so is every understanding illumined, by the
divine light internally in invisible manner, as (by the work of the holy ghost)
the Apostles were illumined, and many other Saints: by means whereof, the whole
world became enlightened, Psalm. 76. 4. 5.
according as David (in a very high style) foretold. Illuminans tu mirabiliter
a montibus aeternis, turbati sunt omnes insipientes cord, etc. Upon the which
place it is now no time to philosophize.

Let it suffice then, When the intellectual way is not agreeable to the truth,
the tongue erreth
that when the intellectual way is not right, and conformable to the especial
truth: the tongue then erreth, and violently breaks forth into lies, as
Lucifer did, who told a lie of God, saying to our first parents; Nequaquam
moriemini: Or into error of faith, Genesis 3. 4.
as Caine did, who was the first heretic, and denied the divine mercy: Caine
the first Heretic.
Or into blasphemy and murmuring, as many sinners have done, and yet do.

Secondarily, 2. The way of the will, and how to cleanse it.
we ought to cleanse the way of the will, to keep the tongue from offending,
because the will is that which commands the power of our soul, according as
the understanding first proponeth. Therefore, least the tongue should stumble
by this way, we ought to purge it of inordinate desires, and of those
appetites governed by pride, by those of vain glory, of ambition, avarice and
envy: to the end the tongue may not speak proudely, as Lucifer did, or
vaingloriously, Very pertine^t Examples.
as Antiochus did, or ambitiously, as Nebuchadnezzar did, or couetously, as
Judas Iscar^ot did, or enuiously, as Caiphas did.

This way of the will, The way of the will, is to be kept by the guarde of
reason.
is to be kept with the guarde of reason: Dixi custodiam vias meas. Our will
sometimes is blind, and therefore all that we would, cannot be good and just.
As the sentence of the judge cannot be said to be good, because he has given
it after his own pleasure: Similie, and the allusion thereof.
but as it is given according to the order of justice. So then, that the will
may not wander, and (by his example) the tongue stray after; The necessity of
reason.
of necessity it must be accompanied with reason. For this cause was it, that
God (at first) gave us, not only the freedom of the will, but also gave
reason therewithal, to ratifye and confirm our will.

Wherein Gods gift may not much amiss be compared to the familiar example of a
king, The reason, why God at the first gave man free will, with an excellent
comparison, worth the observance.
who giving the government of a province, to a noble personage of his Court,
who, because he has no knowledge in the laws (as oftentimes in falls out,
that many have not) grants him the assistance of skillful Lawyers, by whose
means the Province may be swayed according to the laws. So in the kingdom of
our soul, Allusion of the comparison, in the kingdom of the soul.
God gave the will, the authority of rule: but because it is sometimes blind,
and suffers it self to be deceived by her proper appetites, he deputed reason
for her assistance, whereby the souls kingdom became better governed, then
when it wanted the association of reason.

But in God it is not so, The difference in God.
because, whatsoever he wills, is just, and to make any thing whatsoever
just, his divine will is only sufficient, as being most direct, most firm and
infallible. Therefore the holy Apostle said: Ephesians. 2. 11.
Deus operatur omnia secundum consilium voluntatis snae. God works all things
after the counsel of his own will. What care then we ought to have, for this
way of the will, be judge your self, in regard it is so exceeding fallacious,
and sooner fallen in, then we are aware of.

Thirdly, 3. The way of the power concupiscible, or lusting, and purgatio^
thereto belonging.
with all heed and diligence, we must regard the way concupiscible, clearing it
from the filth of carnal corruptions, of corporal delectations, and
dishonesting of the senses: for otherwise, the tongue will stagger upon a
thousand vile speeches, shameless repetitions, and be too free in profane
and dishonest examples.

Fourthly, 4. The way of the power inascible, of grief or anguish, and the
good guardance thereof.
we must set a good guarde on the way of the power irascible: which, to the end
it may be a good, direct and smoothe fair way, we ought to cleanse it from all
hatred, rancour, evil will and anger: otherwise, the tongue walking this ready
and ouer-tractable way, will easily stumble upon rash speeches of revenge,
delivering many imprecations, injuries, villainies, blasphemies, and (like an
untamed horse) fall down upon diverse rubs of infernal vices, speaking idly
and foolishly, without any regard, either of Gods honor, the honest fame of
our neighbor, or our own private good: whereupon the wise man said, The mouth
of a fool.
The mouth of a fool is like unto an earthen vessel, wherein folly boyleth,
as if it were water.


Lodouico. It is most certain: Prouer. 15. 2.
Os fatuorum ebullit stulitiam, The mouth of a fool babbleth out foolishness.
The mouths of angry men, like unto a pot boiling on the fire.
And therefore angry men have their mouths like a pot, which boiling upon the
fire, ouerfloweth the water, consuming what was contained in it, by dispersing
it round about it, and so quenches out the fire, with such goodness or
fatness as swimmed upon the top of it. And last of all, remaining quite empty,
by the great power of heat (exhaled from the flaming fire) breaks it self to
many pieces.

Even so the angry man, Allusion of the comparison, to the angry man.
his heart being once heated with disdain, delivers forth from his mouth,
foolish words of blasphemies, of calumnies, of infamies, and of high dishonor:
whereby, according as the fire burns, he does scandalize the present,
backbite the absent, quenches the light of sense with the infernal water of
rage, and so puts out quite the bright fire of reason: and being thus
blinded or become quite empty, Cato his saying of the angry man.
he knows not what he does, according to the saying of Cato. Impedit ira
animu^, ne possit cernere veru^. And being thus ouer-hot, provoked on still by
continual boiling, the goodness of divine grace ouerfloweth from him, and
being once emptied of that, he cracks in pieces presently, which made the wise
man say; That the heart of a foolish man is like a broken vessel, Eccle. 27.
that cannot contain the matter of grace in it: Cor Fatui quasi vas confractum.

If we set but a little pipkin to the fire, every small blaze of fire
enuironing it, Two singular Similies.
suffices to fetch forth all the water contained in it: but with a great pot it
is not so. As also a little water-brooke, by every sudden shower it is filled
and ouerfloweth, streaming away quite out of his bed: the like cannot be seen
in a maine great River, for if it arise out of his usual rest, Allusion of the
Similies, to the heart of man.
it proves to do an infinite damage. Our heart is so narrowly limited that
(by every little distaste) we are strangely altered, and being in this teasty
tetchy way, presently we let fly forth much vnseemelines. The difference in
God.
But with God it is not so, for he is so infinite and spacious, as
(ouer-readily) he is not drawn to be angry with us, wherefore it it written of
him: Exodus 34. 6.
Dominator Domine Deus, misericors and clemens, patiens and multae
miserationis: The Lord God is strong, merciful and gracious, slow to anger,
and abundant in goodness and truth.

There be some kind of angry men, The excuse of some kind of angry men.
who, if they be reproved for their faults, will excuse themselves, saying.
It is very true, that I am cholerike, and easily induced to disdain, and do
speak very injuriously in my fury: but, quickly I am appeased, and soon cast
off all rage; so, by seeming worthy of this excuse, they persuade themselves,
not to be the worst sort of men, though use makes a habit, Sentence.
and their violence (at length) grows to be as great as any others.


Claudio. In my judgment, One small wou^d as sufficient to take away life, as
many together.
this answer of theirs is very ridiculous: because, a man as soon dies by
one small mortal wound, as by the receite of a thousand: for one stroke that
pearceth soundly, is sufficient to kill a man. It imports as much, that any
thing may be as suddenly devoured in a fierce flaming fire, as if a longer
time it lies (to like purpose) in a softer fire, Similie.
for it suffices, that it is burnte: but God bless us all from such a tongue.

Christ said to his disciples, that the faithful, (among the other miracles
that they should accomplish and work in the primitive Church,) one should be
this; That if they drunk of any poisonous or mortiferous liquor, yet they
should thereby receive no harm. Et si mortiferum quid biberint, non eis
nocebit. A singular exposition upon the words of Christ.
Upon which words spoke that golden mouth: If thou shall be defamed by a
venomous tongue, vilified, iniuried, and yet art not thereby provoked to
revenge: it is a sign of great faith. Let us then take good heed to this
dangerous way, and if we fall not thereby, our carriage will be the more
commendable.


Lodouico. As the terrestrial vapors do not ascend to the Moons heaven:
Similie and Allusion.
even so injuries and angers do not arise into the generous breast of the
wise. Marcilius Ficinus of two kinds of furies and follies.
Marsilius Ficinus says; That furies and follies are of two kinds. One is bred
in the brain, and they that endure this fury, are called fobles. The other
receives life from the heart, and they that have this disease, are termed
implacable angrye men: but in mine opinion, this second infirmity is far
worse then the first.


Claudio. Seneca tells us, in the book which he wrote of anger, That anger is
not good for any virtuous thing, Seneca his judgment of anger.
much less then does it incite to any courageous disposition, because never
can any vice be helpful to virtue. And this doctrine he delivered against
certain men, who excused themselves, that (without anger) they could not do any
magnanimous act: Seneca, his answer to such as could do no valiant act, but in
anger.
whereto Seneca answered. That anger is a very perilous thing, and such things
as be perilous, are better to be kept far off, then near at hand: for more
easily is resistance made in the birth or beginning, then we can tell how to
govern it, being once gotten upon us. Aristotle concerning anger*
Aristotle affirms, That anger is good, yet not good to be as a leader, but
as a Soldier, for so much the less then shall it work in cruelty. Psalm. 4. 5.
And I think, this is that kind of anger, which David spoke of, when he said:
Irascimini, and nolite peccare: Be angry, but sin not.


Lodouico. And Seneca, Seneca yo^ further concerning Anger.
as answering Aristotle, says, That if anger be obedient to reason, it ought
not to be called anger but by some other name. And afterward; If anger shall
be reckoned as a good Soldier, then will he be obedient to counsel. Gods
will is not, that reason should take any help of sin. Therefore says Seneca,
anger can never be good, either little or much. And if Aristotle would have
anger to animate men to the battle: why then we may maintain drunkenness to
be profitable, Of drunkenness.
for it makes men bold, furious and spleenefull, and boldness makes men
very forward. Therefore I think, that Seneca, being grown into anger against
his servant, would not then chastise him, but only said: Caederem si non
irascerer: Seneca would not smite his servant in anger.
I would smite thee, if I were not in anger, as fearing, that choler should
take away the light of reason from him.

Diogenes likewise, being spit in the face, and in the public market place,
Example of Diogenes his answer to one that did spit in his face
by a very insole^t young man, said to the saucy youth. Non quidem irascor, sed
dubito an irasci oporteat: Truly (young man) I am not angry at this bold part
of thine, but I stand thinking with my self, whether I ought to be angry or
no, because thou have done but like a fool, and I ought to carry my self as
becomes a wise man.

Cato handling a cause in the Senate house against Lentulus, Example of Cato,
upon the abuse of Lentulus to him.
Lentulus growing into rage against him, prepared a mouthfull of spittle, and
spat it full in the midst of his forehead. Wherewith Cato was not moved any jot
to anger, but only said: Now will I say Lentulus, that such men are deceived,
as shall say that thou have not a mouth, and matter foul enough in it.


Claudio. Oh what examples do live, of rare patience and great wisdom, which
touch (to the very quick) our unjust hastiness. He that of pure gold forms a
fair kind of money, A worthy comparison, with the Allusion thereof.
he does no deed at al of wonder: but he that from a massy log of Lead, can
draw a golden piece of money, it is an act of far greater virtue. The like may
be said of those gentile spirits, which, from men so beastly and full of
anger, could declare in themselves such noble virtues, all which was nothing
else, but good knowledge, in well looking to the way of the power irascible.


Lodouico. The only best means, Example of Iosuah his taking the city of Hai.
to keep our selves untouched of this vice of anger, is to fly from it by
wisdom, in the same manner of flight as Iosuah observed, in taking the city
of Hai. For if we will overcome the passionate and angry, Iosu. 8.
we must take our flight, and keep us far enough off from them. David won
honor to himself, in flying from Absolon, Example of David's flight from
Absolon, and Shemei.
and reputed it as his glory, not to take revenge on Shemei, but referred all
such power to the Lord, saying with a very cheerful countenance: Tu autem
Domine susceptor meus es, gloria mea, and exaltans caeput meum, etc. Tu
percussisti omnes aduersantes mihi sine causa, Psalm. 3. 3. 7. 8.
dentes peccatorum contriuisti. Dominus est salus, etc. Thou O Lord art a
buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my head, etc. Thou have smitten
all mine enemies, (without cause) upon the cheek bone, David's carriage of
himself in his anger.
thou have broken the teeth of the wicked Salvation belongs unto the Lord,
etc. And the self same royal Prophet, when (with a full tide of fury) he was
assalted; he presently made his recourse to silence, for fear of falling, as
knowing, that when a man speaks disorderly, Psalm. 76. 4.
he is angry: Turbatus sum, and non sum loquutus.


Claudio. But Hannibal did far otherwise, Example of Hannibal, and of another
Tyrant recorded by Seneca
for when he saw a ditch filled with the blood of men, he said: Oh what a noble
spectacle is this? And, of another Tyrant, Seneca tells us in his book of
anger, and the fifth chapter, who having in one day slain thirty men, very
proudly he walked upon the dead carcasses, and speaking very arrogantly in his
own language, being the Greek, said: Oh what a thing is rule?


Lodouico. But David being a most hardy knight, and an unconquerable king,
because he would not fall into such a brutish sin, Psalm* 38. 2.
set a sure watch upon his mouth: Posui ori meo custodiam.


Claudio. But if the tongue have these four ways, For many ways of
offending, there ought to be as many of preventing.
according as has been already declared, namely, of the understanding, of the
will, the way of the power concupiscible, and the way of the power irascible:
why then, (in reason) the guardes or defenses for these ways, ought likewise
to be four, otherwise, how can one only defense serve for so many ways?


Lodouico. Let me tell you, that these four ways, albeit they are (among
themselves) diverse, nevertheless they are all confined to one place only,
Similie of many places sorting to one meeting, with the Allusion.
which is the mouth, the mansion of the tongue. Have you never seen, that for
passage to one place there have been fundry ways, which have met altogether in
one conclusion? Even so these four ways are limited to one mouth, for which,
one good guarde will be sufficient to keep it. Posui ori meo custodiam. And
this is no other then wisdom, or, as (we may otherwise term it) discretion,
which together, Of Eustochia, Eubillia, and Sinesi in their several powers for
instruction of speech.
with Eustochia, Eubillia and Sinesi, do make a most secure guardance: the one
coniecturing the best for us, the second counselling what we have to do, and
the last judging all to be just.

Is not this a most safe stability, instructing us when we ought to speak, how
much we should speak, and in what manner we are to speak? what words we may
use, to whom we are to speak them, and the place beseeming us to speak them
in? what a more faithful keeper can we desire then this, Example of a skillful
master in Rhetorique.
to preserve us from al idle wandering, and freeing us from all deceiving? well
may he be called a most skillful master in Rhetorique, that teaches how to
speak advisedly, that is; when we ought to speak, and not always; how much,
and not over immeasurably abounding, or foolishly too little; in what manner,
and not irregularly: to whom, and not to every person; where, and not in every
place. They that in their speech do not observe this rule, of how much, when,
the manner, to whom, and the place, shall find themselves never free from error.

Great need then is there of this guardian; especially, Dum consisteret
peccator aduersum me: while the wicked stand watching us, it behooues us to
speak within compass, and with discretion, because they lend a listening ear
to us. The devil continually watches all our sayings, and in what manner.
Great need also has wisdom, to stand as a true faithful watchman,
because evermore the devil diligently waits to note all our imperfections:
not, whether we speak like Ciceronians, or no, but whether we breathe forth
into blasphemies, murmurings, or evil speakings.

If a man talk among his friends only, Similie.
they will easily bear with any defect whatsoever: but being amidst his
enemies, especially such a one as the devil is, it behooues him to weigh every
word: Dum consisteret peccator. Example of the just man's hearing us, and his
interpretation of our speeches.
if the just man only hear him, his watchman still is in his company, and is as
vigilant for him as him self. If he speak well, the just man commends it; if
evil, he excuses it, or reprehends it with charity; if he speak of a
doubtful matter, which may be taken both in good and evil sort, the just man
conceiues it in the best kind.

But the devil, Of the devil, and the wicked man his disciple, and their
interpretation of our words.
and the wicked man his disciple, they stand always to point our speeches,
interpreting them in the worst sense, and taking all in evil part: If a man
speak gravely, and well; the devil says, he does it proudely, and to make
himself esteemed, as one learned and wise. If he speak of mean and easy
matters: he interprets it presently, that he is ignorant. If he give any
alms: he says he does it in hypocrisy, and to be accounted an especial
man. If he sing Psalms, as in praise of his Lord and maker: he implies, that
he has time to do nothing else. If he be at his prayers: he says, it is only
for ceremony. If he fast, he says, it is because he would be talked of. If
he eat but to suffice necessity: he scandalls it forthwith to be immoderate
gourmandize. If he speak well: he blames him for it. If he speak ill, he
murmurs at it* and thrusts in a great deal of worse matter then ever the other
thought on. If there be any case, of doubt in question: he will be sure to
support still the badder side.

So that we see, How needful a good watchman is for the mouth.
how needful a good watchman is for the mouth, and what counsel is to be taken
with wisdom, for whatsoever we say, to the end, we fall not by our speaking:
otherwise, we ought to keep our selves sile^t, because he can set down nothing
of silence, as otherwise he may, of the words unadvisedly uttered by the
tongue. The Prophet David, being filled with the holy Spirit, called to all
men, and charitably exhorted them in this manner: Psalm. 33. 12. 13.
Quis est homo qui vult vitam, diligit dies videre bonos? Prohibe linguam tua^
a malo, and labia tua ne loquantur dolum. What man is he that desires life,
and loves long days for to see good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips
that they speak no guile.


Claudio. According to your counsel then, it is better for a man to hold his
peace, A man is not so good, but something may be defective in him.
then oppose himself to so manifest peril; in regard, a man is never so good,
but something may be defective in one part or other. As for the talkeatiue
person, he desires nothing more, then to compass occasion of offending by his
venomous tongue, and immediately he will out with it, if there be never so little
cause for opening his mouth.

We read in the book of Kings, 2. Reg. 22. 37.
that in the last battle which King Achab had against the king of Siria,
Example of king Achab, being wounded from an unknown hand.
he was wounded with an arrow from an unknown hand: now, albeit Achab went very
well armed into the battle, as was convenient for a King to do, yet did this
arrowe pearce him at an unarmed part of his body, and he dyed of it. In like
manner, although a man be round about armed with singular virtues, A notable
Allusion of the former place.
yet, if he leave never so little a place discovered and unarmed, whereat a man,
of an evil disposition, may let fly from the bow of a wicked intention, the
enuenomed wounding arrow of his vile speaking tongue, he will offend him to the
death.

Of which kind of men David said: Psalm. 64. 3. 4.
Exacuerunt vt gladium linguas suas, intenderunt arcum rem amaram, vt sagittent
in occuliis immaculatum: They have whet their tongue like a sword, and shot for
their arrows bitter words: to shoot at the upright in secret, they shoot at
him suddenly and fear not. The evil intended to others, re^ods backwards on
the wicked.
Yet many times it comes to pass, that they which vituperiously be^d the bow
of their lying tongue, and against the innocent, do come to the like
themselves, as they purposed against others, and the venomous arrowe of infamy
rebounds back at their own breasts. Hence grew the Proverb, Proverb.
that a lie has but short legs, and hereupon the woorthye Prophet said in the
fore-recited Psalm: Psalm. 64. 8.
Sagittae paruulorum factae sunt plagae eorum, and infirmatae sunt contra eos
linguae eorum. They shall cause their own tongue to fall upon them, and
whosoever shall see them, shall fly away.


Lodouico. A most clear example of what you have said* we read in the book
of Chronicles, 2. Chron. 32. 15. 16. 17.
where is shown, that the most proud king Senacherib, Example of king
Senacherib, in his proud intent against Ezechias, and basphemous speeches
against God.
seeking to become Lord of all Ezechias kingdoms, and (to terrify the
people) sent certain Ambassadors to them, who (in his name) spoke such
impertinent speeches, and so full of pride against the omnipotent God of
Israel, as I believe the like are not to be read in all the holy Scriptures.

Therein they exalted so highly his strength, blaspheming the power of the
almightfull God: as they did not stick to affirm, that God had not the ability
to deliver them out of the Assyrians hands. Si enim nullus potuit Deus
cunctarum gentium, at que regionum liberare populum suum de manu mea, and de
manu patrum meorum, consequenter nec Deus vester poterit eruere vos de hac
manumea. Sed and alia multa locuti sunt serui eius contra Dominum Deum, and
contra Ezechiam seruum eius. Epistolas quoque scripsit plenas blasphemiae in
Dominum Deum Israel, and loquutus est aduersus eum. For none of all the Gods of
any nation or kingdom, was able to deliver his people out of my hand, and out
of the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your God deliver you out of my
hand? And his servants spoke yet more against the Lord God, and against his
servant Ezechias. He wrote also letters, blaspheming the Lord God of Israel,
and speaking against him.

For which, Gods just revenge on the pride and blasphemy of Senachersb.
God, as a just rewarder, without Senacheribs becoming Lord of any one city,
or sleying any person, sent an Angel, and so smote the very nerve of
Senacheribs army, that, as says the Prophet Esaias, (in whose time this
slaughter was made) Egressus est autem Augelus Domini, and percussit in castris
Assyriorum centum octoginta quinque millia: Esaias. 37. 36. 37. 38.
The Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the camp of Ashur, an hundred
fourscore and five thousand.

But that which rendereth more admiration, Senacherib murdered in the Temple,
by his own sons.
is, that Senacherib returning in an infamous flight to Niniuie, and being
sacrificing in the temple of his Idol Nesroch: his own sons Adramelech and
Sarasar there murdered him. All this befell him, not for what he did in act,
but because his tongue talked so blasphemously. If he had fought with his
power, and kept silent his infamous tongue: Senacherib overthrown by his own
lavish tongue.
perhaps his punishment had not bin so severe, or his success against the
people of Israel had bin better, as it fell out with many other: Inf^rmata est
contrae eum lingua eius. By his thngue he lost so mighty an army, which (by
silence) he might (perhaps) have defended with his hands.

The young Amalekite, who (with the tidings of king Saul's death) brought the
Crown and bracelet to David, Example of the young Amalekite who had slain king
Saul, by his own report.
confessing, how willingly, and in mere pity he had slain Saul, who had
before fa^ne upon his own sword, the army of the enemy coming so fast upon
him: was judged worthy of death by royal David, not so much for what he had
done, as in regard of the words he spoke. Sanguis tuus super caput tuum. 2.
Sam. 2. 16.
Os enim tuum loqutum est aduersum te, dicens: Ego interfeci Christum Domini:
Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has testified against
thee, saying: I have slain the Lords anointed.

As if David would have said; The Authors interpretation of king David's
speeches to the Amalekite, for belying himself.
If thou do suffer the death, which already thou have bestowed upon an other:
do not complain of me, who (as a Judge) commands death to be given thee.
But exclaim upon thy self, that with thy sword have slain the king of
Israel, whose very garment thou ought not to have touched. And since with
thy tongue thou make vaunte of thy homicide, therefore thou have condemned thy
self to death. Infirmata est contra eum lingua eius: with thy sword, thou
slewest Saul, and with thy liberal tongue, thy self.


Claudio. Let us therefore set a watch before our mouth, and let us have a great
care of our ouer-slippery tongue, Sentence.
for fear of incurring the like misaduenture: for, to a generous spirit,
sometimes a bad word is much more injurious, then a wound received by a Lance.


Finis Cap. 6.
The Argument.
Declaring, that to keep our selves idle wandering in our talking, it
behooves, that our speech should have five conditions or qualities, which the
tongue it self has, namely: sweet, Rose colored, sharp flexible, and close
couched, which are approved by many authorities of Scripture, as also witty
saying of the Philosophers, and natural examples.

Chap. 7.
LODOVICO. If Senacherib, the young Amalekite, and all such as have endured
like punishment, would have set a sure guarde upon their tongue: without doubt
they had delivered their souls from many anguishes, whereinto (else) they had
never fallen. Proner. 19. 16.
Qui custodit os suum, and linguam suam, Custodit ab angustus aniuam suam: He
that keeps his tongue and his mouth, keeps his soul from anguishes, says
the wiseman.

Plutarch tells us, Plutarch his example of the Lydians against infamy.
That the Lydians, as well sentenced them with death, that (by their tongues)
robbed men of their good fame, as him that took away the life of any Citizen:
holding the guilt of infamy to be as great as the abhorred act of murder: for,
to lay hand to the weapon unjustly, is even as much, as to breed an unjust
quarrel with the tongue. Therefore that our discoursing may be free from all
such blamefull note, it ought to have five properties, which the tongue it
self has.

The tongue is soft and delicate; The five properties which the tongue it self
has, and their allusio^ to our speech.
sweet and Rose colored; sharp in form of a Lance; flexible and voluble,
close kept, walking but in a little room. In like manner, our talk ought to be
soft, by benignity, Rose colored, as sweetened by honesty, sharpened by
severity, pleasing by sagacity, close kept by diligent custody. He that has
his talk softened by compassion, sweetened by love, sharpened by correction, made
tractable by discretion, and close shut up by heedfull caution, can very hardly
fail in his speaking.

First of all then we will thus begin: 1. Our speech ought to be soft and
pleasing.
Our speech ought to be full of pleasing, because there is nothing that more
moves a man to love, then does gentle speech, sweet, compassionate, mild
and benign, as well in answering, as in reproouing the faults in others.
Many strive to overcome men by the strength of arms: but they are not such,
as by a gentle sweet persuasion, have brought men to do even what themselves
would. Whereupon arose the witty Proverb: A sententious Proverb.
Men are bound by words, and beasts by cords. And Solomon in his Proverbs
says: Prou. 15. 1.
Lingua mollis du itiem confringit: for a sweet speech suppresseth fury, and
extinguisheth the sparks of anger in a hard and implacable mind.


Claudio. Why this is every day plainly enough discerned, because many are
chastised by sweet speeches, that by rude and sharp language would become much
worse. Similie and the Allusion thereof.
As the diamond resists upon the hardest steel, yet nevertheless is broken
with the soft blood of a Goat: Even so, Responsio mollis fragit iram, sermo
durus excitat furorem: Proverb. 15. 1.
A soft answer puts away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger.

He that will get himself many friends, and appease the displeasure of his
enemies, must follow Salomons counsel. Eccle. 6. 5.
Verbu^ dulce multiplicat amicos, and mitigat inimicos. A sweet talk
multiplieth friends, and pacifieth them that be at variance. Example of
Absolons pleasing words.
This was apparently to be noted in Absolon, who by sweet speeches (though very
fraudulent) in little time compassed the love of the people, yea, and that in
such sort, as he boldly attempted to deprive his Father of the kingdom.


Lodouico. With this dulcitude of speech, there has bin nothing (almost) left
unattempted: as may be seen in those two great Orators Cicero and Demosthenes,
Example of the two great Orators Cicero and Demosthenes.
the one the light of the Latin, the other of the Greek tongue. What should I
talk of their attemptings? There was nothing which they undertook, but they
obtaind it by the sweetness of their speech. For Lactantius Firmianus
declares, that Apollonius the Philosopher hearing Cicero in his Oration, was
so transported with admiration beyond himself: The words of Apollonius to
Cicero.
that after some small recovery, he said to Cicero in the public presence;
Cicero I commend thee, and am amazed at thee.

Xenocrates the Philosopher, Example of Xenocrates and Palaemon. Example of
Cato Censorius.
by this sweetness of speech, quite changed the vile base behavior, of a bad
luxurious man called Palaemon. Cato Censorius, being accused forty four
times, before a Senate so much to be feared as that of Room: knew so well in
his Orations how to defend himself, as evermore he went away judged innocent.
Example of Aegesias, Platoes scholar.
Aegesias the Scholar of Plato, read so sweetly upon the immortality of the
soul: that many (for mere joy, and to attain that high felicitye,)
accounting it no crueltye to themselves, laid violent hands on their own
lives, until Ptolomeus prohibited him, to discourse any more upon that matter.

Heereuppon the ancient Poets feigned, Example of Amphron the Son of love.
that Amphion the Son of Jove, by music only, without any other mystery,
builded the walls of the city of Thebes, the stones most commodiously laying
themselves one upon another, as if by a skillful masters hand they had been
ordered. Example of Ario^ of Lesbos.
Also Arion Miten^us of Lesbos, with his harp drew the Fishes (netlesse) out
of the Sea, so that himself rode upon the back of a Dolphin, which brought and
set him safely on the shore. Alpheus by his sweet singing, Example of Alpheus,
and of Orpheus.
tamed the wildest and most cruel beasts. Orpheus by the sound of his harp,
made the woods to move, the floodes to dance, and the stoanes to leap about
him.

We may allude all this to the sweetness of their speech, Allusion to the
sweetness of their speech*
as the alluring of men, conversion of sinners, and they being before most
uncivil and barbarous, to make them thus become very meek and tractable.
Example of the Apostles and Martyrs.
As we may read of the blessed Apostles and Martyrs, who converted the most
stearne and bloodiest Tyrants.

We have a pretty story of one M. Iordanus, described by Antonius the
Archbishop of Florence, who preaching in Vercellis, An excellent History of M.
Iordanus, a Preacher in Vercellis.
where (in those times) was the general place of studying: he delivered the
word of God in such sweet and gracious manner, as, within few days after, he
drew the reverend Doctors, Fathers and diverse Noble men, to forsake all things
else, and practice preaching only. Whereupon, Gualterus Teutonicus, Regent of
the other Arts studies, fearing to loose all his Scholars likewise, said in
the public School to them: Gualterus Teutonicus, his words against lordanus.
Take heed you go not to hear the preaching of M. Iordanus, for he polisheth
his words with such sweetness, as does an harlote, when she betrayeth and
catches the souls of men.

But what ensued of this? Gualterus himself ravished with hearing the world.
He that sought to withdraw others, was first of all taken himself, even so
soon as he went but to hear him. And then he became quickly of another
mind, perceiving all other studies to be but vain and fruitless, in
comparison of the heavenly sweetes of the soul, for there is no sweetness
above that of the word of God. Psalm. 18. 11.
Quam dulcia faucibus meis eloquia tua, super mel orimeo.


Claudio. What mightier marvel, The sweetness of the speech of Christ, to
his very enemies.
to approve the sweetness of Christ's speech, (the like whereof was never
heard) then at the very time when they came to take and bind him? hearing but
his words, they stood as men amazed, and forgetting the commandment imposed
upon them, they returned back to the giuers of that charge, John. 7. 46.
saying: Nunquam sic loquutus est homo: Never as man heard to speak the like.
So sweet was his speaking, as he drew infinite multitudes after him, so that
the city being unable to contain them, they flocked forth after him into the
fields, among the mountains, and on the Sea shore, with great striving among
them for taking places, Luke. 5. 1.
according as S. Luke declares: Cum turbae irruerunt in Iesum, vt audirent
verbu^ Dei, etc. And the people preased upon him, to hear the word of God, etc.


Lodouico. Great efficacy undoubtedly was there in the sweet words of Christ,
The ministers of the Pharisees forget their fircenesse at Christ's speaking.
that it could make the ministers of the Pharisees to forget their fierceness,
they coming against Christ like so many roaring lions, or most cruel Tigers,
to lay fast hold upon him: whereupon, they could do any other thing else, but
that which they then came for. Whereat the Pharisees being amazed, and filled
full of railing against him, imagined in their hearts, that they were also
become some of his followers.

David had reason to speak thus of the voice of Christ: Psalm. 29. 4. 5.
vox Domini in v^rtute, vox Domini in magnificentia. Vox Domini confringentis
cedros. The voice of the Lord is mighty: the voice of the Lord is glorious.
The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars. And not the cedars only, but the
stony and adamantine hearts, Religious preachers participating with the virtue
of Christ's voice.
he breaks and crusheth in pieces. But more amazement I account it, to see
that religious holy Preachers, participating with the virtue of Christ should
have such wonderful sweetness in their words as to draw the whole world (in
a manner) after them. Some whereof have converted more then an hundred thousand
heretics: others that have reduced to christian belief, more then five and
twenty thousand Jews, and above eight thousand Saracens. For this, were they
accounted, Even as simple vessels, prepared to contain the seed of the divine
word, The words of S. Augustine of himself.
as S. Augustine says, speaking of himself. Ego, quid sum, nisi cophinus
seminato is, id est Christi? Ipse dignatus est in me ponere semen, quod spargo
vobis. Nolite ad vilitatem ^ophini respicere sed nobilst at em seminatoris.

So sweet, delicious and delicate is the word of God, as it surpasses the
sweetness of honey, then which there is nothing sweeter in the world. Judge.
14. 18.
Quid dulcius melle? what is sweeter than honey? quoth they that expounded the
riddle of Sampson. The word of God is sweeter then honey.
The word of God, says David, exceeds honey in sweetness: Quam dulcia
faucibus me is eloquia tua, super mel o^i meo? as much to say: Oh lord, how
sweet are thy words unto me, that they surpass the sweetness of honey, when I
have them in my mouth?


Claudio. A very rare example of the sweetness of the divine word, Example of
the sweetness of the word of God, in Saul's seeking the death of David.
I remember I have read in the first book of Samuel, and the 19. chapter, when
wicked Saul pursued the death of just David, fearing that which was to follow
afterward, namely, that he sold succeed him in the kingdom: he hearing, that
David was with Samuel in Ramah, among other Prophets, he persuaded himself,
that David was gone to usurp his kingdom, and to have himself anointed king
of Israel by Samuel, to whom this office appertained. Albeit, he was with the
Prophet praising God, yet he sent a great number of soldiers, to the end
they should surprise and bring him to his presence. Saul's soldiers praised god
among the Prophets, according as they were severally sent.
But they being come where David was with the holy Prophets, and hearing them
so praise the Lord: being touched likewise by the spirit of the Lord, they
forgotte the Kings commandment, and began also to praise God, and to
prophecy.

Saul expecting their return, and perceiving they came not, grew vehement
suspicious, that they were grown abbetters of David: wherefore all-enraged, he
sent other ministers, and more in number then the first were, but to them it
happened as it did with the other. Saul having intelligence hereof, began to
burn in a more violent fury, and sent the third band of ministers, but in a
larger company, to execute what was before intended. They being come to
Ramah, such was the power of the word of God, that they no sooner entered among
the rest, but they did as the first and second, and prophesied likewise among
them.

When the king heard this, much more enflamed with anger and desperate hate,
Saul, incensed with rage, goes himself to Ramah, and there was constrained to
praise God also among the^.
he mounted on horseback, and rode along himself with a great multitude: but
so soon as he came near the place of Ramah, his very self (O mighty miracle
of God) even honied with hearing the word of God, forgetting his former
fierceness; he also began to praise the Lord with the Prophets. So that he
despoiling himself of his royal garments, prophesied among the rest in the
presence of Samuel, and even naked as he was, he sung the divine praises all
that day and night, The proverb in Israel.
whereupon arose the Proverb in Israel: 2. Sam. 19. ^4.
Number est Saul inter prophetas? Is Saul also among the Prophets?

Such was the power, pre-eminence and sweetness of the word of God, 2. Sam.
19. ^4.
as it changed the very hearts of the hearers. Et expoliauit se Saul
vestimentis suis, and prophetauit cum caeteris coram Samuel, and cecinit nudus
tota die ^lla, and nocte. And Saul stripped off his garments, and he prophesied
also before Samuel, and fell down naked all that day and all that night.


Lodouico. Oh miraculous sweetness of the word of God, but let us proceed in
our order begun: our speech then must be sweet and soft, 2. Our speech ought to
have the Rose color of honesty 8: charity.
as the tongue it self is. Secondly, our talk ought to have the Rose-blush
color of honesty and charity, because, as the tongue is naturally red and
Rosie-coloured: even so ought our language to have the die of honesty and
modesty, as also the crimson and flame tincture of charity: for in our words,
no one is to be proffered, favoring of dishonesty, A check to the unseemly
language used now adays.
or injurious to the edificatio^ of our neighbor. These days of ours, do
witness the world to be grown so dissolute, and our talk so unseemly: as very
hardly do any words issue from us, but they relish of dishonest iestings, yea,
of shameless, scurril and very impudent dissoluteness.


Claudio. The world can give no other then it has, Sentence.
and because it is full of all uncleanness, unclean likewise needs must our
talk be. An excellent comparison, and his Allusion.
The excellent Physician knows by the tongue, the infirmity of the body, and
when the disease is deadly: in like manner, by speech is discerned the
integrity or corruption of the heart, and the healthfulnesse of the soul. This
was not only the opinion of Socrates, but also of Solomon himself, as is to
be seen in many places of his Proverbs: Prouer. 12. 18.
Lingua sapientium sanitas est: I he tongue of wise men is health. As if he
would have said: will you know if the soul be sincere, and whole from sin? An
implicatio^ of Salomons words.
Awaite then the words proceeding from it: because the sickness of the soul
appears, by the course of speech, delivered by the tongue.

The world, because it is full of pride, luxury and avarice, therefore also the
utterance of our words savor of the worldly cogitations feeding the heart, Our
words answerable to our worldly cogitations.
which are either void of honesty, or empty of charity. S. John the Apostle
saw in the Isle of Pathmos a wonderful vision full of terror, Apoc. 16. 13.
and very dreadful to the sight, his words are these. Et vid^ de ore Draconis,
and de ore bestiae, and de ore pseudoprophetae exire spiritus tres immundos in
modum Ranarum. Of S. John's vision in the Isle of Pathmos.
And I saw three unclean spirits, like Frogs, come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet.

The dragon is the devil the inuenter of pride; Application of the vision, by
the Author.
the beast is the flesh, which beast-like lives in all filthy luxuriousness;
the false Prophet is the deceiving world, of whom ensues all avarice
whatsoever. All these three spirits issued forth in the likeness of Frogs,
because these three in sinning have some similitude with the Frogge. The Frogge
leapeth aloft, Three qualities in the frog answerable to the former
application: of Pride, uncleanness and auatice.
behold there is pride: delights to live in the filthye mire, there is the
uncleanness of beastlye luxurye: it likewise croakes, and with a screeking
confused noise or noate, disturbeth quietness, there is avarice, which fills
a man with all distraction, and daily molesteth the quiet of the mind.

The world then being over burdned with these three foul vices, how can there
be any honest or charitable speeches, beautified with the rosy colors of
honesty and charity? 2. John 2. 16.
Omne quod est in mundo, aut conc^piscentia carnis est; aut concupiscentia
oculorum, aut superbia vitae. All that is in the world, is the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.


Lodouico. The third quality or condition beseeming us in our speech, 3. Our
speech ought to be like a weapon, sharp: as it is in resemblance.
is, that after the manner of a weapon, it should be sharp, for so the tongue
it self appears to be: and this ought (according to time and place) to
resemble such a weapon, by pointing at, punishing and correcting the faultye.
Therefore it is written, that the holy ghost descended upon the disciples, in
the form of cloven fiery tongues, Allusion of the fiery tongues on the
Apostles.
not only as alluding, that our talk ought to be full of charity: but also,
to note the aptness, and readiness of the word of God in us, which after the
manner of a cutting sword, divides the soul from sensual and carnal
cogitations, and seperates it whollye from the world. Viuus est enim Dei
sermo, Heb. 4. 12.
and penetrabilior omni gladio ancipiti, and pertingens vsque ad diuisionem
animae ac spiritus, compagum quoque ac medullarum, and discretor cogitationum
and intentionum Cordis. The word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and
sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing
asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrowe, and
is a disce^ner of the thoughts and the intentes of the heart.

This weapon brought Christ into the world: What weapon our Savior brought
into the world, and what power it has.
Non veni pacem mittere, sed gladium. With this weapon is the father divided
from the Son, one brother from another, and the wife from the husband. With
this weapon shall the Jews be divided from their Iudaisme, the Gentiles from
their idolatry, and be made good Christians. With this weapon shall the
shameless be divided from his uncleanness, the covetous from his money bags,
the wrathful from his furiousness, the high looker from ambition, the glutton
from his surfeiting, etc.


Claudio. There comes now to my remembrance, an excellent matter, which I have
read in the first book of the kings of Israel, Example of the Prophet Elias,
when he fled from queen Iesabell.
and very apt to this purpose of ours. The Prophet Elias flying away (very
poorly) through the vast deserts, being fearful of the wicked Queen
Iezabell: the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and thus spoke. Quid hic
agis Elia? What do thou here Elias? And he answered. Zelo zelatus sum pro
Domino Deo exercituum, 2. Kin. 19. 9. 10.
quia dereliquerunt pactum Domini filii Israel. Altaria tua destruxerunt, and
Prophetas tuos occiderunt gladio, and derelictus sum ego solus, and quaerunt
animam meam vt aufer ant eam. I have bin very jealous for the Lord God of
hoasts, for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down
thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and
they seek my life, to take it away. Et ait Dominus ad eum. Vade, and reuertere
in viam tuam per desertum in Damascum: 1. King. 19. 15. 16. 17.
cumque perueneris illuc, vnges Hazael Regem super Syriam. Et Iehu filium Namsi
vnges Regem super Israel: Helyseum autem filium Saphat, qui est de Abel-meula,
vnges Prophetam prote. Et erit quicunque fugerit gladium Hazael, interficiet
eum Iehu: and quicunque fugerit gladium Iehu, The answer of the Lord unto Elias.
inter ficiet eum Helyseus. And the lord said unto him. Go, return by the
wilderness unto Damascus, and when thou come there, anoint Hazael king over
Syria. And Iehu the son of Namsi, shall thou anoint king over Israel: and
Helyseus the son of Saphat of Abel-Meholah, shall thou anoint to be Prophet in
thy room. And him that escapes from the sword of Hazael, shall Iehu slay, and
him that escapes from the sword of Iehu, shall Helyseus sley.

In this we have to note, What we have especially to note in this worthy
example.
that Helyseus was a man humble, meek and godly, unarmed and vnskild in the
art military: nevertheless, it was the will of God, that they, who had not the
power (by arms) to kill these two potent kings of Syria and Israel, men of
great valor, approved warriors, and very bloody; yet (with this weapon
only) a peaceful Prophet should do it, a man, whose office was to preach, not
to be seen in combats, to preach unto the people, not to war in arms.

Doubtless, hereby it may be alluded, that more strength had the unarmed
Prophet Helyseus, Allusion of the whole History by this powerful weapon of Gods
word.
with this weapon of the word of God, then those most mighty kings, with their
huge squadrons of armed Soldiers: and much better success should attend on
the courage of Helyseus, in pacifying by benignity, then on the armed kings,
in the very hotest of their cruelty. And more good did Helyseus, by his
speaking only, then Hazael and Iehu by their fighting: such is the efficacy of
the word of God, as it penetrates the soul beyond the body.

Which is evidently to be seen in the conversion of nations, Example of the
couuersio^ of Nations, by poor unarmed men, exceeding the might of all the
Monarchs
in which office, more has been wrought by unarmed men, of poor and mean
condition, with the weapon of the divine word, subducing the whole world to
the kingdom of Christ: then could the mighty Monarchs of the Assyrians, the
Persians, the Grecians and the Romans, with all their infinite powerful
Armies. And this (I think) was that weapon, that issued forth of the mouth of
God, cutting both ways, after the manner of a sword, as Saint John tells us,
because God (by his word) remitteth the offense, Apoc. 2. 16.
and pardons the punishment: Exibat gladius vtraque part acutus ex ore eius:
Out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword.

But if our words ought to have the condition of a weapon, and such likewise is
the shape of the tongue it self: for what cause then says the Prophet, Esaias.
2. 4.
speaking of the coming of the Messiah, that in his time, Conflabunt gladios
suos in vomeres, A question concerning the time of the Messiah coming.
and lanceas suas in falces: They shall break their swords into mattocks or
plough shares, and their spears into sithes: what has a mattock to do with a
sword? the sword is apt to cut withal, and the mattock to delue withal.


Lodouico. Two things (in my mind) would the holy ghost allude herby, Answer,
by the Allusion of the holy ghost.
saying, that in those times, of swords shall be made mattocks. First, in
regard of the great peace, all warlike battles then ceassing, according as
the Angels likewise foretold of the birth of Christ: Et in terra pax hominibus
bona voluntatis: Luke 2. 14.
Peace in earth, and toward men good will. Secondly, of the great fruit
ensuing by the word of God, designing by the mattock or plough share, the
manner that ought to be observed in digging up, or tilling the hearts of men
by the word of God, signified in the weapon.

If the husbandman would furrowe up his grounds, Comparison between the
husband ma^s plough share, and a sword, for their several uses.
he can never do it with a sword, nor break abroad the hard knit clods, if
that way he go to work, the earth likewise will be unapt in rendering the
expected fruit: but if he take his mattock, plough share and such like other
meet instruments, he will make it tractable for producing the sown seed. The
sword or weapon signifies the polished speech, adorned with rhetorical
colors, Allusion of both in their true natures.
and a thousand quaint subtilties of arguments. The mattock figureth the easy
speech, domestical, familiar, sincere, cordial, without ornament or vain
terms, which better fitteth for the hearts compunction, and is more apt to
produce the fruit of conversion, being cluttered before, among the hard clods
of sin; then the adorned kind of speaking, curious and artificial, designed
by the sword or weapon.

The ancient Philosophers and Orators, The Philosophers and Orators curiosity.
because they would teach their lies and follies: they intricated them, and
beguiled men with picked, polisht and nice kinds of phrases. The truth of the
Gospel, The plain and sincere truth of the Gospel.
it has no need of any such ornament, nor ought a Christian to fit himself
with such curiosities, in reproouing of sin, and correcting the sinner; but
rather, he should make his plain mattock more plyant and ready, in deluing
up the stubborn hearts of wretched men. Therefore Christ evermore spoke with a
material tongue, delivering many parables, similitudes and examples.

An unhandsome woman, Comparison between a forced beauty, and a true natural
complexion.
destitute of beauty and natural comeliness, seeks by deceiptfull and lying
colors, to make her self appear beautiful: but she that (from her natural
mother) is adorned with good feature and excellent fayrenesse, great wrong
shall she offer to nature, in striving artificially to make her self more
fair: for the greater pains she takes, to seem beautiful by lying
tinctures, An excellent Allusion of the comparison.
the more deformed (in time) she assuredlye makes her self. The Evangelical
doctrine (of it self) is so fair, and surpassing in riches of natural
beauty, that she has no need of artificial or vain rhetorical ornament:
No vain gloss is to be set on the word divine, with the manifest hurt ensuing
thereby
rather great wrong is done to her native beauty, adorning it with vain
colors and coined phrases, such as profane Orators were wont to illustrate
and set forth their gross lies withal.

A matter much to be blamed, and yielding no fruit at all: because while the
auditors listen, not to the substance of what is said, but to the cunning
gloss and idle ornament only: they loose the entire doctrine and truth of the
speech, and hang their attention only on vanity, which makes them, not to put
in diligent execution, what is then said unto them, but only to lend a little
admiration to frivolous eloquence, the cause of much harm in our christian
common wealth.

I pray ye (my Lord) in courtesy tell me, A demand by way of comparison, of a
besieged city, and the meetest means of resistance.
were it not to be reckoned as an express folly, if an army of enemies
should come against this city, and engirt it with severe besieging round
about, and then the citizens did not presently run to take weapons in their
hands for defense of it, darting their shafts and quarries against the enemy,
or what munition else they could possibly devise to help it. But, if (in stead
of repulsing them by the harquebuz and Cannon) they should throw on their
enemies heads, sweet herbs and flowers, might they not justly be termed,
desolators of the common good, and the very cheifest enemies unto their own
native country?

Such (the more pity) are many christians in these times of ours become,
Allusion to the neglect of many in these days, for the reproof of sin.
who ought with words most fervent and effectual (even like unto the sharpest
pearcing arrows) boldly reprove the vile sins of men: but they (in stead
thereof) cast flowrs of fair and fruitless words on their heads, which not
only loose the vigor of all compunction, but delights, and begets a pleasing
itching in the ear, whereof God greatly complained by the Prophet Jeremy:
Ierem. 48. 9.
Date florem Moab, quia florens egredietur, and civitates eius desertae erunt,
and inhabitabiles. Give flowers unto Moab, that it may fly and get away: for
the cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein. As if he
would have said, Ironice: Is it even so? Do you thus give flowers to Moab? You
give him a goodly remedy for his hurt: The Authors applying of the Prophets
words.
if he flourish so delicately, as making that his beauty; miserable Moab, this
will be the cause of thy ruin, and the destruction of the fairest cities in
thy kingdom.

Then presently follows: Maledictus qui facit opus Domini fraudulenter,
Ierem. 48. 10.
and maledictus qui prohibet gladium suum a sanguine: Cursed be he that does
the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed be he that keeps back his
sword from blood. Even as if he would have said, A good note for vain and
idle headed preachers.
Cursed be he that does the Lords work with fraud, and (with deceiving
speeches) is the cause of the loss of souls, not drawing the sword of the
tongue in due time, reprehending sinners, fetching blood at every blow, with
sharp words, yet full of charity and fervent zeal. So when the sword of the
word is not adorned with unfruitful speech, thereof we ought to make a
mattock, apt and meet to dig up the stubborn earth of men's hearts, to the end,
it may become capable of increase, by a good conversion.

A certain Greek Orator went to Lycurgus Prince of the Lacedaemonians,
Example of a Greek Orator, and how Lycurgus answered him.
saying: That he would read Rhetorique to the people of the common wealth,
because they spoke very rude and grossly: to whom Lycurgus answered. We better
affect our plain country wisdom, then vain flourishing eloquence: therefore
you may go into Licaonia, for men are there lovers of artificial eloquence,
which here we make no account at all of.


Claudio. An answer worthily beseeming such a Prince, The common wealth
loses most by lack of well speaking.
because the common wealth loses nothing by lack of speech, but by defect of
speaking well. An artificial devise, is not far off from deceipte, and our
words ought rather to taste of want of curious ornament, then to be any thing
defective from the truth: therefore I cannot but highlye allow your
description of the sword and mattock.


Lodouico. In the fourth place, 4. Our speech ought to show the flexibility of
the tongue.
we say, that our talk ought to show the flexibility of the tongue, which is
to be done by wisdom and discretion; as the tongue is apt and pliant in
yielding every way, so ought our talk to be very discreet, varying our
discoursings, according to the condition of such men as we confer withal,
The offices of this flexibility
and agreeing with the subject whereof we speak. Sometimes comforting the
afflicted, with the sweetness of our words; sometimes instructing the
ignorant, with charity; sometimes reproouing, with severity, answerable to
the offense: sometimes commending (with truth) the good; and sometimes blaming
(as justly) the bad, with significant speeches: yea, to suffer our selves with
them all, to be transformed (as it were) into all; to put on the garmente of
all, only to help and preserve them all, according as Saint Paul did: 2.
Cor. 9. 22.
Omnia omnibus factus sum, vt omnes facerem saluos: I am made all things to all
men, that I might by all means save some.

The dog has a tongue very flexible, Comparison of the tongue of a dog.
slender and fine, and is so medicinable withal, as there is no sore or other
harm happening on his body, but it heals it, only by the office of his
tongue, because he can bring it to the place, and tenderlye lick it. The
very like property ought our tongue to have, Allusion to the offices of our
tongue.
for our words should be profitable, medicinable, and helpefull to every
weak sinner, being cast down upon the deathbed of his sins, and there
lying languishing and despairing, to his souls great danger. Our tongue by
wise and discreet flexiblenesse, must be apt and ready to diverse offices,
as were the tongues of the Apostles, who (for general benefit) spoke in many
languages: Act. 2. 11.
Audiuimus eos loquentes nostris linguis magnalia Deiwe heard them speak in
our tongues, the wonderful works of God.

The Naturalistes do tell us, Example of the Bears producing her young ones.
that the Bear brings forth her young, without any form: but by licking,
and passing over them in diverse kinds with her tongue, she gives them at
length a true shape and similitude. The like ought every one to do, that
reprehendes an other man's defectes, Allusion to Prelates, Preachers, and
fathers of families, showing what is required in the office of their tongues.
but especially Prelates, fathers in their families, and Preachers, to whom
(in regard of their offices) the reproof of sins (in their sons and
servants) especially appertains: which appearing to them, that they are (in a
manner) merely misshapen and brutish, without any figure of true
christianity, they ought, with the tongue, and the office of the mouth, to
pearce so far into them, that even (as it were) by licking their sore souls,
and wiping away the foulness of their inward infirmities, they may make a
sinful man become like unto God, adorned with virtues, beautified with
spiritual graces, variably, and (in many manners) using the readiness of the
tongue, according to the nature and variety of the subject.

For example, sometimes highly, of the joys of Paradise; sometimes lowly, A
method or manner of observation, in their speaking as occasion serves.
of the baseness of this deceiptfull world: severely and in a sharp key,
showing (with rough words) the pains infernal: plainly and pathetically,
laying open sin, and the vain folly of the sinner: sweetly and in a milder
phrase, declaring the incomparable reward of the blessed: boldly and without
fear, checking presumptuous persons, renegates and infidels; speaking sometime
with the tongue of a man, and sometime (if it were possible) with the tongue of
an Angel, according to the diversity of persons with whom we talk, and for the
salvation of all, as S. Paul did, 2. Cor. 14. 18.
saying: Gratias ago Deo meo, quoniam omnibus vobis linguis magis loquor: I
thank my God, I speak languages more then you all.


Claudio. I perceive that our speech ought to be like a clear christaline
fountain, Similies or compariso^s of what the tongue ought to be.
or, as a transparent Glass without any spot, that it may transform it self
into all things represented before it: that by taking the shape of all, it may
be beneficial to all.


Lodouico. Let us come now to the fifth quality of the tongue, 5. Our speech
ought to be close couched, like unto the tongue, with his two guardians.
which is, that it must lie close couched, and be warily kept by two
guardians, to weet, the teeth, and the lips: whereby, the divine workman may
seem to allude, that our speech should be very circumspect, corrected, and
fast bound (as it were) together, according as the tongue is knit and combined,
and first of all, to bethink our selves very well, Prouer. 10. 14.
before we let any word pass from us. Antequam loquaris, disce: because many
evils do proceed from the tongue, when lauishly it runs at random, without
premeditation what is to be said. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
To this effect said the Apostle: Qui enim vult vitam diligere, and dies
videre bonos, coerceat linguam suam a malo, and labia eius ne loquantur dolu^:
If any man long after life, and to see good days: let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.

Pliny reports in his natural History, Pliny and Solynus, of the nature of
the Crocodile.
and Solynus also affirms the same, that the Crocodile is a beast big enough,
nevertheless it has but a little tongue: and by reason he cannot put it
forth of his mouth, therefore he can form no voice at all with it. Even so,
they that are greatest in virtues, Allusion of the Example.
most prudent in their actions, and shine fairest in goodness: they ought to
be sparing of their speech, and very short of tongue, Prou. 10. 2^.
as knowing very perfectly: that In multiloquio non deerit peccatum. James 3. 5.
And Saint James says: Lingua quidem modicum est membrum, and magna exaltat:
The tongue is a little member, and boasts of great at things, therefore it
should be guided by experience: hereupon it happened, that many of the
Philosophers bound themselves to perpetual silence.


Claudio. At any hand then the tongue must have a strict bridle, The tongue
must be kept in, like fire.
that it may be kept within (as I think) like fire, least it should blaze
abroad the flaming words of anger, fury, and disdain: Apoc. 9. 18.
De ore eorum procedebat ignis, and fumus, and sulphur: Out of their mouths
went forth fire, and smoke, and brimstone. The tongue is imprisoned within
the teeth, The tongue imprisoned like a thief.
like a thief that has fetters on his feet, and manacles on his hands:
least getting abroad, he should rob other men of their honest fame.
Acuerunt linguas suas sicut serpents, Psalm. 140. 3.
venenum aspidum sub labiis eoru^: They have sharpened their tongues like
serpents: Adders poison is under their lips, says David. The tongue chayned up
like a dog.
It is chayned up fast like a dog, least if it should get loose, it might
snatch and bite at other men's honor, with foul detraction: Erue a framea Deus
animam meam, and de manu canis vnicam meam. Psalm. 22. 20.
Deliver my soul from the sword, my desolate soul from the power of the dog.

To good purpose is it, that our tongue should be sweet, Rose colored, sharp
and flexible: but how much more need has it to be close couched, Most need
of all for the tongue to be close couched.
and imprisoned, like a chaste and comely maiden, least thereby should issue
forth the virginal purity of our souls, and so become deflowred, by the
crafty and watchful adulteries of the devil.

There be many that have all these properties of the tongue, but in quite
contrary manner to our description. Many have these several qualities, but in
a contrary kind.
They are sweet of tongue, but how? in flattery: they are Rose colored, but
in rage, anger and railing: they are sharp, but in detracting: they are agill
and flexible, but in various, deceiptfull and unconstant speaking: they are
close couched and shut up too, but in envying, as loath to imparte to others
any goodness (if they have any at all) that themselves are possessed of: So,
they will be sure to brag, that they have these five conditions, although it
be in a clean contrary nature.


Finis Cap. 7.
The Argument.
Approouing, that indiscretion in talk, makes the wise man himself to be
reputed as a fool, and many have incurred very great dangers, by talking
carelessly and unadvisedly. Among all tongues, the tongue of the flatterer is
most perilous, and, by breathing forth many evils, it interdicteth the
truth, especially among Noble personages, in whose houses flatterers do most
of all abound, only to enjoy the goods which they possess. This is confirmed
by many lively examples, sundry probabilities out of holy Scripture, and other
similitudes: All which do plainly prove, how displeasing to God, and hurtful
to men, is this wicked vice of flattery, that (like another Judas) kills a man
with kissing.

Chap. 8.
LODOVICO. The improuidence of many men in their talking, procu^eth diverse
important disorders in any common wealth: only through ^he tongues want (in
speech) of those conditions, which (for just and equal direction) are most
necessary in discoursing. Plato, of the heart of man, for refraining the tongue.
And in regard Plato tells us, That the heart of man endures greater labor
in refraining the tongue, then in amendment of life: me thinks men should
therefore employ all their forces, in curbing the tongue, to prevent infinite
evils, and inconveniences of weighty import, yea, verily such, as when a man
speaks confusedly, and without advise, how wise soever he be, yet he is
reckoned but as a fool or a mad man. The censure that is given on indiscreet
me^.
And then this judgment passes on him, that many are wise by book, which are
but fools in talk, and in speculation they know much, but in practice are
most ignorant: the reason hereof is alleged by Cicero, in one of his Epistles,
where he says, That a man is known to be good or bad by the works that he
does: Cicero his opinion of men's works and words.
but whether he be foolish or wise, that is discerned by the words he
speaks.

If a man be held for a fool in his country, by the words he speaks: what
auayles instruction of doctrine, to make him most learned? I have known diverse,
that in the doctors Chair, or pulpit, for disputation, no man could go beyond
them in learning: but yet in familiar conference, Familiar and sociable
conference, best bewrays him that is wise indeed.
or sociable conuersing, none likewise could outstep them in foolishnes.
Whereupon, look what honor they won in the chair or pulpit, they lost it
appara^tly out of the school, which makes me of this mind, that a continual
silence were better out of the School, for maintenance of the reputation gotten
by learning, than (by speaking weakly) to stain the glory of good letters,
with the idle froth of his own silliness.


Claudio. Such kind of men are apt to teach others good doctrine, Many teach
others, that want wisdom themselves.
yet have as much need themselves to be taught wisdom: therefore, for the
better apprehension of this virtue, the School of Pythagoras were most meetest
for them. But whence comes it (I beseech you) that in the doctors Chair, Why
a doctor in the Chair, and a fool in conference.
men are so wise, and yet in familiar conference, are little less then fools,
be getting themselves hatred by their own tongues? For doubtless, if so many
envy them for their learning, as many surely are ashamed of their conversation,
and all this happens by the tongue only.


Lodouico. If you would know the reason hereof, it is thus, when they read to
their Scholars, When men speak with the tongues of their Masters, they are
wise, and fools, when they speak with their own
they talk with other men's tongues, eue^ with those of the doctors, which
they have studied: but in their own familiar discoursing, they pronounce no
more then the heart suggests: and the tongue being the true tel-tale of the
heart, if the heart do keep within the bosom, either lasciviousness, pride,
folly, immodesty or ambition, even such are the speeches that fly from the
tongue. These are excellent instructers of others in the speculatiue cases, but
have mighty need of the practiue themselves, being empty of discretion, yet
full of sciences.


Claudio. I remember a singular example to this purpose, which I have read of a
certain king, Example of a king, and his three Sons, to approve their wisdom.
who being the Father of three Sons: would needs approve, which of them was the
wisest, and (after his decease) meetest for the government of his kingdom, and
began in this manner with them. My Sons, you have diverse times delivered by
open appearance, and instant requests made unto me, which of you three I would
leave as successor of my kingdom: which now I am resolved to let you know, and
he shall be the only man among you three, that answers to my question with
greatest wisdom, and thus it is. I would know of you all, (if you might be
transformed) to what kind of Foul you would best fancy to be compared, and
likened?

The first answered, The first Son would be like the Eagle.
I would be like the Eagle, which is the bird of Jove, and flies higher then
all other foul: it steadfastly looks upon the Sphere of the Sun, and is the
imprese for every Prince, in regard of his especial prerogative. The second
Son would be like the Peacock.
The second said, I would be like the Peacock, who has the most delicate and
fairest feathers of all Birds whatsoever. Quoth the third, I would be like the
Crane, because he has the longest neck, The third Son chose to be like the
Crane, and his reason.
among all the fowls of the air, and if he had but the gift of speech, he
would be very wise and discreet in talking: for, whatsoever his heart
conceited, hardly, and long time first would it be, before the mouth uttered
it, because they stand so far asunder. And in this space, he may very well
consider and deliberate, if what he has to say, be worthy vtteraunce or no.

A matter very especially beseeming a king, A note for kings.
rather then any other, who ought, in doing or saying to be governed by
wisdom, to shun the evil report, A worthy Sentence.
of doing something unbeseeming the wreath royal: as one very well said: Qui
been vult fari, oportet meditari.


Lodouico. This third Son (in my judgment) was worthier of the Crown, then
both the other, because he had greatest respect to the office of royal
dignity. Example of king Pirrhus, answering his Sons.
Pirrhus king of the Epirotes did not thus, who being demanded by his sons,
to which of them he would leave the succession of his kingdom, made answer:
He shall be my successor, that has his sword keenest. Alluding thereby, that
he would leave his Realm to him, who was aptest (by arms) to defend it:
never considering, that oftentimes a kingdom is better defended by discreet
ruling, The strength of kings consists in their subjects love.
and winning the hearts of the people, then by stearne uncivil Arms: for the
principal nerve of the king, is the love of his subjects, which by wisdom is
sooner won, then by severity of war.

Many kings had the Israelites, but none wiser then Solomon, and thence it
ensued, Example of Solomon.
that he enjoyed his government in the felicity of peace: so that not only he
was never disturbed with wars, but likewise every king accounted himself
happy, that could attain to be combined with him in amity. Example of David.
David was a martial man, endued with great strength both from God and nature,
so that in his younger days, he pulled a Bear and a Lion in pieces:
Nevertheless, in the words that he spoke, he declared himself, to have the
neck of a Crane, and trusted more in wisdom, Psalm. 46. 12.
then in his own might: Meditatus sum nocte cum cord meo, exercitab am, and
scopebam spiritum meum. Signifying thereby, The Authors inference upon the words
of David, worthy of all men to be regarded.
this to be his conceit. Before I would open my mouth to speak, before I
would let loose my tongue to speech, and before I would move my lips to form
a word: Iimagined well in my heart, during the night time, on that which in the
day ensuing, I was to utter, because I would deliver nothing with my mouth,
that might not become the dignity of a king. My spirit exercised and practiced,
by forethinking, and then afterward pronouncing the same with my tongue, it was
to the glory of god, and edifying of my neighbor: therefore I swept, purged and
cleansed my thoughts, from all the filth of malice, slattery, infamy and treachery.


Claudio. Quite contrary do they, Of such as speak whatsoever comes first to
mouth Psalm. 40. 9.
that utter whatsoever comes first to mouth, lashing it liberally forth,
without conceiting and foredeeming, whether it be good or evil, of whom we
may well speak that saying of David: Ecce labia mea non prohibebo, Domine tu
scist^s I will not refrain my lips, O Lord thou know. This is the reason
why they commit many errors, and become even unlike an untamed horse without a
bridle: beside, oftentimes, by defect of the lips, The defect of the lips do
endanger both body and soul.
the whole body and soul do suffer greeuance, dearly repenting, what the
tongue has wilfully blabd abroad: which, if not in this world, yet assuredly
in the other, as David, in very significant words testifies in the 140.
Psalm, Psalm. 140. 8.
Labor labiorum ipsorum operiet eos: Let the mischefe of their own lips come
upon them. Why the Latins called the lips Labia.
And therefore I think the Latins called the lips Labia; a labendo, quia per
labia homo labitur in praeceps.


Lodouico. Some hold, that he would, or else might have said; Labor labiorum
ipsorum angustiabit, David's words further commented on.
or rather vestiet eos: but in saying that the travail of the lips shall
cover them, signifies, that there shall be no part of the body or the
soul, but it will be anguished, by the defect of the lips. Moreover, such
will be the pain of the error, committed by the lips, that their rage and
choler being wasted, the damned shall devour up their own tongues, according
as of some of them, the Secretary of Christ Saint John tells us in his
Apocalypse: Et commanducauerunt linguas suas prae dolor, and blasphemauerunt
Deum coeli prae doloribus and vulneribus suis: And they gnawed their tongues
for sorone, and blasphemed the God of heaven, for their pains and their sores.
A warning to the man negligent in his talking.
Be more careful and respective (Oh negligent man) in thy talking, and
consider (miserable wretch) how many are damned in hell, not so much for what
they have done, as for their vile and blasphemous words spoken.


Claudio. Sampson was a man of wonderful strength, Example of strong Sampson,
overcome by the words of a woman.
yet so soon as he was overcome by an immodest silly woman, he was bound, and
delivered into the hands of his enemies, who plucked our his eyes, and made him
(like a beast) to grind in a mill: all which happened to him, by being over
careless of his tongue, and too too ready in the labor of his lips. David's
exhortation.
David exhorts them, that forethinke not well what they would say, to lay a
punishment on themselves, answerable to such neglect, thereby to preuente a
far greater detriment: Psalm. 4. 5.
Quae dicitis in cordibus vestris, and in cubilibus vestris, compungimini:
Examine your own hearts, and in your chambers, and be still, as meaning, to
inflict the penalty there, Of the chastiseme^t of the heart.
where the crime was committed. The heart first contrived it, before the tongue
spoke it; the heart first cried guilty, ere the tongue did blab it: therefore
the heart must have his due chastisement imposed on it; Sacrificate sacrificiu^
iustitiae etc: Psalm. 4. 6.
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, etc.

This sacrifice of righteousness, says old Father Augustine, S. Augustine.
is the very same, where of king David speaks in another place: Sacrificium
Deo spiritus contribulatus, Psalm. 50. 18.
cor contritum and humiliatum Deus non despicies: The sacrifices of God are a
contrite spirit, a contrite and a broken heart (O God) thou will not despise.
The sentence on the heart, for causing the tongue to sin, and the souls
sacrifice for the heart.
In the heart was first of all conceived and committed the sin of the tongue,
therefore the Iibbet of death should first be set up for the heart, and there,
the soul doing her true repentance, she is to endure the justice of
sacrifice on her self, causing the heart to be entirely sorry, even from the
very bottom thereof, and to weep bloody tears, in true compunctio^, promising,
never to minister matter more to the tongue, without sincere and deliberate
premeditation.


Lodouico. The flatterer should have some reason, A lesson for the flatterer,
to refrain his tongue, in sinning against nature.
to refrain his glib and oily tongue, because silence is much better, then
false and coined lying speeches: for that is a sin against nature, because,
the tongue being the discouerer of the heart, in speaking otherwise then, then
as the heart thinks, it appears to have some want in his natural office.
Pliny affirms, Pliny, concerning the two veins of the tongue.
That the tongue of a man has two veins, one correspondent to the heart, the
other agreeable to the brain, the place where reason makes his abiding.

It seems, that the divine architect did this, to instruct thereby, that we
ought not to have one thing in the tongue, and another in the heart: much less
should we profer, An excellent Allusion.
with the tongue, all that is hidden and locked up in the heart, but only those
things, whereof reason has first tasted. Whereupon the wise man said: Qui
ambulat fraudulenter, reuelat arcana: qui autem fidelis est, celat amici
commissum, The flatterer praises and blames, The flatterer observes the
humor of him he would flatter
not according to what he has in his heart, but agreeable to that, which he
perceiues pleasing to him whom he would flatter: therefore he never fastneth
on any proper sentence, but turns and winds still every way, not much unlike
the clapper of a bell, Apt comparisons.
or like a vane on a house top, as the wind blows.


Claudio. The Satyrick Poet, Iuuenal, paints him forth (to the life) in a
Satyr of his.

Rides? maiori cachinno concutitur. Iuuenall his verses of the flatterer.

Flet, si lachrimas aspexit amici;
Nec dolet: iguiculum, brumae si tempore posc^s,
Accipit endromidem; si dixeris, aestuo, sudat.
Nocte dieque potest alienum sumere vultum,
A' facie iacta^e manus, laudare parat us.
Plato in his Phedon, Plato his censure of the flatterer.
and in Menexemus, calls the flatterer, A wild fury infested in man, and au
unclean devil, that with unhappy meats, and hurtful brutishness,
nourishes defiled thoughts. He compares him likewise, 1. He names him.
To a Iuggler, an Enchaunter, or a poysoner, 2. He co^pares him.
who by deceiving words, work men's minds to their own wills. He gives him
also the name Of a seperator, because he is divided in himself, 3. He alludes
him.
keeping one thing in his breast, and uttering another with the tongue The
Grasshopper bathed in oil, dies, but afterward, being washed with vinegar, A
comparison of the flatterer to the Grasshopper, and the Allusion.
he comes to life again: Even so, many are slain by the oily tongue of a
flatterer, which afterward, by a just reprehension, done with charity, do
recover life again.

This made holy David say, Corripiet me iustus me in misericordia, Psalm. 141.
5.
and increpabit me: oleum autem peccatoris non impinguet caput meum. Let the
righteous smite me, for that is a benefit, and let him reprove me, and it
shall be a precious oil, that shall not break mine head. The reason hereof,
his son Solomon teaches us, where he says: Meliora sunt vulnera
diligentis, Prouer. 27. 6.
quam frrudulenta oscula odientis. The wounds of a lover are better then the
false kisses of a^ e^emie.


Lodouico. Let every such tongue be dumb in a christian common wealth, Psalm.
31. 18.
Muta fiant labia dolosa; Let the lying lips be made dumb, Flatterers compared
to Sa^psons Lion.
which are like to the Lion slain by the Nazarite Sampson, that had honey in
the mouth, Judge. 14. 8.
and within the bowels was all full of vermin. Even such are flatterers, all
honye in their mouths, but their inwards very verminous, Flatterers compared
to the whitest Swans
and stinking with foul putrified intentions. They are like unto Swans, who
have sweet songs in their mouths, and are so adorned with the whitest
feathers, as every one would judge their flesh to be as white and sightlye:
notwithstanding, it is blacker then quenched coals. Therefore the children of
Israel were forbidden to feed on them, Leuit. 11. 18.
as we may read in Leuitieus.

In like manner, Allusio^ to the former comparison.
the tongue of the deceiuer, which in appearance makes show of a white
conscience, only by fair speeches, and sweet sound of counterfeited
commendations: does nevertheless declare by evident proof, that their
hearts are fowllie diseased, and their consciences very oughly deformed, which
makes me hold it for an especial good rule, to keep out of the sent or
savor of such, Comparion of the Swans death with the flatterer.
and by no means to have any conversation with them. The Swanne dies singing,
and the flatterer (in his false praysings) falls down dead in sin, and
couets the death likewise of all such as listen to his lies, therefore; Muta
fiant labia dolosa.


Claudio. And who knows (my Lord) whether the holy spirit made allusion to
this or no, when (as we read in Deuteronomy) the Israelites were commanded:
Deuteronomy. 22. 11.
Non indueris vestimento, quod ex lana linoque contextum sit? Example of the
Israelites prohibition, to wear garments of linne^ and woollen.
Thou shall not we are a garment of diverse sorts: as of woollen and linen
together? Little did the Lord respect, whether the Hebrews garments were
wouen either of woollen, or of linen; but he well foresawe, that men were not
truly simple, and adorned with puritye. Therefore he prohibited a commixed
garment of woollen and linen, The authors application of the prohibitio^, and
Allusion to the speeches of the flatterer.
as forbidding (thereby) a double and mixed inward clothing. As for example;
all deceiptfull arguings, kind ceremonies, complementes, suting both to vile
and wicked purpose. And such are the speeches of the flatterer, and false
hearted, even according to their resemblance within, for there they appear to
be soft and delicate like linen: but let them be searched throughlye, and
they will be found to be more sharp, then the roughest wool; yet seeming,
to be of most holy and obseruant kind of life.


Lodouico. This similitude is more conuenable for hypocrytes, Of Hypocrites
supposed to be figured in this similitude.
then any other of fraudulente and deceiving condition: for outwardly, they
will be thought to be of very stricte life, only, that the world may
repute them to be holy: yet inwardly, are very impure and loathsome in their
hearts, Esaias. 29. 13.
of whom it is written: Populus iste ore suo, and labiis suis glorificat me,
cor autem eius long est a me: This people come near unto me with their mouth,
and honor me with their lips: but have removed their heart far from me. In
regard therefore silence is so convenient, and more pleasing to God, then this
idle labor without fruit: Hipocrites are disgracefully silent.
Muta siant labia dolosa. For they are said to be disgracefully silent, and
struck dumb eternally, whose praises are unfruitful, and of no regard in
the presence of God.

But, speaking of the flatterer, me thinks, he has a most apt comparison with
the voice called Echo, whereof the wise man speaking, Sap 17. 18.
says: Resonans de altissimi^ montibus Echo: The sound or Echo that
answers again in the hollow mountain. The flatterer compared to the voice
of Echo, with the description of Echo, and what it is.
Echo is the resou^ding of the voice, or of a noise formed in concaue places
and cauerny, and rebounding thence back again, such as perchance are the
valleys, among the mou^tains or stony places, and it has this property: that
if you sing, it sings again, if you lament, it lame^teth, if laugh, it
laugheth, if speak, it speaks, and in brief, it is a counterfetting Ape of
the voice of man.

Such in all respects is the flatterer, Allusio^ to the flatterer.
imitating the actions and gestures of him whom he seeks to flatter: there is
never any distinct or proper sentence in his mouth, but evermore he directs
himself by opinion and form, The flatterers behavior.
If his object speak well or ill, he affirms all: if he grieve, he also
greeueth: if he laugh, he likewise ioyeth, and does every thing till he
reach the height of his own intent.

This vice reigns too plentifully in princes Courts, and great men's dwellings,
Where flatterers are most abiding.
for they are the places of flatterers stipe^dary wages, wherefore I hold it was
said to very good purpose: Resonans de altissimis montibus. Because they cannot
live in low valleys, or in the humble dale of poor men's houses, Poor places
are no habitations for flatterers.
where is no hope of any profit at all: therefore they fly to the highest, to
the eminent mountains of the great, and to the goulden Sunshine of
wealthye Seigniors.

Moreover, Another comparison of Echo.
it is to be noated, that as the Echo never answers where a firm voice is
made, or when one smites, but as it were a far off, and in a contrary or
overthwart place: Even so the flatterer shapes his blow, How the same holds
with the flatterer.
and forms the appearance of fair words, in the eye only of him he flatters,
but elsewhere it resou^deth, in a further place it reuerberates, and the
intention is in a quite contrary kind. Landant quem perdere volunt, Flatterers
compared to wine.
says the goulden tongued Orator. They are like unto wine, which makes a
show of descending down to the heels, yet mounts aloft up into the head.
Therefore, the great Lords of this world of ours, A sentence for great Lords.
that have their houses filled with flatterers, are more beggars, and barren of
truth, then of money.

A rare example, An excellent example of king Antiochus, and a poor country
man, recorded by Plutarch.
and highly fitting our purpose, Plutarch tells us, of king Antiochus, who
going disguised into the cottage of a plain country peazant, demanded of him,
What he heard abroad reported of the king. The poor man answered, and told
him the truth; That very much evil was spoken of him, to weet, that he was an
unjust man, a mighty taxer of his people, a despiser of the poor, and diverse
such like other ill qualities. The King returning to his Palace royal, called
for his secret chamberlaynes and pages, commanding them to put on his kingly
vestimentes, and taking the crown from off his own head, delivered this most
woorthye sentence. Auferte istam hinc, sine qua, vera de me audio, and
rescisco. A good noate for kings.
Take away this Crown from before me, without which, I can hear the truth of
my self, but with it, a thousand lies are toulde me.


Claudio. Great is the infelicity of Princes, Princes and great men seldom
hear the truth of themselves.
and potent Lords, who very seldom, or never know the truth of themselves,
only through the occasion of false and lying tongues. Miserable is he, who
by giving ear to the fraudulente praises of flatterers, knows not his own
peculiar defectes: which (in fear of his dignity) the good are likewise kept
back from telling him, perceiving him altogether carried away with their
abominable flatteries, whence springs many dangerous inconveniences, The
words of S. Gregory.
according as Saint Gregory asfirmeth. Delinquentem namque eum redarguere
nullus praesumit, and in exemplum culpa vehementer extenditur, quando pro
reu^rentia ordinis peccator honoratur.

The pestilent tongue of a flatterer, is compared to the tongue of a Cat, The
flatterers tongue compared to the tongue of a Cat.
which although it be very flexible, and ready, yet it is notwithstanding
very hurtful, and much enciting to the consumption: for, very gladlye she
will lick a fat body, and (by little and little) consume him to lank
leanenesse. The very same propertye has the flatterer: for, with his false
tongue, he will never leave praising the rich, How it holds in the flatteres
smoothing, and even licking (as it were) away the fatness of their temporal
goods, till (by little and little) he draw away all, leaving him very
lanke, and leanelye diminished: wherefore woorthilye spoke the wise man of such
a tongue: Eccle. 20. 15.
Qui enim edunt pau^m illius, falsa lingua sunt: They that eat his bread,
speak evil of him.


Lodouico. Right well may they be called false tongues, because they have no
other then a feigned appearance, Comparison of a shadow.
even like unto a shadow, which having no substance at all in it self,
follows the body opposed to the light, and by deceiptfull appearaunce,
would make it seem greater then it is: so that a child, or a Peigmei dwarf,
thinks himself thereby to be as great as a Giant. And so, The shadow
counterfeits all the actions of the body.
without any adiunction of substance, grows greater and greater by vanitye,
counterfetting all the motions of the body, stands, sittes, walks, and
mooues, according as the body stands, fittes, Allusion to the flatterer.
walks or mooues. The very like qualities may we observe in a flatterer,
imitating and pursuing every action of his flattered obiecte, so long as the
light of prosperous fortune lasts: but that once clowding, the flatterer
hides his head also, as lacking more light, whereby he might still follow
the same body.

The praises of such mouths, Of the praises of a flatterers tongue.
although they raise thee (in imagined greatness) to the heavens, set thy
conceits on fire, with worthiness of a diadem, and make thee presume beyond
all compass: yet all this notwithstanding, thou wast but a man at the first,
thou art now become no more; as for their commendations and vain counsels they
were but idle shadows, having no other substance, but what thy follies lent
them. Comparison of Apes, Parrats and Parochitoes voices.
Apes are they, in imitation of men's actions, Parats or Parochitoes in their
voices, speaking no more, then by the ear is taught them. They have no
certainty of sentence, no stability in appearaunce, Comparison of water.
no permanencie in opinion: but even (like unto water) do take the form that
the figure gives it, either round, square or triangulare. Let this pestiferous
tongue be silente, unworthy of any use of speech. Muta fiant labia dolosa.


Claudio. This accursed kind of tongue, The flatterers tongue robs a man of
the truth.
besides his nourishing the sinner in all vice and disorder, it robs him of the
very dearest thing he has in all the world: namely, the truth, for which men
imploye their very vttermoste endeavors, and labor the very depth of all their
studies: whereupon, they that ought most to be informed of the truth,
Comparion of dumb dogs.
become banquerupts of it, by these dombe dogs, that better know how to
fawn, then bark: Canes muti non valentes latrare: They are all dumb dogs,
Esaias. 56. 10.
they cannot bark.

Sen^^a writing most elegantly upon this subject, Seneca in Epist. ad liber.
fayeth in his Epistle ad liber. suum. Monstrabo cuius rei inopia, laborant
magna fastigia, and quid omnia possidentibus desit; ille scilicet qui veritatem
dicat. Seneca in Epist. 2.
And in the second Epistle he justifies the same: Incredibile est multis, quam
magnos viros dulcedo orationis abducat Cooks are likewise resembled to
flatterers, Comparison of Cooks.
for they dress the viands, and order the^ in such manner, as they know to be
most pleasing to their Lords taste. Biou of Boristhenes, Bion his answer of
the most dangerous beast.
the Athenian Philosopher, and a great Sophister, being asked, what kind of
beast among all the rest, was most dangerous, presently replied, and very
wisely, Inter fer as, tyra^nus; inter mansueta, adulator. Among the wild, the
tyrant, among the gentle, the flatterer.


Lodouico. Assuredly, among the wild beasts, what is more hurtful and
cruel, then they of tyrannous nature: who unjustly will ouersway and command,
where they have no right, kill, rob and use violence, The flatterers tongue
exceeds the cruelty of wild beasts.
against all equitye? Yet does a flatterers tongue surpass this cruel
tyranny: because, upon such manifest insulting, the rest have means, to
save themselves by flight: but the flatterers treacherous praises, embraces,
inueigleth and so nousleth, as men dye by such deceiving, and, by show of
giving life, receive their own death, only because the effects work
contrary, Comparion of the flatterer, to a looking Glass, when a man sees
himself in it.
to what the tongue utters. Like to a looking Glass, which if one take in
his hand, and look circumspectly into it, he shall evermore behold contrary
operations to what himself does. If he look into the East, the shadow
represented in the glass, it looks directly into the West: if he turn to
the West, then it beholds the East: if he move the right arm, it stirs the
left: if he close the right eye, it shuts the left. And even thus is the
behauioure of flatterers, they commend with their mouths, when they condemn
in their hearts, and when you imagine their minds to be most of all on
friendship, then are their hearts fixed only upon your purse.

This made the Prophet David to say: Psalm. 12. 1. 2.
Dimiuutae suut veritates a filiis hominum. Vana loquuti sunt vnusquis que ad
proximum suum; labia dolosa, in cord, and cord loquuti sunt: The faithful
are failed from among the children of men. They speak deceitefully every man
with his neighbor, The flatterer aptly compared to an Hailot in her behavior
flattering with their lips, and speak with a double heart. Not unlike the
Harlot, that has dishonest words in her mouth, when her intent is to the
purse, which being once emptye, her vain talk then ceasseth. Even so deals
the flatterer, riches once ended, all commendations are concluded: therefore as
the fire is not nourished without fuel, Two excellent Similies.
or the Lamp without oil, so flatterers cannot live, but where substance and
wealth is.


Claudio. Our breath is hot or cold, Comparion of our breath, according as the
mouth is closed or oepned: so in flatterers as the purse is shut or opened.
according to the motion of the mouth: if you extend or enlarge the mouth wide,
the breath that comes forth is very warm and hot; but make a restrainte
with the lips, and then the breath will be as cold again. Some resemblaunce
likewise have flatterers with this similie, if the purse mouth be largelye
opened, and good sums of money do come forth: as wide do they then
stretche their mouths, and no warmthe shall want of their hot praysings,
beside, well tuned songs or Panegyricks of wonderful ostentations. But
restrain the purses strings, to a narower compass, and let no money at all
be seen: then, as close will they keep their lips, and curtall up their
fair speeches, altering then the former noate, to a recanting Palinode,
singing nothing but checks, blames and by-nippes, in cold breath, according to
the saying of David: Sepulchrum patens est guttur little, Psalm. 13. 5.
linguis suis dolose agebant: Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their
tongues they have deceived.


Lodouico. To this kind of deceiving, I think the wise man made his allusion,
The wise ma^s counsel, not to judge wine, by the pleasa^tnes or sweetness.
when he said, that we ought not judge the wine, according to the pleasing
sweetness thereof: because in drinking, it may rellishe sweet to the taste,
but in the end, bite like a Serpent, and cast his deadlye poison abroad, like
unto a Cockatrice, therefore we say: Dulcia sunt amica nature, and hence it
comes, that a man being a friend to sweet things, happens to be stifled by
them. Prou. 23. 31. 32.
N^ intuearis vinum quando flauescit, cum splenduerit in vino color eius.
Ingreditur blande, and in nouissimo mordebit vt coluber, and sicut Regulus
venena diffundet.

They that are delighted so much (as Alexander Magnus) with the sweet praises
of their flatterers, Alexander delighted with his flatterers praises.
become also by them stuffed and filled full of pride, like bladders big
swollen with wind, and no other substance at all in them. Whose ending
(commonly) is like that of Acteons, Acteon devoured by his own dogs.
being eaten up by the dogs which himself had nourished. Wherefore the
Prophet Esaias, foreseeing this evil, and that by such like beguilings of the
tongue, many do suffer the^^elues to be deceived, thus spoke. Popule ^eus, qui
te beatum dicunt, Esaias. 3. 12.
ipsi te de^^piunt. O my people, they that term you happy, do deceive you.


Claudio. I am (my Lord) of your opinion, that the sweet deceiptes of such, do
induce to much evil: and by their pleasing, do foster up many vices.
Antisthenes his judgment of flatterers.
Antisthenes, Prince of the Cynick sect, Judged it less harm to light into
power of Ravens, then into the hands of flatterers. And another Philosopher,
quarrelling with one about words, many unseemly speeches (threatening death)
passed between them. Example of one quarrelling with a Philosopher.
Quoth one of them: Perhpas I may line to see thee hanged, and then the Rauons.
to come peck aut thine ayes; whereto the other answered. Perhpas I may live to
see thee fall among flatterers, for Ravens peck out the eyes but of the dead
only, whereas flatterers dig them forth while we are li^ing. Wherefore, they
that give maintenance to such counterfaite tongues, Comparison of blind men,
and the Allusion.
are even like unto blind men, who very well hear what is said unto them, but
cannot behold any thing done. So are the flutterers heard and their
blandishments fly liberally in men's faces: but fight of their dealing is bereft
the^, they are led away by their smoothe enticing, till sweetelye they have
devoured all their substance up.

This made Diogenes call Aristippus (Dionisius flatterer) a dog: Diogenes,
Aristippus, Constantine Horace.
and another time, a well coucht snare. Constantine called the flatterer, a
Moth. Horace the Lirick Poet; gives him the name of a Fox. Aeneas Siluius
reports, that Sigisnound the Emperor, soothing a flatterer up in his folly,
Aeneas Siluius concerning Sigismund the Emperor.
and using familiar gestures with him, at last lifted up his hand, and gave him
a good box on the ear, and the other finding fault with this injury done him,
said: Alas my Lord, why do you smite me? the Emperor replied. Why do thou
bite me? A blow is the best reward for a bite. Sentence.
And in sooth, it may be very aptly so termed, because nothing bites the soul
more, in feeding it with the vain breath of idle vices.

The flatterers tongue deals, Comparion of a mother, and her young Son.
as a mother is wont to do with her young son, who crying, because she gave him
a blow for falling, she then pays him another, in a kind persuasion, that she
did it to no other end, but because he should look ere he leapt. So the
flatterer, having made a young nouice of his eare-tyed fondling, Allusion to the
flatterers behavior.
and so shrunk him, that he is scant able to stand any longer, he gives him
blows, with one bitter gird or other, which the fool taking unkindly, the
flatterer shrinks away from him, bidding him, to be better advised afterward.
And then (though too late) he can well perceive, that he commended vices to
him, The fruits of folly, found afterward.
as if they had been virtues, that he led him in infamous courses, which true
friends would have checked him for, and now as the flatterer ceasseth, even so
his former shame and follye ceasseth.


Lodouico. These latter words of yours, make me call to mind an excellent
example, Example of the builders of Babell.
which we read in holy Genesis, of Noah's posterity, who said one to another:
Venite, faciamus nobis Turrim, cuius culmen pertingat ad Coelum. But they could
not finish their labor begun, Genesis 11. 4.
for God confused their tongues in such manner, as one understood not what
another said. Whereby ensued, that when the murmurer asked for Lyme above,
they beneath would bring him up stones, and when as he did call for stones,
then he should be sure to have water. Heereuppon they were enforced to give
over work, which before continued in progression, so long as they beneathe
could supplye their demaundes above.

The infamous Tower of sin, A moral explication of the former Example.
pride and vain glory, wretched worldly men builded up, against God, to make
their names glorious on the face of the earth: and so long it lasted, and so
high ascended, as, while their servants and flatterers could minister matter to
them, extolling what they did, soothing their conceit, and magnifying their
vain actions, the only stuff and furnishment, to build vain glories towers
withal. Whereas, if their sins had been reproved, their mighty folly and
insolence checked: the work had been left off, and the weight of their
offenses better remembered.

Philopoemines rehearses, Example of Philopoemenes sentence on a Trumpetter.
that a Trumpet of the contrary Armic, being taken in the battle, the
General gave command that he should be slain: to whom the Trumpet
answered? Wherefore should I be slain, that never unsheathed my sword against
any man in the field? Whereto the General replied. Albeit with thy weapon thou
have not killed any man, yet with thy mouth thou have given death to many,
provoking on the violent fury of the battatle, by the sound of thy trumpet
sent from thy mouth. How flatterers do murder men.
Even so do flatterers murder more, by false extolling and supporting their
vices, then are slain in a field of enemies, by the hands of valiant
soldiers; which made the Prophet Jeremy say: Ierem. 50. 4.
Venite, percutiamus cum lingua.


Claudio. It is most true, that much (being gotten by the false tongue.) makes
more errors escape, then else would have bin committed. Seneca decalareth, that
every time Xenocrates sounded his Trumpet, Example of Alexanders readiness in
unsheathing his sword.
Alexander the great, hearing it, would draw forth his sword, although he was
not in war, yet even as if he had been in the battle fighting. The dancing
instructor, or teacher of dancing, no sooner hears the Lute or the Violen,
but his feet begin to move presently: Example of the dancing teacher.
and so soon as the flatterer lets his lying tongue walk, it puffes up proud
minds immediately, which conceit of their own vain glory.

When Jeroboam made the golden Calves, Example of Jeroboam, and his golden
Calves.
and the people honored them as so many Gods: there wanted no pray^ers of his
workemanshippe, cup-quaffers, singers, dauncers and feasters. Example of Aaron.
So when Aaron erected the golden Calfe, in the plain by the steep mount
Sinai: main commended this ill act of Aarons, Exodus 32. 4. 5. 6.
saying: Hi sunt Dij tui Israel, qui te eduxerunt de terra Aegypti: These be
thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Whereupon,
they builded Altars, offered sacrifices, making solemn feastings, they sung,
sounded and daunced, Aarons view of the peoples vanity.
at the dedication of their Altars: Quod cum vidisset Aaron, edificauit altar
coram eo, and praeconis voce clamauit, dicens: Cras solemnitas Domini est.
Surgentesque mane, obtulerunt holocausta, and hostias pacificas, and sedit
populus manducare, and bibere, and surrexerunt ludere. When Aaron saw that, he
made an Altar before it, and Aaron proclaimed, saying: To morrow shall be the
holyday of the Lord. So they rose up the next day in the morning, and offered
burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings: also the people sat them down,
to eat and drink, and rose up to play.

See what ensues of the flattering tongue, Allusion to the flattering tongue.
of how much evil it was the occasion, by infamous praises. If Jeroboam and
Aaron had had any about them, that in charity and zeal would have reproved
them, as they had many flatterers, commending their unworthy work:
doubtless they had never molded and framed those Calves. Therefore very well
said the Prophet Ose, Ose. 7. 3.
speaking of such flatterers: In malitia sua laetificauerunt Regem. They make
the king glad with their wickedness. The tongue of the flatterer nurseth up
much evil, in the common wealth, and princes houses


If this tongue of the flatterer, do nurse up so much evil in the
commonwealth, but more especially in Princes Palaces, and great men's houses:
much better were it for all Christendom, to sentence it self with perpetual
silence, and be (as it were) eternallye dumb, then either by gestures of the
body, or with the tongue, to be flatterers of any. An infectious plague, a
damnable disease, a sweet poison, and a deadly honey bait, A second Judas,
killing by kissing.
is the tongue of a flatterer: inueigling by entising, poisoning by smoothe
persuading, and (like to a second Judas) killing men by kissing.


Finis Cap. 8.
The Argument.
Discoursing of the leasing and lying tongue, what an infamous sin a lie is,
and how highly God is pleased with truth: of whose excellency and beauty,
arises a profitable short discourse, concluding, that a strict silence is more
commendable, then telling of lies. which are a greatly displeasing to God,
because he is the truth himself. Also approouing, that lying is so brutish and
damnable, a^ no one can so much as think thereon, without a purpose, to deface
some part of truth.

Chap. 9.
LODOVICO. Flattery (for certaintye) is a most vile sin, Lying is a greater
sin then flattery.
as already has been at large approved, but (in any case) I account that to
be a greater sin then it, which (by contemning the truth) flatters it self
more then the flatterer can do; for, if the flatterer were not listened unto,
neither could he continue, or any one be flattered by him. But man is such an
enemy, Man is an utter enemy to reprehension.
to reprehension of errors committed, as he can no sooner hear himself (by
truth) reproved: but immediately arises, an intestine hatred toward the
reproouer, whereupon first sprung the ancient adage, Proverb.
Verit as odium parit. From hence afterward ensued; that, in regard men were so
envious against reproose, others became as silent, contrary to the debt of
charity, and no man would check his neighbors vice, because he made a scruple
of displeasing him: but rather commended his error, as if it had bin a virtue,
and this was no other then mere flattery it self.

Man of himself is so proud by nature, Man is a great lover of liberty.
as he would not willingly be reprehended: beside, he is such a lover of
liberty, as he would have all things lawful, which likes himself to act.
Truth has a great proportion and similitude, Comparison of the truth to honey.
with honey, which although it be sweet: yet nevertheless, being applied to
any wound, it makes it to suffer great anguish. So the truth, though it be
amiable, most excellent, and of all to be desired, Allusion.
yea even of the liar himself, who albeit he lies willingly, and has
therefore no regard, but of them to whom he tells his lies: The wounded
sinner, how he takes reprehension.
yet notwithstanding, to the vulnerated and smitten sinner, very grievously
gasht and wounded with sin, it is painful and bitter, when his faults are
justly reproved by truth. Therefore the Prophet Esaias, lamenting for such,
called them: The sons of lying, lovers of lies, and enemies to the divine law,
which is nothing else but the truth. Psalm. 119. 86.
For David says: Omnia mandata tua veritas: All thy commandments are truth.

Hereupon it arose, that men would say to holy Prophets, and preachers of the
truth: Men's reproouing of Prophets and preachers.
speak of tastable things, and such as are pleasing, stand not to disturb our
content with reprehensions. Filii mendaces, filii nolentes audire legem Dei,
qui dicunt vident ibus; nolite videre, loquimini nobis place^tia. Esaias. 40. 15.
Afterward it came to this pass, that every one perceiving, how loath men were
to have their iniquities blamed: some gave themselves to public applause,
Time seruers and pleasers of men's affections.
and became pleasers of men's affections, not only forbearing to reprove them,
but merely extolled them. Whereat God grew so aggreeued, as he said by Jeremy
the Prophet. Ierem. 5. 30. 31.
Stup^r and mirabilia facta sunt in terra: Prophetae prophet abant mendacium,
and sacerdotes applaudebant manibus suis, and populus meus dilexit talia, quid
igitur fiet in nouis simo eius? An horrible and filthy thing is committed in
the land: The Prophets prophecy lies, and the priests receive gifts in their
hands, and my people delight therein. What will ye then do in the end thereof?
As much to say, as when shall these lies appear before the high truth, God
himself?

Of these and such like, S. Paul's prediction of such lovers of flatteries.
that love flatteries, and become refusers of holy correction, Saint Paul
foretold, when he wrote unto Timothy. Erit enim tempus, 2. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
cum sanam doctrinam non sustinebunt. Sed ad sua desideria coaceruabunt sibi
magistros, prurientes auribus, and ^ verit^^^ quidem auditum auertent, ad
fabulas autem conuertentur. For the time will come, when they will not suffer
wholesome doctrine. But having their ears itching, shall (after their own
lusts) get them an heap of teachers: and shall turn their ears from the
truth, and shall be given unto fables. Man then beco^ming a contemner of truth,
was the cause why so many gave themselves to flattery, and to lies, whereby we
may safely say: Veritas odium parit.


Claudio. A monstrous birth, of so fair and noble a mother, was it for truth
to beget hatred.


Lodouico. A thousand examples do give faithful witness, of this infamous
child birth. 1. Sam. 10. 33.
Saul grew into hatred against Jonathan his own Son, Example of Saules hatred
to Jonathan.
because with truth he excused the innocence of David, and reproved his
vnfatherly cruelty and unjust persecution. Balaac the king of the Moabites
hated Balaam, Example of Balaacs hate to Balaam.
because he told him the truth, and could not curse the people of Israel.
Achior the Ammonite was hated of Holofernes, Numb. 23. 8.
Prince of king Nabuchadnezzers army, and caused him to be strictly bound to a
tree, because he told the truth, Judith. 6. 14.
in speaking of the Hebrew people.

For speaking the truth, Example of Achior, hated by Holofernes Judges. 9. 21.
Ionathas the Son of Gedeon was murdered by Abimilech, reproouing him but
justly. Jeremy, reprehending king Asa, Example of Ionathas, and of Jeremy.
was therefore cast in prison, with fetters on his feet. John Baptist, telling
king Herod of his unlawful marriage, lost therefore his head. Daniell, because
he told the Babylonians, that Bell and the Dragon were not Gods, 2. Chron. 16.
10.
was cast into the den of Lions. All the holy Martyrs were slain by wicked
Tyrants, Example of John Baptist and Daniell.
and other just men most cruelly persecuted, for no other cause, but for openly
speaking and justifying the truth. Luke. 3. 19.


I have read of a virtuous religious man, Dan. 14. 31.
and according to some writers, Example of the holy Martyrs slain by wicked
tyra^ts.
it was venerable Beda of England, who had his eyes pulled out for speaking the
truth, in manner following. In search of ancient monuments in Rome, there was
found a goodly door of Marble, on the forefront whereof, A notable Example, of
venerable Beda of England, whose eyes were plucked out for speaking the (...).
these letters were engraven. P. P. P. S. S. S. R. R. R. F. F. F. many good
wits were called, to express the true sense of them, but none knew directly
how to construe them. At last this reverend man was sent for, because (in those
times) he was greatly esteemed: for the same of his study in good letters, was
far and near renowned. He looking on these mysterious letters, gave the true
interpretation of them, as follows.

The three P. P. P. signified Pater Patria Profectus est. the three S. S. S.
were thus read, Sapientia, Secum Sublata est. the three R. R. R. had this
meaning, Regnum Romae Ruet, the three F. F. F. were thus interpreted. Ferro,
Flamma, Fame. And because he told the truth, he was thought to prognosticate
the ruin of Rome, and for his reward, had his eyes plucked out.


Claudio. Alas my Lord, what needs so long a discourse, or expense of time, in
approouing, how odious truth has been, and yet is to the world it self?
Example of the Son of God himself, and how the world used him.
For, the only truth it self, the Son of God, what travails endured he in the
world? al which he suffered for the truth, for confession whereof, the
Nazarites, his neighborly compatriots, would have thrown him from the mount
whereon their city was builded.

For the truth, the Jews took up stones to stone him withal: for the truth,
they prosecuted him even to death, and at last, he dyed for the truth. John.
14. 6.
Ego sum veritas: I am the truth. Ego in hoc natus sum, and ad hoc veni in
mundum, John 18. 37.
vt testimonium perhibeam verit ati. For this cause am I borne, John. 8. 46.
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto
the truth. He came to teach truth to the world. Si veritatem dico vobis,
quare non creditis mihi? And If I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He
came to teach us the holy law, whose precepts are not other then truth. Psalm.
119. 86.
Omnia mandata tua veritas: All thy commandments are truth. The kingdom of
heaven suffers violence: and to apprehend it, there are no arms more meet
then truth. Scuto circundabit te verit as eius: Psalm. 91. 4.
His truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

When Christ ascended into heaven, he promised nothing else to his disciples,
John. 14. 3.
but the spirit of truth. Expedit vobis vt ego vadam. Si autem abiero, John.
16. 7.
mittam ad vos spiritum veritatis. It is expedient for you that I go away: but
if I depart away, I will send you the comforter, the spirit of truth. If the
holy spirit do teach men any thing, it is nothing else but truth. John. 16. 13.
Cum autem venerit ille Spiritus veritatis, docebit vos omnem verit atem.
Howbeit, when he is come which is the spirit of truth, he will lead you into
all truth.

If the Father would be worshipped, he would have it done in spirit and truth:
John. 8. 36.
Adorabunt patre^ in spiritu and veritate: They shall worship the Father in
spirit and truth. John. 17. 17.
If that we be made free: verit as liberauit vos: The truth has set you free.
The word of God is nothing else but truth: Sermo tuus verit as est: Thy word
is truth. If Christ be persecuted. it is for speaking the truth Quaeritis me
interficere, John. 8. 40.
hominem, qui veritatem vobis loquutus sum: you go about to kill me, a man
that have told you the truth. How God is said to be sorry for Lucifer.
If God be said to be sorry for Lucifer, for no other cause is it, but for
having forsaken the truth. Ille homicida erat ab initio, and in veritate non
stetit, quia non est veritas in eo. He has bin a murderer from the beginning,
John 8. 44.
and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him.

If God be said to grieve for men, he lamenteth for nothing else, but because
they left the truth, How God is said to grieve for men.
and addicted themselves unto lies. Non est in ore eorum veritas, cor eorum
vanum est. Filii hominum vsque quo graui Cord, vt quid diligitis vanitatem,
and quaeritis mendacium? Psalm. 5. 9.
There is no truth in their mouth, within they are very corruption. O ye sons
of men, Psalm. 4. 2.
how long will you turn my glory into shame, loving vanity, God swears the
truth.
and seeking lies? If God do swear, he swears the truth: Iurauit Dominus
David veritatem, Psalm. 132. ^1.
and non frustrabitur eum. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, How God
draws near to any man.
and he will not shrink from it. If God do draw near to any man, it is in
regard of the truth: Prope est Dominus omnibus inuocantibus eum in veritate.
The lord is near unto all that call upon him in truth. Psalm. 145. 18.


If he give heaven to us mortalles, How god gives heaven to me^, Psalm. 15. 1.
2. 3.
it is only to such, as speak the truth. Domine, quis habitabit in
tabernaculo tuo, aut quis requiscet in monte sancto tuo? Qui loquitur veritatem
in cord suo, qui non egit dolum in lingua sua. Lord, who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle, who shall rest in thy holy mountain? He that speaks the truth
in his heart, he that has no guile in his tongue. Nothing is more acceptable to
God, then truth.
There is nothing more acceptable to God, then truth is, because he is the
truth it self. Therefore Stobeus tells us, that Pythagoras being demanded;
what thing men ought to do, Pythagoras, his answer concerning truth.
to be like unto God, made answer: Let them speak truth because God is
truth, the center for full confirmation, and the scope whereat all virtues aim.

Aeschines the Philosopher and Orator, the corriuall of Demosthenes,
Aeschines, in an Oration against Demosthenes, of the power of truth.
in a certain Oration which he wrote against him, says, That the power of
truth is such, as without it, all strength is weakness; all wisdom,
folly; all temperance, turpitude; all justice, revenge; all humility, deceit;
all patience, to no purpose; chastity is hurtful; riches are but loss, and
pity mere vanity. For truth, among all substances, it is the cheifest; among
the heavens, the imperial; among metals, pure gold; among the elements, the
fire; among precious stones, the Carbuncle; among Sciences the most celebrate.
And as without light, light cannot be seen, even so without truth we can never
attain, see nor enjoy God, the only sovereign truth of all.

Anacharsis the Philosopher, Anacharsis the Philosopher, speaking of truth.
speaking of the truth, says. It is a health free from all sickness; a life
that never dies; an antidote that preserves all; a Sun without setting; a
Moon never eclipsed, a door never shut; a walk never weary; neither is there
any thing in the world more high, more profound, more long, more large more
ancient or more new, then is truth, the light of heaven, and splendor of the
earth. The truth is in such esteem with God, God will never pardon him that
belyeth the truth.
that albeit (in his own bounty) he winkes at some sins, yet will he never
pardon him that belyeth the truth, which made the holy Prophet to say: Perdes
omnes qui loquuntur mendacium. Psalm. 5. 6.
Thou shall destroy all them that speak lies.


Lodouico. And woorthily too, No sin more opposite against God, then lying is.
because there is no sin, which more opposes it self against God, being the
truth self, then lying does. For it is a sin against nature, which
peruerteth and defaceth all natural order, in regard that nature did ordain
the voice and speech, to the end, that thereby one might manifest to another,
Aristot. in Perier.
the true conceipte of his mind, as the Philosopher affirms in the first
chapter of his Periermenia. Plato in Thymeus.
Whence Plato likewise took occasion in his Thymeus, to say: Propter hoc
nobis datus est sermo, vt praesto forent mutuae voluntatis indicia.

They then that sound otherwise with their words, then the heart thinks, Tho.
Aquin. in 2. 2. Q. 110. a. 3. Alber, Mag. 2.
do lie, and go against the order natural. Wherefore the Angelical doctor, in
his 2. 2. q. 110. a. 3. says. Innaturale est, and indebitum, quod aliquis voce
significet, id quod meute non habet. And his master says, 2. Sen. D. 35.
sen. d. 35. Mendacium grauis simum est, in quantum est privatiuum ordinis
secu^dum mores, ad optimum finem, qui est veritas. And Tully making of lying,
Cicero, defining lying.
says. Mendacium est falsa significatio vocis, cum intention fallendi. Lying
(then) being such an enormous sin, deservedly should liars be severely
punished, as enemies to God, and sons of the devil. S. Ambrose his advise.
Therefore (says Saint Ambrose,) Brethren, keep your selves from lying, because
all such as love lies, are children of the devil, S. Chrisostom.
Christ (says Chrysostom, upon Saint Matthewe) is such a lover of the
truth, as he will make no acceptaunce of a liar.


Claudio. If by the fairness of the light, Comparison of light and darkness,
and the Allusion.
the foul deformity of darkness is discerned: by the excellency of truth,
we may easilye perceive the brutish shape of lying, which is a vice so
infamous, The devil durst not lie, in his own shape.
as the devil himself (the father of lies) had not the courage to do it in
his own proper form, but took upon him the shape of a Serpent. And Saint Paul
says, that oftentimes he changes himself self into an Angel of light,
when he would fasten a belief of lies in men. 2. Corin. 11. 14.
Ipse enim Sathanas transfigurat se in Angelum lucis. For Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light.

Moreover, The devils children imitate their father.
his ministers and children do the same, knowing there is nothing more
infamous and odious to men, then lying is: therefore of them writes the same
Apostle to the Corinthians: No^ est ergo magnum, si ministri eius
transfigurentur velut ministri iustitiae, quorum finis erit secundum opera
ipsorum. 2. Corin. 11. 15.
Therefore it is no great thing, though his ministers transform themselves, as
though they were the ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according
to their works. Truth is so fair and so lovely, as they themselves that take
delight in beguiling others with a lying tongue, hold nothing dearer, A lie is
odious to the liar him self.
neither can be more displeased, then to be deceived with a lie. Can there
then be sound any thing more brutish, more misshapen and horrid, then is a lie,
that is so offensive to him that tells it? God cannot abide it, because he is
truth it self: the devil, when he does it, transformes himself into an
Angel of light: and man, he mantles it up in colors, and ouerclokes it with
some show of truth, because he would not be held for a liar.

Chilo, Chilo Lacede. discoursing on truth.
discoursing on truth, says. It is a public faithful bond, that never
perishes: a shield, that cannot be pierced through; a firm certainty, never
to be perturbed: an army, that cannot be daunted: a flower that never fades: a
Sea, never tempested: a safe arriving port, without any peril. Shall then such
an excellent thing as truth is, be counterpoised with a matter so misshapen
as a lie is?


Claudio. A lie is so offensive to the Lord, Anselm de Me^. Lib. 2.
as holy Anselme says, That God, as patron of the universal world, may (in
some sort) be said to dispense with theft, not accounting it such a weighty
sin, as he tolerated the fault of the children of Israel, who despoyled the
Egyptians of all their gold and precious things, winking likewise at the
breach of the other precepts: but he never yet dispensed (for at were a great
sin to say he did) with lying, being a thing most pernicious and damnable, even
a mere denying of himself, who is the only truth.

Beside, Christ never called any, son of the devil, but the liar.
it is well worthy consideration, to note, that Christ never called any sinner,
Son of the devil, but only the lying man. Vox ex patre diabolo, estis, and
desyderia patris vestri vultis facere: John. 8. 44.
illae homicida erat ab initio, and in veritate non ste^it. Ye are of your
father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he has been a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. A note worth the
observation.
Can there be found a greater infamy in the world, then this, to be the son of
the devil; the subject of the devil; governed by the devil; possessed with
the devil, and directed by the devil? How can a man stand, but like one
confounded, when he but thinks of uttering a lie? whereby he makes himself most
odious to God, and to al creatures which are capable of reason.


Claudio. A miserable procreation, a most vile servitude, an accursed
subjection, and a most detestable government. Lying polluteth the understanding
(whose only object is truth) and there becomes the root of disloyalty, Lying
polluteth the understanding, and what harms it does.
the occasion of fraud, the mother of malice, the nurse of violence, the
cordial of detraction, the heir of murmuring, the gossip of hypocrisy, the
destruction of truth, the perdition of neighbourly faith, the rooter up of true
friendship, and the utter loss of faith, A liar is not believed when he tells
the truth.
concord, unity and peace. He that takes a delight in lying, is so generally
hateful and condemned, that he cannot be believed when he speaks truly,
and every one points at him with his finger.

Lying is become such a merchandise through the whole world, Lying is beco^e a
merchandise in the world.
as there are very few merchauntes, but they make a use thereof. But (by the
just judgment of God) see what ensues thereon, when they expect to become
rich, they grow very poor, and not knowing the reason thereof, can say nothing
else, but that their traffic makes no such return now, as heretofore it
has done, laying all the blame on fortune, and unlucky speeding; whereas
rather they should say, that it is the desertfull chastisement of God, and that
for their own defrauding in their trade, the trade it self defraudes them.
Even so is deceipte punished with deceipte, Sentence.
and lying is corrected by lying.

So says the Propet David: Mendaces filii hominum in stateris, Psalm. 62. 9.
vt decipiant ipsi de vanitate in idipsum. The children of men are but vain,
deceiptfull upon the weights, and are altogether lighter then vanitye it stlfe.
Of swearing, both in the seller and buyer.
He that sells, swears, that the ware is good, and he that buieth,
swears, that it is naught: the one or other lying, offends God, contaminates
his own conscience, and beguileth his neighbor, even as if with the thruste
of a Lance, Psalm. 5. 6.
at one stroke, three are severally wounded. Now what would you have God do
with this lying tongue? Pordes omnes qui loquuntur mendacium.

Therefore was it (says Saint Augustine, S. August. sup. S. John.
writing upon Saint John,) That Christ our Savior chased the buyers and
sellers forth of the Temple in Jerusalem, in sign, that by their lies, they
shall be driven forth of the heavenly Temple. John. 1. 9.
Eiecit omnes vendentes and ementes de templo.


Lodouico. Let me tell you my Lord, that lying (at this day) is risen to such
a height, as we can hardly trust any man, such is the mighty abundance of
liars: To what a head lying is (...) own in these days, Writings of Notaries
necessary, as necessary evils.
whereby ensues, that even to writings, confirmed by witnesses, fortified with
seals, and made authentical by public Notaries, great outrage is committed,
a thousand deceipts interposed, and no mean store of lies enforced, to bear
down a plain and manifest truth.

I deny not but the writings of public Notaries are necessary, as necessary
euilles, that take head only by the worlds malice: yet in former ages, such
transcriptes were thought unmeet, because men were then so true, both in word
and deed, as one honest simple word, stood in steed of an authentical
instrument.

Laban was a man very cauillous and stricte, Example of the covenants between
Laba^ and Jacob.
notwithstanding, between him and Jacob his son in law, in so many
covenants as passed betwixt the^, in steed of writings, they made a heap of
somewhat, or set up a stone on end like a pillar, in sign and witness of an
inviolable faith, which by Laban was called in his proper tongue, Tumulus
testis, Genesis 31. 47.
and by Jacob, Genesis 23. 15.
Aceruus testimonij. Abraham buying a field of ground his word only served,
Example of Abraha^s bargaining.
instead of a most firm bargain and contract.

Of this faithfulness in men, it ensued that God giving the law of
circumcision, The law of Circumcision not written.
caused it not to be written, but to pass by tradition to posterity, and they
inuiolably observed it. But afterward, the malice of men increasing, and
getting such head, that they defrauded the most ancient contractes, and the
soundest established couenauntes: The reason why God gave his Laws in writing,
but not in paper.
undoubtedly, if God had pleased (simply from his own mouth) to have delivered
his laws, without manifest setting them down in writing, they would have
inserted a thousand lies (devised out of their own brains) among them.

Hereupon it followed, that afterward, when he gave his laws to the Hebrews,
he gave them in writing, not simply in paper, set down with a weak pen, or
easily to be blured or raced out: but gave them engraven in the hardest marble,
to the end, that neither by the force of knife, or any other instrument
whatsoever, they might be altered or defaced.

Do you not see (my Lord) that although the holy Gospel was faithfully
written, The devil has devised many means, to abuse the holy writings of
the Evangelists.
by the blessed Evangelists, the Scribes and Notaries to the highest God: yet
notwithstanding, the seducing devil and Father or lies, has sought
continual^ye, to sullie the pure whiteness thereof, with a thousand black
errors, never ceassing, to raise up heresy and schisms in the Church of God?


Claudio. I remember, and very pertinent to this purpose, that the Egyptians
made such strict account of their word, as for maintenance thereof, Herodotus,
describing the Egyptians form of making their co^tracts.
they have lost their lives. Whereupon, Herodotus, a most ancient writer,
making report of the Egyptians, says. That in making a bargain, a
confederacy, or a conjunction of new amity, one joins his greater fingers* to
the other parties, and each lets them blood. Afterward, with their tongues
they lick off the blood, wherewith each signed the others hand, inferring by
this ceremony, that first they will make expense of their uttermost drop of
blood, and willingly die, rather then speak false, or lie one to another.

If such faithful dealing were at this day in the world, men would be
advertised by so many warnings, These days want such presidents.
and never stand with such suspicious thoughts, evermore fearful to be
deceived. For in deed, these days do afford such plenty of liars, as we may
say with the Prophet Ose. Ose 4. 1. 2. 3.
Non est veritas interra. Mendacium and maledictum inundauerunt; propter hoc
lugebit terra, and infirmabitur omnis qui habitat in ea. There is no truth in
the land. By swearing and lying, they break out. Therefore shall the land
mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall be cut off. A great
chastisement was this which God denounced against liars, in regard that for so
detestable a sin, all the dwellers upon earth should be taken away. And very
woorthily, is such a punishment inflicted on them (says Father Augustine upon
the Psalms) because by lying, S. Agust. sup. Psalm.
they divide themselves from what is, and adhere to that which is not, therefore
their sentence is, to be made just nothing. Per des omnes qui loquuntur
mendacium.


Lodouico. A man capable of reason, making accounte of honor, should at least
(in regard of honor it self) speak the truth, because there can be no
greater confronting of a man, then to bear him down with lies. For the liar
has no credit with any man, and while he labors to maintain a lie, A liar
has no credit with any man, and calls god to witness his lie.
he does but ratify it with lie upon lie, false oaths and vehement
asseuerations, yea many times he calls God to bear witness of his lying.
Can there be a greater sin then this, to outface the uncreated truth it
self?

In the kingdom of Bohemia, Example of a custom observed in Bohemia.
(although there be liars there, as well as in any other part of the world) yet
notwithstanding, they hold it for most certain, that he that tells a lie in
the judgment place, undoubtedly that very year shall dye, and sooner by some
evil kind of death, then otherwise: for fear whereof, you shall have very
few there forward to swearing. Now albeit this is but a superstition, life
and death remaining in the Lords hand only: yet we cannot but confess it for
most true, that God (as a just Judge) will give severe correction to liars and
false swearers, either early or late, as we use to say. And what says the
wise man? Os quod mentitur, occidit animam: Sapien. 1. 11.
The mouth that speaks lies, sleyeth the soul.

And we may hold it for most certain, that as there is no agreement at all
between light and darkness: Similie.
even so there can be no standing together of God the highest truth, and
wretched lying man, acccording as himself says, Apoc. 21. 27.
by S. John in his Apocalypse: Non intrabit in eam aliquid coinquinatu^, aut
abhominationem faciens, and mendacium. And there shall enter into it no vncleaue
thing, neither whatsoever works abomination or lies.

Now let us see, A good lesson for Liars.
what thing is more abominable, more miserable, more dolorous, more foolish
and more impious, then for a man to deprive himself of all goodness, of
glory eternal, and to be condemned into ever burning fire, in the company of
most horrible devils: only for vain words, that endure no longer then their
very utterance?


Claudio. The face of truth is so sweet and amiable, The privileges of the
sons of truth.
and the privileges of her sons are so famous, as every one reports the
greatness of them, and without dread of any penalty, they may boldly speak
the truth. The honest true speaking man may go every where, The true man
goes with his face unmasked.
with his face unmasked, all men repose trust in him, none can accuse him,
without any fear he may freely talk with all men, and he shall be sure
never to want friends.

Look upon the contrary stamp, I mean the liar and false speaking man, The
Liar is shunned of all men.
he is shunned of al, he plays least in sight, he is accounted as loathsome, no
man dare trust him, none will believe him, no, even when he speaks the
truth. Moreover, truth is of it self so strong, as it ouercomes all things,
and so durable, as it contendeth with eternity. Psalm. 117. 2.
Veritas Domini manet in aeternum. The truth of the Lord endures for ever.
Bethink your self (my Lord) I pray ye, of that so public sentence, which
the young man gave to Darius, in favor of the truth.


Lodouico. I remember the young man's glorious victory, against his other
companions: but I have forgotten the manner, and what were his words to them.


Claudio. Among the infinite multitude of most noble Courtiers, The History of
the three young men in the Court of king Darius.
which Darius king of Persia had attending on him, there were three very comely
and wise young men, being of the Guarde, and keepers of the kings person,
awaiting in his secret lodging as chamberlaines. These met together, and
concluded to propound, or utter forth an Enigmae in the presence of the king,
and he, that in the judgment of the kings wise council, did with greatest
discretion unfold it, should have most precious gifts, and sit next in person
to the king, Esdras. 3. 4. 5. 6
as is at large to be read in the book of Esdras.

All three did put, under the pillowe royal, the solution of the mystical
sentence, What thing was the strongest.
consisting of these few words: What thing in the world was strongest. Being
left under the bed pillow, as has bin said already, the first said, that the
strongest thing was wine, the second said, the king was stronger, 1. wine.
but the third, whose name was Zerobabell, he wrote, 2. The king.
that women were strongest, but yet truth overcomes all things. 3. women:
but truth overcomes al things


The king being risen from his bed, each one severally presented his solution,
and all the Magistrates, Senators, Consuls and Pretors of Persia, being
congregated together: the Enigmae was publicly read in the presence of them
all, as also the meaning thereof: whereupon the young men being called, they were
commanded (one after another) to yield a reason of their several opinions, and
the first in order, beginning, thus spoke;

I say that wine is strongest, because the power thereof seduceth all men's
minds, The first man maintains the power of wine.
yea even the kings, or the very wisest men in the world; it makes a man
secure and iocond, and to forget all melancholy, debt, dread of the king, or
any public magistrate: it causes him to take arms, and rush into very
perilous stratagems, yet in short while after, all these things do vanish
from remembrance.

He ceassing, The second man, approving the power of kings defe^deth the same
very strongly.
the second followed in this manner, Men do possess both Sea and land, and
the king is above them all, who only by his authority, without stirring from
his regal throne, makes but a beck and it is obeyed, gives but command to
his subjects, and they fulfill what he would have done: he throws down
houses, ruinateth cities, kills men, abafeth mountains, exalts valleys,
enioyneth tributes, erecteth Palaces, builds cities, planteth vines and other
trees, the king only keeps in his royal city, and his command stretches
to infinite others, yet none dare be so hardy as to disobey it. Is he not
strong then, quoth he? and so concluded.

The third appearing, in an humble habit, and very comely behavior, made
low reverence to the kings Majesty, and afterward to all his assembled
Council, and thus began to maintain his solution. The third man justifies,
first, the might of women.
Great Lords, in so much as I discern the king to be strong, and wine also
strong, enforcing dotage and unadvised boldness yet find I another thing to go
beyond both the one and the other. Now what may it be, that so highly
predominateth, if not a woman?

A woman brought forth the king, and all those men that ouerrule both Sea and
land, yea, those that planted vines, from whence the wine comes, yea, each
one of them, that do such memorable deeds of valor, was borne of a woman,
who is the glory of man, his jewel, joy and cheifest contentmente, from
whom (it appears) he cannot be separated. If he get riches, if he have
heaps of gold and silver, if he enjoy pearls, iewelles and precious stones,
if he have fair and costly garments: yet if he see a woman acceptable in his
eye, he gives them all to her, even with highest contentment.

He forsakes his Father that be got him: his mother that gave him birth, and
man gives himself (in so bountiful manner) to his wife, as he neither minds
his dear country, his most affected friends, or any thing else beside, but
only addicts himself to a woman. Nay, that which is much more, many do leave
their own houses, and (with armed weapons) enter woods and other places, to set
upon passe^gers, yet bring their infamous theft home to their esteemed women.
Diverse have slain themselves for women, others have become foolish and mad,
and others lived as slaves and poor servants for them.

I have seen Apemena, daughter to Bezacis, and Concubine to the king, sit upon
his right hand, and (with undaunted boldness) take from off the kings head,
his Crown imperial, and set it on her own head: nay more, and far beyond that
(O mighty impudency) she grew on into such audaciousnes, as she dared to give
the king a blow with her hand, and he patiently endured it. Is not a woman much
stronger, then either wine, or the king?

The king in his Majesty, and all his congregated counselors, stood amazedly
looking one upon another, delivering gestures of great admiration: when yet,
the third young man began again, and spoke concerning truth, in order
ensuing.

Great is the earth, The third man defends the omnipotent power of truth
excelse the heavens, and most swift the course of the Sun, for in one day he
wheels about the whole globe of the earth: but he that made all these things
by his high wisdom, made also the truth, which is far more strong then all
things else created. All countries calls upon truth, heaven it self has
blessed it, all the creatures honored it, yea, have stood in fear and
trembling of it, because there is no iniquitye at all in it.

The king is wicked, wine is wicked, women are wicked, all the sons of men
are wicked, and all their works wicked, for there is no truth in them, and in
their wickedness they perish: but the truth continues steadfast, it begets
strength of it self, and stands on strict terms with eternity: it lives
ever, wins victory over al things: it is no accepter of persons, judges all
justly, without either fear or respect.

In truths judgment there is no sinful thing, but is thoroughly full of
power, rule and emperie, the majesty thereof abides, to all times and ages,
and for a final conclusion to approve his words, he said: Benedictus Deus
veritatis, and so ceased.

No sooner had he imposed silence to his speech, The whole Senate applaude
the power of truth.
but all the whole Senate, of most noble spectatours, with an high voice and
cheerful applause, accorded to the sentence of this third young man, and cried
out: 1. Esdras. 4. 41.
Magna est veritas, and praeualet. Then did the king accept him as his Cosen,
and promised to give him whatsoever he would demand. But he (like a just man)
desired only, that the king would but be mindful of his vow made to God,
for reedifying the Temple of Jerusalem again, and restoration of all those
vessels of gold and silver, which served for the use of sacrificing.


Lodouico. An excellent Enigmae, an excelleent interpretation, and so much the
more excellent, as in agreeing and consenting, with that which the holy
Scripture says on the behalf of truth: Veritas Domini manet in aeteruum:
The truth of the Lord endures for ever. Which is so strong, that it
overcomes all things, even as oil mounteth abue all other liquors: and
because the truth is God himself, there can be nothing imagined more strong
then he.

A lie has short legs, A lie has short legs, and haltes every where.
says the aunciente proverb, and his halting is very soon discerned, for it
lastes no longer then coming to discovery, and then it departes with most
infamous reproof. And in regard it is such a hateful vice, I suppose, the
wise man wrote thus thereof: Eccle. 20. 24.
Potior fur, quam assiduitas vir^ mendacis: perditionem autem ambo
haereditabunt. A thief is better then a man that is accustomed to lie, they
both shall have destruction to heritage. Of thieves and liars, both are thieves.
For both are thieves, one steals men's goods, the other steals truth,
honor and reputation from men.

For ever let this accursed tongue be dumb, because it is better to be
sentenced with eternal silence, never so much as to dare to speak one word:
then to utter falshoode, to the dishonor of him that speaks it, the danger
of our neighbor, and injury of God the truth it self. Muta fi^^t labia
dolosa.


Finis Cap. 9.
The Argument.
Wherein, according to the course hitherto continued, they now discourse on the
several tongues of the detractor and murmurer, and upon what occasion, the
Devil (having a great delight to lie, and accuse us) was said to be dumb.
Herein likewise are handled, many deceipts of the Devil, many mysteries of
confessing our sins unto God: And how one angellis said to speak unto
another, without sight of each other; A discourse very curious, learned and
profitable.

Chap. 10.
CLAVDIO. Hell is better, then an evil tongue, says the holy ghost, by the
mouth of Solomon. Eccl. 28. 18. 21.
Multi ceciderunt in ore gladij: sed non sic, quasi qui interierunt per linguam
suam. Mors illius, mors nequissima, and vtilis infernus potius quam illa. There
be many that have perished by the edge of the sword, but not so many as have
fallen by the tongue. A wicked tongue is worse then the pain of hell.
The death thereof is an evil death: hell were better then such a one. How is
it possible, that the tongue (how vile soever it be) should not be better then
hell? If there be no greater pains, then those of hell, how is the tongue said
to be worse then hell?


Lodouico. Exceeding great are the pains of hell, I cannot deny it, but yet
they hurt not so much as the biting tongue does: which blasphemeth God,
murmures against the Saints, and speaks evil of men. Hell hurts none but
the damned, but the tongue offends God and his Saints.
Hell hurts none, but such as are thereinto condemned: but the tongue
outrageth God and his Saints, whom hell by no means can offend. And more
profitable is hell, then the wicked tongue, because hell (being duly
considered on by us) makes us refrain from sin: but the evil tongue is the
cause of many sins: for, by hearing the murmurings one of another, we are
easily drawn to judge and speak evil.

Therefore the holy ghost affirms, that the wicked tongue, as meaning
(perhaps) that of the detractour, murmurer and defamer, has some resemblance
with the diabolical tongue, The Deuilles tongue.
which ceasseth not to accuse us before God, according as Saint John says.
Proiectus est accusator fratrum nostrorum, Apoc. 12. 10.
qui accusabat illos ante conspectu^ Dei nostri die and nocte. The accuser of
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God day and night.


Claudio. It is a ma^ucilous matter, and well worthy consideration, how the
devil, being so great a murmurer, that he ceasseth not day and night, The
Devil being so great an accuser how is he said to be dumb?
to accuse us before God, of all our negligences, be they never so small: yet
how he should sometime hold his peace, in such manner, as is written of him in
Saint Luke. Erat Jesus eijciens Daemonium, and illud erat mutum. Then he cast
out a Devil, and he was dumb. Luke 11. 14.
How could so great a talker, an accuser, a detractour and a defamer, hold his
peace, and observe silence?


Lodouico. You have brought an important matter into the field, consisting of
greater difficulty, Three kinds of speaking, and three kinds of tongues.
then it appears to be. We find that there are three kinds of speaking, and
as many kinds of tongues, to weet, of the mind, of the mouth, and of the act or
work: of all which, David speaking, says. Labia dolosa, in cord and cord
loquuti sunt. Flattering with their lips, Psalm. 12. 2. 3. 4.
and speaking with a double heart: there is the first tongue, 1. The tongue of
the mind.
and the first kind of talking. Disperdat Dominus vniuersa labia dolosa, and
linguam magniloquam. The Lord cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaks proud things: there is the second tongue, 2. The tongue of the mouth.
and second kind of talking. Linguam nostram magnificabimus, labia nostra a
nobis sunt, or, opera nostra a nobis sunt: quis noster Dominus est? with our
tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own; or our works are our own, who
is Lord over us? there is the third tongue, 3. The tongue of the deed or
work.
and third kind of talking, whereof it seems the holy ghost, speaking by the
wise man's mouth, says. Lingua tertia multos commouit, and dispersit illos de
gente in gentem. Eccle. 28. 16.
The double tongue has disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation.
Wicked (then) is the first tongue, that is, to think evil in the heart; worse
is the second, Of all the three tongues together, in their badnes.
that is, to spread abroad the evil conceited, by significant speeches; but
worst of all is the third tongue, that is, to put in effect, the evil devised
and pronounced.

Great was the sin of good Noah's successors, thinking (in pride of mind) to
build that infamous Tower, All the three tongues exampled, in the builders of
Babel.
as merely opposing themselves against God: but worse was it, when one
expressed to an other (with words full of loftiness) their detestable
thoughts; yet worst of all, was their putting the same in execution. And it is
to be noted, that God had never divided their tongues, but when (in effect)
they builded the tower. Genesis 11. 5. 7. 8.
Descendit autem Dominus vt videret ciuitatem and turrim, quam aedificabant
filij Adam. But the Lord came down, to see the city and tower which the sons
of Adam builded. And a little after, God said. Venite, descendamus, and
confundamus ibi linguam eorum, vt non audiat vnusquisque vocem proximi sui.
Atque ita diuisit eos Dominus, ex illo loco in vniuersas terras, and
cessauerunt aedificare ciuitate^. Come on, let us go down, and there confound
their language that every one perceive not another speech. So the Lord
scattered them from thence upon all the earth, and they left off to build the
city. Whereby may be gathered, that the holy ghost meant them, and the third
tongue, spoken of by the wise man, Eccle. 28. 16.
Lingua tertia multos commouit, and dispersit illos de gente in gentem.

My Lord Iacono da voragine, Example of the Archbishop of Genoa, in a Sermon of
his.
the Archbishop of Genoa, and of the Preachers order, said in one of his
Sermons preached in Lent: That this monster, which has three tongues, like an
infernal Cerberus, is he, that is al these together, to weet, a flatterer, a
detractor, and a discord breeder, Three tongues to be cut out.
or, as we may say, a dissension sower, out of whose head, all these three
tongues must be cut, and he be enforced to perpetual silence. The first
tongue, Esaias. 3. 11.
because it deceives: Popule meus, qui te beatum dicunt, ipsi te decipiunt, 1.
For deceiving.
O my people, they that lead thee, cause thee to err. The second, because it
defameth: Sepi aures tuas spinis, and linguam nequam noli audire, 2. For
defaming.
and ori tuo facito ostia, and seras auribus tuis. Hedge thy possession with
thorns, and make doors and bars for thy mouth. The third, Eccle. 28. 24.
because it conturbeth: 3. For molesting.
Calumnia conturbat sapientem. Slander troubles a wise man. Now let it be what
ye will, it suffices, that we find three sorts of tongues, and three kinds of
speaking, to wit, of the mind, of the mouth, and of the work.

With the mind God is said to talk, How God is said to talk with the Angel,
the soul and the devil, in the mind, the first kind of speaking.
with the Angel, with the soul and with the devil, not because God has any
need (by speaking) to understand the thoughts of others, for he knows all
things before they are thought, but for manifestation of his will unto us. We
cannot then say of the devil: Et illud erat mutu^, because (in this manner) he
speaks grievously, for he never cease to think, and to contriue evil
against god, against the Angels, and against men: and, what he has wickedly
co^plotted, if he could put it in execution, he would willingly do it.

By the second kind of discoursing, The second kind of speaking, with the
mouth, as one man to another.
namely, the mouth, one man speaks to another in this world. The Angels and
the devil likewise speak in this manner, when forming ay^ry bodies, they
appear unto us in humane shape, and talk according to our use. Or else, when
entering into humane bodies, they move the tongues of them according to their
own wills: and in this manner of speaking, we may say of the devil; Et illud
erat mutum, not in moving, but hindering the use of any poor man's tongue.

With the word of work, The word of work, the third kind of speaking* so God
speaks, the devil and the good Angel, etc.
God speaks, and the Angel with the devil, but not any thing near together,
the devil with the Angel or with God: because the devil has no power at all
against God, or against the good Angel, therefore (in this sort) we may say; Et
illud erat mutum.


Claudio. So then he speaks, as if he spoke not. Is it not written, that he
made the great battle in heaven? Then he bawled loud enough, How the
Devil speaks with the word of work, demanded.
against Michaell the Archangell, by this kind of talking, and every hour
(with the tongue of work,) he opposes himself against God and his Saints,
tempting them in variable manner, and of Christ it is written, that he tempted
him in the wilderness in diverse kinds.


Lodouico. I deny not, that the devil speaks sometime with God, An Answer to
the dema^d.
and with the holy Angels, by the word of work absolutely: but I say, that the
devil thereby can neither hurt God, or his blessed Angels. And although that
Christ our Savior was tempted, and Michaell the Archangell combated with
Lucifer, yet both the one and other remained conquerors: for of the ones
victory it is written; Math. 4. 10.
vade Sathana, non tentabis, etc. and of the others, says Saint John; Apoc.
12. 9.
protectus est Draco, ille magnus serpens antiquus, etc. Behold then how the
devil, although he work many things against God and his Angels, The Devil
cannot personally offend God or his Angels.
yet cannot he personally offend either the one or other, and whatsoever the
infernal spirits do contriue, against the divine law and natural order,
they do it by divine permission, wherefore we may say, in this manner of
speaking, the devil is dumb.


Claudio. I am satisfied, and am persuaded, that Christ spoke of these three
kinds of talking, when he made this difference: inter reum iudicio, Math* 5.
22.
reum consilio, and reum gehennae ignis: guilt of judgment, guilt of a
Council, Three several kinds of guiltines.
and guilt of hell fire. Upon which words venerable Beda discoursing, says. In
primo est vnum, s. ira sola; in secundo sunt duo, Venerable Beda on the three
guilts.
s. ira and vox; iram significans; in tertio sunt tria, s. ira, vox, and in
voce vituperationis expressio, etc. according to his begun discourse.


Lodouico. The Angel speaks with God, How the Angel speaks with God, like
the Scholar to his master. etc.
not after such manner, as the master talks with the Scholar, to teach or
instruct: but in such sort, as the Scholar speaks to the master, to learn
some knowledge of him. The Angel reasons with God, to consult, on what
himself has in duty to do, or (as one stricken in admiration, of Gods infinite
excellencies) breaks forth into divine praises, with a very fiery affection.
Or else, the Angel talks with God, in a mute voice, as declaring thereby,
ardent charity, and most amorous desire, the actions of an inflamed or burning
heart. How the holy soul talks with God, which the Devil cannot do.
In this manner likewise, the holy soul talks (in her kind) with God, both
in prayer and contemplation: but the devils are dumb, and know not how to
speak in this manner; wherefore, remaining thus silent, and bard from the
divine praises, we may very well say: Et illud erat mutum.


Claudio. What kind of conferring is this, in one Angel with another? And how
can one Angel discover his will to another, but others (being by) must know
it? Or can a man manifest his heart to another man, without others
apprehension, or taste thereof?


Lodouico. One Angel conferreth with another, How one Angel conferreth with
another, by the word of the mind.
by the word of the mind, manifesting his will, by a certain kind of
natural light, whereby he directs his thought to one, even him that should
know it, and to whom his will extends, and not to any other. In this manner,
is one Angel said to speak to another, whether it be an Angel of light, or
of darkness: and this happens thus, because the will moves (as
commaundresse) the understanding to his operation, Intelligence is in the
understanding in three kinds.
and intelligence abides in the understanding after three manners, that is to
say, habitually, actually, and as it is related or imparted to others.

A clear case is it, Act of the will.
that by the act of the will, understanding passes from the first to the
second act, and from the second to the third. When our mind would consider any
thing actually, it issues from the first to the second act, Speech of the
mind.
and speaks to it self, because the interior conceit of the mind, is called
the word and speech of the mind. When (afterward) the conceit of the mind is
ordained or prepared, to report it self to another by the will of the Angel:
then is that conceit manifested in such sort, as the others can take no
knowledge thereof, although there be a thousand Angels together. Nor can we
in this manner term the devil to be dumb, How the Devil can not be said
to be dumb.
because that this kind of speaking communeth with all of angelical nature.

Beside, one Angel may confer with another, by the word of work, whereby is
discovered in lively effect what was the intention: Angels may co^ferre by the
word of work.
nor in this kind is it absolutely to be said; Et illud erat mutum, because one
devil may demonstrate to another, his will with the work. As when the devil
filled Job full of ulcers, Example of the Deuls plaguing of Job.
and took from him all the goods of fortune, the other devils could plainly
perceive, that Satan's intent was to bring Job to desperation, and to make him
blaspheme his Creator; but he deceived himself, because it sorted to a
contrary effect.

One Angel also speaks to another, The speech of illuminatio^, only used by
the superior Angels, with the inferior.
by communication of the light divine, manifesting the divine revelations,
which do immediately depend upon God. Which kind of speaking is called
illumination, one Angel illuminating another. Nor do all the Angels confer
together in this manner, but only the superior with the inferior, and we may
say that all the Angels of darkness are dumb, being unable to speak in this
sort: because the divine judgments are not revealed to them, they being
deprived of celestial grace, and condemned to the eternal horrors, therefore
it is true, that illud erat mutum.


Claudio. All these reasons are fair, worthy and quaint enough; but yet it
seems to me a very great matter, that the father of lies, Insinuatio^ for
further satisfaction in this point.
that importunate shameless accuser, that iangling false tel-tale, who
delights so much in lying: should be said to be dumb, to hold his peace, and
observe silence.


Lodouico. A thousand other reasons there are, wherefore the devil should be
called dumb, and every one far better then other: but I suppose, Offer of
further progression.
that I have answered formally enough to your doubt; yet, if I thought, that
(by length of argument) I should not grow tedious and offensive to you, I
could produce you diverse other.


Claudio. Your talk is so sweet, your discourse so ingenious, and my desire
so insatiable, (not that I covet to hear matter of novelty, The proceeding
accepted kindly.
as perhaps this may appear to be, which (by the curiosity) affoordes as
great commoditye:) that I hope to attend you in the height of contentment,
without any thought or touch of tediousness. Say on then, without any eye to
length of time, which, I dare assure you will seem short enough, except it may
grow to offend your self: otherwise, to me it is most welcome.


Lodouico. Sometimes, Example of one man oufacing an other with a lie.
when two men confer together, and (in talk) one of them tells a lie, as
striving to make it mainely believed, if (peradventure) there steppeth one in
unlooked for, who knows at first sight (as we say) the truth of the matter,
and how falsely the one informs the other: undoubtedly, if it were not for
manly respect, public disgrace, or such like modest forbearance, me thinks
he should say; Hold thy tongue liar, do not I know how foolishly thou lie,
and how shamelesly thou striuest to make a lie believed?

The doctrine of truth, The first proof, confirmed by an ancient father.
according to the opinion of a learned father, consists in three things, to
weet, In the thing that is to be believed; in that which is to be hoped for,
and in the thing that is to be done. for the devil, talking to man with his
three ^orked Cerberine tongue, as the enuyer of mankind, and as the deprauer of
the divine honor; he teaches the quite contrary of all that is to be
believed, he cherishes men in doing uncivil actions, and such as beseem not
the divine aspect, making promise of vain things, altogether worth just
nothing. Christ thrusts the lie into the devils throat.
But Christ coming in place, the master of truth, and hearing so many lies
uttered by him, thrusts the ly into the devils throat, and with the triple
cord of truth, binds fast his tongue; enstructing, the verity of things that
are to be believed, the honestly of things that are to be done, and promises
the eternity of heavenly things, which are only to be hoped for. Oh, would you
not then, and at such a time, have this damned liar to rest silent, to be mute
and dumb from any more lying? Et illud erat mutum.

Yet better. The second proof of the truth it self.
Jesus Christ is the truth it self, Ego sum via, veritas and vita: I am the
way, and the truth, and the life. This also could his very enemies themselves
confess, when (fraudulently) they said to Christ: Magister, Mat. 22. 16.
scimus quia recte dicis and doces, and non accipis personam, sed viam Dei in
veritate doces: Luke 20. 21.
Master, we know that thou say and teach right, neither do thou accept
man's person, but teach the way of God truly. A lie is quite contrary to
the truth.
Contrary to truth is a lie, the devil is the inuenter, the father and
begetter of lies* now, would not you, that Christ coming upon the earth, and
delivering this eternal truth, that the father of lying (despite his heart)
should have his mouth looked up, and stand dumb? Therefore it is written, that
Illud erat mutum: Comminatus est ^i Jesus, Mark. 1. 25.
dicens: Obmutesce. Jesus rebuked him saying: Hold thy peace.

Yet better. Christ is called the wisdom of the eternal father. Nos autem
praedicamus Christum crucifixum, The third proof, of the wisedo^e of the
father.
Iudaeis quidem scandaelum, Gentibus autem stultitia^. Ipsis autem vocatis
Iudaeis atque Graecis, Christum Dei virtutem, and Dei sapientiam. We preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews even a stumbling block, 2. Cori. 1. 23. 24.
and unto the Grecians, foolishness. But unto them which are called, both of
the Jews and Grecians, we preach Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of
God* etc. It could not be otherwise possible, When the eternal wisedo^e
speaks, the Devil must be silent.
but this eternal wisdom being speaking on earth, the devil must needs then
be dumb and silent, yea, even in despite of his cheifest height of malice.
For; Sapientiam autem non vincit malitia; Malice cannot overcome wisdom,
therefore, maugre all his mischief and malice, Sap 7. 30.
he is dumb: Et illud erat mutum. Et increpans non sinebat ea loqui. Luke. 4.
41.
He rebuked them, and suffered them not to speak, etc. For it is against
equity, when the eternal wisdom speaks, that foul malice should be prating
too, so much the rather, because he can never open his mouth, but lies are
ready to issue forth: Cum loquitur mendicium, John. 8. 44.
ex propriis loquitur: When he speaks a lie, then he speaks of his own,
etc.

Better yet. The fourth proof, of the word of the father.
Christ is the word of the eternal father: contrary to a word is silence or to
be mute, or (at the least) contradictory. The devil evermore opposes himself
against God, therefore at the presence of the word, The Devil speaks not at
the words presence.
he speaks not: Et illud erat mutum. And I am sure you would not otherwise, but
when the Creator speaks, the creature (whether he will or no) must hold his
peace.

Better yet. The fifth proof, of the tongue to speak, given only to man.
Among all the creatures, to man only, was given a tongue that could speak,
for albeit many other creatures have tongues yet can they not speak with them,
but man alone. The Ass that Balaam rode o^, spoke, but understood not what he
spoke, when he said, Numb. 22. 28. 29. 30.
turning aside to his smiter: Quid feci tibi? Cur percutis me ecce iam tertio?
what have I done unto thee? that thou have smitten me now three times? Balaams
Ass spoke, but understood not what he said.
whereto Balaam answered: Quia commeruisti, and illusisti mihi: vtinam haberem
gladium vt te percuterem: Because thou have deserved it and have mocked me: I
would there were a sword in my hand for now I would kill thee. And the Ass
replied again: Nonne animal tuum sum cui semper insedere confueuisti vsque in
praesentem diem? Di^, quid simile un quam fece ^m tibi? Am I not thine Ass,
which thou have ridden upon since thy first time unto this day? have I used at
any time to do thus unto thee? etc. But in all these lamentatio^s which the Ass
made, he never understood himself, because he was but a beast.

But what greater beast is there then the devil, who is called by Saint
Bernard: The words of S. Barnard concerning the Devil.
Bestia omnium bestiarum bestialissima: the beast among all beasts, the very
beastliest? And a reverend Father, at the very point of surrendering up his
soul to his Creator, said, upon the devils appearing to him: A reverent
father, at his giving up the ghos^e.
Quid asta^ hic cruenta bestia? Why stand thou here thou bloody beast?
Likewise S. John in many places of his Apocalypse, calls him the beast, and, in
the shape of a beast, diverse times he saw him. Apoc. 17. 8.
Bestia quam vidisti, fuit, and non est, and ascensura est de abysso. The beast
that thou have seen, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit. The devil then being such a great deformed beast, who voluntarily has
abandoned his cheifest good, how would you then that he should speak?
therefore, Et illud erat mutum.

Yet better. The sixte Proof, of Ada^s transgressing Gods commandment.
When Adam transgressed the divine commandment, God came, and reproved him
greatly for it: but he excused himself, by saying, that he had not eaten, but
only, as fearing to offend his beloved companion. Mulier quam dedisti mihi
sociam, dedit mihi de ligno and comedi: Genesis 3. 12. 13.
The woman which thou gave to be with me she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. God reproouing Eua for the fact, she also excused her self, by saying,
that the Serpent, the beast infernal had deceived her. The Devil stood dumb,
without any excuse.
Serpens decepit me, and comedi: The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. But
the devil stood as dumb, and said nothing in excuse of his sin, therefore; Et
illud erat mutum.


Claudio. What should the wicked beast have answered in excuse of his evil: but
that he did it on mere malice, on rooted and inueterate envy, not by frailty,
or any other suggestion, could he say he sinned? Some other reasons more proper,
would I have had you alleged, whereby this mutiner might be called dumb: because
all these hitherto rehearsed, though they be very good, yet none of the^ has
so smooth a taste, as absolutely to ^i^ my desirous appetite.


Lodouico. We may say that he is called dumb, The seventh proof, of the
Devils making us all du^be by his false suggestions.
because he makes us all dumb with his false suggestions, and by them he
works so much as he can: for example. That we praise not the Lord, neither
speak to him in our prayers, nor confess the multitude of our sins, but in all
and for all, we hold our selves silent rather. Therefore (perhaps was it) that
the man possessed with the devil, whereof the Evangelist speaks, where he
says, Mat. 12. 22.
Et illud erat mutum; was not only dumb, but blind and deaf likewise, Example
of the blind man in the Gospel.
so that (in no manner) he could either praise God, give good example to his
neighbor, or confess the grievous burden of his own sins, to weet, neither
with his heart, or any kind of other gesture. For, if a man sees not the good
examples of others, nor hears the holy documentes of heavenly doctrine, nor
can require with his tongue, what appertains to the health of his soul: very
vnaptlie can his heart (being naturally inclined to evil) think any good thought
without the especial assistance of God.

Hence was it, The manner of the Devils afflictions laid on the blind, and
their several ends.
that to bring this poor wretch to extreme necessity, he locked up his ears,
because he should listen to no godly doctrine; shut up his sight, to the end,
he might not behold other men's good examples; and because he should not prevent
his own ruin, he tied a knot upon his tongue, least he might (otherwise)
praise the Lord, admonish his neighbor, confess his faults, ask supply for
his wa^ts, and confer (christianlike) among his friends: and being (by him)
reduced to this lamentable estate, he hoped afterward, that he would fall into
the sin of desperation.

He is also called dumb, An other reason, why he is called dumb.
by the effects which he works in us, and by the infamous conquest he makes
of us. In like manner, as Scipio Emilianus was called Affricanus, only for
conquering Africa, Scipio Affricanus.
and joining it to the Roman Empire. Or, in such manner as Titus Manlius,
Titus Manlius surnamed Torquatus.
who killing (in a combat) a knight of France, and taking a chain from his
neck, which he put about his own: was called Torquatus by the chain, which
in the Latin idiome is termed Torques. So the devil, making a man dumb, and
bereauing him of the use of speech, is therefore called dumb himself.


Claudio. An honest stranger, The eight proof, by comparison of a Prince,
besieging a City round about.
in good sadness (my Lord) is this, that for the good lodging allowed him,
returns such an unkind counter-chaunge. The vile devil dealing with this
poor man, like as a Prince does: who, because he would domineer over some
city, besieges it first round in every part with his army, so that on no side
succor can be expected. Whereupon, the Citizens seeing themselves in this
desperate estate, do surrender themselves up into their enemies hands.

So did Holofernes when he besieged Bethulia, Example of Holofernes his
besieging of Bethulia.
with an hundred thousand foot Soldiers, and twenty two thousand horsemen: he
damd up all the passes, quite changed the water courses, so that in the space
of twenty days, they had not in the city one drop of water. Their case
being thus desperate, they resolved to give up themselves, (as a preye) into
the Armies power, and had done so, but that (by a supernatural help) God
sent them succor.

So dealt the devil with this poor man, Allusion of the Devils dealing with
this blind man.
Damming up the torrent of speech or eloquence, closing up the way-gate of
hearing, and robbing him of the cheerful benefit of sight: that then drouping
down into despair, he might (by none of those organes) expect any succor.
That so having, by no way of the senses, any entrance left for help, he seeing
no man else to do good, that (by their example) he might convert; he hearing
no preaching against sin, that his heart thereby might take a loathing of it,
and he, speaking not one word with his tongue, least by true contrition, and
consession of his sins to God, he might call and cry to him for help in this
extremity, might despair and dye.

Herein, The ninth proof by comparison of a sleeper in a close chamber.
the devil observed the rule of him, who entering into a chamber to sleep,
commands those of the house, to keep strict silence, shut up the windows,
lock up the doors, to the end, that not only any noise might offend him, but
also, that the least glimse of light should not be discerned. Allusio^ to the
poor man.
So did the devil with this poor man, he impeached every sense, that could
yield him any service toward help or health, that the body being so shut up in
obscurity, the soul it self might also dwell in darkness, never more to look
on the light of celestial grace.


Lodouico. The devil is an enemy to every good work, The tenth proof by the
Devils hindering us, from confessing our sins to God.
and therefore he makes us dumb, when we would enter into the closet of our
heart, and lay open to God (by true confession) the multitude of our sins.
And this he does, because we should not unfold our infirmity, to the true
physician of our souls, therefore he then strives most to make us dumb, when
silence ought most of all to be broken.

Little cares the Iaoler, Comparion of a Iaylor, or prison keeper.
or (as we may rather say) the prison keeper, if his prisoners walk about the
house at liberty, without fetters on their feet, or manicles on their hands,
when the prison gate is safe shut, up, and himself keeps the keye thereof.
Even so, little cares the devil, if the miserable sinner have his hands at
liberty, to give alms, or do any other good deed, if his feet also be
unbound, to visit the sick, the imprisoned, or to go where any other need is
required: An excellent Allusion, well worth the marking.
so that the door of the mouth be fast locked up, whereby he might call to his
Lord and maker, to tell him the weight and burden of his sin, that lies
very heavily upon his soul, therefore it may be very well said: Et illud erat
mutum. I think the Prophet Esaias meant as much, Esaias. 52. 2.
when he said: Solue vincula colli tui, captiua filia Sion: untie, or take from
thy neck, the snare that holds thee captive, Oh daughter Sion, that is to say,
the sinful soul to forsake her sins.

Among all the chains or snares for thraldom, The eleventh proof, by a chain
or snare fastened about the neck, by way of comparion.
that which is fastened about the neck, is the very worst of all other,
because, by the least twitch of restraint, a man thereby may be strangled and
dead. Although the thief in the prison, have his hands and feet shackled, yet
notwithstanding, he has some hope of life, either by favor of friends, or by
a great sum of money, or else by flight. But when he sees the hangman, to fasten
a cord or chain about his neck, he takes himself to be quite dispatched, and no
longer hope of life then remains. In like manner, the wretched sinner,
Allusio^ to the wretched sinner, by the benefit of his speech.
though his hands and feet be restrained from any good act, yet it hurts
him not so much, as to lose the liberty of his speech, to have his throat
and windpipes passage stopped.

For, if he have but the freedom of his tongue, there is sound hope of inward
health, for that organe will yet entreat for him, speaking sincerely, simply,
humbly, purely, faithfully, nakedly, mournefully, discreetly, freely, strongly,
incessantly, shamefastly and obediently, he may have remedy for all euilles
whatsoever, by this happy means of calling to God, before his case be utterly
dispatched. Therefore the devil (more then by any other restraint) watches to
stifle us with this dumb collar, The Devil his dumb collar.
for then he counts himself sure of his prey, never doubting the perdition of
the poor sinners soul, in which respect we may well say; Et illud erat mutum.


Claudio. The very engine and snare of the woolfe, who, the first thing he does
with his prey, The twelfth proof, by comparison of the woolf and the poor
beast.
fastens his teeth surely to the throat of the beast, to the end he should not
cry: for by crying, the watchful dogs (being near hand as keepers) might
recover the poor beast out of his teeth. So deals the infernal woolfe, with
poor, just, innocent sheep or lambs, Allusion to the infernal woolfe.
for so are they called by Christ himself in the Gospel, for many respects:
Statuet quidem oues a dextris suis: He shall set the sheep on his right hand.

The first thing he does, Math. 25. 33.
he seeks to strangle them by the throat, to the end, they should not cry out,
to the careful watchmen of their souls, Preachers are, or ought to be, the
careful watchmen of our souls.
the Preachers and dispensers of god his sacred blessings, (who have the
furniture for their souls safety in their keeping, and watch day and night,
for defense of their flocks,) least by their prayers, preachings and devout
exhortations, they should regaine them, from the devouring teethe of this
infernal wolf.

For he cares not, though they show some few fruits of faith, as giving alms
to the poor, hospitality to the harbourlesse, and praying for the oppressed:
The Devil most hinders our calling upon god.
but (by no means) must they call to God and his ministers, to lay open the
foul deformities of their sins, to reveal the true compunction of their
hearts, but smother all in silence, stifle one penitente thought, with a
thousand preparations to deeds far worse and worse, and (as apt for his
purpose) he has five several sharp teethe, The Devil has five several
teeth to gripe withal.
wherewith he gripes them.

The first, is shame, for when a man sins, the devil depriues him of all
blushing, Of the first tooth, shame.
and every good or manly respect, till he comes into the Church, and then he
restores it him again, and his comely blushing color may be perceived, even
with entire remembrance of his heavy transgressions. But what does he upon
this? when he ^ees the poor sinner ready to talk with God, and to unlade the
freight of his ouerburthened conscience: even then he intricates his mind with
a thousand strange thoughts, and rounds him in the ear with some silent
suggestions, as thus.

If thou disclose thy secret sins to God, The malicious suggestio^s of the
Devil when we are in the Church, talking with God.
or show thy self to be ashamed of them, and intendest a perfect course of
repentance: why, others being by, and seeing thee, they will throw the
Publicanes disgrace in thy teeth, and say; thou art an hypocrite, a dissembler,
make a show of outward holiness, and art (indeed) but a very devil. So,
every one will be doubtful of conuersing with thee, as hating hypocritical
and formal holiness: and where before, thou wast reputed for an honest man,
of fellowly, friendly and sociable conversation; thou shall now be held for a
reformed fool, a melancholy, precise and captious companion, with a thousand
other such hellish objections, wherewith you are better acquainted in this kind,
then I can express them.


Lodouico. This toothe is to be broken in his mouth, How the Devils first
tooth is to be broken.
with a god sound stroke, and let it be, the perfect consideration, that at
length he shall be discovered to all the world, according as God spoke by
the Prophet Nahum. Nahum. 3. 5.
Reuelabo pudenda tua in facie tua, and ostendam in Gentibus nuditatem tuam,
and regnis ignominiam tuam, etc. I will discover thy skirtes upon thy face, and
will show the nations thy filthiness, and the kingdoms thy shame etc.

Socrates walking through the city, Example of Socrates, seeing a young man
coming forth of an harlo^ house.
espied a young man, who stood ready to step forth of an harlots house, but so
soon as he saw Socrates, he returned into the infamous house, as one ashamed.
But Socrates passing on, said to the young man: Non te pude at exire, sed
intrasse: Thou ought not be ashamed to come forth of that bad house, but
rather for thy entering into it. Even so the sinful soul, it should not be
ashamed to issue forth of the infamous house of sin, Allusio^ to the sinful
soul.
the mansion and dwelling of the devil, but for first entering into it rather;
it behooves us therefore to be careful of breaking out this tooth.


Claudio. The second tooth, The devils second tooth: Fear of repentance.
is the fear of repentance, whereto the offended conscience speaks, and
^aith, it is the sin of luxury, for chastisement whereof, let the pampered
ouer-hot body fast with bread and water. But the devil watching (as before) his
fit opportunity, tunes the tongue with this answer; The devils hinderance.
I am not able to fast, or forbear what my appetite desires, what repentance
then is likely to ensue upon this nice nature?


Lodouico. This tooth is to be broken, and that very easily, by due
consideration of the pains eternal. How the devils second tooth is to be
broken.
So may we soon refute, and put down the devil when he frights us with the
fear of repentance, to tell him: That a greater fear has surprised thee,
even the suffera^ce of those pains, which never will be ended.


Claudio. The third tooth, is the vain hope of long life, urging the sinner,
The devils third tooth: Hope of long life.
to procrastination of repentance, by a false persuasion of living long time:
as trusting in the iocond youth of years, the strength of our members, and the
present health of body. Never remembering, how frail this mortal life is, The
devils false persuasion*
compared by holy Job, to the wind, to a shadow, and to a flour, things that
vanishe altogether, with a glaunce of an eye or a puff of breath.


Lodouico. If we would break this toothe with small travail, let us then
consider, How the devils third toothe is to be broken.
that there is nothing more certain then death, nor more uncertain then the
hour thereof. And that, as the fish becomes taken by the hook, and dies, when
he thinks to live a longer date, Similie.
and void of ^aking: even so is man in the hand of death, caught when he most
hops of long life. Allusion.
According as the wise man says. Eccle. 9. 12.
Nescit homo finem suum* sed sicut pisces capiuntur hamo, and sicut aues laqueo
comprehenduntur, sic capiuntur homines in tempore malo, cum eis extempso
superuenerit No man does know his tim^, but as the fishes which are taken in an
evil net, or as the birds that are caught in the snare: so are the children of
men snared in the evil time, when it falls upon them suddenly.

When the simple bird feeds most sauourly on the bait, then without any
means of escape is she taken. Comparion of the birds feeding, with the
Allusion.
And even the very same is the case of man, when least he thinks on the hour
of death, in this unexpected hour is he taken, and falls into death, the fowlers
snare: therefore with this consideration, we may break the tooth of vain and
bootles^e hope.


Claudio. The fourth tooth, The Devils fourth tooth: Carelesnes of riotous
sins.
is this weak opinion, that by no means we must repent us, of any huff-cap or
riotous sin, because (says he) they are termed but good fellowship, tricks
of youth, or manly qualities. Beside, if we should repent them, it were but
needless, for (within a day or two) we shall fall into the same again, and
then the labor of repentance may be very well spared. The Devils insinuation.
And what ensues hereo^? only this conceit is daily buzzed into our ears by
the devil: That we have a certain kind of good will, to leave off these
vanities, but the more we strive to forgo them, the more our nature fastneth
liking on them, and sins incident to nature, do admit tolleration.


Lodouico. This tooth must needs be pulled out, How the Devils fourth tooth is to
be pulled out.
for by breaking it, some piece or stump may be left behind. Consider but thus
much, The knight or Soldier may well be counted foolish, that, returning
grievously wounded from the battle, Comparion of a wounded Soldier.
will not suffer himself to be dressed, or his hurts bound up, but (in a
bravery, and to be reputed a lusty gallant) says to the Chirurgian; Thou shall
bestow no pains upon me, because to morrow I must needs be in the battle
again. Fool, fool, might the Chirurgian answer him, is it not better going
well and half cured, then weakly, and with thy blood streaming forth about
thee?

In a far worse estate is the sinner, Allusio^ to the sinful man.
that makes so slight an account of repentance, and will not give over sin,
because his nature affects to sin. Fall down upon thy knees, put on a more
humble and tractable spirit, and desire thy Lord God to give thee grace, that
thou may abstain from all sins whatsoever: and if thou do thy part in
true penitence, so much as lies in thee, thou shall find God ready (at all
hours) to assiste and strengthen thee. The Devils fifth ^ooth: presuming too
much upon Gods mercy.



Claudio. The fifth tooth, is presumption, relying too much upon the divine
mercy, and saying within thy self: God is so merciful, as he will not permit
me any way to perish. He pardoned Peter his own denyer; The sinners
alleging of Examples in his own presu^ption.
Paul, his Churches grievous persecuter; Matthew, the rich covetous tol
gatherer; Zacheus the Publican, Mary Magdalen the great sinner, the Samaritane
her heresy; the woman her adultery, and the thief his iniquity, why then he
cannot choose but pardon me too. This presumptuous wretch never considers the
true and entire repentance of all these before named, and the especial graces
of God (thereby) conferred upon them; such as he bestows not upon every one,
but only on those, that in singleness of soul, and unfeigned repentance seek
after them.


Lodouico. This tooth may be broken, How the Deuilles first tooth is to be
broken.
by due consideration, that many are the eternal pains of hell, and many are
condemned to endure them, for presuming too rashly upon the divine mercy;
weening to compass that saucily, which is no way to be had but by true
simplicity, or to have a laborers hyre for idleness, when, he that works
not, must have no wages. Unwise may we call him, who being fallen into a
quagmire, Comparion of the man fallen into a bogge or quagmire.
with a purse full of money in his hand, and in very great peril of perishing,
will yet refuse, to catch hold on a cord, cast to him from a friends hand, that
by using some means to fasten it about him, he may the sooner be drawn out of
danger. But he, like a foolish man, loath to let fall the purse out of his hand,
because he would not loose such a sum of money: refuses the cords help; so (at
one instant) the purse and his life are lost together.

In a far worse case do I account the sinner, Allusio^ to the sinner, that
refuses peace in due time offered.
that refuses to accept the divine mercy in due time, but prefers a foolish
delight before it, and so is damned wilfully: for Misericordia, is said to be,
quasi miserorum chorda. We by our sinning, do fall into the bottomless depth
of hell, Of Mercy.
as David says, Infixus sum in limo profundi; I stick fast in the deep mire,
Psalm. 69. 2.
and god, in mere compassion, casts forth the cord of his mercy, An excellent
comparison.
to save us from perishing in our sins: but then, vain love to this world,
which we hold in the hand of our heart, will not permit us (for lucre thereof)
to take hold upon it. Let us therefore learn to be wise, and know when this
gracious blessing is offered us.

It comes, Similie of Time or occasion.
after the manner of time or occasion, figured by our elders with a hairy
forefront, but a bald scalpe behind, whereon grew the proverb: Front
capillosa; post est occasio calua. Let us not suffer our selves to be caught of
this ravening woolf, Proverb.
nor be stricken dumb by him: but breaking his hellish teeth, cry out with
the Prophet David, that we may be heard: Psalm. 120. 2.
Ad Dominuin cum tribularer clamaui, and exaudiuit me: when I was in trouble I
called upon the Lord, and he heard me. For, to be silent in such necessity, is
a most devilish and detestable error, therefore let us say; Et illud erat
mutum.


Finis Cap. 10.
The Argument.
Continuing on still the same matter and discourse, with diverse other excellent
reproves of this mighty sin of unwillingness to repent, and easing our
consciences of the heavy burden of sin, wherein no silence is to be kept. And
that the detractors tongue is like the Serpents: Also, how we ought sometimes
to cry out, and sometimes to hold our peace.

Chap. 11.
CLAVDIO. God commanded in Deuteronomy, The thirteenth proof, by a Virgin
defloured in the City.
the two and twentieth Chapter, that, if a virgin were defloured in the city,
she should be publicly stoned to death by the people, and he yields the
reason for this so severe punishment. Quia non clamauit cum esset in ciuitate:
Deuteronomy. 22. 24. 25. 26. 27.
Because she cried not, being in the city. For if she had cried out, perhaps,
the impudent man would not have been so forward, in committing such a great
misdeed: and by her not crying it appeared as an evident sign, that she
condiscended to this lustful act.

But if it so happened, Of the virgin defloured in the field.
that in the field she was deflowred, then God commanded, that the man only
should be stoned, and not the woman: because although she had there cried out,
she could not have had such help, as she might in the city. Sin autem in agro
repererit vir puellam, etc. Et apprehendens concubuerit cum ea; ipse mortetur
solus, puella nihil patietur, nec est rea mortis: quoniam sicut latro consurgit
contra fratrem suum, and occidit animam eius; ita a and puella perpessa est.
Sola erat in agro, clamauit, et nullus affuit qui liberaret eam. But if a man
find a betrothed maid in the field, and force her, and lie with her, then the
man that lay with her, shall dye alone. And unto the maid thou shall do
nothing, because there is in the maid no cause of death: for as when a man
rises against his neighbor, and wounds him to death, so is this matter. For
he found her in the field, the maid cried, and there was no man to succor her.

Our soul is this fair young virgin; virgo Israel, proiecta est in terram
suam, Allusion of the comparison.
non est quisuscitet eam: The virgin Israel is left upon her land, Amos. 5. 2.
and there is none to raise her up. Oh how many souls shall be stoned eternally
in hell fire, for not being subjected to this cry of hearty repentance?
because the devil has so stopped their throats, as they cannot cry to god at
all, but sitting wilfully dumb, and stubbomly unrepentant, deservedly they
perish. Whereas, if they had followed David's rule, and (by maine stearne voice)
broke the devils dumb strings; they might have triumphed at the sight of his
own deceit, and cast in his teeth, that repentance only, is able to free any
soul from him, and so have given him this bone to gnaw on, Et illud erat mutum.

Sometimes I have seen diverse Gentlemen, yea even of this city very well
derived, The foureteenth proof, of eloquent worldly speakers and drowsy
sluggards when they should talk with God.
to be most gracious in speech, and (in their familiar conference) so
eloquent, as they needed not give place to the very perfectest Orator, so
excellently were they provided for this frail world. Notwithstanding, when
they should come to talk privately with God, to lay open before him the heavy
load of their sins, to speak in the true eloquent key of a repentant soul,
with prayers and petitions to pearce the heavens: they have shown themselves
sleepy, sluggish and made of lead as it were, nay, merely dumb, and so silent,
as they could hardlye affoorde to open their mouths.

In like manner, we find diverse women of a quick and ready tongue, Of women
quick enough of tongue, for any thing concerning pride.
for any thing concerning pride, voluptuousness, or what their peevish humor
affects, as at plays, vain pastimes or such like delights. But let them
come into the Church, where attonemente is to be made, between god and their
wretched polluted souls, the devil then strikes them dumb, drowsy and
negligent. Or if they talk at all, he will be sure to fit them another kind of
way, with talk of proud attyres, praising of idle fashions in such and such
gossips, or devises of delicates for the belly, or where to meet at some
wanton exercise. So, in stead of repenting their sins, they heap sin upon
sin, extolling their own virtues (if perhaps they have any at all) far worse
then the Pharisey, which either in man or woman is to be highly reproved.

A learned Doctor affirms, The fifteenth proof, of an inward feste^ing
wound.
that, Omne nociuum inclusum magis nocet, whereby we may gather, that
putrefaction within a wound, causes greater anguish, then when it is drawn
forth, for then the pain is more tolerable. Allusion to the comparison*
Even so, the soul that has many sins hidden in it, is not much unlike to
such filthy putrefaction: for if by the launcing rancour of true repentance,
they be not gotten forth, and pardon obtained, they will so much the more
painfully afflict the soul, bite the conscience, and suffer the mind to enjoy
no quiet.

As may be said of him, Similie.
that nourishes melancholy in his heart, whereby he pines and droupes away,
even til death make seazure on him, Eccle. 30. 25.
according as says the wise man. Multos enim occidit tristitia, and non est
vtilitas in ea. Sorrow has slain many, and there is no profit in it. But if a
man utter his grief to a faithful friend, that knows how to comfort him: Oh
what a cheering joy is it to the poor afflicted heart? Prouer. 16. 24.
for Solomon says; Fauus mellis composita verba, dulcedo animae, sanitas
ossium. Fair words are as the honie-comb^, sweetness to the soul, and
health to the bones. How can the soul be in health, that is full of
putrefaction, Of the Pharisaicall sinful soul.
and ouercharged with sin? and deals as the Pharisey did; boaste of good
deeds, and hide thereby foul sins? it is like to one let blood, that gives
passage to the best, and keeps the worst behind.

In Phlebotomy or bloodletting, Comparison of Phlebotomy or blood letting.
when we see the good blood to come first forth, we use to say; it is a bad
sign, because the good blood leaving the body, and the bad making no issue at
all, it is held to betoken the death of the patient. On the contrary, when the
corrupt and putrified blood first makes his passage, it is a signal of health
to the party. Allusio^ to the comparison.
Even so, when a proud and an opinionate sinner comes to confer with God,
standing upon the conceit of his own well deserving in some kinds, and shall
presume to say: O Lord, I have not robbed, I have not blasphemed thy name, I
have not committed adulterye, and other such like cleerings of him self: It is
an apparent sign, that as foul sins are remaining behind, and as greatly
do endaunger the death of the soul.

Nor is this to be held as any repentance at all, Of vain and idle justifying
of our selves, urged only by the devil.
or contrite confessing our transgressions to God: but rather a deuillish
exaltation, and vainglorious justification of our selves. For humble
confession and true repentance, is a free accusation of our selves for all
faults committed; without vaunting of any good work whatsoever, which is never
done, but by the craft of the devil, making us dumb in our duty, as
himself is dumb: Et erat illud mutum. This kind of taciturnirie, or rather
dumbness, begets great euilles in the soul, and becomes the ruin of the
conscience, as David affirms in one of his Psalms: Psalm. 32. 3.
Quoniam tacui, inueteraueru^t ossa mea, dum clamarem tota die. When I held my
tongue, my bones consumed, through my daily complaining, as if he would have
said, because I was so silent my bones waxed old, Allusion to the prophets
words.
to wit, my virtue became weakened, while I continued crying all the day.


Lodouico. What a confused speech is this of David? If he held his peace, how
did he cry all the day? and if he cried all the day, how was he silent? A man
cannot cry, and hold his peace too, both at one instant, and yet David's words
are: A Question of David's speech, crying, and silence.
Quoniam tacui, dum clamarem tota die, inuterauerunt omnia ossa mea. Because I
have bin sile^t, while I cried all day, all my bones are waxed old: how can it
stand, a man to be silent, and cry too?


Claudio. David speaks of such sinners, as already I have spoken of to you,
The answer to the former question, of such as are silent, and yet do cry too.
who, after the guise of the Pharisie in the Gospel, at one instant time are
silent, and yet cry too, crying out aloude of their own merits, and singing
their own praises in a lofty strain. Gratias ago tibi Deus, quia non sum
sicut caeteri hominum, raptores, iniusti, adulteri, velut etiam hic Publicanus.
I^iuno bis in sabbatho: decimas do omnium quae possid^o. Luke 18. 11. 12.
Oh God I thank thee, that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publicane. I fast twice in the week: I give tithe
of all that ever I possess.

Do you not hear, Boasting of good deeds, but keeping sin in silence.
of how many things they cry out aloude, and yet are silent enough of their
own sins? they talk not of such things as may abase them, but boast of all
things that may vainly advance them, by means whereof, they fall down into
darkness, according as this proud Pharisie did. Therefore in our secret
communing and talking with God, we should not be silent of our sins, but cry
loud enough on them, and if any good actions have attended our lives, to
reserve them in silence, without so much as a thought of the^: for that is a
place wherein to accuse our selves justly of al our crimes and not to make
vaunt of any good work.

They that thus pharisaically do cry out on their merits, Of the consumption
gotten in the bones*
and silently keep their sins in their own bosoms; get a consumption in their
bones. Inueterauerunt ossa mea, quoniam tacui dum clamarem tota die. Simily.
The bones do signify our virtues, for, as bones do supporte the body,
Psalm. 35. 10.
so do virtues uphold the soul: Omnia ossa mea dicent: Domine, quis similis
tibi? All my bones shall say: Lord, The Prophet David his meaning.
who is like unto thee? David then saying that by his crying, his bones waxed
old and consumed, he means, that the power of our virtues are weakened, by
concealing our vices, and vaunting of our virtues.

And old thing must needs be weak, such is the state of the soul, Sentence,
and the same alluded.
seeking to hide from God her secret sins, and all this is the work of the
devil, therefore, Et illud erat mutum. But blessed be God, who sent his only
begotten Son, to dissolve this strict bondage, and crush in pieces this vile
snare of the devil. 1. John. 3. 8.
In hoc apparuit filius Dei, vt dissoluat opera Diaboli: For this cause
appeared the Son of God, that he might loose the works of the devil:
therefore we read, that Christ cast the devil out of the man's body, and
pardoned his sins also.

Christ came not into the world, The sixteenth proof, by Christ his coming
into the world.
to take sinners out of it, but to take away the sins of the world, which
are the works of the devil, therefore Saint John Baptist said not, Ecce qui
tollit peccatores mundi, but Ecce qui tollit peccata mundi. The taking away
from the world, John. 1. 29.
of the adulterer, the mankiller, the covetous usurer, The taking away of
sinners in their several offenses, appertains to Justice.
the thief, and the blasphemer: that appertains to the office of justice,
which gives sentence of hanging, beheading, burning, and other kinds of death
provided for malefactors. But Christ came to take from the world the sin,
not the sinner, to weete, adultery, pride, ambition, idolatry, murder,
usury, and such like: The devils intent.
Christ takes away the sins, and justice the sinners; but the devil (if he
might) he would take away both virtue, and the virtuous too.

Christ, Christ compared to a painter.
in taking away sin from the sinner, deals as the painter does, in taking a
blemish from his picture: with a dexterious hand, and the perfect use of his
pensill, he takes away the offense, yet harmeth not the picture. A most
excellent Allusion.
God has stamped in us his own perfect figure, and made his Son in all
points like unto us, sin only excepted, what fairer portraite then this was
ever drawn in the world?

But the devil, The malice of the devil, to Gods fair (...).
envying this rare piece of workmanship, by his craft and subtlety, made a
stain first in the very forehead, and afterward in other places, disfiguring
mightily so curious a master piece* and holding on his course still, to mar
the whole together, hinders every good mean that might reform it again. The
stain in the forehead, he couers that with some proud veil, the stayne in
the heart, he hides that with fond ostentation, and so for every blemish,
he has an apt couerture, to make us hide and conceal our sinful infirmities.

But the penitent soul, The courage of the penitent soul.
though smitten dumb by this vile enemy, cries out in anguish of spirit to her
Creator, and he dipping his pensill in the purple of his passion, makes her as
pure and perfect as ever she was before. The sins, not sinners.
Tollit peccata mundi, non peccatores. And the devil working in us this
hurtful silence, is sure to do it when we have most need of speech, yea, of
crying out loudest upon our heavy transgressions, therefore we may still say,
Et illud erat mutum. We can do no greater spite to the devil, How to spite
the devil most.
then by breaking silence with David, and crying to the Lord, that he would
take compassion on our sinful souls. S. Augustine.
Therefore says Saint Augustine. Si tegis peccata tua, Deus detegit: si
detegis, Deus tegit illa, pallio gratiae, and misericordiae.


Lodouico. Hereupon (it may be) was it, Ose. 13. 1.
that the Prophet Osea said, The seventeenth proof: by interpretation of
Ephraim and Israel.
that, Ephram speaking, a great fear came upon Israel: Loquente Ephraim,
horror inuasit Israel. Ephraim, by interpretation, is sharp, and Israel, the
man that saw God. The sinner shows great sharpnes against the devil, when
(by true contrition) he lays open his soul to God, in which sense we may
term him to be the same Ephraim. As for Israel, well may we term him to be
Lucifer, who saw God, he being one of the chiefest and most noble angelical
spirits that God created.

Now the devil can have no greater fear, The devils greatest fear and di^may.
horror and dismay, then when he sees a contrite sinner, to accuse him self of
sin, and (without any thought at all of merit) to condemn himself, as
unworthy to come in Gods sight, for then are his sins pardoned in the death
of his dear son, and the devil loses the soul which he thought he had
won.

And who can tell, The eighteenth proof, the Prophet Ezechiels words expounded.
but that the Prophet Ezechiel had the like meaning, in those mysterious words
which he spoke: Loquutus sum ad populum mane, and mortua est vxor mea vespere?
I spoke unto the people in the morning, and at even my wife dyed? as if he
would have said. A great matter is this that has happened unto me, O Lord,
because I spoke unto the people in the morning, Ezech. 24. 18.
and to me my wife is dead at evening, it may be therefore (perhaps) my wife
dyed by night, The Authors application of this place of Scripture.
because in the clear morning I spoke to the people. Our wife is our sin or
transgression, which (in committing of it) we take as our consorte: and she
being naught and wicked, seeks to dye secretly, and in the dark evening of
wilful despair, as ashamed of her own lothsomnesse. But in the bright
morning, that is, in the contrite clearing of our consciences, by the luster of
divine grace, which shows our foul deformity, and makes us humbly acknowledge
al our sins (from the bottom of our hearts) to God alone, then is the devil
made mad and highly displeased.


Claudio. Why then I perceive, The nineteenth proof by comparion of the
keepe^s of a City.
that sometimes we ought not only to be silent, but to speak likewise, and cry
out with a loud voice, in such manner as the keepers of a City do exclaim,
hearing the enemies drums and trumpets near at hand, intending the cities ruin
and spoil. So then, not with mute voice, but rather in the loudest note of
repentance, Allusio^ to the former comparison.
we ought to break silence in such a dangerous season, seeing our deadly
deformed sins (our very grand capital enemies) seeking all advantages against
the noble city of our soul. Whereto the careful watchmen and keepers thereof,
the reverend, Fathers, Preachers and ministers of the word, Esaias. 62. 6.
do daily inuit us, as being put in trust with the charge of so worthy a
city. According as the Prophet Esaias says. Super muros tuos, Jerusalem,
constitui custodes: tota die and tota nocte in perpetuum non tacebunt. I have
set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which all the day and all the night
continually shall not cease. How can they cease, seeing so fierce and mortal
enemies, in armed preparation coming against us? Eccl. 21. 4.
Quasi romphaea bis acuta omnis iniquitas plagae illius non est sanitas. All
iniquity is as a two edged sword, Two several ways whereby the Lance of our
sin is made sharp.
the wounds whereof cannot be healed. Two ways is the Lance of our sins
made sharp, depriving us both of grace and glory, killing both the body and
soul together, and offending both God and our neighbor: robbing us of glory,
condemning us into hell fire, confounding our understanding, and quite
blinding, our will. How then can the careful keepers of this City hold their
peace, seeing such cruel enemies coming on us, and armed with such dreadful
weapons? Ierem. 4. 19.
Non tacebo (says the Prophet Jeremy) quonia^ vocem buccinae audiuit anima
mea, and clamorem praelij. I cannot be still, for my soul has heard the sound
of the trumpet, and the alarm of the battle. The dreadful sh^king of our
mortal building.
Who can choose but cry now? and cry out with an affrighted fear, when this
mortal building is to be shaken with such dread and terror? Contritio super
contritionem vocata est, and vastata est omnis terra; repent vastata sunt
tabernacula mea, Ierem. 4. 20.
subito pelles meae. Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land
is wasted, suddenly are my tents destroyed, and my curtains in a moment.


Lodouico. They also that are mindful of the day of the Lord, What they do,
that are mindful of the day of the lord*
so dreadful and terrible, can do no otherwise, but even break silence, and
cry out in tears. They likewise, that ruminate on the infinite favors, and
singular graces hitherto extended toward them, cannot abstain, but break forth
into divine praises, even as the Prophet Esaias did. Qui reminiscimini Domini,
Esaias. 62, 7.
ne taceatis, and ne detis silentium ei, donec stabiliat, and donec ponat
Jerusalem laudem in terra. Oh you that are mindful of the Lord, keep not
silence, and give him no rest, till he repair, und till he set up Jerusalem,
the praise of the world. as if he would have said, O you that remember God, The
prophets words applied.
you that are mindful both of his justice and mercy; in no case see you be
silent, neither let him enjoy any rest: until he establish, and bring our
souls into that land of promise, so worthy of all glory and eternal laud.

But all this crying out, is not any part of our speaking, but even the voice of
god himself, The twentieth proof:
as we have said before, and therefore, by our crying out in this manner, we
break not silence; for such a silence shall be with god, How God speaks by us,
and not we our selves.
as a loud speaking voice. As we may note in the man possessed with the devil,
who being silent in this sort, Jesus threw out the devil, to the end of the
possessed man might speak* Erat Jesus eiiciens Demonium, Luke. 11. 14.
and illud erat mutum: and cum eiecisset Demonium, loquutus est mutus. Jesus
cast out a devil which was dumb, and when the devil was gone out, How the dumb
man spoke, and not the Devil.
the dumb spoke. The dumb man spoke, but not the devil, for it pleased god to
hear the man speak, in regard he spoke well; Loquebatur recte: but he would not
admit the devil to speak, because he could speak nothing but evil, and as a
detractor. In like manner, when (in their dissembling speeches) they praised
him, Sentence.
Christ immediately made the^ silent, because, the praise of a defamer is but
mere infamy. Such is that of the devil, Luke. 4. 41.
therefore; Increpans, non sinebat ea loqui, and the reason hereof is alleged
by Solomon: Eccle. 15. 9.
Non est speciosa laus in ore peccatoris.


Claudio. The silence then that is acceptable to god, The 21. proof agreeing
with the words of Esaias.
it may be, is the same whereof Esaias speaks, saying. Sede tacens, and intra
in tenebras filia Chaldaeorum, quia non vocaberis vltra Domina regnorum. Sit
still, Esaias. 47. 5.
and get thee into darkness, Oh daughter of the Chaeldeas, for thou shall no
more be called the Lady of kingdoms. Chaldea signifies a harlot, with the
allusion thereof.
Chaldea by interpretation, is Scortu^, as much to say as an harlot, and what
else is this harlot, but even the sinful soul, who has broken faith with God,
by the means of sin: and, of a beautiful spouse, which she was to God;
(Sponsabo te mihi in fide; Ose. 2. 20.
I will mary thee unto me in faithfulness:) is now become the harlot of the
devil? Ierem. 3. 1.
Tu autem fornicata es cum amatoribus multis, in via stabas expectans eos. Thou
have played the harlot with many lovers, thou have sit waiting for them in the
ways. Therefore says God to the sinful soul: Sit down false wretch, hold thy
peace, speak not for shame, but get thee hence into cloudy darkness.

Three things therefore ought every penitent sinful soul to do, The three
duties of every penitent soul.
for obtaining remission at the hands of god: to sit down, to be silent, and
enter into darkness.

Sit down, 1. To sit down.
for quieting of the mind. For, as the Philosopher says: Anima quiescendo fit
sapiens. Sit down, because by ceasing from sin, and taking repose from
temporal affairs, the mind may be the better elevated to god. Ierem 3. ^.
Sedebit solitarius, and tacebit, and leuabit se super se. There is nothing
that more exalts our spirit to contemplation of celestial things, Nothing
makes us to mind heaven more the^ ou^ retyreme^t from the world.
then keeping our selves far off from worldly occasions, and with a sweet
silence to be retired into some solitary place, free from the offensive noyses
of the world.

Secondly, we ought to hold our peace, not prattle on temporary trash, 2. To
be silent.
except as despising it, Sentence.
for, much more is the heart moved to compunction, by such a contemplative
silence, then by a tedious talkatiue protestation, Ezech. 21. 6.
therefore says Ezechiel; Ingemisce tacens in conturbatione spiritus. Pliny
and Isodorus, of a people in India.
Mourn therefore silently in affliction of spirit. Pliny and Isodorus do both
report, that there are certain men in India, which have no mouths, by want
whereof they can neither speak nor eat: but in stead of meat, they smell unto
trees, by the odor whereof they live and are nourished, and gestures do serve
them, in place of a tongue. The Example alluded to a penitent sinner.
A penitent sinner ought to imitate this strange kind of people, silently to
contemplate, fast, and feed more on celestial sweet favors, then on these
worldely surfeiting meats and drinks; which do but nourish the body in all
sin and iniquity.

Thirdly, 3. To enter into darkness.
we must enter into darkness, that is, to shun all popular resort, to lock our
selves close up in our chamber, or repair to some private shady place, where
no entising matter whatsoever, may corrupt the eye, and so withdraw the mind
from zealous meditation. In former times, Example of holy men's lives in forme^
times: and how we may behave our selves now.
diverse holy men have chosen to live in mossie caves, in vast unhaunted
deserts, and solitary places, where none could have access to hinder their
good purposes. But I do not wish the like in these days, for I know, that a
silent room to a man's own self, may be as fit a sanctuarye for his
troubled soul as an other. And there he may think on all the travails of our
Savior, who overcame all the darknesses of death and hell, and in his blood
washed away his cole black sins, to make him a white Saint in the kingdom of
heaven: therefore Sede, tace, intra tenebras.

When a man is not busied about vain discoursings, The benefits ensuing by
sitting alone by our selves.
but sits alone quietly by him self; the more easily may he contemplate, on
the obscure darkness of his own judgment, as also of hell, death and sin:
Example of Jacob.
whereupon it is written, that the Patriark Jacob stood silently considering, on
the mysterious words of his son Joseph: Pater vero rem tacitus considerabat.
Genesis 37.
And Daniel, Example of Daniell.
at the apparition of the Angel that spoke unto him, was silent, and with
humble looks beheld the earth: Deieci vultum meum ad terram, Dan. 10. 15.
and tacut: I set my face toward the ground, The happiness of silence.
and held my peace. Happy is he, that with like holy taciturnity, fixes his
eyes on the earth, contemplating, that himself is but earth, and into earth he
must return again. This will school him, from opening his mouth to ribald
speeches, blasphemous jests, oaths and cursings, as also to all infamy and
detraction.

And who knows, God his permissio^ of the Devil, to bind up the tongue.
whether (to this end or no) God permitted the devil to bind up the tongue, as
seeing, how ready it was to many evil offices? wherefore, for amendment thereof,
God suffered the devil to enter the man's body, so to strike dumb the ouerlauish
tongue, and (by this chastisement) it became recovered: whereupon it is
written, that after this correction, it spoke more perfectly; Et loquebatur
recte.

Many speak, Many speak, but few speak well.
but very few speak well, for they open their mouths to detraction and
murmuring, and the tongues of such are venomous like unto that of the Serpent:
which, in the deadliness of his poison, appears to be black, The venomous
tongue compared to the Serpents.
and because it moves with all possible swiftness, it seems to be forked.
So is the devilish tongue of the defamer and murmurer, black in mere malice,
venomous and mortiferous, dangerous both to the living and dead. Allusio^ of
the comparison.
It is also forked, by being sharp subtle and swift to infamy, and by
defaming, hurts both the defamed, Psalm. 140. 3.
and the defamer. Whereof David speaking, says, Acuerunt linguas suas sicut
serpents, venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum. They have sharpened their tongues
like serpents; Adders poison is under their lips.


Finis Cap. 11.
The Argument.
Discoursing on the murmuring and detracting tongue, and how fitly it should be
bound to eternal silence; for the praise thereof is shame, and the honor,
most hateful. Also, that the detractor is not only abominable, but is merely
abomination it self: for whatsoever he sees, he makes a most vile
interpretation thereof.

Chap. 12.
LODOVICO. There is a certain little broad kind of creature, A comparison of
the Scarabe Fly, that breeds in foul dung or putrified carrion.
derived or bred out of carrion or foul putrefaction, which although sometimes
(like the fleetest little bird) it towreth toward heaven, and with an
unpleasing buzzing, would chide (as it were) at all the other souls: yet is it
so full of rotten corruption, as, after a silly flight, and a little sorry
harsh singing, he returns back to his stinking place of creation, and, as
abhorring the height of heaven, seems most proud of his noisome habitation,
and loathing to feed on odoriferous things, does feed or glut himself with
filthiness only.

To such offensive Scarabes, Allusio^ of the detractour and murmurer, to that
foul Fly.
may I compare the detractour and murmurer, who, though they seem like little
broad birds to vulgar opinions, when (in dissembling charity) they reprove
other men's defects: yet it may plainly be discerned, how noisome they are in
their own nature, even while they have other men's infirmities in their
mouths. For by their murmuring and perverse speeches, they seek to soil and
besmeare every good deed and virtuous intention, even as if they were of those
Pharisees, which murmured against Christ, because he exhorted to repentance,
received sinners, The Pharisees that murmured against Christ.
and conuersed among them. Et murmurabant Pharisaei and Scribae, dicentes: Quia
hic peccatores recipit, and manducat cum illis. The Scribes and Pharisees
murmured, saying: He receives sinners, and eats with them. Luke 15. 2.



Claudio. A very deuilish tongue. They murmured, that the Physician was come to
visit the sick; Comparisons how the Pharisees murmu^ed.
that the Chirurgian should heal the plague; that the sheephearde should
bring back to his dear esteemed flock, the affrighted strayed Lamb; that the
mystical widow should search diligently for her lost groate; and that the
heavenly Schoolmaster should come to enstruct earthly ignorant scholars.

But it is no marvel: Sentence.
for the vessel must needs taste of that which was contained in it. That great
wise Hebrew king of Israel, who drew men from the very farthest Pole, Example
of Solomon.
to hear his admired wisdom; speaking of the wicked, as fitting this purpose,
used these words. Oculus mali ad malum. Proverb. 14. 19.
And in another place, under other words, he also affirms; Proverb. 21. 4.
Lucerna impiorum peccatum, which is as much to say, as, whatsoever the wicked
sees, is sin, or, the sight of the ungodly, is sin.


Lodouico. How can this stand; that what the wicked beholds, is sin? or how
can this be true, Lucerna impiorum peccatum, that the eye of the ungodly looks
only at evil? A question demanded, how it can be said, that whatsoever the
wicked man sees, is sin.
why then, if a sinner come into the Church, and do hear there divine service,
or a Sermon, and afterward (among other faithful men) receive the blessed
sacrament, of our Lord and Saviors memorable death left unto us, which (having
sight) he cannot do, but he must needs look on the Preacher, as also the other
upon him, shall that be reputed to him as sin? If this argument hold, that the
wicked sees nothing but evil, then it must needs be so, which I think not
possible: how then is Solomon herin to be understood?


Claudio. My good Lord, the wise man (in mine opinion) cold not devise to have
spoken better, and Aristotle approoues this sentence very sufficiently, Answer
is made by Aristotle's learned sentence.
in his vulgar propositions: Vnumquodque recipitur per modum recipientis* Every
thing is received, according to the nature of the body that receives it, and
not according to the nature of the thing it self received. Hereupon it
follows, that the thing abstracted or received (in his own nature) stands
separated from any contrary matter, and yet partaketh or rellisheth of that
which receives it, and seems to make it of an other nature.

We may example the same by our intelligence or understanding, Example of our
understandings perfection.
which, the more important and material occasions are thereto imparted, the
more it declares it self in perfection, and houldes a higher respect of them,
then of those things that present less matter of regard. For our
understanding sits as midway seated, between the thing apprehended or
entertained, and the body which receives the same, and so declares his
perfection or weakness in the receipte. And all this has no other reason for
allowance thereof, but because that every thing is received or entertained,
according to the bodies nature or qualitye receiving the same, and not after
the nature of the thing it self entertained.

And heere-hence is it, Comparison of a Garden of Orange trees.
that in a garden of Orendge trees, all being planted in one and the self
same soil, all alike in neerenesse, all husbanded by one and the same
gardener, all nourished with one kind of manuring, watered all with one water,
and warmed all with one self same Sun: that yet notwithstanding, they are so
variable in taste, as one is sweet, another sower, and others of a middle
savor between both. And whence proceeds this varietye, if not only
because: vnumquodque recipitur, per modum recipientis?

This secret is much more merueilously discovered, Comparion by the art of
engrafting or planting.
in the admirable art of engrafting, especially when we see to hang upon one
and the self same bough, the Pear, the Plum, the Chestnut, and the Seruise,
who stealing severally their sap from the earth, by hidden and vnperceiueable
ways, are yet all nourished through one trunk or stock, and have such a
contrary and pleasing variety, as it is both a goodly sight to behold, and very
strange also in consideration: wherein can nothing else be said, but because
vnumquodque recipitur, per momodum recipientis. So then is this proposition of
the wise man to be understood: How the wise man's proposition is to be
understood.
Oculus mali ad malum, and Lucerna impiorum peccatum. Not, that he which
beholds a wicked man, is therefore a sinner; but because the wicked man takes
good things in an evil kind, as a murmurer or detractor knows not how to speak
well of any man. And hence grew the bad spleen of the Scribes and Pharisees,
because christ received and called poor sinners to repentance. The heretics
abusing of the sacred Scriptures, and the godly ma^s good use of the^*


I pray you my Lord tell me, what thing is or can be more holy then the sacred
scripture? and yet the heretic sucks therout false opinions and devilish
devises; where contrariwise, the true Christian gathers nothing but sound and
perfect doctrine. Does this diversity then arise by the decrees or
determinations set down in holy Scriptures? Not so my Lord: for if the sacred
Scriptures should have been the birth thereof, they would yet also be the
occasion of infinite heresies, which were a most wicked thing but to imagine
so: rather let me assure you, that it happens no other way, but vnumquodque
recipitur, per modum recipientis.

The water of heaven batheth both the vine and the hemlock, Comparion of the
vine and the Hemlock: the Be and the Spider, and their allusion.
yet the one is most wholesome, the other poisonous. The Be and the Spyder
soar abroad, and feed both together upon one flowr: yet the one sucks
hurtful poison, and the other most sweet delicious honey, which still
affirms, that vnumquodque recipitur, per modum recipientis. Therefore, what
the evil man sees, in this kind he conuerteth it to evil: Oculus mali adm
malum: Lucerna impii peccatum. A talkeatiue defamer knows not how to speak
well of any one.


Lodouico. I remember an excellent example to this effect, Example of
Plistoanax son to Pausanias.
of Plistoanax son to Pausanias, and (as I think) king of the
Lacedaemonians, who being informed, that a detestable foul tongued slaunderer
had spoken well of him, made answer very worthily. Let it be falsely delivered
to this evil man, that I am dead, because in all his life time before he never
spoke well of any living man. When a Hen has good and sufficient meat given
her by the maid servant, A Simile worth the observation.
she will yet oftentimes forsake it, and goes to scrape in muck heaps, to
feed there upon worms: where, if she chance to light upon a precious pearl,
she rather pleases her self with the poor worm, and leaves the pearl there
covered, by her own casting earth upon it. Even so the murmurer and detractor,
Allusio^ to the murmurer and detractour.
setting all good and honest works aside, (which are exposed only for common
benefit) seeks industriously (altogether) into other men's weaknesses, to load
them with blames and reprehensions, according to the nature of that filthy
creature which takes such delight in dirt and slyme, as therein she is buried,
being alive.

As the like may be said of the Raven, Comparion of the Raven, alluded to the
detractour.
which makes his best nourishment of stinking carrion, and feeds mainly upon
dead carkas^es; yet (for all that) will not touch a living body. Even so the
detractors tongue, is ignorant in speaking well of any, how great and good
soever their deseruings be: Comparion of a Butchers dog, with the allusion.
but runs all about, only to fasten upon honor, fame and unblemished
reputation. Like unto the dog of a butcher, says Bonauenture, in dicta
salutis. Chap. 19. that evermore has his mouth all goarie. Such are these
evil speaking tongues, always tincturde with blood, full of defamation, and
besmeared with wounding slanders, and fatten themselves greedily on their
neighbors honor.


Claudio. Mere doggish tongues, Comparison of dogs that bark at the moon, and
the allusion thereof.
that know not how to be still, but always are barking, and when they hear no
noise at all, or have nothing else to bark at: then (with loud importunate
voice,) they bark at the moon and bright glittering stars. So do these
noisefull men, ever run about to seek new matter of infamy, as dreaming
still on fresh grounds of detraction: but when they want matter to rail against
men, they stick not to murmur against God and his saints* Such vile kind of
tongues, unapt to speak or conceit well of any, be they never so good and
honest: if they contend at any time against their own bad nature, they will be
sure to utter lies, esteeming them far better then the truth.

Upon this occasion, I call to mind a notable example of Apelles of Ephesus a
most excellent painter, Example of Apelles drawing the picture of king
Antigonus.
drawing the counterfeite (with admirable skill) of Antigonus King of Macedon,
brother to Alexander the great, who having but one eye, he drew him in such
artificial manner, as that part of deformity could not be discerned. And
being demanded, for what reason he had not figured him so apparently, as both
the one and other eye might be beheld, The painters witty answer aptly applied.
replied thus. Let it suffice that I have drawn him with his natural
lineaments and made no appearance of deformity in the ey defective, let another
paint his picture, as him pleases. The murmurer is not of this painters mind,
studious to cover mean blemishes and mislikes, but rather strives to ad more
enforcement of blame, making strict enquiry after men's vices only: as throwing
al desertfull merit aside, or whatsoever (for virtue) ought justly to be
commended, therefore is it rightly said of such by Solomon: Proverb. 17. 11.
Se^per iurgia quarit malus: Angelus autem crudelis mittitur contra ^um. A
seditious person seeks only evil, and a cruel messenger shall be sent against
him.


Lodouico. Very woorthilie does God send a cruel messenger against the
murmurer, The cruel messenger sent by god against the murmurer*
because himself was most cruel against his neighbor, stirring up unjust and
^auselesse quarrelles, because indeed he knew not else how to live, without
speaking false and injuriously of some body, manifestly declaring, that where
he could not hurt with his hands, he would be sure to do it with a
spightfull tongue. Hereupon, Brusonius tells us in his first book, Example
of Zoilus.
that Zoilus being asked, what was the reason he spoke evil of every one,
returned this answer: I speak ill, because I can do no ill. Zoilus termed the
Father of detractours.
This was the infamous Poet that wrote against Homer, and he is the father of
detractors: whereupon, all those that write against men of merit, are called
Zoili, and hence it was that Ovid said.

Ingenium magni liuor detractat Homeri;
Quisquis es, ex illo, Zoile nomen habes.
La^rtius declares in his second book, that Socrates being made acquainted,
Socrates his answer, of one that spoke evil of him.
how there was one in the city which always spoke evil of him, made this
answer: Quia been loqui nescit. As if this great Philosopher would have
said: I little regard, if that talkeatiue fellow speak always badly of me,
because I do not always badly: and he never ceasing to speak evil, confirms
the same, because he knows not how to speak well of any. And yet
notwithstanding, in somewhat I may merit part of praise, which if it should
come out of his mouth, were just none at all.


Claudio. Of the same opinion was Seneca, in writing thus. Male de te loquuntur
homines, Seneca writing on the same occasion.
sed mali; mouerer si de me M. Cato, si Laelius sapiens, si duo Scipiones ista
loquerentur. Nunc malis displi^ere, laudari est. Non potest vllam authoritatem
habere sententia, vbi qui damnandus est, damnat. Male de te loquuntur homines;
mouerer, si iudicio hoc facerent; Nunc morbo faciunt; non de me loquuntur, sed
de se. Male de te loquuntur, qui been nesciunt loqui: faciunt, no^ quod mereor,
sed quod solent, etc. When men of good conversation do speak hardly of a man,
it is more to be weighed then coming from bad men's mouths.
As if he would have said. I should have taken it offensiuely, if that men of
good and honest life had spoken evil of me: but because themselves are wicked,
they speak but what is pleasing to themselves, and therefore I care not what
they say of me, because the very despightfullest speeches of bad men, is
highest commendation to an honest man. The sentence of him that deserves
condemnation, has no merit in condemning another. I should indeed be moved,
if this were done with judgment, but seeing they do it by innated
wickedness, they do nothing at all against me, but merely condemue
themselves, as those that know not how to speak well of any man, much like
unto such dogs, which (not by fierceness, but by natural consuetude) bark
and make a bawling: but barking dogs never prove good hunters.

The same did Solomon also clearly express, Proverb. 14. 2.
saying: Ambulans recto itinere, and timens Deum, despicitur ab eo, qui infami
graditur via. He that walks in his righteousness, fears the lord, but he
that is leude in his ways, despises him. If then good men are despised and
defamed by the guilty, it is a good sign to be blamed by the like detractors,
and not to be taken as any matter troublesome. For when men of bad life, do
scorn the good for honest actions, it is even no otherwise, then as if the
blind should floute other men because they see; or as if the lame should
check others for going vprightlye.

Or in like case, Comparion to very good purpose, in several kinds: but
iumping al in one period.
as if a villain of the mountains of Iurea, should break into laughter, when
he sees another man without a great pogh or throat bag hanging down his
breast, and says he lacks a member of his body, because all that live there
have the like. So may it be well said, Ambulans recto itinere, and timens Deum,
despicitur ab eo, qui infami graditur via. As it is no disgrace to the Sun,
or the day, An excellent Similie, and well alluded.
because their clear splendor and brightness is not pleasing to
night-haunters, such as the Owl, and other creatures, lovers of darkneesse:
Even so is it no shame to be slaundered by the wicked, whose tongues are quite
out of tune, if they should talk well of any man.


Lodouico. Moreover, It is a shame to be praised of an evil tongue.
it is a shame to be commended by such infamous tongues: and happily, in this
respect was it, that our Sauiuiour Christ made the devils silente, when they
confessed him to be Christ: Luke. 4. 35.
Et increpans non sinebat ea loqui, quia sciebant illum esse Christum. Eccl.
15. 9.
Solomon in like manner says: Non est speciosa laus in ore peccatoris, quia non
est a domino missus: Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, Seneca,
concerning the praises of wicked men.
for that is not sent of the Lord. Because, as Seneca says. The praise of
wicked men, is a manifest instance, that the praised is like unto the praiser.
Sit tibi tam triste laudari a turpibus, quam si laudaberis ob turpia.

Therefore Antisthenes the great Philosopher, was very much offended, when he
heard that certain lewd livers had highly commended him, Antisthenes his greef
for a bad man's commendation.
according as Diogenes Laertius tells us, which made him say, Wretched that I
am, I fear no greater mishap could have befalne me: O me miserum: metuo, ne in
crimen aliquod inciderim. An other Philosopher also being told, that some of
evil conversation had liberally praised him, Example of another Philosopher.
answered. Alas, what evil have I done? As knowing, that the wicked extol
vices only, and throw what scandale they can upon virtue.


Claudio. As fitting this purpose, Seneca his sentence of evil men.
there is a very notable sentence written by moral Seneca: Argumentum est
recti viri, malis displicere. It is an argument sufficient enough of goodness,
not to please the evil. The self same is affirmed by the father of Latin
eloquence, Cicero, Cicero to the same purpose.
where he says. That the praise of laudable men only, is joyful and
acceptable. Ea est profecto iucunda laus, quae ab his proficiscitur, qui and
ipsi in laud vixerunt.

There is no account then to be made, of the praise or blame of such pratlers,
whose commendation begets no honor, neither their reproof any blamefull
prejudice: because their praise more hurts then helps, and such blame is more
cordial, then able to corrupt.

Also the holy Apostle Saint Peter says, S. Peter to the like effect.
that nothing can be hurtful to a good-follower. Quis est qui vobis noceat, si
boni aemulatores fueritis? 1. Pet. 3. 13. 14.
Sed and si quid patimini propter iustitiam, beati. Who is he that will harm
ye, if you follow that which is good? Notwithstanding, blessed are ye, if you
suffer for righteousness sake. What hurt can he do, David his rule for our
observation.
whose praise is infamy? Let us then have the justice of God before our eyes in
all our actions, and then we may say with David, when such men praise, Psalm.
60. 5.
or speak evil of us: Domine memorabor iustitiae tuae solius, and this is
sufficient.


Lodouico. These talkeatiue murmuers are not much unlike to diuelles, Murmurers
are compared to devils in their temptations.
who sometimes by the means of their temptations, are the causers of our
great good, in making us more mindful of our walking before God. Even so the
slanderous detracting tongue gives occasion for amendment of some vice
offensive to the soul, and of living more uprightly, without any apparent note
or mark, for avoiding of occasion of blame by others. Whereupon Diogenes the
Cinick said. Diogenes his allowance of enemies, as well as friends, for the
trial of good life.
That for living well and uprightly, there is as much need of cruel enemies,
as of loving kind friends: for look what friends do work by charity, enemies
make trial thereof by malice. So that oftentimes, the case proves more
beneficial, being strained to his uttermost, by reproouing, murmuring, and
the treacherous practices of enemies: then the light checks, souple persuasions,
or vain pity of friends. Therefore muta fiant labia dolosa: because the one
helps accidentallye, and the other by deliberate study.


Claudio. So odious to God are these detractors, as Solomon being not contented
to term them abominable, Proverb. 24. 9.
does call them also abomination it self. The reason wherefore Solomon calls
the detractor abomination it self.
Abhominatio est hominum detractor, The detractor is abomination, could he
speak any worse? Less had he said of their deseruings, if he had termed them
but abominable: but in calling them abomination it self, he could not paint
forth any thing more detestable. For, if Abominari, do signify pro malo omne
habere, then in calling them abomination, he means, that they are
unhappiness it self, and not any prediction or augurie thereof: which made him
say a little after. Prou. 24. 21. 22.
Fili mi, detractoribus ne miscearis, Quoniam repent consurget perditio eorum,
and ruinam vt riusque quis nouit? As if in other words he would have said.
My Son, take this counsel of me, converse not with me^ of an evil tongue,
because they are conjoined (as it were) with their own ruin.

Therefore God cannot long time suffer such talkers, Comparion of the Sith of
an unskillful mower: and the Authors allusion to Salomons words.
who with their tongues, like the Sith of an unskillful mower, make a bundle
of all herbs together, reputing them all to be naught worth. As, very
excellently David does paint them forth in one of his Psalms. Posuerunt in
coelum os suum, and lingua eorum transiuit in terra. They stretch forth their
mouth unto heaven, and their tongue goes throw the world. And who knows my
Son, Psalm. 73. 9.
if thou (with them) do not even chastise god himself? and therefore as a
companion of their crimes, shall thou also be partaker of their punishment.
Therefore, Detractoribus ne miscearis.

This is many ways to be discerned clearly enough, and by diverse very lively
examples. But among all other, I remember one, which is recou^ted by S.
Gregory, Example out of S. Gregory in the fourth book of his Dialogues.
in the fourth book of his dialogues, of a very honest woman, who was
nevertheless much subject to the vice of detraction, and very easily drawn
to murmur against any body. But drawing near her death, it pleased God so in
justice to punish her, as all that part of her head whereas her tongue lay, was
burnt round about, and not any other place of her body touched.

In the book of examples, Example of a religious man: in lib. Exemp. did. 9.
the ninth distinction, and the 57. example, it is registered of a man of
religious habit, but one very vicious in his life, who was greatly addicted to
the sin of detraction. And finding himself to wax very sick, Ex. 57.
he was exhorted by diverse of his friends, to send for some reverend divine,
and between God and his soul to remember the bad course of his life past,
that he might advise him to the speedier repentance: but he made them answer,
that he could not do it, because his case was dispatched already. They not
giving him over so, but still earnestly soliciting him, desired him not so
much to regard the greeuousnesse of his sins, as to think on the infinite
mercies of God, A fearful example of Gods justice, to be well regarded of all
detractours.
who never withdrawes his eye from a repentant sinner. Suddenly his tongue (in
this his stiff impenitencie) started out of his head, whereat he making an
offer in anger to strike, wrote afterward these words with his finger on the
wall; This wicked tongue is the cause of my damnation. Furthermore it is said,
that his tongue continued swelling in such strange manner, as he could by no
means draw it back into his mouth, but dying in this horrible manner, gave a
fearful example of eternal damnation to al detractors.

Let us fly then from this devilish vice, and get far enough off from the
like infamous tongues: because their wicked company is to be shunned of all men
that are weak in virtue. Detractoribus ne miscearis. What company we ought to
make election of.
Seek therefore, to converse and company with such as are grounded in virtue,
and do hold in due esteem true sanctity of life. For, as the Sun beams on
foul mud, is not a jot attainted, but brings that moist filthiness to dry
dust: Similies, and their allusio^s to virtuous men.
Or, as good strong wine swallows up and conuerts water into his own substance;
And quenched coals are by close keeping quickly kindled again: Even so do
virtuous men reduce the vicious into perfection, without any taint or injury to
their own goodness.


Lodouico. I am of opinion (my Lord) that it is better keeping off a loofe,
then coming near to such diabolical tongues: because we are then more secure
that they cannot contaminate us, how weak soever we be, then we are certain
to win them from their innated vices. Saul prophesied among the holy Prophets,
yet for all that (among vile men) he was the very vilest. Several Examples well
worth the respecting.
Laban by Jacob became exceeding rich in substance, but yet was very poor in
belief and goodness. Potiphar by Joseph grew evermore to be a marvelous
substantial man, but in himself he increased the largest measure of
wickedness. Whereby we may for a certainty perceive, that the saying of the
Lyrick Poet is most true: Quo semel est imbuta recens, seruabit odorem testa
diu.


Finis Cap. 12.
The Argument.
Murmuring is an infectious sin, worse then any other disease, and easy to
be taken, therefore it behooves us to fly the company of talkeatiue
detractors, because they are the original of many euilles. Whence it is that
murmuring first arises. What punishment God has inflicted on murmurers: who
have leapt out of themselves (as it were) to fasten hold on other men's
imperfections, and stealing much less then they looked for, at last utterly
lost all. How they have joined the tongue with the ear; how they have deceived
themselves overmuch in judgment, by their own dangerous facility in speaking
evil of all men, to which God will give (as a chastisement) a perpetual
silence. With an exhortation of the holy ghost, not to defame, but to refrain
speaking evil of our neighbor.

Chap. 13.
CLAVDIO. We need make no doubt, but that it is much better to keep our selves
far off, In seeking other men's health, we may foolishlie loose our own.
then to abide near such wickedness, knowing our own weakness; least while
we seek other men's health, we foolishly loose our own. Nevertheless, whosoever
can reduce such tongues to perpetual silence, it will appear in him to be a
very great office of charity. Murmuring is an infectious disease: Example of
Myriam the Sister of Moses, smitten with a leaprosie.
for we may read, that Myriam the sister of Moses, murmuring and speaking evil
against her said brother, suddenly she became a Leaper, quite covered over with
a white ougly scurfe, not much unlike a fold of snow. And this happened by the
just judgment of God, who appearing in the pillar of the cloud, after her
thundering forth those disdaynefull speeches, in the presence of the two
brethren Moses and Aaron, Myriam was smitten with the aforenamed leprosy.

Now albeit Moses and Aaron were great in the favor of God, and labored him
very instantly with their godly prayers for her: Numb 12. 14.
yet could they not otherwise prevail, but that for seven days she must be
sequestered from the people. If the punishment should always be inflicted
answerable to the sin, detraction and murmuring being such an infectious evil,
Detraction and murmuring most infectious.
as nothing in the world whatsoever sooner hurts: judge you by the
chastisement of Moses sister with leaprosie, what should be laid on such as
sin therein, the disease being as ready in catching, as the lavish tongue
is in detracting.


Lodouico. Woorthily (in mine opinion) was it so ordered, to sunder such a
biting tongue from all the other people, least it might also happen to infect
them too. For here was not any regard, how (even but a little before) they had
prophesied, in composing this worthy song. Exodus 15. 2.
Cantemus Domino, gloriose enim magnificatus est, equum, and ascensorem deiecit
in mare. We will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the
horse, and him that rode upon him, has he thrown in the sea. Neither was
there any respect made of Moses and Aaron his brother, Moses a prince, and
Aaron the high priest, both beloved of God.
the one a Prince, the other the high Priest and both beloved of the Lord,
wherefore thus in justice the lord did punish her. If god should always thus
chastise this great sin, there would not be found, neither could there be
heard, so many detracting and grudging tongues, a mere infectious plague among
the people: but silence would be held in more venerable esteem, and found to be
not so necessary, as profitable.


Cla. It is such a pernicious thing, I mean this hellish vice of murmuring, Of
few words do often arise infinite discords.
that oftentimes, of very few words do arise infinite discords, for the holy
ghost says by the mouth of Solomon: A scintilla vna augetur ignis, and ab vno
doloso augetur sa^guis: Of one little spark is made a great fire, Eccl. 11. 32.
and of one deceitful man, is blood increased. As of one spark a great flame is
kindled, Similie, and the allusion.
so by one malicious murmurer great sins are increased.

Sometimes a foolish body puts a spark of fire to the side of a poor man's
house, A comparison of difference in doing or committing a harm, according to
the malicious intent.
and without doing any further harm departs. But then there comes another
more foolish, or rather more malicious then the first, who so stirs and blows
the little spark, that it breaks forth into a great flame, which burns,
consumes and brings the whole house into ashes. If the second had not stird and
blown it, the spark perhaps had dyed of it self, never mounting up to a flame,
or harming the poor house. A great fault was it in the first, but much greater
(me thinks) in the second.

He commits a great sin, that (as but a spark) is the first murmurer and
deprauer of his neighbor, The comparison very singularly alluded to the
murmurer and detractor.
there is no question to be made of that: but yet a far greater sin is it in
him, that (as the devils mouth or bellows) comes and blows that spark to a
flame, adding more violent strength thereto, of viler infamy then before was
thought on, and merely without any regard at all. But often times it happens,
that some part of that which the lavish tongue has fondly uttered in scorn or
spite, A bad tongue does sometimes good against his own will.
sorteth to a very good signal or forewarning, and somewhat that has bin
rashly thrown forth, in mere fury or disdain, appears afterward, as if it
had bin pronounced by mature or deliberate counsel. Therefore we may say, A
scintilla vna augetur ignis, and ab vno doloso augetur sanguis, id est
peccatum: not only in delivering the fault to many, but likewise by enlarging
it, and speaking much more thereof then himself has heard.


Lodouico. This accursed sin arises of overmuch readiness, in prying into
other men's errors and escapes, without one look into our own imperfections.
Comparion of the awe the Schoolmistres keeps her Scholars in, while she
abides in the school.
When the Schoolemistresse for instruction of young maide^s, either in reading,
sowing, knitting or such like, abides in the school; you shall see them all
with their heads held downward, very earnest at their books and needles,
observing wary and fearful silence. But let her be gone out of school, or
never so little out of sight, ye shall see them presently forsake their seats,
leap, skip and run singing about, committing a thousand unhappy pranks. And
if there be any there, that would apply or tend their exercise, they cannot do
it, because they are so disturbed by the other.

Even so, when a man has a care of himself, reason (like a wary
schoolmistresse) awaiteth upon the powers and faculties of his body, Allusion
to the former comparison in a very material case.
which (according as children in the eye of their mistress) do all their
offices quietly, and by the true direction of reason. But so soon as a man
starts out of his own care, and will needs become a considerer of other men's
defectes, their lives, dealings and behauiours: then grow the powers of the
soul to be disturbed in such sort, as no one of them can rightly do his duty
as he would, for attending only to others imperfections. Yet many times it
happens, that this their disquiet, becomes the occasion of ame^dment in
others, and falls out to be their own perdition by offending both god, their
neighbors and themselves.

For as a River, Comparion of a Rivers ouerflowing his ba^ks or bounds.
when it arises tempestuouslie out of his own bed or bounds, and runs many
ways circling it self over the neighboring fields and meadows, does sullie
them with her mud, and (for the time of her there abiding) seems to do them
hurt, but returning much troubled, leaves them subject to the more fertility:
So the man that mounts out of consideration of his own proper life, The
comparison in very apt manner alluded to the inco^siderate man.
and with the mind (as with a troublesome torrent) serpent-like runs winding
and turning about other men's blames, snatching at every one as opportunity
serves him: If they (by the sanctified virtue of patience) can but support
such snarling, the one will remain with his mouth full of filth, and the others
defects be much amended, for the detractor shall look like a foul troubled
water, condemned by every one, and all muddyed with the mire of his own base
murmuring.


Claudio. If the detractor step out of himself, as the mistress sometime does
out of her school, leaving the powers of the soul somewhile quite aba^doned,
Detraction is the cause of forgetfulness, and makes a man a thief to himself.
even as Scholars do then give over al regard of school: why then detraction
becomes the cause of forgetfulness of himself, because while so importunately
he atte^deth upon others, himself steals from himself, which cannot be
without most grievous hurt to himself: Because, what greater favor can the
master of a house do to a thief, then both he and all his family to go out
of doors, Comparion of a man's voluntary yielding to his own robbing, and in
what nature the same is alluded to all the faculties in the detractors body.
and leave it without any faithful guardian at all? I hope (without dread) the
thief may then, as commodiously as his own heart can wish, rob and bear away
whatsoever him pleases.

The biting murmurer, being altogether gone quite out of himself, and from his
own peculiar consideration, applying all the powers of his understanding, to
other men's infirmities and defects, and cauillously catching hold wheresoever
he can: his will is wholly addicted to speak evil of others: his memory
particularly recko^s up other men's errors. The hearing listens willingly what
is said of others, in murmuring, detracting, or the least evil speaking. The
sight has the eyes of Argus, prying into other men's slips, but in his own he
is as blind as the Moale. The fecte run swiftly to acquaint the ear with other
men's blames and taints: and the hands have some office too, What time the devil
choseth for his entrance into man, and how he makes man a thief to himself.
not so much as pardoning a poor pen and paper, but al sides shall be filled full
of other men's infamy.

Now enters the devil into this empty house, being left quite vnmastred and
forsaken of the careful soul, and there he steals and makes booty of al what
is good soever, that they may never more be helpful to poor wretched man. Thus
while he goes about playing the thief to others, he becomes robbed himself, and
while he steals away another man's good fame with his vile tongue, his own
soul (left unlooked too) is carried away by devils, and so without gayning any
thing, himself loses all things.


Lodouico. Oh extreme misery, oh wonderful folly, oh intolerable error! How
much more necessary were a holy taciturnity, a sweet silence? nay, much better
were it to have no tongue at al, then thus to be the cause of our own
destruction. Not to hear only, might suffice to make us silent, If there
wanted a listner, there would be no teltale.
for what is he that would tell a thing to him who imployes all his power not to
hear it? Therefore very well said S. Jerome, Si deesset auditor, non esset
murmurator. Nemo enim libenter illi aliquid narrat, qui narrantem grauiter, and
moleste audit.

They that willingly give ear to detractors, Two apt comparisons.
do resemble such as dress unsavory meat, to the end it may last long. Or like
them that refuse to withhold and check a dog from biting, but rather prouokes
and sets him on with greater violence; a very devilish and wicked kind of
course. If a man would have respect to his own actions, and were no curious
inuestigator after other men's defects, he cold have no occasion of murmuring.
Of the four mysterious beasts in Ezechiell.
Ezechiel the Prophet saw those four mysterious beasts, that went al with
their faces forward, and never turning backward, as some others do: vnumquodque
ante faciem suam ambulabat: Ezech. 1. 9.
They returned not, but every one went straight forward.


Claudio. To what purpose do you produce a thing so manifest? They that be not
backward-legd, Sentence.
how should they otherwise go but directly forward? It is evident, that when
those horses went, they went toward their look, and not backward, as sometime
children do in scorn. Therefore I count it but as superfluous, that the
Prophet made such a description of these four mysterious beasts.


Lodouico. He said very well, and without any dissimilitude at all: vnumquodque
ante faciem suam ambulabat. Some kind of men that go backwarde.
Because there are some kind of persons that go backwarde, and such are they,
who after the manner of wanton dallying children, do badly; going backward,
only but to behold other men's infirmities, not having their own lives before
their eyes. Such is the behavior of murmurers and detractors, of whom we may
say: Quasi per risum stultus operatur malum: Prouer. 10. 23.
It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly.

The Prophet speaking, The Authors interpretation of the Prophets words, and
his application of them.
that every one of the beasts went with his face forward, gives us to
understand thereby, that they had their lives before their eyes: because just
men do listen to themselves, consider their own actions, and according as
they find the least blemish, so they do seek for amendment thereof. God
deliver us from such, as have their lives ha^ging behind their backs, as
murmurers and detractors have, carrying a watchful eye upon other men's lives and
defectes, but never look into their own weaknesses. Of whom David says.
Exixstimasti inique, Psalm. 50. ^1.
quod ero tui similis: arguam te, and statuam contra faciem tuam. Thou
thoughtst wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy self: but I will reprove
thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done.

These are the words of God himself, which he will speak to the slaundering
sinner, in the final strict judgment, even as if he would have said. Thou
thoughtst, wicked wretch, that I was like to thee, The authors conceit of gods
speaking to the wicked sinner.
and that as thou throwest thy sins behind thy back, so I would be as
forgetful of them too. But thou art deceived, for I will approve thee with
reason, how much thou have erred, both in thy wicked life, as also thy daily
sins, and I will set them all before thine eyes, to the end, that thou may
see them with a blushing countenannce, and the shame of them confounding thee,
thou may think with thy self, what pains thou have in justice deserved.


Claudio. This most severe judgment, the same David, with more express
words (in the name of God) speaks of in another place. Erubescant impij, and
deducantur in infernum, muta fiant labia dolosa. Psalm. 31. 19.
Let the ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the grave. Let
the lying lips be put to silence, inferring hereby: That the wicked liar, and
long tongued detractor, at the day of final judgment shall be made ashamed,
The liar and detractor shall be cast into hell.
and cast down into hell; where the infamous lying lips shall murmur in
pains. And this punishment shall befall them, because they have abused just
and innocent men, with proud, disdainefull and wicked speeches. Quae loquu^tur
aduersus iustum iniquitatem, Psalm. 31. 20.
in superbia, and in abusione. Which cruelly, disdainefully and despightfully
speak against the righteous. God keep us from this tyrant of other men's fame,
which so vilely, even as if they were slaves, David's devout prayer to God.
will handle good men. Therefore in devout prayer said David to God: Redime a
calumniis hominum, vt custodia^ mandata tua. Psalm. 119. 134.
O deliver me from the slanders of men, and I will keep thy precepts.

Slaves are redeemed or delivered, and because that detractors are worse then
tirants, Detractours are worse the^ Tirants in oppression of their people,
approved by comparisons.
which with shameful cruelties do oppress their people, therefore the
Prophet uses the word Redimere. Beside, the detractour tortureth more
grievously and insupportably with his vile tongue, then the tyrant can do: for
though the tyrant torments, punishes and depriues men of goods, lives, or
otherwise, yet notwithstanding, he molestes not such as willingly will serve
him. But the defamer, he speaks evil generally, murmures against every man,
and offends every one. Nay, that which is much worse, look whatsoever he but
dreameth on, he would have the same taken for a truth, and for a truth he
delivers it abroad to others. To say and unsay, all is one with the slaunderer.
So that to say or unsay, or how many ways so ever he can devise, whereby to
abuse men's ready credulity, be it in good or evil kind, all is one, he cares
not, and a thousand examples may for this be produced.

When Haman, Example of Haman.
being oppressed with his proud hearts anguish, threw him self down upon the
bed of Queen Hester, Hest. 7. 7.
entreating her with tears for his life: she thought he would have slain him
self with grief, and yet he did it but to deceive the virtuous Lady. When
Iaacob departed from Laban, Example of Laban.
Laban imagined that Iaacob had stolen his Idols: Genesis 31. 33.
but upon search afterward, he found no such matter. Example of Joseph.
When Joseph invited his beloved brethren to a sumptuous banquet, they were
persuaded that Joseph meant to murder them, but never did such a thought enter
the heart of Joseph. Genesis 43. 32.
Eli the Priest seeing the lips of Hannah to move in the Temple, Example of
Hely.
and yet not answer him in all her long prayer: 1. Sam. 1. 13.
supposed her to be drunk, when as she was rapt up in divine meditation.

The disciples of our Savior durst not converse with Paul, Example of the
Disciples.
as thinking him not to be converted, Act. 9. 26.
but that he continued still a cruel persecutour of the Christians, yet was he
already made by Christ a vessel of election. Example of Jeremy.
Jeremy going forth of Jerusalem by the gate of Benjamin, the keeper thought
that he would have fled to the Chaldeans: Ierem. 37. 13.
but the keeper was deceived in Jeremy, for he meant to go and divide a
portion of ground in the land of Benjamin. Example of the Jews.
The Apostles, having received the grace of the holy ghost, spoke to the
admiration of all, Act. 2. 13.
in variable languages: but the Jews thought them to be drunk with new wine,
wherein they were deceived, for they were not full of We ought not to be
ouerhasty in speaking and judging.
wine, but of the holy spirit. We should not therefore be over hasty in
speaking and judging, but first look into the certainty of the matter.

God knows al things by his eternity, nevertheless when (for our example) he
would chastise the Sodomites, it sufficed not, that he had heard, God came
down to see the Sodomits in their sinning against him.
in his hig hest habitation, the infamous rumors which they made, in the
execrable and abominable city of Pentapolis; but he would personally go
down to see, if their works were correspondent to their deeds, and that
their tongues confirmed their vile actions. Whereupon the sacred testis tells
us, Dixit itaque dominus, Clamor Sodomorum and Gomorrhaeorum multiplicatus est,
Genesis 18. 20. 21.
and peccatum eorum aggranatum est nimis. Descendam, and videbo vtrum clamorem,
qui venit ad me, opere complerint, an non ita, vt sciam. The Lord then said,
Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is
exceeding grievous, I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to that cry, which is come up unto me: The readiness of
some in over rash censuring and judging others.
and if not, that I may know. Yet for all this, some busy tongued murmurers
are so ready in judging, blaming and determining, not only without any
fore-thinking, but merely in rash conceit, as whatsoever they hear, it is
presently taken for a truth, though there be an hundred witnesses to the
contrary.


Lodouico. These men (perhaps) have tied their tongues to their ears, Of such
as tie their tongues to their ears.
and their hearing to their talking: for, any thing they hear, they presently
brute it abroad, defaming and detracting with wondrous facility, Psalm. 73. 9.
which made David utter that excellent sentence. Posuerunt in coelum os, and
lingua eorum transiuit in terra. They set their mouth against heaven, and their
tongue walks through the earth.

In saying, The Authors exposition of David's sentence.
that they have set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue walks
through the earth, he signifies, that they are very quick and indiscreet in
talking, yea, there is nothing whereof they prate not, as well of difficult
matters, as of such as are easy, as well of high, honorable, and persons great
in dignity, as of mean, base and popular degree, as well of Lords, as of
vassailes, as well of guilty, as of the innocent, judging of all, and
determining of all ouer-readily, and most maliciously. For where there is no
mature counsel or deliberation, Sentence.
the sentence can never be free from error.

And these men (I think) are those stammerers or corrupt speakers, Of
sta^merers and corrupt speakers signied by the prophet.
whereof the holy Prophet makes relation, that thrust forth their words so
nimbly, as they are scantly understood, and a great sin it is to lend ear to
such. Lingua balborum velociter loquetur. The tongue of the stutterers shall be
ready. Esaias. 32. 4.
They know not how to speak, and yet they will be talking and censuring on al:
but better were it to be without a tongue, then to have it so ouer-long, and
apt to speak evil.


Claudio. These busy ianglers, which utter all that they hear, and care not
whom they slander, Example of certain bulls in India, according to Pliny:
alluded
are like to certain Bulls in India, of whom Pliny reports in his history,
that they have their tongues so long, as they reach out unto their ears. So
these men have tongues stretched out to their ears, declaring, judging and
deprauing whatsoever they hear. They have a heart each of them, but not to
contain any thing, Comparion of a broken glass: alluded.
rather it resembles a broken glass, loosing whatsoever liquour is put into
it. Even so these bad qualitied men, they can keep nothing secret, but if they
hap to be silent, it is but when they shall listen to another man's infamy,
although there is nothing, either in this world or the other more precious,
then good fame and honest reputation.

Hence was it that the holy ghost said: Eccle. 16. 9.
Audistis verbum aduersus proximum? commoriatur in te, A good lesson for me^ to
observe, in hearing or reporting speeches of their neighbors.
as if he would have said. Have thou heard thy neighbor defamed, and know
not whether it be true or no, yet know that every man is a liar, and the
tongue too ready in backe-biting and slaundering? Make account, as if thou
had not heard it, hold thy peace, make no report of it. For beside thy
offending God therein, and defaming thy neighbor against the law of charity;
thou shall injury thy brother in a thing so precious as his honor is, and yet
thy self gain no honor at all thereby, because thou will be held but for a
tatler, a news-caryer, and shall be in danger of spreading lies abroad, under
an imagination of telling the truth.

So shall thou be known but for a detractour, a liar, and a telltale, and no
man will believe thee when thou speak the truth: therefore, Commoriatur in
te, let it die in thee. Blab it not abroad, hold thou thy peace, and keep
silence, for it is better to be silent, then to speak evil, Detractio^
offends as well amans own self, as others.
because detraction offends both others and thy self. But by holding thy
peace of others infamy, thou honor God in his creature, and hurtest not thy
self, nor offendest thy neighbor. Hold then all detractours, murmurers and
false speakers, to be unworthy the company of any Christian.


Finis Chap. 13.
The Argument.
There is not any thing more uneasy or insupportable, neither less deserving
love, then the tongue of the slaunderer and deprauer. And more easily the
Egyptians might suffer the plague of Frogs, then we can endure the defamers
tongue. What the cause was, why God sent such a punishment upon the Egyptians,
by creatures so vile, and unapt to offend. How difficult a thing it is to heal
the plague of the tongue, declaring and approouing, that God only must heal
it: as he healed Egypt, purifyed the lips of Esaias, and restored speech to the
dumb. The murmurer is worse then a thief, and is figured in the ravenous
birds, rejected in the divine sacrifices.

Chap. 14.
LODOVICO. Diogenes, the Cinicke affirms: That there is not any thing more
laborious, then to traffic with bad men, nor any thing more comfortable,
Among bad men, none is more to be shunned then slaunderers.
then to dwell among honest men. But hereto I add, that among bad men, there
is no company more hateful, and worthyer to be fled from, then those kind of
men, which be addicted to detraction and slander, as despised both of God and
men, Slaunderers are given to the world as a plague.
being like unto croaking Frogs, who can do nothing but make a noise, in
their unpleasing and offensive manner. And as they were given to Egypt for a
divine punishment: so are murmurers and deprauers given to the world, A great
mystery in Gods sending of Frogs to the Egyptians: compared with the
offensive qualities of other creatures.
even as a plague, or as the scourge of God.

There wanted no mystery, in that our omnipotent God sent to the Egyptians, as
a great scourge and punishment, frogs, for they are a most vile kind of
creature, begotten of the corruption of foul fennie waters, and are likewise
so weak in offending, that having no poison (as serpents have) they may be
handled. They have no teeth, as dogs that can bite: they have no force in
their feet, as horses have, to strike with their heels: they have no horns,
as Oxen, wherewith to do harm: they have no talants, like Eagles, thereby to
grapple: they have no paws, as Bears and Lions, to tear in pieces withal:
they have no pointed bristles, like the hedgehog, to pearce through any thing:
they have no weapons, like men, therewith to kill: nor are they ravenous like
wolves, that live by devouring.

And yet were they sent as a principal plague from God to the Egyptians, and
that in such abundance, as both water and land produced infinite store of
frogs: so that not only the houses were full of them, but their beds, tables,
furnasses, and the very cupbordes wherein they kept their food. Ecce, ego
percutiam omnes terminos tuos Ranis. Exodus 8. 2. 3. 4.
Et ebulliet fluuius ranas, quae ascendent, and ingredientur domum tuam, and
cubiculum lectuli tui, and super stratum tuum, and in domos seruorum tuorum,
and in populum tuum, and in furnos tuos, and in reliquias ciborum tuorum. Et ad
te, et ad populum tuum, and ad omnes seruos tuos intrabuntranae. Behold, I
will smite all thy country with Frogs. And the river shall scrall full of
frogs, which shall go up and come into thine house, and into thy chamber
where thou sleep, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and
upon thy people, and into thine ouens, and into thy kneading troughes. Yea, the
frogs shall climb up upon thee, David's acknoledgement of this prodigy.
and on thy people, and upon all thy servants. This prodigy also David
registers in one of his Psalms, saying: Dedit terra eorum ranas, in
penetralibus regum ipsorum. Psalm. 105. 30.
Their land brought forth frogs, even in their kings chambers.


Claudio. It is a matter much in use among noble men, A custom observed among
noblemen, being iniuried by a base person: serving as a comparison to this
purpose.
that if either they, or else some knight of honorable respect, do receive any
injury by some mean or vile person, their generous spirit scorns to draw a
weapon to wound him: but commaundes some servant of theirs (of base condition)
to take a cudgel, and soundly to beat him therewith. Contrariwise, if the
wrong proceed from a noble man, or his equal, it mooues his blood the more,
and for the abuse received, he couets with his own hand to act an honorable
revenge.

Among the brute beasts of lofty disposition, The same is exampled among
brute beasts.
we may not the like, even by a mere natural instinct, which makes the Lion
refrain turning to every beast that abuses him. Also the Greyhound and dogs
for the chase, with others of like generous quality, they scorn to deal with
any vile creature, or any dog of gentle condition, Petrarchs report of a
dog that scorned to fight with a Lion.
albeit they may bark, and make a contemptible noise at them. But Petrarche
tells us of a dog of Alexanders, who was of such a gallant condition, that he
disdained to fight with a Lion: notwithstanding he opposed him self against
an Elephant, which is a beast of immeasurable strength, and surlynes of mind,
exceeding other beasts in greatness, and of all other the most disciplinable.

God was very highly displeased at obstinate Pharao king of Aegipt, God
offended with Pharao for withholding his people.
for afflicting his beloved people of Israel, contemning his divine
commandment, and refusing to let them pass to their sacrifices; promising,
yet afterward denying his promises to God, by the means of Aaron and Moses.
There was no need, that a majesty so great, a person so illustrious, and a
Monarch so almighty, as God himself is, should come in proper person, to
revenge him self upon a petty king of Aegipt. Moreover, he scorned to send
one of his attendants, of sovereign and Angelical virtue, but for better
subduing the obstinate pride of a heart therein so hardened: he sent vile and
loathsome creatures, filthy, and made of putrefaction, such as Frogs are,
which although they wanted weapons to endanger him withal, yet had they voices
wherewith to weary him, and thereby they kept such a continual wicked
sounding in his head, as he could never sleep. How odious this plague of
Frogs was to the Egyptians.
And such was the noise of their hateful croaking, as the Aegiptians could not
understand themselves in speaking one to another, having their houses full,
their tables full, and their beds full: beside, over and above the filthynesse
which naturally they had, they were creatures most hateful to look on, and
loathsome to touch. The Plague of detractours and backbiters worse then that of
Frogs.


Much worse is the plague of Detractours, murmurers and lewd speakers in the
world, and far more tolerable were the frogs, as also more easily their
vile voices to be endured: then the others infamyes, cursings and abominable
raylings. For, with their deuillish tongues, Compariso^s of the wicked tongue
with the Frogs qualities and how they agree in their several natures:
they offend the majesty of God, murder the fame and reputation of their
neighbor, and bring their own polluted souls to wilful perdition.

A great similitude has the wicked tongue with the frog, but yet goes beyond
it in vileness of quality. For, as the frog abides always in muddye lakes and
troubled waters: so the lewd tongue delights in deprauing his neighbor, and
never commends any man for the virtues he possesses.

The frog is bred of the dirte and corruption in moorish grounds: so is the
backbiting and slanderous tongue derived of a putrified heart, as also of an
erroneous and perverse conscience. The frog with his horrid voice, never
cease croaking day not night: and the detracting tongue never lacks matter of
murmuring, permitting others to take no rest, but always molests them with new
devised villainies, and will not let it self sleep, least it should loose time
in harming others.

Pharaos Magicians and Enchaunters, could not deliver Aegipt from this great
plague of frogs, God only is to deliver the world of the wicked tongue.
but only God him self must send them away, by reason of the two brethren
Aaron and Moses, by whose earnest prayers, his omnipotency was pleased to rid
them thence. Even so, God only must take away this great plague from the
world, of the murmuring, slaundering and detracting tongue. Domini est
gubernare linguam. Prouer. 16. 1.
The rule of the tongue is of the Lord.


Lodouico. This difficulty is sfficiently discovered in the Prophet Esaias,
Example of the prophet Esaias, how his mouth was purified.
whose mouth was puryfied with one of the sublime Seraphims, which with the
tongs or tanackles, taking a burning coal from the Altar of the Lord, touched
his tongue therewith, and so his lips were made free from all pollution. Esaias.
6, 6. 7.
Et volauit ad me (says he) vnus de Seraphim, and in manu eius calculus, quem
forcipe tulerat de altari. Et tetigit os meum, and dixit. Ecce tetigi hac labia
tua, and auferetur iniquitas tua, and peccatum tuum mundabitur. Then flewe one
of the Seraphims to me, with an hot coal in his hand, which he had taken from
the Altar with the tongs. And he touched my mouth, and said. Lo, this has
touched thy lips, and thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sin shall
be purged.

It is a doctrine sufficient enough, Concerning those Angels sent by God to
the world and how he sends them.
and an opinion concording with the best divines, that God never sends to the
world, for execution of his works, but only those Angels of the utmost or
lowest Hierarchy; except when he will do some act of some important
consequence. Among all his maruailous and mighty works, the most principal
was that, of the ineffable incarnation of the Word, whereon afterward succeeded
the redemption of the whole world, which was sent and pronounced by the
Archangell Gabriel. If to deliver a Sacrament so inexpressible, and to treat
on a matter so important, he sent only but one Archangell:

If God sent to cure the tongue of a sinner, who was not one of the worst in
the world, but one of his most glorious Prophets of the old Testament, not an
Angel, nor an Archangell, but one of his highest and noblest Seraphims, which
do hold the chief place nearest unto God: it may serve as an especial
argument, that to heal a hurtful biting tongue, it is a matter of greatest
difficulty.

If to make sound a holy man, The cure or recovery of the wicked tongue,
belongs only to God himself.
and such a one as Esaias was, there needed to send forth a Seraphim: then to
recover the tongue of a murmurer and an evil defamer (which knows no good of
it self, neither is able to speak well) doubtless it requires the
omnipotency of God him self; Domini est gubernare linguam. I do not say,
that he needs to come in person, for the helping of an infamous tongue, but
yet I say, that not without a great mystery, sent he an Archangell to
pronounce the incarnation of the word, and also to purify the lips of one
of his cheifest Prophets, sent he a Seraphim.


Claudio. What say you, a Seraphim? Do we not read, that Erat Jesus eiiciens
Daemonium, Luke 11. 14.
and illud erat mutum? Jesus cast forth a devil, Mat. 12. 22.
and he was dumb? And in Matthew also: Oblatus est ei Daemoniu^ habe^s, caecus
and mutus, and curauit eum, itae vt loqueretur and videret. Several examples
performed by our Savior himself.
Then was brought to him one possessed with a devil, both blind and dumb,
and he healed him, so that he which was blind and dumb, both spoke and saw.
And of an other dumb man, it is written: Obtulerant ei hominem mutum,
daemonium habentem. Et eiecto daemonio, loquutus est mutus. Mat. 9. 32. 33.
They brought unto him a dumb man, possessed with a devil. And when the
devil was cast out, the dumb spoke. And of another, both deaf and dumb,
Saint Mark writes, that Christ washed with spettle the tongue of the dumb,
opened his mouth, and of his proper authority, and (with his own hands) he
healed him, in such manner, Mark. 7. 35.
that, Solutum est linguae eius vinculum, and loquebatur recte: And the string
of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke plain. Is not this a matter of far
greater marvel, then the sending of a Seraphim?


Lodouico. If my memory does not deceive me, Concerning the dumb man, whereof
the several Evangelists do make different mention.
the same dumb man, whereof Saint Luke speaks in his eleventh Chapter; is
the same which Saint Matthew records in his twelfth Chapter, and the same also
whereof Saint Mark makes mention in his seventh Chapter. For, according to
the sacred doctors opinion, especially Beda, and he who is termed the tongue
of gold, it is all one, and the very self same man, which was blind, deaf
and dumb. S. Luke only tells us, that he was dumb, and that Christ healed
him, making no mention at all either of deafness or blindness. A noate worth
the observation.
But be it howsoever, for so much as is to be said concerning the work, God
does a greater miracle, in curing a man of an evil tongue, then by giving
health to any other bodilye infyrmytie. Therefore let the ungodly talker be
ashamed, and the infamous tongue be strycken dumb: Psalm. 13. 18. 19.
Erubescant impii, and deducantur in infernum, muta fiant labia dolosa: Let the
wicked be put to confusion, and to silence in the grave. Let the lying lips
be made dumb.


Claudio. Since it is such an infectious evil, and so hard of his own nature
to be cured, we may then as boldly say, that the punishment thereof must needs
be great, if the penalty as justly do answer the offense. Saint Paul writing
to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. 10.
says: Necmaledici, nec rapaces, Regnum Dei possidebunt: No raylers, nor
thieves shall inherit the kingdom of God. What difference make you (my Lord)
between raylers and thieves?


Lodouico. Assuredly, what difference is between raylers and thieves, by
comparison of either.
if we shall but yield to that, which a little before we have set down, much
more does a biting slanderous tongue rob and steal, then a thief can do by
his unjust rapine. For the one steals a man's good fame, the other but his
goods or garments, of much less value then a man's honor is, for preservation
whereof, diverse have willingly lost their lives, but never any for their goods
or garments, which do make no more the^ a bare outward ceremony to life,
neither were ever affected or esteemed among the wise.


Claudio. If those men that be thieves, The diversity of punishment on raylors
and thieves.
shall not enjoy the kingdom of heaven, and among the efes, the most devouring
and vilest man, is he that has an infamous tongue: it must needs follow then
by reason, that greater punishment shall the detractour, murmurer and defamer
have, then the poor needy thief. And yet thieves may be cut off by the
gallows, but no justice is awarded to the detractour: therefore the world
swarms more full of wicked tongues, then it does of thieves.


Lodouico. Who knows (my Lord) if that God, Of the ravenous fowls forbidden
in sacrifice.
forbidding the sacrifice of ravenous theeuing fowls in the old Testament,
such as the Eagle, the hawk, the vulture, the kyte, and such like birds, which
feed only upon rapyne, Deuteronomy. 11. 13. 14. 15.
and are nourished with raw flesh, as detractours and insolent defamers, do
fatten them selves on men both alive and dead, who knows (I say) in speaking of
these ravenous birds, whether he aimed at these kind of bad men or no? 2. Cor.
10. 11.
because, Omnia in figura contingebant illis. Al these things came unto them
for examples. And as the fowls were reputed unclean, and not fit for the
sacrifice: so all such theeuing men, are held unworthy to inherit the kingdom
of heaven, figured by the celestial Jerusalem.


Claudio. Your opinion, Det^actours called thieves in sacred scripture,
according to the Septuagint.
my Lord, differs not much from the purpose in that those men which by the
Prophet Ezechiel are called detractours, according to our vulgar edition,
agreeing with the seauenty interpreters, are also termed thieves. Viri
detractores fuerunt in te, ad effundendu^ sanguinem and super montes comederunt
in te, scelus operati sunt in medio tui. In thee are men that carry tales to
shed blood, in thee are they that eat upon the mountains, Ezech. 22. 9.
in the midst of thee they commit abomination, thus speaks our edition. But
the Septuagint have it: Viri latrones fuerunt in te, etc. And very worthyly are
they called thieves, for worse are the thieves of our good fame and honest
repute, then the stealers of our treasure, as very sufficiently has already
been said.


Lodouico. Yet we have to consider one thing more in the detractour, One thing
to be considered in the standerer.
which is, that if he speak the truth, we should make great reckoning
thereof: but when he falsely defameth, no account at all is to be made of it,
because at length the truth will undoubtedly appear. There are certain
ravenous birds, Example of ravenous birds, that have no feathers to fly with
all, and others of high flight, with their allusion.
that have no feathers for flight, or if they do fly at all, they be able to
hold out but a little while, as the Eastridge and such like. Others there be
that fly very high, as the Eagle, the kyte, the Goshauke, etc.

Even so is it in the infamies of the detractour and murmurer, for those
disgraceful reports, which are grounded upon real defects, and undoubted truth
of the deed, are to be feared, because they have the wings of truth, and
therefore do not easily fall out of men's remembrance, in regard those
powerful feathers do mightily support them. But those that are maliciously
uttered, and unjustly are opposed against apparent truth: they can hardlye
hold out flight, nor fly any long while, wanting the wings of truth, and
therefore are not a iotte to be respected. Comparison of the belyed Susanna.
Such was the infamy bruited against chaste Susanna, which because it was
founded on falsehood, it had no permanence, but (with the heyght of honor) she
was thereof acquitted.


Claudio. Christ our redeemer will deliver us from the fear of such
detractours, as appears by the gracious promise made to the patient
sufferers: Math. 5. 11.
Beati estis cum maledixerint vobis homines: Blessed are ye when men revile ye.
And God exhorts us by the Prophet Esaias, not to fear the iniuryes of men, or
the slanders of the murdering tongue. Esaias. 51. 7. 8.
Audite me qui scitis iustitiam, populus meus lex meae in cord, nolite timere
opprobrium hominum, and blasphemias eorum non metuatis. Sicut enim vestimentum,
sic comedet eos vermis: and sicut lanam, sic deuorabit eos tinea: salus autem
mea in sempiternum erit. The Prophets exhortation, against the fear of men's
reuilings.
Harken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law. Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye affraide of their
rebukes. For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worms shall
eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation
from generation to generation. Oh perpetual consolation to poor defamed men,
the firmest hope that slaundered souls can have. Therefore Saint Jerome in an
Epistle of his, S. Ierom praised God for suffering him to be slaundered.
gave great thanks to God, That he had made him worthy to be hated of the
world, and falsely slaundered. Gratias ago Deo meo, quia dignus sum quem mundus
oderit.


Lodouico. We ought not only, to make no account of talkatiue babblers,
because they cannot hurt us, and very gladly should we suffer them, Slander
often times brings truth it self to light.
in hope of the promised reward: but also to weigh them as nothing, in regard
it often happens, that by the imposition of a slanderous calumny, the truth
it self is brought to light. Which makes me to conceive, why David likened the
detractours tongue to an arrowe: Psalm. 57. 5.
Filii hominum, dentes ^orum arma, and sagittae, and lingua eorum gladius
acutus: The children of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their
tongue a sharp sword.

The arrow (says Saint Jerome to a friend of his) if it be shot against an
hard stone, S. Jerome his comparison of an arrowe shot against a stone, alluded
to the arrowe of detraction.
it sometimes rebates the point, or breaks, or if it rebound back, it
wounds the archer that sent it from his bow. So, the arrowe of detraction,
being let loose against a just man, who is as the solid rock of constancy: it
returns back upon the unjust defamer, and offends his own proper author, even
like unto an other Perillus.

And this is also veryfied by the saying of the holy ghost, from Solomon.
Eccle. 27. 25. 26. 27. 29.
Qui mittit in altum lapidem, recidet in caput eius, and plaga dolosa dolosi
diuidet vulnera. Et qui foueam fodit, incidet in eam, and qui statuit lapidem
proximo suo, offendet in eo. Et qui laqueum alii ponit, peribit in illo.
Facienti ne quissimum consilium, supra ipsum deuoluetur, and non agnoscet vnde
adueniet illi. Whosoever casts a stone on hye, casts it upon his own head, and
he that smites with guile, makes a great wound. Whosoever diggeth a pit, shall
fall therein, and he that lays a stone in his neighbors way, shall stumble
thereon. And he that lays a snare for another shall be taken in it himself.
He that works evil, shall be wrapped in evils, and shall not know from whence
they come unto him.

Nay, yet there is a worse matter for these detractours, because it follows:
Let slaunderers make use of this heavy threatening.
Laqueo peribunt, qui oblectantur casu iustorum, dolor autem consumet illos,
antequam moriantur: They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous, shall be
taken in the snare, and anguish shall consume them before they dye. Let these
wicked tongues then be mute, for lessening and abridging their own harms,
before such judgments fall upon them, from the omnipotent hand of God So shall
they be sure to escape offending their neighbors, with the poisoned arrow of
their tongues, and likewise be free from such dreadful punishments.


Claudio. It may be (my Lord) these biting tongues strive to imitate Camelles,
Example of Camelles, according to Pliny, Hist.
who (as Pliny reports in his natural history, the eight book and
eighteen Chapter) when they would drink, beholding (as in a perfect glass)
in the clear water before them, the brutish shape of their own huge bodies:
Not. Lib. 8. Cap. 18.
by the me^re displeasing sight of so bad a spectacle, they stir their feet,
and trouble the water, that it may be void of such means to show their own
ugliness, and then with contented mind they drink.

So these deuilish tongues, The Example very excellently alluded to deuilish
tongues.
because in sanctity of life, goodness of manners, and glorious fame of
virtuous men, their own detestable brutishnes plainly appears, even as in a
crystal glass, showing their hellish vices and abomination of life;
therefore they stamp, make muddy, and scandalize others fair reports, to the
end they may not see their own loathsomeness in them. But in seeking to sullie
others splendor their own credit becomes clouded, and their own souls are
endangered, before they can impair other men's reputation. Eue^ like him, that
seeks to spoil a white wall with a coal, before the wall is any thing
iniuried, his own fingers are first of all defiled.

Have you never seen (my Lord) that such as have serious affairs in the
Court, A very apt and witty Similie.
either to visit some noble man, or to follow a suite of great importance,
their attending servants of base degree, such as the horse-keeper or
foote-boy, Example of Lackeys or Seruingme^s abusing the walls in Court.
having waited some while for his master: at length, wearied with attending,
and willing rather to be badly employed, then so to stand idle, knowing nothing
else then to do, with an extinguished torch, or a coal, he finds him self
work upon the white wall, drawing a thousand foolish gaudes, and diverse times
sets down dishonest lines or sentences, or such noates as him self may well
be ashamed of. The like also some times we see in prisons, by men restrained
of their liberty, seeking to shun idleness, with such a bad and indecent
exercise.

Not much unlike to these men, Allusion to those of wicked tongue against good
men's fame and repute.
are they of evil tongue, who having nothing else to say, nor knowing
otherwise how to busy their brains: do take the foul coal of infamy, and
therewith deface the white wall of others good fame. But first of all, they
deforme themselves with deadly iniquity, before they can stir their tongues
bad pensill, Psalm. 13. 5.
to set down other men's imperfections. Linguis suis dolose agebant: iudica
illos Deus. God keep us from such wicked tongues, and impose upon them (in his
divine goodness) a perpetual silence.


Finis Chap. 14.
The Argument.
Discoursing of the double tongue, to wit, that of the hypocrite and false man,
who has one thing in his mouth, and another in his heart: Whereby he makes
himself hateful to God, to the very devils, and also to men. Of an hypocrite,
what thing it is, how hardly he is to be known of men, and of devils: being
compared to the Comedian; the gallant dog, that has a smooth quick tongue;
and to the vapor exhaled by the Sun up into the air. The hypocrite has his
mouth in heaven, and his tongue on earth. And he is also compared to the sword
of Holofernes, of Saul, and of Goliath. etc.

Chap. 15.
LODOVICO. But what shall we say of such double men, Of double me^, speaking
one thing, and thinking another.
as have one thing in their heart, and yet sound another with their tongue? Not
much unlike to the flattering tongue, whereof we have already said somewhat, and
because they both are liars, the continue not long, but even till their deceit
is discovered. For, Eccl. 5. 11.
as the wise man says. Non ventiles te in omnem ventum, et non eas in omnem
viam. Sic enim omnis peccator probatur in duplici lingua. Be not carried about
with every wind, and go not into every way: for so does the sinner that has
a double tongue.


Claudio. Aristotle also confesses the same, A^^istotle his comparion of the
vain flourish of Life.
and gives the reason thereof. Because (says he) none can comment more on
colors then the woman which is addicted to paint her self: yet it lasts but a
little while, resembling a vain flourish of life, which at last is discovered,
by the wiles, cunning sleights, and fraudulent stratagems thereof. Nemo potest
diu fictam ducere personam. Sentences to good purpose
But what is the conclusion? the woolfe eats up the sheep, though he come to
him in a lambs clothing, and the fox will devour the pullen, though in
outward show he seems not to care for them: every one turns to his own
natural instinct, therefore Dissimilium infida societas. When we have talked
all that we can do, yet at the last our own deeds will accuse us.

When our Savior raised the Rulers daughter of the Synagogue, Mark. 5. 41.
he took her by the hand; Of Christ's raising the Rulers daughter, and what the
Author gathers thereby.
Tenens manum puellae, and then said: Tabitha kumi; Quod est interpretatum;
Puella (tibi dico) surge; Which by interpretation is; Maiden, I say unto thee,
arise. As if he would allude thereby, that he would have us ready to do good
works, signified only by the hand. But the hypocrite puts out his glove
only, which has a false resemblance to the hand, and so the works of
hypocrites shall pass without any eternal reward. So the man is sure to be
known by his works, as the tongue when it lies, even as the double man, that
speaks one thing, and does another.


Lodouico. But by your patience, No easy matter to know an hypocrite, the
knowledge of the heart belonging only to God.
my Lord, I take it not so easy a matter, to know an hypocrite or a double
hearted man, as thus in slight words you seem to pass it over. For, if man
him self, no, nor the Angels, but only God alone knows the inward of the
heart; Deus autem intuetur cor, how can your speeches hold? The hypocrite
speaking holy words, and doing deeds correspondent to those words, may want
only the Christian perfection of a good intent. because virtue consists not
in the verb, Sentence.
but in the aduerbe, that is to say, not in lip-labor, praying, giving alms,
fasting, pardoning offenses outwardly, punishing the body, ceremonious
visitation of prysons, or the sick, and such like, but in doing all the said
deeds, truly, well, justly and really to the glory of God.

We not knowing the inside of the heart, How far our outward judgment
reaches it self.
nor the intention of the work, but hearing only godly speeches, and seeing
deeds done according to such words, it appears to me impossible (which is more
then difficult) to know whether the tongue be double or pure.

And to go on yet a little further, The hypocrite hateful to God, to men, and
to the devils themselves.
by more the^ conjecture. We know that the counterfeite man not only offends
God, who sees the corruption of his unclean heart, but also he beco^es hateful
to me^, in discovering of his deceit. Nay, he is odious to the devils
themselves, so soon as they perceive his disse^bling life: because, declaring
a sanctified life in deeds and words, and not agreeing therewith in trueness of
intention, he is but reputed only to be a man of a virtuous life, and so
becomes he thereby most displeasing to the infernal spirits. Tell me then, can
there be seen in the world a more brutish mo^ster then the hipocrite? hated of
God, contemned of men, and offensive to the very devils?


Claudio. Your argument (at the first sight) seems to be a matter
unanswerable: but whosoever considers the opinion of Aristotle, and (with the
eye of ehe mind) contemplates the instabilitie of man's life; Aristotle his
opinion of our life's instability.
which can not long time persevere in one and the same condition: shall find it
not so intricate a case as you make it, to discover the dissembling of an
hipocrite. And your self, in confessing, (that he is odious to men) do differ
not a jot from Aristotle's judgment, The hipocrits holy life is to get his own
intent.
which is: That man cannot long time continue in a feyned life, but in the end
his corrupt rottenness will be made manifest. It evidently appears, that
the hypocrite, in counterfeyting a religious kind of life, until he may reach
to his own intent, the same being once obtained, he then returns to his
former ordinatie life again.

The Prince of the Tribunes to the most cruel king Antiochus, Example of the
Tribune to king Antiochus.
dissembling a peace in goodly protestation of words: caused the most bloody
massacre in Jerusalem, as made every one (in mere compassion) that either
heard or read of this cruel example, to shed fountains of tears. So deals
the double tongue and hipocriticall man, such is the end of his purpose and
aim: with the feigned words of a friend, to carry an outward color of
kindness, even the valiant knight Ioab slew Abner in Hebron. 2. Sam. 3. 27.


The like by envy did he to the Prince Amasa, Ioabs killing of Abner and Amasa.
with whom counterfeiting as a great friend, meeting him upon the way in the
open field, and friendly saluting him, saying: Salve mi frater, Art thou in
health my brother? 2. Sa. 20. 9. 10.
Then taking him by the beard with the right hand, as if he meant to kiss him:
drew forth his sword with the left hand, and (before Amasa could be aware of
him) smote him therewith under the fifth rib, so that all his bowels fell out
upon the ground, Qui percussit eum in latere, and effudit intestina eius in
terram, and mortuus est, nec secundum vulnus apposuit.


Lodouico. This doubleness of tongue which now you speak off, The doubleness
of tongue is the effect of anger.
it is most true, that it lasts but for little time, because it is the effect
of anger, which being once set on working, suddenly breaks forth to his
effect, and then it can no long while endure: as your examples already
alleged do very well testifye, for it is the property of anger, to pursue
(so speedily as it can) the hated conceit. But in an hypocritical man, The
property of anger.
who may nevertheless be without disdain or fury, the rehearsed examples are
not verified, because not all those, that keep one thing in the breast, and
deliver another with the tongue, are to be called hypocrites.

But they are truly and properly hypocrites, Of such as may justly be termed
hypocrites.
who feign a Saint-like behavior, and utter honest words, yet in any virtuous
action, are (notwithstanding) inwardly such devils, as they are without piety
and any religion at all. As were the Scribes and Pharisees, of whom our
savior speaking, Mat. 15. 7. 8.
says: vae vobis hypocritae, been propheta^it de vobis Isayas, dice^s, populus
hic labijs me honorat, cor autem little long est a me. Woe to you hypocrites,
Esaias prophesied well of you. This people draws near unto me with their mouth,
and honoreth me with the lips, but their heart is far off from me.

And in a thousand other places we read, that such are properly called
hypocrites, which in a lying habit, have seemed to be obseruers of the divine
law, The nature and behavior of hypocrites, to be Saints in the eyes of me^*
but a good intention has altogether bin wanting in them. In regard, that
whatsoever they have done, has not been to the honor of God, but to be
reckoned as Saints in the eyes of men. Wherefore it is said, that receperunt
mercedem suam, Mat 6. 2.
they have their reward. And these hypocrites have practiced long time to
persevere in such a lying kind of life, because their hope and intent is, to go
masked in sheep clothing, until the very hour of their death.


Claudio. It merits some blame, my Lord, that you will reduce a name general
for feigners only, to such as may seem to dissemble well, and yet no way be
really the same in truth. Who is rightly said to be an hypocrite, according to
Budeus.
Because an hypocrite (if we shall give credit to Budeus) is every dissembler,
that represents any other condition then he is indeed. Hereupon, stage
players, and all kind of Comedians were termed hypocrites, and the action of
Comedians called hypocrisy and dissimulation, because themselves were but Apes
of men's actions, representing diverse other personages in lively imitation.
Demosthenes his answer concerning the first and chief part of an ch
And this to be true, we read it approved by that great greek Father of
eloquence, who being asked what was the first and cheifest part of an
Orator, constantly answered, Hypocrisis, simulation, hypocrisy. Being asked
again, what was the second part, returned the same answer Hypocrisis, and on
the third demand, for the third part of an Orator, did always make the
self same answer.

For to speak uprightly, the principal part of an Orator, is hypocrisy,
that is, imitation: to imitate the gesture, voice, words and action of some
person, that the subject (whereof the Orator speaks) makes relation unto.
Some can dissemble more cunningly the^ others.
So then, every one that resembles another bodies person, is called an
hypocrite, and it is not meant of him only (as you say) that shows himself in
appearance to be good, yet afterward proves naught, whose dissembling
(happily) is not so hard to be noted, Math. 7. 16.
as it is in the contrary body. Beside, Christ himself says, A fructibus eoru^
cognoscetis eos. You shall know them by their fruits.

It may be there are some, who are more perseuera^t in a dissembling course of
life, then others can be, the better to compass and gain in their own greedy
desires, and all is done with a golden tongue, which yet may prove but copper
too. But let the woolfe be clothed or shaddowed in a sheeps skin, even as
cunningly as he can devise to be, yet in the end, some part of his body must
needs be discovered, and so he shall come to be generally known; An hypocrite by
one means or another will be discovered.
Either by his head, that is, the beginning of his perverse actions: or by his
feet, that is, his progression in his disse^bling works: or by his tail, that
is, the uttermost end of al he can do. Let it suffice then: Nemopotest diu
fictam ducere persona^, as likewise the Comical person, can not always of
himself abide in place to fill the Scene.


Lodouico. I did not derive this name of hypocrite, from his amplenesse, or
large scope in dissembling, but gave it according to the use of the world in
these our days: Hypocrisy derived from the course of the world now adays,
pointing out such as are hypocrites.
which terms them to be hypocrites, that do faigne themselves outwardly, to
be full of great holiness, always praying, and seeming evermore to be (as it
were) even tied or united to god himself, in their ceremonious kind of
praying: but their hearts in soundness and true effect, are very far off, both
from his most sacred majesty, and any good or virtuous action. Transfiguring
themselves (like their father) into Angels of light, albeit inwardly they are
such saints, as seeming to have the lips of the Cherubines, that cease not
continually to praise the Lord, do contain yet within them such devils hearts,
as never make an end of blaspheming god. Of whom we may well say that sentence
of the royal Prophet David. Et dilexeru^t eum in ore suo, Psalm. 78. 36.
and lingua sua mentiti sunt ei. Cor autem eorum no^ erat cum eo, nec fideles
habiti sunt in testamento eius. They flattered him with their mouth, and
dissembled with him with their tongue. For their heart was not upright with him,
neither were they faithful in his covenant.

Now if you will have it, How Comedians and Stage players ar said to be
hypocrites acording to S. Basil.
that stage players shall be said to be hypocrites, we may then with as much
reason say, that such behauior as comes from those Comedians, does best bewray
the nature of hypocrisy. For many times may be easily seen, that one of bad
or base condition, one of the very meanest among the people, taks on him the
shape or Idea of a person royal, in very rich and costly habilime^ts, with
grave gesture, witty speeches, and kingly carriage, so that every simple and
unwary eye, is pleasingly deceived in him. Yet at the length, when his
counterfeited garments are cast off, and he returned into his own proper
apparel; The comparison alluded to the hypocrite well worth noating.
then his true nature and quality is discerned. Even so the hypocrite, making a
protestation of holy speeches, such as may seem pleasing (outwardly) in the eye
of heaven: afterward, when his lying and dissembled cloak is thrown off, then
hell takes hold of him, and quite bereaues him of heavens happiness.


Claudio. O tongue, The tongue compared to the Greyhounds or best hu^ting
hounds.
thou accursed deceiuer, twofold, or double, like to the best and most esteemed
Greyhoundes or hunting dogs, whose tongue is so apt and pliable, as very easily
it is every way turned double. And who can tell, but that this might be the
meaning of the prophet David, Psalm. 68. 25.
when he said: Lingua canum tuoru^ ex inimicis ab ipso? The tongue of thy dogs
in the blood of the enemies?

These men are at one instant, Hypocrites, in heaven and on earth at one
instant.
both in heaven, and on earth: for their unclean lips in praising of god, do
appear to seek nothing but his divine glory; but in true effect, they go
licking like the wandering Be, among all the frail flowrs of worldly glory,
which (in one moment) vanish suddenly away. Job. 20. 5.
Whereupon, Job that great Prince of the East said: Gaudium hypocritae ad instar
pu^cti: The joy of hypocrites is but a moment. Psalm. 73. 9.
Therefore said David: posueru^t in coelum os suum, and lingua eoru^ tra^siuit
in terra: They set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue walks through
the earth.

To have the tongue in or aloft toward heaven, How the tongue is said to be in
heaven.
is nothing else, but to talk over liberally of heavenly things: whereon grew
the old Adage Noli ponere os in coelu^, How the tongue is said to be upon
earth.
as much to say, as, with unclean lips let no man talk of heavenly matters.
And the tongues extention upon earth, may (happily) be taken in this kind, by
over great affection to the things of this world. How in both places at one
instant.
And as the Be couets honey, even so do double tongued hypocrites, speak with
their dissembling mouths, of celestial happiness, but their desires stretch
wholly to worldly glories.


Lodouico. Let us then say of these trewantly tongues, Comparion of exhaled
vapors, shining like stars, and aptly alluded to disse^bling hypocrites.
that they are like to earthy vapors, exhaled by the Sun up into the air,
shining by night as if they were bright stars: but falling down to the ground.
Simple children tell their parents they saw fair stars fall down to the
earth. So is it with your dissembling hypocrites, feigning wonderful sanctity
with their tongues, which to the ignorant and simple, makes them to seem like
glorious stars of the firmament: whereas indeed, they are but mere flashes of
the devil their father. Of whom it is written. Esaias. 14. 12.
Quomodo cecidisti de coelo Lucifer, qui mane oriebaris? How art thou fallen
from heaven O Lucifer, Son of the morning?

Even so may we say to these saint-like tongues, and devils in heart, when, in
the judgment they shall fall like vapors, into the infernal depth: How
happens this, poor wretches? you that appeared like shining lamps in heaven,
that thus like thin vapors you are miserably fallen to the earth? And what shall
the wicked answer again? Qui vertit linguam suam, Proverb. 17. 21.
incidet in malum. A naughty tongue shall fall into evil. Even as if he would say,
they that speak doubly, as false hypocrites do, fall into evil, that is, into
hell, or hell fire.


Claudio. Wherefore should falling into evil, signify falling into hell, or hell
fire? what, are there no other evils, but those of hell, and hell fire?


Lodouico. It is an universal rule, How falling into evil, is said to be
falling into hell, or hell fire.
not only in Philosophy, but also in divinity, that when we find any voice
simply, without any adiu^ct, it is taken for the principal signified by that
same voice, according to the very analogy: vox simpliciter prolata, debet
accipi pro suo potiori significato. The wise man then saying, that the double
tongued man shall fall into evil, adjoining no other words thereunto: teaches
us to understand and look into the thing what it is, that is called the true
evil indeed, because, whatsoever of it self is absolutelye evil, is utterly
repugnaunt to the truest good.

There is nothing that hinders so much the fruition of the cheifest good, The
privation of the cheifest good, eue^ God himself.
and stretches to the pain of punishment, as the damnable evil of hell does,
which is the castigation of the true evil committed in fact, and that is it,
which truly depriueth us of the truest good, even of God himself. Incidet in
malum, id est in infernum, qui vertit linguam suam. And of the Princes
infernal we may say, that even they also (by their evil tongues) fell into
the bottomless deep; Ose. 7. 16.
according as Ose, prophesying of them before, said. Cadent in gladio principes
eorum, a furore linguae suae. Their Princes fall by the sword, for the rage of
their tongues.


Claudio. Why then me thinks the Prophet David said well, in speaking of this
wicked tongue, and comparing it to a sword: Psalm. 57. 6.
Et lingua eorum gladius acutus. And, as oftentimes it happens, that a man
(by mischance) hurts himself with his own weapon: Comparison of a man hurting
himself by his own weapon: alluded.
the like do these men with their own tongues, even confound themselves, and
become worthy of eternal horror. So that we may say of them, as of Saul, who
was murdered by his own proper weapon: and David did cut off the head of
Goliath, with his own sword. The like dealt the chaste matro^ Judith with
Holofernes, smit off his head with his own weapon.


Finis Cap. 15.
The Argument.
The hypocrite, because he has holy words only, without deeds, is compared to
the glow-worme: to the statue which Nebuchadnezzer saw in his dream, that had
a head of gold only: he has his left hand about God, and his right under his
head. He has more faces then one, disfiguring it to appear only, but not to be
good indeed: he goes forth of his own confines; he suffers himself to be
guided in his actions, like unto a brute beast: with his best virtue he buieth
sle^der rewards, and hangs his praise upon other men's lips. He is like to the
brood hen, that calls her young ones to eat, and almost starues her self to
death: like to the thief, that shoes a horse backward, to deceive the
pursuer; with many other worthy comparisons against the double hypocritical
tongue.

Chap. 16.
LODOVICO. Now, The hypocrite very aptly compared to the glow-worme, or
glaze-worme, that shines brightly in the night season, and is not seen in the
day unto.
what might I say, if me^ were inwardly so good, as they are inwardly naught,
deserving eternal death, and only by their false tongues? May they not
rightly be compared to the glow-worme? a thing which is of no bigness, and
which in the summer time when it flies in the dark, seems as if it were ail
fire in appearaunce to us, and yet by day it does deliver no light at all. So
may we very well say of the hypocrit, that in the dark season of this present
life (when we can discern no hidden things, but by faith only, he then
appears to be kindled (as it were) with celestial fire. But in the bright day
of eternity, when every thing shall be clearly discovered, then it will be
evidently seen, how much he was deprived of charity, how empty of al heavenly
love, and how that all his goodly words, were utterly void of true effects.
Also, how much he spoke only by speaking to appear, and not indeed to be holy
like to false imaginations, having no real essence, and to no other end but
only, that he might be esteemed, reverenced and honored of men. Hence comes
it, that it was said of such men, Math. 6. 2.
Receperu^t mercedem sua^; They have their reward, not that which god in his
goodness would have bestowe^ on the^: but rather that vanity is enough for them,
and therefore vanity is their reward, themselves being indeed nothing else, but
a little vainglory.


Claudio. Miserable men, The reward which hypocrites do most gape after.
they might as easily have labored for the true reward, the certain assurance
of eternal glory: but like giddy headed fools, forsaking a certainty, they
strove for a little smoke of worldly honor, which quickly was carried away with
the wind. The devout soul the spouse of Christ.
But the holy and devout soul, the spouse of Jesus Christ, she is of another
mind of whom it is written. That she has the left hand of her spouse under her
head, and his right hand does sweetly embrace her. Cant. 2. 6.
Laeua eius sub capite meo, and dextera illius amplexabitur me. His left hand
is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me.

The right hand of God, Of the right hand of God, and why so called.
is the glory of Paradise, whereupon the everliving father said to the Son:
Dixit Dominus Domino meo, sede a dextris meis: The Lord said unto my lord: Sit
thou at my righthand. And it is called the right hand, Psalm. 110. 2.
because it is free from al sinister things whatsoever. Of the left hand of
God, and where the holy spouse places it.
The left hand is the glory of this frail life, and the honors which this
present world does afford.

The holy spouse puts her husbands left hand under her head, as one utterly
careless of this worlds vain honors; desiring only to be embraced with his
right hand, Psalm. 73. 24.
that is, to be circled and engirt with his never failing glory. Psalm. 3. 3.
Cum gloria suscepistime; Thou have received me to glory. The hipocrite seeks
after the left hand of worldly vanity, making no account at al of the right
hand.
Gloria mea, and exaltans caput meum: My glory, and the lifter up of my head.

The hypocrite, with the glory which he gives to god, and with the holy words
which he vtters to other, like one bereft of his wits, seeks only after the
left hand of worldly preferments, making no account at all of the celestial
glories: but thinks he ought to do every thing contrary, that is, to lay the
left hand of worldly honors under his head, as if he were sleeping upon the
pillow of promotion, there is nothing else in him to be respected.

As for the right hand, whereof the heavenly spouse makes her use, to wit, a
longing heart, filled full of earnest and enflamed desires, holily to aspire, to
be circled about with his eternal love, and round embraced in the arms of his
brightness, in him there is not so much as one thought admitted thereof.


Lodouico. Whosoever does advisedly note the hypocrite, being adorued with the
name of a Christian, full of such sincere and holy words: shall apparently
perceive, that he is not much unlike the mysterious image, The hypocrite
compared to Nabuchadnezars Image in his dream.
which Nabuchadnezzer king of the Assyrians saw in his dream. His head was of
the finest gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of
brass, the legs of iron, and the feet, partly of iron, partly of earth: But
from a high mountain there came a little stone, and smiting the earthy part of
the statue, broke this immesurable Colossus, and bruisd it into the smallest
dust.

The hypocrite has his head of gold, For the head, and how the comparison
holds in the hypocrite, in every part according to the Image.
because he seems to glory in the name of a Christian, and his works also are
christian-like, so much as by outward appearance ca^ be discerned. And they
that hear him to utter forth such sanctified speeches, do merely judge him to
be a saint of Paradise; so much for his golden head.

But the trunk or body is not answerable to the head, because the breast and
arms are of silver. The breast and arms.
His inward thoughts, are signified by the breast, and his outward worksare
distinguished by the arms, being altogether, tied to worldly reward, and
infinite in auaritious scraping together, therefore are they thus denoted by
silver.

His belly is of brass, The belly and thighs.
a metal full of noise and sounding, which signifies, that whatsoever he does,
is but to get him a name in the world, and only to compass a fame of holiness.

His legs are of iron, The legs.
for the hypocrite walks many countries, leaves no ways whatsoever
vnessayed, to purchase either spiritual or temporal authority, to the end he
may rule and swaye over others, with the iron rod of tyrannical government.
Psalm. 2. 9.
Reges eos in virga ferrea, and tanquam vas figuli confringes eos. Thou shall
bruise them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters
vessel: this signifies the iron, which tames all other metals whatsoever.

He has his feet of earth, The feet.
for the hypocrites affections are all carnal, and therefore thus signified to
be earthie. The hypocrites works are so interessed with vanity, that whatsoever
he does, it is only to gain money, or else to purchase fame of the world, or
for some temporary authority: never having the glory of God before his eyes,
which ought to be cheifest preferred in all our actions. Psalm. 115. 2.
Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Not unto us O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.

Woorthily therefore does Christ (the corner stone) descend, The stone, Christ
the corner stone.
brusing all into small dust, and dissoluing all his vain thoughts into
nothing. Tunc contrita sunt pariter ferrum, testa, aes, argentum and aurum,
Dan. 2. 35.
and redacta quasi in fauillam aestiuae areae, quae rapta sunt vento: nullusque
locus inuentus est eis, etc. Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the
silver and the gold broken all together, and became like the chafe of tbe
summer flowers, and the wind carried them away, that no place was found for
them. And the stone that smote the image, became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth.


Claudio. Deservedly do hypocrite; want a right intention, and having a vain
respect in all their actions, our Savior spoke very well of them, Math. 6. 16.
when he said. Nolite fieri sicut hypocritae tristes, exterminant enim facies
suas, Of the face of an hypocrite.
vt appareant hominibus i^^unantes. When ye fast, look not sour as the
hypocrites do: for they disfigure their faces that they might seem unto men to
fast. Speaking of hypocrites he says, Of the face of a true christian.
that they look sour, and disfigure their faces. But when he speaks of the
true christian, who does all things to the honor of God, he uses then the
singular number, saying. Math. 6. 17.
Tu autem cum ieiunas, etc. Et faciem tuam laua. But when thou fastest, etc.
And wash thy face.

Hereupon was it, that in speaking of the hypocrites face, he uses the number
of more then one: Exterminant facies suas. But in speaking of the just man, he
uses the singular number only: because the end of the just man is b^^ one,
that is, the glory of God only, but many are the vain ends of hypocrites;
Exterminant facies. The several faces of the hypocrite.
For the hypocrit has now the face of one that is earnest in prayer, then by
and by of an almes-giuer: anon of an apostolical preacher, and afterward, of a
devout faster, but he has none of all these faces truly and in deed.

His own proper face, being a very devilish face, is fearful to behold, and
every one flies from it, even the devil himself. But the just man has one
face only, and that is most Angell-like, as we may read of S. Stephen the
glorious martyr: Acts. 6. 15.
intueba^tur faciem eius, tanquam faciem Angeli: They saw his face, as it had
bin the face of an Angel.

The hypocrite has many faces, The hipocrite is the Ape of many persons,
directing his actions to many ends.
not only because he is the Ape of many persons, as in a Comedy we may see,
that one man plays the parts of many: but also in this regard, that he directs
his works to many ends, namely, to temporal profit, to worldly honor, to
please men, and a thousand other unworthy deseignes: which the just man never
does, but addicteth all his actions to the glory of God only.

And this word Exterminant, The signification of the word Exterminare.
is not quite void of mystery; Exterminare has no other signification, but to
issue forth, to step beyond or out of our bounds and limits. Now the
hypocrites confynes are, where with holy words he may cloak a devilish heart,
and therein is he said to go beyond his true confines.


Lodouico. What are those limits or confines, which hypocrites do use to outgoe
or pass?


Claudio. The confines or bounds of the universal world, How hipocrits are
said to go beyond their bounds.
are only two, heaven, and earth. Hypocrites by their counterfeite kind of
life, are extermined and banished both from heaven, and earth, from God, and
from men, and so they loose both the one and other reward. That of heaven,
because Receperu^t mercedem suam; Math. 6. 2.
They have their reward. And that on earth, because in a moment it vanished and
left them; Spes hypocritae peribit; Job. 8. 13.
The hope of hypocrites shall perish.

Hateful they are to God and men; Hypocrites hateful to god and men.
Exterminant facies suas, More especially, because they never show a true
countenance: for it follows, vt appareant, that they might seem unto men, but
he says not, vt sint; because whatsoever they do, they do it but to appear
only, and not to be truly the same indeed.


Lodouico. What a misshapen monster is this? But tell me (my Lord) I pray you,
upon what occasion was it said; Nolite fieri, and not much rather; Nolite
facere? In mine opinion, it had bin better said, I would not have ye do, as
hypocrites do, then saying, I would not have you be made like to hypocrites.


Claudio. Do you not know (my Lord) that this difference is between men, The
difference between men and brute beasts in their actions.
and brute beasts in their actions: that the one does freely whatsoever he
will: but the other, beasts I mean, are led merely by nature, and a
determinate fantasy to their attemptes, or otherwise they are not able to do
any thing?

The saying then of Christ concerning hypocrites; Nolite fieri, implies thus
much, not to be led (after the manner of beasts) to their actions, by blind
sense, and not by reason.

Herein their folly manifestly is discerned, seeing that by such works,
wherewith they made a show of winning heaven, even as if they had bin the
iustest men in the world: they have thereby purchased their own damnation,
never to look upon the bright face of heaven.

And Petrus Chrisologus says, Petrus Chrisologus concerning the hopocrites
actions.
The hypocrite with the sharp lance of virtue, murthereth virtue it self:
kills fasting with fasting, empties prayer by praying, and by mercy, dries up
the flowing fountain of mercy.

Hypocrisy is all one with the Fever, procuring a fiery burning by cold
drinking: Hypocrisy compared to the Fever and Dropsy.
or as the dropsy is in the body, even so is hypocrisy to the soul. The
dropsy increases thirst by drinking, and the ouerdrunk hypocrite, dies with
thirst, gaping hourly for more and more; but ever with an extraordinary
greediness, after idle shadows of fleeting vaineglory.


Lodouico. He committes an intolerable folly, that by virtue seeks to
purchase the favors of men, Grego. in Moral. Cap 8.
because (for a vile matter) he parts with an importaunt jewel: and that
which might have made him fit for heaven, he barters away for fruitless
breath, the copper coin of men's vain praise, and sinkes therewith deservedly
to hell; So says Saint Gregory in the eighth of his Morralles.


Claudio. It is so undoubtedly, Thom. Aquin. in Sum. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.
and thereupon said the goulden tongued divine, That the delectation of humane
praise, lasts no longer then it is heard, and the relish thereof dies with
the very taste. For when the word is spoken, the worth is ended, a folly so
great, as there cannot be imagined a greater. How true co^me^dation is to be
sought.
He that is desirous of eternal commendation, must not seek that which comes
from men, but from the searcher and examiner of all hearts: 2. Cor. 4. 5.
Tunc erit laus vnicuique a Deo: Then shall every man have praise of God. There
is no security (says a learned Father) in committing ones glory to the tongues
of men, which are like chests without either lock or key. The tongues of men*
are like Chests without lock or key. Hug. Car.
For when it is referred to another man's liberty it is no longer in thine own
power, but in the others, either to commend, or to condemn thee.


Lodouico. How perilous it is, and without any security at all, to commit our
own praise into an others power, is very easy to be discerned. Therefore
hypocrisy, in his earnest affection to popular applause, is compared to the
weeuel, Hypocrisy compared to the weeuel, that eats the flowr in the corn,
and leaves the husks. John Climack.
from whom we cannot so closely keep the corn, but he steals into it so soon
as it is threshed: and to the end it may not be sowed, to spring again to a
further increase, he filcheth away the sbstance, leaving nothing but a
disse^bled empty husk. Even such is hypocrisy (says John Climachus) which
steals away all our honest deseruings, so that no other reward is to be
expected, but this bare breath of vain glory: Receperunt mercedem sua^, Math.
6. 2.
a price so vile, as worse is not to be thought on.

A fool may that merchant well be called, Hypocrites compared to merchants.
which brings most precious wares into so poor a city, as yields no man able
to buy the very meanest of them. Such merchants, are hypocrites, who sell their
works by a signal formality, of praying, exhortation, teaching, fasting, and
open giving of alms in this world, where there is no man, that can give them
the condign value to such good deeds done in sincerity, and therefore they
sell them but for a little vain commendation.

You shall sometimes see a Preacher preach for many years together, An
especial note for such preachers as are time obseruers, and the pleasers of
men's private humors.
to the amazement of all his hearers, even as if at his lips there hung no
mean perfection, but rather such power and efficacy in his speeches, as many
stubborn minds have bin won by him to god, every one admyring and honoring
him, even as if he were another Paul. Nevertheless, among so many by him
converted, himself remains perverted, by executing this his Apostolical
office, only for the applause of poor men's breath, and for his own
advancement to honor in the world. Whereon it follows, that by helping others
to heaven, he goes himself to hell, causing others to be repentant, yet
himself has continued impenitent in his sins, thirsting after a little praise
and vainglory of men, and loosing thereby the grace and true glory of heaven.

Agreeable with the brood Hens quality, Men pleasing preachers compared to the
brood Hen.
calling the other chicke^s to meat, but famisheth her self. Or they are like
the horse, that brings bottles of wine home to the house, and drinks nothing
but water himself.

Caesar and Alexander cheered on their soldiers* and boldly encouraged them to
the battle, Example of Alexander and Caesar.
but yet were themselves the foremost in fight. In like manner, with greatest
heart and spirit did the Princes, Example of Moses, losuah and Gedeon.
Moses, Iosuah and Gedeon lead on Gods armies, and the Priests led on the
Ark of the Testament, when others stood and noted their worthy example. But
these hollow hearted hypocrites, send out others before them, and tarry at home
themselves immooueable, because after the manner of the Pharisees, Dicunt and
non faciunt, Why God gave us one tongue and two hands.
they talk only, but do nothing, except it be by contraries. Whereas, God
having given us one tongue, and two hands; he implies thereby, that we should
work much, but talk little.

The Nurse first takes the food into her own mouth, and having prepared as it
ought to be, Comparison of the Nurse feeding her child: alluded to the
hypocrite.
then she nourishes her child therewith. But the hypocrite, without once
tasting himself the food of any good actions, feeds the people with fair
words: preaching fasting, but himself with a full belly, exalting virtue in
others, being most vicious himself, and condemning others covetousness, when
his own heart is most greedy and insatiable.

But what says S. Paul concerning these people? Qui alium doces, Romans 2. 21.
te ipsum non doces? Qui praedicas non furandum, furaris? Thou which teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? Heereto may we add this sentence of the Prophet. Cum
ipsi limpidissimam aquam biberitis, Ezech. 34. 18. 19
reliquam pedibus vestris turbatis? Et oues meae his quae conculcata pedibus
vestris fuerant, pascebantur, and quae pedes vestri turbauerant, haec bibebant.
Have you drunk of the deep waters, and must you trouble the residue with your
feet? And my sheep eat that, which ye have trodden with your feet, and drink
that which you have troubled with your feet.


Claudio. I remember, and very well fitting to our purpose, a notable mystical
note, Example of the ornaments appointed for the priesthood
and this it is. Among all the ornaments appointed for the Priesthood, the
chief and most esteemed was that termed rational: whereupon was written
this mysterious word; Lemma, which being interpreted, signifies doctrine and
truth. As alluding thereby, that the principal thing in a Priest, ought to
be divine doctrine, coupled with the truth of deeds; because, Turpe est
Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

They are like to so many Tantalusses, Hypocrites compared to Tantalus.
that are in the midst of water, and yet dye with thirst. And in them is that
sentence of old Isaac verified, vox quidem, vox Jacob, manus autem manus sunt
Esau: The voice is Jacobs voice, Genesis 27. 22.
but the hands are the hands of Esau. For in voice and doctrine only, they
seem to have the tongue of our Savior, who (according to his humanity) was of
Jacobs house or stock; Et regnabit in domo Jacob in aeternum. And he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever. Luke 1. 33.
But their hands, that is, their works, they are of Esau, in whom the wicked
and reprobate are figured.

They seem as if they soared up to heaven, Comparion of thieves, that shoo
their horses backward, to prevent pursuit, alluded to hypocrites.
but sink down (indeed) to hell. Not much unlike unto those thieves, who
having stolen some great booty in the city, do cause their horses to be shod
backward, so when the pursuers do imagine them to be still within the city,
they are fled far enough off from it. Even so is it with hypocrites, they have
their horse-like bodies soaled or shod backward, they pray, reprove, admonish,
preach and do such things, as in our eyes are reputed to be holy: but all is
done the contrary way, because they gape after humane glory and ostentation,
without any care of the divine honor at all. Therefore, when sometimes we think
in our selves that they are in the celestial Jerusalem, they are in hellish
Babylon it self.

Might not this tongue as easily have labored the way of salvation, Eccle. 5.
11.
as thus (by abusing it self) work his own damnation? Peccator cognoscitur in
duplici lingua, The sinner is known by his double tongue; as when one thing is
sounded by the mouth, and taught in doctrine, and a quite contrary matter is in
the deed. A double tongue, one of the mouth, an other of the deed.
A double tongue is this, one of the mouth, another of fact: with the one we
make show of mounting up to heaven, and with the other fall wilfully down
into hell.


Finis Cap. 16.
The Argument.
The tongue of the hypocrite, when it teaches or enstructeth, is like many
branches, severally grafted upon one stock: or, as when upon thorns there
hangs grapes: or like the foolish virgins, that had every thing answerable
to the wise, but yet stayed without; whereon, a notable doubt is resolved. It is
also compared to the Estridge, whose wings do resemble the Hawks in color,
but yet are not able to bear her body aloft: Or like to the vain woman, who
because she would seem fair, paints her self. How much it bebooues us to be
ready, in subduing the appetite of vainglory, which is discovered most, in
striving to speak fine and curiously.

Chap. 17.
LODOVICO. If the works of hypocrites are contrary to the doctrine which they
teach, or if not contrary, yet at the least strange and diverse: Comparion of
diuets fruits growing upon one stock.
then it may be well said of them, as it is of those engraffed pla^ts or
stocks, whereon not only we behold fruits of the same kind to grow, but
oftentimes) and to be maruaild at) among the leaves of the Medler, to grow the
Seruise, and upon one self same tree, the Pomegranate and the ordinary Apple
to branche forth, and where the white grape blancheth, the red to show it
self substantially, as in like manner the red with the white.

Even so in hypocrites are their own proper fruits discerned, The allusio^ to
hypocrites, in the fruits of their works.
which be naught and wicked: A fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos: By their fruits
ye shall know them. And they have an ingraffing too, which is by the voice and
doctrine of Christ, wherefore it is said of them: Mat. 23. 3.
Omnia quaecunque dixerint vobis, seruate, and facite: secundum opera vero
eorum, nolite facere: All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do: but after their works do not: these men are mere mercenaries,
because they do all for worldly reward.

The mercenary or hyreling, Of mercenaries and hirelings, that seek their own
benefit in the church of god.
although he lays not down his life for his flock, yet notwithdanding, he
feeds them (for so it is needful) by doctrine: but this auoydes not his
sinful guilt, in regard he seeks after reward and temporal glory; Sua
quaerentes, non quae Jesus Christi* Coloss. 3. 1.
They seek not those things that are above with Jesus Christ. They seek their
own private commodity in the Church of God, nevertheless, they preach
Christ, after the manner of the Pharisees, who for their own benefit preached
the law of Moses, but yet they observed it not: Math. 23. 3. 4.
Dicunt enim, and non faciunt: For they say, and do not. And again, Alligant
autem onera grauia and importabilia, and imponunt in humeros hominum: digito
autem suo nolunt ea mouere. They bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne,
and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one
of their fingers.


Claudio. How can this be? John. 10. 5. 8.
If Christ say that the sheep hears them not? Non audierunt eos oues: quia non
nouerunt vocem alienorum. The sheep did not hear them, for they knew not the
voice of strangers. If they do not hear them, it may perhaps be by this
reason, because their voice soundes not as the true voice of a shepherd.


Lodouico. This question is answered, and it is the answer of Saint Augustine.
How the sheep do hear mercenary hypocrites, according to Saint Augustine.
That the sheep do not hear them, neither can they hear such mercenary
hypocrites of themselves; but they hear in them the voice of Christ. Because
there are two things in these hyreling hypocrites, as a little before we have
declared. One is their works, and this proud voice of Pharisaicall and
hypocritical works, the sheep of Christ is deaffe to, Two voices in
hypocrites.
and hears not. Alienum autem non sequuntur, quia non noueru^t vocem
alienorum: therefore it is said; Secundum autem opera eorum facere nolite. John.
10. 5. 8.
The second is the voice of Christ, Math. 23. 3.
which voice only is heard of the flock: Omnia quaecunque dixerint vobis
seruate, and facite. This is the true ingraffing, and god (this while) by them
is preached, but when they speak as of themselves, then are they not heard,
When men speak of them selves, they are not heard.
nor listened to by the flock.


Claudio. But by your Lordshippes good favor, here I will use the words of
Christ himself: Math. 7. 16.
Nunquid colligunt de spinis vuas, aut de tribulis ficus? Do men gather grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles? How is it possible to gather grapes from the
thorns?


Lodouico. Yet my Lord it is so. In what manner grapes may be upon thorns, and
yet be different in root.
Have you never seen the grape to hang upon a thorn? And yet though the
thorn seem to bear the grape: the grape has one root, and the thorn
another. The Lambs do take that which comes from the root of the vine,
being the sacred Doctrine of Christ himself, and they leave that which
proceeds from the root of the thorn, whereon the grape but appears to
hang, which is nothing else but the mere ostent of a mercenarie hypocrite.

The mercenary hypocrite who goes about merchandising for worldly glory, having
and delivering the true grape of holy doctrine, you may not refuse to take it,
In what kind an hipocriticall hireling is to be heard.
because it is the voice of Christ in a shepherd. But when you come to his
own works and actions, reject them utterly, because they are pricking thorns,
proceeding from their own proper root, and therefore cannot choose but pearce and
prick. And as of thorns the grape thus may be gathered, so from hireling
hypocrites, the very voice of Christ may be heard, and so is it said;
Colligitur de spinis vua.

But what say I; How the works of hypocrites may appear to be good, and yet
want the true intent.
that the thorns are their wicked works? why their works in themselves
oftentimes (to the outward appearance of man) are very good, and yet because
the intention is not good in it self, the work sorteth not to his due end,
nor is according as humane judgment prognosticated. This is clearly to be
discerned, in the apt similitude given by Christ of the ten virgins, five
wise, and five foolish, well worthy to be especially noated.

The virgins were ten in number, appointed to entertain and honor the
Bridegroom, An example most excellent of the ten virgins.
all are chaste, all have lamps in their hands, and every one has her lamp
ready lighted. All go by night to meet the bridegroom, all slumber, all
sleep, and all are called to this solemn wedding; yet five are termed
foolish, Mat. 25. 1. 2. 3. etc.
and five are called wise. Five had admittaunce into the palace of the
wedding, and to five the gate is shut against their faces. Five do rejoice
in the eternal spousall, and five do suffer eternal pains, for not having
respect to the prepared nuptial, the solemn wedding day, the bridal
rejoicing: who is not filled with admiration, and who does not wonder at this
raritie?

Here is no speech at all used of the covetous, Of such as are not spoken of,
to be present at this wedding.
the adulterer, the murderer, the blasphemer, the wrathful, the belly-God, or
luxurious liver, for then all marvel might justly cease, because such persons
are not worthy to be bidden to this eternal wedding. But virgins are only
spoken of, elected for the meeting of the celestial bridegroom, and therefore
it is not otherwise to be credited, but that they were all furnished of
garments meet and beseeming so solemn a feast, and adorned with the rich
habylimentes of precious virtues, as also with works full of sanctity. All
which notwithstanding, five are reputed to be foolish, and five wise, five
thought worthy to enter the palace of the bridegroom, and five condemned to
eternal horror.

It is a matter of no mean admiration, Another example of special
consequence, and meet to be regarded.
that in one and the self same City, there shall be found many religious
persons, all Christians, and obseruers of the divine precepts. All fast, and
chastise their rebellious senses, all pray, all exhort to live as becomes
Christians, to fly vice, and embrace virtue. And yet (for all this) but some
of them are to be saved, and others condemned; what may be the reason of this
so strange a case? If while some prayed, others played; If while some sang
Psalms and the divine praises, others carolled profane and idle songs; If
while some strove to tame their inordinate affections, by fasting and devout
meditating, others did nothing else but cram their paunches; If while some gave
alms, No wonder if the wicked and reprobate do perish, but a great marvel,
that among ten, five are chosen, and five refused.
others practiced how to rob the poor of them: Here it were no wonder, that
to the one sort, the gate of heaven should be opened, and deservedly shut
against the other, that the one might worthily be called wise, and the other
justly reputed as fools. But being all virgins having all their lamps ready
lighted, whereby may be gathered, that they all labored to do good works. Yet
some of them to be saved, and some condemned; undoubtedly, my Lord, this is a
matter full of marvel, able to strike a man into no mean astonishment, and
therefore well worthy of great and deep consideration.


Claudio. Whence comes (my good Lord) this difference of eythers end?


Lodouico. It comes (as I take it) by the variable intention of the workers.
The variable intent of me^ in their works.
This is that testimony of our conscience, which makes our actions to be
glorious, whereof S. Paul speaking, says: Gloria vestra haec est, testimonium
conscientia vestrae: your glory and rejoicing is this, the testimony of your
conscience.


Claudio. What is that testimony of our conscience?


Lodouico. It is that, Of the testimonies of a good consie^ce
whereof Saint Paul, speaking to the Corinthians, says: Quod in simplicitate
cordis, and in sinceritate Dei, and non in sapientia carnal^, sed in gratia Dei
conuersati sumus in hoc mundo. 2. Cor. 1. 12.
That in simplicity and godly pureness of heart, and not in fleshly wisdom:
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. Holy words
in the mouth, and good deeds in the hands is not sufficient.
It is not enough then to have holy words in the mouth, and virtuous actions in
the hands, but he that requires a pure and sincere heart, would have all
directed to his divine honor, and not for the atchieueme^t of worldly glory, as
the fayning tongue of vain hypocrites daily does.

By this you may perceive, A good father of the church, his good admonition.
how true that is, which a great Pastor of the holy Church said, in one of his
Homilyes made on the 21. Chaper of Saint Mathewe, where he affirms; That a
vain commendation, and a frivolous appetite, to be admired for holiness,
makes utter loss of the fruits of good works. Therefore he used often to
speak in this manner. Saepe vos fratres charissimi admonui, praua opera
fugere, and mundi huius inquinamenta deuitare; sed hodierna die, (O great word)
Sancti Euangelii lectione compellor dicere, vt and bona opera quae agitis,
magna cautela timeatis, ne per hoc quod a vobis recte geritur, aut gratia
humana requiratur, ne appetitus laudis subrepat, and quod foris oftenditur,
intus a mercede vacuetur, etc.

As perchance it happened unto the foolish virgins, The Authors conceit of
the five foolish virgins.
who having (in their actions) sought more after humane glory, then that which
belonged to the divinity, they were therefore deprived of the celestial
banquet. The like may also be said of the double tongue, which labors only
for humane applause, and into which sin diverse preachers often times do
fall, only by the craft and deceit of the devil.


Claudio. Why then, Job. 39. 16.
of such men is truly verified, that notable saying, which we read in Job:
Penna struthionis similis est pennis ^aerodii, and accipetris. Have thou given
the pleasant wings unto the Peacockes, Comparion of the Peacocke and Ostriche
alluded to the hypocrite.
or wings and feathers unto the Ostriche? Yea, it is true, but the one flies
aloft, and the other cannot raise it self from the earth. Even so it is with
hypocrites, who are like to Saints in their outward behavior: but in their
deeds, when others do soar up to heaven like Eagles, they cleave to the
earth, as only affecting earthly praises.


Lodouico. The soldiers of Gedeon, Example of Gedeons Soldiers warring
against the Moabites.
when they went to war against the Moabites, every man held in his left hand
a little pitcher, and a lighted lamp within the said pitcher. So when they
were to give the assault about the midst of night, they brake their pitchers,
and the lighted lamps might then be discerned, when sounding the dreadful
trumpets, they cried out with a loud voice, Judges. 7. 20.
Gladius Domini, and Gedeonis; The sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon. No man
named his own proper weapon, but exalted only the sword of God and of
Gedeon, and yet each one carried his own peculiar arms.

In like manner, How we ought to apply the former Example, and make use thereof
in our selves.
not to be deprived of the honorable palm of victory, ought we to demean
our selves, when we break the earthen vessels of our hearts, with true
contrition and unfeigned repentance; that then in our hands the light of holy
and religious works might shine and appear, when we take the trumpet of
zealous preaching in our mouths, we ought to reprove others by brotherlike
affection And when against the world, the flesh and the devil we enter
combat, no other voice ought to be heard among us, but Gladius Domini;
attributing al to the Godheads glory. Psalm. 115. 2.
Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Not unto us O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory.

Moreover, Our duty in laboring for the glory celestial.
when in laboring for this conquest of celestial glory, we shall here seem
to be faint and ouer-wearied; we ought to strive to hold out so much as we
may, not in regard of the glory, but in respect of the far greater occasion,
that thereby we have to love, In what ma^nner we ought to fly from hell.
praise, and glorify God. So in like case, we ought to shun and fly from
hell, not so much for fear of incurring the pains thereto belonging, as in
more especial regard that God is not there honored and loved, but hated and
continually blasphemed. Hereupon grew that fervent speech of Anselme, Anselm.
in lib. de Beat. Chap. 190.
in the book he made of blessedness chap. 190. Mallem purus a peccato, et
innocens gehe^nam intrare, quam peccati sorde pollutus coelorum regna tenere. I
had rather being innocent and clear from sin, enter into hell: then to hold
place in heaven, polluted with sin. A sentence beseeming a zealous inflamed
spirit, devoted only to the glory of God: which is able to suppress the
spirit of vainglory in any christians breast. For that only depriues him of
so rich a benefit, as ensues by the due praises given to the Almighty.


Claudio. Deservedly does the feygning tongue loose the fruit of eternity,
which for the silly price of humane praise, exhortes, reprooues, admonishes
and teaches; And as says divine Dionisius, 14. De diuinis nominibus. Dionis.
lib. 14. de divine. nom.
One defect suffiseth, to make that a matter cannot be good in it self, and
one blemish is enough, to make a thing unsightly; therefore says he: Bonum
consurgit ex integra causa, malum autem non.

He is said to be a worthy knight, Comparison of a good knight, and how he is
best known.
that is a good house keeper, an alms giver, a visiter of the sick, loving,
frequenting the Church, and doing diverse other virtuous actions: but if he be a
loyterer in other matters of life, that very stain only serves to confound
all the rest. Even so, the hypocrit uses many prayers, exhorts to do well,
to perform many godly actions: and commendable examples: but he wants the good
end in him self, and the perfect intention. Math. 23. 5.
Omniae faciunt vt videantur ab hominibus. This only suffiseth to check all
his other actions, and make them to be held bad, because this aimed end of the
work is not good; And that is it only which gives the name to the work, The
saying of S. Ambrose.
according as S. Ambrose says: Intentio tua, operi tuo, nomen imponit. Thy
irtent does give the name to thy work.


Lodouico. It is a great fault in that vain woman, Comparion of a vain
woman, that tricks up her self to please others, beside her husband.
that delights to spend the whole morning, in painting and coloring her self,
Ieweling her hair, aduauncing her periwig, curling and plaiting her locks,
adorning her coronet with variety of flowers, loading her body with precious
garments, chayning her neck and breast with circlets of goulde and pearl,
putting on costly bracelets, invaluable rings on her dayntie fingers, and with
variable perfumes and rich unguents of Arabia, to fill the air with precious
odours as she passes along: And yet all this labor is bestowen, only to
seem beautiful, and to please another beside her husband: then which, she can
offer him no greater indignity.

Our soul is the spouse of Jesus Christ, The comparison applied to the soul
of man.
by the ordained means of holy baptism, where the ring of faith is freely
delivered unto her; Sponsabo te mihi in fide; I will even marry thee unto me in
faithfulness. Oh in what hatred may the celestial husband take it, when she
with so many smooth (but lying) speeches, for all his holy exhortations, good
instructions, and celestial preachings, by her rash and ouer-ready tongue,
returns him none but false answers, even like unto a giddy idle headed
damsel, desirous only to be pleasing to other men, and no care at all
appears in her, of delighting in her true and heavenly bridegroom. Math. 23.
5.
Omnia opera sua faciunt vt videantur ab hominibus: All their works they do
for to be seen of men.

Such temptations we ought to resist with great violence, Example of the
Israelits in rebuilding the Temple of Jerusalem, and fearing the Samarita^s
and do as the Israelits did, in reedifying the Temple of Jerusalem, who for
fear of the Samaritans, which had round besieged them, did perform the
building work with one hand, and held a sword in the other, to offend the
enemy withal. Vna manu sua faciebat opus, and altera tenebat gladium.
Aedificantium enim vnusquisque gladio erat accinctus renes. Nehem. 4. 17. 18.
And they that builded, did the work with one hand, and with the other held a
sword. For every one of the builders had his sword girded on his loins.

The like is required in us, A duty required in us in the like case, but
especially in Preachers.
with one hand we ought to do good works; and with the other to beat away
the temptations of vaineglorie, which the subtle devil does most of all use,
especially when he sees, that Preachers do strive to appear gracious, and
pleasing to their hearers.


Finis Chap. 17.
The Argument.
Wherein those are reproved, that are good only of their tongue, but wicked
in their deeds. Resembling the poor man, who would feign take a rich wife,
but (in regard of his poverty) none in his own country will accept of him:
Wherefore, clothing him self in strange garments, he travails to speed
where he is not known. Such men are compared to builders, that lay unwrought
stones in the foundation, but aloft to the eye, they place curious stones of
richer labor. They are also like to Pirates on the Seas, with lying banners:
like to the Sichemites: like to Ioseps cloak: like to the wife of Putiphar:
and like to the aprons of fig leaves, which Adam and Eve made for themselves.
They are like to Ahaz the king: like to the Dolphine: like to the Physician,
that cures others, yet helps not himself. They are like the white wall shown
to Ezekiel: they are good for others, and hurtful to them selves: Here is some
speech used, of the great pains threatened to such, as also of the
reprehension, which God in his judgment will give them: A subject, by how much
the more curious, by so much it is the more true and profitable.

Chap. 18.
CLAVDIO. But what shall we say of them, who only have a good tongue, and
utter forth many holy speeches: yet in their actions are most vile, and
whatsoever they perform, is done but as an outward sign or ceremony.


Lodouico. Such people may be justly compared to a certain poor man,
Comparison of a poor man, coveting to have a wealthy wife.
who being desirous to join him self in a wealthy marriage, because he was
known in his own country, to be little better then a beggar, and in regard of
his exceeding poverty, no woman would easily be drawn to accept him as her
husband: makes means to get garments of richer estimation, forsakes his native
soil, and goes far off, to find a wife where he is not known: And being by
his habilyments imagined Noble, Gentle, or otherwise, of large revenues and
possessions, Truth will discover it self in the end.
compasses a liberal dowry. But when the beguiled woman comes home to his
dwelling, and perceiues he is most poor, and ready to starve through mere
want; imagine then her alteration.

Such kind of men are the worlds hypocrites, The comparion holds truly in the
worlds hypocrites.
who because in the^ selves, and of their own knowledge, they are most
wretched and vile, therefore in outward appearance, they will cloth themselves
with the garments of the godly, using all smooth and hypocritical persuasions,
to the end they may reach the height of their own desires. But in the end,
every such soul shall myserably perish by famine eternally in hell, her own
wretchedness being euidentlye laid open, and (as a just judgment) be damned
for ever. Psalm. 31. 22.
Erubescant impii, and deducantur in infernum, muta fiant labia dolosa.


Claudio. This sort of hypocrites, Hypocrites compared to builders, in making a
rude foundation, and a curious top-piece.
as have no other goodness in them, but the sound of the tongue only, are like
unto builders, who in the foundation of their work, do lay rude and unwrought
stones. But higher and nearer to public sight, they place other stones, that
are more curiously polished and labored, only to make the work the more
regardable.

The hypocrite, that has only holy words in his mouth, has the foundation of
his building rude and unseemly, wanting a true intention, a pure heart, and
sole desire of Gods glory. Now this rotten foundation of avarice, of fond
vainglory, or of any other hateful vice whatsoever, he buries all these,
only to make a bottom of them. But aloft in the forefront, or in the very
face and chiefest appearance of the work, there goodly and Saint-like words
are liberally affoorded.

The just and faithful man, The just and faithful man, quite contrary to the
hypocrite.
he does all things quite contrary to the hypocrite, which makes his
foundation to be most precious, because wholly it is laid on Christ him
self, the abounding treasure of all celestial riches. Fundamentum aliud nemo
potest ponere, 2. Cori. 3. 11.
praeter id quod positum est, quod est Christus Jesus. Other foundation can no
man lay, then that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus. On what a precious
foundation does the just man lay in his spiritual building, whereon, all other
rich stones are plentiouslie heaped, according to the beauty of so fair a
building? Vnusquisque autem videat quomodo superaedificet. Let every man take
heed how he builds.

When God, How God began his building in creation of the world.
being the only chief Architect of all things whatsoever, began his building
of this goodly world: he dealt quite contrary to those builders, that make
their beginning at the groundwork or foundation, with vnshap't stones,
rubbish and such base trashe. He went another way to work, and as a main
beauty to his fair fabric, he began with the firmament of heaven; and that
was the luster of his foundation and beginning: Genesis 1. 8.
Vocauit Deus firmamentum coelum: God called the firmament, heaven.

The like did he when he framed the building of the little world, Man, How god
framed his building of the little World, Man.
to adorn him with the more admirable beauty, he placed first (as his
foundation) a reasonable soul in him, which was so fair and goodly, as it
received form and shape even from him self. Therefore when the soul is taken
away, the building of our body falls into cinders.

When he builded the most noble palace of the militant Church, How God builded
the palace of the militant Church.
he placed (as a most precious foundation thereof) our redeemer him self, even
Jesus Christ. Fundamentum aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positum
est, quod est Christus Jesus.

The hypocrite does all his works quite contrary, 1. Cori. 3. 11.
and therefore his building falls soon to the earth. The hypocrites building
soon falls to the ground.
And even as God made a confusion of tongues, among the proud builders of the
Tower of Babell: even so at length will he confound this hypocritical
building tongue, that does all things whatsoever, only for pride and
vainglory, which infamous kind of building must needs fall to the ground,
according as that tower did, because: Deus superbis resistit.


Lodouico. The hypocrite deals like the Pyrate, The hypocrite compared to the
Pyrate, or Rouer on the Sea.
or (as we may otherwise term him) the Rouer on the Sea, who because he would
not be known for a thief and robber, spreads false Ensigns upon his
tops: which giving some security to the mistaking passengers, they are by
this means fraudulently seized on. Even so the counterfeyting tongue,
displayeth forth very glorious ensigns, and teaches the same words that
Christ him self taught: but he then inueigleth, makes a pray of the poor
soul, and murders it, like as the heretic does, who only in tongue
confesses Christ, but in his deeds is all devil.

The Painter busieth him self greatly to set down the shape of a Crucifixe,
Comparion of a painters curious making of a Crucifixe.
in very lively colors; with such natural lineaments, even as if all the
muscles and sinews of the body were perfectly to be discerned. But if a man
should ask him, if all his diligence had been employed, only for the love he
bare unto Christ, he would make answer (if he should speak but plainly and
from his heart) Truly my Lord, to tell you but the troth, I had little
remembrance of him when I did it, nor could I devise how to paint him
perfectly; but what I have here done, was only to sell my labor at the dearer
rate.

Such (for all the world) is an hypocrite in his words, The painters example
verified in the hipocrite.
he transformes them wholly into Christ's appearance, but not for the love he
bears to Christ, but rather to win estimation of the world. Even as
arch-heretikes use to do, or like so many Herostratoes, strive to make them
selves famous to the world, and greedily to graspe up riches.

Agreeable to the false Sichemites, Example of the Sichemites.
who circumcised them selves, according to the manner of the Hebrews, only to
inherit their goods and possessions. Genesis 34. 22. 23
Si circuncidamus masculos nostros, ritum gentis imitantes, substantia eorum,
and pecora, and cuncta quae possident, nostra erunt. If all the men children
among us be circumcised, The reward of the Sichemits for their hypocrisy.
as they are circumcised, shall not their flocks, and their substance, and all
their cattle be ours? Nevertheless it happened unto them quite contrary,
for the third day following the circumcision, they were all put to the edge of
the sword: such was the permission of God, because they were not circumcised
for observation of the Law, but only in regard of avarice. In like manner
the false tongue, that with the colorable pretexte of the name of Jesus
Christ, seems to be seriously employed for his divine glory: labors only
for his own covetous reward, but when he thinks this greedy hoped-for gain
is gotten, he is miserably slain by eternal death.

Many of these hypocrites do much busy them selves in counterfeited speeches,
Hypocrites presume into the presence of princes, to gain promotion.
to get into the presence of Princes, only for ascente to some high place of
dignity. But when the goal is once gotten, then their perverse natures are
apparently discerned, and that their outward humility, was only but to cloak
their inward pride: Hypocrites compared to the Hawk.
Whereupon, in their following course of life, they seem like the hawk, that
takes her flight a far off, when she means to seize on the simple dove, as
if she had no intent at all that way: but suddenly she winds in upon her,
and grasping her in her tallents, killes and eats her.


Claudio. This kind of ambitious hypocrites, are yet more supportable then the
other, Ambitious hipocrits better to be endured the^ the other, resembling
scar-crowes.
for these men, although inwardly they are devils: yet notwithstanding,
outwardly they show them selves like Saints in holy speeches, and serve as good
examples to others, for the lewd sinner fears to offend in their presence.

They resemble the figure made of rags and cloutes, commonly called,
scar-crowes, which is set forth on the boughs of trees, to affright away the
birds from feeding on the fruits, and in this kind (perhaps) they may also
be termed profitable.

But afterward, A worse hypocrite then the former.
we must needs come to an other sort of them, who are far worse then are
these, because their words are merely hypocritical, appearing to be true
lovers of holiness: but their works are most wicked. Because they exalt
humility, and are proud them selves; they praise chastity, and yet are
luxurious; they preach almes-giuing, yet rob the poor of it; they magnify
justice, yet are strong thieves them selves. Such were the Pharyseys, Example
of the Phariseys.
who said to the man that was borne blind; Da gloriam Deo; Give glory unto
God; as if they had been wondrous zealous of the divine honor: John. 9. 23.
nevertheless, they did all only to rob Christ of his honor.

Of this temper also was King Ahaz, Example of king Ahaz.
to whom (as Esaias says) God spoke, that he should ask a sign of his
redemption from him, Esaias. 7. 11. 12.
which should be given him. Pete tibi signum a Domino Deo tuo, in profundum
inferni, sieve in excelsum supra. Ask a sign for thee of the Lord thy God,
either in the depth beneath, or in the height above. But he made refusal,
saying: Non petam, and non tentabo Dominum: I will not ask, neither will I
tempt the Lord. Which he did, not in humility, or for observation of the divine
precept, Deuteronomy. 6. 16.
which was given to the people of Israel, Non tentabis Domiaum Deum tuum; Ahaz
refused the miracle, because he would not honor God.
ye shall not tempt the Lord your God. Nor was this miracle to tempt God,
because God him self willed that he should ask it: but he would not ask it,
because he would not give such glory to the true God, but even as a wicked
idolater, despised, that the divine power should have any honor at all.


Lodouico. This is a most detestable kind of hypocrisy, Example of Iaacob,
when his sons presented him the garment of Joseph.
and well may we say of such men, as did the good old afflicted Iaacob, when
being presented deceiptfully, by his sons, with the altered garment of his
beloved son Joseph, tinctured with the counterfeited blood of a beast; After
he had wondered and wondered again thereat, Genesis 37. 33.
thus he spoke in a teareful voice. Tunica filii mei est, fera pessima comedit
eum, bestia deuorauit Joseph. It is my sons coat, a wicked beast has
devoured him, Joseph is surely torn in pieces.

So may the holy Church say to this hypocritical kind of son; What the
Church may say to this hypocritical son.
It is most true, that thou wast borne to be my son, because I gave thee life
in baptism, and (concerning thine outward part) thou have still the same
garment that I gave thee, which is nothing else but Christ: Induimini Dominum
Iesum Christum; Put on ye the Lord Jesus Christ. And Christ thou namest, and
Christ thou preachest, and of him thou talkest in private or public meetings,
or in familiar conference among thy friends. But yet in very deed, although
Tunica filii mei sit, this be my sons coat; Fera pessima deuorauit filium
meum, the wicked and immane beast of hypocrisy has slain him. Because,
inwardlye he is nothing else but all vanity, all devil, all flesh, all sin;
The inward part of an hypocrite.
And hence proceeds it, that Fera pessima deuorauit filium meum. My son he
is only by his coat, and outwardly by his voice, but inwardly he has no
part at all of him.


Claudio. The glory of our soul consists not in the garment, Wherein the
glory of the soul consists
but in the heart, according as the father of Solomon (speaking of the spouse)
says: Psalm. 45. 13.
Omnis gloria eius ab intus, circumamicta varietatibus: She is al glorious
within, her clothing is of broydred gold. First he prayseth her inward
endowme^t, Omnis gloria eius ab intus, and afterward talks of her outward
clothing, Circumamicta varieattibus: because he would first have the affection
of the heart, and afterward requires effectual works.

So deals nature likewise, first she creates and produces the heart,
Example of Nature in her work of man.
and afterward the other members. But hypocrites (says Saint Gregory) are
Artistes, who caring nothing at all for the inward part, S. Grego. de Heret.
bestow all their industry for embellishinge the outward, couetinge rather
to imitate art then nature.

These retainers of the garment only, Example of Potifars wife with Joseph.
are like to the incontinent wife of Potiphar, who being enamoured on the
comely young man Joseph, and seeking to constrain him to the immodest act of
lust: he fled away* nothing remaining in her violent hand, but his cloak
only. Genesis 39 12.
Qui relicto in manu eius pallio, fugit, and egressus est for as. He left his
garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out. So these hypocritical voices,
The example alluded to hipocrites.
are cloakes only, that is, they have the name of Christ in their hands, and
not the mystical Joseph Christ in their hearts.

After that Adam had sinned, Example of Adam after he had sinned
feeling his own rebelling nature, he hid himself, remembering that he was
naked, not coun^ing it sufficient for him, that his shame was covered with fig
tree leaves. Consuerunt folia ficus, Genesis 3. 7. 9. 10.
and fecerunt sibi perizomata. They sewed fig tree leaves together, and made
them selves breeches. Whereupon, when (unthought on) God called him, and said,
Adam vbi es? Adam where art thou? He answered; Timui eo, quod nudus essem, and
abscondi me; I was afraid, because I was naked, therefore I hid my self.

It is not enough for hypocrites, The fig leaves of holy words is not
sufficient for Hipocrites.
to be hidden with the fig leaves of holy words, because the searching eye of
God penetrates even into the heart; Dominus autem intuetur cor. Therefore when
they think that they have substantially enough covered their shameful abused
bodies, they shall even then most vituperiously be made manifest to the whole
world: N^hum. 3. 5*
Reuelabo pudendatua ante faciem tuam, and ostendamin gentibus nuditatem tuam:
I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and will show the nations thy
filthynesse, and the kingdoms thy shame.

Little shall it then avail them, The Dolphin guides other Fishes into the net
and keeps him self our.
that they have had holy words in their mouths, and have exhorted others to
do well. Or, like unto the Dolphin, have conducted other fish into the net,
and kept them selves out of the fishers power, close by the rock. Therefore
are they thus reproved: Quare tu enarras iustitias meas, and assumis
testamentum meum per os tuum? Psalm. 50. 16. 17.
Tu vero odisti disciplinam, and proiecisti sermones meos retrorsum. etc. Why
do thou preach my laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth? An excellent
interpretation made by the Author, upon the Prophet David's words
Whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee.

As if he would have said. Thou thoughtst (perhaps) that to save thy self,
certain outward works were only sufficient. Thou wicked and ungodly wretch,
could thou imagine it enough for thee, to preach to others, that they ought
to do good, and yet thou thy self to deal most badly? I tell thee, this not
only is displeasing to me, but I will turn my self into anger and fury
against thee, and in the trembling day of judgment, I will say unto thee;
Impudent and graceless as thou art, wherefore did thou not first purge and
make clean thine own lips? Why did thou not first cleanse thy own
dissembling tongue, before thou were so bold, as to preach my law therewith?
How durst thou, by so impure a passage, and a way so beastly, It were good that
all hypocrites should remember this.
give scope to matter so white and immaculate? Hereby have thou made others
holy, and at the same instant time refused all disciplyne thy self, when being
careless of my Law, there is no foul sin whereinto thy self have not
fallen. Oh fair Sepulcher, An excellent comparison.
full of all unsavory sent within. Thou art as a bell, calling others to
serve God, and yet keepst thy self without the Church: Or art as that ungodly
wretch, who only sounds well with his tongue, but does commit abominable
and most irreligious deeds.


Lodouico. A great penalty (questionless) will fall upon the wicked man,
that with his tongue has been the means of others salvation, by exhortation,
preaching and reprehension, and yet thereby is the cause of his own damnation.
The hipocrite compared to the Physician.
Having (like unto the Physician) cured and made others healthful, yet
remains him self in most weak and sickelie estate, the which begets him
an intolerable envy, and a hatred more then can be spoken of.


Claudio. In such a one is verified that prophecy of Micheas. Tu seminabis,
Mich. 6. 15.
and non metes; tu calcabis Oliuas, and non vngeris Oleo; and mustum, and non
bibes vinum: Thou shall sow, but not reap; thou shall tread the Olives, but
shall not anoint thee with the Oil; The Prophets words very aptly verified in
dissembling hypocrites.
and make sweet wine, but shall not drink wine. Because in very deed, these
men do sow the most fertile seed of Gods word, and yet shall not gather the
eternal fruit thereof, in regard they do all for the pleasing of men. They
tread the Olives, as seeming to be full of sanctity, but yet in proof are
quite empty, what it is to be empty of heavenly love.
therefore they shall also remain deprived of the divine mercy.

They gather the grapes, as declaring to have great charity by their ferue^cy
in speech: Psalm. 36. 8.
yet they shall never drink of the wine, because they are void of that love
celestial, wherewith the soul should be filled. Inebriabuntur ab vbertate
domus tuae, and torrente voluptatis tuae potabis eos. Agge. 1. 5. 6.
They shall be satisfied with the fa^nesse of thine house, and thou shall give
them drink out of the river of thy pleasures. And that also of the Prophet
Aggeus: Ponite corda vestra super vias vestras. Seminastis multum, and
intulistis parum; comedistis, and non estis saturati; bibistis, and non estis
inebritati; operuistis vos, and non estis calefacti, and qui mercedem
congregauit, misit eas in sacculum pertusum. Consider your own ways in your
hearts: you have sown much, and bring in little; ye have eat, but ye have
not enough; ye drink, but yet ye are not filled; ye cloth ye, but ye be
not warm; The Authors explication of these several scriptures, according as
he appropriates the sense unto hypocrites.
and he that earneth wages, puts the wages into a broken bag.

As if he would have said. O you hypocrites, that have Christ only in your
tongues, consider now faithfully your own errors, and with all your hearts,
think whether there ever has bin the like folly or no. Has it not been a
wonderful foolishness in you, that you have sowed so much seed of Gods
sacred word, and yet your selves have gathered in no fruit at all, only by
your vanity, attending altogether upon the pleasure of men.

You have eaten, yet never would you be satisfied; because you could not taste
the sweetness of the heavenly bread of wisdom, which (nevertheless) you
gave plentifully enough unto others. You have drunk; but never were ye filled
with celestial love, only ye did but wet your lips therewith, and never
received any iotte thereof down into the heart. You clothed your selves with
the garment of Jesus Christ, having it still ready on your tongues, To such as
covet to hold grace with the people.
by often preaching; but never were ye warmelie clad with his sanctified love.
And (which is much worse) you that have made profession, to accumulate great
wages, by the exceeding grace you held with the people: have yet put up your
money, and the wages of your ouer-great labor of body, of understanding and
memory, (oh intolerable folly) into a rotten purse, that had no power to
contain the money. Therefore, all your reward (in an vnrepayreable moment) is
quite lost, and all the hope you had of heaven (if any you had at all) is
utterly void and frustrated.


Lodouico. Oh lying tongue, oh fraudulent tongue, oh most treacherous and
betraying tongue. Example of Ezekiels vision on the wall.
That obscure Prophet Ezekiell, saw a most goodly prospectiue upon a wall, and
while he admired the wondrous beauty upon the wall, God said unto him: Ezekiel.
8. 8. 9. 10
Ezekiell, take an instrument, and dig the wall, which seems so stupendous
to thee. Fode parietem: He dug, and beheld a door, and God commanded him
to enter in thereat: he entered, and saw dreadful serpents, as also beasts of
diverse kinds. Et ingressus vidi, and ecce omnis similitudo reptilium, and
animalium abominatio, etc.

Such are these hypocrites, The Prophets speeches holding comparison with
hypocrites.
fair in looks, Saints in speech, but in their hearts full of all
filthynesse. From which effects the Lord in mercy deliver us, and let us
beseech him to govern our tongue, to make clean our lips, and rather quite
to bereave us of our tongue, then it should offend the creator thereof by
doublenes, and much better for us were eternal silence, then such dissembling
fraudulent speech.


Claudio. Hypocrisy is a sin against nature, Hypocrisy, a sin against
nature, and what provision she makes for every valuable thing.
not only in regard that the tongue ought to be the ambassador of a
faithful heart, but also, because we see that nature hydeth or makes provision
for every precious thing whatsoever. As pearls, them she hydeth in fish
shelles; invaluable rich stones, in the earth or ryuers; Coral, in the bottom
of the Sea; Gold, under cauernie mountain; apples and other like fruits,
among leaves; grapes also under their shelter; the heart, in the very secretest
place of the body; and things of meanest moment, if not hidden, yet shadowed
with some kind of defense. But the hypocrite, the little goodness that
remains in him, he hydes it from all men by the help of a dissembling glib
tongue, and his imperfections or wickedness, he conceales it with all the
art he can devise.


Lodouico. So do bankerupt merchants, Bankerupt Merchants in their behavior,
hypocrites compared to them.
or such of slender substance, whatsoever they have, they set it forth to open
view, as making show of far greater matters to be in their shoppes. But if
they be demanded for a chain of gold, parle, coral, or any other thing then
those hanging forth upon their stalle, they will smoothly answer. I pray you
Sir pardon me, I had such, but indeed they are sold, and I would gladly please
ye with what is here left. Such are these counterfeiting dissemblers, full of
all gay and goodly words, but their hearts are utterly empty of any virtue. The
hipocrite compared to a Ship riding under full spread sails, but empty of any
merchandise.


A galla^t show makes a Ship, ryding vnderful spread sails, adorned with fair
banners wauing in the wind, and every one runs gladly to see her, when by a
prosperous gale she puts into the port. But afterward, when they perceive that
she is empty of merchandise, the greedy beholders then stand as men
confounded. A Ship void of any merchandise, and seeming full to the eye,
sailing only by the wind of vain men's breath, and coveting to arrive at
honor and high applause, such, and no other is the false hypocrite.


Claudio. They want no wickedness, yet live as ceremonious examples, Hypocrites
are like to vncharged Cannons.
every one fearing them for their appearaunce of holiness: like vncharged
Cannons, dreadful only at the first beholding: and not much behind these,
are sacrilegious blasphemers, and perjured persons.


Finis Chap. 17.
The Argument.
Wherein is declared, that the sin of blasphemy is most great and grievous,
insomuch that it exceeds every other sin, even those of the Infidelles, and
of the Jews, who crucified our Lord and Savior. It is aggrau^ed by many
circumstances, and has no apparent excuse, as diverse other sins may seem to
have. It is a sin eternal, in regard of the exercise thereof; because among
all sins, blasphemy only remains with the damned, even as charity does among
the blessed, and is punished with every part of the law. It is the sin of
unthankfulness, the punishment whereof sometime begins in this world, and
yet is never finished. It is a manifest sign of damnation, and a sin so
abominable, as the holy Scripture sometime forbeareth to name it, among the
rehearsal of other grievous offenses. A discourse very profitable, ingenious,
necessary and worthy to be noted, for fear of falling into a sin so horrible
and detestable.

Chap. 19.
LODOVICO. Seeing there is no sin so great in a Christian, as blasphemy is,
whereby he derogates from the supreme goodness, which is the only object of
charity: Thom. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 10. Art. 3.
Therefore it is a most mighty sin, in regard it opposes it self against the
christian faith, and has in it the weightinesse of the sin of infidelity,
which being a notorious sin in his own nature, (as says the divine Doctor) 2.
2. q. 10. ar. 3. It therefore follows, that the sin of blasphemy has hardly
any eequall, or appertaining to the self same kind.


Claudio. How can it be, Blasphemy may be committed without injury to faith.
that the sin of blasphemy has in it the burden or weight of infidelity?
For blasphemy may be committed, without prejudice to faith, and so much the
rather, because it appertains not properly to blasphemy, to swerue or
dissente from that which ought especially to be believed, and that is the
only thing that constituteth infidelity.

Therefore it often happens, Of rash Blasphemous speches, the heart not
co^senting thereto.
that when the blasphemer is in choler, he utters that with his tongue,
whereunto properly in humane belief, he consents not. As perhaps, in saying,
that god can not let me from winning this game, or the like vile words, and
yet (for all that) to think within himself that he can.


Lodouico. I will answer you with a distinction, necessary for the clearing
of such a doubt, Three ways whereby to fall from Gods goodness.
to weete. That in three several manners we may derogate from the divine and
supre^me goodness.

First with the understanding only, 1. By the understanding.
that is, in imagining a false conceit against God.

Secondly, 2. By the wills detestation.
by adjoining to that former false conceived opinion, the detestation of the
will.

Thirdly, 3. In uttering of blasphemies contrary to belief.
(without having a false imagination, accustomed only to the detestation of
the will,) to utter many blasphemies, though belief of them be otherwise, and
be but delivered with the tongue only, according to the same example your
Honor gave of the gamester. Albeit blasphemy is not a false opinion of the
understanding, derogating from the divine bounty, for that is called
infidelitye, which is the error of understanding, and of ignorance, with the
pertinacye of the will.

Nevertheless, How blasphemy coupleth it self with infidelity, in our
speaking against the confession of our faith.
because in blaspheming, words are uttered with the tongue, even as if they
were breathed from an infidel, and against the divine goodness it self, as
infidelity is wont to doc, (by attributing to God such things as are no way
conuenable for him. or, by denying things especially to him belonging, or, in
giving to the creature, what is only meet for God and no other) in these, or
the like, blasphemy carries the very same greatness, which infidelity does,
because it offends the same object as infidelity does, and delivers the
same false opinion as infidelity does, although not by consenting, but in
believing otherwise of them, then with the tongue is manifested, and so it
opposes it self against the confession of faith.


Claudio. If it be so, it must then of necessity be affirmed, that blasphemy
shuts up within it self, the very sin of infidelity, or at least, How
blasphemy may be in the will, and in the desire.
apparently in the pronunciation. And it may be also both in the will, and in
the desire, as in conuicting and calumniating (by some examples) the power
divine. To wit, in desiring to have it be believed that every thing is
possible, which is impossible, and thereby displeases the highest omnipotency.
And if it be thus, we may as then well confess, that blasphemy (in this kind)
is far more great then infidelity.


Lodouico. It is not to be doubted, Two kinds of blasphemy.
but that blasphemy (perfected with this vile intention) is much worse: because
there is blasphemy, although it be uttered on the behalf of God, he being
thereby blasphemed, as the behalf of the blasphemer, in his own nature.

When one, 1. Of unbelievers blasphemy.
not believing (as an Infidel) that he speaks blasphemy against God, yet
does it, the blasphemy is only on gods part blasphemed, and not on the part
of the blasphemer, but it is blasphemy only according to him, and not to him
that uttered it forth.

But when blasphemy is delivered by one that believes in christ, 2. Of a
Christians blasphemy.
it is then merely blasphemy on gods part in it self, by giving or taking
away what to god is only convenient. And also on the behalf of the blasphemer,
that robs or attributs to god, that which he knows and believes, to be no way
agreeable to him. And so is the blasphemy the more perfected, and made far
greater by belief, then without belief.

And this is not only the opinion of S. Augustine, in the book he wrote
against lying, S. August. in Li. de Menda. Chap. 19.
Chap. 19. but also it is confirmed by the authority of Saint Peter, who in one
of his Epistles, speaks against those believers, as do turn to the same sin,
as is in the weight of infidelity. 2. Pet. 2. 20. 21. 22.
Facta sunt cis posteriora deteriora prioribus. Melius enim erat illis non
cognoscere viam iustitiae; quam post agnitionem retrorsum conuerti ab eo, quod
illis traditum est sancto mandato. Contingit enim eis illud very prouerbij;
Canis reuersus ad suum vomitum, and Sus lota in volutabro lut^. The later end
is worse with them then the beginning. For it had been better for them, not to
have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn
from the holy commandment given them. But it is come unto them, according
to the true proverb; The dog is returned to his own vomit: and, the Sow
that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire.


Claudio. What an enormous sin is this? what vice more diabolical, exceeding
all other misdeeds, how great soever? It outgoeth the sin of the Paganes,
Blasphemy goes beyond the sin of the Paganes, because what they say they
believe to be true.
because, though the infidel speaks of God what ought not to be spoken, yet
notwithstanding, he believes that what he vtters with his tongue, is true.

What though the Turk and the Jew do deny Christ to be the Son of God,
and that Marie should be a pure virgin? It is no great matter in him to breath
forth such blasphemy, because his belief is such, and he thinks that he
speaks truly.

But much worse is it in a Christian, How abominable blasphemy is to a true
Christian.
to call his redeemer a traitor, and the blessed virgin a strumpet: yet knowing
and believing it not to be true, but rather what he speaks, is uttered in
mere contempt of his creator. So, in naming, vilely or abusiuely, the members
or parts of christ, or of his saints in despightfull manner, the very like may
be said.


Lodouico. By your leave (my Lord) if then to name the parts of Christ, Of gods
name or his Saints in swearing.
and of the Saints, or speaking sometimes as swearers are wont to do: By God,
by holy God, by the good God, by the blessed Lady and such like, His position
to be further resolved.
is this the sin of blasphemy? If always in enunciatiue blasphemy (to use
the very scholasticall word) there be a falsity: we yet in naming the members
of Christ, or of the Saints, or saying, By the blessed God, By thee O good
God, and such like, we deliver no falsity at all, because christ had really all
the parts of a man, and god is truly good, and most holy; how then can this be
termed blasphemy?


Claudio. I answer, The Answer well worth the observation.
that albeit the blasphemer in his violent heat, shall disdainfully name the
parts of Christ, or of his saints, or say, By blessed god, though he speak
true, and free from an falsenesse: yet notwithstanding, because he vtters it as
a conte^ptible thing, he makes it false by consequence, for neither in God or
his saints, is any thing to be contemned.

And this kind of blasphemy, not only is committed sometime with significant
terms, but also with the gesture and motion of the body, and albeit in the
pronuntiation of a very true thing, Example of one man's despising an others
repute.
but yet it is done in a most ignominious manner. As sometimes, one man
(despising the honor and reputation of another) says: Oh, you are a man of
God; Oh, you are a Saint of Paradise, and yet in his own heart terms him, a
man of the devil, and a fiend of hell. Of this nature have ye many blasphemers
in the world, uttering holy words, but with unholy intention, yet not daring to
speak one heretical word, for fear of public punishment.


Lodouico. You have begun well, proceed I pray you.


Claudio. The sin of blasphemy is worse then that of murder, The sin of
blasphemy worse the^ the sin of murder.
because oftentimes it happens, that if the man killer could compass his
revenge, and kill his enemy, without offense of his divine maker, he would
willingly do it. But being thus disabled, he will still retain his murdering
intent, wherein he highly offends God. But not so immediately as the
blasphemer trespasseth, who principally and directly opposes himself against
god, blaspheming and abusing him in mere despite.


Lodouico. But under your favor, my good lord, I am of a contrary opinion with
S. Augustine, S. August. in Enchirid, Chap. 12.
who in this Enchiridion, Chap. 12. says, That the sin of manslaughter is more
hurtful, in taking away the life of a man, then is the sin of blasphemy, which
can bring no injury at all to God. If then murder hurts more then
blasphemye, it must needs be allowed to be the greater sin.


Claudio. If we shall consider homicide and blasphemy, Blasphemy and homicide
severally to be considered.
accorcording to the object against which each sins, there is no doubt to
be made, but that blasphemy (without all comparison) is a greater sin, then an
hundred thousand murders: because it is immediately against God, an object
infinite, and the other is against our neighbor, an object finite.

But if we have regard to the effect of eithers hurt: The effect of eithers
hurt in power.
then homicide is much greater then blasphemy, because homicide is more
hurtful to our neighbor, then blasphemy is or can be to God.

Now because in the greatness of the fault, The greatness of the fault is
measured by the intent of the will.
more regard is to be had to the intent of the will, then the effect of the
act: therefore, in regard the blasphemer simply purposes, to do damage to the
honor divine, albeit the wicked effect cannot so succeed, but in vain is let
loose the arrow of the biting tongue; absolutely, and without all question, the
blaspheamer sins more, then the mankiller does.

It is superior also to the sin of heresy, Blasphemy is above heresy.
which believes, that whatsoever the tongue utters, is true: but the
devilish lips of the blasphemer, speaks such things as himself believes
not, and wills likewise the thing that cannot be.

It is worse also then the sin of the Jews, Blasphemy exceeds the sin of
the Jews in crucifying Christ.
who crucified our blessed Lord and Savior, whereon Saint Augustine says,
writing on the 12. Chapter of Saint Matthew: Magis peccant blasphemantes Deum
triumphantem in coelis, quam qui crucifixerunt eum ambulantem in terris. They
sin more that blaspheme God triumphing in heaven, S. August. in Mat. Cap. 12.
then they that crucified him walking on the earth.

The reason hereof is delivered by Saint Paul: 2. Corin. 2. 8.
Si enim cognouissent, nunquam Dominum gloriae crucifixissent. For had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Yet this
ignorance is not altogether excused. Act. 3* 17.
Scio fratres, quia per ignorantiam fecistis: I know brethren, that through
ignorance ye did it.

But the blaspheming Christian, he knows him to be God, and therein he sins
the more grievously: Similie.
and so much the rather, as by how much more noble the offended person is, even
so much the greater is the offense augmented.

The Jews offended a Christ mortal, The Jews, and the Christians offenses
several.
but the Christian offendes a glorious Christ in heaven, to whom he promised
faith and obedience in baptism, which by the Jew was never promised.

Moreover, The Jews crucified christ once only, the Christian by blasphemy,
infinite times.
the Jews crucified him at one time only, but the Christian blasphemeth his
maker a thousand times in an hour, and so much as in him lies renueth his
torments: makes wider the Lances wound; increases the number of his lashes;
prepares a new Cross; forgeth new nails in the fire of his wicked heart;
filles a fresh sponge with gaul and vinegar; makes a more pearcing wreath of
sharp pointed thorns; spittes more abominable filth in his face, and does
every other thing to his greater vexation.

Beside all this, Blasphemy goes beyond Idolatry.
blasphemy (then which, more cannot be said of it) seems to go beyond
idolatry, because the one takes the honor due to God, and the other gives it
unto infamy. If a defect positive be greater then a defect privative, then
blasphemy may be said to be the greater sin; for the ungodly wretched sinner
basely reprocheth his creatonr, and idolatry does but deprive God of his due
honor.


Lodouico. This grievous sin is yet further aggrauated, because there is no
one thing whatsoever, There is no one thing to move a man to blaspheme God;
but many to incite him to thankfulness.
that can move a man to blaspheme God: but there are many and infinite,
whereby to give him always just occasion, of rendering endless thanks every
hour, for such abundant graces conferred upon him, as well spiritual as
corporal, beside those two most signal benefits, of creation and redemption.
Yet the wicked sinner, when he ought to seek all means, by Hymns, Psalms
and spiritual songs, to praise and glorify his creator, he unthankfully
turns his tongue to reproachful infamies and dishonours, Oh sin too
insupportable!

Every other sin (more or less) has some excuse and motive, Every other
sin has some excuse, but blasphemy has none at al
except this horrible vice of blasphemy. The proud man perhaps is moved, by
some imagined excellency he has in himself, more then he sees in any other,
whether it be of virtue, beauty, riches or nobility.

The ambitious man may be urged, to make vaunt of himself, as by having many
subjects, or much treasure, to purchase a high prelacie or temporal estate.
Even as the covetous man, may make the like commodity of his welthy bags: The
glutton, of his surfeiting sweetness in meats and drinks: The luxurious, of
his fleshly delectation: The angry, of his accounte of honor: And the
slothful, of his bodily rest.

Let it suffice, that every sinner has some formal appearance, Every sinner
can pretend some motive to his sin, but the blasphemer none.
as thereby moving him to sin, and which he would feign allege in his own
defense, if he might do it without offense to the majesty divine. But
concerning blasphemy, what can be said to incline any man thereto? nothing at
al: neither sensuality, neither delectation, nor money, honor or any reward
whatsoever.

Moreover, Men are natuturally inclined to praise and honor God.
we are naturally inclined to praise and honor god, as being the only universal
benefactor, that so largely imparteth to us (unthankful wretches) his singular
graces. Having then no occasion at al, that might induce us to this vice, it
delivers us up the more inexcusable, and makes the sin much greater then any
other.

As for example the sin of luxury, Example of luxury in an old man more
offensive the^ in a young.
it is held more great and offensive in an old man, then in one of younger
years, who by nature may have more inclination thereto (though in no age
whatsoever it is to be excused) Yet in an old man it is most shameful, as
Cicero (the father of eloquence) affirms in the first book of his Offices:
Cicero lib. 1. de officiis,
Luxuria, cum omni aetati sit turpis, tum senectuti foedissima est. In like
case, though all sins in a Christian are evil, yet blasphemy is the most odious
beyond all other.


Claudio. As it is the most shameful sin, and furthest from any excuse: so
must you then also of necessity confess, that it deserves greater
punishmente, then any of the other sins.


Lodouico. It is not be doubted, Sentence.
but where the fault is greatest, the penalty ought as largely to be extended.
Whereupon, among other pains denounced by Saint John in his Apocalypse, Apoc.
16. 10.
one is, that they gnawed their teeth for sorrow. Et commanducauerunt linguas
suas prae dolor, The punishment of blasphemy begins often in this life.
etc. And many times it comes to pass, that (by the just judgment of God)
the punishment thereof begins in this world.

Saint Gregory, in his fourth book of dialogues declares, that this vice is
so much displeasing to God, as a child of five years old in Rome, Example of a
young child in Rome.
being carried in the arms of his mother, and blaspheming the name of god, was
suddenly snatched away by the devil, and never afterward seen any more.

In Mantua, Example of ga^sters at play in Mantua.
diverse gamesters being playing at the tables, and abusing the name of Christ
and the blessed virgin: their eyes fell presently out of their heads, upon the
tables as they played.

A soldier in the diocese of Rhemes, Example of a Soldier in Rhemes.
one day blaspheming the holy name of god, was suddenly surprised with the
falling sickness, and falling on the ground in the presence of many, he rent
and tare himself most miserably all the day following, casting and vomiting
his very entrails upward, and in breathing forth his last words, most impiously
he recommended his soul to the devil.

An other also, Example of an other in the same parts.
abusing there most horribly the name of his creator, renting his blessed body
peecemeale in sunder: his own body miraculously split in sunder, even in the
same parts he so wickedly blasphemed, and dying in desperation, gave both soul
and body to the devil.

In Florence there was a man much addicted to blaspheming, and one day among
the rest, Example of one in Florence.
as he held on this vile course against god, being in the company of diverse his
familiar friends, he was suddenly lifted up into the air by the devil, where
being despoyled of his garments, they fell down piece by piece to the ground,
but no part of his body was ever after seen.

A mariner dwelling in Siracusa, Example of a Mariner of Siracusa.
being greatly given to swearing and balsphemy, upon a day (the sea being very
mild and calm) he would needs leap into the water to swim: and albeit he
was exceeding skillful in that quality, yet (by the divine permission) he sunk
and drowned. But being afterward fished for, and found by his friends and
companions, and a due inquisition being made of the body, there was nothing
found wanting, but his accursed tongue only, wherewith he had so often
blasphemed his maker.

But why stray I thus after miracles, Infinite other Examples to this purpose
might be alleged.
imposed as divine chastiseme^ts upon blasphemers, whereof an infinite number
might be produced. If your Honor would see whole beadroles of authentical cases
in this kind, read but the Garden of Examples, composed by the reverend father,
Master S^rafino Razzi, of the Preachers order in the city of Florence. But let
it suffice, that this sin is so abheminable in the sight of God, as even in
this life he many times does begin to punish it.


Claudio. Very worthily ought the punishment to begin in good time, and to
endure much longer then any of the other: because, if the penalty should be
conformable to the offense, Blasphemy outstretcheth time, and continues for
ever.
as there is no fault that lasts longer then blasphemy, so ought the
inflicted pain to be correspondent, which must needs stretch further then the
allotment to other sins, for blasphemy outgoeth time, and continues eternally.


Lodouico. Does blasphemy then endure for ever?


Claudio. It is a common opinion among the reverend divines; That as charity is
the cheifest virtue, Comparison of Charity, as the cheifest virtue of all, and
Blasphemy the very worst of all sins whatsoever.
most perfect and maiesticall, because it only remains eternally, (all the
other virtues severally having an end, but yet answerable to their several
actions:) So blasphemy is the very worst of all sins whatsoever, not only
because it is committed in this life, but also in regard it lives for ever in
hell, as an eternal exercise for the damned; other sins, having also (according
to their action) an end and period. Therefore says Saint John in his Apocalypse.
Blasphemaueruut Deum coeli, prae doloribus and vulneribus suis. Apoc. 16. 11.
They blasphemed the God of heaven, for their pains, and for their sores.

And the Angelical Doctor, Thom. Aquin, In. sum. 2, 2. Q. 13. Art. 4.
in his 2. 2. q 13. art. 4. uses these formal speeches. Et credibile est,
quod post resurrectionem erit in eis etiam vocalis blasphemia, sicut in Sa^ctis
vocalis laus Dei. That as in heaven the Saints with cheerful voices shall
praise the lord, so is it most certain, that the damned with horrible voices
shall blaspheme him.


Lodouico. The sin of blasphemy then, continuing longer then the other
sins, we may by good reason make this addition thereto. Sins exte^t ensues
by his long lasting.
Because the sin, by how much it lasts, so much the greater is his extent;
blasphemy going beyond all, must needs be said to be more grievous then them
all. As contrariwise, by how much virtue continues, Charity is eternally
joined with god.
so much the more noble it is. So charity ought to be esteemed the worthiest
among all virtues, because it is that which is eternally joined with God, and
never has ending, whereupon the Apostle says. 2. Cor. 13. 13.
Nunc autem manent fides, spes, charitas, tria haec: mayor autem horum est
charitas. And now abides faith, hope and charity, even these three: but the
cheifest of these is charity.


Claudio. If a man may be known by his speech, A man may be known by his
speech, according to Socrates.
of what quality he is (according to the opinion of Socrates): And if by the
language he speaks, may also be gathered of what nation he is: (as whether he
be an Italian, Spanyard, Germane French, English, Greek or Hebrew, as Peter was
known by his speech. Galilaeus es, nam and loquela tua manifestum te facit.
Math. 26. 73.
Thou also art a Galilean, for even thy speech bewrays thee.)

Why then, A blasphemer is easily discerned by his speaking, jesting and
swearing, to be of the province of hell.
when we perceive a man to be addicted to blasphemy, in such manner, as by
frequent use in his speaking, he will iestingly both swear and blaspheme: we
may justly say of him; This man is of the province belonging to the kingdom of
hell, because his devilish language does manifestly accuse him. Ipsi de mundo
sunt, ideo de mundo loquuntur: They are of the world, therefore speak they
according to the world. John. 14. 30.
So said Christ to his disciples, as if he would have further added, in this
manner;

The quality of the soul, The quality of the soul is best known by our speech.
it is better known by speech, then by any other way else whatsoever:
therefore let it be no maruayle in you, if the children of this world, do speak
world-like, even as they that are of God, do confer on none but those things
belonging to god.

Hereupon we may well say, that the blasphemer is of the infernal kingdom,
because he uses the same language which the damned do, who are doomed for ever
to that abiding. Even as contrariwise the exercise of the heavenly Citizens, is
evermore to be lauding and praising God. Beati qui habitant in domo tua Domine,
Psalm. 19. 55.
in saecula saeculorum Laudabunt ^e. Blessed are they, Lord, that d^ell in thy
house, for they shall praise thee for ever and ever.

Three several provinces or kingdoms did god make, Three several kingdoms
made by God, each having his several language.
and each one has his proper language: to wit, the province celestial, the
terrestrial, and the infernal.

The language celestial, is to bless and praise God eternally. Et quatuor
animalia, singula eorum habebant alas senas in circuitu, and intus plena sunt
oculis, and requiem non habebant die ac nocte, 1. The language celestial.
dicentia: Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus omnipotens, Apoc. 4. 8.
qui erat, and qui est, and qui venturus est. And the four beasts had each
one of them six wings about him, and they were full of eyes within, and they
ceased not day nor night, saying: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which
was, and which is, and which is to come.

The language of the terrestrial kingdom, The language terrestrial.
is to speak of things that are terrestrial: Qui de terra est, de terra est,
and de terra loquitur: John. 3. 31.
He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and speaks of the earth.

The language of the infernal jurisdiction, The language infernal.
is to speak evil, curse and blaspheme both God and his Saints: Esaias. 8. 21.
Cum esurierit, irascetur, and maledicet Regi suo, and Deo suo, and suspiciet
sursum: When he shall be hungry, he shall even fret himself, and curse his
king and his Gods, and shall look upward. If by the tongue, he shall be known
whether he be a stranger or no: Evil speakers are of the infernal kingdom.
then is it most evident, that cuill speakers and blasphemers are of the
infernal kingdom.


Lodouico. Most wretched blasphemer, who being paid with his own evil, The
tongue was made to praise God withal.
never thinks of amending his tongue, nor altering his bad language: but
being assured of his harm, perseuers in the blame. And the tongue which was
made for to praise God withal, he turns it to curse and blaspheme him. Which
is a sin so execrable and abominable, The Scripture uses the word blessing,
in steed of blaspheming.
as sometimes it falls out that in the holy Scripture, where it speaks of
blasphemy, there is used in steed thereof the word blessing, as refusing to use
that wicked phrase.

As we have it in the first book of the Kings, 1. King. 21. 10.
where when wicked Iezabell found out two false witnesses against Naboth,
Example of the witnesses against Naboth
to win occasion of putting him to death, the same witnesses testified, that
Naboth had blasphemed God and the king; saying. Benedixit Naboth Deum and
Regem. For which he was unjustly led forth of the city, and stoned to death by
all the people. At illi viri diabolici, dixerunt contra eum testimonium coram
multitudine. Benedixit Naboth Deum and Regem. Quamobrem eduxerunt eum extra
ciuitatem, and lapidibus interfecerunt. And the wicked men witnessed against
Naboth in the presence of the people, saying Naboth did blaspheme God and the
king. Then they carried him away out of the city, and stoned him with stones,
that he died.

The like may we read in the first and second chapters of the history of Job.
Example of the diuelles words to God against Job.
in the very words of the devil to God, speaking against Job: Tange cuncta
quae p^ssidet, nisi in faciem benedixerit tibi: Touch all that he has, to
see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face. Job. 2. 11.


And the wife of Job, Example of Jobs w^fes words to him.
exhorting her husband to curse and blaspheme God, used scripture quite
contrary, speaking the word blessing, in steed of cursing. Dixit autem illi
vxor sua; Adhuc tu permanens in simplicitate tua? Job. 2. 9.
Benedic Deo, and morere. Then said his wife unto him; Do thou continue yet
in thine uprightness? Blaspheme God, and dye.

The sacred Scripture has great respect in but speaking or naming the word
blasphemy; The ungodly tongue of man makes no regard of blasphemy.
yet the ungodly and wicked tongue of man, makes no regard at all of it, but
even with heart and mouth blasphemeth his Creator. Could God more exaggerate
this devilish sinner, then by using contrary words in the describing thereof?


Claudio. Blasphemy is likewise the vice of ingratitude, Blasphemy is the sin
of ingratitude.
because in sign of gratification, every creature is obedient to the Lord,
blessing and praising him after his manner. Yet man, endued with more singular
gifts then all other creatures, he only blasphemeth him, Psalm. 119. 91.
and none but he. Ordinatione tua perseuerat dies, quoniam omnia seruiunt
tibi. They continue even to this day by thine ordinances, for all are thy
servants.

The tongue which God gave unto man, because therewith he should land him; to
make it the engine of cursing? oh sin intolerable. Dedit mihi Dominus linguam
(says the wise man) and in ipso laudabo eum. Eccle. 51. 22.
The Lord has given me a tongue, wherewith I will praise him.

The blasphemer is worse then the brute beasts, The blasphemer is worse then
brutish beasts.
who do all magnify the Lord, as David wills them in his last Psalm: Let
every thing that has breath, praise the lord. And the three children, Psalm.
150. 6.
in the midst of the fiery furnace, invited all the works of the
omnipotente, to praise him. Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino, Dan. 3. 60.
laudate, and superexaltate eum in saecula. All ye works of the lord, bless
ye the lord, praise him, and exalt him above all things for ever. Only the
ungodly sinner blasphemeth him.

The heavens wheel about in their course, All creatures (in their kind) do
praise the Lord, and man only blasphemeth him.
the Stars twinkle, the Sun guides the world with his beams, the Moon
shines, the fire heates, the air breathes, the sea^bs and flows, the rivers
run, the lakes stand still, the earth fructifies, the plants live, the beasts
have some measure of understanding, the birds chaunte their noates, the fishes
glyde about in the waters, and every creature (in his kind) gives laud to
his creator, unthankful man only blasphemeth him. Et iugiter tota die nomen
meum blasphematur. Esaias. 52. 5.
My name all the day continually is blasphemed.


Lodouico. Happy David, Psalm. 33. 1.
who evermore praised his creator: Benedicam Domino in omni tempore, Sundry
examples of praises given to God, By David in himself.
semper laus eius in ore meo: I will give thanks unto the Lord, his praise
shall be in my mouth continually.

Good old Tobias forewarned and schooled his only son to this lesson, Toby.
4 19.
sayng. Omni tempore benedic Deum, and pete ab eo, Old Tobies lesson to his
son.
vt vias tuas dirigat, and omnia consilia tua in ipso permaneant, Bless thy
Lord God always, and desire of him that all thy ways may be made strait. and
that all thy purposes and counsels may prosper. David's charge to his sons and
servants.
David also himself, was no sooner in the morning risen from his bed, but he
charged all his children and servants to glorify the Lord. Psalm. 113.
Laudate pueri Dominum, laudate nomen Domini. Praise O ye servants of the
Lord, praise the name of the lord: the like does he in the 134. Psalm,


Claudio. But some there are, Example of too many now in these days
that do quite contrary, who rise no sooner in the morning out of their beds,
but (full of impatience) give some sudden command to their sons or servants,
and because they be not as ready in executing of what they would have them:
presently they break forth into horrible blasphemies, and severe
imprecations, so that the very first moving of their lips, and first word
delivered from their tongues, is infamy and disgrace to their creator. Which
grievous sin being so frequent in committing, if sometime the punishment thereto
belonging, were but as ready from God in following: there would hardly be found
so many devilish tongues in the world, if not for the love of virtuous deeds,
yet at least to avoid the terror of so condign an infliction.

Lewis, A memorable Example of Lewis king of France, how he used two
blasphemers.
called the holy and Saint-like King of France, caused the tongue of a
blasphemer to be cut forth of his head. And so offensive was this sin unto
him, as (at another time) he commanded the lips of a blasphemer to be feared
with a hot burning iron, saying. I would very gladly endure this punishment in
mine own person, conditionally, it might sort to such a happy success, as (by
that example) the hateful vice of blasphemy might never more be heard in my
kingdom.

But now adays, you have men apt and ready enough, to punish such praters or
talkers, as any way do fpeak against their own worth and esteem; but none are
found to reprove them, that speak open blasphemy against God and his saints.

The divine law commanded, Example of Gods law against blasphemers.
that the blasphemer should be stoned by all the people. Educ blasphemum extra
castra, and ponant omnes qui audierunt, manus suas super caput eius, and
lapidet eum populus vniuersus. Leuit. 24. 14. 16
Bring the blasphemer without the host, and let all that heard him, put their
hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him. Again. Et qui
blasphemauerit nomen Domini, morte moriatur. And he that blasphemeth the name
of the Lord, shall be put to death.

Therefore Senacherib King of the Assyrians, Example of blasphemous Senacherib,
and his Army.
besieged Jerusalem, and blaspheming the name of the Lord, the night following
(by Gods appointmente) 185. thousand of his soldiers were slain, and himself
murdered by his own sons.

The law Ecclesiastical enjoined, that the blasphemer, for seven weeks
together, every Friday should fast with bread and water, Ex de mal. c.
statuimus.
and every Sabbath day at Evening prayer time, he should stand before the
Church door, Example of the law Ecclesiastical.
without cloak, without hose or shoes, bare headed, his girdle or a coard
about his neck, and other such like penalties were inflicted on him, only to
make this sin most odious to the people.

The imperial law of Justinian the most Christian Emperor commanded,
Example of the Emperor Justinians law.
that the blasphemers head should be smitten off.

Among the very Paganes also, Example of the law among the Paganes.
there was a terrible law, as we may read in the third Chapter of Daniel,
where it is shown, That Nebuchadnezzer, having seen the great marueyles of
God, in the three children put into the fiery Oven, commanded, that whosoever
did blaspheme that God, should be slain, his house ouerturned, Dan. 3. 96.
and raced from the foundation. A me ergo positum est hoc decretum, vt omnis
populus, tribus and lingua quaecunque loquuta fuerit, blasphemiam, contra Deum
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, dispereat, and domus eius vastetur. Therefore I
make a decree, that every people, nation and language, which speak any
blasphemy against the God of Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, shall be drawn in
pieces, and their houses ruined.

And Mahomet himself, Example of Mahomet the seductor.
who was drawn by the devil to seduce so many souls, commanded that his
body to be divided and cut in quarters, that should blaspheme God, Christ or the
blessed virgin.

If all laws have condemned the blasphemer, not only among believers, but even
among the very Infidelles themselves: it may then easily appear, what an
abominable and detestable sin it is, and that it were much better to be
without a tongue, then thereby to offend so highly our creator, redeemer and
glorifier. Muta fiant labia dolosa.


Finis Chap. 19.
The Argument.
Approouing that it is better to have no tongue at all, and to be silent
eternally, then to fall into any of the before remembered vices. What benefit
ensues by the privation of speech, of which, although we should have no use
at all, yet we are not void of the speech of the mind; which is much more
excellent, and sooner listened unto by god himself, then to the careless and
idle babbling of the lips. He that wants speech, is disburdened of a heavy
load, and may the easier preserve himself from many heavy charges: because by
the tongue of the body, we please men only, but by the tongue of the heart, we
become pleasing to God. Every man has two lips, but the just man has his
upper lip much greater then the nether. Contrariwise, the wicked man has his
nether lip so great, as therewith he covers his whole face, and all the
strength of bad men consists in their lips; which is approved by a short,
yet sweet discourse, and afterward pleasingly concluded on the befalf of
silence, approouing it to be much more allowable then speech.

Chap. 20.
LODOVICO. Pursuing this case of the blasphemer, we may (without any doubt at
all) ad to the rest which is gone before, What he seeks that by blasphemy
opposes himself against God.
that in regard the opposes himself immediately against his Creator, thereby
he coueteth no less, but would enforce (as much as in him lies) that he
neither is, or should be just, good, omnipote^t, wise and merciful. And he that
desires or seeks after these things, would willingly have God not to be God.

In like manner, when he would have him to be void of eyes, whereby he beholdes
his sins, and discouers his deceiptfull devises: he wishes him also to be as
empty of power, whereby to punish him, or to censure him with pains of
condemnation. And feign he would have such a potency to remain within him
self, whereby he might as easily afflict his creator, as he dares venture
with his deuilish tongue, to blaspheme and abuse him.

This is a denying of the divinity in God, Blasphemy leads to the denying of
the Godhead.
with a mere hellish and deuillish presumption a sin so immane and
monstrous, as much better were it, not to have a heart to think it, or a
tongue to utter it. A sin so horrible, that the Jews (by nature obstinate,
and addicted to many vices) would yet stop their ears from hearing it, and
rent their very garments in pieces, in sign that it did split their very
hearts in sunder, when any such blasphemy was delivered: as we may read in the
Acts of the Apostles, in the Gospels, and in many other places of the holy
Scripture. Who can hear a worse or viler thing then blasphemy is?

Will ye listen what Saint Bernard says thereof, Bernard in Cant. Septuages.
Sermon. secundo.
in his Canticle of the Septuagesi. Sermon. 2? Vult ergo non esse Deum, qui
quantum in ipso est, aut vult eum impotentem, aut iniustum, aut insipientem
esse vult. Crudelis plane, and omnino extrema malitia, quae Dei potentiam,
iustitiam, sapientiam perire desiderat; Qui autem vult Deum esse iniustum, vult
non esse Deum: and qui desiderat Deum non esse; nonne quantum in se est Deum
occidit?


Claudio. I could wish such a one, not only to be deprived of his tongue,
wherewith he has so blasphemed the divine goodness of God: but rather (then to
offend in any of the before named vices,) that he had no life at all in him,
even any one whatsoever that should be so displeasing to his heavenly maker.

Many times it happens, A benefit is never truly known, but by the loss of
it.
that sickness is much more available then health, not only, because
unthankful man scarsely knows a benefit given him by God, till first he have
endured the loss thereof: but in regard also, that infirmity, and debilitie in
our natural forces, does beget and bring forth the surer health of the soul.
Such a hurt is worthily to be wished for, that shows it self to be a remedy
to a far greater inconvenience, and is a secure escape from harm of higher
quality. But this being utterly unknown in our selves, we cannot devise how
to help it, and we being ouerslouthfull in seeking redress, do thereby grow
to a more dangerous weakness of the mind, which taking away the light of
the soul, becomes a prouder nourishment to the flesh. Much better then do I
reckon the infirmity of the body, The health of the soul, is better then that
of the body.
that engenders the souls health: then the health of that, which weakens and
makes the soul to be sick.

We often times do foolishly conceit in our selves, that by recovery of
health after some long sickness, we are quite set free and escaped from
death. But even then do we run with the greatest haste of all toward him, and
are even nearest to death, when we imagine him to be furthest off. we are
nearest to death, when we think him furthest off.
The deprivation of speech, nay, death it self is far better, then long time
of life, and offending our heavenly creator, by those means which were made
for his laud and magnifying.


Lodouico. Privation or lack of speech, The lack of speech begets the quiet
of the mind.
begets the security and quiet of the mind. Many, mere innocents of their
hands, have yet been condemned by their tongues, because they have fondly
taken great pleasure, in appearing before men, to have done such things as they
never did, nor perhaps ever could do, and so have made them selves guilty by
their tongues, of that which their hands never performed.

As in the like case it happened to the young Amalekite, The young Amalekites
belying of him self for the death of king Saul.
who vaunted before David, that he had slain king Saul, as hoping to have
gotten (thereby) a great reward, because Saul was a most heavy enemy to David.
But albeit he was cleerelye innocent of the fact, yet notwithstanding, he
bare the penaltye of a murderer, only by belying him self, and accusing him
self of a deed, which he never thought to do. Whereupon David said to him.
Sanguis tuus super caput tuum. Os enim tuum loquutum est aduersum te, 2. Sam. 1.
dicens; Ego interfeci Christum Domini. Thy blood be upon thine own head, for
thine own mouth has testified against thee, saying; I have slain the Lords
anointed.

I say again, What labor is required in the well and orderly delivery of our
speech.
that the want of speech, is the occasion of much quiet, because it is no mean
labor, to speak well, to make answer in due time, and to apt purpose; to
talk graciously, and to give proportionable gesture to our words; to adorn
our sayings with comeliness; to deliver sentences with sweetness; to accompany
our speeches with the bodies seemly behavior; sometimes speaking loud,
sometimes low; now sweetly, then more sharply.

But this (you will say) is the labor only belonging to an Orator. Yet let
me tell you, that the want of speech in consideration of the many harms,
whereinto a man falls by the tongue only: is the chief way to much
quietness, and the means to prevent innumerable evils. Diverse have desired,
that they could never have spoken, Of Cicero and Demosthenes whose tongues were
their death.
but never attained to such a happiness. If Cicero the father of Latin
eloquence, and Demosthenes, the splendor of the Greek tongue, had ever been
dumb: both the one and other had longer lived, and death had been more
sufferable to them, and much less grievous.


Claudio. Questionless, whosoever considers our humane frailcie, and how
procliue a man is to fail in his speaking: will allow dumbness to be far
better then speech. What benefits ensue on the lack of speech
He that has lost the use of speech, has also lost the art of lying, the
consuetude of deceiving, the instrument of enmity, the organe of quarrelling,
the sower of slanders, and the broacher of blasphemies.

Many more are they, that by their words have become infamous, then by their
deeds: for there is no part of our body, more ready to do harm, and harder
to bridle, then the tongue of man is. Therefore, they that know them selves apt
to fail thereby, and consequently, to fall into the vices whereon we have so
long discoursed; me thinks, should rather wish them selves to be dumb, then
to covet the engine of their own unhappiness.


Lodouico. It is very true, It is great riches to be poor in evil.
in regard it is a great treasure, to be poor in evil. Whereupon we may say,
and very truly, that such as are borne without the unhappy tongue, are borne
to be rich, and they that have such a wicked kind of tongue, do loose for
ever the eternal riches. How to find by loosing, and loose by finding.
Thus (by a new way) may we become wealthy, loosing by finding, and finding by
loosing, because there is no worse thing, then to have an evil tongue. Even so
by consequence, there is nothing better, then in having it, to remain as
deprived thereof, seeing he that gets much that way, loses much more an other
way. Esaias. 31. 9.
And the tongue is as a fire, which consumes any thing. Labia eius repleta
sunt indignatione, and lingua eius quasi ignis deuorans.


Claudio. But what shall we say (if the tongue be not good) that many yet have
been found to be of innocent tongues, evermore praising therewith their
Creator? If then to loose an evil tongue, is to get great riches, to loose a
good tongue, is to loose greater riches.


Lodouico. He that has lost his tongue, Sentence.
has not lost his heart. He remains only deprived of that member, wherewith
he could appear pleasing but to men, The heart only is pleasing to god, the
tongue winnes but praises of me^.
but is not robbed of his heart, wherewith he pleases God only. Being then
not secured by that member, which won him but the bare pleasing opinion of
men: it is best for him to preserve the heart carefully, whereby he may be
thankful to God, to whom, though he cannot speak with his material tongue,
yet may he liberally and freely express his whole heart.

And if the wicked be said to have the lips of the heart, The wicked have the
lips of the heart.
how chances it that the just have them not also? Of the wicked says David:
Labia dolosa, in cord, and cord loquuti sunt: Flattering with their lips,
Psalm. 12. 2.
and speak with a double heart. The just have the mouth and tongue of the heart.
The just have the mouth and tongue of the heart, wherewith they may freely
speak unto God, which made David say of him self. Non est occultatum os meum
a te, quod fecisti in occulto. My bones are not hid from thee, though I was
made in a secret place. Psalm. 139. 15.
Or, as if he should say. Lord, the mouth of my heart, which thou have created
for me in the most secret part of my body: from thee it is not hidden, because
thou searchest into the secrets of the heart, and hear the moving of the
lips of the thoughts. Dominus autem intuetur cor.

Praise then the Lord with the tongue of the heart, God listens more to the
tongue of the heart, the^ that of the voice.
because he is wont to be much more attentive to that kind of language, then
to the other idle talkatiue noise of the voice. And in the presence of his
omnipotent Majesty, there is no clamor more loud, more vehement, nor more
moving, then that of the heart is, because otherwise (as we have already said)
he only delights in silence.

This clamor did that Shepherd of his flock, and (afterward) the guide to
numberless people, Example of Moises crying to God in silence.
Moses, breath forth, when praying (in silence) with a most earnest spirit,
his zealous cries entered the ears of the Almighty, which made God himself
say: Quid clamas ad me? Exodus 14. 15.
Wherefore cryest thou unto me? He spoke not, neither moved his lips, and
yet it is said, he cried. As we perceive then, that he whom god hears, is not
dumb, because he speaks to him with his heart: even so may we say, that he
who has lost the tongue of outward crying, and of the voice whereby he would
strive to be understood, neither wantes his material tongue, nor voice vocal.

Moreover, Lack of speech gives freedom to our thoughts.
loss of the use of speech, has been very aduantagious to diverse men, because
thereby their thoughts have had the more gentle freedom. Which made King
David say, that it behooued, to set a good watch before the tongue. Pone Domine
custodiam orimeo, Psalm. 141. 3.
and ostium circumstantiae labits meis. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and
keep the door of my lips. Psalm. 39. 2. 2.
Dixi custodiam vias meas, vt non delinquam in lingua mea. I said, I will take
heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. Posui ori meo custodiam,
dum consisteret peccator aduersum me. I will keep my mouth bridled, while the
wicked is in my sight. And Solomon his son said, that it behooves (with all
diligence possible) to keep the heart, as that which is the fountain of life.
Prouer. 4. 23.
Omni custodia serua cor tuum, quoniam ab ipso vita procedit. Keep thine heart
with all diligence for therout comes life.

Being then deprived of the tongues use, either by nature or fortune, thou art
disburdened of this watch-charge: and being to keep one watchman only, thou
art eased of a moity of the trouble, by being able to preserve (with greater
facility) things so reduced to a small number, yet of greatest value, then
those that are amounting to many in their number.

And it may yield thee some contentment beside, The tongue has hurt many, and
helped but few.
to loose that only member of the body, which has helped very few, but hurt
many. Because it is the Seminary of war, dissensious, strifes, adulteries,
blasphemies, periuries, frauds, flatteries, and of an hundred thousand other
vices beside. Better then is the tongue of the heart, whereby God may be
pleased, and no man scandaled: then that of the mouth, whereby God delights
not to be spoken unto, and infinite evils have redounded unto men.


Claudio. Your discourse, The custody of the tongue very difficult.
my Lord, may be allowed for the more authentical, by how much we know the
custody of the tongue to be very difficult. Whereupon, many have been enforced
to attempt impossible ways, only to contain (in good compass) the slippery
tongue.

Francis Petrarche the Poet, An excellent example, of a man that desired to
study the Scriptures.
and an Orator most famous, tells us of a devout man, who was very desirous to
learn the study of sacred letters or divinity. And to that end entered into a
School, where hearing this verse of the thirty eight Psalm, at his very
first entrance; Dixi custodiam vias meas, vt non delinquam in lingua mea etc.
He presently went foor^h of the School, and would never after come into it
again. A pr^^^y while after, the Master (by chance) meeting him on the way,
and marueiling he had in such sort forsaken the School: demanded, upon what
occasion he had so soon given over his new-begun study? Whereto the holy man
thus answered. I have found so much to do, to observe but one document, which
I heard in my very first lesson, concerning the keeping of my tongue, and which
all my life time hitherto I was never able to compass: that I will first
attain the perfection of that one precept, before I presume upon any other.

This good man accounted it merely superfluous, It is superfluous, to hear
much, and practice little.
to hear many lessons, without putting any one of them in execution.
Therefore, it appearing to be such a hard matter, to keep the tongue in an
absolute custody; he would have no one to seem otherwise learned, then as
they have truly followed the perfection of their lessons.


Lodouico. Assuredly, it is most difficult for a man, to preserve him self
innocent in speaking: because we are so ouer-ready, to talk of worldly
matters, even as men that have no way made clean their affections. The reason
why a man has two lips to his mouth.
A man has two lips necessarily belonging to speech, one beneath, and the
other aloft above the mouth, because humane argument is but twofold, and no
more; that is, of matters sovereign and celestial, and of meaner things, base
and terrestrial.

The two lips are distinct: notwithstanding, in forming of the word, they
aptly unite them selves according to time. Even so, albeit celestial things
are furthest off from matters terrestrial, The use of celestial and
terrestrial things
and those divine, from them that are humane: yet ought were to unite them
together, and so far to serve our turn with earthly occasions, as they may
stead us in our duty to heaven. Holy men have spoken of them both so
graciously together, that the holy Ghost said of them: Diffusa est gratia in
labiis tuis, propterea benedixit te Deus in aeternum: Psalm. 45. 2.
Grace is powered in thy lips, because God has blessed thee f^reuer.


Claudio. Quite contrary are the ungodly, Example of Zacharias.
who speak so vngratiously, as God is forced sometime to make them be silent.
As he did to talkatiue Zacharias, Luke 1. 20.
albeit a good man: Eris tacens, and non poteris loqui: Example of the talking
devils.
Thou shall be dumb, and not be able to speak. And he did the like to the
bold talking devils: Et imperans, non sinebat ea loqui: He rebuked them, Luke.
4. 41.
and suffered them not to speak. And the like he said to the unthankful
sinners: Example of the thanklesse sinners.
Tacete qui habitat is in insula: Be still ye that dwell in the Isles. Esaias. 23.
2.



Lodouico. Just men are like to goodly fair hounds, Just men compared to
goodly hounds.
which have their upper lip much greater then the lower. So do just men more
gladly talk of celestial affairs, then those belonging to the world. God
commanded Moses, Example of the proposition table.
that he should make for the proposition Table, a cover of gold, and for the
cover a high golden crown. Facios illi labium aureum per circuitum. Exodus 25.
24. 25.
Et ipsi labio coronam interassilem altam quatuor digitis, and super illam
alteram coronam aureolam.

This Table we may say to be the just man, The just man compared to to the
table.
whose heart is like unto a rich table, furnished with all sweet meats of
virtue, wherein God him self so highly delights, and whereon he pleases to
eat and drink, even as if he were a fellow-commoner with him. Si quis
audicrit vocem meam, Apoc. 3. 20.
and aperuerit mihi ianuam: intrabo ad illum, and coenabo cum illo, and ipse
mecum. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him,
and will suppe with him, and he with me.

His lips are made of the purest gold, The lips of the just man.
as a couerture to a holy receptacle, and the words of such a sanctified
vessel, are full of most ardent and perfect charity. And therefore is a high
crown of eternal reward laid up in store for him, yea, a golden crown of
perpetual honor. Eccl. 45. 12.
Corona aurea super caput eius, expressa signo sanctitatis. A crown of gold
upon his head, bearing the form and mark of holiness. Psalm. 8. 5.
Gloria and honor coronasti eum. Thou have crowned him with glory and honor.

Now the wicked are quite contrary to the just, The wicked contrary to the
just man.
for they have the nether lip far greater then the upper, because they
talk of nothing but earthly and carnal things: John. 3. 31.
Qui de terra est, de terra loquitur, as if he would have said. They that have
their hearts made of earth, do talk altogether of earthly things, because the
tongue is the messenger of the heart, and Ex abundantia cordis os loquitur.

They have their lips of their mouths, answerable to the cogitations of their
hearts. Wicked men compared to swine, in all their behavior.
Therefore they gladly discourse on earthly affairs, because their nether lip
is so great: being justly herein compared to swine, whose strength consists
wholly in their lips; with them they delue into the earth, root up plants,
break down doors, and remove stones out of their places. Even so the
ungodly Orator and careless sinner, all their power is in humane eloquence,
and in the ne^ues of worldly business, which they continually exalt and
applaude, making no account at all of celestial and invisible treasures.


Claudio. These men may be compared to certain people of Ethiopia, Isidorus
in Etim. Lib. 11. Pliny. in Hist. Not. Lib. 14.
of whom Isidorus speaks in the eleventh book of his Etimologic, and
likewise Pliny in his natural history, describing them to be very monstrous.
Their faces being all plain and even: but their ne^her lip is of such huge
largenes and length, as therewith they cover all their face, to defend it from
the heat of the Sun, and so they wander about the Ethyopian mountains.

Even so wander the wicked through the black Ethiope of this world, How the
wicked do wander through the Aethiopia of this world.
ouer-warme and sweltring in all naughtiness. They are so monstrous and
imperfect, that they have faces plain and smooth, and walk as void of all
understanding; wanting the clear sighted eye of discretion, the pearcing
savor of devotion; the solicitous care of obedience, the delicate taste of
contemplation, and the soft touch of mild compassion. So that we may very
well say of them. Psalm. 115. 5. 6. 7
Oculos habent and non videbunt; nares habent and non oderabunt; aures habent,
and non audient, manus habent and non palpabunt; os habent et non manducabunt.
They have eyes and see not; they have noses and smell not; they have ears and
he are not; they have hands and touch not; they have mouths and eat not.

Only they have their nether lip so large, The lower lip of the wicked
couers al their face.
as therewith they cover their whole face: because by their vain talking, they
cloak, cover and cloud all their lewd life, making that as a veil, to
obscure their detraction, flattering, deceiving, dissembling, murmuring,
deriding, lying, boasting, defaming, slaundering and blaspheming.

All their strength consists in their lips; they byte and wound with their
lips; Of the lips of the wicked.
Gladius in labiis eorum; Swords are in their lips. They lie with their lips:
Psalm. 59. 7.
Abhominatio est Domino labia mendacia: The lying lips are abomination to
the Lord. Proverb. 12. 23.
They flatter with their lips: Mark. 7. 6.
Populus hic labiis me honorat: This people honors me with their lips etc.
They poison with their lips: Venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum: Psa^m. 140. 3.
Adders poison is under their lips. They sow strife with their lips:
Prouer. 18. 6.
Labia stulti miscent se rixis: A fools lips cause strife. They kill and
ruinate souls with their lips: Labia ipsius ruina animae eius: Prouer. 15. 7.
His lips are a snare for his soul. They smite, and shall be smitten with
their lips: Siultus labiis verberabitur: Pro. 16. 8.
He that is foolish in talk shall be beaten. They burn with their lips: The
whole power of the wicked is in their lips.
In labiis eius ignis ardebit: Fire burns in his lips.

All their whole power is in their lips, because the greatest evil the
wicked can do, they do it with their lips: moving them to blasphemies,
evil speaking, lying, strifes, and therefore were they better to be deprived
of them, then have use of them, to their own damnation, dishonor of God, and
detriment of their neighbor.


Lodouico. Let us pray then to the Lord, to strike them dumb, or to change
their lips. Or if the lips of the heart be to abide with them, that they
may not move them to his disgrace, not be offensive to the chaste ears of
good men, by their Gomorrish speeches, and cries of Sodom, so highly
displeasing to the Almighty. Muta fiant labia dolosa.


Finis Chap. 20.
The Argument.
He that would talk with God, must either learn to be silent, or speak
far otherwise then he did before: because his heart is to be first purged of
wicked thoughts, and his lips made clean from speaking of evil. He that
conferres with God, must either hold his peace, or speak very little, in
regard of the greatness of divine mysteries. Or he must talk highly, by a
new kind of speaking, as being lifted up by divine assistaunce of the holy
Ghost. For approbation whereof, diverse sound testimonies out of sacred
Scripture are produced. As of Moses, Jeremy, Daniell, Paul, and the other
Apostles, Silence also makes the fool to seem wise, and the want of speech is
the gift of God, as well as talking in many languages. Herein likewise is
discoursed, whence it proceeds that some are borne dumb, and others very
hard in delivery of their words, or else do speak very slowly.

Chap. 20.
CLAVDIO. To be silent, we have already discoursed and approved, that it is
very behoouefull for all men, as well the good, as the bad, the foolish, Fools
by silence do seem to be wise.
as the wise: because such commendation awaiteth on silence. as if the foolish
man do but hold his peace, he appears to be wise; At the least in this,
that in refrayning speech, he acquainteth not others with his folly, which
made the wise man say. Prouer. 17. 28.
Stultus quoque sit acuerit, sapiens reputabitur, et si compresserit labia sua,
intelligens. Even a fool (when he holds his peace) is counted wise, and he
that stops his lips, prudent.

If silence do cause the very fool to be reputed wise, Silence is no mean
grace in a wise man.
how much more grace then does it give to a man wise indeed? Mark what Solomon
further adds: Prouer. 17. 27.
Qui moderatur sermones suos, doctus and prudens est: and pretiosi spiritus vir
eruditus: He that has knowledge, spares his words, and a man of understanding
is of an excellent spirit.

If then god do take away from the wicked the use of speech, Two benefits
ensuing to the wicked by want of speech.
two admirable benefits ensue to him thereby. One is, that he shall appear to
him that knows him not, to be dumb, and to be a wise man. The other is, that
he cannot hurt his neighbor, by evil example of murmuring and lewd speaking.

We may therefore say, Silence is the gift of God, as well as speaking well.
that as it is the gift of god to speak well, and in variable languages, as
the Apostles (by the work of the holy spirit) did: Even so is it the gift of
god, to be silent, and deprived of that member, wherewith we may much offend
the divine goodness, and little help our neighbor: for the one holds his
peace by virtue, and the other by infirmity. Therefore very elegantly said the
wise man. Eccl. 20. 6. 7.
Est autem tacens, and non habens sensum loquelae, and est tacens, sciens
tempus apti temporis. Homo sapiens tacebit vsque ad tempus. Some man holds
his tongue, because he has not to answer, and some keeps silence, waiting a
convenient time. A wise man will hold his tongue, till he see opportunity.


Lodouico. Upon this occasion, we may lawfully (by your leave my Lord) demand
to know, whence it ensues, that some are endued (by nature) with a perpetual
silence, so that they know not how to form one word?


Claudio. Aristotle says; Aristotle his opinion of the deaf and dumb by
birth.
That if a man be borne deaf, it is necessary that he should also be borne
dumb: because in not hearing, he knows not how to form the articulation of
the voice, and the names given to things in the first institution, neither
knows what is signified by them. And this ensues (as he affirms) Because
the tongue has his use by reason only, and so attaineth to ability in
discourse, or in dispute. Whereupon it is necessary, to receive the word or
name from another, and so to contain the signification thereof in mind.
Therefore necessarily are they which are borne deaf, dumb also.


Lodouico. A good answer, and grounded upon reason. But tell me I pray you,
whence comes it, that some are so imperfect of speech, as they can hardly
deliver two words readily together, and others have their tongues so quick and
voluble.


Claudio. To have the tongue ready, Of the quickness and agility of the
tongue, and how by natural means it is caused, or hindered in the mela^cholic
body.
quick and agill, it requires the aid of much heat, and moderate dryness.
Wherefore, they that be melancholy bodies, (as well by nature, as by ad^stion)
are tardy of speech, because their tongue is very cold and moiste, abounding
always with much water, and spettle in the mouth. By which disposition, they
have a very moiste and relaxe tongue, because they spit much and often; which
quality both slowes, and also greatly weakens the tongue, so that it cannot
duly attend on the imaginatiue part: which contrariwise better in the disposed
body, makes it to be very strong and gallant. And the tongue cannot run to
speak so distinctly and readily, as when it receives due order from the part
imaginatiue, therefore being thus impeached, it huddles and tumbles out words,
which are not truly and rightly formed.

The Phlegmatike bodies likewise, Of bodies that are phlegmatic.
not being over moody and angry, have a very cold and moiste brain; and
therefore they are not over ready in speaking, their tongue being also relaxed
by too much humiditie. But when they are offended, then choler mountes aloft,
and rouzeth up the heat on a sudden, eleuating the imaginatiue part: and they
then may speak as much as they please, for the tongue is not impeached, Of
such as are unapt to be good Orators.
because it is already well heated. Such men can never be good Oratous, because
they know not how to speak, except they baule and make alowd noise, which
tires the patience of the auditors; and yet the Orators action necessarily
requires, that sometime he should speak loud, and sometime low.

Hereupon Aristotle searching into the occasion, Of such as know not how to
speak lowly, according to Aristotle.
why men being tardy of tongue, knew not how to speak in an humble key: found,
that the tongue which is fastened to the palate, by reason of over much
humiditie, delivers and frees it self better by rough violence, then when
less strength is put unto it. As if a man, being desirous to lift a Lance
from the ground, A very apt comparison.
holding it out at length: more easilye (by a stearne stroke against the earth)
shall mount it aloft, then by lifting it up at arms end by little and little.


Lodouico. It appears to me, The reason of stammering and unready speaking.
that this defect comes hot only so much by humiditie and coldenesle, but
likewise by superfluity of heat and dryness: whereon it happens, that
choleric men (being adust and fiery by nature) when they are in heat, they
cannot pronounce perfectly, but do stammer in such sort, as sometime it cannot
be discerned or gathered what they have spoken. Yet when they are quiet, and
choler quite dismissed, then do they utter their minds with very gracious
eloquence. Which in Phlegmatic bodies is clean contrary, who being quiet and
in peace, they seem then as if they could not speak at all: but let them be
heated or angerly moved, they talk with sententious phrases, and flowing
bounty of very good words.


Claudio. The reason of this is, How heat helps the part imaginatiue, and
the tongue.
that though it be true, that heat both helps the part imaginatiue, and the
tongue too, yet notwithstanding, because men being in anger or fury, heat
aduaunceth more of his power, then is needful or (indeed) convenient, he
domineereth over the imaginatiue part, and thereby so immeasurably dries the
tongue, that it cannot articulate the word as it ought to be spoken. Wherefore,
being in moderate quiet, these kind of me^ do speak very well, because
(then) they have that help of heat, whereof the good imaginatiue part, and the
tongue both have especial need.


Lodouico. If the impediment of the tongue in speech, do come by superfluity
of cold and moisture, or superaboundance of heat and dryness: we may then
say, that the Prince of Isreal's people, the law-deliuerer Moses, he was
hindered by the self same infirmity, when having talked with God, he became
to know his tongues infirmity: which defect he had not before that time, but
only affirmed, that he was not eloquent. The Authors conceit of Moises excuse
to God, concerning his imperfection of speech.
Therefore, when God would send him as an Ambassador to king Pharao, he
desired the Lord not to send him, but excused him self to God, after this
manner saying.

I beseech thee (O my Lord) lay not this burden upon me, because the execution
of such an office, had need of such an eloquent person, as can very readily and
with eloquence deliver his Embassy, wherein I know my self to be utterly
unable. For since I thy most unworthy servant, have been so favored, as to
hear my Lord speak, and that it has also pleased thee, to speak to me: from
thence hitherto, I have known, that I am imperfect of tongue and very tardy in
my speech. Obsecro Domine, Exodus 4. 10.
non sum eloquens ab heri, and nudiustertius: and ex quo loquutus es ad seruum
tuum, impeditioris, and tardioris linguae sum.

This is a very great matter, and well worthy of as great consideration. Moses
perceived his imperfection, after his speech with God.
Before Moises had reasoned with God, he very well knew that he was not
eloquent. But afterward, when he had talked with God, he the^ perceived him
self plainly to be a stammerer, and very slack in speaking. A far greater
defect is it doubtless, to be a stammerer, then not to be eloquent, because
the one is a defect positive, and the other privative.


Claudio. How, The like example of the prophet Jeremy.
and by what means in your opinion, my Lord, grew this strange alteration?
Perhaps the talking with god caused this defect, and it may be so, because
Jeremy the Prophet also, after that he had spoken with god, found him self to
be so deprived of speech, as he said unto god. Ah, ah, ah Lord, how is this
that thou speak unto me? Thou tellest me, that before I was begotten, thou
had elected me, and before I issued forth of my mothers womb, thou
sanctifiedst me, to the end that I might be without the blemish of sin, and
did ordain me a Prophet unto the nations. But remembering what thou have said
unto me, I find my self as a child, that knows not how to form a word.
Ierem. 1. 5. 6.
Priusqua^ te formare^ in vtero, noui te, and antequam exires de vulua,
sanctificaui te, and prophetam in gentibus dedi te. Et dixi, Ah, ah, ah, Domine
Deus, ecce nescio loqui, quia puer ego sum. Whereby is evidently discerned,
that never did the Prophet Jeremy know how to speak, but when God had first
spoken to him, to send him to preach.

Daniel the Prophet, Example of the prophet Daniel^ standing by the river
Tigris.
a man of a most singular prerogative, in the time of Cyrus king of Persia,
standing in great heaviness, afflicted with fasting and full of tears, by the
side of the great river Tigris: God came to reveal a secret of mighty
importance to him. And he stood as smitten dumb, and could not open his mouth
to speak a word. Dan. 10 15. 16. 17.
Cumque loqueretur mihi huiusmodi verbis, deieci vultum meum ad terram, and
tacui. Et ecce quasi similitudo filii hominis tetigit labia mea, and aperiens
os meum, loquuius sum, and dixi ad eum qui stabat contra me. Domine mi, in
visione iua dissolutae sunt compages meae, and nihil in me remansit virium. Et
quomodo poterit seruus Domini mei loqui cum Domino meo? Nihil enim in me
remansit virium, sed et bal^us meus includitur etc. And when he spoke these
words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and held my tongue. And
behold, one like the similitude of the sons of man, touched my lips: then
I opened my mouth, and spoke and said unto him that stood before me. O my Lord,
by the vision, my sorrows are returned upon me, and I have retained no
strength. For how can the servant of this my Lord, talk with my Lord, being
such a one? Natural strength and speech failed Daniell, in his talking with
God.
for as for me, straight way there remained no strength in me, neither is there
breath left in me. Wherein also may be evidently noted, that not speech only,
but even all natural strength wanted in Daniel, in the time of this his
talking with the Lord.

Moses, without requiring any other sign of God, in confirmation of being
made his Ambassador: he could hold this only for enough; The three
exaxamples co^.ferred together.
that, of being before but slender lie eloquent, he was then become also
defective of tongue. And Jeremy, as a manifest token that God had spoken to
him, could declare this: that he was become like a child, who scantly knows
how to form the beginning of any word. And Daniel, in attestation, that the
Lord had talked with him, alleged his own dumbenes.


Lodouico. Many are the answers, and all of them very pregnant and proper,
which might be delivered for the clearing of this doubt. First of all we may
conceive, The majesty and excellency of the presence of God.
that the divine Majesty is so high and excellent, that all humane strength
stands as utterly confounded, and quite bereft of it self, even at his mere
presence, except in mercy it please him to vouchsafe some comfort. And albeit,
in this superabounding celestial glory, the blessed spirits them selves have
no other exercise, but to laud and praise him eternally (as Saint John
declares, of those foue mysterious beasts, and of the twenty four most
venerable Elders, with infinite multitudes of celestial spirits:) yet
notwithstanding, such is the ouer-flowing excellency of the Majesty divine,
as, little less then ouer-pressed with superfluity of glory, (after the
manner of Peter, James and John upon the mountain Tabor,) it casts down all
countenances whatsoever, in looking on it. Et ce ciderunt in conspectu Throni
in facies suas, Apoc. 7. 11. 12.
and adorauerunt Deum, dicentes; Amen, Benedictio, and claritas, and sapientia,
and gratiarum actio, honor and virtus, and fortitudo Deo nostro in secula
seculorum. Amen. And they fell before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped
God. Saying, Amen. Praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and
power, and might, be unto our God for evermore, Amen.

And although of the four mysterious beasts it be written, A noate of no
mean importance.
that they never ceased the divine praises of god. Et requiem non habebant, die
ac nocte dicentia: Apoc. 4. 8.
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus omnipotens etc. And the like of the
Elders, and all the other blessed spirits is registered, that they continually
lauded god: yet notwithstanding, it is also written, that they all in like
manner held their peace. Apoc. 8. 1.
Factum est silentium in coelo, quasi media hora. There was a silence in
heaven, about half an hour.

And David in one of his Psalms says, Psalm. 65. 1.
That to God there belongs silence, The difference in the two translations.
according to the translation of S. Jerome; Te decet silenti^^ Deus in Ston.
Albeit according to the vulgar tra^slatio^, it speaks the contrary, to wit; Te
decet hymnus Deus in Sion. Yet notwithstanding all this, these two translations
are not truly contrary, although at first sight they may seem the one
repugnant to the other.


Claudio. How can it be, The interpretation of the word Hymn.
but that those translations must needs be contrary, if the one say, silence
belongs to God, and the other says, a hymn. Saint Augustine also names a
hymn, which is a Greek word, and in our language is as much to say, as praise
with a song. What coherence thence has a hymn with silence, or silence with a
Song? He that holds his peace, neither praises nor sings. If unto god there
belongs silence, then is not the hymn convenient for him: or if the hymn
be thought agreeable, then is not silence to be dedicated to him. Therefore the
one or other translation is false, or one of them (undoubtedly) speaks not
rightly.


Lodouico. There is no contrariety in these two translations, much less then
are they repugnant one to an other. How the word Hymn and and silence agree
together.
The Hymn imports as much as silence, and silence holds equal with the
hymn. Nay then, let me tell you more, that the silence whereof now we speak,
is begotten both of the hymn, and also of the sound of praise. And I dare make
this addition, that this silence speaks more, then praise can do in the
hymn.


Claudio. I cannot conceive how silence should speak more then praise does,
neither how silence is engendered of the hymn. Well wot I, The question, how
silence speaks more, then praise does.
that when I am silent, I speak not, and when I praise god in a song, such as
a hymn is, that I stand not dumb in silence. Except you please to be plainer
then thus, I understand you not, and this kind of arguing seems to me, like
that of the Tuscane Poet in one of his Sonnets.

E volo sopra'l cielo, e son' in terra,
E nulla stringo, e tutto il mondo abbraccio.
I fly above the heaven, yet am on earth:
And gripe at nothing, yet graspe all the world.
Will this strange birth ever be like to that of Love, which brought forth
Jealousy? Fear ensues of overmuch boldness.
or comparable to fear, that sometime is begotten by overmuch boldness?
whereon the same Poet wrote.

Sento di troppo ardir nascer paura.
Of ouer-bolde, I find that fear is bred.

Lodouico. I said, The answer, how silence is begotten of the Hymn: whereon he
alleges his first proof.
and so say still, that this kind of silence is produced by the Hymn, because
the celestial spirits, beholding the infinite majesty of God, do break forth
into continual divine praises. But such is the greatness of the subject, as
they are quite transported out of themselves, and in a sweet oblivion of
their-then-present estate, they are al as rapt up with a marvelous
astonishment of God. Nor know they then otherwise how to do or say, (being
overcome by this infinite admiration of Gods high glory) but even to stand all
silent, divinely contemplating this exceeding majesty, and so holding their
peace, they do yet give praises with their thoughts mute voices, and so sing
praises to him silently. Thus of the Hymn is silence begotten.

I said also, His second proof, how silence praises more then the Hymn ca^
do.
that this kind of silence praises more, then the Hymn can do. Because, more
swiftly do still thoughts run in contemplation, wherewith the blessed spirits
praise the Lord, then the quickest tongue in the world, can bestir it self in
the forming of words. And these voices do praise more, being thus blessedly
in contemplation, and with so sacred a taciturnity, then the glibbest tongue
can reach unto, with longest or loudest speech. Because the very subject it
self, outgoeth the greatest and highest Oratorie.

What maruayle was it then, His answer concerning Moses, Jeremy and Daniell.
Apoc. 8. 2.
if Moses (having talked with god) found an impediment in his tongue, and
Jeremy knew not how to form a word; and Daniel remained as dumb? when even
the sanctified spirits (themselves) do hold their peace, and are driven to
silence, only by the wonderful excellency of the object? Factum est
silentium in coelo. And so much the rather, because those spoken of were but
mortal men, and the other, are both immortal, and ever blessed.

It is a matter oftentimes experimented, The greatness of the person may daunte
the best Orator in his speaking.
that the greatness of the subject, for, or to whom the speech is prepared,
does daunt the Orator in such sort, as he becomes forgetful of what he would
say: albeit the Oration had bin long time before premeditated, and conned
perfectly by heart, as we use to term it. Whereof I could allege many
examples, which for ciuilities sake I am enforced to forbear.

Only let me remember you but of the Queen of Saba, Example of the Queen of
Saba, coming to king Solomon: his third proof.
who departed from her own royal kingdom, to hear the admired wisdom of
Solomon. Being come to Jerusalem, and beholding there the riches of Solomon,
the adornements of the Temple, the pretiousnesse of the vessels, the beauty of
the Kings Palace, the sitting of his servants, their sumptuous preparation,
their costly food and variety of viands, the Majesty of the kings person, his
unmatchable wisdom, and his speeches delivered with surpassing grace. By
ouer-abounding amazeme^t, she was quite carried from her self, and she had not
so much boldness left her, as but to speak, neither strength to go, or ability
to move, but stood transported with unspeakable astonishment, even like a body
without a soul. So that the holy scripture says; 2. King. 10. 5.
Non habebat vltra spiritu^; There was no more spirit in her.

What shall we hold it then to be, The example urged on gods behalf, and
speaking in his presence.
for us to see and speak with God himself, as did Moses, Jeremy and Daniel?
Can there be any greater amazement, to strike dumb, and make the tongue falter
and be imperfect, when even the blessed themselves do fall into such an
ecstasy? why then, I may well say, that thus they praise him more by silence,
then they can by the Hymn; Te decet silentium Deus. Which is a thing
unspeakable, and goes beyond al humane power, and even Angelical praise it
self. Quantum potes, tantum aude, quia mayor omni laud, nec laudare sufficis.

Hereupon, His fourth proof, by David.
and much to this purpose, David has a most excellent sentence: Cogitatio
hominis confitebitur tibi, and reliquiae cogitationum diem festum agent tibi.
As if he would have said. Lord, the just man, perceiving thy greatness, Psalm.
75. 10.
prayseth thee, and in his praysings, is filled full of most sweet rauishing
thoughts, The manner of the just man's praising of God.
which make so deep an impression into his mind, as they cease not to solemnize
and hail thee for ever.

Likewise the blessed Saints, singing thy divine praises, do fall into a
merueilous astonishment. How the blessed sing the praises of god.
And this is the silence, wherewith, pleasing themselves, they evermore laud
thee, and in their lauding, contemplate thee the highest Creator after this
manner. Apoc. 4. 8.
Non cessant clamare quotidie vna voce dicentes; Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus
Dominus Deus exercituum. And they ceased not daily to cry with one voice,
saying: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hoasts.


Claudio. If at al hours, and every moment, the celestial spirits do give
praise, both with a contemplative silence, and yet with voices also, do sing to
the sovereign majesty divine, as you say: what needed David then to have
invited them to laud him, in the Psalm by you so lately alleged, as if
otherwise they did not laud him at all? His words are these. Laudate Dominum
omnes Angeli eius, laudate eum omnes virtutes eius. Praise ye the lord, all ye
his Angels, praise him all his Army.


Lodouico. Saint Augustine answers your demand concerning that Psalm, S.
Augustines answer to this point.
and that in very gracious manner also, saying. Although it be most true, that
the Angels, and all the blessed spirits are never weary, neither can be wearied
in their praises to God, (whereon Saint John says; Cantabant quasi canticum
nouum; They sung as it were a new song; Apoc. 14. 3.
not that the Song was new, but by the great sweetness, they received in the
praises divine, it seemed to them as a new Song, only by the inexplicable
dulcitude therein contained:) Yet notwithstanding, David inuites them after
such manner, Comparion of a Gardener and his servants.
as the father of a family uses to do. Or as a Gardener, who beholding his
spade-men to labor lustily, even contending (as it were) for most speed and
agility, each one seeking to outstrip his companion: He (in mere joy)
seeing in them such diligent cheerfulness, says to them. On, gallant
spirits, on, you labor lustily. Nor speaks he this, as if he thought them to
be slothful and negligent, for he plainly perceiues them to work with
courage: but, as one overcome with joy and contentment. Even so spoke David to
those celestial spirits; Laudate Deum omnes Angeli eius, etc.

But to return to our own purpose, The same reason alleged for Moses, Jeremy
and Daniel.
it is not to be maruailed at, if (by the like or same reason) Moses found a
defect to be in his tongue, if Jeremy and Daniel were smitte^ as dumb: being al
assailed by the excellency of such a subject, and glorious majesty of the
highest Creator, whereupon the wise man said: Proverb. 25. 28
Qui scrutator est maiestatis, opprimetur a gloria.

Saint Paul was a great Preacher, Example of S. Paul's rapture.
and a most eloquent Orator: nevertheless, he being mounted above the third
heaven, and there beholding the divine secrets, he knew not what to say, but
only that they were inexplicable. Audiuit arcana verba quae non licet homini
loqui. 2. Cor. 12. 4.
He heard words which cannot be spoken, which are not possible for man to utter.

We may also say in answer of the before named doubt, Another answer, by our
own coming to the knowledge of god.
speaking of Moses and of Jeremy, that, when we our selves do come to the
knowledge of god, the more that knowledge increases in us, so much the more
will our strength grow enfeebled. And perceiving thereby our own less aptness,
both to his divine praises, and also to the right cognition of his infinite
majesty, we do come even then to the true knowledge of our own insufficiency
and vileness.

Therefore, Moses excusing of himself to God.
when Moses had heard God speak to him, he found himself to be the less fit
for speaking to men. Whereupon grew his excuse, that he was unmeet for the
message to Pharaoh: but much more need there was, that God would make choice of
his brother and companion Aaron, he being a man most eloquent. Obsecro Domine,
Exodus 4. 10.
non sum eloquens ab heri and nudiustertius: and ex quo loquutus es ad seruum
tuum, impeditioris, and tardioris linguae sum.

Whence we may learn this celestial doctrine, The love of heaven kills the
love of the world.
that, by how much the more a man delights himself in heavenly occasions, so
much the less apt shall he be for worldly matters, because one love abates and
extinguisheth another. The love of God chaseth away all love of our selves, and
of the world, and the nearer we neighbor to our own respect and vain esteem
of worldly affairs, the further off are we from the love of heaven.

The more a man talks of God, The more we talk of God, the more we know our
own infirmities.
and grows to be truly holy, the more knowledge has he of his own defects,
even as by the brightness of the day, the dark obscurity of the night is
discerned. Therefore Daniel reputed himself unworthy, to talk unto God,
saying; Quomodo poterit seruus Domini mei loqui cum Domino meo? Dan. 10. 17.
How can the servant of this my Lord talk with my Lord? As if he would have
said. I am not worthy to behold, much less to speak to the majesty of my
Lord, because I am but a worm of the earth, vile dirt and ashes. And, in great
humility, our forefather Abraham used the like speeches to God: Genesis 18. 27.
Loquar ad Dominum meum, cum sim puluis and cinis, I have begun to speak unto
my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes.

We may yet hereto add another notable mystery upon this place, conforming it
to the opinion of the Philosopher, Men are masters of speech, but God only is
master of silence.
who said: that of speech, men are masters, but of silence, God only is
master. For Moses, before he talked with god, spoke well and freely enough:
but so sooone as god spoke to him, he became a stammerer. And Jeremy, speaking
at the first very readily, god having spoken to him, he knew not how to shape a
word. Even as Daniel (in the like manner) became dumb.

Al which happened, The difference between our speaking to God, and to men.
because there is great difference, between our speaking to god, and our
conferring with men. In our speaking to god, we learn to be silent, as may be
discerned by those former alleged examples. And in that to men, we learn
nothing else but to talk only. For he that among men talks not, is held to
be a melancholist, blamed for a Saturniste, reproved with uncivil
conversation, accused of vnmanlynesse, thought to be a clownish companion, and
nothing meet to hold societye among men.


Claudio. But the Apostles learned not like such men to be silent, How the
Apostles learned their speaking.
for in regard that they continually conuersed with Christ, by the means of
him, they were made meet to receive the holy ghost. Which not only deprived
them of all dumbness, or other impediment in their speech, but, they being
before rude men of tongue, it altered them to most expert and eloquent
Orators, No Orator could equal any of the Apostles.
yea, in every kind of language. So that there was no Orator or Philosopher,
how learned or skillful soever he was, that could equal or go beyond them,
or knew how to answer or convince them in disputation. Therefore, that which
Tyrants could not attain to, by despighting their tongues; by rage, violence
and cruel torture they compassed against them.


Lodouico. They first of all learned to be silent, The Apostles learned silence
before speaking.
ere to speak, and observed taciturnity, before speech: that therefore when
they began to speak, they might the better deliver any other language, then
before that time they had used, and talk of another subject then as yet they
had dealt in.

And as Jeremy in no one thing more showed himself to be sanctified, and
created a Prophet of the Lords own making, then by becoming like a child,
The several comparisous produced together, for approbation of the Apostles
speaking.
deprived of his speech; and even at the very instant (as a very child) said to
the Lord Ah, Ah, Ah. And as Daniel, in nothing else declared so manifestly,
that God had spoken to him, as by his loss of speech. And as Prince Moses
gave no greater a sign of his talking with God, and of his being chosen for
his Ambassador, and guide to the people of Israel, then when suddenly he
became stammering, and imperfect of tongue: Even so the holy Apostles, in
nothing else more apparently witnessed, that they had received the holy ghost,
then when by speaking in several new languages, it showed in them more
unusual, then their first accustomed speech was wont to do.

Wherein evidently may be discerned, What they learn, that talk with God.
that such as talk with God, do either learn to hold their peace, or to
speak otherwise then at the first they did; The tongue being reformed, as in
like manner the heart is reformed, and so consequently both life and conscience.
For a good conscience and a wicked tongue, can never dwell together in one and
the same habitation. He therefore that talks with God, either wants words
and is silent, or breaks forth into divine discoursing, which is not our
talking, but our silence, as we have before sufficientlye proved.

And even in as absolute manner may we say, that all they, which in such sort
do confer with God, All that confer with God, learn silence.
they learn nothing else but to hold their peace, because this new language is
not ours, but it comes from God only. Non enim vos estis qui loquimini, sed
Spiritus Patris vestri, Math. 10. 20.
qui loquitur in vobis. It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father, which speaks in you.


Finis Cap. 21.
The Argument.
To the end, that in our discoursing we should not grow offensive to God, it
behooves us (with devout hearts) to beg of him that he would purify our
minds, and purge our lips. According as David did, who prayed to the Lord,
that he would open his mouth, to the end that he might woorthily praise him.
And, without him, we cannot speak well, because he has the keye of our mouth.
Which is approved by a sentence produced out of Esaias, where he says, that
Christ is the key of David. He therewith opens the mouth, and gives not much
of what we know to ask for, because we should require things correspondent to
his greatness. Moreover, not only are the lips opened therewith, but
likewise the heart, the understanding, the Scriptures, types and figures, yea,
heaven it self, and the mouths of the Saints and Prophets: and without this
keye, all things remain shut up, and every mouth dumb.

Chap. 22.
CLAVDIO. I hold it then most necessary, least that our manner of communing
together, What the Apostles did after Christ's ascension up into heaven.
do fall out to be guilty of blame, and worthy of reprehension: that we should
imitate the blessed Apostles: who after they had gotten the sweet aspect of
the humanity of Jesus Christ, by his glorious asce^sion up to heaven, within
few days after, they published to the world the holy faith, manifesting to
every one, the redemption made by the precious blood of the Son of God, to
banish idolatry, to illuminate the understanding of Infidels, ouershadowed with
the misty fogge of unbelief, and by the extirpating of wicked vices, to sow
plentifully virtues all abroad. So all of them, returning devoutly with the
virgin Mary into a place of quiet, there, with fiery spirits, enflamed hearts
and earnest desires, they prayed to the Lord, that he would send them the
promised holy ghost: which should fill them with sanctified zeal, and purify
their minds, disperse all clouds of sin, make clean their hearts, purge their
understandings, and refine their lips with the burning fire of divine love. To
the end, that their hearts might not contriue, nor their lips deliver one word,
disagreeable to the honor of god, injurious to themselves, or any way
unprofitable to their neighbor.

In like manner, A duty required on our behalf.
let us beseech the holy ghost, that the tongue may not move, to minister a
word, coming from an unclean thought; to the end our speech may be free from
folly. But that, as they had the holy ghost, in the form of fiery tongues;
(Apparuerunt illis dispertitae linguae tanquam ignis, Acts. 2. 3. 4.
seditque supra singulos eorum: Et repleti sunt omnes Spiritu Sancto; There
appeared unto them cloven tongues, like fire, and it sat upon each of them:
And they were all filled with the holy Ghost.) Even so, that all our talk may
be enflamed with christian charity. Prayer the best way to begin withal.
And for our better attayning herunto, let us first have recourse (as the
Apostles had) to prayer: Erant omnes perseuerantes vnanimiter in oracione cum
mulieribus, Acts. 1. 14.
and Maria Maire Jesus, and fratribus eius. They al continued with one accord,
in prayer and supplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and
with his brethren.


Lodouico. The like did all the holy Fathers and Doctors: The Fathers and
Doctors of the church used prayer.
before they prepared themselves to their study, they would be private in their
Oratories, where (humbly on their knees) they implored the help of heaven, in
assistance of whatsoever they presently should undertake. Which gave such a
blessing to all their labors, being both begun and ended in prayer, as they
were able to resolve all doubts, expound all difficulte places, and we (from
them) to this day, have the benefit of their sanctified trauayles.

The same course also the Prophets observed. David's prayer for the opening of
his mouth.
Whereupon, David, knowing how easily a man might break silence by vain words,
desired the Lord to open his lips. Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum
annuntiabit laudem tuam. Psalm. 51. 15.
Open thou my lips O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise: to the
end, that a holy touch of Gods own hand, might purify his mouth, even as if
it were to another Jeremy.


Claudio. Is there such a difficulty in opening of the mouth, The hand of God
must open David's mouth.
as it must needs require the hand of God? We read (notwithstanding your
words) that David opened his own mouth. Os meum aperui, and attraxi spiritum;
Psalm. 119. 131.
I opened my mouth, and panted; he was not then dumb neither had his lips so
contracted, that he should need another to open his lips. On what occasion then
should he desire the Lord, to open his lips? Is the mouth a door locked with a
key, that David of himself could not open it, or had the Lord the key of his
mouth in keeping?


Lodouico. There needs no question to be made, The mouth compared to a gate.
but that the mouth is after the manner of a gate, whereof the lips are as the
very door. If the mouth were not the door of the heart, David never would have
said: Psalm. 141. 3.
Pone Domine custodiam orimeo, and ostium circumstantiae labijsmeis: Eccle. 28.
25.
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. And his
Son also would not have said: Orituo facito ostia, and seras auribus tuis: Make
a door and a bar, and a sure bridle for thy mouth.

If then the mouth be the door of the heart, The heart is a man's Exchequer or
treasury.
and the heart the Exchequer or treasury of whatsoever is precious in man, and
especially of life it self, as the wise man says; Omni custodia serua cor
tuum, quoniam ab ipso vita procedit; Keep thine heart with all diligence, for
therout comes life: Proverb. 4. 23.
I should hold it very requisite, that the gate of such a precious treasary,
The Lord only has the key of the mouth.
ought not to be free and set wide open to every one, but rather, that a sound
firm door should be made before it, well locked and looked unto, the key whereof
the Lord only has, and he alone gouerns it, as Solomon says; Domini est
gubernare linguam; The Lord is the governor of the tongue. Proverb. 16. 2.
When David opened his mouth, Psalm. 81. 10.
it was because god had before opened it, or given him the key wherewith to open
it, which caused him once to say: Dilata os tuum, and implebo illud. Open thy
mouth wide and I will fill it.

The mouth of that man, Of the mouth whereof the Lord keeps not the keye.
whereof the Lord keeps not and guides the key, remayns wide open, and al
uncleanness entering into it, it delivers forth much evil, and is the occasion
of infinite disorders. Which made David to compare it to a stinking grave, full
of all filthiness. Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum, Psalm. 5. 9.
linguis suis dolose ageba^t. Their throat is an open sepulcher, and they
flatter with their tongue. And this ensues, because the tongue is not kept,
and locked up by the Lord: therefore it is not apt to speak well, but to utter
forth notorious blasphemies.

The blessed Apostles, Of the blessed Apostles, and holy Martyrs.
and all the holy Martyrs, who overcame the bloudiest Tyrants with no mean
amazemeut, by being most rare and eloquent Orators: Christ both opened and did
shut their mouths, saying to them. Luke 21. 14. 15.
Ponite ergo in cordibus vestris non praemeditari quemadmodum respondeatis. Ego
enim dabo vobis os, and sapientiam, cui non poterunt resistere omnes aduersarij
vestri. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, that you premeditate not what you
shall answer. For I will give you a mouth, and wisdom, where-against all your
adversaries shall not be able to speak, The Authors insinuation.
nor resist. As if he would have said. My sons, resolve with your selves, that
when you come before Tyrants, you enter not into any premeditation, of what you
shall answer them: for I will move your tongues mith such wisdom, as your very
greatest enemies shall remain confounded, so that they shall be no way able to
answer you. Whereby may be clearly discerned, God has the keye of the just man's
mouth.
that God has the key of the just man's mouth.

Therefore Saint John the Evangelist, the Secretary to Christ, and profound
searcher into celestial secrets, writing by divine commandment to the
Bishop of Philadelphia says. Et Angelo Philadelphiae ecclesiae scribe. Apoc.
3. 7.
Haec dicit Sanctus and verus, qui habet clauem David, qui aperit, and nemo
claudit, claudit, and nemo aperit. Aed write unto the Angel of the Church
which is of Philadelphia. These things says he that is Holy and True, which
has the key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, and shuts, and no
man opens.

If God have the key of David, Why David desired the lord to open his mouth.
it was no marvel then if he desired the Lord, that he would open his mouth,
to the end he might speak without breach of silence. Domine labia mea aperies.
The lord likewise vouchsafe (in his mercy) to open our mouths, Psalm. 51. 15.
to the end we may speak woorthily of him, and then our talk shall never break
silence.


Claudio. In search and research of the whole history of David, I could never
yet find that he had any such key.


Lodouico. The mystery must be sought, Several expou^dings of the key of David.
where the letter has not the sense. Some do expound, that this key is the
fullness of the knowledge and wisdom of Christ.

Aimonius says, The exposition of Aimonius.
that this key is the incarnation of the word, which (as concerning the
humanity) had original from David, to whom by especial prerogative it was
given, to know the mystery of the incarnation.

Helimanus says, The exposition of Helimanus.
that this key is the grace of wisdom, arising from Christ the fountain of
wisdom.

Others do affirm, Others, alluding it to the pastoral office
that this keye signifies the Prelacy and office pastoral, which by
soundness of doctrine, accompanied with good example of life, opens heaven to
the godly; And contrariwise, by ignorance and lewd course of life, ope^s hell
both to the wicked and to themselves.

Others would have it, Others, to the power of binding and loosing.
to be the power of binding and loosing, accompanied both with knowledge and
order.

Others would have it to be christ himself, Others, to Christ himself
who (as God) here opens the heart to holy inspirations, the understanding to
belief, the will to love, and Paradise to reign in. All which are to be
gotten by this key, with endless sweating, innumerable sufferings, tears of
blood, and infamous death. Data est mihi omnis potestas in coelo, and in terra.
Math. 28. 18.
All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth. And perhaps it was of this
key, Esaias. 22. 22.
the Prophet Esaias spoke to Eliacim the Priest, saying. Dabo clauem domus David
super humerum eius: And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his
shoulders.


Claudio. What keye is so heavy and ponderous, as need should require to lay
it on a man's shoulder? A keye is usually carried fastened to the girdle, or hid
in ones pocket, purse, bosom, or carried in the hand, His question for further
satisfaction in this point.
not on the shoulder. And so much the rather do I urge this question, because,
that the fullness of the wisdom of Christ, nor the incarnation of the word,
nor the grace of wisdom, nor the office of Prelacie, nor the power of binding
or loosing nor Christ himself is a weight so burdenous as to be carried on the
shoulders of a man.


Lodouico. And yet it is so. What greater burden is there I pray you, The
burden imposed on the Clergy, and the several duties required in him toward
his flock.
then that of the Prelate? who ought to watch with Argus eyes, and have a
vigilant care of his beloved flock, making spare of no toil or discommodity
whatsoever. Sometimes ought he to feed them with the blessed sacraments, then
with the food of healthful doctrine. Now must he entice them with celestial
promises, the^ again threaten them with eternal pains. Sometimes must he go
before them in holiness of life, and virtuous examples: then again ought he
to follow them, with the knotted staff of repentance.

Now must he comfort them with sweetest speeches, then terrify them with rough
and stearne reprehensions. Comparion of a mother trauayling with child.
And even, as if he travailed with them, like as a mother does with her
burden, and afterward had brought them forth: so should he hug them in his
bosom, having the self same love and respect toward them, as a mother has
of her deer esteemed Son, and of them, as of himself, and for them, as for
himself, for rendering of his account in the day of latest judgment, before
the highest shepherd and cheifest Prelate of all, even God himself. And do
you think (my Lord) that this load lies lightly upon the Churchma^s shoulders?

No less painful and grievous is the power of binding and loosing, The
painful burden of binding and loosing.
because he to whom such a charge is commitred, may (by his own ignorance)
loose both his own, and all the souls committed under his cure. As contrary
wise, by his wisdom, learning and christian providence, he may also be the
means to preserve both them and himself.

The fullness of grace in Christ Jesus, The fulness of grace in Jesus Christ,
and how the keye is applied to him.
beside that it is the key, and beginning of our salvation, because thereby the
prophecies were fulfilled, types and figures finished, sins cancelled, faults
pardoned, grace received, hell closed, heaven opened, Moses laws concluded,
and the Gospel declared: So, was it not a most painful burden unto Christ
(according to the power of flesh and blood) to accomplish so much in himself,
and to be the only Captain of so signal a victory?

Christ himself, Christ according to his humanity, descended of David.
who alone here upon earth did open heaven, is this key of David; according to
his humanity, desce^ding from the honorable and royal stock of David. A key
very weighty to weak sense, marvelous burthenous to the devil, a great load to
the Gentiles, and of infinite poise to the perfidious Jews.

Christ truly is that key, The Cross of Christ the handle or hold of this
keye.
and the hold fast or handle to this keye, was his glorious Cross made.
Because thereon he would open the adamantine gates of heaven. Wherefore,
speaking of himself, he said. Oportes exaltari filium hominis: John. 3. 14.
15.
vt omnis qui credit in ipso, non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam. So must
the son of man be lift up: That whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

Before the death of Christ, through the lack of this key handle the Cross
(which with disgrace) he afterward bare, for our honor and eternal salvation)
heaven was continually shut up, Til Christ suffered on the Cross, heaven was
continually locked up before.
by reason of the ancient enmity between God and man. Whereupon, every one, and
very justly too, should (whether he would or no) have descended into the dark
dungeon of the infernal parts. But no sooner was the key, Christ, fastened to
the handle of his Cross, but immediately heaven opened. The sign of heavens
present opening.
And, as a sign of the then present opening, at the very same hour that
Christ dyed, he said to the good thief: Hodie mecum eris in paradiso: This day
thou shall be with me in paradise. Luke 23 43.


Many would gladly have entered Paradise before, Before christ's death many
sought to enter paradise, but could not.
but they cold never compass it, because this key was wanting to them.
Whereupon, in regard the gate was adamantine, impearceable, or else very
strictly shut up: they desired, either that the walls of heaven might be
broken, or that he would descend to them upon earth: Vtinam dirumperes coelos,
Esaias. 64. 2.
and descenderes. Oh that thou would break the heavens, and come down. Or
that he would send the Lamb, which might appease the Godheades displeasure,
that peace being obtained, Esaias. 16. 1.
heaven might be opened. Emitte Agnum Domine dominatorem terrae. Gods sending
of the key.
Stay a little while, says God, and then I will quickly send you the key.
Esaias. 22. 22.
Dabo clauem domus David super humerum eius, and aperiet, and non erit qui
claudat. So shall you enter in at the door as friends, and not climb over the
walls like thieves.


Claudio. But wherefore is Christ called the key of David, if David never gave
him any key?


Lodouico. Do you not know (my Lord) that the fortresses, An excellent
comparion for proof of the key.
placed at our utmost confines, are commonly called the keys of this kingdom,
because they are seated in the beginning of the dominion. And they being
surprised, the whole kingdom is easily taken, either by besieging, or by
strength of arms, because they are the original, How Christ is called the key
of David.
doors and keys of the kingdom? So Christ is called the key of David, because
he is the original of David, as concerning his divinity, Romans 1. 3.
yet desce^deth of David, according to his humanity: Ex semine David secundum
carnem: Of the seed of David, according to the flesh.

And even (as with a key) is shut and made fast the door of a house: Comparion
of a key that locks the door of an house.
So, no one of the Prophets, being locked up never so fast, opens better to our
understanding, and reueales the mystery of the incarnation, like unto David; To
whom god (by an oath) promised the Messiah. Iurauit Dominus David veritatem,
Psalm. 132. 11.
and non frustrabitur eum; De fructu ventris tui ponam super sedem tua^. The
Lord has sworn in truth unto David, and he will not shrink from it: Of the
fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

Before the eternal father sent this key into the world, 1. The gate of heaven.
and long ere the Jews prepared the Cross, John. 3. 13.
all the gates whatsoever were fast locked up. That of heaven: Nemo ascendit in
coelum, nisi qui descendit de coelo. No man ascends up to heaven, but he that
has descended from heaven.

That of terrestrial Paradise, 2. The gate of terrestrial Paradise.
kept by the Angel with a fiery sword: Collocauit ante paradisum voluptatis
Cherubim, and flammeum gladium atque versatilem, Genesis 3. 24.
ad custodiendam viam ligni vitae. At the East Side of the Garden of Eden, he
set the Cherubims, and the blade of a sword shaken to keep the way of the tree
of life.

That of divine mysteries; 2. Cor. 10. 11.
Omnia in figura contingebant illis: Al these things came unto them for
examples. 3. The gate of heavenly mysteries.


That of the sense of sacred scripture: Quomodo possum intelligere nisi aliquis
ostenderit mihi? Acts. 8. 31.
How can I understand, except I had a guide? 4. The gate of holy scripture


That of the maruails of God: Non intellexerunt opera Domini: They understood
not the works of the Lord. 5. The gate of gods maruels.


That of the Prophets mouths: Psalm. 28. 5.
Ah. Ah. Ah. Domine ecce necscio loqui. 6. The gate of the Prophets mouths.
Ah. Ah. Ah. Lord I cannot speak. Domine labia mea aperies: Open thou, O Lord,
my lips. Et ecce erts tacens, and non poteris loqui: And behold thou shall be
dumb, and not able to speak.

That of the Tabernacle with the veil: Ierem. 1. 6.
Prima die mensis primi, eriges tabernaculum testimonij. Psalm. 51. 15.
Et pones in eo arcam, Luke. 1. 20.
dimittesque ante illam velum. 7. The gate of the Tabernacle.
The first day of the first month, thou shall set up the Tabernacle, called
the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And thou shall put therein the Arc of the
Testimony, and cover the Arc with the veil. Exodus 40. 2.


But Christ being come, How all these gates opened at the coming of Christ.
and the key handle of his Cross fastened to him; even like the opening of a
lock, so were all things presently opened and dissolved.

Forthwith rent in two parts the veil of the Temple: 1. The temple.
Velum templi scissum est in duas parts, a summo vsque deorsum. Math. 27. 51.
And hehold the veil of the Temple rent in twane, from the top to the bottom.

The Prophets mouths opened: 2. The Prophets mouths.
Apertum est illico os Zachariae, and Prophetauit. And his mouth was opened
immediately, and he prophesied. Luke. 1. 64.


The scriptures were opened and declared: 3. The scriptures.
Tunc aperuit illis sensu^, vt intelligerent scripturas: Then opened he their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. Luke. 24. 45.


Christ's side opened: 4. Christ's side.
Lancea latus eius aperuit: A spear opened his side. John. 19. 34.


The graves and monuments opened: 5. The Graves.
Et monumenta aperta sunt: And the graves opened themselves. Math. 27. 52.


Their eyes were opened: 6. Their eyes.
Aperti sunt oculi eorum. Luke 24. 31.


Heaven it self opened: 7. Heaven opened.
Apertum est coelum.

Yea, the mouths of men and women were opened, every one spoke. 8. Of men and
women the mouths opened.


The blessed virgin Mary spoke, and sung with a cheerful voice: Magnificat
anima mea Dominum: My soul magnifieth the Lord. 9. The virgin Mary.


The simple sheepheards spoke: Pastores loquebantur ad inuicem: The Sheepheards
said one to another, Luke. 1. 40.
etc.

The wise men spoke: Luke. 2. 15.
Vbi est qui natus est rex Iudaeoru^? Where is the king of the Jews that
isborne? 10. The sheepheards.


The rude and unskillful Apostles, 11. The wise men.
who scantly before knew the characters of the Hebrew tongue, became such
perfect Orators, as no one could go beyond them in all kind of languages: Mat.
2. 2.
Loquebantur varijs linguis Apostoli. 12. The Apostles.


And S. John, Acts. 2. 4.
who before was accounted as ignorant; Nescitis quid petatis, spoke then so
loud, as that great doctor of the church S. Augustine, could not imagine how to
understand the true sense of his high words: Quid autem Sacramenti haberet,
verbum caro factum est, nec suspicari quidem poterat.

This key opened the eyes to the blind, The general benefit received by this
key.
the ears to the deaffe, the tongues to the dumb, the understanding to the
simple, and heaven to the just.

When the handle of the Cross was fastened to this keye, The greatness of this
key.
it grew so great, as then it could not be carried but upon the shoulders: Psalm.
129. 3.
Supra dorsum meum fabricauerunt peccatores: The plowers plowed upon my back.
Yea, it became so weighty, as it needed the help of Simon Sirenus.

And because this key is carried by some, as tied to their girdles, or about
their necks, Concerning the carriage of this key by me^ now a days.
or in their pockets, as your Lordship has already said: Let me tell you that
they are such kind of men, as will not know the weightinesse of the law of
christ: but rather do adorn themselves with it, as if it were with a key of
gould, thinking it enough to gloryfie themselves, with the very bare name of
being Christians.

Others do bear it about in their pockets, Of pocketprofessors, fearful
cowards.
and they are such weak faint hearted cowards, as fear in presence of the
Churches enemies, to be known for true christians and servants to their Master.
Hereupon, they hide this key so much as they can, never showing any sign of
christianity at al. Therefore did David desire this key, and with it, that God
would open his lips, least otherwise he should break silence, even according as
it opened the Apostles mouths; Dabo vobis os and sapientiam. Luke. 21. 14.


And before he had this key, Psalm. 38. 13.
he lamented that he was dumb: Ego autem tanquam surdus non audiebam, and
sicut mutus non aperiens os suum: I as a deaffe man heard not, and as a dumb
man which opens not his mouth. Then with a devout heart, he prayed the Lord to
open his lips; Domine labia mea aperies: And God instantly opened it, Psalm.
51. 15.
when he said; Psalm. 81. 10.
Dilata os tuum, and implebo illud. It was opened and filled with the heavenly
spirit. Psalm. 119. 131.
Os meum aperui, and attraxi spiritum, quia mandata a tua desiderabam: I opened
my mouth and panted, because I loved thy commandments. And this came to him
with such a gladness and spiritual rejoicing, David's rejoicing for this key.
as all his life time afterward, he did nothing but sing sweet Songs, whereon
he vaunted to his friends, Psalm 40. 3.
Et immisit in os meum canticum nouum, carmen Deo nostro: And he has put in my
mouth a new Song of praise unto our God.


Claudio. How is it possible to put words into the mouth? What, Concerning
words put into the mouth.
do you count them like to received morselles? But admit they may be cramd into
the mouth, had it not as well sufficed, if the Lord had said to David; Open thy
mouth, as to say Enlarge thy mouth? A great morsel is required for the mouth,
if it must needs be enlarged so wide.


Lodouico. Have you never heard in disputation, Comparison of a Master speaking
to his Scholars, very aptly alluded.
that the Master (to supply the ignorance and weakness of his Scholar) in
commanding him to open his understanding, winnes occasion thereby to have
himself answered? In such a case we use to say, that the master puts the words
into his scholars mouth. So the lord commanding our understanding to open, and
illuminating the will, administers the words thereby, and gives occasion of
speaking woorthily without error. Psalm. 144. 7.
Which made him say to David; Intellectum tibi dabo. Luke. 21. 14. 15
And to the Apostles he said. Ponite in cordibus vestris no^ praemeditari que^
admodum respondeatis. Ego enim dabo vobis os, and sapie^tiam, cui non poterunt
resistere omnes aduersarii vestri. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, that ye
premeditate not what ye shall answer. For I will give you a mouth, and
wisdom, where against all your adversaries shall not be able to speak, nor
resist: this is called the putting of words into the mouth.


Claudio. But what say you then, to the so wide opening or enlarging of the
mouth: because that Dilatare, idem est quod multum latare: in regard some great
morsel was to be put into the mouth?


Lodouico. To speak uprightly; Caietanus his interpretation of Dilata os tuum.
Dilata os tuum and implebo, according to the interpretation of the reverend
and learn Caietanus, imports thus much. Ask what thou will, that I may give
it thee. Is not this a morsel beyond comparison? And David, knowing the
greatness of the Godhead, would ask nothing of little moment, but even a
matter most great and important, answerable to the majesty of him, of whom he
was to require it. Whereupon he said. Miserere mei Deus, Psalm. 51. 1.
secundum magnam misericordiam tuam. Have mercy upon me O God, according to the
multitude of thy mercies.

Implying thus much on David's behalf, The implication of David's words by the
Author, concerning what our requests ought be to God.
and even as if he had thus minded to say. Lord, I have required of thee, that
thou would open my lips. Thou have (I thank thee) opened them, and in the
opening, have further said unto me; Open thy mouth also, and demand of me
whatsoever thou will. I being a sinner, and (in some measure) considerate of
the infinite power and majesty of thy person: will require no children of
thee, as Sara and Abraham did: Nor food to eat, like the murmuring Hebrew
people in the desert: Nor death, as Elias did under the Juniper tree: Nor long
life, with Haman of Siro: Nor the reward of good labor, as Peter did: Nor a
temporal kingdom, like unto James and John. But I desire a thing
correspondent to thine own greatness, to wit, that thou would give me thy
grace, pardon me my sins, cancel my foul abusings of thee, forget my
weaknesses, and take compassion on my miseries, even according to the
immeasurable bounty of thy mercies. This I ask, this I desire, and this (with
all my heart) most humbly I sue for: Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam
misericordiam tuam.

In this manner also ought we to open our lips, The same f^ormand order to be
observed by us in our petitions.
because such a request is highly pleasing to God, and without any peril of
breaking silence. Let us pray then unto the Lord, that he would open our
vnstanding, move the will, guide our tongue, and rule our lips in speaking
rightly: to ask nothing else, but what may be to gods glory, our own souls
health, and our neighbors benefit. Domine labia mea aperies. Let us heartily
pray unto him, to give us such things, as are answerable to his high
magnificence, agreeable to his glorious majesty: And not things worldly or
momentary, because in such requests, we should offer high prejudice, and wrong
to his wondrous bounty.


Claudio. Let me tell you, Example of Perillus request made to Alexander.
my good Lord, that if magnanimous and great persons, have given more liberal
gifts then have been asked of them: by how much god exceeds them in power
and omnipotency, by so much the more ought our petitions to be answerable in
conformity.

Perillus, a friend to Alexander the great, required money of him toward the
marriage of his daughter, and Alexander gave him fifty talents. But Perillus
dutifully made refusal of them, delivering acceptance but of ten talents
only, and answered; That they only were sufficient for him; whereto Alexander
replied: Ten may be sufficient for thee to ask, but not enough for Alexander
to give. If Alexander had such bounty and largess in him, The example alluded.
being but dust and ashes: how much more, in liberality, will the greatest god
enlarge his graces, to his sons and servants?


Lodouico. Why then, even in as sound reason, as god said unto David; Dilata os
tuum, and implebo illud: may we in humility pray unto him; That he would
purify our unclean lips, and purge our hearts of wicked thoughts and al
unmeet desires, that no vain cogitations may be there contrived, nor
hurtful speeches from our mouths delivered.


Finis Cap. 22.
The Argument.
That abundance of words (without wisdom) is not called eloquence, but
loquacity or babbling. Therefore our words ought first to be brought to the file,
ere to the tongue, to avoid the error of our folly in speaking. Therefore we
should pray unto the Lord, that it would please him to open our mouths, and
fill them with the holy spirit of wisdom, using every morning duly, some
especial godly prayer, meet for such a purpose. And because Intus existens
Prohibet extraneum; we cannot be capable of the blessed spirit, except we first
euacuate our own proper spirit, which is the occasion of infinite defects. We
must know, that there are not so many letters in the Alphabet, as are the
errors hourly committed by the tongue, that is not skild rightly in speaking
of God. Herein likewise is declared, what that race or stock is, whereof the
wise man speaks, who have in steed of teeth sharp swoords. Also, what
wisdom is, according to the Philosophers, Peripatetikes, Stoickes and
Divines, with many other memorable matters beside.

Chap. 23.
CLAVDIO. An excellent prayer is that used by the Church, entreating the
eternal father, that he would send his holy spirit, to purify our hearts, to
the end, that we may worthily love and praise him. And this ought we every
morning (rising out of our beds) to use, for passage of the whole day after,
without stain of sin, which is ouer-easie to be committed by the unprepared
heart and slippery tongue. An excellent collect or prayer observed by the
Church for our instruction.
Deus, cui omne cor patet, and omnis voluntas loquitur, and quem nullum latet
secretum: Purifica, per infusionem Spiritus sancti, corda nostra, vt te
perfect diligere, and digne laudare mereamus. Amen. O God to whom al hearts
are open, al desires known, and from whom no secrets can be concealed: Cleanse
the thoughts of our hearts, by the inspiration of the holy ghost, that we may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thee. Amen.


Lodouico. A notable prayer, Cleansing of our hearts, purifying of our minds,
and sanctifying of our words.
and very meet, to entreat of God the cleansing of our hearts, the purity of
our minds, and sanctification of our words: to the end, that we in speaking
might not break silence, but rather that God may do it the^ we, in speaking by
the organe of our tongue. Wherefore Churchmen, in the beginning of their
service both morning and evening, do desire the Lord to deigne and vouchsafe
the opening of their lips, and sanctifying of their words: Psalm. 51. 16.
Domine labia mea aperies, and os meum annuntiabit laudem tuam. And adioyne
thereto immediately following, as calling for the divine assistance, without
which, no good action can be performed: Deus in adiutorium meum intend, Domine
ad adiuuandum me festina.


Claudio. Let us pray then to the blessed spirit, Without gods assistance, all
our prayers are frivolous.
that he would open our lips, to the end our prayers may be acceptable to
God: because without him, all our speeches do break silence, and our prayers
are ungracious, and not worthy to enter his divine ears, according as the
Church observes: Sine quo cassae creduntur preces, and indignae Deiauribus.


Lodouico. The Organe will never sound, Comparion of the sounding Organe, and
application thereof.
if the register be shut, but the register being opened, whereat the wind
enters and touches the keys, the Organe forthwith sounds. So let us open
the register of the will, and we shall find no hindrance to the wind of the
holy ghost, but presently the sound of our words will be heard, even like a
most sweet song, and acceptable to god. Whereon that happy and cheerful
aduenturous soul, spoke in such wise, to make way for the hearing of her
beloueds voice: Cant. 2. 14.
Sonet vox tua in auribus meis, vox enim tua dulcis: Let me hear thy voice,
for thy voice is sweet.


Claudio. I cannot but allow of your counsel, Of the just man.
therefore of the just man it is written in Ecclesiasticus. Eccle. 15. 5. 6.
In medio Ecclesiae aperiet os eius, and implebit eum Dominus spiritu
sapientiae and intellectus, and stolae gloriae vestiet illum. Iucunditatem, and
exaltationem the saurizabit super illum, and nomine aeterno haereditabit illum.
In the mids of the congregation shall she open his mouth, with the spirit of
wisdom and understanding shall she fill him, and cloth him with the garment
of glory. She shall cause him to inherit joy, and the crown of gladness,
and an everlasting name.

It behooues him to open his mouth, He must desire, that would obtain.
that will have such a sacred morsel, and he must first request, that is
desirous to receive. Therefore let us give attendaunce upon God, that he may
open our mouths, and then to beg humbly of him what we would have; not
because he is ignorant of our necessityes, but for the exercise of our
humility.


Lodouico. Into a mouth fast closed, Sentence.
there can no food enter.


Claudio. He that will give, The duty of giuers and receivers, in giving and
receiving.
and he that will receive, must of necessity open both their hands, the one to
give, the other to receive. If he that gives, does not open his hand, he that
would receive shall find just nothing. And in like manner, if he that
receives, do keep his hand close, in vain does he open that offers to give
him. If god would bestow his grace upon us, and we keep our hearts shut up by
sin, in vain does he bestow that labor. And if we desire god with open
mouth, to grant us his grace, and god find reason to the contrary, our time
spent in asking is to no purpose. It behooves therefore, that both the one and
other, the giver and receiver, and the receiver and giver, should both of them
open their hands.

Let us open our mouths, How christ opened his mouth.
that god may open his hand, to make us partakers of his heavenly favors.
Christ opened his mouth; Aperiens Jesus os suum: but it was to give. The
Apostles opened their mouths, but it was to receive. Mat. 5. 2.
Aperiens Petrus os suum: Peter opened his mouth. Acts. 10 34.
Os nostrum patet ad vos o Corinthii; 2. Cor. 6. 11.
O Corrinthians, Act. 8. 35.
our mouth is open unto you. Aperiens autem Philippus os suum; Then Philip
opened his mouth. A^t. 2. 4.
Et repleti sunt omnes spiritu sancto; And they were all filled with the holy
ghost.

Christ opened his mouth, Christ opened his mouth to teach, and the Apostles to
learn.
but to teach: Docebat eos. The Apostles also opened their mouths, but to
learn: Repleti sunt omnes spiritu sancto, and caeperunt lo qui vartis linguis,
And they began to speak with other tongues. They were filled with the spirit,
because Christ in opening his mouth, Math. 5. 2.
breathed the holy spirit upon them. Act. 2, 4.
Et insuffla^it in eos, John. 20. 22.
and dixit eis, Accipite spiritum sanctum: He breathed on them, and said unto
them; Receive the holy Ghost. The same likewise does he confirm to every just
man: In medio ecclesiae aperiet os eius, and implebit illum Dominus spiritu
sapientiae, and intellectus, etc.

Often times on the Sea shoares, Example of fish shelles found on the Sea
shoares, and applied to the just man.
are found certain fish shelles, which at the rising of the Sun in the East,
do open of themselves, having a kind of celestial licquor congealed within
them, which proves to be pearls and precious stones. Every just man may be
termed this fish shell, left on the spacious shore of this travailing world,
but yet shut fast together, as sequestered from the wicked and ungodly: At the
rising of Christ (the true Son of this whole universe) in the heaven of his
comforted soul, he will open by obedience, and he having filled with the
licquor of eternal wisdom, shall afterward make him to be like to the
precious Margarite, shining in the fair palace of the militant Church. But
then last of all, he shall glister much more brightly, in the heavenly Court
of never ceasing glory; Et stola gloriae vestiet illum.


Lodouico. If the Lord shall thus fill him with his spirit, He whom god filles
with his spirit, must first be emptied of his own.
it behooves, that he be first quite empty of his own spirit. Because, when
a vessel is full of one licquor, it is not capable of receiving an other. For,
as the Philosopher says; Intus existens prohibet extraneum, and an other juice
being to be put in, the other must be first euacuated.


Claudio. Most certain is it, that the just man first expels his own
spirit, and then the Lord fills him with his divine spirit. This does David
affirm in one of his Psalms, Psalm. 104. 29, 30.
when he says. Auferes spiritum eorum, and deficient, and in puluerem suum
reuertentur. Emitte spiritum tuum, and creabuntur, and renouabis faciemterrae.
If thou take away their breath, they die and return to their dust. Again, if
thou send forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renewest the face of
the earth.

As if he would have said. The Authors applying of the words.
Lord, if thou take away their spirit, they shall want their own ability: but
by increasing thine in them, they shall find, that they were but dust and
ashes. Because, by grace thou have euacuated their proper will, singular sense,
and private affection, which gives them now to know both their own frailty,
and how much they were subjected to misery. But, by sending thy sanctified
spirit into them, thou have created a new man within them, formed according to
thine own divine will. Ephe. 4. 24.
Induimini nouum hominem, qui secundum Deum creatus est in iustitia, and
sanctitate veritatis. Put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness, and true holiness.

The just man, Of the just man, he being filled with the holy spirit.
being filled with this spirit, speaks holy words, delivers heavenly
doctrine, frames arguments of truth, and grounded altogether upon gods word.
Eructauit cor meum verbum bonum; Psalm. 45. 2.
My heart will utter forth a good matter. And as a glass being full, A glass
full of water compared to the just man, in doing good to others.
with a very little turning aside, does empty some part of the licquor
contained in it: Even so the just man, with the least breath of an ardent sigh,
sendes forth part of his grace received, unto us, making us partakers of his
inward blessings: and so by the virtue of his good spirit, he purges and
dries up the watrishnesse of our sin, so much as in him lies.


Lodouico. How can this doctrine hold? If wind be of a cold and moiste
quality, then it has no drying virtue, if we do press it according to the
letter. I speak not this to gainsay you, but rather to learn.


Claudio. Aristotle the Prince of the Peripatecians, Arist. in Prob. 27. part.
5.
in his twenty seventh Problem, and fifth particle, going about to search, by
what occasion the wind, being of quality cold and moiste, has yet
notwithstanding a drying virtue, answers him self thus. Because it takes away
and euaporates the part more cold. Of the nature of the wind.
As if he would say. The wind is of a temperate coldness and humiditie,
therefore it makes the part more cold and moiste to euaporate it self, as
meaning thereby mudde and water.

The holy ghost is called a spirit, Of the holy ghost.
and wind: Tanquam spiritus vehem^^tis: Act. 2. 2.
As of a rushing and mighty wind. Veni Auster, perfla hortum meum, Cant. 4. 16.
and fluent aromata illius: Arise O North, and come O South, and blow on my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow out^ because it cools the heat of
carnal concupiscences. Therefore the Angel speaking of this spirit to the
virgin Marie, Luke 1. 35.
said. Spiritus sanctus superveniet in te, and virtus altissimi obumbrabit
tibi. The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
^uershadow thee.

This shadowing is expounded by almost all the doctors, How the word shadowing
is expounded by the Doctors.
that it signifies, The taking away of all lascivious or carnal affections,
and purges every loose concupiscence. When therefore the holy spirit blows
on the mind of him, that listens to the word of God, it causes to euaporate
and vanish (by his expulsive virtue) the excessive coldenesse of sin, which
is of such chillness, as it freezeth up the heat of all charity. So
euacuating this cold, it disposes the soul to quietness, and to lend
attention to the holy doctrine of Christ.

For Saint John Chrysostom says, An excellent saying of S. John Chrysostom.
That, as it is not possible for the earth to fructify by water only, without
wind: Even so as impossible is it, that the Doctrine of the just, (which is as
the water celestial, and they like pregnant clouds; Esaias. 60. 8.
Qui sunt isti, qui vt nubes volant? What are these, that fly like a cloud)
that they (I say) should cause any fruit to grow in the ground of our souls,
without the sweet breathing wind of the holy ghost; which of it self
disposes men's hearts to the hearing of gods word, and makes them to bloome
forth, after the manner of the earth. Mantuan.
Even as when Zephirus sends his kindly blastes abroad in the month of March,
according to the Poet Mantuans description.

The just man therefore opens his mouth, in the mids of the people, and the
Lord fills it with the divine spirit of wisdom, and from hence proceed
infinite good fruits, The Apostle Peter's first Sermon.
to the souls of his hearers. According as from the Apostle Peter it did, who
at the very first Sermon he made, converted to the faith of Jesus Christ, three
thousand persons, Act. 2. 41.
or thereabout, as is to be read in the Acts of the Apostles, the second
Chapter.


Lodouico. Yet by your license (my Lord) it is necessary for us to know, what
wisdom is: so much the rather, because, according to the Prince of Latin
Oratorie, Wisdom is required in an Orator, according to Tully.
It is most expedient in an Orator, who without wisdom, is termed ignorant,
and his full tide of speech is called loquacity, not eloquence. Whereupon,
being once demanded, what eloquence was, he answered: Nihil est aliud
eloquentia, nisi copiose loquens sapientia.


Claudio. Job makes a long discourse of wisdom, Jobs discourse concerning
wisdom.
searching where it should be, and what it was. Finally, after a long
repetition of sententious words, and a very large inuestigation of them, he
concludes. That God only knows what it is. And he revealing the same unto
man, says; That wisdom is nothing else, but the fear of the Lord. Job. 28.
28.
Et dixit homini: Ecce timor Domini, ipsa est sapientia, and recedere a malo,
intelligentia. And unto man he said: Behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom,
and to depart from evil is vnde standing. Psalm. 111. 10
And David says: Initium sapientiae timor Domini: The beginning of wisdom,
is the fear of the Lord.

The Peripatecians used to say. The Peripatecians deAristo. in lib. Eth. 6.
Cap. 6. and Metap. lib. 1. Cap. 5.
That wisdom is an intellectual virtue, and, by the highest and most noble
causes, makes things to be known. Whereupon, in the sixth book of Ethickes,
the sixth Chapter, and in the first of Metaphysickes, the first Chapter,
defyning a wise man, Aristotle says. Sapiens est qui scit omnia difficilia
propter certitudinem and causam; ipsum scire propter se quaerens, and alios
ordinans, and persuadens. And a little after he says; That the wise man ought
to be known, not only by the cause, but also by the highness of the the
cause.

According to the Stoickes, The Stoickes definition of wisdom.
and moral Philosophers, such perhaps as were Seneca, Socrates and Boethius:
wisdom is taken for none other, But a mass or a heap of moral virtues,
which make a man to be virtuous. Therefore according to this kind of wisdom,
Seneca says in his book of the tranquillity of the mind; That to a wise man
there can happen no injury or offense at all, Seneca de tranqu. anim.
to molest the felicity of his mind, which (in the Stoics opinion) ought to
be imperturbable, and his heart adamantine.

But according to the sacred Theologians or divines, The divines, concerning
wisdom.
Wisdom is a gift supernaturally infused, whereby a man has cognition of
divine things, and of humane, by divine and spiritual inspiration, or by some
especial gracious vicinity to God. The innocent man nearest to God.
And because there is none more nearer unto God, then the innocent man, so
clean (as possible he may be) from the foul stains of sin, who (by such
innocence) is made apt to understand the secrets divine: therefore said Job,
that wisdom is nothing else, but the fear of God, and the cancelling of
sin: but yet inchoatiue, as David says, Initium sapientiae timor domini.


Lodouico. Let us then cheerfully open our mouths, and desire of God, that he
would fill them with this spirit of wisdom, so necessary to our own souls
health, and the good of our neighbor.


Claudio. He that partaketh not with this spirit, Of him that partaketh not
with the spirit of wisdom.
his tongue is like a sharp sword, his lips as offensive weapons, his teeth
are like arrows, his mouth a most noisome sepulcher, his palate full of
maledictions, his heart of deceipts, and his words are enuenomed darts. Hence
grew David's speeches, that they never ceased from speaking evil. Psalm. 9. 7.
8.
Dixit enim in cord suo: Non mouebor a generatione in generationem, sine malo.
Cuius maledictione os plenum est, and amaritudine and dolo: sub lingua eius
labor and dolor. He says in his heart: I shall never be moved, nor be in
danger. His mouth is full of cursing, and deceit, and fraud; under his
tongue is mischief and iniquity.


Lodouico. Perhaps such as these, Prouer. 30. 14.
are they, of whose stirpe, Solomon speaking in his Proverbs, says: Est
generatio, quae pro dent ibus gladios habet. There is a generation, whose teeth
are as swoordes. The wicked tongue compared to a sword.
Because the wicked tongue, is after the manner of a sword, always cutting.
It cuttes our neighbors good fame, diuides, separates and tears in pieces the
honor of others. Whereof the divine Musition speaking, agrees almost with
Solomon his son. Filii hominum, dentes eorum arma and sagitiae, and lingua
eorum gladius acutus. Psalm. 57. 4.
The children of men whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a
sharp sword.

As if he would have said, The Authors application, by the interpretation of
Caietanus.
according to the interpretation of Caietanus. Such are the sons of Adam, who
have their teeth like lances, which are wont to offend near at hand, and as
arrows, to wound afar off, and their tongue is a sharp sword, to do harm
on all aduauntages. And needs must it be so, because the tongue that is not
guided by God, and the mouth not opened by the Lords own hand: can pronounce
nothing but blasphemies and cursings, even like unto an infernal tongue,
directed by the devil.

Therefore, How the wicked tongue co^mits deadly sin, in several manner, well
worth the consideration
look howsoever it speaks, it cannot but commit mortal sin. Sometime by
false imposition of infamy. Sometime by vaunting of a vile act performed,
which (notwithstanding) he never did. Sometime by making large addition to
other men's offenses, and converting a small stick, to a huge big beam.
Sometime in revealing (contrary to charity) other men's hidden infirmities, to
make our poor neighbor infamous among many. The common behavior of too many
now adays.
Sometime by perverting others intentions, judging sinisterly of men's hearts;
calling fasting, covetousness; praying, hypocrisy, and all other good actions
whatsoever, thinking them to be done to evil purpose.

Sometime in denying the truth, when being demanded, concerning other men's
good deeds: we answer slanderously of them, to the end that no good account
may be made of them. Sometime in concealing the good of others, wherewith,
though we be truly acquainted: yet we continue silent, being asked: only
because that those goods should never be known of, nor any success to the
right owner ensue by them. This cruel silence, Gilbertus Porre tanus calls
pilling, polling or extortion. Grauis rapacitas, cum veram alterius gloriam,
etsi mendacio non corrumpis, silentio praeteris, Liu^r enim excellentiam
propriam se^per cogitans, alienam obscurat.

Sometime in composing infamous lines, The tricks of knauish Critticks, on
Stages, or else where.
verses or songs upon other men's concealed sins, or speaking like an impostor
on them. Sometime in reporting others disgraces for a truth, being only but
suspected, and never in any force, yet this is done either for hate or envy.
Sometime in showing truly the defectes of others, Hypocritical seekers of
conformity.
and accusing them thereof; yet not for any zeal to justice, nor because
(being corrected) they might be amended, or to any other virtuous end: but only
in mere hatred, and to make them generally received for infamous. Sometime by
showing (very joyfully) and recounting in the height of pleasure, the errors of
other men: only to make but floutes and scorns of them.

Sometime in giving commendation, Trencher flies, and parasiticall table
talkers.
that others defamations should be blazed abroad, and taking great delight in
the publication of them, inuiting others to give them attention. Sometime in
blaspheming and detracting the honor dyuine: with an hundred, nay, a thousand
other ennormous offenses.

Nor are there so many letters in the Alphabet, Not so many letters in the
Alphabet, as abuses in the tongue.
as the tongue daily delivers abuses, in diverse and sundry kinds of sinning,
and yet no account at all is made thereof. God therefore (of his goodness)
always open our mouths, to the end we may not in such grievous manner, offend
thereby both him and our neighbor.


Claudio. The greater part of the world (we see) do run into these defects
of the tongue. A very good advise.
But if first of all, they would consider on their own words, ere they spoke
them, and poize them before in the balance of justice, they would not fall
into so many offenses.


Lodouico. As a remedy for this great defect, we ought to follow the
counsel, S. Ieromes counsel, for ordering of our words.
which the great doctor of the Church Saint Jerome gives us: Prius ad limam
quam ad linguam verba veniant: as if he would have said. If a man before he
speak, would conduce the words which he has to utter, first to the file or
touch, ere to the tongue, as considering whether they were worthy or no, to
come forth of his breast, whether they be to the dishonor of god, or
unchristian prejudice of our neighbor: no error at all should be committed.
Because all those speeches which may otherwise prove superfluous, would thus be
abated, and our words would be much more corrected and adorned.

Now in regard that our weakness is very great, How great our imbecility and
weakness is, without gods assistance.
and (without the divine assistance) all humane diligence is merely but in
vain: let us do as we have already said, the blessed Apostles did, that is,
Let us retire into the secret closet of our hearts, and desire the Lord, to send
us his sanctified Spirit: which puryfying the heart, examining the thoughts,
ruling the tongue, moving the lips, and procuring passage of our words, all
will be well; Otherwise, never can the tongue pronounce one only word, except
the heart be first made clean.

For Saint Paul the Apostle says, We are not able to think one good thought.
that without the divine help, we cannot so much as think one good thought,
of our selves. Non quod sufficientes simus cogitare aliquid a nobis, quasi ex
nobis, sed sufficientia nostra ex Deo est. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves:
but our sufficiency is of God.

It behooves therefore, God first speaking to our hearts, our speaking will be
the better.
that God do first of all speak in our hearts, and then we may afterward
speak the better to others. Not of our own proper will, or after our own
peculiar conceit; but as learning of that, first spoken by God him self in
our hearts. So shall it not be we, that speak, but God, who speaks by our
means, and so shall we be sure not to break silence. Math. 10. 20.
Non enim vos estis qui loquimini, sed spiritus patris vestri qui loquitur in
vobis. For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father which
speaks in you.

This is that whereof God spoke by the Prophet Ose, Ose. 2. 14.
speaking to our soul: Ducam illam in solitudinem, and loquar ad cor eius: I
will bring her into the wilderness and speak unto her heart. The application
of the Prophets words by the Author, to exceeding good purpose.
As if God would have said to the soul of a devout christian; To the end that
the soul of my dear and devout son, may not err in talking, nor scandalize
the conne^sation of others: I will lead her into the secret desert of holy
contemplation, and there I will do her so much favor, as to reveal unto her
the secrets of mine own heart, speaking in a silent voice to her heart. But yet
in such sort, as when she her self by the sound of her voice would speak to
others, it shall not be of such mysteries, as she goes about thinking on, or
what words she shall use, nor of the things she is to speak of. Because I will
minister to her thoughts, and I will guide her words, speaking my self within
the secrets of her heart. Wherefore, she shall have nothing else to do, but
only to be a faithful deliverer of what I shall commit to her speaking.

This is the sending of his holy Angels, The holy Angels inspiring our souls.
to inspire our souls with what we have to do, and they may say to them, that
they speak to their hearts. Esaias. 60. 14.
Loquimini ad cor Jerusalem. He calls the soul Jerusalem, because she is made
a Citizen of the Sovereign Jerusalem. Even in like manner as the Preacher
uses to do, Comparison of the preachers words to his auditory.
when he terms his present hearers, by the name of the whole City, saying;
I speak to thee Room; I speak to thee Millaine; or I speak to thee London;
that is, I speak to you which are the inhabitants of Room, or to you
Romans, Londoners, etc.


Claudio. A very special favor is this, Gods great favor in speaking to the
heart.
which God does unto man, in speaking to the heart, to avoid breach of
silence, by importunity of words. And most happy is that soul, to whom God
reuealeth his secrets divine, and governs his words, least he should err in
praying, by not failing in his speeches, nor stumbling in reproof of other
men's defects.


Finis Chap. 23.
The Argument.
From whence it ensues that man (being a creature so noble) yet
notwithstanding, he commits greater errors then any other creature
whatsoever. How God has given him many helps to preserve him from sin, and
particularly, the precept of brotherly correction, committed into the power of
the tongue. The necessity and excellency whereof is here discoursed on. And
that silence (in such a case) is proved great babbling, and a grievous sin,
because the tongue may be a safety to our neighbor. They also show the way
which we ought to observe, in correcting of our neighbor, as also the quality
of the precept it self, by approved sound doctrine, and testimonies of holy
Scripture.

Chap. 24.
LODOVICO. As God speaks unto the heart, thereby most highly manifesting his
divine secrets, to his esteemed sons servants, least they should err in
speaking, or else in any other humane action: Our duty of assisting one an
other by the tongues office.
Even ^o ought we also to assist one another, with the office of the tongue,
^or avoiding of such defects, as oftentimes we do fondly commit. Because
christian charity so requires, and he that di^igently imployes him self in
the duty of charity, resembles God him self, who seeks very many ways,
whereby to help man out of his sin. Whereupon it is said by Jeremy; Si
separaueris pretiosum a vili, Iere. 15. 1^.
quasi os meum eris: And if thou take away the precious from the vile, thou
shall be according to my word.

Even as if he had said. The Authors application of Ieremies words.
Man is by nature frail, apt to err, corrupt and led by giddy sense: but
thou, if by the keen sword of thy tongue, thou will seek to separate the
precious soul of thy neighbor from the vileness of sin, thou shall be like
unto me: Who to raise man out of misguidance, have laid aside honor, life,
and all other commodities whatsoever; and to me is given in liew thereof,
death, with mine own blood standing bound, to redeem him from the cruel
objected articles of sin and the devil.

Well shall it become us then, to labor duetifully for those means, whereby we
might resemble so great a majesty, and a beauty so exquisite, as (without any
like) that of god is. Of the help of our neighbor, and the reasons binding us
thereto.
As also for the help of our neighbor, we being equal brethren in christ,
descended of one stock, created by one and the same God, redeemed by one most
precious blood, nourished by the self same sacraments, and hoping for one and
the very same glory.

Admit you were travailing on the way with a friend of yours, Example of two
trauailers together on the way.
and perchance should meet with an enemy of his, who drawing forth his
weapon, attempts all the ways he can to wound him: Would not you lay hand to
your sword with your friend, and defend him to your uttermost?

Our neighbor is mainly assaulted by sin, The example alluded to our
neighbor.
the capital enemy that seeks the slaughter of his soul, while we are in
this miserable peregrination of this world together. We therefore, not to see
the death of our brother thus assailed by sin; ought to draw forth the sword
of the tongue; Lingua eorum gladius acutus, and (with him) help to drive his
adversary to flight, Many virtuous actions may be done by the tongue
striving to cure his trespasses, with humble reprehensions, and charitable
exhortations. Because, as there be many sins committed by the tongue, so
likewise are there as many virtuous actions thereby to be performed: in which
behalf, strict silence is a fault as heinous, as is idle, vain and needles
talking.


Claudio. If insensible creatures, The help the insensible creatures do yield
to one another.
by so admirable an order in nature, lend help one to another, and profit each
other in their kind, led only thereto by natural inclination. As the Sun
in most wondrous manner enlighteneth the Moon, the Stars and other Planets,
and she also clearing the ougly darkness of the night, giving an influence to
the earth, whereby it yields to us such copious bounty of precious fruits; The
fire purging the air; the air purifying the water; the water bathing and
fertiling the earth, and they (of all these gifts) are not scarce or sparing
to us. The gifts of god bestowed on man.
How much more then ought men, being adorned with understanding, beautyfied
with reason, ennobled with senses, and endued with discourse, be forward in
help, one to an other, especially in so weighty a case as sin is? which,
robbing us of grace, depriues us of glory, making us meet for hell, by taking
the blessed Angels comfort from us, and gives us in stead thereof, the company
of devils.

Therefore we ought to use all diligence, We ought to call for others aid, if
our own be not sufficient for our neighbor.
by being helpful in this kind, even to our uttermost: and if we find defect
in our own ability, to call for the more powerful assistance of others, who
may bind up compassionately his bleeding wounds, and set him on his own beast
in the ready way to heaven. All this we know truly to be our duty,
therefore I cannot but account it most maruailous, that man being the perfect
creature and only noble, as he for whose service all creatures else in the
world were created, and him self ordained for the divine fruition: yet
notwithstanding all this, he, more then any other creature, walks from the
intent of his end, and goes beyond them all in greatness of error.

It is not to be doubted, Man erreth beyond all other comparison.
but that the other creatures sometime do swerve, yet very sildome, casually,
or by some accident: but man erreth much more, beyond comparison, coming
ouer-short of his purposed period, and therefore has more need then any other
creature, of especial helping.


Lodouico. All strife is soon appeased, Sentence.
the occasion being considered: Other creatures are not composed as man is.
My reason is, that other creatures are not composed, as man is. Therefore
insensible and inanimate creatures, as are stones and such like, they have a
natural form, whereon attends a natural propension and inclination, ordained
for them by God and nature, and hereunto accordingly they always work, except
they be by some means hindered. From hence it ensues, that heavy things ever
move toward the center of the earth, Example of heavy and light things.
and light things usually ascend toward the concaue of the Monne, if they be
not violenced or impeached.

Brute beasts likewise them selves, Aristotle concerning brute beasts.
because they have their fantasy determinate to one thing, and by nature are
guided to their actions (according to Aristotle) therefore they cannot be said
to err. But man, endued at first with freedom of will, has not his fantasy
determined, but it is extended to many and almost infinite things. The will is
the handmaid of understanding.
For the will is the handmaide of our understanding, which can do al things,
either in the agent understanding, whose office Est omnia facere, or in the
possible understanding, whose nature Est omnia fieri.

Therefore the fantasy of man is also indetermined. The fantasy of man is
indeterminate.
And hence grows the cause of often erring, because our knowledge is by means
of the sense, which only gains cognition of things sensible and material.
Therefore have we little judgment in matters divine and immateriall: yet are
they the means to the invisible things, Roman. 1. 20.
as the Apostle says to the Romans. Inuisibilia enim ipsius, a creatura mundi
per ea quae facta sunt intellecta, conspiciuntur: sempiterna quoque cius
virtus, and diuinitas, ita vt sint inexcusabiles. For the iuuisible things of
him, that is his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the
world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be
without excuse. The reason of our affecting the world more then heaven.
Hereupon it comes to pass, that we draw nearer to the matters of this world,
then those of heaven, and fall into many infirmities, by the repugnancy which is
between the flesh and the spirit.


Claudio. The Angels have in themselves a prerogative of will, The will of the
Angels.
and therefore few of them do err, no, not the third part. But men do
altogether run astray, except they be powerfully assisted by the hand of
heaven, whereof the Prophet David bears true witness. Psalm. 14. 2. 3.
Deus de coelo prospexit super filios hominum, vt videat si est intelligens,
aut requirens Deum. And what found he? Omnes declinauerunt, simul mutiles facti
sunt, non est qui faciat bonum, non est vsque ad vnum. All are gone out of the
way, they are all corrupt, there is none that does good, no not one.


Lodouico. Let me answer you, that though the Angels are said to have liberty
of will, Man is composed of two contrary natures.
yet notwithstanding* being all spirits, they have not the repugnancy in sense,
according as man has: who is composed of two contrary natures, to weet,
sensible and intellectual, whence that continual repugnancy deriueth his
birth, and is the occasion of many errors, which the Angels do not commit, who
are simply of the intellectual nature. Nor fails thus the bruit beast
likewise, who has his fantasy determined^ neither the insensible creatures,
who have one sole form, and natural inclination. God nevertheless gave unto
man sufficient help, to serve as a supply to natures frailty.

To our first father Adam before his fall, he gave original justice, commerce
with the Angels, God gave Adam original justice, etc.
revealed knowledge, a perfect synderisis. and an hundred thousand helps beside.

To man (fallen into misery by natural corruption) to defend him from further
transgressions, To Adam being fallen, god gave the law natural, etc.
in the first world he gave him the law natural, an Angelical custody,
celestial visions, and the aid of civil conversation.

Afterward, The written law.
he gave the law written, divine precepts, promises of great rewards, the
speeches of Prophets, and the terror of pains.

Since then, The law Evangelical.
he gave the law Evangelical, the infinite benefits by the Words incarnation,
the Gospel preached, most mighty miracles, a precious death, a glorious
resurrection, Christ's victorious ascension, the mission of the holy Ghost, and
evangelical decrees.

Among which, Of brotherly correction.
one is that of brotherly correction, a most sacred precept to help man from
sinning. Math. 18. 15.
Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, vade, and corripe eum inter te and ipsum
solum: si te audierit, lucratus es Fratrem tuum. If thy brother trespass
against thee, go, and tell him his falt between thee and him alone: if he hear
thee, thou have won thy brother.

If then we may do so much good by the voice, What good may be don by
charitable correcting of our brother.
and by our speech: doubtless it cannot be but a great sin, in charity not to
reprove our brother, when in matter of less weight, we stick not sometime to
break silence, by wicked oaths, cursings and blasphemies.


Claudio. We have spoken sufficiently already, that to be silent, is much more
commendable then speech. But now we are also enforced to say, that to hold our
peace, is even as great an offense. Because not only it is the Lords precept,
How holding our peace is a great offense.
that in such a case we ought to speak; but likewise, then to be silent, may be
the occasion of ruinating the soul of an offending neighbor, and hazard our
own utter loss of heaven also.

Wherefore the holy Prophet Esaias lamented, Esa. 6. 5.
that he held his peace when he ought to have spoken: The cause why Esaias
complained of holding his peace.
vae mihi quia tacui. And the cause of his complaint was, that having seen the
Lord sit upon a throne in infinite majesty, adorned with the highest glory, the
year that Ozias king of Israel dyed by a sudden death: That he had not before,
(with a constant heart) reprehe^ded his sins, whereby he might have expected some
amendment of them. For he was the same king, that so boldly durst use the
Priests office, contrary both to the divine will, and the Priesthoods authority.

But the Lord being offended thereat, The justice of God upon the king, that
would needs go beyond his regal authority.
the king going to offer incense in the Sanctum Sanctorum, as the high Priest
was wont to do: he was smitten by the highest Majesty with a leprosy, in that
part of the forehead, where the high Priest used to wear a plate of fine gold.
For which heavy judgment so fallen upon the king, the Prophet cried, vae mihi
quia tacui.

As if he would have said. The Authors implication.
Woe is me, that I have held my peace, and not constantly rebuked the king in
his sin, which (happily) by correction he would have amended. Most wretched
am I, if (by my negligence) the king have lost eternal happiness, because the
Lord will demand, of me, the loss or safety of such a soul, And, Esaias. 6. 5.
which is worse; In medio populi polluta labia habentis, ego habito, and Regem
Dominum exercituu^ vidi oculis meis. I dwell in the mids of a people of
polluted lips, and mine eyes have seen the king and Lord of hoasts.

As adding thus. A lesson for such as little regard what is committed to their
charge.
Not only have I failed in admonishing the king, but I dwell among a flattering
people, who (with unclean lips) not only durst not adventure to reprove the
kings sins for fear; but rather soothed up and flattered him in evil. Whereby,
both Crown and Miter have hatched the more iniquities, nursed and cockringly
brought them up, and, (in reverence to the Prince) sinners have bin honourred,
and soft pillows laid under the elbowes of wickedness.

Whereon Saint Gregory says in his Pastorals: S. Greg. in Pasto.
Delinquentem namque eum redarguere nullus praesumit, and in exemplum culpa
vehementer extenditur, quando pro reuerentia ordinis peccator honoratur. Now
albeit many have murmured, none yet durst undertake the courage, personally to
reprehend sin between him and thee, or face to face: only through fear of
punishments infliction.

In this case if befalls us, Example of Mice for their safety among their
enemies.
as it did to the Mice, who being in a deep consultation together, what they
might best do for safety of their lives, being every hour subject to their
enemies the Cats mercy: thought it safest for them, every one to hang a little
bell about his own neck, to serve as a sufficient pass or warrant. Al allowed
this advise, but upon he success of some, few afterward would adventure to put
it in execution.

Even so fares it with the correction of great men, The allusio^ to all the
correction of great me^.
who have terrors and punishments, to support in themselves all unlawful
actions. And this strikes a fear in too many faint hearts: because S. John
Baptist lost his head for reproouing of Herod. As also the Apostles and holy
Martyrs, (in like cases) lost their lives.


Ludouico. Such pills ought to be folded up in Sugar, How reprehe^sion is to be
delivered.
and reprehension should come with sweetness, not with bitterness. Because
Prelates ought oftener to exhort, then reprehend, as men that are our Pastors
and Fathers, not Tyrants to us and persecutors. Agreeing with the counsel of
Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 5. 2.
Seniorem ne increpaueris, sed obsecra vt patrem: Rebuke not an Elder, but
exhort him as a Father.

Antisthenes being asked, wherefore he reprehended Princes, and men placed in
great dignity, with so much mansuetude, mildness and modesty? The answer of
Antisthenes, for the rebuking of princes.
answered (in my mind) very excellently. Because Princes (quoth he) are like
unto Bees, who if they be not warily and circumspectly handled, do strike
suddenly with the sting. Even so Princes, if they be not reproved with all
humility and modesty: they easilye strike with the sting of power which they
have in hold.

For possessed Saul, Example of King Saul possessed.
to have the devil cast out of his body, there was great need of a Musician,
to play very sweetly. Even so, to raise up Princes and great men from their
sin, A lesson for bold presumers with princes.
a sweet and pleasant correction behooves, rather more by entreating, then by
controwling. And to answer to the question already moved, before I further
forget my self, if we but consider whereon we have already discoursed, we may
easily resolve all intricate scruple.

It is true, There is a time apt for all things.
that silence is more commendable then talking: but Omnia tempus habent; tempus
tacendi, and tempus loque^di. To al things there is an appointed time; a time
to keep silence, and a time to speak. Therefore (in this case) silence is a
grievous offense, Eccl. 3. 1. 7.
because by silence, we are partly the cause of our neighbors souls loss:
whereas contrariwise, by speaking, we might be a means of safety to the same.

Moreover, How sometime by speaking we hold our peace.
sometime by speaking, we do hold our peace, and god speaks by the use of our
tongue. But in keeping silence, contrary to the divine precept, our silence is
a talkatiue babbling, wherewith we endanger both our selves and our neighbor,
that is, by the word of work, not of the voice.

Thus houlding our peace, How we break silence in holding our peace, and yet
in talking are silent.
we break silence; and talking, are silent. Or thus being dumb, we talk, and
yet in discoursing we speak not, but God in and by us. And further you must
noate, that this precept does not always bind, because it is an affirmative
precept, which binds thus, but not always. For such precepts as are
affirmative merely, are virtuous actions, wherein there is to be observed, both
manner, and rule.


Claudio. I know not what you mean by these affirmative precepts: how many
kinds of precepts are there? what, are there negative precepts also?


Lodouico. There are found three several kinds of commandments, whereunto
all the precepts divine are reduced.

Some are negative, Of negative precepts.
which do always bind, and for ever, in all places, and at all times: As,
not to swear and blaspheme.

Some are affirmative, Of affirmative precepts.
which do bind always, but not for ever, but only for a time: As, the giving
of Alms, to be continually performed: but yet, in time of necessity, the bond
most binds.

Others there be, Of precepts consisting of both natures.
which participate of both these before named natures, being precepts
affirmative and negative, binding always, and for ever: because they have two
heads, one pertinent to the negative precept, the other appertaining to the
precepte affirmative.

Of this nature is restitution. Of restitutio^.
For God commands thee not to retain the goods of others, which appertains
to the negative precept. He commands thee also to restore them back again, and
this belongs to the precept affirmative.

The precept of brotherly correction, The precepte of brother lie correction.
it is an affirmative precept, and therefore binds always, but not ever.
Therefore there is great need of observing both the rule and manner, for fear
of failing. Which by our Savior Christ himself is thus taught us.

Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, Math. 18. 15. 16. 17.
vade, and corripe eum inter te and ipsum solum: si te audierit, lucratus es
fratrem tuum. Si autem non audierit, How it is taught us by Christ himself.
adhibe te cum adhuc vnum vel duos. vt in ore duorum, vel trium, testium stet
omne verbum. Quod si non audi^rit eos, dic Ecclesiae: si autem Ecclesiam non
audierit, sit tibi sicut ethnicus and publicanus. If thy brother trespass
against thee, go, and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if he
hear thee, thou have won thy brother. But if he hear thee not, take yet with
thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
confirmed. And if he will not vouchsafe to hear then, tell it unto the Church:
and if he refuse to hear the Charch also, let him be unto thee as an heathen,
and a publicane.

Herein are three things to be observed, Three things things to be observed.
namely the place, the time, and the manner.

The place is noted, when he says; Si peccauerit in te; If thy brother
trespass against thee, 1 The place for speaking.
that is. If thy neighbor sin secretly, and thou only know thereof,
reprehend him in some remote place, that no one may know thereof, for fear of
giving thereby scandale to others, and discovering (against charity) another
man's defects. To the end also, that the delinquent may the more willingly
amend, by perceiving, that all this is done unto him in love.

The time also is to be respected, 2 The time for speaking.
because always and at all seasons, it is not a time for reprehension. For it
often falls out, that the person offending, is incorrigible. Which he well
knowing or perceiving that should urge the reproof, he stands not bound then to
move correction, least the sinner should fall into greater guilt, but ought to
take a fitter opportunity.

Or else, Of time unbefitting.
if he know it to be no apt season, even immediately upon the transgression to
strike with reproof, his wisdom (in forbeara^ce) cannot be therefore impeached,
and yet the sinner in due time may be also chastised.

Noah patiently awaited seven days together, Example of Noah's seven days
waiting for the doves returns.
having first sent forth the dooue, and seeing her return to be so quickly,
without bringing any sign of the waters cessation: then he sent her forth
again, and then she brought back the Olive branch with her At illa venit ad
eum ad vesperam, portans ramum Oliuae, virentibus folijs in ore suo. Genesis 8. 11.
Intellexit ergo Noe, quod cessassent aquae super terram. And the Dove came to
him in the evening, and lo, in her mouth was an Olive leaf, that she had
plucked: whereby Noah knew, that the waters were abated from off the earth.

In Noah is figured the christian soul, remaining within the Arc of our body.
The Authors moral application of this example.
The waters of the deluge are our sins, wherein, we (like poor wretches) are
as drowned. Whereof David speaking, says. Saluum me fac Deus, quoniam
intrauerunt aquae vsque ad animam meam. Save me, Psalm. 69. 1.
O God, for the waters are entered even to my soul. The Dove represents
brotherly correction, and the Olive branche, is the fruit of this brotherly
admonition.

When we behold our brother in the deluge of sin, The form of use for this
application.
we ought to send forth out of the Arc of the body (by the window of our
mouth) the dove of mild correction. Which returning unfruitfully, and without
any sign of amendment at all, we ought not therefore to despair of his
recovery. But after the example of Noah, with patience to attend a time more
opportune. In which space (perhaps) the waters of this wretched flood may
cease, by the want of former proud conceit, and better consideration of his
own estate.

VVhereupon, The second observation for brotherly correction.
sending forth again the simple Dove, in kind correction, and on mere
charity: doubtless she will bring some sign of the great floods fall, even
the very fruit of so good an endeavor, and so thou have won thy brother;
Lucratus es fratrem tuum.

We must in like sort observe the manner, 3. The manner.
that is, charitably, with sweet words, and full of love.

David drove the tormenting spirit forth of Saul, Example of David's
dispossessing Saul.
not with stearn strokes, but with mild music.

Eliseus the Prophet sent his servant Gehezie with a staff, to revive the son
of the widow, Example of Eliseus sending Gehezie to the widows son.
which proved to nothing: but when afterward he came himself in person, and
with his own limbs warmed the dead-benummed limbs of the child, being
lifelesse, he, joining part to part, face to face, hands to hands, breast to
breast, and feet to feet, thus heating the child, he raised him from death to
life.

So, How we should revive our brother from sin.
when we would revive our brother, he being mortally wounded with sin, and even
almost dead in soul: we should not send our servant with a staff, to do such
correction as Pilate did to Christ; Corripiam ergo illum, Luke 23. 22.
and dimittam; I will chastise him, and let him loose.

Neither ought we to use any rough or rigorous words. Our immitation of Elizeus.
But like to Eliseus, warm the delinquents soul with the heat of charity,
and by compassionating his case, even transforming our selves altogether into
him. Gal. 6. 1.
According to the instruction of Saint Paul. Fratres, and si praeoccupatus
fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, vos qui spirituales estis, huiusmodi instruite
in spiriu lenitatis, considerans teipsum, ne and tu tenteris, Brethren, if a
man be fallen (by occasion) into any fault, you which are spiritual, restore
such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou
also be tempted. Being thus heated with the warmth of christian charity, we
shall raise the sinners dying soul, by the religious means and office of the
tongue.

Oh how pleasing is this manner to me, The Authors commendatio^ of this course.
and I praise the true use thereof from time to time: because, when we go over
hastily to the committed evil, the offender (having his senses blinded) will
not suffer himself to be reprehended, but rather (in haughtiness of spirit)
will even approve and maintain his sin.

Wherefore, look how thou blowest the fire then, so much the more thou
kindlest it, Comparion of blowing the fire, alluded to our brothers nature.
whereto if nourishment want, it will extinguish of it self: Even so is it
with thy brothers choleric and hasty nature, being reproved too quickly of his
committed error. Therefore it shall become us well, to expect a while, and in our
reprehension, to use no loftiness, because the sinner in this case, may very
aptly be compared to a sick man.

When a sick body would feed on delicate and healthful meats for his
disease, Comparion of a sick man's feeding.
and yet are to him most displeasing, though in their own nature very
wholesome: they use such art in the deliverance of them, laboring to please
his weak relish, as he hardly perceives what they are.

The finner, by his ouersurfetting on sin, abhors all spiritual meats, The
application of the comparison.
how healthful or delicate soever they be. He finds no taste in preaching, he
has no delight in praying, no mind to the holy Sacraments, no pleasure in
fasting, nor any godly action agrees with his relish. Nay, he is reduced into
such an estate, as he has no feeling of any spiritual matter. So that even as
David says; Omnem escam abominata est anima coru^; Their soul abhors al
meat. Almost they are ready to leave their houses, Psalm. 107. 18.
drawing on their latest breath, eue^ as next neighbor to eternal death:
Appropinquauerunt vsque ad port as mortis.

Wherefore in the administering of this healthful food of brotherly
correction, The administering of brotherly correction.
that it may be willingly and lovingly accepted: you must shadow it in some
substantial manner, to make it carry a taste of kind and comfortable words, after
this, or the like observation;

Dear brother, so it might not be displeasing to you, I would deliver a few
words greatly to your profit: The Authors institution for the manner of
correcting.
wherein, God is my witness nothing else moves me but the honor of God,
true brotherly charity, and unfeigned regard of your good. I know well, that
such an offense has escaped you, and no marueyle, for you are a frail man,
like unto others, therefore it makes no admiration in me. Because we are all
weak, the snares so many, and the occasions so numberless, as I know not how
we should escape falling into far greater errors, yea, and much more often too.
But after (by our own frailty) we are encompassed with danger, it may not
therefore be held for reasonable, that we should long time continue in so
wretched an estate: but rather seek after some remedy, as wise men are wont to
do, and not be careless of help, like insolent fools.

Consider brother, The allegatio^ on Gods behalf.
that god is so good and patient, as we cannot (with devout hearts) be so ready
to ask pardon for our sins, but we shall find him as forward in pardoning them.
Wherefore I beseech you, by the bitter passion of so loving a God, and in the
very bowels of his endless mercies: that you would take such a course, as this
bounty of his may redound to your benefit, only by true conferring with your
soul, on such an escape, which I am bound lovingly to tell you of, and you (in
as kind love) to accept.

If manly entreaties may be available with you, if you see me to fall into
this, The manner concerning our selves.
or any other sin: I pray you do me the like office of charity. For oftentimes
we are so blinded, that we take delight in our own harm, and our affections do
so ouermaster judgment: as evil seems good, and good evil, justice appears to
be injury, zeal hatred, and virtue vice.

So, 2. Kings. 4. 34.
after the manner of another Eliseus, who Incuruauit se super puerum; th^ew
himself upon the child: abasing our selves, and confessing our own frailty to
be as great as his, we shall so warm his soul with the heat of good words, and
with the supple sweetness of fervent charity, as he will arise from death to
life, and then we may say; Lucratus es fratrem tuum.


Claudio. These are the preserving sirropes, of power able to revive the
sickest sinner, and keep him from falling into greater perils, as also most
effectual for his recovery. Reprehensio^s compared to Physical pills.
And because reprehensions are to sinners, like bad sauouring pills: it
behooves the brotherly reproouer, to be so careful, as he do cover them with
the fine gold of loving speeches. And because, Comparion of the Ague.
by giving drink to one troubled with an Ague, even in the heat when the fit
is upon him, is a mere nourishment to the fever: we ought to await the fits
declination, and til the body be more temperate.

So, The application.
when we would admonish, if we see the delinquent much enraged, or in the
superfluity of passion: we must stay a while, until the heat of anger be over,
and the Fever of passion be in his declination. And then is best to administer
the healthful strengthening of loving rebukes: for our taste is so delicate, as
otherwise it will not endure reproof. Nay, we must use great diligence, and
seek several ways, according to the quality of the person. Even as the
Physician does, who considering the complexions of his patients, Comparion of
the Physician.
gives to the delicate complexion, a light and a sweet medicin, and to the
contrary constitution, a medicine of like and answerable nature.


Finis Chap. 24.
The Argument.
Wherein is discoursed, how important the precept of brotherly correction is,
and for avoiding error therein, all the words which our Savior used, in giving
the precept, are diligently examined, and diverse good considerations in that
behalf alleged. Moreover, they handle severally the number of corrections,
which are to be used to our neigbor, and by the office of the tongue, all
justified and warranted by proofs of Scripture.

Chap. 25.
LODOVICO. In such a case as this it behooves us to imitate hunters,
Comparion of huntsmen in their several pastimes.
who according to the variety of ^h^ir sports, prepare an answerable use of
instruments. To surprise the wild Bore, they have Bore spears, ^auelings and
guns: for the Hare, they have Greyhounds: for Quails they have spaniels, or a
false call: for fish, they have nets: and for foul, sundry kinds of Hawks. So
ought we to make difference between the Clergy, Observation for a difference
to be made in persons.
and underlings, between those of degree, and them of meaner sort, between men
and children, between the choleric and phlegmatic. Beside, no diligence
should want, in recovering a man from sin: because the very best has small
reason to boast, for there is none good, no, not one.


Claudio. The diligence ought to be great, for the case is important, and the
necessity extreme. When the good Patriarche Joseph sent his brethren, Example
of the Patriark^ Joseph.
with their beasts laden with corn, from Egypt into Canaan, for the
nourishment of aged Jacob: among other good admonitions, Gen 45. 24.
one was this; Proficiscentibus ait; Ne trascimini in via. As they departed, he
said unto them; Fall not out by the way. The Authors allusion.
As if he would have said. Dear brethren, you lead these Asses laden with
corn and money, the way is long, the beasts weak, and disgraces are evermore
too ready at hand. Wherefore I pray you, let peace be among you, because, if
one of you grow angry against another, your carriage falling down, who shall
help you to lift it up again?

All we are brethren, Application to our selves.
travailing from this earth to heaven, with the frail carriage of these our
bodies like beasts; vt iumentum factus sum apud te; Psalm. 73. 22.
I was as a beast before thee, and laden are we with the weight of legal
observance. Now because we are by nature weak, by every small difficulty which
we find in the law dishartned, and by the very least temptation, which our
infernal enemy uses against us, we are soon smitten to the earth, and so the
soul falls into sin: If we shall wax choleric among our selves, who shall
quiet us? who shall admonish and brother-like reprove us? Therefore, The way of
this world.
Ne trascamur in via, let us not fall out by the way, but with charity assist
our neighbor, with that loving and charitable word, Corripe eum.


Lodouico. Many do come very short of this manner: therefore, to avoid
wandering astray, we ought to attend and consider the words used by Christ
himself in this precept. What signifies this conditional phrase; Si
peccauerit; If he trespass, or, if he sin?


Claudio. We may moderately philosophize upon the words of this precept, The
conditional word, If.
the better to keep our selves in compass. This conditional Si, If, I take it
to signify, that we ought only to reprove those sins, whereof we have a
certain knowledge, Sipeccauerit, If he sin, that is; If by chance thou
perceiuest thy brother to sin, correct him brotherlike: but go not to make
search after other men's sins, to win occasion (thereby) of reproouing thy
brother.

And for this purpose, Example out of the old law.
I call now to mind a notable occasion. God commanded in the old law, that
when one borrowed money of another, Deul. 24. 10* 11.
he should not enter his house to fetch his pledge: but stand and await without
doors patiently, until he brought it forth to him.

We (by our sins) have pawned our souls: The example applied.
it is not necessary therefore, that he (who comes to reprehend) should enter
our souls house, making there a curious enquiry and search, after other men's
transgressions, to compass occasion of imperious reproouing. For Christ gives
no such commandment, but rather advises us to stay without doors, that is:
not to charge our neighbors weak consciences, with other men's infirmities:
but, if we happen to see our brother sin, to correct him charitably; so
signifies this conditional Si, If.


Lodouico. If we our selves are stained with the self same transgressions,
ought we then to employ our officious tongues, in administering correction? A
se^te^tious demand.
How can a foul hand make the face clean, except it self be first washed?
Otherwise, the delinquent may use the words of Christ unto us: Mat 7. 3.
Quid vides festucam in oculo fratris tui, and trabem in oculo tuo non vides?
Why see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not the
beam that is in thine own eye? Or else this other; Medice, curate ipsum;
Physician, heal, thy self. Luke 4* 23.
For it appears, that by our correction, we may cover our own proper vices,
which is no way conuenable in a Christian.


Claudio. In such a case, The words of Father Augustine.
says Father Augustine, We ought rather to condole and weep with him, then come
to correct and contro^le him, mutually wishing one another to repentance,
especially, if the sin be public. He ought not reprove, that deserves
reproof.
For it will be a scandale to many, for him to be a reproouer, that in himself
deserves reproouing: beside, it is a sin of very great pride.


Lodouico. If the delinquents sin be public, ought the correction
(notwithstanding) to be private? This breeds in me a doubt of Christ's
words, who only says: Si peccauerit in te: Public of ^ending must have
public reproof.
If he sin against thee, whether any other should be present, or no?


Claudio. If the sin be public, the correction should be public also, 1.
Tim. 5. 20.
says the Apostle. Peccantos, coram omnibus argue, vt and caeteri timorem
habeant. Them that sin, rebuke openly, that the rest also may fear. We
ought therefore to consider well, how our brother has sinned, and not blindly
go to reprehension, till first we be certain of the sin, for prevention of
others infamy and scandal. Si peccauerit. says Christ: therefore look well
before, and say nothing.

Else in saying, Example of Lamech.
I thought he had sinned, it may fall out as it did to unadvised Lamech, who
going on hunting, and seeing (he knew not what) to stir among the leaves,
imagining it had bin some wild beast there hidden: drew his bow, and losing his
arrow, when he supposed he had slain a saluage beast, he found he had slain
his father Caine. VVhereupon, repenting himself for this ill shot arrowe, Genesis
4. 23.
he said to his wives Adah and Zillah. Audite vocem m^am vxores Lamech,
auscultate sermonem meum; quoniam occidi virum in vulnus meum, and
adolescentulum in liuore meo. Hear my voice you wives of Lamech; for I would
slay a man in my wound, and a yo^ng man in mine hurt.


Lodouico. If the sin be secret, Of secret sin, but against a community.
but against a community, or a whole State: a good mind (in me) is not enough
for reprehension of the offender, neither avails hope (by any respects) to
draw him to amendment, what correction then should such a one have?


Claudio. Being assured of no fruitful success, as in this case it cannot
be, you ought more to respect the weal public, then a private man's
condition. In matter of faith.
And, in matter of faith, not only the meanest ought (in humilitye) to
reprehende the mightier, but (in such a case) an equal estimate should be in
correction, we being all Christians, and all bound together for defense of the
faith. As Saint Paul reproved Saint Peeter, being above him, Galat. 2. 11.
in regard of the scandal which might arise. Reprehendi eum quia
reprehensibilis erat. He withstoode him to his face, for he was to be blamed.
Therefore says the great doctor of the Church: Thom. Aquin. Sum. Cap. 20.
Whenever the danger of the faith is discerned, we ought to withstand it
even to life it self: Corripe eum.

We find two several kinds of correction, Two kinds of correction.
one is the act of justice, as when the Judge sentenceth the guilty: and this
only belongs to the^ in government, 1. The act of Justice.
upon whose shoulders lies the weight of justice.

The other is the act of charity, 2. The act of charity.
and particularly belongs to every man. Therefore they which profess
religion, and yet usurp upon these words, they presume on that which
appertains to the Judge only, and in stead of their tongue, do strike with
a sword.

Corripe eum inter te and ipsum solum; Tell him his fault between thee and him
alone. Between him and thee alone.
Not like unto such, as set up writings, infamous libels, and Pasquilling
slanders on public poasts. Corripe eum inter te and ipsum solum. And not in
company of brauers, swaggerers, sworders and lawless quarrellers, as seeking
that way to please thy mind.

He says Corripe, Correct, not kill.
not Occide, correct, not kill, tell him, not defame him, as now it is become
the practice of the world. Corripe eum, not seek revenge, because such
correction belongs to God only.

We are the sons of God by adoption: Example of children offended.
therefore, let us do like unto a child when he is any way iniuried, first
runs and tells his Father the wrong done unto him. And the father says, to
comfort him; Peace my Son, I will be thy revenger.

So, Application to our selves.
when any one has offended us, let us freely pardon him, never move a hand to
wreake our wrong* it is enough for us, that our heavenly father knows our
injury, Roman. 12. 19.
and he will be our just auenger. Mihi vindicta, and ego retribuam ^is in
tempore: vengeance is mine, and in time I will repay it.

No sooner had Cain committed his murder, Example of Cain.
but immediately God said: vox sanguinis fratris tui clamat ad me de terra: Genesis
4. 10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth; implying
thereby, that he would be his revenger.

Scarsely had Myriam ended her murmuring against her brother Moses, Example of
Myriam to Moses.
but suddenly the Lord struck her with a leaprosie.

And you (my Lord) know much better then I, Example of Mary Magdalen, and of
Martha.
how much christ desended Mary Magdalen, against Judas murmuring at the
Pharisees supper.

Also of her sister Martha, who lamented that Magdalen would not help her in
her business.

But what was Christ's answer? Christ's answer Luke. 10. 14. 15.
Martha Martha sollicita es, and turbaris erga plurima. Maria optimam partem
elegit, etc. Martha Martha thou carest, and art troubled about many things.
Mary has chosen the good part.

So was Job defended by God, Job.
against the injury of his three friends; Susanna.
Susanna from the old luxurious Judges; and David from the injuries of Saul.
David.


All that we ought to do, Our own duty.
is to pray unto the Lord, to give us patience, and to illuminate the
understanding of our enemy, to the end, he may have knowledge of his error: in
this kind also ought we brotherly to correct him; Corripe eum.


Lodouico. Ought we to correct him for eury sin, or only for those which are
termed deadly?


Claudio. For ought I can discover by this Gospel, Al sins are not alike in
quality.
those sins which are termed deadly, we ought in duty especially to correct
them. And those that are of lesser kind or quality, we must correct them too:
or else I think, that the winking at them, may cause a fall into a far greater
offense.


Lodouico. Whence do you gather, that we stand bound (as it were) to correct
deadly sins so especially?


Claudio. From these fruitful words of brotherly correction, The correction of
deadly sins.
when Christ said: Si audierit, lucratus es fratrem tuum: If he hear thee,
thou have won thy brother. If by brotherly correction we may gain a brother,
it is a sign he was lost, and made slave to the devil, which needs must
ensure through deadly sin, even that which hazardeth the death of the soul for
ever.

As for other sins; Of sins of less quality.
they take not away the grace of god quite from us, but only do make us
lukewarm in affection: Whereas by sinning deadly, it locks up the gates of
heaven against us, except there be immediate recovery. And Christ saying, thou
have won thy brother, approoues, that the devil had great power over him: and
rescuing him then in such a dangerous estate, it shows thee to be a dear
brother indeed.


Lodouico. If the tongue can reach to such a redemption, it were a great sin
in us, to be negligent of our neighbors good, especially in such a case as
this. But first we should free our selves from sin, so much as lies in us to
do, Because (as Cirillus Alexandrinus says) that we ought to open our
mouths in correction, The words of Cirillus Alexandrinus.
in such manner as we see the Cock opens his to singing^, who first beats him
self with his wings, before he chaunteth forth his noates.

So we ought no to reprove another man, Consideration of our own faults.
till first (with the wings of good consideration) we have well beaten our
selves, least we should stand guilty of the same crime, which we seek to
reprehend in our brother. Hereupon was it, that God said to the Prophet Esaias,
Esaias. 38. 12.
sending him to preach, and to correct his elected people: Quasi tuba exalta
vocem tuam: Exalt thy voice like unto a Trumpet.

Before a man can sound a Trumpet, he takes it in his hand, puts it to his
mouth, Comparion of sounding a Trumpet, applied to preaching.
there gives it breath, and afterward the sound is heard. So should it be with
him that preaches to others, or him that will correct his neighbor for any
negligence. He must first take up the Trumpet in his hand, and prepare it with
such actions, as he himself labors to reprove in others: otherwise, he is
unworthy to check another man's sin, which cunningly he would cloak in
himself.

But let us come now to the number of reprehensions, Of the number of
reprehensions.
which cannot stand void of doubting: because to Saint Peter it seemed
sufficient, when he had allowed seven times, for forgiveness of sin in our
neighbor, with reproof of the offenses committed. And Christ made him
answer: Non dico tibi vsque septies, Math. 18. 22.
sed vsque septuagies septies: I say not to thee, unto seven times, but unto
seauenty times seven times, what say you now to this?


Claudio. I say with S. Augustine, and all the cheifest doctors of the Church,
A finite number put by an infinite.
that here Christ put a finite number, by an infinite. Septuagies septies,
seauenty times seven times, implies so much, as we ought always to pardon,
and in like manner to make our brotherly correction. And if it please you to
license me, in speaking my mind concerning this number, you shall perceive that
I will approve it to be so.


Lodouico. Therein you shall do me a singular favor, and I hope to hear matter
agreeing with your great judgment.


Claudio. Seauenty times seven times, says Saint Jerome, are four hundred
and ninety. Seauenty times seven times according to Saint Jerome.
If you tahe away from the number of 490. the last figure nullo, which of it
self is nothing, there remains behind a 9. and a 4. Nine and four, do make
thirteen. Twelve are the Articles of our faith, and the one remaining over,
signifies the defect or failing in them: therefore, we ought to reprehe^d our
brother, every time that he erreth in any of the twelve Articles of the faith.

Seauenty time seven times, According to S. Augustine.
Saint Augustine says, they are seauenty seven. To come to the number of
seauenty seven, they value here eleven times seven. Ten are the divine
precepts: therefore this accountable number, signifies the ten commandments,
and the odd one over, alludeth to the transgression of them. Wherefore,
seauentie times seven times, is as much to say, as that we ought to reprove
our neighbor, every time he commits breach of any one of the ten divine
commandments.

Moreover, The writing of seauenty seven by figures, alluded to the works of
mercy.
seauenty times seven times are written with two figures of seven, as thus,
77. Two times seven do make fourteen, and so many are the works of mercy,
to wit, seven spiritual, and seven temporal. Therefore in saying seauentie
times seven, it imports, that we ought to reprehend our neighbor, every
time he fails in any of the works of mercy.

Once again, A second co^ceipt on the figures, by the senses.
77. has two figures of 7. and twice seven (as I said before) are fourteen:
in writing of fourteen, there is required a 1. and a 4. One and four do
make five, and so many are the senses belonging to our body. Therefore, in
saying seauenty times seven times, it implies, that we ought to admonish our
brother, every time he erreth in his five bodily senses: That is, either in
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting or vainly touching.

Further yet, A third proof of the figures, by the seven deadly sins, and
seven ages of man.
seauenty times seven times, written as before with two seauens, 7. and 7. are
fourteen. Seven in number are the deadly sins, contained in this word
Saligiae. And seven are the ages of man, to wit, Infancy, Childhood, Youth
from twelve to one and twenty, Young man's estate from twenty to thirty, Manhood,
Middle-age, and Old decrepite age. According to which computation, seauenty
times seven is to be understood, that in every of these several ages,
according as our brother falls into deadly sin, we ought in charity to
reprove him.

In another 77. being twice seven, A third proof, by the gifts of the holy
ghost, and the virtues.
we may say thus. Seven are the gifts of the holy spirit: wisdom,
understanding, counsel, strength, science, piety, and the fear of God.
Seven also are the virtues, four Cardinal, and three Theological: to wit,
Justice, Fortitude, Temperance and Prudence; the other three, Faith, Hope and
Charity. Seauenty times seven then may signify, that we ought to be helpful
to our neighbor, every time we perceive defect in any of these virtues, or the
gifts of the holy ghost to grow weak in him.

Much better says Origin, S. Origin upon S. Matthew.
upon Saint Matthew. Numerus sex, videtur esse operis, and laboris, septimus
autem repansationis. Dicit autem remissionem fieri oportere fratribus in hoc
mundo degentibus, secundum res huius mundi peccantibus. Si aliquis autem vltra
ea peccata peccauerit, iam non habebit remissionem. As if he would have said;
Every time that a man sins in this world, we should always pardon him, and
charitably correct him, because the senary number or that of six is a number
of pain and labor, and appertains to this present life. But if he persevere
obstinately in sin, as in the contempt of eternal life, signified also in
the septenarie number, being the number of rest and quiet, wherein God him
self ceased, from all the works he made in the creation: Remission nor
correction is then any longer in our power, because eternal are the torments
prepared for such transgressions, specified by the pains of hell, and then he
is wilfully cut off and divided from the Church.

And that is it which he says: Si Ecclesia^ non audierit, sit tibi et h^icus
and Publicanus. Math. 18. 17.
If he refuse to hear the Church also, let him be unto thee an heathen man
and a Publican. Thus have I proved by the number of seauenty seven, that it
alludeth universally by the sense, to the time present, and at all times else,
wherein we ought to labor our very uttermost, for the good and welfare of our
neighbor.


Lodouico. A very excellent and witty discourse, whence may be gathered, how
much we ought to esteem of brotherly affection, and observe the rule of
perfect charity. The command of Christ for our neighbors good.
For Christ him self has commanded us, to use such diligence for our
neighbors amendment, not suffering him to run on until the hour, when no
hope at all is to be expected. And therefore he has set vt down a manner
how. First alone, by him self and thee to correct him. Afterward, with two or
three. Then in the presence of all: which brings to my remembrance, the
sentence of the holy ghost, speaking of the Church, Cant. 2. 9.
and comparing it to a well ordered army: Terribilis vt castorum acies ordinata.

When an army is encamped, Comparison of an Army encamped.
about the armed squadrons Sentinelles are appointed, who whatsoever they
hear, they impart it to one another, or else altogether do advertise the
corpse du guard thereof. With this goodly order is the Church defenced:
Terribilis vt castrorum acies ordinata.

Wherefore when any hellish rumor of sin is heard, which might disranke or
disorder this noble Army: one Sentinel advises an other in this manner. The
first Sentinel.
Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, corripe cum inter te and ipsum solu^: there
is the first Sentinel, Si te non audierit, adhibe adhuc vnum vel duos, The
second Sentinel.
vt in ore duorum vel trium testium stet omne verbum: there is the second
Sentinel. Si eos non audierit, dic Ecclesiae: The whole corpse du guard.
there is the whole corpse du guard, and the very nerves of the Army of the
militant Church.

And well shall it become us, to use all diligence, in the safety of our
neighbor, for whose souls freedom, Christ instituted his Sacraments, and
suffered patiently so many torments. And if so many evils are easily committed,
by our ouer-ready tongue, well may we convert it then to our neighbors
benefit: as being assured, that such speaking is acceptable to God; neither do
we break the eternal silence imposed by his divine Majesty, because this is
our silence, and his speech: Dabo vobis os, and sapientiam.


FINIS Cap. vlt.
The Table of the Arguments.
IT is here discoursed in a pleasing controversy, whether Silence or speaking,
merits most praise. And the one contrarying the other very familiarly, each
strives to maintain his cause by soundest reasons* sometime producing
authorities from holy writ, and other whiles from the auncientest Philosophers.
At length (after a sweet and sent entious arguing) they conclude, that there
is more security in silence, then indiscreete talking: in regard, that while
each man strives to speak best, his own conceit does soonest deceive him.
And this is confirmed by divine proofs, witty sayings of Philosophers, and
natural reasons. Chap. 1. Fol. 1. Proceeding further on, it is here approved,
that the first instruction a man ought to have, is to speak discreetely,
without offense to any. Here (in an ample discourse) the negligence of Fathers
in their families is much reproved, for not instructing their children in
silence, whereby they may attain to a perfect order of speaking. For which
purpose, many curious sentences of the ancient Philosophers are herein
entercoursed, beside diverse other out of holy Scriptures. Chap. 2. Fol. 11.
Here are delivered many examples of worthy men, true affecters of silence: And
in this Chapter, they discourse on the four excellent qualities of silence,
and how they do adorn a man; a very sweet and profitable Dialogue, for such
as desire to talk discreetly. Chap. 3. Fol. 25. Herein is handled, which is
the hardest matter for a man, either silence or speaking. And to this purpose
each one alleges several reasons, with many examples out of the ancient
Philosophers, as also authorities out of the sacred Scriptures: they show,
likewise, many inconveniences which arise by the tongue. A discourse very
excellent, curious and sententious. Chap. 4. Fol. 32. Herein is declared, how
God spoke so little, as he spoke but once or twice only: And how man ought to
keep an eternal silence; otherwise, he that alwais talks, sins. Who was
the first that brake silence, as well in heaven, as in earth. How it is to be
understood, that God only is truth, and every man a liar: considering that
many have spoken the truth, as well Philosophers of the Gentiles, as also many
Christians: A discourse full of learning, and pleasing curiosities. Chap. 5.
Fol. 43. Declaring, what custody we ought to have of our tongue, to avoid
error in our speaking. Of the several ways, whereby the tongue passes, when
we talk: which although they be four in number, yet one only guarde is
sufficient for them all. Chap. 6. Fol. 54. Declaring, that to keep our selves
from idle wandering in our talking, it behooves, that our speech should have
five conditions or qualities, which the tongue it self has, namely: sweet,
Rose colored, sharp, flexible, and close couched: which are approved by many
authorities of Scripture, as also witty sayings of the Philosophers, and
natural examples. Chap. 7. Fol. 66. Approouing, that indiscretion in talk,
makes the wise man him self to be reputed as a fool, and many have incurred
very great dangers, by talking carelessly and unadvisedly. Among al tongues,
the tongue of the flatterer is most perilous, and, by breathing forth many
evils, it interdicteth the truth, especially among Noble personages, in whose
houses flatterers do most of all abound, only to enjoy the goods which they
possess. This is confirmed by many lively examples, sundry probabilities out
of holy Scripture, and other similitudes: All which do plainly prove, how
displeasing to God, and hurtful to men, is this wicked vice of flattery, that
(like another Judas) kills a man with kissing. Chap. 8. Fol. 82. Discoursing of
the leasing and lying tongue, what an infamous sin a lie is, and how highly
God is pleased with truth: of whose excellency and beauty, arises a
profitable short discourse, concluding, that a strict silence is more
commendable, then telling of lies, which are greatly displeasing to God,
because he is the truth himself. Also approouing, that lying is so brutish and
damnble, as no one can so much as think thereon, without a purpose, to deface
some part of truth. Chap. 9. Fol. 96. Herein, according to the course hitherto
continued, they now discourse on the several tongues of the detractor and
murmurer, and upon what occasion, the Devil (having a great delight to lie,
and accuse us) was said to be dumb. Herein likewise are handled many deceipts
of the Devil, many mysteries of confessing our sins unto God: and how one
Angel is said to speak unto another, without sight of each other: A discourse
very curious, learned and profitable. Chap. 10. Fol. 111. Continuing on still
the same matter and discourse, with diverse other excellent reproves of this
mighty sin of unwillingness to repent, and easing our consciences of the
heavy burden of sin, wherein no silence is to be kept. And that the
detractors tongue is like the Serpents: Also, how we ought sometime to cry
out, and sometimes to hold our peace. Chap. 11. Fol. 127. Discoursing on the
murmuring and detracting tongue, and how fitlye it should be bound to eternal
silence; for the praise thereof is shame, and the honor, most hateful. Also,
that the detractor is not only abominable, but is merely abomination it
self: for whatsoever he sees, he makes a most vile interpretation thereof.
Chap. 12. Fol. 137. Murmuring is an infectious sin, worse then any other
disease, and easy to be taken, therefore it behooves us to fly the company
of talkeatiue detractors, because they are the original of many euilles.
Whence it is that murmuring first arises. What punishment God has inflicted
on murmurers: who have leapt out of themselves (as it were) to fasten hold on
other men's imperfections, and stealing much less then they looked for, at last
utterly lost all. How they have joined the tongue with the ear; how they have
deceived themselves overmuch in judgment, by their own dangerous facility in
speaking evil of all men, to which God will give (as a chastisement) a
perpetual silence. With an exhortation of the holy ghost, not to defame, but
to refrain speaking evil of our neighbor. Chap. 13. Fol. 147. There is not
any thing more uneasy or insupportable, neither less deserving love, then the
tongue of the slaunderer and deprauer. And more easily the Egyptians might
suffer the plague offrogges, then we can endure the defamers tongue. What the
cause was, why God sent such a punishment upon the Egyptians, by creatures so
vile, and un apt to offend. How difficult a thing it is to heal the plague of
the tongue, declaring and approouing, that God only must heal it: as he
healed Egypt, purified the lips of Esaias, and restored speech to the dumb. The
murmurer is worse then a thief, and is figured in the ravenous birds,
rejected in the divine sacrifices. Chap. 14. Fol. 156. Discoursing of the
double tongue, to wit, that of the hypocrite and false man, who has one thing
in his mouth, and another in his heart: Whereby he makes himself hateful to
God, to the very devils, and also to men. Of an hypocrite, what thing it is,
how hardly he is to be known of men, and of devils: being compared to the
Comedian; the gallant dog, that has a smooth quick tongue; and to the
vapor exhaled by the Sun up into the air. The hypocrite has his mouth in
heaven, and his tongue on earth. And he is also compared to the sword of
Holofernes, of Saul, and of Goliath, etc. Chapter. 15. Fol. 166. The hypocrite,
because he has holy words only, without deeds, is compared to the
glow-worme: to the statue which Nebuchadnezzer saw in his dream, that had a
head of gold only: he has his left hand about God, and his right under his
head. He has more faces the^ one, disfiguring it to appear only, but not to
be good indeed: he goes forth of his own confines; he suffers himself to be
guided in his actions, like unto a brute beast: with his best virtue he buieth
sle^der rewards, and hangs his praise upon other men's lips. He is like to the
brood hen, that calls her young ones to eat, and almost starues her self to
death: like to the thief, that shoes a horse backward, to deceive the
pursuer; with many other worthy by comparisons against the double hypocritical
tongue. Chap. 16. Fol. 173. The tongue of the hypocrite, when it teaches or
instructs, is like many branches, severally grafted upon one stock: or, as
when upon thorns, there hangs grapes: or like the foolish virgins, that had
every thing answerable to the wise, but yet stayed without; whereon, a notable
doubt is resolved. It is also compared to the Estridge whose wings do resemble
the Hawks in color, but yet are not able to bear her body aloft. Or like to
the vain woman, who because she would seem fair, paints her self. How much
it behooues us to be ready, in subduing the appetite of vainglory, which is
discovered most, in striving to speak fine and curiously. Chap. 17. Fol. 182.
Herein these are reproved, that are good only of their tongue, but wicked in
their deeds. Resembling the poor man, who would feign take a rich wife, but
(in regard of his poverty) none in his own country will accept of him:
Wherefore, clothing him self in strange garments, he travails to speed
where he is not known. Such men are compared to builders, that lay unwrought
stones in the foundation, but aloft to the eye, they place curious stones of
richer labor. They are also like to Pirates on the Seas, with lying banners:
like as the Sichemites: like to Joseph's cloak: like to the wife of Potifar:
and like to the aprons of fig leaves, which Adam and Eve made for themselves.
They are like to Ahaz the king: like to the Dolphine: like to the Physician,
that cures others, yet helps not himself. They are like to the white wall
shown to Ezekiel: they are good for others, and hurtful to them selves: Here
is some speech used, of the great pains threatened to such, as also of the
reprehension, which God in his judgment will give them: A subject, by how
much the more curious, by so much it is the more true and profitable. Chap. 18
Fol. 190. Herein is declared, that the sin of blasphemy is most great and
grievous, insomuch that it exceeds every other sin, even of the infidelles,
and of the Jews, who crucified our Lord and Savior. It is aggrauated by many
circumstances, and has no apparent excuse, as diverse other sins may seem to
have. It is a sin eternal, in regard of the exercise thereof; because among
all sins, blasphemy only remains with the damned, even as charity does
among the blessed, and is punished with every part of the law. It is the sin
of unthankfulness; the punishment whereof sometime begins in this world,
and yet is never finished. It is a manifest sign of damnation, and a sin so
abominable, as the holy Scripture sometime forbeareth to name it, among the
rehersall of other grievous offenses. A discourse very profitable, ingenious,
necessary and worthy to be noted for fear of fulling into a sin so horrible
and detestable. Chap. 19. fol. 201* Approving that it is better to have no
tongue at al, and to be silent eternally, then to fall into any of the before
remembered vices. What benefit ensues by the privation of speech, of which,
although we should have no use at all, yet we are not void of the speech of
the mind; which is much more excellent, and sooner listened unto by god
himself, then to the careless and idle babbling of the lips. He that wants
speech, is disburdened of a heavy load, and may the easier preserve himself
from many heavy charges: because by the tongue of the body, we please men
only, but by the tongue of the heart, we become pleasing to God. Every man has
two lips, but the just man has his upper lip much greater then the nether.
Contrariwise, the wicked man has his nether lip so great, as therewith he
covers his whole face, and all the strength of bad men consists in their
lips; which is approved by a short, yet sweet discourse, and afterward
pleasingly concluded on the behalf of silence, approving it to be much more
allowable then speech. Chap. 20. Fol. 216. He that would talk with God, must
either learn to be silent, or speak fa^re otherwise then he did before:
because his heart is to be first purged of wicked thoughts, and his lips
made clean from speaking of evil. He that conferres with God, must either
hold his peace, or speak very little, in regard of the greatenesse of divine
mysteries. Or he must talk highly, by a new kind of speaking, as being
lifted up by divine assistaunce of the holy Ghost. For approbation whereof,
diverse sound testimonies out of sacred Scripture are produced. As of Moses,
Jeremy, Daniell, Paul, and the other Apostles. Silence also makes the fool
to seem wise, and the want of speech is the gift of God, as well as talking
in many languages. Heerin likewise is discoursed, whence it proceeds that
some are borne dumb, and others very hard in delivery of their words, or
else do speak very slowly. Chap. 20. Fol. 226. To the end, that in our
discoursing we should not grow offensive to God, it behooves us (with devout
hearts) to beg of him that he would purify our minds, and purge our lips.
According as David did, who prayed to the Lord that he would open his mouth, to
the end that he might worthily praise him. And, without him, we cannot speak
well, because he has the key of our mouth. Which is approved by a sentence
produced out of Esaias, where he says, that Christ is the key of David. He
therewith opens the mouth, and gives not much of what we know to ask for,
because we should require things correspondent to his greatness. Moreover, not
only are the Lips opened therewith, but likewise the heart, the
understanding, the Scriptures, types and figures, yea, heaven it self, and the
mouths of the saints and Prophets: and without this keye, all things remain^
shut up, and every mouth dumb Chap. 22. Fol. 239 That abundance of words
(without wisdom) is not called eloquence, but loquacity or babbling. Therefore
our words ought first to be brought to the file, ere to the tongue, to avoid
the error of our folly in speaking. Therefore we should pray unto the Lord,
that it would please him to open our mouths, and fill them with the holy
spirit of wisdom, using every morning duly, some especial godly prayer,
meet for such a purpose. And because Intus existens Prohibet extraneum; we
cannot be capable of the blessed spirit, except we first euacuate our own
proper spirit, which is the occasion of infinite defects. We must know, that
there are not so many letters in the Alphabet, as are the errors hourly
committed by the tongue, that is not skild rightly in speaking of God. Herein
likewise is declared, what that race or stoke is, whereof the wise man
speaks, who have in steed of teeth, sharp swoords. Also, what wisdom is,
according to the Philosophers, Peripatetikes, Stoickes and Divines, with many
other memorable matters beside. Chap. 23. Fol. 251. From whence it ensues that
man (being a creature so noble) yet notwithstanding, he commits greater
errors then any other creature whatsoever. How God has given him many helps
to preserve him from sin, and particularly, the prec^pt of brotherly
correction, committed into the power of the tongue. The necessity and
excellency whereof is here discoursed on. And that silence (in such a case)
is proved great babbling, and a grievous sin, because the tongue may be a
safety to our neighbor. They also show the way which we ought to observe, in
correcting of our neighbor, as also the quality of the precept it self, by
approved sound doctrine, and testimonies of holy Scripture. Chap. 24. Fol. 262
Wherein is discoursed, how important the precept of brotherly correction is,
and for avoiding error therein, all the words which our Savior used, in giving
the precept, are diligently examined, and diverse good considerations in that
behalf alleged. Moreover, they handle severally the number of corrections,
which are to be used to our neigbor, and by the office of the tongue, all
justified and warranted by proofs of Scripture. Chap. 25. Fol. 274.
A Table of the Authorities, alleged by the Author, out of the sacred
Scriptures in this present work, the better to declare his exposition of them.
Genesis.
Chap. 4. 13. MY sin is greater, then it can be pardoned. fol. 20* Chap. 11. 4.
Come, let us build us a city and a Tower, whose top may reach unto heaven,
that we may get us a name, least we be scattered upon the whole earth. fol. 24
Chap. 3. 2. 3. 4. We eat of the fruits of the trees of the Garden. But of the
fruit of the tree, which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said; you
shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it, least that you die. fol. 38.
Chap. 31. 47. Laban called it in his own language Tumulus testis, and Jacob
called it Aceruus testimonij. fol. 104 Chap. 23. 13. Abraham said to Ephron, I
will give thee the price of the field, receive it of me, and I will bury my
dead there? ibid. Chap. 11. 5. The Lord came down to see the city and the
Tower, which the sons of Adam builded, etc. fol. 113 Chap. 3. 12. The woman
which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat, etc.
fol. 119 Chap. 37. 11. But his Father noted well the saying. fol. 136 Chap. 18.
20. 21. Then the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great,
and because their sin is exceeding grievous: I will go down, and see whether
they have don altogether according to that cry, which is come up unto me; and
if not, that I may know. fol. 154. Chap. 27. 22. The voice (...) hands of Esau.
fol. 180 Chap. 1. 8. God called the firmament heaven. fol. 192 Chap. 34. 22.
23. If all the men children among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised,
shall not their flocks, and their substance, and all their cattle be ours?
fol. 193 Chap. 37. 33. It is my Sons coat, a wicked beast has devoured him,
Joseph is surely torn in pieces. fol. 195 Chap. 39. 12. He left his garment in
her hand, and got him out. fol. 196 Chap. 3. 7. They sewed fig tree leaves
together, and made them selves breeches, etc. ibid. Chap. 18. 27. I have begun
to speak unto my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes, fol. 236 Chap. 3. 24. And
at the East side of the garden of Eden, he set the Cherubims, and the blade of
a sword shaken, to keep the way of the tree of life. fol. 246. Chap 8. 11. And
the dove came to him in the Evening, and lo in her mouth was an Olive leaf
that she had plucked; whereby Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the
earth. fol. 270 Chap. 45. 24. And he said unto them: fall not out by the way*
fol. 275 Chap. 4. 23. Then Lamech said unto his wives Adah and Zillah, Hear my
voice ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my speech: for I would slaye a man in
my wound, and a young man in mine hurt. fol. 277 Chap. 4. 10. The voice of thy
brothers blood cries unto me from the earth. fol. 276
Exodus.
Chap. 34. 6. The Lord God is strong, merciful and gracious, flow to anger,
and abundant in goodness and truth. fol. 58 Chap. 32. 4. 5. 6. These be thy
Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, etc. fol. 95.
Chap. 15. 1. 2. We will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously:
the horse, and him that rode upon him, has he thrown in the Sea. fol. 148
Chap. 8. 2. 3. 4. Behold, I will smite all thy country with frogs. And the River
shall s^rall full of frogs, which shall go up and come into thine house, and
into the chamber where thou sleep, and upon thy bed, and into the house of
thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine O^ens, and into thy kneading
troughs. Yea, the Frogs shall climb up upon thee, and on thy people, and upon
all thy servants. fol. 157 Chap. 14. 15. Wherefore cryest thou unto me? fol.
220 Chap. 25. 24. 25. And thou shall cover it with pure gold, and make thereto
a crown of gold round about. Thou shall also make unto it a border of four
fingers round about, and thou shall make a goulden crown round about the
border thereof. fol. 223 Chap. 4. 10. Oh my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither at
any time have bin, nor yet since thou have spoken unto thy servant, but I am
slow of speech and slow of tongue. fol. 229 Chap. 40. 2. The first day of the
first month, thou shall set up the Tabernacle called the Tabernacle of the
congregation. And thou shall put therein the Arc of the Testimony, and cover
the Ark with the veil. fol. 246
Leuiticus.
Chap. 11. 13. These shall ye have also in abomination among the Fowls, they
shall not be eaten, etc. fol. 67 Chap. 24. 14. 16. Bring the blasphemer without
the host, and let all that heard him, put their hand, upon his head, and let
all the congregation stone him. And he that blasphemeth the name of the lord
shall be put to death. fol. 14
Numbers.
Chap. 19. 15. The vessels that be open, and have no covering fastened upon
them, shall be unclean. fol. 26* Chap. 24. 17. There shall come a star of
Jacob, and a scepter shall arise of Israel, etc. fol. 51* Chap. 22. 28. 29. 30.
What have I done unto thee, that thou have smitten me now three times? etc.
fol. 118. 229
Deuteronomy.
Chap. 22. 11. Thou shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen and
linen together. fol. 87 Chap. 22. 24. 25. 26. 27. Because she cried not, being
in the City. But if a man find a betrothed maid in the field, and force her,
and lie with her, then the man that lay with her shall dye alone. And unto the
maid thou shall do nothing, because there is in the maid no cause of death:
for as when a man rises against his neighbor, and wounds him to death, so
is this matter. For he found her in the field, the maid cried, and there was
no man to succoure her. etc. fol. 127. Chap. 14. 15. 19. The Estrich nor the
night crow. And every creeping thing that flies, shall be unclean unto ye,
it shall not be eaten. fol. 161 Chap. 6. 16. You shall not tempt the Lord your
God. fol. 194 Chap. 24. 10. 11. Thou shall not go into his house to fetch his
pledge. But thou shall stand without, and the man that borrwed it of thee, shall
bring the pledge out of the doors unto thee. fol. 276
Judges.
Chap. 14. 18. What is sweeter then honey? Chap. 7. 20. The sword of the Lord,
and of Gedeon. fol. 187
1. Samuel.
Chap. 19. 24. And Saul stripped off his garments, and he prophesied also before
Samuel, and fell down naked all that day and all that night: therefore they say,
Is Saul also among the Prophets? fol. 71
2. Samuel.
Chap. 1. 16. Thy blood be upon thine own head, for thine own mouth has
testified against thee, saying: I have slain the Lords anointed. fol. 65. and
218 Chap. 20. 9. 10. Art thou in health my brother? And Ioab took Amasa by the
beard, etc. fol. 168s
1. Kings.
Chap. 19. 9. 10. What do thou here Elias? And he answered, I have bin very
zealous for the Lord God of hoasts, for the children of Israel have forsaken
thy covenant, broken down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword,
and I only am left, and they seek my life, to take it away, etc. fol. 73 Chap.
21. 10. And the wicked men witnessed against Naboth in the presence of the
people, saying; Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they carried him
away out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died. fol. 211 Chap.
10. 5. She was greatly astonished, and there was no more spirit in her. fol. 234
2. Kings.
Chap. 4. 32. 33. 34. Then came Elisha into the house, and behold, the child
was dead, and laid upon his bed. He went in therefore, and shut the door upon
them twain, and prayed unto the Lord. After he went up, and lay upon the
child, and put his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his
hands upon his hands, and stretched himself upon him, and the flesh of the
child waxed warm. fol. 271
2. Chron.
Chap. 32. 15. 16. 17. For none of all the gods of any nation or kingdom able to
deliver his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much
less shall your God deliver you out of my hand? And his servants spoke yet
more against the Lord God, and against his servant Ezechias. He wrote also
letters, blaspheming the Lord God of Israel, and speaking against him. fol. 64.
Nehemiah.
Chap. 4. 17. 18. And they that builded, did the work with one hand, and with
the other held a sword. For every one of the builders had his sword girded on
his loins. fol. 189.
Job.
Chap. 39. 38. Once have I spoken, but I will answer no more. fol. 4. Chap. 13.
5. Oh that you would hold your peace, that it might be imputed to you for
wisdom. fol. 5, Chap. 10. 1. I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
fol. 26. Chap. 4. 2. Who can withhould himself from speaking? fol. 34. Chap.
33. 14. For God speaks once or twice, and one sees it not. fol. 43. Chap.
20. 5. The joy of hypocrites is but a moment. fol. 171 Chap. 8. 13. The hopes
of Hypocrites shall perish. fol. 177 Chap. 39. 16. Have thou given the pleasant
wings unto the Peacocks, or wings and feathers unto the Estrich? fol. 186 Chap.
2. 11. Touch all that he has, to see if he will not blaspheme thee to thy face.
fol. 112 Chap. 2. 9. Then said his wife unto him, do thou continue yet in
thine uprightness? Blaspheme God, and die. ibid. Chap. 28. 28. And unto man he
said; Behold, the fear of the lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil, is
understanding. fol. 256
David's Psalms.
Psalm. 45. 1. 2. My heart will utter forth a good matter, I will entreat in
my works of the king. My tongue is as the pen of a swift writer. fol. 31 Psalm.
31. 3. While I held my tongue my bones consumed. fol. 4 Psalm. 140. 3. All the
labor of a man is for his mouth. fol. 9 Psalm. 112. 1. 2. Blessed be the name
of the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. The Lords name is praised from the
rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same. The Lord is above al
nations, and his glory is above the heavens. fol. 13 Psalm. 15. 1. 2. 3. Lord,
who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, and who shall rest upon thy holy mountain?
etc. fol. 18 Psalm. 140. 3. Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, and keep the
door of my lips. fol. 22. Psalm 5. 11. Their throat is an open sepulcher, and
they flatter with their tongue. fol. 27. Psalm. 50. 16. Open thou my lips O
Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. fol. 33. Psalm. 119. 131. I
opened my mouth and panted. ibid. Psalm. 38. 13. But I, as a deaf man heard
not, and am as a ^umb man, that opens not his mouth. ibid. Psalm. 56. 4.
Their tongue is a sharp sword. fol. 39 Psalm. 62. 18. One time only God spoke,
and these two I heard, that power belongs unto God, and to thee O Lord mercy,
for thou rewardest every one according to his work. fol. 43 Psalm. 2. 7. The
Lord has said unto me: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. fol.
45. Psalm. 64. 1. O Lord, praise waits for thee in Sion. ibid. Psalm. 115. 2.
Every man is a liar. fol. 47 Psalm. 5. 6. Thou shall destroy all them that
speak lies. ibid. Psalm. 61. 9. The children of men are vanity, the chief men
are liars, to lay them upon a balance, they are altogether lighter then vanity
it self. fol. 48 Psalm. 52. 12. God looked down from heaven upon the children
of men, to see if there were any that would understand, and seek God. Every
one is gone back, they are altogether corrupt, there is none that does good, no
not one. ibid. Psalm. 81. 6. I have said you are Gods, and you are all children
of the most high. ibid. Psalm. 43. 3. Send thy light and thy truth, let them
lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy mountain, and to thy Tabernacle.
fol. 49 Psalm. 38. 8. Surely, man in his best estate, is altogether vanity.
ibid. Psalm. 41. 10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. fol. 52 Psalm. 38.
1. 2. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I
will keep my mouth bridled, while the wicked are in sight. fol. 54 Psalm. 38.
3. I was dumb and spoke nothing, I kept silence, even from good. fol. 55 Psalm.
129. 86. All thy commandments are true, ibid. Psalm. 4. 5. Be angry, but sin
not. fol. 59 Psalm. 3. 3. 7. 8. Thou O Lord art a buckler for me, my glory, and
the lifter up of my head, etc. Thou have smitten all mine enemies (without
cause) upon the cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the wicked. Salvation
belongs unto thee O Lord, etc. fol. 61 Psalm. 77. 4. I was astonished, and
could not speak. ibid. Psalm. 34. 12. 13. What man is he that desires life,
and loves long lays for to see good. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips
that they speak no guile. fol. 63 Psalm. 64. 3. 4. They have whet their
tongues like a sword, and shot for their arrows bitter words: to shoot at the
upright in secret, they shoot at him suddenly, and fear not. ibid. Psalm. 64.
8. They shall cause their tongue to fall upon them, and whosoever shall see
them, shall fly away. fol. 64 Psalm. 29. 4. 5. The voice of the Lord is mighty,
the voice of the Lord is glorious. The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedars.
fol. 69 Psalm. 140. 3. They have sharpened their tongues like Serpents: Adders
poison is under their lips. fol. 79 Psalm. 22. 20. Deliver my soul from the
sword, my desolate soul from the power of the dog. fol. 80 Psalm. 77. 6. I
called to remembrance my song in the night, I communed with mine own heart,
and my spirit searched diligently. fol. 83 Psalm. 40. 9. I will not refrain my
lips, O Lord thou know. fol. 84 Psalm. 140. 8. Let the mischief of their own
lips come upon them. ibid. Psalm. 4. 5. Examine your own hearts, and in your
chambers and be still. fol. 85 Psalm. 4. 6. Offer the sacrifices of
righteousness, etc. ibid. Psalm. 50. 18. The sacrifices of God, are a contrite
spirit, a contrite and a broken heart (O God) thou will not despise. ibid.
Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, for that is a benefit, and let him
reprove me, and it shall be a precious oil, that shall not break mine head.
fol. 86* Psalm. 31. 18. Let the lying lips be made dumb. ibid. Psalm. 12. 1. 2.
The faithful are failed from among the children of men. They speak
deceitfully every man with his neighbor, flattering with their lips, and
speak with a double heart. fol. 91 Psalm. 13. 5. Their throat is an open
sepulcher, with their tongues they have deceived. fol. 92 Psalm. 119. 86. All
thy commandments are truth. fol. 97 Psalm. 91. 4. His truth shall be thy
shield and buckler. ibid. Psalm. 5. 9. There is no truth in their mouth, within
they are very corruption. fol. 100 Psalm. 4. 2. O you sons of men, how long
will you turn my glory into shame, loving vanity, and seeking lies! ibid.
Psalm. 132. 11. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, and he will not shrink
from it, etc. ibid. Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is near unto all that call upon
him in truth. ibid. Psalm. 15. 1. 2. 3. Lord, who shall dwell in thy
Tabernacle, who shall rest in thy holy mountain? He that speaks the truth in
his heart, he that has no guile in his tongue. ibid. Psalm. 117. 2. The
truth of the Lord endures for ever. fol. 107* Psalm. 69. 2. I stick fast in
the deep mire. fol. 126* Psalm. 120. 2. When I was in trouble, I called upon
the Lord, and he heard me. ibid. Psalm. 35. 10. All my bones shall say: Lord,
who is like unto thee? fol. 131 Psalm. 73. 9. They stretch forth their mouth
unto heaven, and their tongue goes through the world. fol. 145 Psalm. 50. 21.
Thou thoughtst wickedly, that I am even such a one as thy self, but I will
reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done. fol. 152
Psalm. 33. 19. Let the ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in
the grave. Let the lying lips be put to silence. ibid. Psalm. 31. 20. Which
cruelly and disdainfully and despightfully speak against the righteous. ibid.
Psalm. 119. 134. O deliver me from the slanders of men, and I will keep thy
precepts. ibid. Psalm. 105. 30. Their land brought forth Frogs, even in their
kings chambers. fol. 157 Psalm. 57.5. The children of men, whose teeth are
spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. fol. 163 Psalm. 78. 36.
They flattered him with their mouth, and dissembled with him with their tongue.
For their heart was not, upright with him, neither were they faithful in his
covenant. fol. 170 Psalm. 68. 25. The tongue of thy dogs, in the blood of thine
enemies. fol. 171 Psalm. 110. 2. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my
right hand. fol. 174 Psalm. 73. 24. Thou have received me to glory. ibid.
Psalm. 3. 3. My glory, and the lifter up of my head. ibid. Psalm. 2. 9. Thou
shall bruise them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters
vessel. fol. 175 Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy
name give the glory. fol. 176 Psalm. 45. 13. She is al glorious within, her
clothing is of broydered gold. fol 195 Psalm. 50. 16. 17. Why do thou
preach my laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth? whereas thou hate to
be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. fol. 196 Psalm. 36. 8. They
shall be satisfied with the fatness of thine house, and thou shall give them
drink out of the river of thy pleasures. fol. 198 Psalm. 119. 55. Blessed are
they Lord, that dwell in thy house, for they shall praise thee for ever and
ever. fol. 210 Psalm. 119. 91. They continue even to this day by thine
ordinances, for all are thy servants. fol. 212 Psalm. 150. 6. Let every thing
that has breath, praise the Lord. ibid. Psalm. 113. 1. Praise O ye servants of
the Lord, praise the name of the Lord. fol. 219 Psalm. 139. 15. My bones are
not hid from thee, though I was made in a secret place. fol. 220 Psalm. 45. 2.
Grace is powered in thy lips, because God has blessed thee for ever. fol. 222
Psalm. 8. 5. Thou have crowned him with glory and honor. fol. 223 Psalm. 115.
5. 6. 7. They have eyes and see not, they have noses and smell not, they have
ears and hear not, they have hands and touch not, they have mouths and eat
not. fol. 224. Psalm. 65. 1. O God, praise waits for thee in Sion. fol. 231
Psalm. 28. 5. They understood not the works of the lord. fol. 246 Psalm. 129.
3. The plowers plowed upon my back, and made long furrows. fol. 247 Psalm. 40.
3. And he has put in my mouth a new Song, of praise unto our God. fol. 248
Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me O God, according to the multitude of thy
compassions. fol. 249 Psalm. 104. 29. 30. If thou take away their breath, they
die, and return to their dust. Again if thou send forth thy spirit, they are
created, and thou renewest the face of the earth. fol. 254 Psalm. 111. 9. The
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. fol. 256 Psalm. 10. 6. 7. For
he has said in his heart, Tush, I shall never be cast down, there shall no
harm happen unto me. His mouth is full of cursing, deceit and fraud, under
his tongue is ungodliness and vanity. fol. 257 Psalm. 14. 3. 4. The Lord
looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that
would understand, and seek after God. But they are all gone out of the way,
they are altogether become abominable, there is none that does good, no not
one. fol. 265 Psalm. 69. 1. Save me O God, for the waters are com in, even unto
my soul. fol. 270 Psalm. 107. 18. Their soul abhorred all manner of meat, and
they were even at deaths door. fol. 272 Psalm. 73. 21. I was ignorant, even as
it were a beast before thee. fol. 275
Proverbs of Solomon.
Chap. 18. 21. Life and death are in the power of the tongue. fol. 4 Chap. 10.
9. The foolish in talk shall be beaten. ibid. Chap. 17. 29. A fool when he
holds his peace, is accounted wise, and he that stops his lips prudent.
fol. 5 Chap. 10. 20. In many words there cannot want iniquity, but he that
refraineth his tongue, is wise. fol. 11 Chap. 15. 14. A soft answer puts
away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. A wholesome tongue is a tree
of life, but the frowardness thereof is the breaking of the mind. fol. 20
Chap. 25. 29. A man that refraineth not his speech, is like a city which is
broken down, and without walls. fol. 22 Chap. 13. 3. He that keeps his mouth
and his tongue, keeps his soul from destruction. fol. 23 Chap. 18. 4. The
words of a wise man's mouth, are like deep waters. fol. 30 Chap. 14. 25. Where
many words are, there want attends. ibid. Chap. 16. 1. The answer of the
tongue, is of the Lord. fol. 30 Chap. 15. 2. The mouth of a fool, babbleth out
foolishness. fol 57 Chap. 12. 18. The tongue of a wise man is health. fol. 71
Chap. 27. 6. The wounds of a lover are better then the false kisses of an
enemy. fol. 86 Chap. 23. 31. 32. Look not thou upon the wine when it is red,
and when it shows his color in the cup, it goes down pleasantly. But in the
end it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a Cockatrice. fol. 92 Chap. 16.
24. Fair words are as the hony-combes sweetness to the soul, and health to
the bones. fol. 129 Chap. 17. 11. A seditious person seeks only evil, and a
cruel messenger shall be sent against him. fol. 141 Chap. 14. 2. He that
walks in his righteousness, fears the Lord: but he that is lewd in his
ways, despises him. fol. 143 Chap. 24. 9. The detractor is abomination. fol.
144 Chap. 10. 23. It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly. fol. 151 Chap. 17.
21. A naughty tongue shall fall into evil. fol. 172 Chap. 4. 23. Keep thine
heart with all diligence, for thereout comes life. fol. 221 Chap. 12. 23. The
lying lips are abomination to the Lord. fol. 224 Chap. 18. 6. A fools lips
causes strife. ibid. Chap. 15. 7. His lips are a snare for his soul. ibid.
Chap. 30. 14. There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords. fol. 258
Ecclesiastes, and Ecclesiasticus.
Chap. 51. 30. The Lord has given me a tongue for my reward, wherewith I will
praise him. fol. 3 Chap. 3. 1. 7. To all things there is an appointed time, a
time to keep silence, and a time to speak. fol. 4 Chap. 15. 18. Learn before
thou speak. fol. 8 Chap. 6. 7. All the labor of man, is for his mouth. fol. 9
Chap. 22. 26. Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom
upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me
not? ibid. Chap. 32. 8. Thou that are young, speak if need require, and yet
scarcely when thou art twice asked. fol. 13 Chap. 30. 12. 8. Bow down the neck
of thy son while he is young. An untamed horse will be stubborn, and a wanton
child will be wilful. fol. 18 Chap. 28. 29. Weigh thy words in a balance, and
make a sure bridle for thy mouth. fol. 28 Chap. 9. 17. The words of the wise
are more heard in silence, then the cry of him that rules among fools. fol. 31
Chap. 11. 30. 2 Judge no man blessed before his death, for a man is known by
his children. Commend no man in his life time. fol. 37 Chap. 28. 25. Make a
door, and a bar, and a bridle for thy mouth. fol. 38 Chap. 21. 14. The heart
or inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, he can keep no knowledge
whiles he lives. fol. 40 Chap. 20. 7. A wise man will hold his tongue till he
see opportunity, but a fool and a trifler will regard no time. ibid. Chap. 28.
22. There be many that have perished by the edge of the sword, but not so many
as have fallen by the tongue, etc. fol. 41 Chap. 40. 21. The pipe and the
Psalterion make a sweet noise, but the stroke of the tongue breaks the
boanes. ibid. Chap. 32. 6. Power not out words where there is no audience. fol.
45 Chap. 15. 5. In the midst of the congregation shall he open his mouth, with
the spirit of wisdom and understanding shall he fill him, and cloth him with
the garment of glory. fol. 51 Chap. 15. 1. A soft answer puts away wrath,
but grievous words stir up anger. fol. 67 Chap. 20. 15. They that eat his
bread, speak evil of him. fol. 90 Chap. 20. 24. A thief is better then a
man that is accustomed to ly, they both shall have destruction to heritage.
fol. 110 Chap. 28. 16. The double tongue has disquieted many, and driven them
from nation to nation. fol. 112 Chap. 9. 12. No man does know his time, but as
the fishes which are taken in an evil net, or as the birds that are caught in
the snare: so are the children of men snared in the evil time, when it falls
upon them suddenly. fol. 124 Chap. 30. 25. Sorrow has slain many, and there
is no profit in it. fol. 129 Chap. 21. 4. All iniquity is as a two edged sword,
the wounds thereof cannot be healed. fol. 133 Chap. 15. 9. Praise is not seemly
in the mouth of a sinner, for that it is not sent of the Lord. fol. 143 Chap.
11. 31. Of one little spark is made a great fire, and of one deceitful man is
blood increased. fol. 148 Chap. 16. 9. Have thou heard any thing against thy
neighbor? let it die in thee. fol. 145 Chap. 5. 11. Be not carried about with
every wind, and go not into every way, for so does the sinner that has a
double tongue. fol. 166 Chap. 27. 25. 26. 27. Whoso casts a stone on high,
casts it upon his own head, and he that smites with guile, makes a great
wound, etc. fol. 165 Chap. 45. 12. A crown of gould upon his head, bearing the
form and mark of holiness. fol. 223 Chap. 2. 6. Some man houldeth his tongue,
because he has not to answer, and some keeps silence, waiting a convenient
time. fol. 227 Chap. 15. 5. 6. In the midst of the congregation shall she open
his mouth, with the spirit of wisdom and understanding shall she fill him,
and cloth him with the garment of glory. She shall cause him to inherit joy,
and the crown of gladness, and an everlasting name. fol. 252
Canticles or Salomons Song.
Chap. 4. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of Scarlet, and thy talk is sweet.
fol. 22 Chap. 2. 14. Let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is sweet. fol. 23
Chap. 2. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.
fol. 174 Chap. 4. 16. Arise O North, and come O South, and blow on my garden,
that the spices thereof may fly forth, etc. fol. 255 Chap. 6. 3. Terrible is
an Army with banners. fol. 282
The Prophet Esaias.
Chap. 6. 5. Woe be to me because I held my peace. fol. 4 Chap. 14. 12. 13. I
will ascend above the highest of the clouds, and exalt my throane beside the
stars of God. I will sit upon the mount in the congregation of the North, and
I will be like to the most high. fol. 21 Chap. 30. 15. In quietness and in
hope shall be your strength. fol. 27 Chap. 32. 17. The beauty of justice is
quietness. fol. 29 Chap. 45. 9. My secrets I keep to my self, etc. fol. 42
Chap. 14. 15. But thou shall be brought down to the grave, to the sides of the
pit. fol. 52 Chap. 37. 36. The Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the
camp of Ashur, an hundred fourscore and five thousand. fol. 64 Chap. 2. 4.
They shall break their swords into mattocks or plough-shares, and their spears
into Sithes. fol. 74 Chap. 29. 13. This people come near unto me with their
mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their hearts far from
me. fol. 88 Chap. 56. 10. They are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark. fol. 90
Chap. 3. 12. O my people, they that term you happy, do deceive you. fol. 93
Chap. 52. 2. Vnty, or take from thy neck, the snare that houlds thee captive,
Oh daughter Sion. fol. 121 Chap. 62. 6. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which all the day and all the night continually shall not cease.
fol. 133 Chap. 62. 7. Oh you that are mindful of the Lord, keep not silence,
and give him no rest, till he repair, and till he set up Jerusalem, the praise
of the world. fol. 134 Chap. 47. 5. Sit still, and get thee into darkness, Oh
daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou shall no more be called the Lady of
kingdoms. ibid. Chap. 32. 4. The tongue of the flatterers shall be ready.
fol. 154 Chap. 6. 6. 7. The flew one of the Seraphims to me, with an hot coal
in his hand, which he had taken from the Altar with the tongs. And he touched
my mouth, and said. Lo, this has touched thy lips and thine iniquity shall be
taken away, and thy sin shall be purged. fol. 159 Chap. 51. 7. 8. Harken unto
me, you that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law. Fear
you not the reproache of men, neither be you afraid of their rebukes. For the
moath shall eat them up like a garment, and the worms shall eat them like wol:
but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to
generation. fol. 163 Chap. 14. 12. How art thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer,
Son of the morning? fol. 172 Chap. 7. 11. 12. Ask a sign for thee of the Lord
thy God, either in the depth beneath, or in the height above. I will not ask,
neither will I tempt the Lord. fol. 194 Chap. 8. 21. When he shall be angry, he
shall even fret himself, and curse his king and his Gods, and shall look
upward. fol. 211 Chap. 52. 5. My name all the day continually is blasphemed.
fol. 213 Chap. 31. 9. And the tongue is as a fire, which consumes any thing.
fol. 219 Chap. 23. 2. Be still ye that dwell in the Isles. fol. 222 Chap. 22.
22. And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulders. fol. 243
Chap. 64. 1. Oh that thou would break the heavens, and come down. fol. 245
Chap. 1^. 1. Send you a Lamb to the ruler of the world, from the rock of the
wilderness. ibid. Chap. 60. 8. Who are these that fly like a cloud? fol. 256
Chap. 6. 5. I dwell in the midst of a people of polluted lips, and mine eyes
have seen the king and Lord of hoastes fol. 267 Chap. 38. 10. Exalt thy voice
like a Trumpet. fol 280
The Prophet Jeremy.
Chap. 48. 9. Give flowers unto Moab, that it may fly and get away: for the
cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein. fol. 76 Chap.
48. 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, and cursed be
he that keeps back his sword from blood. ibid. Chap. 18. 18. Come, and let
us smite him with the tongue. fol. 94 Chap. 5. 30. 31. An horrible and filthy
thing is committed in the land. The Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests
receive gifts in their hands, and my people delight therein. What will you then
do in the end thereof? fol. 97 Chap. 4. 19. I cannot be still, for my soul
has heard the sound of the Trumpet, and the alarm of the battle. fol. 133
Chap. 4. 20. Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is
wasted, suddenly are my Tents destroyed, and my curtains in a moment. fol.134
Chap. 3. 1. Thou have plaide the harlot with many lovers, thou have sit waiting
for them in the ways. fol. 135 Chap. 1. 5. 6. Before I formed thee in the
womb, I knew thee, and before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee,
and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto the nations, etc. fol. 230 Chap. 15. 19.
And if thou take away the precious from the vile, thou shall be according to my
word. fol. 263
The Prophet Ezechiel.
Chap. 24. 18. I spoke unto the people in the morning, and at even my wife
died. fol. 132 Chap. 21. 6. Mourn therefore silently in affliction of spirit.
fol. 135 Chap. 1. 9. They returned not, but every one went straight forward.
fol. 151 Chap. 22. 9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood, in thee
are they that eat upon the mountains, in the midst of thee they commit
abomination. fol. 162 Chap. 34. 18. 19. Have you drunk of the deep waters, and
must you trouble the residue with your feet? And my sheep eat that, which you
have trodden with your feet, and drink that which you have troubled with your
feet. fol. 180 Chap. 8. 8. 9. Ezechiel, take an instrument and dig the wall,
which seems so stupendous to thee, etc. fol. 199
To Prophet Daniell.
Chap. 10. 15. I set my face toward the ground, and held my peace. fol. 136
Chap. 2. 35. Then was the iron, the claye, the brass, the silver and the gould
broken all together, and became like the chafe of the summer flowers, and the
wind carried them away, that no place was found for them. And the stone, that
smote the Image, became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth. fol. 176
Chap. 3. 96. Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation and language,
which speak any blasphemy against the god of Sydrach, Misach and Abednago,
shall be drawn in pices, and their houses ruined. fol. 215 Chap. 10. 17. How
can the servant of this my Lord talk with my Lord? fol. 236 Chap. 3. 60. All
ye works of the Lord, bless you the Lord, praise him, and exalt him above
all things for ever. fol. 212
The Prophet Oseas.
Chap. 7. 3. They make the king glad with their wickedness. fol. 95 Chap. 4.
1. 2. 3. There is no truth in the land. By swearing and lying, etc. they break
out. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall
be cut off. fol. 105 Chap. 13. 1. Ephraim speaking, a great fear came upon
Israel. fol. 132 Chap. 2. 20. I will even marry thee unto me in faithfulness.
fol. 135 Chap. 7. 16. Their Princes fall by the edge of the sword, for the rage
of their tongues. fol. 172 Chap. 2. 14 I will bring her into the wilderness,
and speak unto her heart. fol. 260
The Prophet Amos.
Chap. 5. 2. The virgin Israel is left upon her land, and there is none to
raise her up. fol. 128
The Prophet Micheas.
Chap. 6. 15. Thou shall sow, but not reap, thou shall tread the Olives, but
shall not anoint thee with the Oil, and make sweet wine, but shall not
drink wine fol.
The Prophet Nahum.
Chap. 3. 5. I will discover thy skirtes upon thy face, and will show the
nations thy filthiness, and the kingdoms thy shame. fol. 196
The Prophet Aggeus.
Chap. 1. 5. 6. Consider your own ways in your hearts. You have sown much, and
bring in little; you have eat, but you have not enough; you drink, but yet you
are not filled; you cloth you, but you be not warm; and he that earneth
wages, puts the wages into a broken bag. fol. 198
The Prophet Esdras.
Chap. 4. 41. 42. Blessed be the Lord God of truth: Truth is great and
strongest, and overcomes all things. fol. 107
Wisdom of Solomon.
Chap. 7. 12. The soul of the just is the seat of wisdom. fol. 28 Chap. 17.
18. The sound or Echo that answers again in the hollow mountain. fol. 88
Chap. 1. 11. The mouth that speaks lies, sleyeth the soul. fol. 106 Chap. 7.
30. Malice cannot overcome wisdom. fol. 118
Saint Matthews Gospel.
Chap. 12. 37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. fol. 39 Chap. 10. 20. It is not you that speak, but the
spirit of your father which speaks in you. fol. 51 Chap. 26. 65. 66. He has
blasphemed: what have we any more need of witnesses? Now you have heard his
blasphemy, he is worthy to die. fol. 52 Chap. 5. 22. Guilt of judgment, guilt
of a Council, and guilt of hell fire. fol. 114 Chap. 22. 16. Master we know
that thou say, and teach right, neither do thou accept man's person, but
teach the way of god truly, etc. fol. 117 Chap. 25. 33. He shall set the
sheep on his right hand. fol. 112 Chap. 12. 22. Then was brought to him one
possessed with a devil, both blind and dumb, and he healed him, so that he
which was blind and dumb, both spoke and saw, etc. fol. 160 Chap. 5. 11.
Blessed are you when men revile you. fol. 163 Chap. 15. 7. 8. VVoe be to you
hypocrites, Esaias prophesied well of you; This people draws near unto me with
their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far off
from me. fol. 169 Chap. 7. 16. You shall know them by their fruits. fol. 170
Chap. 6. 2. They have their reward. fol. 174 Chap. 6. 16. 17. When you fast,
look not sour as the hypocrites do: for they dissigure their faces, that
they might seem unto men to fast. But when thou fastest, etc. fol. 176 Chap.
23. 3. 4. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do:
but after their works do not, for they say, and do not. They bind heavy
burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they
themselves will not move them with one of their singers. fol. 183 Chap. 7. 16.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? fol. 184 Chap. 25. 1. 2.
3. The kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto ten virgins, etc. ibid. Chap.
23. 5. All their works they do for to be seen of men. fol. 189 Chap. 26. 73.
Thou also art a Galilean, for even thy speech bewrays thee. fol. 210 Chap.
27. 51. And behold the veil of the Temple rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom. fol. 246 Chap. 27. 52. And the graves opened themselves. fol. 247 Chap.
2. 2. Where is the king of the Jews that is borne? ibid. Chap. 5. 2. And he
opened his mouth, and taught them saying, etc. fol. 253 Chap. 18. 15. 16. 17.
If they brother trespass against thee, go, and tell him his fault, between
thee and him alone, if he hear thee, thou have won thy brother. But if he
hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the mouth of two or
three witnesses, every word may be confi^med. And if he will not vouchsafe to
hear then tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse to hear the Church also,
let him be unto thee as an heathen, and a publicane. fol. 269 Chap. 7. 3. Why
see thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, and perceiuest not the beam
that is in thine own eye? fol. 276 Chap. 18. 22. I say not to thee, unto
seven times, but unto seauenty times seven times. fol. 280
Saint Marks Gospel.
Chap. 15. 25. And it was the third hour, when they crucified him. fol. 24
Chap. 1. 25. Jesus rebuked him, saying: hold thy peace. fol. 117 Chap. 7. 35.
And the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke plain. fol. 160 Chap. 5.
41. And he took the child by the hand, and said unto her Tabitha kumi, which
is by interpretation, Maiden, I say unto thee arise. fol. 167 Chap. 7. 6. This
people honoreth me with their lips. fol. 224
Saint Lukes Gospel.
Chap. 1. 29. She thought what manner of salvation that should be. fol. 8 Chap.
12. 19. My soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years: live at ease,
eat, drink and take thy pleasure. fol. 23. Chap. 21. 15. I will give you a
mouth and wisdom, where-against all your adversaries shall not be able to
speak nor resist. fol. 52 Chap. 5. 1. And the people pressed upon him to hear
the word of God, etc. fol. 69 Chap. 2. 14. Peace in earth, and toward men
good will. fol. 75 Chap. 11. 14. Then he cast out a devil, and he was dumb.
fol. 112 Chap. 4. 41. He rebuked them, and suffered them not to speak. etc.
etc.fol. 118 Chap. 18. 11. 12. Oh God I thank thee, that I am not as other
men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publicane. I fast twice
in the week: I give tithe of all that ever I possess. fol. 130 Chap. 15. 2.
The Scribes and Pharisees murmured, saying: He receives sinners, and eats
with them. fol. 138 Chap. 1. 33. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever. fol. 180 Chap. 1. 20. Thou shall be dumb, and not be able to speak.
fol. 222 Chap. 21. 14. Lay it up therefore in your hearts, that you premeditate
not what you shall answer, etc. fol. 242 Chap. 23. 43. This day thou shall be
with me in Paradise. fol. 245 Chap. 1. 64. And his mouth was opened
immediately, and he prophesied. fol. 246 Chap. 24. 45. Then opened he their
understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures. fol. 247 Chap. 1. 40.
The sheepheards said one to another. ibid. Chap. 1. 35. The holy ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall ouershaddow thee. fol. 255
Chap. 23. 22. I will chastise him and let him loose. fol. 271 Chap. 4. 23.
Physician heal thy self. fol. 276 Chap. 10. 14. 15. Martha Martha thou carest
and art troubled about many things. Mary has chosen the good part. fol. 278
Saint John's Gospel.
Chap. 8. 38. I speak that which I have seen with my father. fol. 46 Chap. 1.
12. To them he gave power to be the sons of God. fol. 48 Chap. 7. 46. Never
was man heard to speak the like. fol. 69 Chap. 18. 37. For this cause am I
borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness
unto the truth. fol. 99 Chap. 8. 46. And if I say the truth, why do you not
believe me? ibid. Chap. 14. 3. It is expedient for you that I go away: but if
I depart away, I will send you the comforter, the spirit of truth, etc. ibid.
Chap. 8. 44. He has been a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him. fol. 100 Chap. 8. 45. When he
speaks a ly, then he speaks of his own, fol. 118 Chap. 10. 5. 8. The sheep
did not hear them, for they knew not the voice of strangers. fol. 183 Chap. 9.
13. Give glory unto God. fol. 194 Chap. 14. 30. They are of the world, therefore
speak they according to the world. fol. 210 Chap. 3. 31. He that is of the
earth, is of the earth, and speaks of the earth. fol. 211 Chap. 3. 14. 15. So
must the son of man be lift up: That whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. fol. 244 Chap. 3. 13. No man ascends up to
heaven, but he that has descended from heaven. fol. 246 Chap. 19. 34. A spear
opened his side. fol. 247 Chap. 20. 22. He breathed on them, and said unto
them; Receive you the holy Ghost. fol. 253
Acts of the Apostles.
Chap. 4. 20. For we cannot but speak the things which we have heard and seen.
fol. 35 Chap. 6. 10. They were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit,
by which he spoke. fol. 51 Chap. 2. 11. We heard them speak in our tongues,
the wonderful works of God. fol. 78 Chap. 6. 15. They saw his face, as it had
bin the face of an Angel. fol. 177 Chap. 3. 17. I knew brethren, that through
ignorance you did it. fol. 206 Chap. 2. 3. 4. There appeared unto them cloven
tongues, like fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were call filled
with the holy Ghost. fol. 240 Chap. 1. 14. They all continued with one accord,
in prayer and supplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus and
with his brethren. ibid. Chap. 8. 31. How can I understand, except I had a
guide? fol. 246 Chap. 8. 35. Then Philippe opened his mouth. fol. 253
Epistle to the Romans.
Chap. 1. 20. For the invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and
Godhead, are scene by the creation of the world, being considered in his works,
to the intent that they should be without excuse. fol. 44 Chap. 3. 4. Let God
be true, and every man a liar. fol. 47 Chap. 2. 21. Thou which teach
another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? fol. 180 Chap. 1. 3. Of the seed of David, according
to the flesh. fol. 245 Chap. 12. 19. Vengeance is mine, and in my time I will
repay it. fol. 278
Epistle to the Corinthians 1.
Chap. 1. 23. 24. We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews even a stumbling
block, and unto the Grecians foolishness. But unto them which are called, both
of the Jews and Grecians, we preach christ the power of God, and the wisdom
of God. fol. 118 Chap. 6. 10. No raylers, nor thieves shall inherit the kingdom
of god. fol. 161 Chap. 4. 5. Then shall every man have the praise of God. fol.
178 Chap. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid,
which is christ Jesus. fol. 191 Chap. 2. 8. For had they known it, they would
not have crucified the Lord of glory. fol. 206 Chap. 13. 13. And now abides
faith, hope and charity, even these three: but the cheifest of these is
charity. fol. 210
Epistle to the Corinthians 2.
Chap. 5. 4. For indeed, we that are in this tabernacle, sigh and are burdened,
because we would not be vnclo^thed, but would be clothed upon, that mortality
might be swallowed up of life. fol. 19 Chap. 4. 7. But we have this treasure in
earthen vessels. ibid. Chap. 9. 22. I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all mean save some. fol. 77 Chap. 14. 18. I thank my God, I speak
languages more then you all. fol. 78 Chap. 11. 15. Therefore it is no great
thing, though his ministers transform themselves, as though they were the
ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. fol.
102 Chap. 11. 14. For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light.
ibid. Chap. 1. 12. That in simplicity and godly pureness of heart, and not in
fleshly wisdom. but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world. fol. 186 Chap. 12. 4. He heard words which cannot be spoken, which are
not possible for man to utter. fol. 235 Chap. 6. 11. O Corinthians, our mouth
is open unto you. fol. 253 Chap. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God.
fol. 260 Chap. 6. 1. Brethren, if a man be fallen (by occasion) into any fault,
you which are spiritual, restore such a one with the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. fol. 271 Chap. 2. 11. He
withstood him to his face, for he was to be blamed. fol. 277 Chap. 2. 11. God
works all things after the counsel of his own will. fol. 57
Epistle to the Ephesians.
Chap. 4. 24. Put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness. fol. 254
Epistle to the Colossians.
Chap. 3. 1. The seek not those things that are above with Jesus christ. fol.
183
Epistle to Timothy 1.
Chap. 5. 2. Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father. fol. 268 Chap. 5.
20. Them that sin, rebuke openly, that the rest also may fear. fol. 277
Epistle to Timothy 2.
Chap. 4. 3. 4. For the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome
doctrine: But having their ears itching, shall (after their own lusts) get
them an heap of teachers: and shall turn their ears from the truth, and
shall be given unto fables.
Epistle to the Ebrewes.
Chap. 1. 1. 2. At sundry times, and in diverse manners God spoke in the old
time, to our Fathers by the Prophets. In these last days, he has spoken to us
by his Son, whom he has made heyr of al things, etc. fol. 44 Chap. 4. 12. The
word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged
sword, and enters through, even to the dividing a sunder of the soul and the
spirit, and of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and the intents of the heart. fol. 73
Epistle of Saint James.
Chap. 3. 5. The tongue is a little member, and boasts of great things.
Epistle of Saint Peter 1.
Chap. 3. 10. If any man long after life, and to see good days, let him
refrain his tongue from ^uill, and his lips that they speak no guile, fol.
79 Chap. 3. 13. 14. Who is he that will harm you, if you follow that which is
good? Notwithstanding, blessed are you, if you suffer for righteousness sake.
fol. 144
Epistle of Saint John.
Chap. 3. 8. For this purpose appeared the Son of God, that he might loose
the works of the devil. fol. 131
Apocalypse.
Chap. 4. 11. For thou have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are,
and have bin created. fol. 46 Chap. 12. 9. And the great Dragon, that old
Serpent, called the devil, and Satan, was cast out. fol. 53 Chap. 2. 16. Out of
his mouth went a sharp two edged sword. fol. 74 Chap. 9. 18. Out of their
mouths went forth fire, and smoke, and brimstoane. fol. 79 Chap. 21. 27 And
there shall enter into it no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination or lies. fol. 106. Chap. 12. 10. The accuser of our brethren is
cast down, which accused them before our God day and night. fol. 112 Chap. 17.
8. The beast that thou have seen was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the
bottomless pit. fol. 119 Chap. 16. 10. They gnawed their tongues for sorrow.
fol. 208 Chap. 16. 11. They blasphemed the God of heaven, for their pains, and
for their sores. fol. 209 Chap. 4. 8. And the four beasts had each of them
six wings about him, and they were full of eyes within, and they ceased not
day nor night, saying: Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and
which is, and which is to come. fol. 211 Chap. 3. 10. If any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him,
and he with me. fol. 223 Chap. 7. 11. 12. And they fell before the Throane on
their faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen. Praise and glory, and wisdom,
and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for evermore,
Amen. fol. 231 Chap. 8. 1. There was a silence in heaven, about half an hour.
ibid. Chap. 14. 3. They sung as it were a new Song. fol. 235 Chap. 3. 7. And
write unto the Angel of the church which is of Philadelphia; These things
says he that is holy and True, which has the keye of David, which opens,
and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens. fol. 242
FINIS.
A Table, Alphabetically gathered, of all the sever all matters contained in
this Book.
A.
ABraham, in steed of an authentical writing, gave his word only. fol. 104
Achaz, a wicked man, would not give God his due glory, in requiring a sign.
fol. Absalon, by his flattering sweetness of speech, attempted to deprive his
father of the Crown. fol. 67 Acaticus, the Philosopher, would not talk at
banquets, and being demanded the reason thereof, returned a very witty
answer. fol. 25 Acteon, devoured by his own dogs that he nourished, so in like
case are men by flatterers. fol. 92 Agatonus, a religious man, who for thirty
years space carried a stone in his mouth, to learn thereby silence. fol. 26
Agis, king of Lacaedemonia, reproved the Ambassador from the Abderites, for
the tedious length of his Oration. fol. 32 Aegesias, Platoes Scholar, reading
on the immortality of the soul, many were thereby drawn to sley themselves.
fol. 68 Alpheus, and his history. fol. 68 Amphion, and his history. ibid.
Amalechite, that vaunted how he had slain king Saul, slew himself by his own
ouerlauish tongue. fol. 65 Angels, in what manner they speak to God, among
themselves, and with men. fol. 115 Anacharsides the Philosopher, had in a fair
Quadrant of his own picture, written an excellent sentence in praise of
silence. fol. 13 Anacharsis the Philosopher gave a goodly commendation of
truth. fol. 100 Antiochus renounced the vesture and ornaments regal, because
he would not be flattered. fol. 89 Antisthenes the Cynick, said, there was
less harm to be had, lighting among Ravens, then falling into the hands of
flatterers. fol. 93 Antisthenes the Philosopher grieved, because a wicked man
had spoken well of him. fol. 143 Antisthenes his answer concerning the
reprehension of Princes, and men in authority. fol. Apelles of Ephesus, drawing
the portraiture of king Antigonus, who wanted an ey, painted him without any
defecte at all: And being therefore reproved, made a witty answer. fol. 141
Apology made to the Sea Crabbes by their Parents, whereby to reprehend the
lewd examples of Fathers in their families. fol. 14 Apology made by the Cats
to the Mice. fol. Alexander, what a liberal giver he was. fol. Apoll^nius the
Philosopher, praised silence, and reproved loquacity or babbling. fol. 12
Apostles, their speaking in diverse languages, for doing good to many. fol. 78
Apostles, before they received the gift of tongues, they were devout in prayer.
fol. Apollonius the Philosopher, was stricken with amazement at the speaking of
Cicero. fol. 67 Architas the Tarentine said, that nothing was delightful,
without some friend. fol. 34 Arion, and his history. fol.68 Aron erected the
goulden Calfe by the steep mountain of Sinai. fol. 95 Aristippus the
Philosopher reprehended a covetous father about his Son. fol. 16 Aristippus
the flatterer of Dionisius, was by Diogenes called a dog, and many other
significant names thereto appertayning. fol. 93 Aristotle said, that anger is
good, but never fit to serve as a guide or director. fol. 59 Aristotle said,
that it is more hard to be silent, then to speak. fol. 42 Artificial and
cunning speaking, can very hardly be void of deceit. fol. 75 Atys, Son to king
Croesus, being borne dumb, did speak by command of nature. fol. 34 Ass
belonging to Balaam, what words he delivered when he spoke. fol. 118
B
Babylon, and the people thereof had many sins, because they were proud,
ambitious, heretics, and Idolaters; notwithstanding, God chastised them by
their tongues only. fol. 24 Balaam was like to his Ass he rode on. fol. 51
Barber belonging to king Mydas, could not conceal his Lords deformity, but
cried out in a cave, that Mydas had the ears of an Ass. fol. 35 Beda, a
venerable Father of England, had his eyes pulled out of his head, for delivering
an interpretation of the truth. fol. 98 Bethulia, very cruelly besieged by
Holophernes. fol. 120 Bion the Philosopher, said: That among wild beasts, a
Tyrant is the worst, and among the tame, the flatterer is most dangerous. fol.
91 Blame justly belonging to the unbridled tongue. fol. 27 Blessed and
s^nctified spirits attending upon God, they cannot err either in their
conceits or words. fol. 56 Bohemia, and the people thereof observe for a
certainty, that such as do tell, or swear a ly in the judgment place,
undoubtedly shall die that same year. fol. 106 Blasphemy committed by
Senacherib, and in Gods justice sharply punished. fol. 64 Blasphemy has in it
the weight or burden of the sin of Infidelity. fol. 202 Blasphemy sometimes is
worse then Infidelity. fol. 203 Blasphemy is more offensive in the christian,
then in the Infidel. ibid. Blasphemy out-goeth any sin else. fol. 204
Blasphemy sometimes is committed, in scorning the truth, by gestures of the
body, and without speaking. ibid. Blasphemy is worse then the sin of murder.
fol. 205 Blasphemy is a greater sin then heresy; or the sin of the Jews in
crucifying Christ; and blasphemy goes far beyond Idolatry. fol. 206
Blasphemy has no excuse for it self, as other sins do pretend to have. fol.
207 Blasphemers gnawe their tongues for a punishment. fol. 208 Blasphemy
endures longer, then any other vice whatsoever, and the punishment thereof is
of like length, and more intense or vehement. fol. 209 Blasphemers are known
by their manner of speaking, to be of the kingdom of hell. fol. 210 Blasphemy
is so abominable, that the holy Scripture refraineth to use the word; but in
steed of blaspheming, uses blessing. fol. 211 Blasphemers are worse then brute
beasts, and even do kill God, so much as in them lies. fol. 212 Blasphemy is
punished by all laws. fol. 213 The blessed do keep silence, as being overcome
with joy, in beholding the presence of the majesty divine. fol. 231 Brevity
in speaking has always been commendable. fol. 30 Budeus, defining an
hypocrite, says, That an hypocrite is every such dissembler, as takes upon him
to represent that which himself is not. fol. 169
C
Cicero said: That a man is known by his speaking to be either wise, or
foolish. fol. 5. Cato was highly commended by Cicero, because he never spoke
any word, whereof he repented himself afterward. fol. 7 Chilo was wont to say:
That the tongue ought not to fore-run the mind. fol. 8 Cato of Vtica, and
Cicero said: That it was a great fault to be silent, when necessity of speaking
was required. ibid. Cleobulus, one of the seven Sages of Greece, said: that a
wise man is more sollicitous to hear then to speak. fol. 10 Careon, a young
man very talkeatiue, yet willing to learn the Art of Rhetoric, had a double
salarie demanded of him, to teach him to avoid his evil talking. fol. 12
Cadnidus king of Scythia, was brother to Anacharsides the great learned
Philosopher. fol. 13. Crates the Philosopher, did much lament the negligence of
those fathers of families, who were careless of their childrens enstruction.
fol. 15 Cato his advise for a child's first erudition. fol. 18 Cain did more
offend with his blasphemous ^ongue, in denying the mercy of god, then he did
with his bloody hand, in taking away the lif^ of his brother. fol. 20 No better
covering for the heart of man then silence. fol. 26 Cicero was slain for
overmuch speaking. fol. 28 How all the creatures do bring us to the knowledge
of god, and his omnipotent greatness. fol* 44 The creatures are to us in steed
of as many tongues, whereby to speak unto us. fol. 46 Caiphas, the high Priest,
understood not his own prophecy, and therefore is said to be like Balaams Ass.
fol. 51. Comparison of sundry ways, whereby our feet make use of walking and
proof of the like diversity of paths, which the tongue has to go by. fol.
55 Concupis^ible, is a way whereby our tongue has occasion to pass, and
therefore that way requires a very good guardian. fol. 57 Cain was the first
heretic in the world. fol. 56 Cato his saying of the angry man. fol. 58 Cato
his great patience, being abused by Lentulus. fol. 60 Cruelty very great in
Hanniball. fol. 61 Courageous and generous spirits do receive more offense by
a bad spoken word, then a wound received by a lance. fol. 65 Conditions five
in number belonging to the tongue of man, and very necessary in our manner of
speaking. fol. 66 Cicero, how much he was able to prevail, only by the
sweetness of his tongue in speaking. fol. 67 Cato Censorius was accused forty
four times before the Roman Senate, and yet was every time adjudged innocent.
fol. 68 Christ, most sweet in his speeches to his very enemies: which made the
Pharisees bloody ministers to forget their fierceness against him. fol. 69
Christ preached in a maternal tongue, including many parables and similitudes
among his enstructions. fol. 75 The Crocodile in his qualities used as a
necessary observation to be had in a wise man. fol. 79 Cicero his opinion of
men's works and words. fol. 81 Comparision of the Grasshopper, being bathed in
oil, dies, but being washed with vinegar, comes to life again. fol. 8^
Commandment given by God, that the flesh of Swans should not be eaten. fol. 87
Constantine called the flatterer, a Moath. fol. 93 Calves made of gold by
Jeroboam, and honored of the people as if they had bin gods. So the like in
Aaron, etc. fol. 95 Christ, how many trauelles he endured, and all for the
truth which himself so dearly loved: the same is approved by a very
excellent discourse of truth. fol. 99 Chilo the Philosopher of Lacedemon, gave
a singular discourse concerning the excellency of truth. fol. 102 Christ never
called any one, Son of the devil, but the liar. ibid. Circumcision, upon what
occasion God caused it not to be left as a law in writing, and had such an
especial care of his commandments delivered in the time of Moses. fol. 104
Conceit of the mind is called the word and speech of the mind. fol. 115
Confession of our sins, how necessary it is, and how highly offensive it is to
the devil. fol. 121 Confessors, Pastors and Preachers, are compared to
watchful dogs, that keep away the devil the wolf of our souls. fol. 122 In
confession of our sins before God, it is a most evil sign, when we make a
presumptuous ostentation of our own doings, and do not sorrow for the offenses
which we have committed. Read much said to this purpose, in Fol. 125. 126. and
so in the succeeding chapter. Correction and punishment promised by god to
detractors and evil speakers. fol. 161 Comedians are Apes of other men's
actions. fol. 169 Confines or bounds, out of which the hypocrit goes, of
himself. f. 177 Charity is a virtue that lives beyond all other whatsoever,
and blasphemy is a sin of the self same nature. fol. 209 Cicero and
Demosthenes, their tongues cost their lives. fol. 219 Custody of the tongue is
very difficult. fol. 221 Choleric men do stammer in their speaking, and a
reason is delivered for the occasion thereof. fol. 228 Comparison of carriage of
keys, how some do fasten them to their girdles, others put them in their
pockets, others wear them about their necks, and some on their shoulders. fol.
247
D
Diogenes the Cinick would eat raw fish. fol. 7 David desired of god, that he
would set a watch before his mouth, and a door of wisdom before his lips. fol.
9 Difficulty very great in speaking well. ibid. David and Solomon required of
god, a door and a watch for their mouths, and not a wall: wherein is
delivered an excellent mystery. fol. 10 Dulcitude or sweetness of conference,
is a certain kind of viands. fol. 13 Defect of the tongue is worse then
gurmandise or luxury. ibid. David, the first lesson that he taught his
children, when they rose every morning out of their beds, was, to praise the
Lord. ibid. Diogenes, seeing a dissolute boy to abuse himself in the street,
went and beat his Schoolmaster, for bringing him up no better. fol. 17
Disorder and inconvenience which ensues, upon the lack of reproving the faults
of our children. ibid. Disorder and offense occasioned by feasts and
banquettings. fol. 21 David sometimes prayed God, that he would vouchsafe to
open his mouth, and at other times desired that he would shut it. fol. 33
Difficulty much greater to be silent, than to speak. ibid, Doubt in a case
resolved, why the tongue (being the cause of many evils) was given by god to
man. fol. 39 Delicacie more then music to the ear, is a good tongue. fol. 41
Doubt very great, how it should be true that every man is a liar. fol. 47
Devil and the woman were the first that brake silence, both in heaven and upon
earth. fol. 52 Doubt concerning the words of David, in his 38 psalm: I said,
I will take heed to my ways, etc. and an answer made thereto. fol. 54 Doubt
resolved, about the four ways of the tongue. fol. 56 Double, or twofold are
our follies and furies: one being bred in the brain, the other taking life
from the heart. fol. 59 Diogenes very patient, and his mild answer when an
indiscreet youth had spet in his face. fol. 60 Devil, a continual obseruer of
our speeches, and his malicious converting them to his own purpose, and how
his wicked children do learn the like of him. fol. 62 Diamond, and the nature
thereof, resisting the hardest steel, and yet is easily broken, or softened
with the blood of a goat. fol. 67 Doctors in the chair, yet mere Dunses in
common conference, whence it ensues. fol. 82 David a very powerfu^l king, yet
he reposed more trust in wisdom, then in strength. fol. 83 Discourse made by
Zerobabell to king Darius, in commendation of the truth. fol. 109 Definition
made of lying. fol. 117 Devil durst not tell a lie in his own shape, but
took upon him the Serpents shape. fol. 101 Devil, how he is said to be dumb,
and how he speaks, with sundry other matters concerning him. fol. 113 Devil
has no power against god or his good Angels. fol. 114 Devil is a bloody
beast, and beastlier then al beasts. fol. 119 Devil made the dumb man, to be
deaf and blind also, and the reason of his malice in so doing. fol. 121
Devil compared to a Iaylor, or keeper of a prison, to a hangman, and to a
wolf. fol. 122 Devil makes use of our best actions, to his own advantage.
ibid. Devil has five teeth in his head, and how they are to be used. fo. 123
David cried out, and yet was silent all at one instant. fol. 130 Devil would
take away both virtue and virtuous people out of the world together, if he
could. fol. 131 Devil most of all dismayed, when the penitent sinner confesses
his sins to god. fol. 132 Despising or defaming of good men by the bad, is an
apparent sign of virtue and goodness. fol. 143 Detractors are called
abomination it self by Solomon, and are compared to the Estridge. fol. 144
Detraction a most infectious sin, the detractor most abominable, compared to a
thief, to ravenous birds, to Perillus statuary, the Cammell, etc. fol. 150
Double or twofold is brotherly correction. fol. 266 Devil, and his dumb collar
to stifle men withal: which if he prevail withal, then he is best pleased.
fol. 122 Doubt very well resolved concerning mercenaries and hirelings. f. 179
Doubt satisfied, concerning the sin of blasphemy. fol. 202 Daniell, talking
with god, was smitten dumb. fol. 230 Demosthenes slain by his speaking. fol.
219
E
Epaminondas the Thebane, in commending silence, said: That it behooved a man to
hear much and speak little. fol. 11 Example of wicked Parents, and of how many
evils they only are the occasion. fol. 16 Example of the rich glutton, and why
his tongue is said to be more tormented, then any other member of his body.
fol. 21 Epaminondas the Painter, was a great obseruer of silence, and made a
discreet answer to the Rhodians, concerning what he had seen in the time of his
travails. fol. 28 Example of two Ambassadors, the one delivering a long and
tedious speech, the other speaking briefly and wittily. fol. 31 Eua, of one
commandment made two. fol. 52 Example of great patience in Seneca, Diogenes,
and Cato. fol. 60 Example of the pleasing sweetness of the speech of man, and
how prevailing it is in power. fol. 67 Example of men's eloquence very
admirable: how one reading on the immortality of the soul, caused many
wilfully to slay themselves, and how another won him, that before had given his
scholars especial warning not to hear that man. ibid. Efficacy and
excellency of the word of god. fol. 69 Elyseus the Prophet, how much he
prevailed by the word of god only, more then powerful kings by their Armies
could do. fol. 74 Example of a king and his three Sons, for several proofs of
their wisedoms, and how needful it is for men to speak under correction. f. 82
Example of the harm that ensues by improuident talking. fol. 85 Echo, what
manner of thing it is, how it is formed, and in what place. fol. 88 Example of
a Trumpetter taken in war, and Philopoemines sentence on him to be slain, only
for the sound of his Trumpet, sent from his mouth: alluded to the case of the
slatterer. fol. 94 Example out of the sacred scriptures, approouing how highly
truth has bin hated and abused. fol. 99 Example of Aeschines the Orator, who
said: That, without the truth, every ver^se was vice in it self. fol. 100
Example of the Egyptians, in making a bargain, or renewing of amity, they let
their fingers blood, and sign one another therewith, in token of their perfect
continuance. fol. 105 Ephraim, and what the word signifies. fol. 132 Example
very strange, of a slanderous woman, and what a grievous punishment God sent
upon her. fol. 145 Egyptia^s severely punished by god, when he sent the plague
of frogs among them, in such abundance beyond the resistance of man. fol. 156
Exterminare, and the signification thereof. fol. 177 Examples very dreadful
concerning blasphemy, and the heavy punishments thereon inflicted. fol. 208
Example, that wicked men have the lips of the heart. fol. 220 Exemption or
privation of the tongue is better then to have it. f. 221 Example of a man that
desired to study the Scriptures, and the answer he made for leaving the
School, upon his very first leslon. ibi. Example of wicked men, who have their
lower lips very great, like unto swine, and like to certain people in
Aethiopia, that can cover their whole face with their nether lip. fol. 224
Example of the wicked, that they are deprived of all their senses, and have
their lips only wherewith they perform al their actions. ibid. Exchequer or a
rich treasury is the heart of man. fol. 241 Excellency of the graces bestowed
by Christ upon the blessed Apostles, and holy martyrs. fol. 242 Excellent
mystery, concerning the key of David. ibid. Ecclesiastical persons, what an
Excellent Collect or Prayer is by them observed on mornings in the church. fol.
251 Eloquence, what it is, according to Cicero. fol. 256 Elizeus, how he raised
up the widows dead child, so ought we to revive our brother, being dead in
sin. fol. 271
F
Friendly and familiar speeches, how greatly they prevail in quietting the
afflicted thoughts of a man, and such words do serve many times in stead of
precious antidotes. fol. 1 Fathers of a family, the first enstruction they
ought to give their children and servants, is to praise god. fol. 13 Fathers
ought to use their children, as husbandmen do the vine, the Iuy, and the
Mellone. fol. 14 Fathers should go before their children, in good examples, and
civil behavior of their lives. fol. 15 Force and power of silence. fol. 27
Facility in speech, using a brief and comely decorum, has always bin much
more commended, then prolix and tedious arguing. fol. 31 Felix the doctor was
answered by Vincentio Balnaceus: That it was not good to praise a man in his
life time. fol. 37 Fools are full of words, and yet are reputed wise by
silence. ibid. The fools mouth is like a pot boiling upon the fire. fol. 57
Furies and frenzies are of two kinds, and do receive their original from
several causes. fol. 59 Flight is the only remedy against Anger. fol. 60 Five
properties or conditions very necessarily required in our speaking king and
discoursing one with another. fol. 66 Force extraordinary in pleasing words.
fol. 67 Fear and amazement in the Pharisees at the preaching of christ, and
alteration in the hearts of their ministers of justice. fol. 69 Fond speaking,
without wisdom, how dangerous it is, and the same is approved by many
examples. fol. 85 False and feyned speaking is a sin against nature. ibid.
Flatterers and their nature described. fol. 86. and so the end of the same
chapter. fol. 86 The flatterer termed by Plato by diverse names. ibid. The
flattere likened to the lion slain by Sampson. ibid. Flatterer compared to the
Swan: To the garment wouen of linen and woollen: To Echo, and to wine. fol. 87
The flatterers best live in great men's houses. fol. 88 The flatterer has no
direct kind of speech. ibid. The flatterers tongue compared to the tongue of a
cat: To the shadow following the body: To the Ape: To the Parrat, and to water.
fol. 89 The flatterers tongue maintains sin, and robs a man of the truth.
fol. 90 Flatterers do hold resemblance with dumb dogs: And with cooks, that
dress meats according to their masters appetites. fol. 91 The flatterer is
worse then a tyrant. ibid. The flatterer is compared to a looking glass: To a
harlot: And to our breath issuing from our mouths. fol. 92 The flatterer is
likened to a Mother and her young Son: And to them that builded the infamous
tower of Babell. fol. 94 Flattery is the occasion of Idolatry. fol. 95
Faithful dealing among men, how commendable it is. fol. 104 Force or power of
wine, women, and the king, and which is said to be the strongest. fol. 107
Foundation of the hypocrite and the just man, how different they are. fol. 191
Foundation given by god to man, and to his Church. fol. 192 Fearce as a
ravenous beast is the hypocrite. fol. 195 Fathers of the Clergy, the great
burden imposed on them, and the duties required at their hands. fol. 243
Fortresses placed on the confines of a land, are said to be the keys of the
kingdom. fol. 145 God commanded in the Leuiticall law, that such as were
appointed for the service of his majesty, should be ^rayned up from their very
childhood, in the divine worship of him. fol. 18 Gods especial grace it is,
that his dear so children, not mastring men by speech, do yet by silence come
near unto himself. fol. 26 Gods wonderful workmanship in forming the tongue,
and an excellent observation made thereof. fol. 27 Gods seat is said to be the
iustmans soul. fol. 28 God is most jealous of his secrets, and a great
obseruer of (...) fol. 43 God is so sparing of speech, that it is said he spoke
but once or twice only. ibid. God speaks to us by his creatures. fol. 44 In
god there is nothing defective, but all things in act. fol. 46 God disposes
the soul according to the rule of a kingdom. fol. 57 Whatsoever god wills,
is just. ibid. Guard of reason is best for the way of will. ibid. Gualterns
Teutonicus, Regent of the studies at Vercellis, his worthy history. fol. 68
Gods word, and the sweetness thereof, declared by the example of Saul among
the Prophets. fol. 70 Gods word compared to a sword or weapon. fol. 74 God did
forbid the eating of Swans flesh: and the wearing of a garment-made of woollen
and linen. fol. 87 God is said (in some sort) to dispense with theft, but not
with lying. fol. 102 Good men, when they are contemned by the bad, are therein
the more highly honored. fol. 143 Great hurt and danger ensues by murmurers.
fol. 148 Great resemblance and similitude have murmurers with the frogs of
Egypt. fol. 159 God sends his Angels of the utmost Hierarchy only upon
important negotiations. fol. 159 God only has the knowledge of men's thoughts.
fol. 160 God judges with great deliberation, for our enstruction. fol. 154
Glory, termed vainglory, the occasion of much evil. fol. 184 Gods glory we
ought to seek for in all our actions. fol. 187 Glory for our selves consists
not outwardly, but in the heart. fol. 195 Great is the sin of bl^sphemy,
exceeding every other sin, and therefore the punishment thereof is answerable to
the fault. etc. fol. 201 God his three several kingdoms, of three several
languages. fol. 210 God listens more to the tongue of the heart, then to that of
the voice. fol. 220 Good men are compared to goodly fair hounds; and to a
richly furnished table. fol. 223 God speaking with Jeremy, made him like unto
a child that could not speak, and the reason thereof. fol. 230 God talking to
Moses, caused him to stammer: To Jeremy, made him not know how to speak: To
Daniell, made him dumb, and why. fol. 231 Greatness of the subject, or person
spoken too, may daunt the best Orator, and distract his memory. fol. 233
Talking with god, we learn to be silent, and talking with men, we learn
nothing but vain babbling. fol. 237 Grace of wisdom, arising from Christ the
fountain of wisdom, is termed David's key. fol. 243 God keepe^h the key of
the just man's mouth. ibid. God delights that we should make our requests unto
him. fol. 253 God speaks to the hearts of just me^, and enstructeth them to
speak because they shall not err in speaking. fol. 260 Gilbertus Porretanus
his saying concerning silence. fol. 258 God sends his blessed Angels, to
inspire our souls with what we have to say or do. fol. 261
H
He may be as guilty of death that speaks not in time convenient, as he that
is over talkatiue, and speaks too much. fol. 4 He that is a fool, cannot sit
silent. fol. 5 He that speaks without premeditation, many times repents
himself, of that he has spoken. fol. 8 How difficult a thing it is to speak
well, without erring. fol. 9 How and in what place the mouth ought to be
opened. fol. 10 He that hears attentively, and speaks little, if he be not
more then robbed of reason, cannot fail, and may so much the better discern
truth from falsehood. ibid. He cannot but commit many errors, that takes
delight in overmuch talking. fol. 11 How many evils the fathers of families
may be the cause of, only by their bad examples. fol. 15 He that in his heart
thinks the truth, and with his mouth speaks it, is said to be like unto god.
fol. 18 He that is talkatiue, offends many ears: But he that receives
example of others murmuring, may take the less occasion of sinning. fol. 25
How all the discoursings which god had with the Prophets and Patriarchs, is
termed but one speaking only, etc. fol. 45 How there be four principal ways
for the tongue to walk by: all which do require especial regard, for
avoiding of error. fol. 55 How Cain was the first heretic that ever was in
the world, and the heresy he spoke. fol. 56 How unseemly indiscretion in
speeches is in a learned man, and that many have bin noated very learned in the
Doctors chair, but very fools being forth of the Schools, etc. fol. 82
Hatred begotten of Truth. fol. 98 How many travails Christ suffered in the
world for the truths sake. fol. 99 How detestable the lying man is, is
approved by a very singular discourse. fol. 102 Hell hurts none but the
wicked only, but the lying man is more offensive to god. fol. 111 Holofernes
besieged Bethulia, and took ^way the water. fol. 120 How our bones are said to
signify virtue. fol. 130 How whatsoever the wicked man sees, is sin. fo. 138
How great their peril is, that keep company with detractors: And how fearful
the penalty of detraction is, declared at large in two excellent examples. fol.
145 How offensive to god the sin of murmuring is. fol. 147 How infectious the
sin of murmuring is. fol. 148 Honor is more to be valued then li^e. fol. 1^1
Hypocrites are not soon to be discovered. fol. 166 Hypocrisy what it is. fol.
167 The hypocrit gives his glove only, and not his hand to christ. fol. 167
Hypocrites are discerned by their deeds and dissembling tongues. ibid. The
hypocrit is hateful to god, to men, and to the devil. ibid. Hypocrites best
resembled in Comedians or Stage Players. fol. 169 Hypocryts are in heaven and
on earth at one instant. fol. 171 The hypocrite is compared to the Greyho^nd to
the Be: to vapors attracted up by the Sun, which seem to be falling stars: to
king Saul to Goliath: to Holofernes: to the glow-worme: to Ch^^^cra: to the
statue of Nebuchadnezzer. fol. 173 The hypocrit has many faces: goes forth of
his confines: is compared to the dropsy: to the weeuell: to a horse shod
backward. f. 179 How falling into evil, is said to be falling into hell, or hell
fire. f. 172 Hypocrisy is likened to the worm that eats the corn: to a
thief: to Jacob when he beguiled his Father: to Tantalus: to several fruits
grafted upon one stock: and to the mercenary hireling. fol. 182 How perilous
it is for a man, to commit his own praise into another man's power. fol. 178 How
grapes are said to be gathered on thorns. fol. 184 Hypocrites, that have
nothing but good words only, are compared to a poor man, that seeks to get a
rich wife where himself is not known: to builders: to Pi^ates: to a Painter:
to the Sichemites: to scar-crowes, to Joseph's cloak: to the Hawk: to Adams
garment: to the dolphin: to the Prophet Ezechiels white wall: to empty ships: to
banquerout merchants: and empty Cannons. fol. 190 How contrary the buildings of
the hipocrit and the just men are. f. 192 Hypocrisy is a sin against nature.
fol. 199 Homicide is a greater sin then blasphemy, as concerning the effect,
but is much less, in regard of the object. fol. 205 How the quality of the
soul is best known by our talk. fol. 210 How difficult the custody of the
tongue is. fol. 221 How he that is borne deaf, it is necessary for him to be
dumb also. fol. 227 How the word hymn and silence agree together. fol. 232 How
much the knowledge increases in us, so much the less shall we find our selves
fit for worldly causes. fol. 236 How they that talk with god; do either
learn to be silent, or else do speak otherwise then they did before. ibid. How
the just man first expels his own spirit, and then the Lord fills him with
his heavenly spirit. fol. 254 How by brotherly correction we become like unto
god. fol. 262 How important the precept of brotherly correction is. fol. 267
How many times we ought to forgive our brother. fol. 270
I
Idiots, to seem wise, will declare themselves silent. fol. 5 Isoc^ates the
Philosopher and Orator, demanded double wages of a talkatiue Scholar, to
teach him silence, or how to speak well. fol. 12 Jews in their crying to
Pilate, to crucify christ, were more guilty then they that crucified him.
fol. 24 Job was a true lover of silence. fol. 26 Job spoke but once and
repented him of it. fol. 36 In so much a man is said to speak truth, by how
much he is partaker of the first truth, god himself. fol. 49 In heaven and in
earth, who were the first breakers of silence. fol. 52 Irascible power, is one
of the ways which a man ought to keep carefully, least he err in his tongue.
fol. 57 If the understanding err not, the tongue cannot fail. ibid. Irascible
way, how it is to be cleansed. fol. 58 Infamous injuries are compared to
poison. fol. 59 Ire or anger is not good for any virtuous thing. ibid. Ire
orarger is good, according to Aristotle's opinion. ibid. Ire accounted to be a
good soldier. ibid. Infamy equalled with the sin of murder. fol. 66 Iordanus
second master of the general Preachers, how sweet he was in speaking, and
excellent in preaching. fol. 68 Jesus Christ, how powerful he was in
preaching. fol. 69 John the divine Apostle, and his vision in the I Will of
Pathmos. fol. 72 Iuuenall very excellently describes a flatterer. fol. 86
Infelicitie belonging to Princes, that very rare or seldom come to knowledge
of the truth, or correction of vices, only through the wicked and subtle
tongues of flatterers. fol. 89 Jeroboam made golden calves, and honored them
as gods. fol 95 Ionathas the son of Gedeon murdered because he justly
reproved Abimelech. fol. 98 John Baptist beheaded for reproouing sin. ibid.
Jacob and Laban, in steed of authe^ticall writings, laid a heap of stones
together. fol. 104 Iacomo da Voragine, of the Preachers order, and Archbishop
of Genoa. fol. 113 In what manner one Angel speaks to another, without the
knowledge of any of the other Angels. fol. 115 Intelligence abides in the
understanding after three manners. ibid. Illumination is a kind of the Angels
conference. fo. 116 In scripture what is sig^ified by the bones wexing old.
fol. 130 Jesus came into the world to take away sin, not sinners. fol. 131 In
confessing our sins to god, we must utterly condemn our selves, and that most
of all dismayeth the devil. fol. 132 Jesus would not be praised of the devil,
and the reason thereof. fol. 134 Israel, what the word signifies. fol. 132
India yields a certain kind of people, that have no mouths, but do live by
the smelling of sweet odours only. fol. 135 Judgment of man how fallacious it
is, and the same is approved by diverse examples out of holy Scripture. fol. 153
Judge no man, till first we see how his actions pass. ibid, Instinct naturally
of the mind, in noble and generous persons. fo. 157 In Egypt the Enchaunters
had no power to free themselves from the plague of Frogs. fol. 159 Infamous
words proceeding from bad against good men, is to be held as a great blessing
of god. fol. 160 Jerome the reverend doctor of the Church, gave great thanks
to god, that he had made him worthy of the worlds hatred. fol. 163 In
hypocrites it is especially to be observed, that their colorable deceipts are
of small continuance. fol. 166 Ioab slew Abner; feining himself to be his
loving friend: and the like did the Prince Amasa. fol* 168 Ire or anger has
this property, that suddenly it breaks forth into his own effect. ibid.
Imitation is the principal part of an Orator. fol. 170 Just men have each of
them but one face only, but hypocrites show themselves to have many. fol. 176
John Chrisostom, John Climacus and Petrus Chrysologus delivered each of them
excellent sentences against hypocrites. fol. 178 Joshua, Gedcon, Moses,
Alexander and Caesar, were always themselves the foremost in the fight. fol.
179 Interpretation very excellently made on the parable of the ten virgins.
fol. 184 Infirmity and weakness of the body, is oftentimes much better then
health. fol. 217 Just men are compared to fish shells on the Sea shoares,
wherein are found pearls and precious stones. fo. 254 Jerome his advice, that
before a man does speak, he should bring his words to the touch or file, to try
whether they be worthy of delivery or no. fol. 259 In correction of our
brother, what charitable course is to be observed, and a manner or form
(withal) set down, for every Christians better direction. fol. 272 Knowledge,
what it is, and how to be obtained. fol. 256 Keys, carried by some at their
girdles, others in their pockets: others about their necks: and others upon
their shoulders: and all these are severally applied. fol. 241 Key of the house
of David, and the meaning thereof. fol. 243
L
Life and death are in the power of the tongue. fol. 4 Loquacity (according to
Apollonius) is full of error, and silence most secure. fol. 12 Loquacity in
young men, is a mighty disgrace. ibid. Laud and praise of god, is the first
lesson that Parents ought to teach their children. fol. 13 Liberty must not
be given to the tongue, but it must be carefully restrained, if we will be like
unto god. fol. 18 Life and death issue forth of the gate of the mouth. fol. 19
Lucifers proud words threw him down into hell. fol. 21 Lips of the sanctified
soul, is likened to a hairelace. fol. 23 Lydians rather then they would be
bound to silence, chose condemnation to the galleys. fol. 35 Laud or
commendation of men, is better after death, then in their life time. fol. 37
Lie greater in Eve, then in Lucifer. fol. 38 Lie of Eve and of the devil, were
the occasion of al other lies. fol 39 Liars all men are. fol. 47 Lycurgus an
enemy to vain eloquence. fol. 77 Lentulus spat in Catoes face. fol. 60 Lydians
sentenced them with death, that by their tongues robbed men of their good repute,
even as if they had bin murderers. fol. 66 Lacedaemonians no lovers of curious
speaking. fol. 77 Lips, and the reason of their so calling. fol. 84 Laud or
praise of truth. fol. 99 Lying is a sin against nature. fol. 101 Lying is the
greatest sin that opposes it self against god. ibid. Lying defined by Tullie.
ibid. Liars are all the devils children. fol. 102 Lying is a sin so infamous,
as the devil durst not use it in his own proper shape. ibid. Lying is odious
to the liar himself. ibid. Lying god does dispense withal, as he has done
with theft. ibid. Lying man only called by Christ Son of the devil. ibid.
Lying, how hateful a sin it is, and of how many evils it only has bin the
occasion. fo. 103 Lying is an universal merchandise through the world. ibid.
The liar at one stroke offends three persons. ibid. Laban and Jacob set up an
heap of stones, instead of a writing drawn by a Scriuener. fol. 104 Law of God,
wherefore it was written. ibid. Liars are shunned of all men. fol. 106 A ly has
short legs. fol. 110 The liar is worse then hell. fol. 111 Laud or praise
issuing from an evil tongue, is infamy. fol. 143 Laud or commendation of the
good and virtuous, is only to be esteemed, according to Cicero. ibid. Luxury
is a sin most odious in any age, but most especially in an old man it is
horrible. fol. 207 Jews king of France commanded a blasphemers tongue to be
cut out of his head. fol. 213 Loquacity in an Orator is termed a full tide of
speech, and not accounted any part of eloquence. fol. 256
M
Man is known by his speech to be wise or foolish. fol. 4 More are the defects
committed by liberal talking, then by silence ibid. Many have repented
themselves of their rash speaking, but few or none of holding their peace. fol.
5 Marie the blessed virgin did very consideratly ponder in her mind, before she
answered the angel Gabriell. fol. 8 Men indiscreet, first speak, and consider
afterward. ibid. Mothers, that are too nice and fond of their children, with
kisses do kill them, and with sweet meats poison them. fol. 18 Many sins had
the builders of Babell Tower, but none like to their presumptuous tongues. fol.
24 Men virtuous, are like goodly horses with costly bridles: but the wicked do
resemble Iades with halters on their heads. fol. 28 Men of many words are
slenderly credited. ibid. Men wise speak seldom, and little. ibid. Men grounded
in learning, do savor the more of silence. fol. 30 Mydas had ears like an
Ass, and none knew thereof, but his Barber: yet could not he refrain from
blabbing it. fol. 35 Men that are wise, can easily keep silence. fol. 36 Mimas
the Philosopher said, that the tongue was the Ambassador of the heart. fol. 41
Much better is it not to know the secrets of a friend, then to know them and
disclose them. fol. 42 Men are all liars. fol. 47 Men may be said to speak
truth, in partaking of the cheef truth god himself. fol. 49 Man of himself
has nothing at all. ibid. Man knows more by negation, then by affirmation.
ibid. Men that cleanse not the ways of the tongue, called irascible and
concupiscible, do fall into many errors. Mouth of the angry man compared to a
pot seething over. fol. 57 Men that are wise are capable of no disdain. fol.
59 Many have bin chastised by sweet and mild speeches. fol. 67 Men ought to
resemble clear fountains, or transparent glasses, to transform themselves
into all good objects. fol. 79 Men that desire to live long, and see good
days, must keep their tongues from evil speaking. ibid. Men of wisdom must
have their tongues like to the Crocodils. ibi. Man endures more labor for
refraining his tongue, then for the amendment of his life. fol. 81 Man whether
he be good or bad, is best known by his works: but whether he be foolish or
wise, is discerned by his talk. ibid. Men learned, whence it ensues, that in
the Doctors chair they seem wise, and yet in familiar discourse are fools. fol.
82 Martyrs executed by Tyrants, for confessing the truth. fol. 98 Merchants
using lying, become thereby impouerished, and therefore were cast out of the
Temple by Christ. fol. 103 Monster with three tongues and what he is. fol. 112
Mute or dumb was the devil called, and the same is approved by many singular
discourses. fol. 113 Man only, and no creature else speaks. fol. 118 Many are
in hell, by presuming ouerboldly upon gods mercy. f. 126 Mercy, and whereof the
word is said to be derived. ibid. Men on the mountains of Iurea, do laugh when
they see other men not misshapen like themselves. fol. 145 Murmurers, how
offensive to god they are. fol. 147 Myriam the sister of Moses, by her
murmuring became a leaper. ib. Murmuring, what it is, whereof it arises, and
comparisons thereof. fol. 149 Mercenaries or hirelings labor for worldly glory,
and not for the benefit of their flock. fol. 183 Mercenaries have two voices:
one of doctrine, another of profit, the one is Christ's voice, the other their
own. ibid. Many that have bin innocent of their hands, have yet condemned
themselves by their tongues: and many more have bin infamous by their speeches,
then by their deeds. fol. 219 Melancholy persons are tardy of their speech.
fol. 228 Moses talking with god, grew to have a defect in his speech, and the
reason thereof. fol. 229 Many have sharp swords in stead of teeth. fol. 258
N
No man can be said* to be truly free, but he that by his virtues resists all
vices whatsoever. fol. 16 No man is a speaker of truth: but all men are liars.
fol. 46 No man speaks well, but when God speaks by him. ibid. No man breaks
silence, when he speaks truly. fol. 49 No better guardian for the tongue,
then wisdom: whereupon are delivered many notable noates. fol. 61 No man, or
very few, is willing to be reproved: whereon arises the maine ground of
flattery. fol. 96 Nothing is more acceptable to god, then truth. fol. 97 No
sinner is more hateful, or more opposes himself against god, then the liar
does. fol. 101 Nothing is more to be abhorred, then lying. ibid. Notaries or
Scriueners, whence it arose, that they became to be thought necessary evils in
the world. fol. 104 Notaries were not thought fit men in the first times, nor
their writings made any reckoning of. ibid. No greater beast, and more to be
abhorred of the world, then is the devil. fol. 119 Nothing is more pleasing to
the devil, then when he can lock up the lips of a sinner, and hinder him from
confessing his sins unto god. fol. 121 No good sign is it, when a sinner comes
to confer with god, to stand proudly on his own good deeds, and never
acknowledge the horror of his own sins. fol. 129 No accounr ought to be made of
the murmurings of detractors, because their praises are rather dispraises. fol.
143 No dissimilitude between the devils and detractors. fol. 144 Necessary are
bitter enemies, for our uprightness in life, as kindest friends, for the one
part will always most be feared. ibid. Nothing in the world is more precious
then true honor. fol. 155 No greater labor is there, then to traffic with
bad men, and no greater comfort, then to deal with good men. fol. 156 Nolite
fieri, sicut hypocritae, tristes, what is signified thereby: And whether it were
not better to: Nolite facere, sicut hypocritae. fol. 177 No pain is to be
spared in laboring for the conquest of heavens glory, not so much in regard of
the matter it self, but in respect of our love, to praise and glorify god.
fol. 187 No cause at all is there to move a man to blaspheme god, and therefore
blasphemy is the deadlier sin. fol. 206 No punishment lasts longer, then that
allotted to the blasphemer, and sometimes it begins here in this life. fol.
208 No beast abuses god, but ungrateful man only. fol. 212 No benefit is
truly known, but by the loss thereof. fol. 217 No member of man is harder to be
bridled, and more apt to sin, then the tongue is. fol. 219 Necessity requires
it, that he who is borne deaffe, should be dumb also. fol. 227 No eloquence at
all, without wisdom. fol. 233 No wise man's heart can be capable of injuries,
according to the opinion of the Stoics. fol. 257 No man nearer to god, then
the innocent man. ibid. None daring to reprove Princes errors, do cause the
greater evil. 259 Noah's name, what is signified thereby. fol. 270 Number of
brotherly corrections. fol. 278
O
Of all men, the young man ought to speak least, and should not speak at all,
except he be thereto required. fol. 12 Omulus the Philosopher highly commended
silence. fol. 25 Observation is to be had, in speaking little, and hearing:
approved by an excellent example. fol. 29 Orator of the Abderites, scorned by
Agis king of the Lacedaemonians, for his tedious discoursing. fol. 32 Ovid said:
What labor is less then to hold our peace? fol. 33 Ovid also said: It is a
great virtue, to know how to be silent. fol. 41 Observations for a perfect
Orator. fol. 61 Orpheus and his history. fol. 68 Orators of the Church, have
no need of vain and Rhetorical ornament in their speaking. fol. 75 Ornament
curious and fine in gods affairs, has bin the occasion of much evil to
hearers. fol. 76 Odours only maintain the life of some people in India. fol.
135 Observation for the receipt of things, wherein Aristotle's opinion is held:
Vnumquodque recipitur per modum recipientis. fol. 138 Orators ought to be good
imitatours, because imitation is the principal part of Oratory. fol. 170 Our
works cannot be good, if they want the true intention. ibid. Order observed by
inse^sible creatures, for helping one another. f. 263
P
Proverb ancient, that deeds are men, and words women. fol. 2 Proverb, The word
of a king. Plato said, that men are soonest approved by their sound, like unto
glasses or vessels. fol. 6 Pythagoras made such reckoning of silence, as he
held fishesin great veneration, because they were silent creatures. ibid.
Pythagoras taught his scholars silence, as their first lesson. fol. 7
Periander the Philosopher said: Hear much, and speak little. fol. 20 Pittacus,
the Mitylenian, commended silence greatly. fol. 12 Prating and babbling how
pernicious it is. fol* 13 Parents first precept to their children, ought to be
enstruction how to speak honestly, and virtuously: and the same is confirmed by
many worthy examples. ibid. Parents that take care to leave their children
great riches, and no virtuous presidents, resemble them that take care for a
close neat shoe, and regard not how much it paineth the foot. fol. 15 Parents
reprehended by Crates the philosopher. ibid. Plutarch reprooueth Fathers of
families, for their great negligence toward their children. fol. 16 Parents
that study how to leave their children goods of Fortune, and nothing else, do
bring them up like dogs, Goats, etc. ibid. Philip of Macedon thanked the
Gods, that his son Alexander was born in Aristotle's time, to whom he made him
scholar. ibid. Parents should resemble a Nurses dealing with a weak child.
fol. 17 Parents ought not only to give example to their children of not
sinning, but of good, honest and laudable action. ibid. Parents that are nice
in correcting their children, resemble a mother who seeing her son in the
water, and being fearful to catch him by the locks of hayr to save him,
suffers him to be drowned. They are like to David, who not reproouing Amnon,
was the occasion of his many disorders: compared are they likewise to Heli the
priest. etc. ibid. Peril of man's life is only in his tongue. fol. 19 Pardon is
a peculiar virtue, belonging to god only. fol. 20 Pain of the rich glutton, for
his wicked tongue. fol. 21 Plutarch says, That of silence, god only is the
master, but of talking man is master. fol. 27 Pitheus by over liberal talking,
obscured his many victories. fol. 28 Phormio the philosopher, lived in the
woods, because he would not be offended by men's vain talking. fol. 29
Philippides the poet humbly desired of prince Lysimachus, that he would not
acquaint him with any of his secrets. fol. 34 Plague of a wicked tongue,
breaks the bones, which a whip cannot do, and therefore is held to be much
worse. fol. 41 Pambus the Abbot, concerning the best lesson that ever he
learned. fol. 36 Plato said, That a man cannot be wise, except he be able to
retain a secret. fol. 42 Prophecy of Ca^phas, not understood of himself. fol.
51 Preachers are Coffins or Trunkes of the word of god, according to the words
of S. Augustine. fol. 70 Property of the Bear, when she brings forth her
young ones, to be observed of us men. fol. 78 Prudence is the fittest for
government, and the praise thereof. fol. 78 Pyrrhus king of Epyre said: He shall
be my successor, that has his sword keenest. ibid. Philopoemenes gave sentence
against a Trumpeter taken in the war, that he should die. fol. 94 Pythagoras
said, that truth makes men like unto god. fol. 100 Problem of the three young
men, in the court of king Darius, what thing in the world was strongest. fol.
107 Preachers are like watchful dogs, careful of keeping their flocks. f* 122
Pharisie in the Temple as he prayed, both cried out, and yet was silent too at
the same instant. fol. 130 Pharisees and their unjust murmuring against Christ.
fol. 138 Plistoaxax gave an excellent sentence against bad men. fol. 140
Punishment inflicted by god upon a religious man for his evil tongue fol. 145
Punishment must be answerable to the offense. fol. 161 Pain imposed upon
detractors. ibid. Pharisees preached the law of Moses for their own benefit,
but made no observation thereof. fol. 183 Provinces of the world, are three,
and no more. fol. 210 Privation or lack of speech, begets the quiet and
security of the mind. fol. 218 Port or gate of heaven, of paradise, of figures,
of the Prophets mouths, and of Gods maruailes, were all fast shut up before the
coming of Christ. But afterward, Christ's side was no sooner opened, but they
all were opened. fol. 246 Perillus had fifty talents given him by Alexander,
toward the marriage of his daughter. fol. 250 Peter the Apostle, at his first
Sermon, converted three thousand souls. fol. 255 Princes are compared to Bees.
fol. 268 Precepts, of how many kinds they be. fol. 269
Q
Quintilian wrote, That there is no virtue more painful to be followed, then
silence. fol. 35 Quality of the soul is best known by our speech. fol. 210
Queen of Saba, seeing the greatness of Solomon, lost her spirit with
amazement. fol. 233
R
Rich glutton was given to many sins, and therefore deserved many
chastisements: nevertheless, the gospel makes mention of no punishment, but
of that he suffered in his tongue, and the reason thereof. fol. 21 Reason is
that which rectifies the will. fol. 57 Reason was given to man for an aid to
his soul. fol. 58 Reprehension is not pleasing to the world. ibid. Reproof
that god will give to those hypocrites, that have nothing but good words only.
fol. 199 Reasoning or discoursing, declares of what nation a man is, and thereby
the blasphemer is noated to be of hells kingdom. fol. 210 Reasoning or speaking
is of two kinds, as the lips are two. fol. 220 Requests made unto god, ought to
be great, answerable to the greatness of his Majesty. fol. 249 Request made by
Perillus to Alexander. Receivers and giuers ought to open their hand. fol. 253
Reprehension of princes, how it ought to be done. fol. 267 Reprehension must be
gilded over like pills. fol. 268 Reprehension and brotherly correction, how, and
after what kind. fol. 274 Reprehenders must imitate hunters. ibid. Reprehension
for great sins. fol. 279 Reprehension brotherly made, confounds the devil.
ibid. Reprehension must be used after the Cocks quality. ibid.
S
Solon said, That words are the image of deeds, and the lively figure of a man's
life. fol. 2 Socrates to understand the nature of a young man, commanded him to
speak to him. ibid. Solon, a man greatly given to silence, said to Periander
king of Corinth, A foolish man cannot be silent. fol. 5 Scholars of
Pythagoras, for their first lesson, learned silence. fol. 7 Scholars that will
learn knowledge, must first believe. fol. 8 Silence sometimes may be the
occasion of many inconveniences. ibid. Solomon the wisest man of the world,
said, That it was and is a very difficult thing to speak well. fol. 9 Sasiades
the philosopher, said: That the tongue ought not to speak, until the mind
have first forethought what is to be spoken. fol. 12 Silence commended by
Isocrates, for to teach well speaking. ibid. Silence is to be praised in all
men: but especially in young men is a most goodly ornament. ibid* Seneca says,
That silence renders most commodious quiet to the mind. fol. 13 Sentence of
Plutarch, against such fathers, as did not instruct their children in actions
of virtuous life. fol. 16 Similitude of fathers of families, that reprove not
their children. fol. 17 Silence makes a man near, and like unto god. fol. 18
Silence in time beseeming it, is more commendable then a choisely decked
Oration. fol. 25 Silence is the guard of the conscience, a bridle for insolence,
the beauty of innocence, the badge of wisdom: and this is approved by many
singular reasons. fol. 27 Silence is compared to the wall of a city. ibid.
Silence preserves men from offending god and our neighbor. fo. 29 Socrates
wrote a book in praise of silence. fol. 38 Silence, and the commendation
thereof. fol. 37 Schools for instruction of silence were very convenient. ibid.
Silence helps both the wise man and the fool. ibid. Sum of all that Seneca
wrote to Lucullus, was: To be slow in speaking ibid. Secrets of a friend, it is
not good to know them. fol. 42 Silence eternally man ought to keep. fol. 44 S.
Stephen in disputation overcame many nations. fol. 51 Silence breakers, the
first in heaven was Lucifer, and on earth it was our grandmother Eve. fol. 52
Seneca said, That anger was not good for any virtuous thing. fol. 59 Seneca
would not smite his servant in his anger. fol. 60 Silence is the only remedy
against anger. ibid. Senacherib slain by his two sons, and his Army slain by
the Angel of the Lord, only for blasphemy, and such was the slaughter, that in
one night there perished 185. thousand soldiers. fol. 64 Saul the king among
the Prophets. fol. 71 Sampson and his mishap, by speaking improuidently. fol.
86 Sigismond the Emperor gave a flatterer a blow on the ear, demanding why he
bit him? fol. 93 Sacred scriptures, why they were written in marble, and the
law not rather given without writing. fol. 104 Sin, why it is called a lance
sharpened on both sides. fol. 133 Socrates, seeing a youngman coming forth of
an harlots house, gave him a witty reprehension. fol. 123 Sede, tac^, intra
tenebras, and the same explaned. fol. 134 Sinners have more need of tears then
of talking. fol. 135 Scriptures read of many: by abusing them, the heretic
sucks out false opinions, and the true Christian gathers nothing but sound
doctrine, and whence this variety ensues. fol. 139 Seneca his learned saying
against evil tongues. fol. 142 Sichemites circumcised themselves, only to
inherit the Israelits goods and possessions. fol. 193 Sin in several kinds, do
pretend some excuse for themselves* but the sin of blasphemy can pretend none
at all. fol. 207 Silence is begotten of the hymn. fol. 232 Sanctified spirit
or holy ghost, and the reason wherefore it is called in (...)
T
There belongs as much blame to unproportionable silence, as to vain and
careless talking. fol. 4 The precept divine, as it commands obedience in the
Son to his Father, so does it also bind the Father, to bring up his son in
virtuous education. fol. 15 To keep silence is the noblest Philosophy in man.
fol.26 To keep silence is an especial gift of god. ibid. Thomas Aquinas, was
termed by his master Albertus Magnus, the Ox, for the love he bare to
silence. ibid. Theodauas and Agatonus, two worthy lovers of silence. ibid.
Tiberius teaching a talkatiue Senator silence, caused him to use very absurd
and antiquelike behauiours. fol. 35 Those things that God commands, are most
just. fol. 57 Three kinds of speaking, and three kinds of tongues. fo. 112
Three things ought every penitent soul to do, in seeking pardon for her
transgressions. fol. 134 The whole powers and faculties of the soul, do step
forth, for sake and leave the slanderer. fol. 150 The ^^^gue of man is as a
touchstone, whereby to try him. fol. 2 The tongue given to man for a reward.
fol. 3 The rich gluttons tongue was more punished, then any other part of his
body. fol. 21 The tongue without a bridle, is compared to a city without a
wall, or any guard or defense. fol. 22 Tongues first, before hands, did
crucify Christ. fol. 24 The tongue of man is like a City or Castle, builded in
a most artificial manner. fol. 27 The tongue being the occasion of so many
evils, wherefore it was by God bestowed upon man. fol. 39 The tongue compared to
riches. ibid. The tongue compared by David, to a sword, and to a pen. fol. 40.
The tongue is the best and worst thing in a man. ibid. The wicked tongue is
worse then hell. fol. 41 The tongue is the Ambassador of the heart. ibid. The
tongue has four ways to walk by, all which do necessarilye require great
care and circumspection. fol. 55 The tongue ought to have five conditions,
needful for well speaking. fol. 66 The tongue bewraies the health or
Sickness of the soul. fol. 71 The tongue of man ought to have the properties
of a dogs tongue. fol. 77 The reason why God did shut up the tongue between
teeth and lips. fol. 79 The tongue has two veins, one answerable to the heart,
and the other agreeable to the brain. fo. 85 The serpents tongue is always
black, and the reason thereof. fol. 136 The reason, why God permitted the
devil to bind up the dumb man's tongue. ibid. The Bulls in India have their
tongues so long, that they reach forth unto their ears. fo. 155 The
hypocrites tongue, how hurtful it is. fol. 182 Testimony of the conscience,
what it is. fol. 186 Three several ways we may derogate from Gods goodness.
fol. 202 Three several kingdoms made by God, and each of them has his
particular language, and phrase of speaking. fol. 210 The wicked man's mouth is
an open sepulcher. fol. 241 Three several kinds of precepts. fol. 269 Time,
place and manner, ought to be observed, in brotherly correction. fol. 270
V
Virtue first of all to be learned, is to govern the tongue. fol. 18 Vessels
that be open, and have no covering fastened upon them* by Gods law were held to
be unclean. fol. 26 Understanding apprehends the knowledge of things. fol.
50 Understanding divine is the cause and measure of things. ibid. Understanding
of man, is a liar, without God the only truth. fol. 51 Variable ought our
discoursings to be, according to the variety of the object and subject whereof
we speak. fol. 77 Verity seldom known of Princes, in regard of their
flatterers. fol. 89 Vanity of flatterers, very lively described. fol. 90
Variable names of the flatterer, and all significant. fol. 86 Verity, like unto
Honey. fol. 97 Verity beloved of liars themselves. ibid. Verity is hated, and
thence arises flattery: approved by many notable places of Scripture. fol. 98
Verity so beloved of Christ, as for it only he came into the world. fol. 99
Verity contendeth with eternity. fol. 109 Virgin defloured in the field,
cleared from punishment by the old law, but being dishonored in the City,
the law commanded all the people to stone her: Quia non clamauit. etc. fol.
127 Vice of detraction, how great and odious it is. fol. 144 Virtue consists
not in the verb, but in the aduerbe. fol. 167 Virgins in the Parable, Mat. 25.
notably expounded. fol. 184
W
Way of wisdom for a guide to the tongue, fol. 65 Will is one of the tongues
ways, whereto there needs a very good guardian. fol. 56 Will commands all
the powers of the soul. ibid. Word of God how sweet it is, and able to convert
men. fol. 68 Word of God compared to a ploughshare. fol. 75 Whence it ensues,
that one and the self same earth produces diverse and sundry fruits, and
grafts diverse upon one stock. fol. 139 Works good and virtuous, in what
danger of loss they are, only by vain glory. foll. 185 Works of good life,
in doing them, we ought to resemble the Israelites, in ^eedifying of the holy
Temple, in one hand to hold a sword, and to work with the other. fol. 189
Works of man cannot be good, if they want Gedeons example. fol. 187 Whence
it ensues, that the deaffe borne, are dumb also. fol. 127 Whence it ensues,
that some stammer, and others are eloquent. fol. 228 Whence it proceeded, that
some holy Saints talking with God, became stammerers and dumb. fol. 229 When we
ask any thing of God, we ought to crave things correspondent to his divine
majesty, and no matters of mean moment. fol. 249 Whence it arises, that man
being so noble, is yet more defective then all the other creatures. fol. 264 We
ought not search into other men's sins, thereby to win occasion for reproouing
them: whereon is discoursed very learnedly. fol. 276 We ought not to reprove
those falts in oth^^s, wherewith we know our selves to be stained. ibid.
X
Xenocrates the Chalcedonian Philosopher, never repented himself for silence,
but many times for talking. fol. 29 Xenocrates by his sweetness of discourse,
altered the base behavior of a luxurious young man. fol. 68 Xenocrates,
Alexanders Trumpetter never sounded his Trumpet, but still Alexander drew
forth his sword. fol. 95
Y
Young men ought not to speak, till they be thereto requested. fol. 12 Young
damoselles in elder times, observed it as a custom, to bind up their locks
with a crimson hayre-lace, whereof they made a wise and moral signification.
fol. 23 Zeno the Philosopher, he only among guests at a solemn banquet, sat
silent. fol. 5 Zeno bit forth his tongue with his teeth, and spat it in the
Tyrants face, because he would not discover his friends, true lovers of their
country. fol. 10 Zeno Elateus delivers the reason, wherefore nature gave a man
two ears, and but one tongue. ibid. Zoilus the detractor could speak well of
no man. fol. 142 Zephirus sends his kindly blasts abroad in the month March.
fol. 256
FINIS.

