The Explanation of the Frontispice.
AVgustus Caesar in the front does stand,
Who banished Ovid to the Ponticke land.
One side shows Rome, the other does present,
The Ship which carried him to Banishment.
A happy Pyramid it self does raise,
Built on those Books from whence he got his praise.
The sable Pyramid does likewise show,
That his ruin from the Art of Love did grow.
Beneath poor Ovid rests his weary head
Upon his Coffin, when all hope was fled.
And thereupon his wreath of Bays does lie,
To show he did in Pontus banished die.
But yet his Muse new life to him does give,
And by his lines sweet Ovid still does live.
Vade Liber mundo, Dominus fuit exul, and inde
Disce pati a Domino, fer mala, vade Liber.
Augustus Caesar
Hence grew my fame
Hence my ruin came
In Pontus I Did bannisht dye
OVIDS TRISTIA

Containinge five Books of mournful Elegies which he sweetly composed in the
midst of his adversity, while he lived in Tomos a City of Pontus where he
dyed after seven years Banishment from Rome.

Translated into English by W. S. Ve^iam pr^ laud pet^

London Printed for Fra: Grove and are to be sold at his shopp on Snow hill
near the Sarazens head. 1633.



(...) to your protection this translation of Ovids Elegies, who I think was
even rockt in his cradle by the Muses, and fed with Sugar and Helliconian
water, which made him have so sweet a vein of Poetry. So that the name of Ovid
is a sufficient commendation for any work of his, if my English can but like
the Echo, send back the soft Music of his lines. And indeed if he write
best of love that has been in love; and that there is a certain (...) or
efficacy in his words that feels the affection; I doubt not but my own
sorrow has learnt me how to translate Ovids sorrow. For I confess I was never
in Fortunes Books, and therefore am not much indebted to her, neither do I
care for her frowns; but I am greeved for one who is my brother in misfortune,
who is exul in patria, being enforced to let that skill and experience which he
has gotten abroad in marine affairs, and which has been approved of both by
the English and Dutch nations in several long voyages, lie dead in him for
want of employment which is the life of practical knowledge: and though he
must be compelled by his present fates to accept of the employment of foreign
nations, yet if a way might be opened unto him he is more willing (as he is
bound by duty) to serve his native King and Country, which desire of his I
know your generous disposition cannot but cherish, and approve of my love
toward him. This Book Ovid sent to the City of Rome as appears by the first
verse, Parve nec invideo, etc. and I am now to send it forth into a City
abounding with Critticks, and therefore it desires your worthy patronage and
defense; for which (if Ovid lived) he would make his fluent Muse express his
thankfulness: But I for any favor which you shall show unto this
translation, must acknowledge my self bound unto your virtue, which I wish may
shine forth in prosperous actions, until your fame be equal to Caesar's who
banished Ovid.

The Servant of your Virtues, W. SALTONSTALL.

To the Reader.
IT is now grown a common custom to seek thy good will by an Epistle, and
therein to move thy affection to be favorable to the present work, wherein I
need not bestow any great pains, for this is a translation of Ovids last
book which he writ in banishment; and therefore if you would set before your
eyes the present estate wherein he then lived, it would exceedingly move your
pity toward him. Imagine that you saw Ovid in the Land of Pontus, where he
whose company was so much desired, was now banished from all company; he that
was once the Darling of the Muses, now made the subject of misery; he that
drank choice wines, now drinks spring water; he that wore a wreath of Bays,
now wears a wreath of Cypress: and to conclude, he that was once so famous,
was now (...)

Angelus Politianus his Epigram on the banishment and death of Ovid.
THe Roman Poet lies in the Euxine shore,
And barbarous earth the Poet covers over:
Him that did write of love that land does hide,
Through which the Isters colder stream does glide.
And were not ashamed to be (O Rome)
More cruel than the Getes to such a son?
Oh Muses, while he sick in Scythia lay,
Who was there that his sickness could allay?
Or keep his cold limbs in the bed by force,
Or pass away the day with some discourse?
Or that could feel his pulse when it did beat,
Or apply to him warm things to cherish heat?
Or close his eyes even swimming round with death,
And in his mouth receive his latest breath?
There were none, for his ancient friends then were
In thee O Rome, from Pontus distant far.
His Wife and Nephews were far off, together
His daughter went not with her banished father.
The B^ssi and Coralli were in these parts,
And the skin-wearing Getes wirh stony hearts.
The Sarmatian riding on his horse was there,
To comfort him with looks that dreadful were.
Yet when he was dead, the Bessi wept, the Get,
And stout Sarmatians did their faces beat.
Woods, mountains, beasts, a mourning day did keep,
And Isters pearly stream they say did weep.
Some say that frozen Pontus did begin
To melt, with tears of Sea-nymphes shed for him.
Light Cupids with their mother Venus ran,
And with torches set the funeral pile on flame:
And while his body did consume and burn,
They put his ashes in a closed Vrne:
And on his Tombe-stone these words graven were,
He that did teach the Art of love lies here.
Then Venus with her white hand did bedew
His grave, while she sweet Nectar on him threw.
The Muses brought their Poet many a verse,
Which I am far unworthy to rehearse.
Julius Scaligers Verses on Ovid, wherein he makes Ovid speak to Augustus.
I Would thy cruelty had in me begun,
Nor by murders steps to ruin me had come.
If my wanton youth did move thy discontent,
Thou may condemn thy self to banishment.
For such foul deeds thy private rooms do stain,
That men condemned never did act the same.
Could not my wit, nor gentleness thee restrain*
Nor sweet tongue second to Apollo's vain?
My strain has made the ancient Poets soft,
And to the new the weight of things has tought.
I then did lie when as I praised thee,
For this my banishment was deserved by me.
(...) (...) Nor shame those blots which on thy face appears;
For some may think they were made with my tears,
Go book, salute the City in my name,
For on thy feet I will go back again;
And if by chance among the common crew,
Some mindful of me ask thee, how I do?
Return this answer, tell them that I live,
And that my god this life does freely give.
But if they more do seek, then silent be,
And speak not that should not be read in thee.
Then the angry reader will repeat my fault,
While by the people I am guilty thought.
Defend me not though they my fault repeat,
An ill cause by defense is made more great.
Some thou shall find will sigh, 'cause I am gone,
And read these verses with wet cheeks alone.
Who often wishes, Caesar would but please,
Some lighter punishment might his wrath appease.
And I do pray he may n'ere wretched be,
That wishes Caesar thus should pity me.
But may his wishes come to pass, that I
At last may in my native country dye.
But book, I know, thou shall receive much blame,
And be thought inferior unto Ovids vain:
Yet every judge the time and matter weighes;
The time considered, thou deservest praise.
Smooth verses from a quiet mind do flow:
My times are overcast with sudden woe.
Verses require much leisure and sweet ease:
But I am tossed by winds, and angry Seas.
Verses were never made in fear, while I
Do look each minute by the sword to dye.
So that an equal judge may well approve
These lines of mine, and read them with much love.
Had Homer been distressed so many ways,
It would his sharp discerning wit amaze*
Then book be careless of all idle fame;
For to displease thy Reader, is no shame,
Since fortune has not so kind to me been,
That thou theit idle praise should so esteem:
When I was happy, I did covet fame,
And had a great desire to get a name.
But now both verse and study I do hate,
Since they have brought me to this banished state.
Yet go my book, thee in my place I assign,
And would to God I could not call thee mine.
Though as a stranger thou do come to Rome,
Thou can not to the people come unknown:
Had thou no title, yet thy sable hew,
If thou deny me, will thy author show.
Yet enter secretly, least some do disdain
My verse, which is not now esteemed by fame.
And if by chance some when they hear me named*
Do cast thee by out of their scornful hand,
Tell them that I do teach no rules of love,
That work was long since punished from above.
Perhaps thou do imagine thou art sent,
To Caesar's Court, which is not my intent:
Aspire not thou unto those seats divine,
From whence the Thunder did on me decline.
Though once the Gods more favorable were,
Yet now their just deserved wrath I fear.
The fearful Dove once struck, still after springs,
When she does hear the Hawks large spreading wings*
And from the fold the Lamb dare never stray^^*
That from the Woolfe has gotten once away.
Nor would young Phaethon desire (...)
His fathers steeds, if he were now (...)
Since on my face the angry waves do break.
And now the southern winds so cruel are,
They will not let the Gods even hear my prayer,
But coupling mischeefes, with their rufling gales,
They take away my prayers, and drive our sails;
The waves like mountains now are rolled on,
Which even seem to touch the starrie throane.
And by and by deep valleys do appear,
As if that hell it self dissolved were.
Nothing but air and water can I see,
And both of them do seem to threaten me;
Whiles diverse winds their forces do display,
The sea is doubtful which he should obey.
For now the wind comes from the purple East,
And so again it blows from the West.
Then Boreas flies out from the Northern Waine,
While Southern winds do beat him back again.
Our Pilat knew not whether he should steare,
Art fails him, lost in his amazed fear.
Perish we must, all hope of life is past,
And while I speak the angry billows slasht
Into my face, and with their waves did fill
My mouth while I continued praying still.
I know my wife at home does now lament,
And grieve to think upon my banishment:
Yet knows she not how I am tossed here,
And little thinks the that I am so near
Unto my death, and were she here with me,
My grief for her a second death would be.
Now though I dye, yet while that she is safe,
I shall survive in her my other half:
But now quick lightning breaks through the Cloud,
And following Thunder roareth out aloud.
And now the waves upon the ship do boat,
Like bullets, and as one wave does retreat,
Another comes that does exceed the rest,
And thus their fury is by turns expressed.
I fear not death, yet I do greeve that I
Should here by shipwreck in this manner dye.
Happy is he whom sickness does invade,
Whose body in the solid earth is laid:
And having made his will, in his grave may rest,
Nor shall the fishes on his body feast.
And yet suppose my death deserved be,
Shall all the rest be punished here for me?
O ye green gods who do the sea command,
Take off from us your heavy threatening hand.
And let me bear this wretched life of mine,
Unto that place which Caesar did assign.
If you desire with death to punish me,
My fault was jug'd not worthy death to be:
Had Caesar meant to take my life away,
He need not use your help who all does sway.
For if that he do please my blood to spill,
My life is but a tenure at his will.
But you whom I did never yet offend,
Have pity on me, and to mercy bend:
For though you save me in this great distress,
Yet you shall see my ruin never the less.
And if the winds and seas did favor me,
I should no less a banished man still be.
I am not greedy, riches to obtain,
Nor do I plough the sea in hope of gain.
I go not to Athens, where I once have been
Or Asian towns which I have never seen,
Nor unto Alexandria do I go,
To see how Nilus seven streams do flow:
I wish a gentle wind, which may so stand,
It was the deepest silence of the night,
And Luna in her chariot shined bright:
When looking on the Cappitols high frame,
Which joined was unto our house in vain:
You gods (quoth I) whom these fair seats enfold,
And temples which I never shall more behold:
And all ye gods of Rome whom I must leave,
These my last tenderd prayers to you receive;
Though wounded I the buckler use too late,
Le^ exile ease me of the peoples hate.
Tell Caesar though I sinned by ignorance,
There was no wickedness in my offense.
And as you know so let him know the same,
That so his wrath may be appeased again.
With larger prayers my wife did then beseech
The gods, until that sobs cut off her speech.
Then falling down with flowing hair long spread,
She kissed the harth whereon the fire lay dead;
And to our Penates pourd forth many a word,
Which for her husband now no help afford,
Now growing night did haste delay again,
And Arctos now had turned about her Waine,
And loath was I to leave my country sight,
Yet this for exile was my sentenced night.
If any urgd my haste I would reply,
Alas consider whither, whence I fly.
And then my self with flattory would beguile:
And think no hour did limit my exile.
Thrice went I forth, and thrice returning find,
Slow paces were indulgent to my mind;
Often having bid farewell, I spoke again,
And many parting kisses gave in vain.
Then looking back upon my children dear,
The (...) repeated charge I gave them there.
Why make we have? it is just to seek delay,
Since I am sent from Rome to Scythia.
For I must leave my children, house and wife,
Who while I live must lead a widows life.
And you my loving friends that present be,
And were like Theseus faithful unto me:
Let us embrace, and use times little store,
Perhaps I never shall embrace you more.
And then my words to action did give place,
While I each friend did lovingly embrace.
But while I speak and tears bedewed my eyes,
The fatal morning star began to rise.
My heart was so divided therewithal,
As if my limbs would from my body fall.
So Priam grieved when he too late did find,
The Grecian horse with armed men was linde.
Then sorrow was in one loud cry expressed:
And every one began to knock his breast;
And now my wife her arms about me cast,
And while I wept she spoke these words at last.
Thou shall not go alone, for I will be
Thy wife in banishment and follow thee:
In the same ship with thee I Will go aboard,
And one land shall to us one life afford.
Thee unto exile Caesar's wrath commandes,
Me love, which love to me for Caesar's stands.
This she repeats which she had spoke before,
And could not be persuaded to give ore.
Till at the last when I my hair had rent,
Forth like some living funeral I went:
And after (as I heard) when night grew on,
Being mad with grief, she threw her self along
Upon the ground, while as her hair now lies,
Soild in the dust: and when that she did rise,
Of Nisus love who should the story know?
For as the fire the yellow gold does try,
So love is proved by adversity.
While Fortune helps us, and on us does smile,
They will attend upon our wealth that while:
But if she frown, they fly, and scarce of any,
Shall he be known that had of friends so many:
This which before I from examples drew,
In my own fortune now is proved true.
Since of my friends so few remaining be,
The rest did love my fortune and not me.
Then let those few aid me distressed the more,
And bring my ship with safety to the shore:
And let not any fear to be my friend,
Least that his love great Caesar's might offend.
For faithfulness in friendship he does love:
And in his enemies he does it approve.
My case is better, since that no attempt
Against him, but folly wrought my banishment.
Be watchful then in my behalf, and see,
If that his anger may appeased be.
If any wish I should my griefs rehearse,
They are to many too be showed in verse.
My griefs are more than stars within the skies,
Or little mo^es which in the dust arise.
For to my sorrows none can credit give,
Posterity will scarce the same believe.
Besides those other griefs which ought to have,
Within my secret thoughts a silent grave.
Had I voice and breast could never be tired,
More mouths and tongues than ever grief desired:
Yet could not I express the same in words,
My grief so large a theme to me affords.
You learned Poets leave off now to write,
Ulysses troubles, and my woes recite.
I sufferd more, he wanderd many years,
In coming home from Troy as it appears.
We sayld so far to the Sarmatian shore,
Till we discoverd stars unknown before.
With him a faithful troop of Grecians went,
My friends forsook me in my banishment.
To bring him home his happy sails were spread,
While I even from my native country fled.
Nor do I sail frrm Ithaca, from whence,
It would not greeve me to be banished thence:
But even from Rome which does the gods enfold,
And from seven hills does all the world behold.
He had a body hardened to endure,
To labor I my self did never inure,
In the stern wars great pains he daily took,
But I was still devoted to my book.
One god opposing me, no god brought aid,
But him Bellona helped the warlike Maid.
And since that Neptune is than Jove far less,
Him Neptune, but great Jove does me oppress.
Besides, some fictions do his labors grace,
Which in our griefs sad story have no place.
And lastly though at last, his home he found,
And landed on the welcome long sought ground.
But never shall I my native country see,
Until the angry gods appeased be.
Unto his wife whose faithful love,
And constancy he does approve.
ELEGY V.
APollo Lyde never loved so well,
Nor did Philetas love so much excel
(...) Unto the Reader put in mind of me.
Yet they with patience can be read of none,
That to the world are uncorrected shown,
Snatched from the forge before they could be framed,
Deprived of my last life-giving hand.
For praise I pardon crave, it shall suffice,
If Reader thou do not my Verse despise.
Yet in the front these verses placed be,
If with thy liking it at least agree:
Who meets this Orphan Volumne poor in worth,
Within your City harborage afford
To win more favor, not by him set forth,
But ravished from the funeral of his Lord:
This therefore which presents its own defect,
At pleasure with a friendly hand correct.
To his unconstant friend, whose love
He finds does now unconstant prove,
And like a Glow-worme seems to shine,
But yields no bea^e in hardest time.
ELEGY VII.
LEt Rivers now flow back unto their Spring,
And let the Sun from West his course begin:
The earth shall now with shining stars be filled,
The skies unto the furrowing plough shall yield.
The water shall send forth a smoking flame,
The fire shall yield forth water back again.
All things shall go against old natures force,
And no part of the world shall keep his course.
This I presage because I am deceived
Of him whose love most faithful I believed.
What made thy hollow thoughts so soon reject me,
What did thou fear when fortune did afflict me,
That thou would never comfort me at all,
Or mourn at my living funeral?
That name of friendship which should holy be,
Is not esteemed or reckoned of by thee.
What had it been to have seen a maimed friend,
And with the rest some words of comfort lend?
And if no tears for me thou could have shed,
With fained pity might have something sed.
Thou might have done as some who I never knew,
And in the common voice have bid adieu:
And lastly, while thou might, take the pain
To see my face never to be seen again.
And might have then (which never shall more befall)
Give and receive a farewell last of all.
Which others did whom no strick^ league did bind,
And made their tears the witness of their mind.
For were not we in love joined each to other,
By length of time and living both together?
My business and my sports were known to thee,
And so were thy affairs well known to me.
Did not I know thee well at Rome of late,
Whom I for mirth-sake did associate?
Are these things vanished into empty wind,
Drowned in the Lethe of a faithless mind?
I do not think that thou were borne at Rome*
(Whither alas I never more shall come.)
But on some Rock here in the Pontick land,
Or Scythian Mountains that so wildly stand:
And veins of flint are every where dispersed
In slender branches through thy Iron breast.
And su^e thy Nurse some cruel Tiger was
Who gave thee suck as she along did pass:
(...) In that thy virtues have such publication.
Would I had kept in darkness out of sight,
My studies, which I wish had never known light:
For as thy fame from eloquence does grow,
So from my Verse, my ruin first did flow.
Thou know my life, and how I did abstain
From those same Arts of love which I did frame:
Thou know I writ it in my younger days,
In jesting manner, not to merit praise.
Though I dare nothing urge in my defense,
I think I may excuse my late offense.
Excuse me then, nor 'ere forsake thy friend,
But as thou have begun so also end.
Ovid here his ship does praise,
That carried him through many Seas.
ELEGY IX.
YEllow Minerva does my ship maintain,
Which of her painted Helmet bears the name,
For with the least wind she will nimbly sail,
And go with Oars when as the wind does fail.
She will out-saile her company outright,
And fetch up any ship that is in sight.
She can endure the waves which on her beat,
Yet will she never open any leake.
I boarded her in the Corinthian bay,
From whence she stoutly brought me on my way,
By Pallas help, by whom she was protected,
Through many dangerous seas she was directed:
And may she now cut through the Pontick strand,
And bring me safely to the Getick Land.
Who when that she had carried me at last,
Through the Ionian seas, when we had past
Along those coasts, we stood to the left hand,
And so we came unto the Imbrian land,
Then, with a gentle wind she sailed on,
And touched at Samos as she went along.
Upon the other side there stands a wood,
Thus far my ship did bring me through the flood,
Through the Bistonians fields on foot I went,
And then from Hellespont her course she bent:
For to Dardania she her course intended,
And Lampsace which Priapus defended.
So to the walls of Cyricon she came,
Which the Maeonian people first did frame.
Thence to Constantinople was her way,
Where as two seas do meet within one bay.
Now may my other ship with a strong gale,
Pass by the moving Isles, while she does sail
By the Thymian bay, while her course does fall,
To come hard by Anchiolus high wall.
Then to Messembria, Odesson, and the Tower,
Which is defended by god Bacchus power:
And to Megara which did first receave.
Alcathous, who did his Country leave.
So to Miletus which is the place assigned,
To which by Caesar's wrath I am confined.
Where for an offering of a greater price,
A Lamb to Pallas I will sacrifice.
And you two brothers that are stellify'd,
I pray that you my ship may gently guide:
One ship to Cyanean Isles is bound,
The other goes to the Bistouian ground:
And therefore grant the wind may fitly stand,
To bring them safely to a diverse land.
LIB. II.
Unto Caesar he excuses
Himself, and condemns his Muses:
And many Poets does recite,
Who in their times did loosely write;
Yet in that age were never sent,
Though like in fault, to banishment.
WHat have I to do with you my unhappy book?
On who^ as on my ruin I must look.
Why do I return unto my Muse again,
(...) not enough one punishment to obtain?
It was my verse that first did overthrow me,
And made both men and women wish to know me.
It was my verse that made great Caesar deem
My life to be such as my verse did seem.
Amongst my chiefest faults I must rehearse,
My love of studdy, and my looser verse:
In which while I my fruitless labor spent,
I gained nothing but sad banishment.
Those learned Sisters I should therefore hate,
Who their adorers still do ruinate.
Yet such my madness is, that folly arms me
To strike my foore against that store that harms me;
Even as some beaten fencer after tries
To regaine honor by a second prize.
Or as some torn ship that newly came
To shore, yet after stands to Sea again;
Perhaps as Telephus was healed by a sword,
So that which hurt me shall like help afford:
And that my Verse his moved wrath may appease,
Since verses have great power the gods to please.
Caesar has bidden each Italian Dame,
To sing some verses to great Opis name:
And unto Phoebus when he set forth plays
To him, once seen within an age of days;
So may my verse, great Caesar's now obtain,
By examples to appease thy wrath again.
Just is thy wrath, which I will never deny,
Such shameful words, from my mouth do not fly:
And this offense makes me for pardon cry,
Since faults are objects of thy clemency.
Jove would be soon disarmed, if he should send
His thunderbolts as often as men offend.
Now though his thunders make the world to fear,
It breaks the Clouds, and makes the air more clear:
Whom therefore father of the gods we name,
Than Jove none greater does the world contain.
Thou Pater patriae too art called, then be
Like to those gods in name and clemency:
And so thou art, for no more moderate hand,
Could hold the raines of Empire and command.
Thy enemy once overcome in field
Thou pardonst, which he victor would not yield.
And some thou did with honors dignifie,
That have attempted against thy Majesty.
Thy wars on one day did begin and cease,
While both sides brought their offerings unto peace:
That as the Victor in the vanquished Foe,
The vanquished in the Victor gloried so.
My case is better, since I never did join
With those who did in arms against thee combine:
Yet now this house which by my Muse was raised,
Is by one fault of mine again disgraced:
Yet fallen so as it it self may rear,
If Caesar's wrath would once more mild appear:
Whose mercy in my sentence was expressed,
^a^^e short of that my fear did first suggest.
Whose anger reached not to this life of ours,
But with great mildness used thy Princely powers:
And thou my forfeit goods to me did give,
And with my life did grant me means to live.
Nor by the Senates sentence was I sent,
Or private judgment into banishment:
But did thy self pronounce those heavy words,
Whose execution full revenge affords.
Besides, thy edict forcing my exile,
^id with great favor my late fault enstile:
Whereby I am not banished, but confind,
And misery is in gentle words assignd.
For there is no punishment though never so strickt,
Can more than thy displeasure me afflict.
Yet sometimes angry gods appeased are,
And when the clouds are gone, the day is fair.
I have seen the Ealme laden with Vines again,
That had before been strooken by Jove's flame.
Therefore I Will hope, since thou can not deny,
To grant me this even in my misery.
Thy mercy makes me hope, till I reflect
Upon my fault which does all hope reject.
And as the rage of seas by winds incensed,
Is not with equal fury still commenced:
But that sometimes a quiet calm it has,
And seems to have laid by his former wrath:
Even so my various thoughts do make me fare,
Now calmed by hope, then troubled with despair.
By those same gods that grant thee long to reign,
That thou may still maintain the Roman^ name:
And by thy Country happy in thy fate,
Where I a subject were of thine of late:
May so the City render thee due love,
For thy great acts which do thy mind approve.
So may thy Livia live here many years,
Who only worthy of thy love appears:
Whom nature kept for thee, else there had been,
None worthy to have been thy Royal Queen.
So may thy Son grow up, and with his Father,
Rule this same Empire happily together.
And by his acts and thine which time cannot hide,
May both your ofsprings so be stellified.
May victory so accustomed to thy Tent,
Come to his colors, and herself present:
And fly about him with displayed wings,
While she a Laurel wreath to crown him brings.
To whom thou do thy wars command resign,
And give him that fortune that was thine:
While thou thy self at home in peace do reign,
Thy other self does foreign wars maintain.
May he return a victor over his foe,
And on his plumed horse in triumph go.
Oh spare me therefore, and do now lay by,
Thy thunder which has bred my misery.
Spare me thou Pater patriae, let that name,
Give me some hope to please thee once again.
I sue not to repeal my banishment,
Though unto greater suits the gods assent.
For if thou would some milder place assign
Of exile, it would ease this grief of mind.
For here I suffer even the worst of woes,
While I do live amongst the barbarous foes:
Being sent unto Danubius sevenfold stream,
Of vices knowledge she may learn the skill.
Let her the Annals take (though most severe)
The fault of Ilia will thereby appear.
And in the Aeneads read as in the other,
How wanton Venus was Aeneas mother.
And I will show beneath in every kind,
That there is no verse but may corrupt the mind.
Yet every book is not for this to blame,
Since nothing profits, but may hurt again.
Than fire what better? yet he that does desire,
To burn a house, does arm himself with fire.
Health giving physic, health does often empaire,
Some herbs are wholesome, and some poison are.
The thief and traveller swords wear, to the end,
The One may assault, the other may defend.
Though eloquence should plead the honest cause,
It may defend the guilty by the laws.
So if my verse be read with a good mind,
Thou shall be sure in it no hurt to find.
He therefore erres who led by self conceit,
Does misinterpret what so e're I write,
Why are there Cloisters? wherein maids do walk,
That with their Lovers they may meet and talk.
The Temple though most sacred, let her shun,
That with an evil mind does thither come.
For in Jove's temple her thoughts will suggest,
How many maids by Jove have been oppressed:
And think in Iunoe's temples when she is praying,
How Juno injured was by Jove's often straying,
And Pallas seen, she thinks some faulty birth,
Made her to hide Ericthon borne of earth:
If she come to Marses temple, over the gate,
There stands Venus with her cunning Mate.
In Isis temple she revolveth how,
Poor Io was transformed into a Cow.
And something then her wandering fancy moves,
To think of Venus and Anchises loves.
Iasus and Ceres next her thoughts encite,
And pale Endimion the Moons favorite:
For though these statues were for prayer assigned,
Yet every thing corrupts an evil mind:
And my first leaf bids them not to read that Art,
Which I to Harlots only did impart.
And since in maidens it is thought a crime,
For to press farther than the Priests assign:
Is she not faulty then, who not forbeares
To read my verses, prohibited chaste ears?
Matrons to view those pictures are content,
Which various shapes of venery present:
And Vestall Virgins do peruse the same,
For which the Author does receive no blame.
Yet why did I that wanton vein approve?
Why does my Book persuade them unto love?
It was my fault which I do here confess,
My wit and judgment did therein transgress.
Why did not I of Troyes sad ruin tell,
(That vexed theme) which by the Graecians fell.
Or Thebes seven Gates which severally kept,
Where by mutual wounds those brothers dye and slept.
An ample subject warlike Rome afforded,
Whose acts I might have piously recorded.
And though great Caesar's deeds abroad are known,
Yet by my verse some part I might have shown:
For as the Suns bright rays do draw the sight,
So might thy acts my willing Muse encite.
Yet 'twas no fault to plough a little field,
Knowing that theme does fertile matter yield.
For though the Cock-boate through the Lake do row.
Whose treacherous Hostess sought his life in vain.
What of Hermione or the Arcadian maid,
Phoebe whose course the Latmian Lover staid.
Or what of Danae, by Jove a mother grown,
And Hercules got in two nights joynd in one.
To these add Iole, Pyrrhus, and that boy,
Sweet Hylas, with Paris, firebrand unto Troy.
And should I here recite loves tragic flames,
My book would scarce contain their very names.
Thus Tragedies to wanton laughter bend,
And many shameful words in them they blend.
Some blameless have Achilles acts defaced,
And by soft measures have his deeds disgraced.
Though Aristides his own faults compiled,
Yet Aristides was not straight exiled.
Eubius did write an impure history,
And does describe unwholesome venerie:
Nor he that Sybarin luxuries composed,
Nor he that his own sinful acts disclosed.
These in the libraries by some bounteous hand,
To public use do there devoted stand.
By strangers pens I need not seek defense,
Our own books with such liberty dispense:
For though grave Ennius of wars tumults writ,
Whose artlesse works do show an able wit:
The cause of fire Lucretius does explain,
And how three causes did this world frame:
Wanton Catullus yet his Muse did task,
To praise his mistress, whom he then did mask.
Under the name of Lesbia, and so strove,
In verse to publish his own wanton love.
And with like license Calvus too assaies,
For to set forth his pleasure diverse ways,
Why should I mention Memn^as wanton vain?
Who to each filthy act does give a name;
And Cinna striving by his verse to please:
Cornificus may be well rankt with these,
And he that did commend to after fame,
His love disguised by Metellus name.
And he that sailed for the Fleece of gold,
His secret thefts of love does often unfold.
Hortensius too, and Servius writ as bad,
Who'd think my fault so great examples had?
Sisenna, Aristides works translates,
And often in wanton jests expatiates.
For praising Lycoris none does Gallus blame,
If that hls tongue in wine he could contain.
Tibullus writes that women's oaths are wind,
Who can with outward shows their husbands blind.
Teaching them how their keepers to beguile,
While he himself is cosen'd by that wile.
That he would take occasion for to try
Her ring, that he might touch her hand thereby.
By private tokens he would talk sometime,
And on the table draw a wanton sign:
Teaching what oils that blewnesse shall expel,
Which by much kissing on their lips does dwell.
And unto husbands does strickt rules commend,
If they be honest, wives will not offend.
And when the dog does bark, to know before,
That it is their Lover that stands at the door.
And many notes of love-thefts he does leave,
And teaches wives their husbands to deceave.
Yet is Tibullus read and famous grown,
And unto thee (great Caesar) he was known.
And though Propertius did like precepts give,
Yet his clear fame does still unstained live.
To these did I succeed, for I Will suppress,
Than where he brings him to Queen Dido's bed.
Yet in his youth he did commend fair Phillis,
And sports himself in praising Amorillis.
And though I formerly in that same vain
Offended, yet I now do bear the blame.
I had writ verses, when before thee I,
Amongst the other horsemen passed by:
And now my age does even bear the blame,
Of those things which my younger years did frame.
My faulty books are now revenged at last,
And I am punished for a fault that is past.
Yet all my works are not so light and vain,
Sometimes I lanch'd into the deeper maine.
And in six books Romes Holidays have showed,
Where with the Month each Volumne does conclude.
And to thy sacred name did dedicate
That work, though left unperfect by my fate.
Besides, I stately Tragedies have writ,
And with high words the Tragic style did fit.
Besides, of changed shapes my Muse did chant,
Though they my last life-giving hand did want.
And would thy anger were but so appeased,
As that to read my verse thou would be pleased:
My verse, where from the infant birth of things,
My Muse her work unto thy own time brings.
Thou should behold the strength of every line,
Wherein I strive to praise both thee and thine.
Nor are my verses mingled so with gall,
As that my lines should be Satyricall.
Amongst the vulgar people none yet found,
Themselves once touched; my Muse my self does wound,
Therefore each generous mind I do believe,
Will not rejoice, but at my ill fate grieve:
No^ yet will triumph over my wretched state,
Who never was proud even in my better fate.
O therefore let these reasons change thy mind,
That in distress I may thy favor find:
Not to return, though that perhaps may be,
When thou in time at last may pardon me.
But I entreat thee to remove me hence,
To safer exile fitting my offense.
LIB. III.
The Book does to the Reader show,
That he is loath to come to view:
And tells how he was entertaind
By some, while others him disdaind.
I Am that Book who fearfully do come,
Even from a banished man to visit Rome:
And coming weary from a foreign land,
Good Reader let me rest within thy hand.
Do not thou fear or be ashamed of me,
Since no love verses in this paper be.
My master now by fortune is oppressed,
It is no time for him to write in jest.
Though in his youth he had a wanton vain,
Yet now he does condemn that work again.
Behold! here is nothing but sad mourning lines,
So that my verse agrees with his times.
And that my second verse is lame in strength,
Short feet do cause it, or the journeys length.
Nor are my rough leaves covered over with yellow,
For I my Authors fortune mean to follow.
In Swan-like Tunes he does deplore
His exile, and knocks at the door
Of Death, desiring hasty fate,
His wretched life would terminate.
ELEGY II.
WAs it my fate that I should Scythia see,
And the land whose Zenith is the Axeltree?
And would not you sweet Muses nor Apollo,
Help me, who did your holy rites still follow?
Could not my harmless verses me excuse,
And life more serious than my jesting Muse?
But that I must when I the seas had past,
Unto the Ponticke land be brought at last.
And I that still my self from care withdrew,
Loving soft ease, and no rough labor knew:
Having past great dangers both by sea and land,
Here worst of miseries is by me sustained.
Yet I endure these evils, for I find,
My body does receive strength from my mind
And in my passage to my sad exile,
I with my study did my cares beguise.
But when I did my journeys end attain,
And that unto the hated shore I came.
Then from mine eyes a shower of tears did flow,
Like water running from the melted snow.
And then my house and Rome comes in my mind,
And every thing that I had left behind.
A ^^tle that I should knock still at the Grave,
To be let in, yet can no entrance have.
Why have I still escaped from the sword,
Could not the Sea to me a death afford?
You gods who constant are in your just ire,
And do with Caesar in revenge conspire,
I do beseech you hasten on my fate,
And bid death open unto me the gate.
He lets his wife here understand,
Of his sickness in a foreign land:
Then writes his Epitaph, with intent,
To make his books his monument.
ELEGY III.
THat this my Letter by a strangers hand
Is writ, the cause my sickness understand.
For in the worlds farthest part I lie,
Sick and uncertain of recovery.
What comfort can within that climate shine,
On which the Getes and Sauramats confine?
My nature does not with the soil agree,
The air and water do seem strange to me.
My shelter poor, my diet here is bad,
No health-restoring Physic can be had.
No friend to comfort me, who will assay,
With some discourse to pass the time away.
But here upon my bed of sickness cast,
I think of many things which now are past.
And thou my dearest wife above the rest,
Do hold the chiefest place within my breast:
Thy absent name is mentioned still by me,
And every day and night I think on thee.
Sometimes I speak things without sense or wit,
That I may name thee in my frantic fit.
If I should swound, and that no heating wine,
Could give life to this faultring tongue of mine:
To hear of thy approach would make me live,
Thy very presence would new vigor give.
Thus I most doubtful of my life am grown,
But thou perhaps livst merrily at home.
No, I dare say, that thou my dearest wife,
Do in my absence lead a mourning life.
Yet if the number of my years be done,
And that my hasty thread of life is spun:
You gods you might with ease have let me have,
Within my native land a happy grave.
If that you would have let my death prevent
My fatal journey unto banishment;
Then had I died in my integrity,
But now I here a banished man must dye.
And shall I here resign my weary breath,
The place makes me unhappy in my death.
Upon my bed I shall not fall asleep,
And none upon my coffin here shall weep.
Nor shall my wives tears while that they do fall
Upon my face, me unto life recall.
I shall not make my will, nor with sad cries,
No friendly hand shall close my dying eyes.
Without a Tomb or Funeral I shall be,
While as the barbarous earth does cover me.
Which when thou hearst, be not with grief oppressed,
Nor do not thou for sorrow beat thy breast.
Why should thou wring thy tender hands in vain,
Or call upon thy wretched husbands name?
Te^^ not thy cheeks, nor cut thy hair for me,
For I am not (good wife) now took from thee.
When I was banished then I died, alas,
For banishment than death more heavy was.
Now I would have thee to rejoice (good wife)
Since all my grief is ended with my life.
And bear thy sorrows with a valiant heart:
Mishaps have taught thee how to play thy part.
And with my body may my soul expire,
That so no part may escape the greedy fire.
For if to Pythagoras we may credit give,
Who says the soul eternally does live:
My soul among the Sarmatick shades shall stray,
And to the cruel ghosts never find the way.
Yet let my ashes be put in an Vrne,
So being dead I shall again return.
This lawful is, the Theban being dead,
His loving sister saw him buried,
And let sweet powders round my bones be laid,
And so unto some secret place convai'd:
Graving these verses on a Marble stone,
In letters to be read by every one.
"I Ovid that did write of wanton love,
"Lie here, my verse my overthrow did prove.
"Thou that have been in love and passest by*
"Pray still that Ovids bones may softly lie.
This Epitaph shall suffice, since my books be,
A far more lasting monument to me.
Which though they hurt me, yet shall raise my name,
And give their Author everlasting fame.
Yet let thy love in funeral gifts be showed,
And bring sweet Garlands with thy tears be dew'd.
Those ashes which the funeral fire shall leave,
Will in their Vrne thy pious love perceive.
More would I write, but that my voice is spent,
Nor can my dry tongue speak what I invent.
Then take my last words to thee; live in health.
Which though I send to thee, I want my self.
Ovid does his friend advise,
A life of greatness to despise:
Since thunder does the hill assail,
While quiet peace lives in the vale.
ELEGY IIII.
MY always dearest friend, but then most known,
When I by adverse fortune was orethrowne:
If thou will take the counsel of a friend,
Live to thy self, do not too high ascend.
Since thunder from the highest tower does come;
Live to thy selffe and glittering titles shun.
For though the beams of greatness may us warm,
Yet greatest men have greatest power to harm.
The naked sayle-yard fears no storms at all,
And greatest Sails more dangerous are than small:
The floting cork upon the waves does swim,
While heavy Lead does sink the Net therein.
Of these things had some friend admonisht me,
Perhaps I had been still at Rome with thee.
While as a gentle wind did drive me on,
My boat through quiet streams did run along.
He that by chance does fall upon the plain,
He falls so that he may rise again.
But when Elpenor from a high house fell,
His ghost went down to Pluto king of hell.
Though Dedalus his wings did him sustain,
(...) Icarus gave the sea his name;
Because that he flew high, the other low,
While both of them their wings abroad did throw:
The man that unto sollitude is bent,
Does live most happy if he be content.
Eumenes of his son was not deprived,
Until that he Achilles horses guided:
And Phaethon had not dyed in the flame,
If that his father could his will restrain.
Then fear thou still to take the higher way,
And in thy course draw in thy sails I pray.
Thou worthy art to live most fortunate,
And to enjoy a candide happy fate.
Thy gentle love deserves these prayers of mine,
Since thou did cleave to me in every time:
I saw how that thy grief for me was shown,
Even in thy looks most like unto my own.
I saw thy tears which on my face did fall,
And with my tears I drunk thy words withal.
Now to thy absent friend thou yeeld'st relief,
Thereby to lighten this my heavy grief:
Live thou unenvied, honor crown thy end,
For thou art worthy of a noble friend.
And love thy Ovids name which cannot be,
Banished though Scythis now contains me:
For me a land near to the Bear does hold,
Whereas the earth is frozen up with cold.
Here Bosphorus and Tanais do remain,
And places which have scarcely any name.
Uninhabitable cold does dwell beyond,
For I am near unto the farthest land.
My country and my wife are absent far,
And with them two all things that dearest are.
Yet though with them I cannot present be,
Within my fancy I their shape do see.
My house, the City stand before my eyes,
And all my actions in their place do rise.
My wives dear Image does it self present,
Which does increase and lighten discontent.
Her absence grieveth me, but then again,
My comfort is, she constant does remain.
And you my friends do cleave unto my breast,
Whose names I wish by me might be expressed.
But wary fear does my desire restrain,
And you I think do even wish the same.
For though that heretofore you pleased were,
When as your names did in my verse appear:
Yet now I Will talk with you within my breast,
Nor shall your fears by my verse be encreast.
Nor shall my verse disclose a secret friend,
Love secretly, and love me to the end:
And know though we by absence be disjoynd,
Yet you are always present in my mind.
Then strive to ease those griefs which I sustain,
And lend your hand to help me up again.
So may your fortune prosperous remain,
And never have just cause to ask the same.
By a fained name he does commend.
One C^rus that had been his friend:
And then does mittigate his fault,
(...) error him to ruin brought.
ELEGY V.
MY use of friendship with thee was but small,
And if thou will, thou may say none at all:
But that thy love most faithful I did find,
When as my ship sailed with a prosperous wind.
When once I fell, then all did shun my wrack,
And all my friends on me did turn their back.
Yet thou when I was strooken with Jove's flame,
Did visit me and to my house then came:
And in thy fresh acquaintance thou did show,
More love than all my ancient friends would do.
I saw thy amazed countnance at that time,
Thy face be dewed with tears more pale than mine.
And seeing tears to fall at each word, my ears
Did drink thy words, my mouth did drink thy tears:
Thou did embrace my neck, and then betwixt
Some loving kisses with thy sighs were mixed.
Now absent thou defendest mo again,
Thou know that Carus is a fained name:
And many tokens of thy love appear,
Which I in memory will ever bear.
The gods still make thee able to defend
Thy friends unto a far more happy end.
To know how I do live if thou require,
As it is likely that thou do desire:
I have some hope, which do not take from me,
That those offended powers will pleased be.
Which being vain, or if it may befall,
Do thou allow my hope though it be small.
Bestow thy eloquence upon that theme,
To show it may fall out as I do mean.
The greatest men are placeable in wrath,
A generous mind a gentle anger has.
When Beasts unto the Lion prostrate lie,
He ends the combat with his enemy.
But Wolves and Bears their yielding foes do kill,
And the inferior beasts are cruel still.
Who like Achilles? yet even he appears,
To be much moved with Dardanus sad tears.
Emathions clemency is best declared,
Even by those funeral rites which he prepared.
And that I may not man's calmed anger show,
Even Juno's son in law was once her foe.
Lastly, I needs must hope, since at this time,
I am not punished for a heinous crime.
I did not plot against great Caesar's life,
To ruin him by sowing civil strife:
I never yet did rail against the time,
Or spoke against him in my cups of wine:
But am punished for beholding of a fault,
Which I through ignorance beheld, unsought.
Yet all my fault I cannot well defend,
Though in part thereof I did no ill intend.
So that I hope that he will pleased be,
To grant an easier banishment to me.
I wish the morning star that brings the day,
Would bring this news and quickly post away.
His friends fidelity he does praise,
And to excuse himself assayes:
Desiring if he have any grace
At Rome, to use it in his case.
ELEGY VI.
O(...) of friendship thou will not conceal,
Or if thou would, it would it self reveal.
For while we might, none was more dear to me,
And I do know I was beloved of thee.
And this our love was to the people known,
So that our love more than our selves was known:
The candor of thy mind is easily seen,
Of him who for thy friend thou do esteem.
Thou nothing from my knowledge did conceal,
And I my secrets did to thee reveal:
For all my heart and secrets thou did know,
Except that which wrought my overthrow.
Which had thou known, thou would have counseld me
So well that I should never banished be.
But 'twas my fate drew on my punishment,
And crossed me in any good intent.
Yet whether that I might this evil shun,
And reason cannot fortune overcome:
Yet thou to me my old acquaintance art,
And of my love thou holdst the greatest part.
Be mindful then, and if thou gracious be
At Court, then try what thou can do for me.
That Caesar being unto mildness bent,
May change the place of my sad punishment:
Even as I did no wickedness devise,
Since that my fault from error did arise.
It would be tedious, nor safe to unfold,
By what chance these eyes did that act behold.
Such shameful deeds as do the ear affright,
Should be concealed in eternal night.
I must confess therefore my former fault,
Yet no reward by my offense I sought:
And for my fault I may my folly blame,
If to my fault thou will give a true name,
If this be false, then further banish me,
These places like unto Romes Suburbs be.
The Letter here he does command,
To fly unto Perhillas hand:
And shows that the Muses give
Immortal fame which still shall live.
ELEGY VIII.
Go thou my letter being writ so fast,
And to salute Perhilla make thou have:
To sit hard by her mother she still uses,
Or else to be amongst her books and Muses:
What ere she does, when she knows thou art come,
She Will ask thee how I do that am undone?
Tell her I live, but wish I did not so,
Since length of time can never ease my woe.
Yet to my Muse I now returned am,
Making my words in verse to flow again:
And ask her why she does her mind apply,
To common studdies not sweet Poesy.
Since nature first did make thee chaste and fair,
Giving thee wit with other things most rare.
I first to thee the Muses spring did show,
Least that sweet water should at waste still flow.
For in thy virgin years thy wit I spied,
And was as 'twere thy father and thy guide.
Then if those fires still in thy breast do dwell,
There Is none but Lesbia that can thee excel:
But I do fear that since I am orethrowne,
That now thy breast is dull and heavy grown:
For while we might we both did read our lines,
I was thy judge and master oftentimes.
And to thy verse I an ear would lend,
And make thee blush, when thou did make an end.
And yet perhaps it may be thou do shun,
All books because my ruin thence did come:
Fear not Perhilla, but all fear remove,
So that thy writings do not teach to love:
Then learned maid no cause of sloth still frame,
But to thy sacred art return again.
That comely face will soon be spoild with years,
While aged wrinckles in thy brow appears.
Old age will lay hold on thy outward grace,
Which comes on still with a silent pace.
To have been fair it will a grief then be,
And thou will think thy glass does flatter thee.
Thy wealth is small, though thou deservest more,
But yet suppose thou had of wealth great store:
Yet fortune when she lists does give and take,
And of rich Craesus she can I^us make.
All things are subject to mortality,
Except the mind and ingenuity.
For though I want my country, friends, and home,
And all things took from me that could be gone:
Yet still my Muses do with me remain,
And Caesar cannot take away my vain:
Who though he should me of my life deprive,
Yet shall my fame when I am dead survive.
While Rome on seven hills does stand in sight,
My works shall still be read with much delight:
Then of thy studdie make this happy use,
To shun the power of death even by thy muse.
His country he desires to see,
If Caesar would so pleased be.
Then mournfully be does complain,
And shows what grief he does sustain.
ELEGY. VIII.
I Wish I could Triptoleusus waine ascend,
Who first did seed unto the earth commend:
Or guide Medea's Dragons through the air,
With which the once from Corinth did repair:
I wish that I had Perseus wings to fly,
Or Dedalus his wings to cut the sky:
That while the air did yield unto my flight,
I might enjoy again my Countries sight:
And see my poor forsaken house again,
My wife, and those few friends that do remain.
But why do thou so foolishly require,
When thou can never attain to thy desire?
In stead of wishes, unto Caesar send,
And strive to please him whom thou did offend.
I^ he repeal thy banishment, his word,
Can give thee wings to fly like to a bird.
Perhaps when once his wrath does milder grow,
He to my suit will then some favor show:
And I beseech him now in the mean time,
Some easier place of exile to assign.
This air and clymate both contrary be,
(...) sickness seazeth here on me.
Either my sick mind makes my body ill,
Or else the air does some disease instill.
Since I to Pontus came, each night I dream,
I do distaste my meat, my limbs grow lean.
Like that pale color which in leaves is seen,
When they by Autumns frost have nipped been:
So do I look being pined away with grief,
Having no ^^iend to yield me some relief.
For I am sick in body and in mind,
In both of which I equal pain do find.
Me thinks my fortune stands before my eyes,
In a sad shape repleat with miseries.
When I behold the people and the place,
Comparing pastime with my present case:
Then I am willing to resign my breath,
Wishing I had been punished with death:
But yet since that he was more milder bent,
Let him now grant me milder banishment.
Ovid briefly does explain,
How Tomos first did get that name.
ELEGY IX.
ARe here some Cities (who can it believe)
That from the Greeks did first their names receive?
While husbandmen even from Miletus came,
And among the Getes did grecian houses frame.
Yet this same place does anciently retain,
Still from Absyrtus murder this same name:
For in that ship which Pallas name did bear,
And in those unknown Seas her course did steare.
While fierce Medea from her father fled,
Unto these shoares her fatal sails she spread:
Which from a hill one veiwing on the land,
Cries out, Medeas sails do hither stand.
The Myniae trembled, and without delay,
Untie their ropes and all their anchors weigh:
While that Medea struck her guilty breast,
With that same hand which had in blood been dressed.
And though her former courage did remain,
Yet still her blood in palenesse went and came*
But when she saw the sails, we are betrayed
Quoth she, my fathers course must be delayed
By some new Art: while thus she does devise,
By fatal chance her brother she espies.
And having spied him, now quoth she it is done,
For from his death my safety now shall come.
And with a sword she ran him through the side,
Who little thought by her hand to have died.
Then tears his Limbs in pieces, and on the ground,
She scatters them, that so they may be found
In many places: and that her father may
Not pass by it, she places in the way
His bleeding head, and both his pale cold hands,
Which set upon a rock before him stands.
And while that horrid sight did stop her father,
He stayed his course those scatterd limbs to gather,
Whence Tomos got that name, because that here,
Medea first her brothers limbs did tear.
Ovid lively does describe,
The Country where be does abide:
Which in this short map you may view,
Which he in bannishment then drew.
ELEGY X.
IF any yet do think of Nasoes name,
Which yet within the City does remain:
Know that I live within a barbarous land,
Which near unto the Northern pole does stand.
The Sauromates and Getes do hemme me in,
Whose ruder names my verse do not beseem.
While the air is warm, we then defended are,
By Ister whose fair stream keeps back the war:
But when that Boreas once does fly abroad,
Those Countries he with heavy snow does load.
Nor does the snow dissolve by Sun or rain,
But the Northwind does make it still remain:
New snow does fall on that which fell before,
While that the earth is doubly covered over.
Such is the Northw^nds force when it does blow,
That Towers and houses it does overthrow.
The people we are short mantles against the cold,
So that their faces you can scarce behold.
From their Icy hair a ruffling sound is heard,
A hoary frost does shine upon their beard.
The frozen wine does keep the vessels shape,
And in stead of draughts, they pieces of it take.
Of Rivers frozen, what should I here tell?
Or yet of water dug from the well:
For Ister which with Nile may equal be,
Whose many mouths do fall into the Sea,
His blue waves hidden over with ice does keep,
And so unseene into the sea does creep.
Where ships did sail, their feet they now do set,
And on the ice the horses hoof does beat.
The Sarmatian Oxen draw their wagons over,
New bridges which the running water cover:
It Is strange, yet lying brings me no reward,
And therefore my report you may regard.
We have seen when as the ice the sea did cover,
While that a shell of ice did glaze it over:
And on the frozen sea have often g^^,
While with a dry foot we could walk thereon.
And had Leander such a shore descri'd,
Then in that narrow Sea he had not died.
The crooked Dolphins cannot then repair,
Unto the upper waves to take the air:
And though that Boreas blustering wings were heard,
Yet no waves in the frozen sea appeard.
The ships were frozen up that there did ride,
Nor could the Oars the stifned waves divide.
We have seen the fish within the Ice lie bound,
While that in some of them some life was found.
If Boreas therefore with too powerful force,
Do freeze the Sea or stop the Rivers course:
When Ister by dry winds is once congeald,
The barbarous foe no longer is conceald.
Who skillful in their horsemanship and Bow,
Do waste the country wheresoere they go.
While some do fly, and none defend the fields,
Their unkept wealth some little pillage yields.
Their riches is their cattle and their waines,
And that which their poor Cottages contains:
And some that by the foe are captive took,
D^e leave their country with a back-cast look.
Some by the barbed arrows here do dye,
Who with their poysond heads do swiftly fly.
(...) which they cannot take they spoil the same,
And make their harmless Cottages to ^^ame:
When they have peace they stand in fear of war,
(...) the fields by no man ploughed are.
(...) is not hid in the leavy shade,
(...) vessels (...) with wine new made.
(...) ^ould not here an Apple find,
(...) his sweetheart in the rind:
Here the n^ked fields have neither leaf nor tree,
(...) marked (...) for misery.
And though the world has such a large extent,
This land is found out for my punishment.
Sweet Ovid is enforced to write,
Against one who rayld at him in spite:
Whom mildly here he does reprove,
And unto pity does him move.
ELEGY XI.
THou that my sad misfortune do contemn,
And cruelly do always me condemn,
Were nursed on the rocks by some wild beast,
And I may say, thou have a flinty breast.
O whither can thy wrath extended be,
Or what is wanting to my misery?
The barbarous shores of Pontus me enfold,
And here thr Northern Bear I do behold.
The peoples speech I understand not here,
And every place is full of careful fear.
For as the Heart persu'd by Bears does shake,
Or as a Lamb hemmed in by wolves does quake:
So when these nations do me round enclose,
I am afraid, being compassed in with foes.
Suppose it were no punishment to me,
Of wife and children thus deprived to be:
Though nothing troubled me but Caesar's wrath,
Sufficient punishment his anger has.
Yet there are some who handles my green wounds,
And to speak against me have let loose their tongues.
In an easy matter every one can speak,
And little strength a bruised thing can break,
It shows some strength to throw down walls which stand,
When falling Towers yield to the weakest hand.
Why do thou persecute my empty shade?
Or why do thou my grave with stones invade?
Though Hector in the wars did show his force,
It was not Hector that behind a horse
Was drawn about; nor am I now the same,
And nothing but my shadow does remain:
Why do thou rail on me with words so foul?
I pray thee do not seek to vex my soul.
Suppose my faults were true, my chiefest fault,
Was not by wickedness but error wrought:
Then glut thy anger with my punishment,
For we are sent to grievous banishment.
A murderer would lament my unhappy fate,
Thou think me not enough unfortunate.
More cruel than Busiris, or that man,
Who first to make a brazen Bull began.
And on the Sicilian Tyrant it bestowed,
While thus in words his Art to him he showed
This work O King may far more useful be
Than the outward shape does seem to promise thee
For look, the Bulls side may be opened so,
That whom thou meanst to kill, thou needs but throw
Into his belly, and being closed therein,
Put fire beneath, and then he will begin
To (...) and make a groaning noise as though
The br^sen Bull it self began to Low:
Therefore to recompense my gift again,
Let my reward be equal to my pain.
Phalaris replied, since that thou did invent,
This cruel torment for a punishment:
Thou first shall feel it, and so being thrown
Into the Bull, he there began to groan.
But from Sicilia I return again,
Of thee that railest on me I must complain:
If thou desire to quench thy thirst with blood,
And that to hear my grief would do thee good:
I have suffered so much both by sea and land,
That thou would grieve the same to understand.
Ulysses was not in so great distress,
Since Neptunes anger is than Jove's far less.
Then do not thou rip up my faults again,
And from my bleeding wound thy hands refrain.
Let time my former fault in darkness cover,
That this same wound may once be skinned over.
Since Fortune throws down whom she does advance,
Be thou afraid of her uncertain chance.
And since thou have a great desire to pry,
And would be glad to know my misery:
My fortune is of misery most full,
For Caesar's wrath all ill with it does pull.
And if thou think I do the same augment,
I wish that thou might feel my punishment.
Though it be Springtime every where,
No Spring in Tomos does appear:
Which makes him pray here to be sent,
Unto some milder banishment.
ELEGY XII.
NOw Zephyrus warmes the air, the year is run,
And the long seeming winter now is done:
The Ram which bore fair Hellen once away,
Has made the dark night equal to the day.
Now boys and girls do sweet Violets get,
Which in the Country often grow unset:
Fair colored flowers in the Meddowes spring,
And now the Birds their untaught notes do sing:
The Swallow now does build her little nest,
Under some beam, wherein her eggs may rest.
The seed which long since in the ground was laid,
Is now shot forth into a tender blade.
And now young buds upon the vine appear,
Although the Getick shore no tree does bear.
It Is there vacation, and the wars of Court
Do now give place to Plays and other sport:
Now they do tilt, and feats of arms assay,
Now with the ball and with the top they play.
Young men anointed now with oil begin,
To bathe their limbs within the virgin spring:
The scene does flourish, and new strains are found,
Which make the three Theaters to resound.
O four times happy sure and more is he,
That to enjoy the City now is free.
But here I see the snow melt with the Sun,
The undigged waters now begin to run:
The sea is not frozen, not does the swain,
Over the Ister drive his creaking waine.
Yet when that any ships do hither sail,
And Anchor at our shore, then without fail,
I run to the Master, and after salutation,
I ask him whence he comes and of what nation.
And it is a wonder if he be not one,
That from some neighbor country then does come:
From Italy few ships do ever stand,
To come unto this haven-wanting land.
Whether his language Greek or Latin be,
The latter is most welcome unto me:
If any from Propontis here arrive,
While a northwinde his spreading sails does drive:
He may inform me of the common fame*
And orderly he may relate the same:
For of Great Caesar's triumphs I do hear,
And of those vows to Jove performed were.
And how rebelling Germany in the end,
Beneath our Captains feet her head did bend:
He that shall tell me these things here expressed,
I will invite him home to be my guest:
Alas, does Ovids house alone now stand?
Being seated here within the Stirian land:
May Caesar make this house of mine to be,
Only an Inn of punishment to me.
Against his birthday he does complain,
Which was now returned in vain.
ELEGY XIII.
BEhold my birthday (for why was I borne?)
Does vainly unto me again return,
Hard hearted day, why do thou still extend
My years, to which thou should have put an end?
If thou had any care of me or shame,
Thou would not thus have followed me in vain:
But in that place have given me my death,
Wherein my childhood first I drew my breath.
And with my friends that now at Rome do dwell,
Thou might at once have took thy last farewell.
What Is Pontus unto thee? or art thou sent,
By Caesar's wrath with me to banishment?
Do thou expect thy wonted honor here?
While I a white robe on my shoulders wear:
Or that fair garlands should environd round,
The smoking Altar with sweet incense crowned?
Offering such gifts as may befit the day,
While for thy prosperous return I pray.
But now I do not live in such a time,
That when thou come I should to mirth incline.
A funeral Altar does become me now,
That may be stuck round with the cypress bough.
Now incense to the gods were cast away,
While in my depth of grief I cannot pray.
Yet one request upon this day i will name,
That to this place thou never return again,
Whilst in the farthest Ponticke shore I live,
Which falsely some the name of Euxine give.
Here he writes unto his friend,
That he would his books defend.
ELEGY XIIII.
THou chief of learned men, what makes thee,
A friend unto my idle vein to be?
When I was safe then thou my lines did praise,
And being absent thou my fame do raise.
And all my verses thou do entertain,
Except the Art of love which I did frame.
Since then thou love the new Poets strain,
Within the City still keep up my name.
For I and not my books am banished thence,
Which they could not deserve by my offense.
The father often is banished we see,
While as his children in the City be:
My verses now are like to Pallas borne,
Without a mother; and being so forlorn,
I send them unto thee, for they bereft
Of father, now unto thy charge are left.
Three sons of mine by me destroyed were,
But of the rest see that thou have a care*
And fifteen books of changed shapes there lies,
Being ravished from their masters obsequies.
That work I had unto perfection brought,
If that I had not my own ruin wrought:
Which uncorrected now the people have.
If any thing of mine the people crave,
Let this among my other books now stand,
Being sent unto thee from a foreign land.
Which who so reads, let him but weigh again,
The time and place wherein I did it frame:
He will pardon me when he shall understand,
That I was banished in a barbarous land.
And will admire that in my adverse time,
With a sad hand I could draw forth a line.
Misfortunes have deprived me of my strain,
Although before I never had a rich vain.
Yet whatsoere it was, even now it lies,
Dried up for want of any exercise:
Here are no books to feed me with delight,
But in stead of books the bows do me affright.
Here Is none to whom I may my lines rehearse,
That can both hear and understand my verse.
I have no place where I may walk alone,
But with the Getes shut up in walls of stone:
Sometimes I ask for such a places name,
But there is none can answer me again.
And when I feign would speak, I must confess,
I want fit words my mind for to express.
The Scythian language does my ear affright,
So that the Geticke tongue I sure could write:
I fear least you within this book should see,
That Ponticke words with Latin mingled be.
Yet read it, and thereto a pardon give,
When thou considerst in what state I live.
LIB. IIII.
To excuse his books he does begin,
And shows how his Muse did comfort him.
ELEGY. I.
IF any faults are in these books of mine,
Have them excused Reader by their time.
I sought no fame, but only some relief,
That so my mind might not think on her grief.
Even as the Ditcher bound with fetters strong,
Will lighten heavy labor with a song:
And he will sing that with a bended side,
Does draw the slow boat up against the tide:
And he that at the Oar does tug with pain,
Does sing while he puts back his oar again.
The weary Shepherd sitting on a hill,
Does please his sheep with piping on his quill:
And every maid within the Country bred,
Will sing while she is drawing forth her thread.
Achilles being sad for Brisis loss,
The Haemonian harp did soften that same cross.
While Orpheus for his wife much grief did show,
With his sweet tunes the woods and stones he drew.
So did my Muse delight me as I went,
And bore me company in my banishment.
She feared no treachery, nor the Soldiers hand,
Nor yet the wind, or sea, or barbarous land.
She knew what error first my ruin brought,
And that there was no wickedness in my fault:
And since from her my fault did first proceed,
She is made guilty with me of that deed.
Yet still the fear of harm me so affrights,
I scarce dare touch the Muses holy rites.
But now a sudden fury does me move,
And being hurt by verse, yet verse I love.
Even as Ulysses took delight to taste,
The Lote tree which did hurt him at the last.
The Lover feels his loss, yet does delight
In it, and seeks to feed his appetite.
So Books delight me which did me confound,
Loving the Dart which gave me this same wound.
Perhaps this study may a fury seem,
And yet to many it has useful been.
It makes the mind that it cannot retain,
Her grief in sight, but does forget the same.
As she never felt the wound which Bacchus gave,
But wildly on the Idean hills did rave:
So when a sacred fire my breast does warm,
My higher fancy does all sorrow scorn.
It feels no banishment, or Ponticke shore,
Nor thinks the gods are angry any more:
And as if I should drink dull Lethes water,
I have no sense of any sorrow after.
Needs must those goddesses then honored be,
Who from their Helicon did come with me.
And for to follow me they still did please,
Either by foot, by shipping, or by seas.
And may they gracious unto me abide,
Since that the gods are all on Caesar's side:
While those griefs which they heap on me are more,
Than fish in seas, or sands upon the shore.
The flowers in springtime thou may sooner tell,
Or Autumns apples, or the snow that fell,
Than all my griefs being tossed too and fro,
While I unto the Euxine shore do go:
Where come, I found no change of misery,
As if ill fortune still did follow me.
My thread of life in one course here does run,
Of black and dismal wool this thread is spunne.
Though I omit my dangers and my grief,
I have seen such miseries as are past belief.
Amongst the barbarous Getes how can he live?
To whom the people once such praise did give.
How grievous is it to be locked within,
A walled Town, and yet scarce safe therein?
For in my youth all war I did detest,
And never handled weapons but in jest.
Now in my hands a sword and shield I bear,
And on my gray hairs I a helmet wear.
For when the watchman standing in his place,
Does give some sign, then all do arm apace.
The enemy with his poisoned shafts and bow,
On their proud Steeds about the walls do go:
And as the Wolf does bear a sheep away,
Into the woods, which from the fold did stray:
So those that once are strayd beyond the gate,
The f^e comes on them, and does take them straight.
Then like a captive they his neck do chain,
Or else with poisoned arrows he is slain.
In this place I a dweller am become,
A less my time of life too slow does run.
Yet to my verse I do return again,
My friendly Muse does me in grief sustain:
Yet there is none to whom I may recite
My verse, or hear the Latin which I write,
But to my self I do both write and read,
And then to judge my self I do proceed.
Often I have said, why do I take this vain?
Or shall the Getes delight in Ovids name?
Often while I write my eyes to weeping set,
And every letter with my tears is wet:
And then my heart renewes her grief again,
While on my bosom, showers of tears do rain.
When as my former state comes in my thought,
Thinking to what my fortune has me brought:
Often my mad hand, even angry with my vain,
Has cast my verses into the quick flame.
Then since of many, these few do remain,
Who e're thou art, with pardon read the same.
And Rome do thou take in good part each line,
Though each verse be no better than my time.
He grieves that he could not present be,
At the triumph of conquered Germany.
ELEGY. II.
NOw haughty Germany (as the world has done)
May kneel to Caesar, being overcome.
Now the high palaces are with garlands dight,
And smoking incense turns the day to night.
Now the white sacrifice by the axe is slain,
And with his purple blood the earth does stain.
And both the conquering Caesar's do prepare,
To give the gods those gifts which promised were.
And all the youngmen borne under his name,
Do pray that still his progeny may reign.
And Livia, since the gods her son did save,
Presents those gifts which they deserve to have.
The Matrons, and those free from bad desire,
Who living Virgins, keep the vestall fire:
The people, and the Senate too are glad,
And Gentry, among whom once a name I had.
These public joys to me here are unknown,
And but a weak report does hither come.
But on these triumphs may the people look,
And read what towns were by such captains took:
While as the captive kings to increase the show,
Before the plumed horses chained go.
With countenances to their fortune changed,
Once terrible, now from themselves estrangd.
While some desire their cause and names to know,
One knowing little thus describes the show.
He that in yonder purple roabe does shine,
Was captain of the war, and next to him,
He whose sad eyes fixed on the ground appear,
Bore not that look when he his arms did bear*
That cruel man whose eyes still burning are,
By counsel did incite them unto war.
This fellow did false ambushments provide,
Whose shaggy hair his ougly face does hide.
This fellow killed the captives which he took,
Although the gods such offerings did not brook.
These Mountains, Rivers, Castles, which you see,
Where filled with blood of men which slaughterd be:
Here Drus^s did his honor first obtain,
Being worthy of that house from whence he came.
Here R^^^e with blood of men was colored over,
While no green reeds his winding banks did cover.
Behold how Germany with her long hair spread,
S^ts at his feet who has her conquered:
And to the Roman axe her neck does yield,
Her hands being chained which once did bear a shield.
(...)
And above these Great Caesar thou art carried,
Through all the people in thy conquering Chariot:
Thy subjects by loud shoots their love do show,
While all the way with sweetest flowers they strew
Thy temples crowned with Phoebean bays,
The soldier sings Io to thy praise.
While thy four Chariot horses by the way,
Heated with noise do often stop and stay.
Then to the Tower and Temples favoring thee,
Thou go, where gifts to Jove shall offered be.
These things I can within my mind review,
For it has power, an absent place to show.
Through spacious lands it can most freely stray,
And unto heaven find the ready way.
By help whereof the City I do see,
That of this good I may partaker be.
It shows the Ivory Chariots which do shine,
So I shall be at home even for a time:
The happy people shall be hold this sight,
And for to see their captain take delight.
But I must see it by imagination,
My ears shall taste the fruit of the relation:
For being banished to a forraingne land,
To tell me of it here is none at hand.
Yet he that this late triumph tells to me,
When ere I hear him I shall joyful be:
And on that day no sorrow I will show,
For public joy exceedes a private woe.
Ovid seems to speak here,
To the constellations of the Bear.
ELEGY III.
YOu great and lesser beasts, whereof the one
Guides Grecian ships, the other Sydonian:
Which from your Poles view all things which you please,
And never set beneath the western Seas:
And while that you encompasse in the sky,
Your circle from the earth is seen on high.
Look on these walls, ore which as they report,
Remus leapt over in his merry sport.
And look with shining beams upon my wife,
And tell me if she lead a constant life.
Alas, why doubt I in a matter clear?
Why do I waver between hope and fear?
Believe as thou desirst, that all is well,
Persuade thy self she does in faith excel.
And what the fixed stars cannot unfold,
Tell to thy self and be thou thus resolved:
That as thou think on her, so she again
Does think on thee, and with her keeps thy name:
And in her mind thy countenance does review,
And while she lives that she her love will show.
When thy grieved mind does on thy sorrow light,
Does gentle sleep forsake thy bosom quite?
Does thy cold bed renew thy cares afresh,
And make thee think on me in my distress?
Do nights seem long while sorrows inward burn,
Do thy sides ache while thou do often turn?
Yet I believe that now thou do no less,
And that thy sorrow does thy love express.
Thou greev'st no less than did that Theban wife,
To see brave Hectors body void of life,
Drawn by Thessalian horses; yet I cannot tell,
What passion in thy mind I wish to dwell.
If thou art sad, then I am greev'd for thee,
That of thy sorrow I the cause should be:
(...) gentle wife do thou lament thy losses,
(...) the time to think upon my crosses.
Weep for my fall, to weep is some relief,
For that does ease and carry out our grief.
And would thou could lament my death, not life,
That so by death I might have left my wife.
Then in my country I had died, and dead,
Thy tears upon my corpse had then been shed.
And thou had closed my eyes up with thy hand,
While looking unto heaven they did stand:
In an ancient Tomb my ashes had been spread,
And had been buried where I first was bred.
Lastly, I then had dyed without blame,
But now my banishment is to me a shame.
Yet wretched am I if thou blushest than,
When thou art called wife to a banished man.
Wretched am I if thou that name decline,
Wretched am I if thou sham'st to be mine:
Where is that time wherein thou took'st a pride,
In Ovids name, and to be Ovids bride?
Where is that time wherein these words you spoke,
That you in being mine did pleasure take:
Like a good wife in me you did delight,
And love increased my value in your sight.
And unto you so precious was I then,
That you preferred me before all men:
Then think it no disgrace that thou art named
My wife, for which thou may be greev'd, not shamed.
When rash Capaneus in the wars did fall,
Evadne blushed not at his fault at all.
Though Jupiter did fire with fire suppress,
Yet Phaethon was beloved never the less:
And Semele did not lose old Cadmus love,
Because she perished by her suite to Jove.
Then since that I am stricken with Jove's flame,
Let not a crimson blush thy fair cheek stain.
But with fresh courage rather me defend,
That for a good wife I may thee commend:
Show now thy virtue in adversity,
The way to glory through hard ways does lie.
Who would talk of Hector, had Troy happy been,
For virtue in adversity is seen.
Typhis Art fails when no waves are seen,
In health Apollo's Art has no esteem.
That virtue which before time lay concealed,
In trouble does appear, and is revealed.
My fortune gives thee scope to raise thy fame,
And by thy virtue to advance the name.
Then use the time, for these unhappy days,
Do open a fair way for to get praise.
He writes to his friend in his distress,
Whose name by signs he does express.
ELEGY IIII.
O Friend, though thou a Gentleman art borne,
Yet thou by virtue do thy birth adorn.
Thy fathers courtesy shines in thy mind,
And yet this courtesy is with courage joined.
In thee thy fathers eloquence does dwell,
Whom none could in the Roman Court excel.
Then since by signs I am enforced to name thee,
I hope for praising you, you will not blame me:
It Is not my fault, your gifts do it proclaim,
Be what you seem, and I deserve no blame.
Besides, my love in verse expressed, I trust,
Shall not harm thee since Caesar is most just:
Our Countries father, and so mild that he,
Su^fers his name within my verse to be.
Nor can he now forbid it if he would,
Caesar is public, and a common good.
Jupiter sometimes lets the Poets praise
His acts, that so their wit his deeds may raise.
Thy case by two examples good does seem,
The one believed a god, the other seen:
Or else I Will take the fault, and to it stand,
To stay my Letter was not in thy hand.
Nor thus by writing have I newly erred,
With whom by words I often have conferred.
Then friend lest thou be blamed, thou needst not fear,
For it is I that must the envy bear.
For if you will not dissemble a known truth,
I loved your father even from my youth.
And you know how he did approve my wit,
More than in my own judgment I thought fit.
And oftentimes he would speak of my verse,
And grace them while he did the same rehearse.
Nor do I give these fair words unto thee,
But to thy father who first loved me.
Nor do I flatter, since my lives acts past
I can defend, except it be the last.
And yet my fault no wicked crime can be,
If that my griefs be not unknown to thee.
It was an error brought me to this state,
Then suffer me now to forget my fate.
Break not my wounds which yet scarce closed are,
Since rest it self can hardly help my care.
And though to suffer justly I am thought,
There was no wicked purpose in my fault.
Which Caesar knowing, suffered me to live,
Nor to another my goods did he give.
And this same banishment perhaps shall cease,
When length of time his anger shall appease,
And now I pray he would me hence remove,
(If this request would not immodest prove:)
To some more quiet banishment, where I
Might live far from the cruel enemy.
And such is Caesar's clemency that he
Would grant it, if some asked this boon for me.
The shores of the Euxine sea do me contain,
Which heretofore the Axine they did name.
The seas are tossed with a blustering wind,
Nor can strange ships any safe harbor find.
And round about blood eating men do live,
Thus sea and land do equal terror give.
Not far off stands that cursed altar where,
All strangers to Diana offered were.
These bloody kingdoms once King Thoas had,
Not envied nor desired, they were so bad.
Here the fair Ipigenia did devise,
To please her goddess with this sacrifice:
Whither as soon as mad Orestes came,
Tormented with his own distracted brain;
And Phoceus with him his companion,
Who two in body, were in mind but one:
To this sad altar they were bound, which stood
Before a pair of gates embru'd with blood:
Yet in themselves no fear of death they had,
But one friend for the others death was sad.
The Priest with faulchion drawn stood ready there,
With a course fillet bound about his hair.
But when she knew her brothers voice, she came,
And did embrace him that should have been slain:
And being glad, she left the place, and then
She changed the rites, which Dian did contemn.
Unto this farthest region I am come,
Which even gods and men do likewise shun.
These barbarous rites near my country are maintained,
If a barbarous country may be Ovids land:
May those winds bear me back, which took Orestes hence,
When Caesar is appeased for my offense.
His grief to his friend he does reveal,
Whose name he on purpose does conceal.
ELEGY V.
O Chiefest friend among those were loved of me,
The only sanctuary to my misery:
By whose sweet speech my soul revived again,
As oil powered in, revives the watching flame.
Who did not fear a faithful port to open,
And refuge to my ship with thunder broken:
With whose revenues I supplied should be,
If Caesar had took my own goods from me.
While violence of the time does carry me,
Thy name's almost slipped out of memory:
Yet thou do know it, and touched with the flame
Of praise, do wish thou might thy self proclaim:
If thou would suffer it, I thy name would give,
And make them that they should thy fame believe.
I fear my grateful verse should hurtful be,
Or unseasonable honor should but hinder thee.
Since this is safe, rejoice within thy mind,
That I remember thee that thou were kind:
And as thou do, to help with Oars strive,
Till Caesar pleased, some gentler wind arrive.
And still bear up my head which none can save,
But he that plunged me in the stygian wave:
And which is rare, be constant to the end,
In every office of a steadfast friend.
So may thy fortune happily proceed,
That thou no help, but others thine may need:
May so thy wife in goodness equal thee,
And in thy bed may discord sildome be:
May thy kindreds love be unto thee no other,
Than that was showed to Castor by his brother.
May so thy son be like thee, and in's prime,
By his carriage may they know him to be thine:
May thy daughter make thee a fatherlaw to be,
And give the name of grandfather to thee.
Though time all things does assuage,
Yet his sorrow more does rage:
So that being tyrd, at length,
To bear his grief he had no strength.
ELEGY VI.
IN time the Ox endures the laboring plough,
And to the crooked yoke his neck does bow:
In time the horse does to the raynes submit,
And gently takes into his mouth the bit.
In time the Afric Lions oulder grow,
Nor do they still their former fierceness show.
Time makes the grape to swell until the skin
Can scarce contain the wine that is within.
Time brings the seed unto an ear at last,
And makes apples to be sweet in taste.
Time wears the ploughthare that does cut the clay,
The Adamant and Flint it wears away.
This by degrees fierce anger does appease,
It lessens sorrow, and sad hearts does ease.
Thus length of time can every thing impair,
Except it be the burden of my care.
Since I was banished corn has twice been thresht,
The grapes have twice with naked feet been pressed:
Yet in this time no patience can I gain,
My mind most freshly does her grief retain.
Even as old Oxen often shun the yoke,
And the horse will not be bridled that was broke:
My present grief is worse than that before,
Which by delay increases more and more.
Present griefs better known than past griefs are,
And being better known they bring more care.
Besides it is something when we bring fresh strength,
And are not tired before with griefs sad length:
The new wrastler on the yellow sand is stronger,
Than he whose arms are tired with striving longer:
The unwounded Fencer better is than he,
Within whose blood the weapons dyed be.
A new built ship resists the winds fell power,
When an old ones broken with the smallest shower.
And we more patiently before did bear,
Those sorrows which by time increased are:
Believe it, I grow faint, and I am sure,
My body will not long these griefs endure:
My strength nor color does not now abide,
And my lean skin my bones can scarcely hide.
My body and my mind too is not well,
Which on the thought of grief does always dwell:
The City and my friends both absent are,
And wife, than whom there is none to me so dear.
But the Scythians and a rout of Getes here be,
Both absent things and present trouble me:
One hope there is which yields me some relief,
That death will give an end unto my grief.
(...) The Chariot of my life was overthrown,
When it unto the goal was almost come.
And against me have enforced him to be wrath,
Than whom the world none more milder has:
Though my offense orecame his clemency,
To grant me life he never did deny.
But near the north Pole I my life must lead,
In the land which by the Euxine Sea does spread.
Had the Delphian Oracle told these things to me,
That place had seemed then most vain to be.
There Is nothing though the Adamant it contain,
That can be stronger than Jove's sudden flame.
There Is nothing is so high or placed above
Danger, but that it is set under Jove.
Though part of my grief did come by my one fault,
Yet Caesar's wrath my utter ruin wrought:
But be you now admonished by my fate,
To please that man who equals gods in state.
Here he does admonish one,
That he proceed not to do him wrong.
ELEGY IX.
SInce thou art content I will conceal thy name,
And drench thy deeds in Lethaean waves again:
And thy late tears our mercy shall overcome,
So thou repent of that which thou have done.
But if hatred of us still thy bosom warmes,
My unhappy grief must take up forced arms:
Though I am banished to the farthest lands,
My anger may from thence reach out her hands.
All right of laws great Caesar did me grant,
My punishment is my country for to want.
And if he live, we may hope our return,
The Oak looks green which lightning once did burn
If I had no power to revenge, at length
The Muses then would lend me help and strength.
Though in the Scythian coasts I here do lie,
Whereas the starrie signs are ever dry:
Yet through large spacious lands my praise shall go,
And all the world my sad complaint shall know.
What we speak in the west, unto the East shall fly,
And the East shall hear my Western harmony.
Beyond both lands and seas they shall hear me,
In a loud voice shall my lamenting be.
Nor shall the present age thee only blame,
But of posterity thou shall be the shame:
I am now despos'd to fight, though I have not blown
The trumpet, and I wish no cause were known.
Though the Circk cease, the Bull does cast aloof
The sand, and beats the earth with his hard hoof,
And now my Muse sound the retraite again,
While that he may dissemble his own name.
In this sweet Elegy at last,
Ovid shows his life that is past:
Describes his birth, and does rehearse,
How he took delight in verse.
ELEGY X.
POsterity receive me with delight,
For it is I that once of love did write:
Sulmo my country is, where cold springs rise,
And fifteen miles it from the City lies.
Here was I borne, and as you know right well,
When both the Consuls by like fortune fell.
My second daughter did two husbands take,
And twice a grandfather of me did make.
My father now his life even finished had,
While nine times four years he to mine did add.
I wept for him, as he would hove done for me,
And then my mother dyed presently.
Happy and timely to the grave they went,
Because they died before my banishment:
And I am happy, since while they did live,
They had no cause at all for me to greeve.
If ought remain unto the dead but names,
And the thin Ghost do escape the funeral flames;
If you my parents hear some sad report,
And that my faults are in the stygian court:
Know then (whom to deceive is not my intent)
Error, not wickedness caused my banishment.
Thus much to the dead, to you I now return,
That the actions of my life would feign discern:
Now whiteness, when my best years spended were,
Came on and mingled with my ancient hair.
The horseman with Pisae in Olive crowned,
Has since my birth gotten prizes renowned.
When as the Emperors wrath does me command,
To To^os which by Euxine Sea does stand.
I need not show the cause of my sad fall,
Which is already too well known to all.
What should I show the treacherous intent,
Of friends and servants, bad as banishment:
Yet my mind scornd to yield to grief at length,
And showed herself invincible in strength.
And forgetting of my quiet life, I than
To take arms in my unwonted hand began:
In more perrills I by sea and land have been,
Than stars between the shining Poles are seen.
At last I arrived at the Gettick coast,
Joined to Sarmatia, being with errors tossed.
Though noise of wars do round about me rage,
Yet by my verse I did my grief assuage.
Though there be none that can my words receive,
Yet thus I do the day alone deceive.
In that I live and labor still between,
And that the time does not to me long seem:
Thanks Muse to thee, for thou do yield relief,
Thou art the ease, and medcine of my grief.
Thou art my guide, from Isther me do bring,
And placest me in the Heliconian spring.
And have given me in my life time a great name,
Which after death is given still by fame.
Envy which does at present things repine,
Has never bitten any work of mine.
Though many Poets in this age forth came,
Yet fame was never envyous to my name.
I preferred many who of me still sed
No less, and through the world I am red:
If Poets any truth do prophecy,
I shall not all be earth when I do dye,
If favor or my verse gave me this fame,
Kind Reader I do thank the for the same.
LIB. V.
He writes here unto his friend,
To whom he does this book commend.
ELEGY I.
THis book which comes from the Gettick shoate,
Add thou (my friend) unto the other four,
For this is like unto the Poets times,
And thou shall find no sweetness in my lines.
My verse and fortune full of sorrow be,
My matter with my writing does agree:
Being happy, in a pleasant vein I writ,
But now alas I do repent of it.
But when I fell, my sad chance I proclaim,
And I my self the argument do frame:
Even as the Swan that on the bank does lie,
Bewailes herself when she is near to dye:
So I being cast on the Sarmattick shore,
My own sad funeral do her^ deplore.
If any do in wanton verse delight,
I advise him not to read what I do write:
Gallus and sweet Propertius fitter be,
Whose names do flourish still in memory.
And in their number would I might not fall,
Alas why has my Muse even spoke at all?
But now to Scythia for a punishment,
He that did write of quiverd love is sent:
Yet I have bent my friends unto my vain,
And bid them to be mindful of my name.
If some would know why I so much do sing
Of grief, ascribe it to my suffering:
We do not now compose with will and Art,
Sorrow does to the matter wit impart.
How small a part of grief is in my verse,
He Is happy that his sufferings can rehearse:
As shrubs in wood, or sands which Tyber guild,
Or the soft blades of grass in Marsses field
So many miseries do we now endure,
Of which my Muses are the only cure:
If thou ask when Ovid ends his weeping lines,
I answer, when I do find better times.
She this complaint from a full spring affords,
They are not mine but my misfortunes words:
If to me my wife and country thou restore,
I shall be merry as I was before.
If Caesar's wrath to me become more mild,
I Will give thee verses that with mirth are filled
Yet shall my writing not jest so again,
Though once it ran out in a wanton vain.
I Will sing what shall by Caesar be approved,
If that I might be from the Getes removed:
Till then sad matter in my books shall be,
This pipe does unto funerals agree.
But thou may say, twere better for to cover
Thy griefs, and strive in silence them to smother.
Thou would have torments, yet no groans resound,
Thou bidst him not to weep that has a wound.
In that Bull which Perillus once did frame,
Phalleris suffered them to roar and complain.
And Priams tears Achilles did not blame,
But thou more cruel would my tears restrain.
When Dian Niobe did childlesse leave,
She did not bid her that she should not grieve:
It Is something by words to ease sorrows vain,
Which makes Progne always to complain.
This made Paeantius in a cold cave lie,
Wearying the Lemnian rocks even with his cry.
Sorrow conceald does choke and inward swell,
Restraint to gather strength does it compel.
Then pardon me, or leave my works even quite,
If they harm thee which do me much delight:
But yet they can be hurtful unto none,
Which only have their Author overthrown.
I confess they are ill, who bids thee take them then?
Or who forbids thee lay them down again:
Yet that they may be read at last of thee,
More barbarous than the place they cannot be.
Rome with her Poets should not me compare,
Though among the Sauroumates I witty were:
Lastly I seek no glory to obtain,
Nor that which spurrs up wit, aspiring fame.
I would not have my mind to waste with care,
Which still break in though they forbidden are:
This makes me write, but if you ask why I send
These books, it is to visit you my friend.
He bids his wife not to fear,
To entreat Caesar that he would hear
His case, and after be content,
To grant him milder banishment:
ELEGY II.
WHen a letter comes from Pontus art thou pale?
Why does thy hand in opening it even fail?
Fear not, I am well, my body which I long
Did never inure to pains, now grows strong:
And being vexed, by use does wax more hard,
Or that to be sick, time is now debard:
And yet my mind of strength does get no more,
My affections are the same they were before.
Those wounds which I thought time would close again,
As if they were new made put me to pain:
Time has some power to heal a little cross,
But greater sorrows do by time grow worse.
P^^^^tius ten whole years that wound did feed,
Which from the poisoned Snake did first proceed:
Let part then of my grief his wrath appease,
And let him ^^ke some drops from the full Seas.
Though he take off much, yet much remain still shall,
Part of my punishment will be like to all.
As shells on shore, or flowers on beds of Roses,
Or as the grains which Poppie first discloses:
As beasts in woods, or fish in waters swims,
Or birds do beat the gentle air with wings:
So many are my griefs, and I as well
The drops of the Icarian Sea may tell.
Though I hide my dangers both by Sea and land,
And how my life was sought by every hand:
In the barbarous part of all the world I lie,
Which is encompassed by the enemy.
Since my crime is not bloody, I should be
Conveyed hence, if thou did care for me.
That god on whom the Roman power does lie,
Has been most mild unto his enemy.
Why do thou doubt? go and entreat for me:
Than Caesar no man can more gentle be.
What shall I do if thou do me forsake?
And from the broken yoke thy neck do take,
And whence shall I some comfort now provide?
Since that my ship does at no anchor ride.
He shall see, and to the Altar I will run,
The Altar which no hands at all does shun.
I absent to the absent powers will speak,
If that a man to Jove his mind may break:
Thou Ruler of the Empire in whose safety,
The gods do show their care of Italy:
The glory and example of thy land,
Great as the world which thou do command:
So dwell on earth, that heaven may thee desire,
And slowly to the promised stars aspire.
Spare me, and take some thunder back again,
Enough of punishment will still remain.
Thy wrath is mild, thou gantedst me to live.
And the right of a Citizen to me did give.
Nor was my substance given away, and than,
Thy edicts calls me not a banished man.
All which I feared, cause I did thee incense,
But thy wrath was more mild than my offense.
To banish me to Pontus thou did please,
While that my ship did cut the Scythian seas.
Thus sent, at the Euxine shores I landed straight,
Which under the cold Pole are situate.
Nor with the cold air here more vexed am I,
Nor hoary frost which on the clods does lie:
Or that they are ignorant of the Lattine tongue,
And Grecian speech by Getick is overcome:
As that I am encompas'd round with war,
So that within the walls we scarce safe are:
Sometimes there is peace, but yet no trust therein,
We fear the wars until the wars begin.
So ^ remove, may Charibdis me devour,
And send me down unto the Stygian power.
In Aetna's scorching flame i will burn with ease,
Or be thrown into the Leucadian Seas:
For to be miserable I do not refuse,
But yet a safer misery I would choose.
To Bacchus that he would but speak
To Caesar, and for him entreat.
ELEGY III.
BAcchus, this day the Poets keep to thee,
If in the time ^ not deceived be:
Tying sweet garlands round about their head,
(...) much in praise of wine by them is sed.
Among whom while I was suffered by my fate,
I made up one, whom thou did (...) then hate:
But now placed under the stars of the B^^^^
Sarmatia holds me to the Getes so near.
I that did lead a life from labor free,
In my studdie, or in the Muses company:
Now Gettick weapons l^sh on every hand,
Having suffered much before by Sea and Land*
Whether fate or angry gods did this assign,
Or that the Parcae frownd at my birth time?
Yet by thy power thou should have helped me,
One of the adorers of thy Ivy tree.
Or can no god ever alter that decree,
Which once the fatal Ladies prophecy?
Thou by desert in heaven a seat do hold,
And made thy way through labors manifold.
Nor did thy country always thee contain,
But to the Getes and snowy Strymo^ came:
To Persis and to Ganges wandering stream.
And all those waters Indians drink unclean.
The Parcae that the fatal threads do spin,
To the twice borne, twice this decree did sing:
If I by the example of the gods may go,
A hard estate of life does keep me low.
And in as heavy a manner as he I fell,
Whom Jove for bragging did from Thebes expel.
When thou heardst thy Poet was thus thunder-strooke,
For thy mothers sake some grief thou might have took.
And looking on thy Poets, might say thus,
One here is wanting that much honored us:
Help Bacchus, and may so a double vine,
Burden the Elm, the grapes being full of wine.
So may the Bacchae with the Satyrs be,
Ready to make an amazed cry to thee.
And may Lycurgus bones be hardly pressed,
And Pentheus ghost from torment never rest.
So may thy wives clear crown within the sky
Shine ever, and excel those stars are nie.
Come hither and help me in my sad estate,
Remember I was one of thine of late.
The gods have one society, strive to incline
Great Caesar's power by that same power of thine.
And you Poets that my fellow students be,
Take wine, and after pray the same for me.
And let some of you when Ovids name he hears,
Set down the cup and mingle it with tears:
Saying when he does all the rest epsy,
Where Is Ovid once one of our company?
Do this if my candor did deserve your love,
Or if I never did any line reprove.
If while I reverence former men that writ,
I am held equal not beneath in wit:
If with Apollos favor you would frame
A verse, then keep among you still my name.
This letter here does descrie,
Ovids grief and misery:
And it praises much a friend,
That was constant to the end.
ELEGY IIII.
I Ovids letter from Euxine land
Am come, being tired both by Sea and land:
Who weeping said, go thou and visit Rome,
Thy state is better than my fatal doom.
Weeping he writ me, nor at his mouth would wet
(...) seal which to his moist cheeks he did set.
If any one my cause of grief would know,
He wishes I the sum to him should show:
He sees no leaves in woods, in fields no grass,
Nor how the water in full streams does pass.
He may ask why Priam grieved for Hectors sake,
Why Philoctetes gron'd stung by a Snake:
Would the gods would put him into such a state,
That he should have no cause to wail his fate.
Yet as he ought he indures his miseries,
Nor like a wild horse from his bridle flies.
He hopes that Caesar's wrath will not still last,
Knowing no wickedness in his faults that's past:
He calls to mind great Caesar's clemency,
Which by himself he does exemplify.
For that he keeps his wealth, and still does live,
And is a Citizen; all this he does give:
Yet thee (if thou beleev'st me) he does bear,
Always in mind and above all things dear.
His Patroclus and Pylades thou shall be,
His Theseus and Euryalus he calls thee:
Nor does he wish his country more to see,
And those things which with it now absent be,
Than to see thy face, than honey sweeter still,
With which the Attick Be the hive does fill.
Often being sad, the time to mind he does call,
And greeves that death did not prevent his fall.
When some my sudden misery did shun,
Nor to the threshold of my house would come.
He remembers thou most faithful did remain,
If any two or three a few do name.
And though amazed he did then perceive,
That thou as much as he himself did greeve.
Thy words and sighs he usually declares,
And how his bosom was wet with thy tears.
Of which he says he will be mindful ever,
Whether he see day, or the earth him cover:
He would swear even by his head and thine,
Which as his own he esteemed at that time:
He shall return thy love full thanks again,
Nor shall thy Oxen plough the shore in vain:
Defend a banished man; I ask what he
Himself does not ask, that has well known thee.
His wives birth he does celebrate,
And prays she may be fortunate.
ELEGY V.
MY wives birth day due honor does expect,
My hands do not those holy rites neglect:
Thus Ulysses in the farthest part of all
The world, did keep a solemn festival*
Let now my tongue forget past griefs again,
Which I fear has forgot good words to frame.
That garment which I once a year do take,
He wear being white and unlike to my fate.
And a green Altar shall of turfe be made,
And a Garland round about the Altar laid:
Boy give me incense making a fat flame,
And wine that in the fire may hiss again.
Birthday I wish that thou may still come here
Prosperous, and unlike to mine appear:
If any ill fate hover ore my wife,
Let me endure it in my wretched life:
And let my ship bruised with a grievous storm,
Sail on her way through safe Seas without harm.
In her house and country let her take delight,
It Is enough that these are taken from my sight.
Though in her husband she unhappy be,
Let her other part of life from clouds be free:
May she live and love her absent husband now,
And spend those latter years which fates allow,
And mine too, but I fear my fate would give,
Some infection to those years which she does live:
Nothing is certain, for who'd think that I,
Should among the Geres keep this solemnity?
Look how the wind toward Italy now drives,
The smoke that from the Incense dotha rise:
There is sense in the clouds, which fire does show,
But what it does portend I do not know.
When those brothers once did sacrificing stand,
Who after were slain by each others hand:
In two parts the black flame did upward go,
As if it were by them commanded so.
I remember once I said it could not be,
And Calimachus was not believed of me;
Now I believe, since thou wise smoke do bend,
For the North, and toward Italy do ascend.
This is the day, which if it had not been,
No feastday had of wretched me been seen.
This day brought virtues that most equal were,
To those same men whose fames did shine most clear:
Chastity and constancy with her were borne,
But no joys began upon that day forlorn.
But labor, cares, and sad adversity,
And like a widow all alone to lie:
Yet goodness by adversity is tried,
And praised that does in hardest times abide.
Had Ulysses seen no troubles in his days,
Penelope had been happy without praise:
Evadne had layne in the earth unknown,
If her husband conqueror from Thebes had come.
Of Pelias daughters one is praised by fame,
Because she married an unhappy man.
Had another first gone on the Trojan shore,
Of Laodameia we should hear no more:
And that affection had been still unknown,
If that a fair wind in my sails had blown.
You gods and Caesar, which to you shall go,
When he has lived out Nestors years below:
Spare not me who due punishment receive,
But her that does unworthily now greeve.
Here he does entreat his friend,
Not to leave him in the end.
ELEGY VI.
THou that were once the hope of my affairs,
A refuge and a haven to my cares,
Do thou forget thy friend in misery?
That pious office do thou now lay by?
My burden thou should not have undergone,
If in this time thou would have laid it down:
Palinurus thou in the Sea do leave my bark,
Fly not, but be thou faithful in thy Art,
Autom^don in the battle never fled,
Nor left Achilles horse unmaniged.
Podali^ whom he took to cure, would still,
Give him that help he promised by his skill.
Better not take than to thrust forth a guest,
Let my hand on thy Altar firmly rest:
To maintain me at first thou did intend,
Me and thy judgment do thou now defend.
If that there be no new offense of mine,
To make thee change thy faith for any crime:
My breath which I in Scythia fetch so slow,
I wish may first out of my body go:
Ere any fault of mine thy breast do move,
Or that I seem less worthy of thy love.
We are not so by unjust fates oppressed,
That length of misery should disturb my breast:
Suppose it were, how often did Orestes.
Speak froward words against his Pylades.
Nay it is true that he did strike his friend,
Yet in friendship he continued to the end.
In this the wretched with the rich are even,
That unto both much flattery is given.
We give the way unto the blind, and those
Who are feared because they wear the purple clothes.
You should spare my fortune though you spare not me,
There is no place now angry for to be:
Choose the least sorrow which I do sustain,
It Is more than that whereof thou do complain.
As Ditches hidden are with many a reed,
Or as the Bees which do on Hybla feed:
Or like those grains which by the Ants are found,
And in a small path carried under ground.
Even such a troop of sorrows compass me,
Believe me, my complaint might greater be:
He that is not content herewith, may power
Water to the Sea, or sands unto the shore.
There fore thy unseasonable rage appease*
Nor leave my sails in the midst of the seas.
His miseries he here repeates,
With the manners and habit of the Getes.
ELEGY VII.
THis letter which thou readst, from thence did come,
Where Ister into the green sea does run.
To enveigh against one he does begin,
Who had railed first at him.
ELEGY. VIII.
THough I am fallen, yet I am not beneath thee,
Than which there is nothing can inferior be.
What makes thee wicked man, to stomach me,
Insulting in that which may hap to thee.
Cannot my miseries make thee soft and mild.
For which the beasts would weep though they are wild.
Fearst thou not fortune, on a Globe that stands,
Nor yet that hated goddesses commands?
Rhamnutia will on thee revenged be,
Because thou tread'st upon my misery.
I have seen a shipwreck, and men cast away,
Yet that the water was just never did say.
Who once denied the poor some broken meat,
Is glad himself of begged bread th eat.
Fortune does rove with an unconstanc pace,
And never remains certain in one place.
Now she is merry, then sullen by and by,
And constant in nothing but inconstancy.
We flourisht once, but soon that flower did fade,
And this our sudden blaze of straw was made.
Yet least thou cruelly rejoice in vain,
I have some hope to please the gods again.
My fault is not wicked, though it merit blame,
And envy is wanting to increase my shame.
Besides, from Sun rising till he down does go,
The world a milder man can never show.
And though he cannot be overcome by strength,
Entreaty makes his heart grow soft at length.
And like the gods to whom he shall go at last,
Will pardon me, and give more than I ask.
If you count the fair and foul days in a year,
You shall find the day has oftener been clear:
Then least thou joy in my ruin any more,
Think Caesar may me once again restore.
Think that the Prince appeased, it may come to pass,
That in the City thou may see my face:
And see thee banished for a worse fault than this,
Which is the next unto my former wish.
He shows why his friend he dares not name,
Or mention him for fear of blame.
ELEGY IX.
IF thou would let thy name be in my verse,
How often then should I thy name rehearse.
For thou the subject of my song should be,
And each leaf of my Book should mention thee.
My love to thee through the City should be spread,
If banished, I am in the City read:
The present age and latter should know thee,
If that my writings bear antiquity.
And the Learned Reader praise to thee should give,
And be honored while that I thy Poet live.
It Is Caesar's gift that we do breath this air,
After the gods thanks unto thee due are.
He gave me life, and thou do it maintain,
That so I may enjoy that gift again.
When some to see my ruin were dismayed,
And some I think for company were dismayed,
And beheld my shipwreck from some hill on land,
And to me swimming would not reach their hand:
Thou caldst me half dead from the Stygian water,
And made me to remember this hereafter.
(...) Hard Lachesis thou gav'st too long a thread
Of life to me, under an ill star bred:
That my countries sight and friends I now do want,
And thus in Scythia do make my complaint.
Both grievous are, I have deserved from Rome
To be banished, not to such a place to come:
What speak I madly? I deserved to dye,
When I offended Caesar's majesty.
To his wife 'cause some did her defame,
And call her wife to a banished man.
ELEGY XI.
THy Letter which thou sendst me does complain,
That some one called thee wife to a banished man:
I grieved, not that my life is ill spoke by,
Who now have used to suffer valiantly:
But that I am a cause of shame to thee,
And I think thou blushest at my misery.
Endure, thou have suffered more even for my sake,
When the Princes wrath me from thee first did take.
He Is deceived who calls me a banished man,
My fault a gentler punishment did attain:
Our ship though broke is not orewhelm'd or drowned,
It bears up still, though it no Port has found.
My life, my wealth, my right he does not take,
Which I deserved to lose for my faults sake.
To ofend him was a punishment far more,
I wish my funeral hour had gone before:
But because no wickedness was in my fault,
To banish me he only fittest thought.
As to those whose numbers cannot reckond be,
So Caesar's Majesty was mild to me.
Therefore my verses by right as they may,
O Caesar, do sing forth thy praise always:
I beseech the gods to shut up heavens gate,
And let thee be a god on earth in state.
But thou that calld'st me thus a banished man,
Increase not my sorrow with a fained name.
To his friend who wished him to delight
Himself, while he did verses write.
ELEGY XII.
THou writ'st that I should pass the time away,
With studdy least my mind with rust decay:
It Is hard (my friend) verse is a merry task,
And it a quiet mind does always ask.
Our fate is droven by adverse wind,
No chance more sad than mine can be assigned:
Thou would have Priam at his sons death jest,
And Niobe dance as it were at a feast.
Ought I to studdie or else to lament?
That alone unto the farthest Getes am sent.
Give me a breast with so much strength sustained,
Such as Anytus had, as it is famed.
So great a weight would sink his wit at length;
Jove's anger is above all humane strength.
That old man which Apollo wise did call,
In such a case would not have writ at all.
Though I forget my country and my self,
And have no sense at all of my lost wealth:
To do my office fear does me forbid,
Being compassed in with foes on every side.
Besides, my vain grows dull being rusted over,
And now it is far lesser than before,
The field if that it be not daily tilled,
Will nothing elss but thorns and knot grass yield.
The horse having long stood still will badly run,
And be last of those that from the lists do come.
The boat that has long out of water been,
Grows rotten, and the chinkes thereof are seen.
Then hope not I that had an humble vain,
Can ere return like to my self again.
My wit by my long suffering is decayed,
And part of my former vigor now does fade.
Sometimes my tables in my hand I take,
And I my words to run in feet would make.
I can write no verses but such as you see,
Fitting the place and their Authors misery.
And lastly, glory gives strength to a strain.
And love of praise, does make a fruitful vain.
I was allured with hope of fame before,
While as a prosperous wind my sails out bore.
But now in glory I take not delight,
I had rather be unknown if that I might:
Because that some my verse at first did like,
Would thou have me therefore proceed to write?
May I speak it with your leave, you Sisters nine,
You chiefly caused this banishment of mine.
As the maker of the Bull in it did smart,
So I am also punished by my Art.
And now with verse I ought for to have done,
And being shipwrackt I the sea should shun.
Suppose that study I should again assay,
This place is unfit for verses any way.
Here are no books nor none to lend an ear,
Nor none can understand me if they hear.
All places here both rude and wild are found,
And filled with the fearful Gettick sound.
I have forgot in Latin for to speak,
And I have learnt the language of the G^^e.
Yet to speak truth, I cannot so restrain
My Muse, but sometime she ^ verse will frame.
I write, and then I burn those books again,
And thus my studdy ends in a flame.
I cannot make a verse, nor do desire,
Which makes me put my labor in the fire.
No part of my invention to you came,
But that which was stole or snatched from the flame.
And would that Art too hard been burnt for me,
Which brought the Author unto misery.
Here he does accuse his friend,
Because he did no letters send.
ELEGY XIII.
FRom the Getticke land thy Ovid sends thee health,
If one can send what he does want himself:
For my mind from my body infected is,
Least any part of me should torment miss.
A pain in my side me many days hold,
Which I had gotten by the winters cold.
If thou art well, then we in part are well,
For thou did underprop me when I fell.
Thou gav'st the many pledges of thy heart,
And did defend me still in every part.
It Is thy fault that letters thou do seldom send,
Thou performedst deeds, deny'st words to thy friend.
Pray mend this fault, which if you shall correct,
In thee alone there will be no defect.
I do not need thy death, show love to me,
And thence thou shall get fame most easily.
Nor think I exhort thee, cause that thou do fail,
Though the ship go with oars, we put on sail.
He that exhorts, does praise what thou do do,
And by exhorting does his liking show.
FINIS.

