THE SIXTH LAMP OF VIRGINITY; Containing a Mirror for Maidens and Matrons:
OR, The several Duties and office of all sorts of women in their vocation out
of Gods word, with their due praise and dispraise by the same: together with
the names, lives, and stories of all women mentioned in holy Scriptures,
either good or bad: very necessary, pleasant, and profitable for all women to
read and use, both for instruction and imitation. Newly collected and compiled
to the glory of God, by T. B. Gentleman.

Ecclesiasticus. 26, 19. Perpetual are the foundations that are laid upon a
strong rock: so are the commandments and precepts of God, in the heart of an
holy woman. 1582

THE SIXTH LAMP OF VIRGINITY.
Of Virginity, and the state of single life, together with the duty of
Virgins, of Maids, or single Women.
NOw concerning virgins [or the state of Uirginitie] I (says S. Paul) have no
commandment of the Lord: yet give I mine advise and counsel, as one that has
obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful [or believed.]

I suppose therefore, that the single life is good for the present necessity,
[in these afflictions and persecutions of the Church] I mean that it is good
for a man so to be [single, or a woman to be a virgin.]

Art thou bound unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a
wife? Seek not a wife: but if thou marie, and take a wife, thou sinnest not.
And if a virgin marie, she sins not: nevertheless, such shall have trouble
in the flesh, [as worldly cares of their children and family:] but I spare
you, [in wishing that you men could live without wives, and you virgins without
husbands.]

And this I say, because the time is short: the fashion of this world goes
away, and I would have you without care. For the unmarried cares for the
things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married, cares
for the things of the world, [onelie apperteining to this present life] how he
may please his wife.

There is difference also between a virgin and a wife: the virgin, or unmarried
woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body
and in spirit: and attain unto it sooner than the married wife, because she is
without cares: but she that is married cares for the things of the world, how
she may please her husband.

And this I speak for your own commodity or profit, not to entangle you in a
snare: [not to bind your conscience to single life.] For that were
presumption:] but for comeliness sake, that ye might follow that which is
honest, and that ye may cleave fast unto the Lord without separation.

But if any man think that it is vncomlie for his virgin, if she pass the
flower of her age or time of marriage, [then] and need so require, [that she
should marie to avoid fornication] let him do what he will, he sins not:
let them be married. Nevertheless, he that stands firm in his heart [and is
fully persuaded] that he has no need: but has power over his own will, and
has so decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgin, he does well. [For
the fathers will depends on his childrens will in this point of marriage,
insomuch as he is bound to have respect to their infirmity: neither can he
justly require of them singleness of life, if they have not the gift of God
so to live.] So then, he that gives his virgin to marriage does well: but he
that gives her not to marriage does better [and more commodious for his
children, in preserving them from cares.]

The wife is bound by the law of matrimony, as long as her husband lives:
but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to marie with whom she will,
only in the Lord: but she is more blessed, if she so abide, in my judgment:
and I think that I have also the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 7, 25,26, etc.

[Where note, that S. Paul does not here prefer single life, as a thing more
holy than marriage: but in respect, and by reason of the incommodities which
marriage has more than the other: neither does he bind men's or women's
consciences to single life or widowhood, as to that which God has left free,
and therefore it were presumption in any other to do it. But showing what is
most agreeable to Gods will, according to the circumstance of the time, place
and persons, as appears in that the Church was now, when he wrote this, in
great persecution: he would insinuate hereby, that to heap one trouble or care
upon another by marriage, was not so profitable for men and women to go on
toward godliness, as behooued, during such afflictions.]

If a virgin or maid vow a vow unto the Lord [of virginity,] and bind her
self by a bond [to live chaste,] being in her fathers house, in the time of her
youth: and her father [hearing of this her vow and bond, wherewith she has
bound her selfe] hold his peace, and do not gaine-saie, but by silence
approve it: then all her vows [of virginitie] shall stand, and every bond
wherewith she has bound her self, shall remain of force against her: but if
her father disalow of this her vow and bond, the same day that he hears
thereof, and do not approve or consent to the vow or bond wherewith she has
bound her self: then shall not that vow or bond be of value. And the Lord will
forgive her, because her father [who has authority over hir] disalowed her.
Numb. 30,4,5, etc.

Now therefore slaie all the males among the children, and kill all the women
that have known man by carnal copulation: but all the virgins, and women
children that have not known carnal copulation, keep alive for your selves
to marie. [Note here the prerogative of virginity in the old law of arms.]
Numb. 31, 16,17.

Also, when thou shall go to war against thine enemy, and the Lord thy God
shall deliver them into thine hands, and thou shall take them captives, and
shall see among the captives a beautiful woman, and have a desire unto her,
and would take her to thy wife: then thou shall bring her home to thine
house, and [to signify that her former life must be changed, before she be
joined to the people of God] she shall shave her head, and pare her nails, and
put off the garment that she was taken in, and so shall she remain in thy
house: and as she that has renounced parents and country, she shall bewail
her father and her mother a month long, and after that shall thou go in unto
her, and marie her, and she shall be thy wife. And if thou have no favor unto
her, then thou may let her go whither she will: but thou shall not sell her
for money, nor make merchandise of her, because thou have humbled her. [Note
that this only was permitted in the wars, otherwise the Israelites and
people of God could not marie strangers.] Deuteronomy. 21, 10,11, etc.

If a man take a wife, and when he has lien with her, hate her, and lay
slanderous things unto her charge, and bring up an evil name upon her, and
say: I took this wife, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid: then
shall the father of the maid, and her mother take and bring forth the signs
and tokens of the maids virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate.
And the damsels father shall say unto the elders: I gave my daughter unto this
man to wife, and he hates her, and lo he lays slanderous things unto her
charge, saying: I found not thy daughter a maid: and yet lo, these are the
tokens of my daughters virginity: and they shall spread the vesture or sheet
before the elders. Then the elders of the city shall take that man, and
chastise him, and condemn him in an hundred sicles of silver, and give them
unto the father of the maid, because he has brought up an evil name upon a
maid in Israel, and because the shame of the fact should have lighted upon the
father, therefore the recompense shall be made unto him that is faultlesse: and
she shall be his wife still that complained, and he may not put her away all
her life time.

But if this thing be true, that the maid be not found a virgin: then they
shall bring forth the maid to the door of her fathers house, and the men of
the city shall stone her with stones to death: because she has wrought folly
in Israel, by plaieng the whore in her fathers house, and loosing her
virginity: so thou shall put evil away from among you. Deuteronomy. 22, verse 15,
etc.

If a maid, damsel, or virgin betrothed unto an husband be found lieng with an
other man in the town, they both shall be stoned to death: the maid, because
she cried not being in the city, [where she might have had rescue.]

But if a man find a betrothed maid in the field, and force her, and lie with
her, then the man only shall die, and not the maid, because there is in the
maid no cause of death. For as when a man rises against his neighbor, and
wounds him to death, so is this matter. For he found her in the fields, where
though she cried, yet was there no man to resist, help, or succor her against
the violence and force. [Therefore the innocent can not be punished.] Deuteronomy. 22,
23, etc.

The woman shall not wear that, which pertains unto the man: neither shall a
man put on woman's raiment. [For that were to alter the order of nature, and to
despite God therefore.] All that do so are abomination unto the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy. 22, 5.

A maid, that in her virginity is defiled or gotten with child in her fathers
house, or otherwise is unshamefast, bold, licentions, and uses much liberty,
shall bring both her self, and her friends to public infamy and open reproach
of all. Eccles. 42, 10,11.

A fair maid without discretion or good manners, is like a ring of gold in a
swines snout. Prou. 16, 22.

Maidens, damsels, or women that are singers and dansers, are not to be
harkened unto, or kept company withal. Eccles. 9, 4.

Say not thou, O young woman, after the manner of the wicked, which
desperately boast, and say: Come, let us enioie the pleasures that are
present, and let us cheerfullie use the creatures, as in youth. Let us fill our
selves with costly wine and ointments, and let not the flower of youth pass
by us. Let us crown our selves with rose buds, before they be withered. Let us
all be partakers of our wantonness. Let us leave some tokens of our pleasures
in every place. For it is our portion, and this is our lot. O be not thou, my
daughter, of this number, I say. For they that imagine such things, go
astraie, and their own wickedness has blinded them ^o their sudden
destruction, which they shall undoubtedly feel and prove, [but too late to
repent of.] Wisd. 2, 6.

Ye maids, damsels, and virgins, use not the company of them that are singers,
dansers, and riotous men: neither harken unto them, least you be snared, and
taken by their crafty allurements. Eccl. 9,4, etc.

Gaze not on the beauty of any man, least thou fall by that, which is
precious in him.

Cast not thy mind upon ruffians in any manner of thing, least thou destroy
both thy self, and thine heritage.

Go not about gazing in the streets of the city, neither wander thou in the
secret corners or places thereof.

Turn away thine eyes from a beautiful man, and look not upon their comlie
personages, and feature of body. For many have perished by such gazing: and
through it, love is kindled as a fire.

Every woman that is an harlot shall be trodden under foot, as doong of every
one that goes by the way.

Sit not at all with another woman's husband, neither lie with him upon the bed,
nor banquet with him, least thine heart incline unto him, and so through his
inordinate desire of lust thou fall into destruction with him.

Delight not thou in the things that the ungodly have pleasure in: but
remember that they shall not be found just unto their grave. Remember, I say,
that thou go in the midst of snares, and that thou walk upon the towers
of the city in the view of every one. Eccles. 9, verse 14.

He that touches pitch shall be defiled with it, and she that is familiar with
the proud and ungodly shall be like unto them. Eccl. 13,1.

A shameless maid is compared to a dog: but she that is shamefast reuerenceth
the Lord. Eccles. 26, 26.

Let the yoonger women therefore be sober minded, discreet, chaste, keeping at
home, good, and subject unto their superiors, that the word of God be not evil
spoken of. Titus. 2, 4.

Fly also from the lusts of youth, and follow after righteousness, faith,
love, and peace with them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. For if any
woman separate her self from the wicked, and purge her natural corruption by
Gods spirit, she shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the
Lord, and prepared to every good work. 2. Tim. 2, 22.

A well nourtured and manerlie maid is as a polished stone of a palace: yea,
she is the beauty of the city, and the honor of her fathers house, as
appears by David's opinion in his Psalm 144, 12.

Because youth is most given to licentiousness, and vain pleasure, and wanton
delights of the world: therefore the holy Prophet King David chiefly warns
them to frame their lives beetimes to Gods word, saying: Wherewithal shall a
young maiden redress her ways? Even by taking heed, and ruling her self
according to Gods word. Psalm. 119, 9.

Love wisdom, and seek her from thy youth. For by her shall thou get glory
among the multitude, and honor among the nations, though thou be yet but young.
Yea, by her thou shall obtain immortality, and leave an everlasting memorial
among them that come after thee. Wisd. 8, 2, etc.

Desire to hear all godly talk, and let not the grave sentences of knowledge
escape thee.

Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord, and be continually occupied
in his commandments; so shall he stablish thine heart, and give thee wisdom
at thine own desire. Eccles. 6, 36,38.

Love the Lord all thy life, and call upon him for thy salvation. Ecc. 13,
verse 15.

Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and honor thine elders. Eccl. 7, verse 29.

Pride is hateful before God and man, and by both does one commit iniquity.
Why art thou proud, O earth and ashes? Why is earth and ashes proud, seeing
when a man or woman dies, she is the heir of serpents, beasts and woormes?
The beginning of all pride is to fall away from God, and to turn away thine
heart from thy maker. Pride was not created in men, neither wrath in the
generation of women. Pride is the original of sin, and she that has it
shall power out abominations so long, till at last she be overthrown. For the
Lord destroieth the memorial of the proud, and plucketh them up by the roots:
but loves the remembrance of the humble, and planteth the lowly with glory
among them. Eccles. 10, 7, etc.

Dishonor not a man or woman in their old age. For they were as thou, which
art not old. Eccles. 8, 6.

Despise not the exhortation of the elders that be wise: but acquaint thy self
with their wise sentences and grave manners, so shall thou be able to serve
even great men without complaint. Eccles. 8, 8.

Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto thee: depart from the thing that is
wicked, and sin shall turn away from thee. Sow not upon the ^urrowes of
unrighteousness: least thou reap them seven fold. Eccles. 7, 1,2, etc.

Make not many words when thou art among thine elders, neither use to make
any manner of lie. For the custom thereof is not good. Eccles. 7, 14,13.

Stand thou in thy state, and exercise thy self therein, and remain in thy
work unto thine age. Eccles. 11, 20.

Get thy self praise by modesty, meekness, and chastity, and esteem thy
self least of all other. Who will count her just that sins against her
self? Or honor her that dishonoreth her own soul? Eccles. 10, verse 29.

Follow not thy lusts: but turn thee from thine own app^tites. For if thou
give thy soul her desires, it shall make thine enemies that envy thee, to
laugh thee to scorn. Take not thy pleasure in great voluptuousness, and
entangle not thy self with such lewd riotous company. Eccles. 18, 30, etc.

She that companieth adulterers and riotous company shall beecome impudent,
rottenness and woorms shall have her to heritage: and she that is too bold and
impudent shall be taken away, and be made a public example. Eccles. 19, 3.

Who so reioiceth in wickedness shall be punished: but she that resists
pleasures crowns her own soul. Eccles. 19, 5.

A maidens garment, her looks, her countenance, her excessive laughter, and
going, and pride, declare what manner of person she is. Ec. 19, ^erse 28. and
26,9.

A maid that communeth with all men, is a scourge of the tongue, and a plague
to her soul. Eccles. 26, 7.

There be three things hid from me (says Solomon,) yea four that I know not.
The way of an Egle in the air: the way of a serpent upon a stone: the way
of a ship in the midst of the sea: and the way of a maid or young woman with a
man. Prou. 30, 18.

An untamed horse will be stubborn: and a wanton wench will be wilful.
Eccles. 30, 8.

Thou maiden that art young, speak if need be, and yet scarce when thou art
twice asked: and when thine elder speaks, babble not much: but give ear and
be still: and for thy good and modest behavior thou shall be loved and
commended.

Before thunder goes lightening: and before a shamefast maiden goes favor
and grace. Eccles. 32, 8.

To avoid fornication let every woman have her own husband. 1. Cor. 7, 2. For
it is better to marie than to burn in lust.

I will (says S. Paul) that the yoonger women marie and bear children, and
govern the house, and give no occasion to the adversary to speak evil, as
some do that are turned back after Satan. 1. Tim. 5, verse 14.

I will power out my spirit (says God) upon all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions: and also upon the servants and upon the maids in
those days will I power my spirit. Joel. 2,28,29.

Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dense, and the young men and the old men
together. For I will turn their mourning to joy, and will comfort them, and
give them joy for their sorrow. Ierem. 31, 13.

Can a maid forget her ornament? Or a bride her attire? Yet my people have
forgotten me days without number. Ierem. 2, 32.

How streightlie virgins were kept in from men in the old time, yea among the
heathen that knew not God, so that it was a very hard thing for a man to come
unto them without leave of their keeper, it does appear by the story of
Hester. 2. and of Thamar. 2. Sam. 13, 2.

How perilous a thing it is for maidens and virgins to use the common meetings
at bridalls, faires, dansing schools, and plays, it may well be seen by the
story of Dinah. Judge. 21, 19. and of the daughters of Silo, who thereby lost
their virginity and chastity, and by Jobs daughters, who dansing and
banketing, lost their lives by sudden death. Job. 1, 13.

It was counted a great shame in Israel, in the old time, for a virgin to die
unmarried and without children: and therefore the maids reioiced to be married.

Yea the Prophet David reckons it among the great plagues of God, for a
maiden to die in her virginity, or unmarried: where he says: The fire consumed
their young men, and their maidens were not given to marriage: [or had no
marriage songs.] Psalm. 78,63.

Therefore, if you will see how the maidens customablie lamented and bewailed
the virginity (the space of a month together in the mountains) of her that
died a virgin, you may read the story of Iepthas daughter. Judge, 11, 37.

Young men and maids, old men and babes, praise ye the name of the Lord. Psalm.
148, 12.

I am gelous over you with godly gelousie, for I have prepared you for one
husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ. Beware therefore, least as
the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds be not corrupted
from the [puritie, holiness, perfection and] simplicity that is in Christ. 2. Corinthians. 2,3.

O how fair is a chaste generation with virtue! The memorial thereof is
immortal. For it is known with God, and with men. When it is present, men
take example at it: and if it go away, yet they desire it: it is crowned, and
ever triumphs: when it has won the reward of the undefiled battles.
Wisdom. 4,1,2.

These are they, which were not defiled with women: for they are virgins. These
are they which follow the lamb, whithersoeuer he goes: these were redeemed
from men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the lamb. Revel. 14,4.

The duty of husbands toward their wives.
These are the ordinances, which the Lord has commanded between a man and his
wife. The first institution of matrimony in paradise.
WHen the Lord GOD formed all the creatures of heaven and earth, he brought
them to man, that be might give them names: who accordingly gave names to
every creature. But for Adam found he not an help or mate meet for him,
among all the creatures under heaven: therefore the Lord said: It is not good
that the man should be himself alone, I will make an help or companion meet
for him. So the Lord caused an heavy sleep to fall upon the man, and whilst
he slept, he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in steed thereof:
and of that rib, which the Lord God had taken from the man, made he a woman,
and brought her to the man to be his mate or wife. [Signifieng thereby, that
mankind was now perfect, when the woman was created, which before was like an
imperfect building. And as this first institution of matrimony in paradise was
by God: so all lawful marriages are now also made by the same God, and
therefore to be highly had in honor.] Then the man said: This now is bone of
my bones, and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called woman, because she was
taken out of man. Therefore shall man leave his father and his mother, and
shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh. [Whereby we may see,
that marriage requires a greater duty of men toward their wives, than
otherwise they are bound to show to their parents.] Genesis 2, 18, etc.

And thus in the day that God created Adam in his own likeness, he created
them male and female, and blessed them, and called their name (Adam) in the
day that they were created. [So that the husband and the wife are now as one
man, or one person, flesh or body. For by giving them both one name, he notes
the inseparable coniuction of man and wife.] Genesis 5, 2.

Of plurality of wives.
BUT this lawful institution of marriage by God, which is, that two should be
one flesh: was first corrupted and violated in the house of Cain, by Lamech
that cruel tyrant, who took unto him two wives at once: the one called Adah,
the other Zillah, who greatly feared his cruelty, as appears in their
stories. Genesis 4, 19.

Afterward also Abraham, Elkana, David, and diverse other of the holy
Patriarchs and fathers had two wives at once: but this privilege of having two
wives, came in at the first with the promise of multiplication of seed to
replenish the world, as well with the heirs of promise, as of the flesh. But
this promise being now performed and ended in Christ, the privilege cease,
and Gods first law takes place again, which ioineth two in one flesh, and no
more, as before is said, and will not have us break wedlock by plurality of
wives. Re^d 1. Sam. 1, 2.

Again, King Solomon had seven hundred wives that were Queens, and three
hundred Concubines: for every day three in the year. We read also that
Rehoboam Salomons son had eighteen wives, and three score Concubines. 2.
Chron. 11, 21. And that Abiiah his son had fourteen wives. 2. Chron. 13, 21.
[Wherby note, that God tolerated in his people, the Israelites, in those days
plurality of wives: as well for the increase of his people, as also for a
mysterier that he would include and hide therein. For Hagar and Sara, Abraham's
two wives: as also Leah and Rahel, Jacobs two wives, were figures of the
synagogue, and of the true Church: of the children of reprobation, and the
children of election. But Christ has now in the time of the Gospel called us
to the first institution, as it was made of God in paradise, saying: They shall
be two of one flesh. 1. King. 11, 3. Matt. 16. Judges 2.]

And did not he make one; that is, did not God make man and woman as one flesh,
and not maine ^ Yet had he abundance of spirit, and by his power and virtue he
could have made many women for one man. And wherefore one flesh? Surely
because he sought a godly seed, even such as should be borne in lawful and
moderate marriage, wherein is no excess of lusts. Therefore keep your selves in
your spirit, that is, contain your selves within your bounds, and be sober in
mind, and bridle your affections, and let none trespass against the wife of
his youth, says the Lord by his Prophet. Malac. 2, 15.

A man ought to be the husband but of one wife. For to have more than one at
once is a sign of incontinencie, especially in a bishop or minister, as
appears by S. Paul. 1. Tim. 3, 2.

The commendation of wedded life, and godly marriages,
THE Apostle S. Paul (because marriage, through man's corruption, and not by
Gods institution, brings cares and troubles to the flesh, and not so much to
bind men's consciences to single life, as to answer certain questions of the
Jews) says: It were good for a man not to touch a woman; nevertheless, to
avoid fornication, let every man (in general) have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband.

Art thou bound unto a wife? Seek not to be loosed. Art thou loosed from a
wife? Seek not a wife: but if thou take a wife, thou sinnest not.

The unmarried cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord:
but he that is married, cares for the things of the world, how he may please
his wife.

And hereafter they that have wives, shall be as though they had none. For the
fashion of this world goes away, etc. Read more in virginity. 1. Cor. 7, 2,
etc.

Where no hedge is, there the possession is spoiled: and he that has no wife
wandereth to and fro mourning. Eccles. 36, 25.

Two are better than one alone. For if they fall, the one will lift up the
other: but woe unto him that is alone. For he falls, and there is not a
companion to lift him up. Also, if two sleep together, then shall they have
heat: but to one how should there be heat? And a threefold or twofold cord is
not easily broken. [Where note by this proverb, how necessary it is for a
man to live in matrimony, and mutual society, to the intent they may be
profitable one to another, and that their things may increase: and
contrariwise, how pernicious and hurtful a thing it is be solitary and alone,
without an helper and fellow conforter.] Eccles. 4,9,10.

The blessings of God upon godly marriages, and his curses upon the ungodly
espousals.
BLessed are they that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways. For thou shall
eat the labors of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy shall thou be. Thy
wife shall be as the fruitful vine upon the walls of thine house. Thy children
like the Olive branches round about thy table. Lo, thus shall the man be
blessed that fears the Lord, etc. Psalm. 128.

He that finds a wife, [or, he that is joined with a virtuous woman in
mariage] finds a good thing, and receives favor [or is blessed] of the
Lord. Prou. 18, 22.

House and riches may a man have by the heritage of his elders: ^ut a discreet
woman and prudent wife comes of the Lord, and is his only gift. Read more in
the praise of women. Prou. 19, 14.

Well is him that dwells with an huswife of understanding: it is one of the
ten things that Solomon judges to be happy. Eccles. 25, 8.

He that has gotten a virtuous woman, has a goodly possession: she is unto
him an help and pillar, whereupon he rests. Eccles. 36, verse 24.

Contrariwise, who so despises wisdom and discipline, is miserable, and
their works unprofitable; their wives are indiscreet, and their children
wicked, and their offspring accursed. [Marke well this sentence, O ye husbands
that contemn the word of GOD, and neglect the diligent reading and hearing of
the same, and repent in time, and embrace the Gospel, that these curses may be
avoided, and Gods blessings acquired to your salvation.]

It is a thing very dangerous both to body and soul, to match in marriage
with an idolatrous and superstitious woman, as appears by many notable
examples in Scripture, especially in Solomon, Achab, and others, whose wicked
idolatrous wives brought them to unspeakable mischiefs and dangers, even to
their destruction and wrath of God. Read the story of Iezabel, and such like.
1. Kings. 11, verses 16, 21. 2. Chron. 8, etc.

Also how perilous a thing it is for the husbands to permit their wives any
thing, whereof they be not assured by Gods word. For thereby they take an
occasion to justify their doings, and their husbands shall give an account
thereof before God. Ye may read in the story of the idolatrous women of
Jerusalem. Esai. 3,25, etc. where GOD plagued the husbands for suffering their
wives to commit idolatry. The like also for permitting their wives to prance
in pride, and wear apparel past their degree, and to live dissolutelie,
nicelie, and vainlie attired, to the tempting, alluring, corrupting, and
undoing of other men. Read Esaie 3.

Therefore says God, If thy wife that lies in thy bosom entise thee to
commit idolatry, and to forsake thy God; thou shall cause her to be stoned to
death; yea thine own hand shall cast the first stone at her. So greatly does
God detest idolatry and superstition, and the mainteiners thereof, be they
never so near or dear unto us. Deuteronomy. 13, 6.

The prerogative of marriage.
A New married man, by the old law of arms has this privilege and prerogative
by matrimony: that he shall not go a warfare, neither shall be charged with
any business in the Commonwealth: but shall be free at home one year, and
rejoice with his wife that he has taken. Which was permitted them, that they
might learn to know one another conditions, and so afterward live together
in godly purity: as ye may read, Deuteronomy. 20,7. and 24,5.

The first duty of new married folks.
NEw or young married folks ought not licentious^ie to go together, before they
have first upon their knees, secretly in their chamber, commended themselves
unto God by prayer, after the good example of Tobie and Sara, whose prayer for
this purpose you may read before in the fifth Lamp of Uirginitie. Tob. 7,17, and
8, verse 4.

The husband ought to pray unto God diligently and often for his wife and
children, that they may live godly and agree together. So did Isaac for his
wife Rebecca, because she was barren, and the Lord was entreated of him, and
she conceived and bare him a son. Genesis 25. So did Tobie for Sara, etc.

The husband ought to instruct and teach his wife the fear of God: so did
Jacob his two heathen wives, as appears, Genesis 31,13.

Of consenting to the wives lawful or unlawful acts, etc.
HUsbands must beware how they consent or obeie their wives in unlawful things
prohibited by Gods law. For Adam not so much to please his wife, as moved by
ambition at her persuasion, did eat of the forbidden tree in paradise, and it
turned to his sore punishment. For therefore God said thus unto him. Because
thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree whereof I
commanded thee, saying: Thou shall not ^ate of it: cursed is the earth for thy
sake. Genesis 3, 6, 11, etc.

And when they are reproved for following their wives follies, they must not
wickedlie and hypocriticallie vpbraid God, and burden him with the fault,
because he has given them such an evil wife, as Adam did, when he said: The
woman, which thou gave me to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. Genesis 3, 11, etc.

But in Gods matters: and in all things touching virtue and honesty it shall
not be amiss, if the husband bear his wife patiently, and be ruled by her
advise, as Abraham was at the counsel of Sara, in putting away Hagar and her
child. For true faith must renounce all natural affection to obeie Gods
commandments: though pronounced by the mouth of the weaker vessel. Genesis 21.

Husbands ought not by unlawful means, shifts, and silence, to put their
wives in danger to save their own lives: as Abraham and Isaac often did, by
dissembling with Pharao and Abimelech, and calling their wives Sara and
Rebecca, Sisters, for fear of killing, which turned their wives to great
danger of deflouring, and themselves to great rebuke, among the heathen. Genesis
12, 16,26.

Of the husbands headship, power or souereigntie over the wife.
BUT the husband ought to be the head, veil, and defense of his wife, to
preserve and keep her from all dangers.

For as Christ is the head and Savior of his body the Church: so the husband
is the head of his wife, and ought to nourish, govern, and defend his wife
from all perils and dangers, as he would himself. Ephesians. 5, 24.

Give not the power of thy life unto a woman, least she overcome thy strength,
and so thou be confounded: that is, let not thy wife have rule over thee. For
if she once get the maisterie, then will she be contrary unto thee, take away
thine heart and strength, and bring thee to confusion among thine enemies, [as
did Eua to Adam: Dalila to Samson: Iezabel to Achab: Herodias to Herod, etc.]
Eccles. 9.

Give the water no passage, no not a little: neither give a wicked woman
liberty to have her will, or to go out of doors. For if she walk not in thine
obedience, she shall confound thee in the sight of thine adversaries: cut her
off from thy flesh, etc. Eccles. 25, 27.

Give not thy wife power over thee as long as thou live, and have breath.
Eccles. 33, 18.

Be not ashamed to set a good lock where an evil wife is, and to lock up
things where many hands are. Eccles. 42, 6.

Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom. Mich. 7, 5.
[That is, be not hasty to reveal secrets unto thy wife: least others plowing
with thy heifer (as the Philistines did with Dalila Samsons wife, unto whom at
her dissembling tears and impudent importunacie he disclosed his riddle) reap
the fruits of thy wished harvest, and so turn thee to wrath and displeasure,
as it did him.] Read, Judge. 14.

The husband has power by Gods law to approve or disapprooue, break or
disalow of every oath, bond, promise, contract, or vow that his wife shall
make, during couerture, yea though it be a vow between God and her: of
mortification, by abstinence to humble her soul, or of any other bodily
exercises: much more any promise, bond, or contract made between her and
others, and that because she is in subjection unto her husband, and can
perform nothing without his consent. Nevertheless, if the husband, hearing of
his wives vows and bonds, hold his peace, and say nothing against it, nor
warn not his wife the self same day that he has first notice of her vows
so made: then his silence shall establish all her vows and bonds, which she
has made, and confirm them to be good both against himself and his wife. But
if at any time after, the husband speak against it, and break that vow by
showing himself altogether unwilling, and vnpleased therewith, then shall it
be void, and of none effect, and he shall bear her iniquity, and the sin
and offense for the breach thereof, shall be imputed to the husband, and not to
the wife. Numb. 30.

Of anger and frowardness.
Godly and zealous anger in the husband toward the wife is lawful, and ought
not to be counted frowardness in him, especially when it is to prefer the
glory and worship of God. For that is to be angry and sin not: so was Jacob
angry with Rahel, and reproved her folly, as you may read, Genesis 30. in the
story of Rahel. So also was David with Michol, as you may see in her story.
2. Sam. 6. and diverse others.

But godliness does require, that the husband ought not for every light
occasion, or by any ungodly means to trouble, disquiet, or vex his wife,
nor to take any mo wives beside her. For that was a thing hateful and
detestable even among the heathen: as you may read in Labans covenant with
Jacob, concerning the good using and entreating of his two daughters. Genesis 31.
And Ednas exhortation to Tobie. 10, 12.

For he that troubles his own flesh [or deals frowardlie with his wife] is
to be reputed a cruel man, says Solomon. Prou. 17, 11.

He that vpbraideth his wife, or dear friend [especiallie in the presence of
other] breaks friendship, and the bond of amity. Eccles. 22, verse 20.

That man is said to abound in sin, whose angry mind toward his wife is hot
as fire that cannot be quenched, till it be consumed: as you may read
afterward. Eccles. 23, 16.

Love thy wife as thy self. For if ye bite and devour one another, take heed
least ye be consumed one of another. Gal. 5, 14.

Bear ye one another burden, and that with the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self, least thou also be tempted. Gal. 6, 1.

Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. Col. 3, 19.

Ye husbands, dwell with your wives as men of knowledge, by neither keeping
them too straight, nor giving them too much liberty: but giving honor unto
them, as unto the weaker vessels: [in taking care and providing for their
necessities] and in living quietly one with an other, even as they that are
heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted. For
you can not pray well as ye ought, when ye are at strife and dissension one
with the other. 1. Pet. 3, verse 7.

Use thy self to live ioifullie and quietly with thy wife, which God has
given thee under the sun, and whom thou love all the days of thy life,
which is but vanity. For this is thy portion in this life of all thy labor.
Eccles. 9, 8.

Three things rejoice me, says God, and by them am I beautified before God and
men: that is to say, the unity of brethren: the love of neighbors, and a man
and his wife that agree well together. Eccl. 25.

Such husbands as were frowardlie and irreverently handeled and entreated by
their wives were these: Abraham of Sara: Jacob of Rebecca: Moses of Zipporah:
Samson of Dalila: Tobie of Anna: Achab of Iezabel: Nabal of Abigael, etc. As
you may read in their several stories. Genesis 16, 30, 18. Judge. 14, etc.

Of gelousie.
THis is the law of gelousie, when a wife turns from her husband, and is
defiled by another man: or when a man is moved with a gelous mind, and is
gelous over his wife: then shall he bring his wife before the Lord unto the
priest, and the priest shall do to her according to the law of gelousie: and
the man shall be free from sin, but his wife shall bear her iniquity,
[which proves that by Gods law the man might accuse his wife of
incontinencie, and not be reproved therefore, although it be not true.] Read
more in wives duty. Numb. 5, 11, etc. Deuteronomy. 22.

Gelousie is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance. Prou. 33, 34.

Be not gelous over the wife of thy bosom, that she show not some shrewd
point, and least thou teach her an evil lesson against thy self. Eccles. 9, 1.

Ask no counsel of thy wife touching her, of whom she is gelous. Eccles. 37,
11.

Of love and hate.
ALthough children be a great cause of mutual love between the husband and
the wife, because they are the gift of God, and fruits of marriage: yet the
husband ought not to despise his wife, though she be barren: but always to
love, cherish, and comfort her with sweet words, and do her all the good he
can, after the example of these godly men, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Elcana,
David, Job, etc. Who most entirely loved their wives whether they were barren
or fruitful, and when they perceived them to be at any time troubled or
disquieted, deal by gentle speeches with them, and godly entreaty lovingly
comfort and relieve them, patiently enduring all troubles, praieng unto God
heartily for them to quiet them, and to make them fruitful: as you may read in
the several stories of Sara, Rebecca, etc. Genesis 24,6. 33,2. 1. Sam. 1,8.

We read of Palthiel that he so entirely loved Milcha, that he went after her
weeping like a child, for grief that she was carried away to her husband
David. 2. Sam. 3, 16.

A man loves his own father, which has nourished him, and his own country,
and is joined with his wife, and for the woman he ieopardeth his life, and
neither remembers father nor mother, nor country. He labors, and
trauelleth, and gives, and brings all home to his wife: wherefore a man
loves his own wife more than father or mother. 1. Esdras 20, 21,25.

A man ought to love his wife for three causes especial: first, because they
lead their lives together in mutual society: secondly, for that she is the
weaker vessel, and therefore to be cherished and borne with; but chiefly and
lastly, because that God has made them as it were fellowe-heires together of
life everlasting: as you may read before in the 1. Pet. 3.

Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church or congregation,
and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it by the
washing of water through the word, that he might make it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot nor wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy, and without blame: even so ought men to love their wives, as
their own bodies. He that loves his wife, loves himself. For no man ever
yet hated his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord
does the Church. For we are members of his body, and of his flesh, and of his
bones. For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave
unto his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh. For this is a great
mystery; but I speak concerning Christ, and concerning the Church, says S.
Paul. Therefore every one of you husbands, do ye even so; let every one
love his wife, even as himself. Ephesians. 5, 25.

Nevertheless, by the parable of the great supper, where one refused to come
thereto being called, alleging it for a lawful excuse, because he had married a
wife, it does appear that we ought not to love our wives more than God. For
there Christ says, If any man come to me, and hate not father and mother,
wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, he can not
be my disciple. Matthew. 14. Again he says; Whosoever shall forsake house and
land, wife and child for my name sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more,
and inherit everlasting life. Matthew. 19,29. [Where we learn to cast off all
natural affection and desires, even to our dearest friends, which draw us
from coming to Christ, and to follow and obey his will before all things.]

When to abstain or forbear to accompany our wives.
BE ready on the third day, and come not at your wives: [but sanctify your
bodies, and give your selves to praieer and abstinence, that you may at this
time of the publishing of the law and Sacraments be holy, and attend only
upon the Lord and his seruice] said Moses to the people. Exo. 19,15.

Thou shall not go unto a woman to uncover her shame, as long as she is put a
part for her disease, [or whilst she has her flowers.] Leuit. 18, 19. See
more Cap. 20,18.12,2. and 15,24. [Where we see that the husband might not for
that time, that his wife was either in childbed, or put apart for her
uncleanness, by the old law resort unto her to lie with her.]

Abimelech the priest would not give of the hallowed shewbread of the temple
unto David and his servants, at the first asking: but said; If the young men
have kept themselves at least from women, and have not companied with their
wives: and when David answered, saying: Certeinlie women have been separate
from us these two or three days, and the vessels or bodies of the young men
are holy, though the way were profane: and how much more then shall every
one be sanctified this day in his vessel, or shall be more careful to keep
his vessel holy, when he shall have eaten of this holy food? With this
answer of David, I say, Abimelech being pleased, gave unto David and his men
of the shewbread to eat: as you may read, 1. Sam. 21,4,5.

There is a time to love, and a time to hate: a time to embrace, and a time to
be far from embracing. Eccles. 8, 5.

Let the husband give unto the wife due benevolence, that is, all duties
pertaining to marriage. The wife has not the power of her own body, but the
husband: and likewise also the husband has not the power of his own body,
but the wife. Defraud not one another (therefore by long abstinence) except it
be with consent for a time, that ye may the better give your selves to fasting
and prayer: and again come together that Satan tempt you not, for your
incontinencie: but I speak this by permission, not by commandment, says the
Apostle Paul. 1. Cor. 7, 5.

When and wherefore the husband may lawfully put away his wife, and where
not, see in title divorce.
MOses as it may seem, sent his wife Zeppora back again unto her fathers
house, for her impatiencie by the way, [or in the journey that they went,
least she should be a let to his vocation, which then was so dangerous:] read,
Exo. 18,2. As the Apostles also, who though it were lawful for them to lead
about a wife being a sister, that is, a faithful Christian woman, as the
brethren of the Lord: yet it may seem that in time of persecution and planting
of the Gospel, they forsook their wives, and left them with their friends, as
Moses did, 1. Chron. 9, 5.

It was lawful for the Israelites that had married strange wives to put them
away every man his wife: because it was to avoid Gods plagues, that therefore
were hanging over their heads, because they contrary to his commandments had
married strange idolatrous heathen women: as you may read in 1. Esdr. 9. Neh. 9.

He that puts away a good woman, puts away a good thing: but he that
keeps an harlot is a fool and unwise. Prou. 18, 22.

Depart not from a wise, discreet, and godly woman that is fallen unto thee
for thy portion in the fear of the Lord. For her grace, and gift of her
honesty is above gold.

If thou have a wife after thy mind, forsake her not: but commit not thy self
to the hateful woman. Eccles. 7, 19,26.

Give the water no passage, nor a wicked woman her will: and if she walk not
in thine obedience, cut her off then from thy flesh. Give her a bill of
diuorcement, and forsake her, that she do not alwaie abuse thee. For it is
better to dwell with a lion and a dragon, than to keep house with a wicked
wife. Eccles. 25. So did Ashuerus put away Uasti his wife, because she was
disobedient to his commandment, as appears in the story of Queen Hester 1.

If thou hate thy wife, put her away, says the Lord God of Israel, [not that
he does allow diuorcement: but of the two faults he shows which is the lesse]
as you may read more at large described. Mal. 2, 16.

Joseph being a wise man, and one that feared God, when he perceived his
espoused wife the virgin Marie great with child, before they came together, he
suspected that she had committed fornication before she was betrothed: and
therefore partly because he would not retain her, which by the law (if it
had been true) should have been married to another: and partly, for that by
accusing her, he was loath to put her to open shame for her fact, or to make her
a public example to the world: therefore he was minded to have put the blessed
virgin away secretly, until it pleased God to reveal the truth unto him,
and to command him to take her home unto himself: who did so, and was very
loving, tender, and careful over her continually, both for her preservation,
and her blessed babes, to the glory of God, and both his and our everlasting
joy: as you may read at large in the story of the virgin Marie. Matthew. 1, etc.

Art thou bound to a wife? Seek not to be loosed. 1. Cor. 7.

Yea God, to the end we should do our best to convert our wives, and cleave
inseparably unto them, though they fall into folly and uncleanness upon hope
of amendment: shows by his prophet Hosea, that he loves his Church though it
err or fall into idolatry, which is spiritual whooredome, and does not
withdraw his love from us, for all our sins, if we abuse not his lenity and
patience too much, but repent in time, and believe his Gospel. Hos. 3,1.
Ezech. 24,16. See more in diuorcement.

Of Gods heavy judgments against wedlock breakers.
THou shall not commit adultery: thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife: but
be pure in heart, word, and deed. Exo. 20, 14, 17.

Thou husband drink the water of thine own well, and the rivers that run of
thine own spring, [that is, content thy self with thine own wife] so shall
thy fountain [that is, thy children, which shall come of thee in great
abundance] be blessed. For God blesses marriage, and curses whooredome.

Rejoice, I say, and be glad with the wife of thy youth, which thou did
marie of a virgin, or when you were young: let her be as the loving Hind and
pleasant Roe: let her breasts alwaie satisfy thee, and hold thee ever content
with her, and delight thou in her continually. For why should thou delight,
my son, in a strange woman, or embrace the bosom of an harlot? And know
this, that every man's ways are open in the sight of the Lord, and he
pondereth all their paths: yea, the wicked shall be taken in their own
iniquity, to their utter confusion. [Thus we see, that except a man join to
his wife both in heart, and in outward conversation, that he shall not escape the
judgments of God.] Prou. 5, 15.

He that breaks wedlock, and commits adultery, shall find a wound and
dishonor, and his reproach shall never be put away. For gelousie is the rage
of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance. He can not
bear the sight of any ransom, neither will he consent, though thou augment
the gift. [Whereby the holy Ghost shows, that man by nature seeks his own
death, that has abused his wife, and God will undoubtedly punish him
therefore.] Pro. 6,32.

Take heed, O thou husband, that the Lord be not witness between thee, and
the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed. For she is thy
companion, or as the one half of thy self, and the wife of thy covenant,
which was joined to thee by a solemn promise, and by the invocation of Gods
name before the congregation. Therefore keep your selves in your spirit, and
contain your selves within your bounds, and be sober in mind, and bridle your
affections, and let none trespass against the wife of his youth. And if for
her faults thou hate her, yet he that is godly, covers the injury under
his garment, and thinks it expedient for his own honesty to keep his wife
still, and so as it were covers her fault, says the Lord by his Prophet.
Malac. 2, 14, etc.

There is two sorts of men that abound in sin, and the third brings wrath
and destruction. A mind hot as fire that can not be quenched till it be
consumed: an adulterous man that gives his body no rest, till he have have
kindeled a fire to lust, and a man that breaks wedlock, and thinks thus in
his heart: Tush, who sees me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls
cover me, no body sees me, whom need I to fear? The most high will not
remember my sins. Such a man only fears the eyes of men, and knows not
that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun,
beholding all the ways of men, and the ground of the deep, and looking even
to men's hearts, in the most secret places. The same man shall be openly
punished in the streets of the city, and shall be chased abroad like a young
horse fool, and when he thinks least of it, he shall be taken, and openly
punished. Thus shall the adulterous man that breaks wedlock be put to shame
of every man, because he would not understand the fear of the Lord. And thus
shall it go also with every wife that leaves her husband, and gets
inheritance by a strange marriage. Eccles. 23.

Fly fornication and adultery. For do ye not know, that he which coupleth
himself with an harlot is one body. For two shall be one flesh. 1. Cor. 6,16.

Marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled: but whooremoongers
and adulterers God will judge. Heb. 13, 4.

If mine heart, said holy Job, has been deceived by a woman, or if I have
laid wait at the door of my neighbor: then let my wife grind unto another
man, and be made a slave, and let other men bow down upon her. For this is
wickedness and iniquity to be condemned: yea this is a fire that shall
devour to destruction, and which shall root out all mine increase. Job. 31, 9.

Finally we have many notable examples, how greatly the breach of marriage
displeases God, and how in all ages men were persuaded, that Gods vengeance
should light upon wedlock-breakers, as it may appear even in the heathen
kings, Herod and Abimelech, who took Sara and Rebecca the wives of Abraham and
Isaac, to be their wives, and had almost lien with them: for which GOD plagued
them with great plagues, as appears, Genesis 12, 20,26, etc.

The duty of wives toward their husbands.
THe woman was created of man, to the end she should be an help and comfort
meet for him: but because she first transgressed Gods commandment, and intised
her husband to do the same, therefore unto her God inioined this punishment of
sorrow and subjection, saying unto Eve, and in her to all wives:

I will greatly increase thy sorrows, and thy conceptions: In sorrow shall
thou bring forth children, and thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and
he shall rule over thee. Genesis 2,20,3,6,16.

This difference was betwixt the wife and the concubine in the old time: The
wife was taken with certain solemnities of marriage, and her children did
inherit as lawfully begotten: but the concubine had no solemnities in marriage,
neither did her children inherit, but had a portion of goods or money given
them, as appears by Sara and Hagar, and others. 1. Chron. 2,46.

Harken O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine
own fathers house and people: so shall the King (thy husband) have pleasure in
thy beauty. For he is thy Lord, and him ought thou to reverence. Whereby is
signified, that the wife is blessed, if being an heathen or infidel, she can
renounce her idolatrous and irreligious people and kindred, and the love of her
own nation and country, and give her self wholly to her Christian husband,
to love him heartily, and worship God aright, as he does. For most perfect love
ought to be between the husband and the wife, even such and so great, as is
betwixt Christ and the Church his spouse. Psalm. 45, 10,11.

Thou wife, forsake not the husband of thy youth. For he is thy head, veil,
defense, and guide to govern thee, and with whom thou shall be preserved from
all danger, and from whom thou ought not to depart to any other man, but to
live with him, and remain in his subjection. And forget not the covenant of
thy God, that is, thy promise made in marriage before God and his Angels. Prou.
2, 17.

Let the husband give unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise the wife unto
the husband: that is, all duties pertaining to marriage. 1. Cor. 7, 3.

Let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband.
1. Cor. 7, 2.

The wife has not the power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise
the husband also has not the power of his own body, but the wife. 1. Cor. 7,
4.

Defraud not one another (therefore) except it be with consent for a time, that
ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer: and again, come together that
Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. 1. Cor. 7, 5.

Wives, submit your selves unto your husbands, as unto the Lord. For the
husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of the Church, and the
same Christ is the Savior of his body the Church: even so ought the husband
to govern and nourish his wife from perils. Therefore as the Church is in
subjection to Christ, even so let the wives be to their husbands in every
thing. Ephesians. 5, 22, etc.

Let the wife see that she fear her husband. Ephesians. 5, 33.

Wives, submit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comlie in the Lord.
Colos. 3, 18.

Let the wives be subject to their husbands, that even they which obeie not the
word, may without the word be won, by the conversation of the wives, while they
behold your pure conversation, which is with fear. Whose apparelling, let it
not be outward, as with broided hear, and gold put about, or in putting on of
(gorgious) apparel: but let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt, with a meek
and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. For even after this
manner in time past did the holy women, which trusted in GOD, tire themselves,
and were subject to their husbands. As Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him Sir,
or Lord. Genesis 18, 12. Whose daughters ye are, whilst you do well, not being
afraid of any terror, but willingly doing your duty. For your condition is
not the worse for your obedience. 1. Pet. 3, 1, etc.

The wives of Bishops or Ministers also must be honest, not evil speakers, but
sober, and faithful in all things. 1. Tim. 3, 11.

Teach the yoonger women to be sober minded, that they love their husbands,
that they love their children, that they be discreet, chaste, keeping at home,
not running to and fro without necessary occasions, which is a sign of
lightness, that they be good, huswifelie, and subject unto their husbands,
that the word of God be not evil spoken of. Tit. 2, verse 4.

I will, says S. Paul, that women araie themselves in comlie apparel, with
shamefastness and modesty, not with broided hear, or gold, or pearls, or
costly apparel; whereby also curiosity, pomp, and wantonness is condemned,
which women use in platting, crisping, folding, or curiously curling their
hear, or trimming their heads. But as becomes women that profess the fear
of God: so let them adorn and deck themselves with good works. 1. Tim. 2, 9.

Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection. For I permit not a woman
to teach, neither to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. For
Adam was first formed, then Eve, and Adam was not deceived (first,) but the
woman was (first) deceived, and so became the instrument of Satan to deceive
the man, and was guilty of the transgression. Notwithstanding, though therefore
God punishes them with subjection, and pain in their travel: yet through
bearing of children, if they continue in faith, and love, and holiness with
modesty, and be faithful and godly in their vocation, they shall be saved.
1. Tim. 2, 11.

Again, says S. Paul: Let your women keep silence in the Churches. For it
is not permitted unto them to speak: but they ought to be subject, as also the
law says, Genesis 3. before. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask
their husbands at home. For it is a shame for women to speak in the Church or
congregation, and a great disorder therein to suffer the woman to usurp that,
which is peculiar to men. 1. Cor. 14, 33.

She that is married cares for the things of the world, how she may please her
husband. 1. Cor. 7,34.

Raguel exhorted Sara his daughter, saying: Honor thy father and mother in
law: love thine husband: rule well thine household: keep thy family in good
order, and show thy self faultlesse. Five notable points to be observed of
every godly wife, toward God, her husband, friends, family, and neighbors.
Tob. 10, 12,13.

The wife is bound by the law of matrimony as long as her husband lives to
cleave unto him without separation. Read more, title divorce. 1. Cor. 7, 39.
Romans 7, 2.

So then, if while her husband lives she take another man, she shall be called
an adulteress. Romans 7, 3.

The wife that is found lieng with another man, shall die for it, because she
has broken wedlock, etc. Deuteronomy. 22, 22. Leu. 20, 10.

If any man's wife turn to evil, and commit a trespass against her husband,
by breaking the bond of marriage, and plaieng the harlot, so that another man
lie with her fleshly, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and kept
close, and yet she be defiled, and there be no witne^^e against her, neither
she taken with the manner: if her husband be moved with a gelous mind, so that
he is gelous over his wife, which is defiled: then shall the man bring his wife
to the priest with her offerings with her: namely, the tenth part of an Ephath
of barlie meal, but he shall not power oil upon it, nor put incense thereon.
For it is an offering of gelousie, and for a remembrance, calling the sin to
mind, and making it known, and not purging it. And the priest shall bring her,
and set her before the Lord. Then the priest shall take the holy water of
purification or sprinkeling in an earthen vessel, and of the dust that is in
the floor of the tabernacle shall he take, and put it into the water. After
the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the woman's head,
and put the offering of the memorial in her hands, which is the gelousie
offering, and the priest shall have bitter and cursed water in his hand, to
declare that she is accursed, and turned to destruction if she be found
faulty. And the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman: If
no man have lien with thee, neither thou have turned to uncleanness from thine
husband, be free from this bitter and cursed water: but if thou have turned
from thine husband, and so art defiled, and some man have lien with thee
besides thine husband; then the priest shall charge the woman with an oath of
cursing, and say: The Lord make thee to be accursed and detestable, for the
oath among the people, and the Lord cause thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to
swell, and that this cursed water may go into thy bowels to cause thy belly to
swell, and thy thigh to rot (both because thou have committed so heinous a
fact, and forsworn thy self in doing the same.) And the wife shall answer
Amen, Amen: that is, be it so, as thou wishest.

After, the priest shall write these curses in a book, and shall blot them out
with the bitter water, and wash those curses, which are written, into the water
in the vessel, and shall cause the woman to drink the bitter and cursed
water, and the cursed water turned into bitterness shall enter into her. Then
the priest shall take the gelousie offering out of the woman's hand, and shall
shake the offering before the Lord, and offer it upon the altar. And the priest
shall take an handful of the offering, for a memorial thereof, and burn it
upon the altar, (where the incense was offered) and afterward make the woman
drink this water. So when he has made her drink the water, if she be
defiled, and have trespassed against her husband, then shall the cursed water
turned into bitterness, enter into her, and her belly shall swell, and her
thigh shall rot, and the woman shall be accursed among her peoople. But if the
woman be not defiled, but be clean, she shall be free, and shall conceive and
bear.

This is the law of gelousie, when a wife turns from her husband, and is
defiled, etc. And the man shall be free from sin, but the woman being found
guilty shall bear her iniquity: so that you see the man might accuse his
wife, and not be reproved by Gods law. Numb. 5, verse 12, etc.

The woman shall not wear that, which pertains to the man, neither shall the
man put on woman's apparel. For all that do so are abomination unto the Lord,
and alter the order of nature to despite God as it were. Deuteronomy. 22, 5.

When two men fight, or strive together: if the wife of the one come near for
to rid her husband out of the hands of him that smites him, and put forth her
hand, and take him that smites her husband by the privy members: then shall
thou cut off her hand, thine eye shall not spare her. Which law of God
imports, that godly shamefastness is to be preserved. For it is an horrible
thing to see women past shame. Deuteronomy. 25, verse 11.

If a woman that has an husband, either by open vow or solemn promise,
pronounce ought with her lips, wherewith she binds her self to mortify her
self by abstinence, or other bodily exercise: if her husband hear it, and
hold his peace concerning her, the same day he hears it, then her vow shall
stand, and her bonds wherewith she has bound her self shall remain in
effect: but if her husband disalow her, the same day that he hears it, then
shall he make her vow, bond, promise, and that she has pronounced with her
lips, and bound her self, of none effect, and the Lord will forgive her. For
she is in subjection of her husband, and can perform nothing without his
consent during couerture. Read more in the chapter, Number. 30, 7, etc.

Unto the married I command, not I but the Lord: let not the wife depart from
her husband, but and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled
unto her husband, and let not the husband put away his wife save for
whooredome.

But to the remnant I speak, and not the Lord: If any brother have a wife
that believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not forsake
her. And the woman which has an husband that believes not, if he be content
to dwell with her, let her not forsake him. For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the believing wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the
believing husband, else were your children unclean: but now are they holy.
But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not in
subjection in such things, but God has called us in peace.

For what know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thine husband? Or what
know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? etc. 1. Cor. 7, 10,11,
etc.

The wife, which is in subjection to a man, is bound by the law of matrimony
to cleave inseparably unto her husband while he lives: but if he be dead she
is delivered from the law of the man, and at liberty to marie whom she will
in the Lord: as ye may read more in diuorcement, and second marriages. Romans 7,
2. 1. Cor. 7, 39.

Read more of the wives duty, etc. In Uirginitie. Mothers and mistress duty.
Praise and dispraise of women. Threatenings against women. Widows. Diuorcement,
and Second marriages. Lives and stories of women.


That the wife ought to be sorry for her husbands trouble, and seek by
counsel, and all godly means to comfort him, and prevent those evils hanging
over his head: we have example in the two wives of Lamech, as ye may read in
their lives. Genesis 4, 23. In Michal, Esaie 19,11. In Abigael, Esaie. 25. In
Ieroboams wife, 1. King. 14,2. Yea and in respect of her husband, though to a
wicked end, in wicked I^zabel, 1. King. 21,5. 2. King. 9,30. In Cleopatra, Dan.
11,17. And in Pilats wife, Matthew. 27, 19.

The duty of mothers and parents toward their children.
THE mother ought not to baptize her own children. For though Zipporah
circumcised her own son, as forced so to do to please God, and turn away
his wrath then conceived against her husband Moses, whom for neglecting so
necessary a sacrament, the Lord had smitten with sickness almost to death, so
that he could not do it; and the Lord even then required it to be done: yet
for because this was an extraordinary and particular act in her, therefore it
is no general example for another to follow, or for any other woman to
baptize her children. Read, Exo. 4,24,25. 1. Macc. 1, verse 63.

The mother may give the name to her child that is to be christened, as well as
the father. For so did Elizabeth, the wife of Zachary, and mother to John
Baptist. Luke 1,60. And many other women in scripture: as Hanna, who named her
son, Samuel, 1. Sam. 1, 20. Rahel and Leah, Genesis 30,6,8, etc.

It is the mothers duty especially to nurse her own children, after the good
example of old mother Sara, Genesis 21^7. Of Hanna, 1. Sam. 1, 23. Of the virgin
Marie. Luke. 2,7,16. 11,27.

And when the days of her purification are accomplished, by the old law, she
was to bring her child to the Church, there to present it to the Lord by
prayer, and to offer her oblation of thanksgiving and praise unto God for it,
and that it may be holy unto him. So did Hanna, the virgin Marie, etc. Luke
2.22.

The tender heart, that the mother should bear unto her little child or
infant, ought not to see it to perish under her hand for want of sustina^ce;
as Hagar did. Ge^. 21.14.15. read Iochabds story. Exo. 2.3.

Yet the mother ought so far forth to tender and love her child, that in
benefiting it she use not any unlawful means to tempt God, as did Rebecca,
Genesis 27.9.

It is the parents duty to pray heartily and often for their children, both
in sickness and in health: and also to praise and laud God for them as his
gifts. For so did Eua; Genesis 4.1. Abraham for Ismael. Genesis 17.18. Sara. Genesis
21.6. Manoah, Judge. 13.8. David. Hanna, 1. Sam. 2. all. Zachary, Luke 16.8^
the virgin Mary Luke 1.46. and diverse other both men and women in the old and
new Testament, Math. 15.22. Mark. 7.14,

It is the duty of parents to bless their children and wish them al good, a
pattern whereof they have in Gene. cap. 48.15.20. Jacob. Numb. 6.24.

It is the mothers office, as well as the fathers to instruct her children with
precepts and good doctrine: so did Bethshiba teach her son Solomon. Prouer.
31.1. as you may read in her story.

The mother, that has a diseased or sick child, ought first with the woman
of Canaan, and David, the Shunamatesse, etc. to carry it to Christ to be
cured. Math. 15.22. 1. Sam. 12.16.2. King. 4.18.

The mother ought not to ask pre-eminence at Gods hand for her children, as
did the mother of Zebedyes sons, Math. 20.20.

No small sorrows, greeues, crosses, and adversities do peerce the hearts,
and accompany the bodies and minds of a natural and loving mother for their
children: as may appear in the blessed virgin Mary, Hagar, etc. Iocabed, Exodus
2.3. Luke 2.35.41. Genesis 21.16,17. etc read after Eccle. 42.

The mother ought to comfort her sorrowful child with sweet words, and to
wipe their tears off from the eyes of their daughters that are afflicted: so
did Edna to her daughter Sara. Tob. 7.17. The parents of Susanna, etc.

Can a mother forget her child that she bare, and not have compassion on the
son of her womb, Esai. 49.15.

No: Rachel can not choose but weep and take on for her children, neither can
she be comforted if they be not alive Iere. 31.15. Math. 2. 18.

Wretched is the state of that mother, that is forced to curse, complain, and
finds fault with her own children: as appears in. 2. Esdra. 2.2.

Thou shall not discover the shame of thy daughter in law, nor of thy sons
wife, nor of thy sons daughter, nor of thy daughters daughter. For the man
that does so, they both shall die the death; because they have wrought
wickedness and abomination in Israel, their blood shall be upon them. Leuit.
18.10.20,12.

She that lies with her son in law, shall be burnt to death with fire. Leuit.
20.14.

Thou shall not make thy daughter common, to cause her to be a whore; least
the land also fall to whoredom, and be full of wickedness and abomination:
(as did the Cyprians and Locrenses.) Leu. 19.29.

Thou shall not give thy children unto Molech, or any kind of Idol For
whosoever he be, that offers his children to Molech, and brings them up
in superstition and idolatry: he shall die the death; and I will set my face
against that father or mother, and cut him off from among my people; because he
defiles my Sanctuary, and polluteth my name in so doing Leuit. 20.2.

If thy son or thy daughter entise thee secretly to commit Idolatry, thou
shall not consent unto him or her, nor hear them; neither shall thine eye
pity them, nor show mercy, nor keep their secrets: but thou shall even kill
that Idolatrous child, thine hand I say shall be first upon him to cast the
first stone at him, to put him to death: because he has gone about to thrust
thee a way from the lord thy God. etc. Thus we see that all natural affection
must give place to Gods honor. For God is honored in destroying them that rob
him of his honor. Deuteronomy. 13.6.

And he that loves son or daughter more then me, says Christ, is not worthy
of me. Math. 10.37.

And whosoever shall forsake house, and land, wi^e, and child for my names
sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and shall inherit everlasting
life. Math. 19,29.

Yea the father ought not to spare the child, nor the child the father in Gods
matters: as we have example in Leuy, who preferring Gods glory to all natural
affection, spared not his own children and kindred that committed Idolatry,
but show them at Moses commandment. Exodus 32.30.

And in Asa, who put down Macha his own mother the Queen from her Royal
estate and dignity; because she had made an Idol in a grove, and worshipped
it contrary to Gods laws. 1. King. 15. 12.

It is abomination before God, for parents to make their sons priests of
purpose to worship idols, and commit idolatry in their own houses, as that
idolatrous woman Michas mother did. Judge. 17.

Thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid servant,
nor thy beast, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, shall do any work
upon the Saboth day: but shall remember to keep it holy to the Lord Exo.
20.10. Read Deuteronomy. 4. all. 6. all. 12. all. 16. all. Exodus 10. all.

How the parents shall first instruct, then chasten, and lastly complain to
have an evil child taken away by death, according to justice. Read in
Children. Deuteronomy. 21.18.

Fathers and mothers ought both to know Gods judgments and laws, and to
declare the^ to their children; after the example of Abraham, of whom God thus
said, I know him, that he will command his sons and his household after
him, that they keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment, yt
the Lord may bring upon him that blessing that he has promised. Genesis 18.19.

Ye parents provoke not your children to anger, by austeritie^ or too much
rigor, or straight keeping, least they be discouraged: but bring them up (not
in wantonness or idleness) but in the fear, instruction, and information of
the Lord. Ephe. 6.4. Colos. 3.21.

Ye parents teach your children, to know the holy scriptures from their
childehood. For they are able to make them wise to salvation, through faith in
Christ Jesus. 2. Timo. 3.15.

S. John highly commends a certain Lady in his epistle, for that she so
virtuously brought up her children in the truth of Gods word. 2. John 1.1.4.

A Matron of maidens ought to be one, that can rule her own house well, having
children under obedience with all honesty; such as are faithful and which are
not slandered of riot; neither are found disobedient. 1. Timo. 3.4. Titus. 1.6.

Chastise thy child betimes, while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare
for his murmuring or cries. Prou. 19.18.

For he that spares the rod, hates his child: but he, that loves him,
chasteneth him by times. Prou. 13.24.

The rod and correction gives wisdom, and delivers the soul from
destruction: but a child set at liberty and left to his own will; brings
his mother to shame. Prou. 29.15.

She, that delicately brings up her child from his youth, shall make him
her master at the length. Prou. 29.21.

Foolishnes is bound in the heart of a child, (for he is naturally gi^en unto
folly;) but the rod of correction shall drive it away from him. Prou. 22.15.

Withholde not correction from thy child. For, if thou beatest him with the
rod, he shall not die thereof. Thou shall smite him with the rod, and
shall deliver his soul from hell and destruction. Prou. 23.13.

If thou have sons instruct them, bring them up in nourture and learning,
and hold their necks in awe from their youth up.

If thou have daughters keep their bodies, and show not thy self cherefull
toward^s them Mary thy daughter, and so shall thou perform a weighty matter:
but give her to a man of understanding. Ecclesi. 7.23. etc.

A man after his death shall be known by his children: Eccle. 11. 28. And as is
the mother, so is her daughter. Ezech. 16.44.

An evil nourtured son is the dishonor of the father, and the daughter is
least to be esteemed. Eccle. 22.3.

If children live honestly^ and have wherewt, they shall put away the shame of
their parents: but if children be brought up proudly with hautinesse and
foolishnes, they will defile the nobility of their parents and kindred. Eccle.
22.3.8.

If thy daughter be not shamefast, hold her straightly; least she abuse her
self through too much liberty.

Take heed of her, that has an unshamefast eye, and marvel not if she
trespass against thee. Eccle. 26.10.

The mother, that flattereth or cockleth her children, byndeth up their wounds,
and her heart is grieved at every cry.

An untamed Horse will be stubborn: and a wanton child will be wilful.

If thou bring up thy child delicately, he shall make thee afraid, and it
thou play with them, they shall bring thee to heauin^sse.

Laugh not upon them, least thou weep and be sorry also with them; and least
thou gnashe thy teeth in the end.

Give the child no liberty in his youth, and wink not at his folly.

Bow down his neck while he is young, and bea^e him on the sides while he is
a child, least he wax stubborn and be disobedient unto thee; and so bring
sorrow to thine heart.

Chastise thy child and be diligent therein, least his shame grieve thee.
Eccle. 30.7.

Beware of thine own children, and take heed of them that be of thine own
housholde^ Eccle. 32.22.

The daughter makes the father and mother to watch secretly, and the
carfulness, that the parents have for her, takes away their sleep, least
in her youth she should pa^^e ^he slower of her age, and when she has an
husband, least ^hee should be hated: In her virginity, least she should be
defiled or gotten with child in her fathers house: And when she is married,
least she misbehaue her self toward her husband, or continue unfruitful.
Eccle. 42.9. So there is no end of the parents care over a daughter.

If thy daughter be unshamefast, keep her straitely; least she cause thine
enemies to laugh thee to scorn, and make thee a common talk in the city, and
defame thee among the people; and bring thee to public shame. Eccle. 42.10.

It is the mothers duty, as well as the fathers, to provide a godly husband
for her daughter, or a virtuous wife for her son. For so did Hagar for her
son Ishmael, when he was grown to man's state, and diverse other godly women in
scripture. Genesis 21.21.

The mother ought to have great care in the marrying and bestowing of her
children, to the children of God and such as be of a good religion, and therein
to yield her consent to the ordinance of GOD, as diverse holy men and women
have done. Genesis 24.4,50,57,27,46, 26,1,29.21,38,6. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Ezra. 9.12. Exodus
34.16.

What authority the father or mother has over their daughter concerning the
breach of virginity, and marrying her to a man of understanding. Read tit.
virg. at large. ^. Cor. 7.36.

If thy daughter vnbetrothed be defloured by a man, that has entised her, and
thou refuse to give her unto him in marriage to be his wife, then thou shall
take of him money according to the dowry of virgins. Exodus 21.16. Deuteronomy. 22.28.

How the parents are to try and prove the honesty and chastity of their
daughter that is married, and accused of adultery: and how the father shall
be recompensed, if his daughter be found faultlesse by trial: read in the
chapter of virginity or maids. Deuteronomy. 22. 19.

That parents have not authority to marry their children of a covetous
intent for their own gain, which in deed is to sell them for service to
their servants: as Laban did his two daughters Rahel and Leah to Jacob. Genesis
29.19. or as Shesham did his daughter to his servant Iarha. 1. Chron. 2.35. more
of a devilish purpose to seek revenge by hypocrisy: as Saul, who gave his
daughter Mychal to David to betray him. 1. Sam. Nor yet lastly, without the
consent of the parties themselves; it is manifest by the example of the godly,
especial of the mother and brother of Rebecha: where they said, we will call
ye maid and ask her consent. Genesis 24.57. And as Raguel did Sara his daughter.
Tob. 7.13. Yea, so soon as the parents perceive, that it is the ordinance and
work of God, that their child should be bes^owed, they ought forthwith to
yield and give their consentes, to avoid further inconveniences, and to
commit the matter to God: as the parents of the said Rebecha did. Genesis 24.50.

And how dangerous a thing it is, for parents to be negligent and careless
in bestowing their daughters in marriage, it may well appear by the story of
Tamar, that was defloured by her father in law Judah. Genesis 38.26.

If a woman vow a vow unto the Lord in her fathers house in the time of her
youth, and her father hear her vow and hold his peace concerning her, then
all her vows shall stand, and her bond be good; because her father has
approved her vow and bond by holdyng his peace: but if her father by not
approving, or consentyng to her vow disalowe her the same day, that he
hears of her vow or bond, then they shall not be of value, and the Lords
will forgive her: because her father disaloweth her vow, so made to hu^^ble
her soul and to mortify it by abstinence, or other bodyly exercise. Whereby
we see, how the father has authority to break the vows of his children,
made even to God so long as they are single and under his tuition: but being
married he has no such authority. For then the husband is to approve or
disprove the same: as appears, Leuit. 30.4.

Give not thy son, thy wife, thy brother, nor friend power over thee while
thou live, and give not away thy substance and goods to any other in thy
life time; least it repent it, and thou be feign to ask the same of them
again: as long as thou live (I say) and haste breath, give not thy self
over to any person. For better it is that thy children should pray unto thee;
then that thou should^st be feign to look up to the hands of thy children.

At the time, when thou shall end thy days and finishe thy life; distribute
thine heritance. Eccle. 33.18. etc. read Gene. 25.5. Tob. 8. 21.

If a man die and have no sons, then he shall leave his inheritance unto
his daughters, and for default of daughters to his brethren, and for lack of
brethren, to his fathers brethren: etc. Leuit. 27.8. read more Deuteronomy. 21.15.
Galat. 4.36.

The fathers use to lay up and provide for the children, and not the children
for the fathers. 2. Cor. 12.14.

That parents may modestly mourn for the loss, death, or calamity of their
children, so far forth, as they prefer not natural affection to gods will:
it may appear by many examples in holy scripture: namely in Jacob. Genesis
37.3.43,36. Aaron. Leuit. 10.19. in David. 2. Sam. 19. in the Shunamyt. 2.
King. 4.18. In Job. 15,20. before Iere. 31.16. in Rachel.

The father being a Priest, might not mourn for his daughter; if she were
married. For being married she seemed to be cut off from his family: but
being a virgin, and so dying he might by Gods law mourn and lament for her
death: as appears. Leuit. 21.3.

Finally, it is the duty of all godly parents, as in their life to instruct
and teach them Gods law: so likewise when they lie in their death beds to
call their children before them, and to bless them, and to give them ghostly
admonitions, and godly lessons; to the glory of God and the amendment of their
lives: after the example of Jacob. Ge^. 48. and 49. of David. 1. King. 2.2. of
Job. 15. of Tob. 4.2.5.16. of Mathathias, 1. Mac. 2.49. of Antiochus, 1. Mac.
6.14. The mother of the seven brethr^n, etc. 2. Mac 7.20. and many more.

The Daughters and childs duty to her Parents.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land,
which the Lord thy God gives thee. Deuteronomy. 5.16. Exodus 20.12.

She, that smites her father or mother, shall die the death; and be slain
for it. Exodus 21.15.

She, that curses her father or mother, shall be put to death for it. Exodus
21,17. Leuit. 20.9.

If a priests daughter fall to play the whore, she polluteth her father:
therefor shall she be burnt with fire. Leuit. 21.9.

The daughter, that woorketh folly in Israel by playing the harlot or whore in
her fathers house, and is not found a virgin, shall be brought forth to the
door of her fathers house, and the men of the City shall stone her with
stones to death. Read tit. virg. Deuteronomy. 22.21.

She, that mocketh her father or mother, brings the curse of God upon her
self: as did Came. Genesis 27.12.

Thou shall not uncover the shame of thy father by lying with him: the child
that so does shall die the death: her blood shall be upon her. Leuit. 18.7.
20,11. Lottes two daughters did so, of whom came the wicked and cursed
generation of the Moabites and Benammyts. Genesis 19.

Cursed is she, that lies with her father in law, and commits such
villainy. Deuteronomy. 27.23. so did Tamar. Genesis 38.9.

Cursed is she, that curses or contemns her father or her mother, Deuteronomy.
27.16.

Ye shall fear every child your father and your mother. Leuit. 19.3.

If a man have a daughter, that is stubborn and disobedient, which will not
hearken unto the voice of her father and mother, and they have instructed her
and chastened her, and she will not obey them, nor be ruled by them: then
shall her father and mother take this their stubborn daughter, and bring her
out to the elders of the city, and unto the gates of the place where she
dwells: and shall say unto the elders of her city: This our daughter is
stubborn, insolent, and disobedient, and she will not obey our admonitions;
she is a riotour, and a drunkard, a gadder abroad, and of a shameless
behavior: Then all the men of the city shall stone her with stones unto death
[in token that to disobey the parents is most horrible:] so thou shall take
away evil from among you, that all Israel may hear and fear my judgments or
laws. Deuteronomy. 21.18.19. etc.

Woe be to that child, that disobeyeth and rebelleth against father or
mother, refusing to be corrected for amendment. Esaias. 45.10.

Woe be to that daughter that rises up or rebelleth against her own father.
Gen 30.14. And woe also be to that daughter in law, that strives with her
mother in law. Mich. 7.6. Such were Judith, and Bashmath the two daughters in
law of Isaac and Rebecca. Genesis 26.35.

The child that robs father or mother, and says it is no sin, the same
child is ye companion of a murderer or destroyer. Prou. 28.24. So did Rachael
steal away her fathers Idols. Genesis 31.19.

The child that robs the father, or shuts out the mother, is a lewd, and
an unworthy, and shameful child. Prou. 19.26.

Poverty and shame is to that child that refuses instruction, and will not
abide correction: but that child that regards discipline, and gives ear to
the information of the parents, shall come to honor. Pro. 13.^.18.

Who so laugheth their father to scorn, and set their mothers commandment at
naught: the ravens of the valley pluck out their eyes, and devoured be that
child of the young Eagles. Proverbs 30.17.

She that curses her father or mother, her light shall be put out in the depth
of obscure darkness. Prou. 11.20.

She, that is a companion of riotous men, and uses banqueting with gluttons,
shameth her father, Prou. 7.28. so did Dinah. Genesis 34. 4. and Lots two
daughters. Genesis 19 32. Solomen, Mark. 6.27.

The child may make a vow to God to humble her soul by abstinence: but the
father has authority to break and anull it. Number. 30.4.

A wise child makes a glad father: but a foolish and indiscreet daughter is
an heaviness unto her mother. Prou. 1.10.

My daughter hear thy fathers instruction, and forsake not thy mothers
teaching. Prou. 1.8.

Hear O ye children, the instruction of your fathers, and give ear to learn
understanding when he does teach you good doctrine in the way of wisdom, and
lead you in the paths of righteousness: so shall ye walk at liberty without
offense. Prou. 4.1.11.

A wise child rejoices the father, but a foolish daughter despises her
mother, and is the calamity of her parents. Prou. 5.2. 13.19.

Hear your fathers judgment O children, and do thereafter. For God will have
the father honored of the children, and has confirmed the authority of the
mother over the children: and look what a mother commands her children to
do, the Lord will have it done and kept. Eccle. 3.2. etc.

Who so honors her parents, her sins shall be forgiven her, and she shall
abstain from the^ and shall have her daily desires. And she, that honoreth
her mother, is like one that gathers treasures.

She that honors her father, shall have joy of her own children, and when
she makes her prayers, it shall be heard.

She that honoreth her father, shall have long life, and she that is obedient
to the Lord, shall comfort, and cherish her mother.

She that fears the Lord, honoreth her parents, and does service unto them
as unto Lords and Ladies. So did Rachel call her father Laba^ Lord in great
reverence. Genesis 31. 35.

Honor thy father and mother, in deed and in word, and in all patience, that
thou may have Gods blessing and that his benediction may abide with thee in
the end. For ye blessing of the Father establishes the houses of the children,
and the mothers curse rooteth out the foundations thereof, as appears in Ham,
who^ his father Noah cursed, but blessed his brother Sem and Iaphet etc. Genesis
9.22.

Rejoice not at the dishonor of thy father, or mother, when they are
reproved. For it is no honor unto thee, but shame: seeing yt the child's own
glory comes by his fathers honor: and the reproach of the mother, is
dishonor to the children.

My daughter make much of thy father in his old age, and green him not as long
as he lives: and if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and
despise him not when thou art in thy full strength, and lusty youth. For the
good entreaty of thy father, and the good deed that thou show unto him
shall not be forgotten, but it shall be a fortress for thee against sins:
and when thou thy self want, it shall be rewarded thee. And for thy mothers
offense thou shall be recompensed with good: yea it shall be founded for thee
in righteousness, and in the day of trouble thou shall be remembered, thy sins
also shall melt away, as the ice in the fair weather.

But she, that forsakes her father, shall come to shame, and she, that
angreth or defieth her mother, is cursed of God.

Honor thy father from thy whole heart, and forgette not the sorrowful
travail that thy mother had with thee. Remember (I say) that thou wast borne
of them, and how can thou recompense them the things that they have done for
thee. Eccle. 7.27.

An evil or misnurtured child is the dishonor of the father, and a foolish
d^ughter shall be little regarded. 22.3.

A wise daughter, is an inheritage unto her husband, but she, that lives
dishonestly brings her father and mother to sorrow and care.

A daughter that is bold, impudent, or past shame, dishonoreth both her father
and her husband: and is not in favor to the ungodly: who shall regard her?
but they both, that is, the father and husband also shall despise and abhor
her. Eccle. 22.5.

If children be proud with haughtiness, and foolishnes, they blot out and
defile the nobility of their kindred. 9.1.

If Miriams father had spit in her face in his displeasure, should she not
have been ashamed seven days: yea she might not presume to come in his
presence till he were reconciled. Number. 12.14.

Remember thy father and mother when thou sit among great me^, least God
forget thee in their sight, and least thou doting in thy custom, become a
fool and suffer rebuke, and wish yt thou had not been borne, and so curse
the day of thy nativity. Eccle. 23.14.

The children that boast of their riches and nobility, seem but to reproach
their father, who was base borne, and of low condition. Hosea 12. L.

An untamed horse will be stubborn, and a wanton child will be wilful.
Eccle. 30.8.

Be ashamed of whoredom, before father or mother. 41.17.

Honor thy father and thy mother in law, which are now thy parents, that thou
may get thy self a good report of all. Tob. 10.12. So was Sara the wife of
Tobie, Ruth, Rachel, etc.

My daughter, hear the words of thy father, and lay them up in thine heart as
a foundation. Despise not thy mother: but honor her all the days of thy life,
and do that which shall please her, and anger her not. Remember my daughter how
many dangers she sustained, when thou wast in her womb, and when thy parents
dye, close the^ their eyes, and bury them together honestly.

My daughter set thou our Lord God always before thine eyes, and let not thy
will be set to sin, or to transgress the commandments of God. Tob. 4.6.

But keep thou the law and commandments of the Lord, and show thy self
merciful, pitiful, and just, and love the Lord thy God in truth and justice,
so shall thou rejoice, and all things go well with thee. Tob. 14.9.

Do uprightly I say all thy life long, and follow not the way of
unrighteousness. For if thou deal truly, thy doings shall prosperously
succeed to thee, and to all them which live justly. Be liberal to the just,
and give alms of thy substance cheerfully, and when thou give alms, let
not thine eyes be envious, neither turn thy face from any poor man, least
that God turn his face also from thee, etc.

Beware of whoredom, adultery, and al uncleanness, and take thee an husband
in the fear of the Lord, that thou may be blessed in thy children, and thy
seed inherit the land.

Also love thy brethren and sisters, kindred and friends: and despise not in
thine heart, the sons of thy people, in not taking an husband of them. For in
pride and disdain is destruction, and much trouble, and in fiercenes is
scarcity and great poverty. For fierceness or vprofitablenes is the mother
of famine.

Serve God diligently day and night: be circumspect in all things thou do
and be well instructed in all thy conversation.

Do that to no man which thou hate. Drink not wine to make she drunk,
neither let drunkenness go with thee in thy journey.

Ask counsel always of the wise, and despise not any counsel that is
profitable.

Bless thy Lord God always, and desire of him that thy way may be made
straight, and that all thy purposes and counselles may prosper.

Fear not my daughter, if thou be poor. For the Lord gives all good
things, and he humbles whom he will, and as he will. Content thy self (I
say) with thy poor estate. For thou have many things if thou fear God and
fly from sin: and do the thing which is acceptable unto him.

Now therefore my daughter, remember these commandments and precepts, neither
let the^ at any time depart out of thy mind. Tob. 4. all. A virtuous child shall
have rule under her mother, and govern by her authority: so did Sara Raguels
daughter, rule and guide her fathers house: as mistress, and correct and beat
his maids for their faults. Tob. 3.9.

She that loves father or mother more then me (says Christ) is not worthy of
me. Mat. 10.37.

Whosoever shall forsake house and land, father or mother, husband and
children, for my names sake (says Christ) she shall receive a hundred fold
more, and shall inherit everlasting life. Math. 19.29.

Woe be to those children, that fulfill the measure of their fathers iniquity.
Mat. 23.32.

God has commanded, saying: Honor thy father and mother. And he, that
curses father and mother: let him die the death. Mat. 15.4.

Give to all men their duty: fear, to whom fear is due: honor, to whom ye
owe honor. Romans 13.7.

Saint Paul reckons those children, that are without all natural affection
and disobedient to their Parents, among the wicked ones and reprobate that
know not God: whom God has delivered up unto a reprobate mind, to commit all
manner of sin and wickedness. Romans 1.30.

Know this, yt the law is given unto ye lawless and disobedient, to the
ungodly, and to murderers of fathers and mothers, to whoremongers, harlots, and
liers, etc. to take vengeance on al such woorkers of wickedness, contrary to
wholesome doctrine and admonition. 1. Tim. 19.

This know, that in the last days shall come perilous times. for men shall
be disobedient to parents, without natural affection. 2. Tim. 3.1. The son
shall be at variance against the father, and the daughter against the mother:
and the daughter in law against the mother in law, and a man's enemies shall be
they of his own household. Math. 10.34.

What child is it who^ the father chasteneth not, if then ye be not under
correction, then are ye bastardes and not children: Give therefore due
reverence unto those your natural parents of your bodies, which have begotten
you; and despise not their chastisement, which correct you and chasten you a
few days, eue^ after their own pleasures, for your profit. Heb. 12.5.

Ye children obey your parents in all things, which are in the Lord. For this
is well pleasing unto the Lord and right. Col. 3.20.

Honor thy father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise,
that it may be well with thee, and that thou may belong on earth. Ephe. 6.1.

That the child ought not to marie or make private contracts, without the
consent and knowledge of the parents: it is manifest by many examples in
holy Scripture: as in Rebecca, Gen, 24. 49. Sara the wife of Tobit. Tob, 6.12.
etc. in Dinah. Genesis 34.4. Thamar. Genesis 38.9.

It is the duty of that child, whom the father or mother dearly loves, as
most dear unto him, or chief of the kindred to lay his or her hand upon her
fathers, or mothers, or kinsmans eyes in their departure, and to shut or close
them up when he dies: for so did Joseph as it was prophesied upon his father
Jacob. Genesis 46.4. So did also Tobit close the eyes of his father and mother in
law. Tob. 14.15.

The office and duty of Masters, and Maistresses, or Dames toward their
servants and maids.
IF thy brother an Hebrwe, or an Hebruesse, (or even Christian) sell or hire
himself to thee, and serve thee six years, even in the seventh year thou
shall let him or her go out free from thee, (paying nothing for their freedom
or liberty:) if he came himself alone, not having wife nor children, he
shall go himself alone; if he were married, then his wife shall go out with
him free: if thou his master have given him a wife, and she has borne him
sons and daughters, the wife and her children shall be thine till her time
of servitude be expired, which is till the seventh year, or the fiftieth
year being the year of Jubilee: but her husband thy servant he shall go
out himself alone, if he will. But if the servant say this, I love my
master or mistress, my wife and my children, I will not go out free alone:
then thou his master shall bring him unto the Judges, and set him to the
door, or to the posts where the judges sit: and shall bore his ear through
with a naule, in toke^ that he shall serve thee until the year of Jubilee,
that is for the term of 50. years. And unto the maid servant thou shall do
likewise. Exodus 21.2. Deuteronomy. 15.12.

Likewise if a man (constrained either by poverty, or else to the end that the
master should mary her:) sell his daughter to be a servant, she shall not go
out as the men servants do. For if she please not her master, who has
betrothed her to himself, then shall he cause another man to buy her of him,
by giving him money so to do. For he shall have no power to sell her to a
strange people, seeing he despised or defloured her. But if he have betrothed
her unto his son: he shall deal with her according to the custom of the
daughters and give her dowry: and if afterward he take for his son another
wife, yet shall he not diminish her food, her raiment, and recompense of her
virginity: but if he do none of these three, that is, neither mary her
himself, nor give another money to buy her, nor bestow her upon his son:
then shall she go out free, paying no money. Exodus 21.7.8. etc.

If thy brother also that dwells by thee, be impouerished and be sold unto
thee, thou shall not compel him to serve as a bond servant; but as an hired
servant, and as a soiourner he shall be with thee, he shall serve thee unto
the year of Jubilee, that is 50. years, and then shall he depart from thee,
both him and his children with him, and shall return unto his famelie and
possession of his fathers. For they are my servants whom I brought out of the
land of Egypt, they shall not be sold unto perpetual slavery, as bondmen are
sold, neither shall thou rule over them cruelly: but shall fear thy God.
Leuit. 25.39.

Thy bond servant also and thy bondmayd, which thou shall have, shall be of the
heathen and strangers, yt are round about thee, of them shall ye buy servants
and maids to be bo^dmen or bondwome^, and not of thine own people or nation.
Moreover of ye children of the strangers, that are soiourners among you, of
them shall ye buy, and of their famelies, that are with you, which they begat
in your land, these shall be your possession and inheritance to you and your
children after you to use their labors and in heritances for ever: [for they
shall not be bought out at ye year of Jubilee: but over your brethren the
children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with cruelty: nor take
them as inheritance to possess their service for ever. Leuit. 25.44.

And if thy brother, being impouerished by a stranger dwelling or soiourning
with thee: sell himself unto that stranger or soiourner, or to the stock of
the strangers family: he shall be with that stranger year by year as an hired
servant, until the year of Iubelie: neither shall thou suffer that stranger
to entreat him rigorously, if thou know it: and if he be not endowed, he shall
go out both he and his children with him in the year of Jubilee from that
stranger. For unto me the children of Israel are servants: they are my servants
whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God. Leui.

But if either he himself, or any of his kindred be able, they after he is
sold may buie him out and redeem him from that strangers service, by money
according to ye number of years, that he has yet to serve: be they more or
less, etc. Leuit. 25.47.

Thou shall not deliver thy brother, (servant to an heathen master, and Read
from and escaped his masters cruelty, to embrace thy true religion) unto his
heathen master again: but shall suffer him to dwell with thee, or among you:
that are his brethren in what place soever he shall choose in every of your
cities, where it likes him best; thou shall not vex him. Deuteronomy. 23.15.

Thou shall not oppress an hired servant, that is needy and poor, neither of
thy brethren, nor of the stranger that is in thy land within the gates. Thou
shall give him his hire for his day: neither shall the sun go down upon it.
For he is poor, and therewith susteyneth his life: least he cried against thee
unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. Deuteronomy. 24.14.15. Leuit. 19.13.

Bring not every man into thine house. For the deceiptfull have many trains
and lay wait diversely: they are like stomakes that belche stinkingly. For
after they know thy secrets, they will not fear to utter them with Althie
railing to thy discredit. Eccle. 11. 29.

If thou take an aliant unto thee, or lodgest a stranger, he shall destroy
thee with unquietness, and drive thee from thine own. Eccl. 11.34.

Burden not thy self above thy power, while thou live, with unprofitable and
abundance of idle servants, neither be thou familiar with the proud and
scornful: but those that be for thy profit, use them and make much of them.
Eccl. 13.2. etc.

Forsake not an old servant for a new: for the new shall not be like him,
[delight not in change, for seldom comes a better.] Eccl. 9.12.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors manseruant, nor his maidseruant, nor his
ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his. Exodus 20.17.

Entertain such into thy service, as near as thou can, which are approved
to be true, faithful, and honest: so shall thou be sure to have thy business
well done: so did Tobias and prospered. Tob. 5.8. Abraham. Genesis 24. Pharao.
Genesis 41.47.

A faithful servant is a medicine of life and immortality, they that fear
the Lord shall find him. Eccle. 6.16.

That master or mistres, that fears God, and seeks his glory, God will
provide for the^ such faithful servants to do their business, who^ they may
trust with all their goods wheresoever they go: as he did good king Josias.
etc. 2. King. 22.7.

The master or mistres ought both to know both gods judgments and laws, and
also to declare the^ unto their family: and to be in their houses as
Preachers to their children and families, that from the highest to the lowest,
they may all obey the will of God: so did Abraham. Genesis 17. 23.18.19. So did
Jacob also, exhort his household to repentance, and outward professing of the
same, and reformed it of all superstition and idolatry: as appears. Ge.
36,2. And notwithstanding the corruption and idolatry of Egypt, yet Joseph
taught his own family to fear God, and know God: though he could not reform
the whole Realm: as appears. Genesis 43.23.

Yea by Gods own commandment, the master and mistres is bound not only to be
holy and religious themselves, but also to see that all under their charge and
rule be so likewise, where it is said: remember the seventh day to keep it
holy, six days shall thou labor and do all thy work: but the seventh day is
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manserua^t, nor thy maidseruant, nor thy
beast, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, etc. Exodus 20.8.

Again, thou shall keep my feasts, and rejoice in them, thou and thy son,
and thy daughter, and thy servant, and thy maid, and the Leuit, and the
stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates, etc.
Deuteronomy. 16.14.

Again, Thou shall bring of thy first fruits of the land unto the Lord, and
offer them before him by the hands of the Priest, and thou shall worship before
the Lord thy God, and thou shall rejoice in all the good things, which the Lord
thy God has given unto thee, and to thine household, thou and the Leuit, and
the stranger yt is among you (signifying by this that God gives us not goods
for our selves only, but for their uses also which are committed to our
charge.) Deuteronomy. 26.2.11.

All masters and dames ought with Joshua to say, I and my house will serve the
Lord: for he is our God, and his voice will we obey though all the world else go
away from him and forsake him. Joshua. 24.15.

So Da^id after he had made an end of praying for his people, he then
returned to bless his house, and pray for his family: to declare yt after our
duty done to God and his Church, we are chiefly bound to our own house and
family, for the which as for all other things we ought to pray unto God, and
instruct our families to praise his name. 1. Sam. 6.20.1. Chro. 16 43.

The Centurion brought his servant unto Christ to be cured, and prayed
earnestly for his health. Mat. 8.5. So did S. John Baptist send his disciples
to Christ, to teach all masters to do the like by hearing of his word, and
learning of his laws. Mar. 11.2.

The ruler of Capernaum believed in Christ and all his household. John. 4.53.

Cornelius the Italian captain was a devout man, and one that feared God with
all his household. Act. 10.1.

Lydia a woman worshipped God, and was baptized with all her household at the
preaching of the Gospel. Act. 16.14.

The keeper of the prison also, where Paul was in bonds, believed, and was
baptized, with all his household at Paul's preaching: so that both he and all
his household were saved. Act. 16.31. The like did Iustus and Chrispus. Act.
18.7.8. that worshipped god and all their household, to the good example of all
godly and christian masters and dames.

Every particular master and christian householder ought often with David to say
and repeat the 101. Psalm. For therein is contained briefly the duty of all
godly masters both toward God and their servants: so shall they walk in their
house with a perfect heart. Psalm. 101.

A wise master will instruct his servants and family with disretion: the
governance of a prudent man or woman is well ordered. As the master is, so are
his servants, and look what manner of man the good man of the family is, such
are all they that dwell with him: and like mistres, like maid. Eccle. 10.1.

An unwise ruler or master destroieth his household and servants: but where a
wise man has gouerna^ce, there ye family prosper. Ec. 10.3

Let him that governs or rules, do it with diligence, and wait on his office
and calling, doing his duty in the fear of God, says Saint Paul. Romans 12.8.

Thou shall not rule over thy servant or maid cruelly: but shall fear^ thy God,
and remember that thou want a servant thy self. Leuit. 25. 43. Deuteronomy. 15.15.

If thou smite thy servant or thy maid with a rod, and he or she die under thy
hand presently, thou shall surely be punished for it, but if thy servant so
beaten continue a day or two and then die: thou shall not be punished [by the
civil magistrate: but before God thou art a murtherer] for he is thy money.

Also if a man smite out his servants tooth or perish his eye, he shall let his
servant go out free for his blemish and hurt, so God reuengeth cruelty of
masters or dames in most little things. Exodus 21. 27.

If an ox goare a man's servant or maid, the owner of the ox shall give unto
the master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned. Exodus 21.32.

If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let no wickedness dwell
in thy tabernacle: that is, renounce thine own evil works, and see they
offend not God, over whom thou have charge: then shall thou lift up thy face
without spot, and shall be stable, and not fear any misery. Job. 11.14.15.

Give thy hired servant some rest and ease, for they that labor truly, are
worthy of refreshing. Job. 7.2.

He that troubles his own house shall inherit the wind, and like a fool
shall become servant to the wise. [That is the covetous man that spares his
riches, to the hindrance of his family shall be deprived thereof miserably, and
become poor and needy, yea, a slave to the godly, which are the true
possessours of the gifts of God]. Pro. 11.29. For there is a time to spare, and
a time to spend. Eccle. 3.6. do all things therefore in due order.

A wise and huswifely woman builds her house [by taking pain to profit her
family, and doing that which concerns her duty in her house diligently:]
but the foolish dame destroys it with her own^ idle hands. Prou. 14.1.

As a bird that wandreth from her nest, so is a woman that gaddeth from her
own house, and is often flitting from place to place, nothing careful of her
family. Pro. 8.27.

Accuse not a servant unto his master, least he curse thee, and speak evil
of thee, and so hurt thy self, and offend by accusing him without a cause.
prou. 30.10.

Take no heed to every word that is spoken, neither care for the^, nor credit
them, least thou hear thy servant curssing: therefore thine own heart knows
that thou thy self also have oftentimes cursed and spoken evil by other men.
Ecclesiastes. 7.22.

Be not as a Lion in thine own house: neither beat thy servant for thy
fancy, destroying thy household folks, nor oppress them that are under thee.
Eccl. 4.30.

Whereas thy servant works truly, entreat him not evil, nor the hyreling
that bestows himself wholly for thee, and is faithful unto thee. Eccl. 7.20.

Let thy soul love a faithful and discreet servant, and defraud him not of
his liberty, neither leave him a poor man: as Laban would have done Jacob.
Eccle. 7.21.

Blame nor condemn not thy servant before thou have inquired, and tried out
the fault: understand the matter or complaint first, and when thou have made
inquisition, then reform thy household righteously (if Potipher had kept this
rule, Joseph had not bin so rashly cast in prison, at the wrongful complaint
of his lecherous mistres.) Eccl. 11.7.

Reprove thy servant, least he do evil: and if he have done it, reprove him
also that he do it no more. Tell thy servant of his fault, least he be
ignorant, and say, I have not done it, and so a slander be raised upon thee:
and give no credit to every word. Give thy servant warning I say before thou
threaten him, and being without anger, gi^e place to the law of the most high.
Eccl. 19.13. etc.

Take heed of the^ that be of thine own household, (for a man's enemies are
they of his own household) Eccle. 32,22. Mat. 7.6.

The yooke and the whip bow down the hard neck: so came thine evil servant
with the whip and correction. Set him to work, for that belongs unto him: if
he be not obedient put on more heavy letters, and bind his feet to a
clogge: but be not too excessive, nor punish him not too much in any wise,
nor without discretion do nothing. Eccle. 33.23. etc.

Be not ashamed ta beat an evil servant to the blood: for so were slaves
used in old time. Eccl. 42.5.

Some masters there be, says Christ, that bind heavy burdens and grievous
to be borne, and lay them on their servants shoulders: but they themselves
will not move them with on finger, Matthewe 23. 4.

He that rules, let him do it with diligence, and discretion, and wait on
his office. Romans 12.8.

Ye Masters and dames, do ye the same things unto your servants, that are
good and right in the sight of God and men, putting away threatening: and know
that even your master also is in heaven, neither is there respect of person
with him: whether he be bond or free, servant or master. For the cruel
master, that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that he has done, Ephe,
6.9. Collos. 4. 1. 3.25.

A master must be one, that can rule his own household honestly, having
children and servants under obedience with all honesty: no fighter, no
striker, nor given to wickedness. For if any cannot rule his own house, how
shall he be a profitable member in the church of God?

If there be any, that provides not for his own house and family; and
namely for them that be of his own household, he denies the faith, and is
worse then an infidel. Learn therefore to show goodness toward your own
house, that you may be blameless. For that is an acceptable thing before God.
1, Tim. 5,8. So did that heathen King Pharao make provision for his house
against the time of dearth, Gene. 41. and 42, by the counsel of Joseph.

Sara dealt roughly with Hagar her hand maid, for despising her dame, which
forced Hagar to fly away: but the angel of the Lord comforted her, and made
her return to her dame again. Gene. 16.6. etc.

How friendly Saint Paul wrote to Philemon in the behalf^ of Onesimus his
servant, that had run away from Philemon: and exhorted him, lovingly to
receive him again, and forgive him al faults: appears in his Epistle to
Philemon written only for that purpose, and upon that occasion. 1.10.

How greatly God does and ever has detested the cruelty o^ masters toward
their servants, it appears in the Prophet Esaias: who says, The Lord
himself will rise against the wicked and froward man, and all his household.
Esaias. 31.2. And in the Prophets Malach. The Lord will cut off the master that
does transgress his his holy law. Mala. 2.12. Again, I will come near to
judgment and be a swift witness against those that oppress the stranger,
and wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages: and fear not me says ye Lord.
Malach. 2.12.3.5.

Yea how grievously God plagued both Prince and people for their cruelty
toward their servants: it may appear, if you will vouchsafe to read the 34.
Chapter of Jeremy the Prophet.

A righteous man regards the life of his cattle (much more the life of his
servants,) but the ungodly have cruel hearts both to the one and the other.
Prou. 12.10.

Be diligent to know the state of thy flock and cattle, and look well to thy
herds: for riches remain not always, nor the crown endures for ever. Pro.
27.23. For if thou be diligent to preserve ye gifts of God, which he does give
thee of his goodness toward thee, then thy hay shall grow, and the grass come
up, and herbs to gather in the mountains: yea thy lambs shall bear wool
to cloth thee, and for thy goats thou shall take money, to maintain thy
huswiferie. Thou shall have goats milk enough, I say to feed thee, and to
uphold thy household, and to sustain thy maidens. Pro. 27.25.

If thou have cattle, look well to them: and if they be for thy profit,
keep them with thee. Eccle. 7.42.

Be not ashamed to set a good lock, where may hands are: and if thou give any
thing by number or weight, to put all things in writing, both that yt is given
out, and that which is received again. Eccl. 42,7.

Take heed of them, that be of thine own household, and look wisely about
thee. Eccle. 32.22. For a man's enemies are they of his own household, Mich. 7.6.
Mat. 10.36.

Ask no counsel of the slothful for any labor, nor of an hyreling, for
the finishing of a work: nor of an idle servant for much business. Eccle.
37.11.

The fodder, the whip, and the burden belong unto the ass: and meat,
correction, and work unto thy servant. If thou set thy servant to labor, thou
shall find rest, but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty. Send
him to labor therefore, that he go not idle about. For idleness brings
much evil. Eccle. 33.23.

Give not thy servant too much pre-eminence over those things which he cannot
use aright. For pleasures are not comely for a foole^ much less for servants
to have rule over their betters. Prou. 19.10.

He that delicately brings up his servant from his youth, at length he will
be even as his son or master. Prou. 29.21.

Through slouthfulnes the roofes of the house go to decay, and by ye idleness
of the hands, the house droppeth through, or it rayneth into the house.
[Therfore keep thy servants evermore well occupied in some good exercise to
common or private profits] Ecclesiastes. 10.18.

The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the idle shall be under
tribute. Prou. 12 24.

Masters ought to be affected toward their servants, as toward their
children: and to love them unfeignedly for virtues sake: as appears. 2. Kin.
5.13. etc. And as the Centurion did. Mat. 8.5.

The Master or Dame ought not to think scorn of their servants advise, nor to
refuse their counsel, if it tend to the glory of God, and their profit: aster
the example of Pharao, who followed Iosephes counsel in providing corn
against dearth, Genesis 41.47. Of Naama^ the Syrian, who went and washed himself
at their request as the prophet bade him. 2. King. 5. 13. And of Abigail Nabals
wife, who with all speed followed her servants counsel, to pacify the wrath
of David conceived against her husband and all his household. 1. Sam. 25.17. And
of Job, who never contemned the judgment or good counsel of his servants or
maide^s, neither did oppress them, nor stand in contention with them: but
being always moved with Christian pity toward them, as he that remembered
his servants were made of the same earth, and cast in the same mould of the
woman with him, he always used the^ as Gods good creatures, lent unto him for
his necessity, and never either in word or deed would ever abuse the^. Job.
31.13.

If thou have a good servant, entreat him as thy brother. For thou hyast need
of him as of thy self: if thou entreat him evil, and he run away, as Hagar
did from Sara, will thou seek him? Eccle. 33.24.

If thou have a faithful servant: let him be unto thee as thine own soul.
For in blood have thou gotten him: so was the Centurions servant unto him, as
appears in that he prayed Christ so heartily for him, Mat. 8.5.

For God oftentimes blesses and prospers the wicked for the godly servants
sake; as he did Laban for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30.27. and Potipher for Iosephes
sake. Genesis 39.5. Saul for David's sake. Achab for Obadias sake. 1. Kin. 18.7.

The master may require an oath obedience, loyalty, and faithfulness in his
business of his servant. So did Abraham Genesis 24.2 41.

But they must not look to be obeyed in all their wicked and ungodly
commandementes, no more then Saul was obeyed of his servants, at what time he
commanded them to kill all the Lords Priests. 1. Sam. 22.17. Or of his Page
that was commanded to thrust him through. 1. Sam. 31.4. More then Potiphars
wife that commanded Joseph to lie with her. Genesis 39.13.

It is an horrible fault for the Master or mystres to entice or solicit their
servants to sin in adultery: as Potiphars wife did her man Joseph. Genesis
39.13. Or to eat the gaynes gotten by their servants lying tongues: as many
do in the world at this day, and which thing David would in no wise do. For
he said, that that is to eat and drink the blood of their servants, and to
make merchandise of their bodies and souls, read. 2. Sam. 23.17. 1. Chro.
11.19. Or to rage against the professors of ye Gospel, and seek to do them
all the hurt and mischief they can possibly devise or procure: as we read
Alexander the Coppersmith did. 2. Tim. 4. 14. And also the Sorceresse of
Phillipie, who when Paul cast out the evil cosining spirit of the Devil out
of her maid, that cried after him, she thereby perceiving ye hope of her
gaynes to be gone, which her maid was wont by that spirit of divination to get
her Mystres: ran furiously upon Paul and Silas, and brought them before the
Magistrates, who whipped and beat them with rods, as troublers of their city.
Read Act. 16.16.

If a master or mystres delight in lies, all her servants are wicked and
ungodly. Prou. 29.12.

But Elisha like a godly man punished the briberie, covetousness, and lying of
his servant Gehezi: as appears, 2. King. 5.27.

It is a thing yrkesome to men, burdensome to the earth, and intolerable in a
common wealth, for the master to marry his maid, and make her heir to her
mystres: or the mistres to marry her man and cause her servant to bear rule,
yet too too much used in these our corrupt days. Pro. 30.22. But the offender
by Gods secret judgments is well punished therefore, as daily experience
proves.

Beware of a talebearer, a blasphemer, and a contentious servant, of an idle
body, and flitting fellow that uses to have many masters, and rid such
quickly out of thy house. Prou. 6.20.8.27.

Cast out also the skornefull person out of thy dwelling, so shall strife go
out with him, yea all variance, contention, and slander shall cease. Prou.
22.10.

Hate such as are unfaithful, and let the froward in heart depart from thee.
Know thou no wicked person. Who so privily slaundereth his neighbor, him
reject. Who so has a proud look and haughty stomach, do not suffer him to
rest with thee: let thine eyes look upon such as be faithful among thy
servants, and let them dwell with thee who so leads a godly life, let him be
thy servant. Suffer no deceitful person to dwell in thy house. He that
tells lies permit him not to tarry in thy sight. Give thy self wholly to
wisdom and uprightness, show thy self a favorer of virtue and virtuous
servants, and a foe to all vice and vicious persons, and do thy best to punish
vice, both in thy self and those that thou have care of, and that betimes
without all delay, so shall all inconveniences be prevented, Gods plauges
auerted, and thy self and his Church benefited, to his glory, and thy
perpetual praise in Christ. Psalm. 101.

Those that are faithful and diligent in thy service, are to be cherished, and
made much of, yea to have more authority committed to them: but those that
thou find loyterers and negligent in doing their duty, those thrust out of
thy dooers as unprofitable, as yt noble man did in the parable. Luke 19.12.

It is a thing very necessary and profitable for all masters to look well to
their affairs: and to call their servants that have charge under them often to
an account and reckoning before they run too far in arrerages: and if they
find any faulty, yet to deal charitablie, liberally, and conscionably with
those servants that are behind in their accounts, and not able to pay or
discharge their debt: as we may read^ in the parable of the King. Mat. 18.23.
And as we example in that Heathen king Pharao, who took occasion every year
once (as upon his birth feast day, which he made accustomably every year unto
all his servants,) to examine their trespasses and faults done against him: to
the end that those whom he found faulty, he might punish the^ accordingly:
and those that had not offended him, he might promote to higher offices, and
give them greater rewards to encourage them in well doing: which example would
God all masters and rulers would imitate to the glory of God. Gene. 40.20. Then
should we not have our houses so full of idle serving men, nor our prison so
farced with condemned debtors, nor our Country so full of idle Roges and
beggars.

It is the part of all godly masters to bear charitably with their servants
infirmities, and to use them courteously and gently at the first, the better to
win them by little and little to their obedience, after the example of
Christ. Mat. 9.14.

Some masters being moved with covetousness, had rather ve^ture their lives by
posting after a runnaga^e servant, then loose the worldly profi^e, which they
had by their servants: as Shimei did. 1. King. 2.36.

A Godly man or woman will never be persuaded or counseled by their servants,
to do any wicked or ungodly thing against the will of God and his prince:
after the example of Job, whose servants could not move him to be revenged of
his enemies. Job. 31.31. And of David. 1. Sam. 26.9.24.5.6.

Finally, the master or mistres, ought not through coueteousnesse to esteem
more of his own profit, then of his honesty, and upright dealing toward
his seruants^ as by cruelty or deceit to defraude, to withhold their wages
from them, that have dealt faithfully with them. For that rather sauoureth of
cruelty then of equity: to change the servants wages, to withholde it upon
light occasion, or to require at their servants hands to make good and
restore, whatsoever is torn and last, stolen or embeseled, through others
default, or otherwise not through their servants negligence: as did Laban to
Jacob. Genesis 31.

But at the end of the servants term, the master ought to let him depart
quietly, and liberally to pay him all his wages: specially if he perceive
that God has blessed him by his servants faithful service, that the servant
may travel for his own house another while also, knowing that the order of
nature so requires, that every one provide for his own family. Neither will
God have the servant defrauded of his just reward, nor to be hurt unjustly any
manner of ways, either in deceiving them of their wages, co^pelling the^ to
serve longer then it is couena^ted or their term lasted, or when their years
are expired, to send them away empty handed. For that God that saw all the
covetous dealing of Laban to Jacob does still behold all ungodliness and
wrong, and his eye evermore observes what injury soever that masters think
or do toward their servants. Therefore ye masters take heed I say, that ye
do nothing to your servants but that which is just, lawful, and right. For
surely the master whose conscience is guilty of the contrary, and of such
misbehauiour toward their servants, without satisfaction and amends made unto
their servants shall undoubtedly be punished and rebuked of the Lord to his
shame: as that cruel hypocrite, hard and covetous man Laban was, Genesis 31.12.

Yea God has commanded thee, saying: the workmans hire and servants wages,
shall not abide with thee until the morning. Leuit, 19.13.

When thou sendest thy servant out free, thou shall not let him go away
empty, but shall give him a liberal reward of thy sheep, and of thy corn,
and of thy wine, and of that wherewith the Lord has blessed thee, and remember
that thou wast a servant thy self in the land of Egypt, etc. Deuteronomy. 15.12.
Exodus 21.

Thou shall not oppress an hired servant that is needy and poor: by
withholding his wages from him, that he has earned by his work: neither of
the stranger that is in the land, nor of thy brethren. Thou shall give him his
hire for his day: neither shall the sun go down upon it. For he is poor,
and therewith susteineth ^he his life, least he cry against thee unto the
Lord, and that turn to be sin unto thee. Deuteronomy. 24.14. Leuit. 19.19.

If I have with holden their wages (says holy Job:) that labored for me, or
grieved the souls of the men of my tabernacle, or be an extorcioner, or
briber, or cruel man: then let mine arm rot from my shoulders. Job. 31.13.

Let not the wages of any man, which has wrought for thee, tarry with thee, but
give him it out of hand. For if thou serve God he also will pay thee. Tob^
4.14. Yea Tobit rather added and increased the wages of his man, then
diminished one jot for his faithful service; as a most thankful master,
requiting so painful a servant in his business. Tob. 5.8.12.1.13.1.

Judith also at her death made her maid Abia free, because she had faithfully
and truly served her all her life. Judith. 16.23.

Alexander king of Macedon also in his death bed distributed his kingdom
liberally among all his chief servants, whom he had brought up of children,
and they reigned after his death in his room: as appears. 1. Macha. 1.7.

For equity and liberality is to be used indifferently to all servants, as
appears in the parable of the householder. Matthewe. 20.1.

And to him that works, the wages is due, not by favor, but by debt, and to
be paid therefore unto thy servant without grudging. Romans 4.4. Because the
workman is worthy of his meat. Math. 10.10. And the labourer is worthy of
his wages. Neither shall thou mosell the mouth of the ox that treads out the
corn. 1. Timoth. 5.18.

Finally, I will come near to judgment and be a swift witness against those
that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages: and oppress the stranger, and
fear not me says the Lord of hosts. Malach. 3.5.

The duty of handmaides and servants toward their Masters and Dames.
LET every one abide in the same vocation wherein he is called: art thou
called being a servant, care not for it. [For although god has called thee to
serve in this life, yet think not thy condition unworthy for a Christian, but
rejoice that thou art delivered by Christ from the miserable slavery of sin
and death] But if thou may be free use it rather. For he or she that is
called of the Lord being a servant, is the Lords freeman or freewoman: Likewise
he or she that is called being free is Christ's servant. Ye are bought with
a price, be not servants of men. Brethren, let every man wherein he was
called, therein abide with God sincerely, as in the presence of God. 1 Cor.
7.20.

Let every servant be subject to his governor. For there is no power but of
God, of whom the powers and governors that be are ordained. Whosoever
therefore resists the authority of ye governor or master, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive unto themselves
judgment, even both the punishment of the Judges and Magistrates, and also the
vengeance of God: neither are masters or governors to be feared of servants
for good works, but for evil: will thou then be without fear of thy Master
or governor, do well then, (and be faithful and diligent in thy service) so
shall thou have praise of the same. For he is the minister of God for thy
wealth: but if thou do evil (and be stubborn and rebellious,) then fear,
for God has not given him authority over thee in vain. Wherefore ye servants
must be subject and obedient unto your masters, not because of wrath or for
fear only, but also especially for love and conscience sake. Romans 13.1.

Servants, be obedient unto them that are your bodily masters, according to the
flesh, (and have dominion over your bodies, but not over your souls: and that)
in all things with fear and tre^bling, in singlenes of heart, as unto Christ:
not with service to the eye as me^ pleasers, but as the servants of Christ,
doing ye will of God from the heart, with good will: and whatsoever ye do, do
it heartily as to the Lord, and not unto men: knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the inheritance, whether ye be bond or free. For
ye serve the Lord Christ: but he that does wrong, whether he be master, or
servant, shall be sure to receive (punishment) for ye wrong yt he has done. For
there is no respect of persons with God. Ephe. 6.5. Col. 3.22.

Ye servants give ye duty, to whom ye owe duty: fear, to whom fear
belongs: honor, to whom ye owe honor: and service, to who^ service
appertaineth^ and owe nothing to any but love. For he that loves fulfilleth
the law. Romans 13.

Let as many servants, as are under the yoke (of servitude:) count their
masters and dames worthy of all honor, that ye name of God and his doctrine
be not evil spoken off: and they that have believing masters, let them not
despise the^, because they are brethren: but rather do service, because they
are faithful and beloved, and partakers of the benefit, that is, of the grace
of God: as their servants are, and having the same adoption. 1. Tim. 6.1.

Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your souls as they that must give as accounts, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief: for yt is unprofitable for you. Heb. 13.17.

Let servants be subject to their masters, and please them in all things, not
answering again, neither pickers, ^ilchers, or stealers from them: but that
they shall show all good faithfulness and truth toward them, that they may
adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Tit. 2.9.

Servants, be ye subject to your masters and mistresses with all fear, not
only if they be good and courteous: but also though they be froward and
^estie, for this is thank worthy, if you for conscience sake toward God
knowing, that God lays this necessity or charge upon you, endure grief, and
suffer wrong^ully. For what praise is it if when ye be buffetted for your
faults, ye take it patiently (knowing that ye have well deserved it) but if
when ye do well, ye suffer wrong, and take it patiently (at your masters or
dames hand, without any murmuring, grudging, resisting, taunting or answering
again) this is acceptable to God (your revenger) for heereunto are ye called.
Yea Christ himself also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we
should follow his steps, who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his
mouth, who when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed it to him, that judges righteously. 1. Pet. 2.18.
Even so do ye knowing that Gods eye observes what injury soever your
masters or dames either think, say, or do against you, so revenge it.

Ye servants, let your love to God and man whom ye serve, ^ee without
dissimulation, abhor that which is evil, and cleave diligently unto that
which is good. Be not slothful to do your service, but be faithful in
heart, and fervent in spirit serving the Lord, rejoicing in hope of Gods
blessing, patient in your sufferings, and continue in fervent prayer, both for
your selves and your masters. etc. Romans 12.9. etc.

O ye servants, know ye not, that to whomsoever ye hire and give your
selves, as servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey: whether
it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness: yes, be ye
well assured, that ye cannot be just, which do not obey God, and in him your
bodily masters and dames, and that eue^ from the heart unfeignedly, as the true
servants of righteousness: and as those yt wholly give the^ their members as
servants to holmes, cleanenesse, and all manner of godliness, remembering that the
wages of sin is death to all yt give their members as servants to uncleanness,
disobedience, and iniquity, to commit iniquity upon iniquity. Rom^ 6.16.

No man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one, and love the
other: or else lean to the one and despise the other. Mat. 6.24.

The eyes of a manseruant must ever look unto the hand^ of his master, and be
diligent to attend upon them: and the eyes of an hand maiden must look unto
the hand of her mistres, to wait attentively upon her: and they both ought
continually to wait upon the Lord their God, and call upon him for mercy and
grace, to accomplish their duties to his glory. Psalm. 123.

A discreet servant shall have rule over a lewd son, and he shall divide the
heritage among the brethren: that is, shall be made governor over the children.
Prove. 17.2.

That servant that honors not the son, the same honors not the ^ather
his master which has entertained him. John. 5. 23.

He that keeps the fig tree, shall eat the fruit thereof: so he that
waits diligently upon his master shall come to honor. Pro. 27.18.

See thou not that they which be diligent in their business, stand before
Kings, and not among the simple people. Prou. 23.29.

Unto the servant that is wise, shall they that are free do service. Eccle.
10.26.

He that is wise in his business, shall find good: and he that trusts in
the Lord, he is blessed. Prou. 16.20.

Who so is a faithful and wise servant, him shall his master make ruler over
his household to give them their portion of meat in due season: yea, blessed
shall that servant be whom his master when he comes shall find diligent,
watchful, and faithful in doing his duty. For verily he shall be made ruler
over all his masters goods. Mat. 24.45.

But as for the evil and froward natured servant, which says in his heart:
^ush, my master does defer his coming, and begins to smit^ his fellow
servants and maids, and to eat and drink with the drunk, and to be drunk
also with tippling and banqueting in his masters absence: that wicked servants
master will come in a day when he thinks not, and at an hour when he is not
aware of, and will cut him off, and thrust him out of his doors, and give him
his portion with hypocrites and rebels. Math. 24.25. Luke. 12.42.

The good servant, that has been faithful over little of his masters goods,
and employed it to ye best commodity and most profit of his master, that he
could in way of honesty and good dealing, shall be made ruler over much, and be
received into his masters house to be partaker of ye same true gotten goods
and commodity with joy. But that evil and unprofitable servant, yt shall
impudently say thus: master, I know yt thou wast an hard man, reaping where
thou sowedst not, and gathering where thou strowedst not: I therefore being
afraid of thy cruel and hard dealing, went and hid my talent, or goods which
thou deliueredst me, in ye earth, behold yet here is thine own, but without any
increase or profit. That slothful and idle servant, I say, that has been
nothing profitable to his master, nor aduantaged him ought toward his meat,
drink and wages, shall have that taken away, which was given him to use, and
he shall be cast out as an unprofitable member, into utter darkness: where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, as it is in the parable. Math. 25. 14. Luke.
19.12.

The diligence of the servants to please their masters, causes the^ to become
most dear unto their masters and dames, and to lack nothing that may do them
good: as ye may read of the Centurion, who gave this good report of his
servants for their diligence, that he could not so soon bid them go, but
they ran: come, but they made have and came: do this, or yt, but they did it
faithfully: and therefore he made his earnest prayers unto God for them when
they were sick to heal them: neither did they want any thing that was
necessary for their preservation or maintenance. Mat. 8.9.

A servant or laboring man yt is given to drunkenness, shall not be rich, and
he that makes not much of small things committed to his charge, shall fall by
little and little into poverty himself. Eccle. 19.1.

The Ceremony, that was used in old time, yt the servant should put his hand
under his masters thigh, and swear unto him fidelity, declares ye servants
obedience toward their masters, yt they should vow to be faithful, loyal,
and true unto the^ in all their affairs: as appears Abraham's servant did Genesis
24.2.9. And that they should diligently pray and praise God for their master
and all his: they have example in the same Abraham's servant, who did so. Ge.
24.12.47.

The fidelity, that all godly servants owe to their masters and dames,
ought to cause them ever to prefer their masters business and affairs to
their own necessity: as did that good old servant of holy Abraham, who
would neither eat nor drink until he had done his masters affairs
thoroughly. In whom also is lively set forth the condition and obedience of all
faithful and trusty servants, for imitation and example to be followed of
them. Genesis 24.33. As also in the person of Jacob, that served Laban so
faithfully many years. Genesis 30. And in the person of Joseph, ye faithful,
virtuous, and chaste servant of Potiphers: Genesis 39.41. And in the holy man
David, that so often endured the cruelty of his master king Saul. 1. Sam. 20.
etc.

That they are blessed, which have their education with good men and serve them
faithfully: it does appear by Joshua that godly servant of Moses, who being
brought up ever under so holy a Prophet of God, was by that means, and the
providence of God made meet for the high calling of gouernourship, after the
death of his Master Moses over all the people of Israel: as ye may read
Joshua. 1.1.

A good servant will both honor and fear his master: as the child does his
father, says the Prophet. Malach. 1.6.

He that has knowledge will not grudge when he is reformed, or corrected for
his faults: and the ignorant and retchlesse servant shall not come to honor.
Eccle. 10.26.

A soft answer, and mild word, given by the servant puts away the wrath of
an angry master: but grievous and reprochful words, with ^aunt for taunt,
stirs up strife more and more to their further punishment and Gods
displeasure. Prou. 15.1.

A foolish servant despises his masters instruction: but he yt regards
correction and will amend for it, is prudent. Prou. 15.5.

A scorner loves not that master that rebukes him for his faults: neither
will he tarry with the wise. Prou. 15.12.

He yt refuses instruction, despises his own soul: but he that obeys
correction gets understanding. Prou. 15.32,

A servant, that is of a servile and rebellious nature, will not be chastened
with words: though he understand and know what to do, yet he will not
regard the patience of his master nor seek to please him by doing his duty.
Prou. 19.19.

He that hates to be reformed, his life shall be shortened: and that servant
that abhors babbling and repeating of words quenches wickedness.

He that refraineth his tongue may live with a troublesome man, and he that
hates babbling, and murmuring shall have less evil done unto him. Eccle.
19.5.6.

Declare not thy masters or mistres secrets or manners, neither to friend nor
foe: If thou know ought amiss by them, let it dye with thee, and reveal it
not for any opportunity: so shall thou be sure to find favor both before God
and man. Eccle. 19.7.8. It was a great grief and shame to Susannas servants to
hear their mistres slandred or reproched with any dishonestie or incontinencie
of life: as appears. Sus^n. 1.27.

If a servant say stubbornely unto his master, I will not do as it pleases
thee, though afterward he do it, yet shall he displease him that nourishes
him. Eccle. 19.21.

That servant, that knows his masters will and does it not accordingly,
shall be beaten with many stripes: but he yt knows it not, and yet does ^ommit
faults worthy of stripes, shall be beaten but with a few strokes. Luke. 12.47.

It is much better to reprove, the^ to bear evil will: and he that
acknowledges his fault, shall be preserved from further hurt.

O how good a thing is it, when thou art reproved to show repentance and
humility, and to promise amendment and obedience: for so shall thou escape
wilful sin. Eccle. 20.2.4.

Who so hates to be reformed is in the way of sinners: but he that fears ye
Lord, co^uerteth ye heart, and abhors stubbornes. Eccle. 21,6.

A foolish servant will not suffer himself to be taught, and there be some
too witty to increase bitterness. Eccle. 21.12.

For a servant, that is often punished cannot be without some scarre, no more
then he, that names and swears by God continually, ca^ be faultlesse Eccle.
23.10.

A murmuring and grudging servant, yt is envious at his masters liberality
toward his fellow servants, deserves due reprehension and rebuke, as
appears in the parable. Math. 20.11.13.

Yea, it is vile impudency and malapert arrogancy, and a thing utterly to be
abhorred of all maids, and servants to reproach their masters children with
their faults to their faces, and to check or taunt them with unseemly
terms: as Raguels maids did his daughter Sara: much more impudency is it for
the maid to use reproachful words to her mistres her self, read the story
of Sara Tobit. 3.9.

Seek not excuses when thou should do thy work, neither be ashamed
thereof through pride in the time of adversity: for better is he that
labors and has plenty of all things, then he that goes gorgeously and
seeks his dinner, or wants bread. Eccle. 10.27.

He that is slothful in his work, is even the brother of him that is a great
waster. Prou. 18.9.

Solomon deriding them that invent vain excuses, because they would not do
their duty, says: The slouthful servant says, O there is a Lion without, I
dare not go for fear least I be slain in the street. Prou. 22.13.26.13.

As the door turns upon the hooks or hinges, so does the slothful servant
upon his bed, and is l^th to rise early to go about his business. Prou.
26.14.

A slothful hyreling hides his hand in his bosom, and it greeueth him to
put it out again to his mouth. Prou. 26.15.

The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit then seven men that can render a
reason. Prou. 26.16.

As Uineger is to the teeth, and as smoke is hurtful to the eyes, so is the
slothful servant to them that he serves: for he is but a trouble and grief
unto his master or mistress, that sets him about any business. Prou. 10.26.

It is a shame for the servant to be idle, and live at pleasure and in delights
when he sees his master work and take pains: such an honest servant was
Urias, who utterly refused to live at ease in David's court, so long as his
captain Ioab traveled in warfare, read 2. Sam. 11.11.

The diligent and faithful servant, that truly discharges the trust that
his master has put him in, shall be well rewarded: but the idle and sluggish
servant that neglects his duty and is void of all care to do his
business faithfully is without all excuse, and shall be judged of his own evil
deeds: as appears in Luke. 17. 17.22.

Servants, be content with your wages: and accuse not your fellows falsely or
unjustly. Luke. 3.14.

For the unmerciful, brawling, and currish natured servant, that has no pity
on his fellows, but most cruelly and despitefully uses and entreats the^
both within and without his masters house, shall surely be cast out a doors,
and put in prison: where he shall become slave to the gaylor, till his
cruelty be well revenged: as appears in the parable. Math. 18.28.

Wicked servants do many evils unknown to their masters: as did the
servants of Abimelech that stopped Abraham's wells of water, unwitting to their
Lord and master, whereby grew great strife and contention: as appears. Genesis
21.26.

The servant, that through vile covetous bribery and lying, slandereth the word
of God and profession of his Gospel, shall surely be plagued as was Gehezi,
that lied unto his master Elisha, etc. as appears. 2. Kig. 5.21.

A thief is better then a servant accustomed to lie: but they both shall have
destruction to heritage. Eccle. 20.24.

The conditions of a lying servant are ever dishonest, and their sham^ is ever
with them. Eccle. 20.25.

That servant which either of malice with Judas, or of rashness with Peter (or
David's servants 1. Sam. 24.5.) shall persuade his master to resist the will of
God, and to do any thing contrary to his word, is to be accounted as a limme
of Satan, and an utter enemy to his master and all godliness: read Math.
16.22.

Yea the day shall come that I will visit all those that dance upon the
threshold so proudely, which fill their masters houses by cruelty and deceit,
says the Lord: who hereby threatens the servants of ye rulers and
magistrates, which invade other men's houses and possessions, and rejoice and
leap for joy, when they can get any pray to please their master withal.
Zephani. 1.9.

It is plain robbery and theft for the servant to take away the good name of
his master, or the honor and praise that he has deserved, or is due unto him:
this would not Ioab take from David, as appears. 2. Sam. 12.28.

That servant, yt is put in trust with all his masters goods, and yet
deceives him, is a most unthankful wretch, and shall surely be plagued: this
would not Joseph do for no temptation, as appears. Genesis 39.8^

The servant that fears God, and stands in awe of his judgments as Joseph
did, shall do no wicked nor villainous act toward his master or mistress for
any temptation or allureme^ts, read P^tiphers wife. Genesis 31.8.

No servant is bound to obey the wicked commandments of his Lord or master,
but stoutly in the fear of the Lord he ought to resist and refuse them,
because there it is better to obey God, the^ man: as did the servants of Saul,
who refused to kill the priests of ye Lord at their kings commandment. 1.
Sam. 32.17. and as did his armor bearer, who refused to thrust him through. 1.
Sam. 31.4.

A faithful servant will not slicke to venture and hazard his life and limbs
for his masters preservation, health, and safeguard: so did David's me^, as
appears. 2. Sam. 23.16. And also Ittay his servant. 2. Sam 15.21. and Peter
Math. 26.35. John. 18.10.

The servant that betrayeth his master for rewards, or conspireth the death of
their master or mistress, or otherwise rises up against them to hurt or
molest them, shall be sure never to escape Gods heavy judgments, but for
their rebellion and treason come to a fearful and horrible end with Judas.
Math, 26. and 27.5. Act. 1.18. and with John. 22. King. 9.14. and Zimri. 1.
King. 16.9.

Yea rather it is the part of every faithful servant, if they shall see or
understand of any peril, dangers, or mischief to be coming toward their
masters: forthwith to tell and utter them to their masterand give them the
best counsel they can to the end he may wisely in time prevent them to his
further safegarde: for so did the good servants of Bethsaba. 1. Sam. 25.14. and
of Naaman. 2. King. 5.13. and of David 2. Sam. 18.3. and as Joseph did to
Pharao. Genesis 41.33.

Pleasure is not seemly for a fool, much less for a servant to have rule
over princes. Neither is the free use of things to be committed to him that
cannot use them aright. Prou. 19.10.

Yea, it is a thing hateful both to God and man, for an handmayde to presume
to be heir to her mistress: read more Eccle.

Art thou forced with Hagar to start or run away from thy Dame for her rough
dealing with thee: O yet with the same Hagar, call to God for help and
succor, and return home again to thy Dame, and humble thy self under her
hand as she did, or at least procure some good friend to write in thy cause to
reconcile thee again to thy master, as Onesimus did. S. Paul to his master
Philemon. 1.10. For the severity of ye dame or master should not make ye
servant desperate, nor to neglect her duty, nor to renounce all obedience,
but patiently to endure correction, and by all means to seek reconciliation:
as Hagar did. Genesis 16.4.9.

Yea, though thy master change thy wages never so often, and be somewhat sharp
and hard unto thee: yet serve thou constantly and faithfully, and have
patience, neither do thou starte away for any light occasion offered: but call
upon God and trust in him: so shall he not suffer thy master or dame to hurt or
abuse thee. Genesis 31.7.

For surely, the property of all good servants is, patiently to tarry out all
their term of years, for which they are bound: yea to endure correction,
labor and hardness, as the heat by day and the cold by night, utterly to
abandon all niceness, and to forbear all vain pleasures and idleness.
Moreover, to look diligently to their masters goods, that nothing perish
under their charge by their negligence or default, if any thing be wasted,
stolen, or lost by their carelessness, to make it good and restore the same, or
the value thereof to their masters contentme^t. To use no churlish or ^itter
speech unto their betters and governors, to content themselves with their
wages, and when they depart, to go away quietly and carry nothing with them of
their masters goods: but that which is their own. Thus did that godly man
Jacob, as ye may read at large, Genesis 31.38. whose example I would wish all
godly servants to imitate: So should God testify for their righteous service
by rewarding them, and blessing them in their own houses: as he did y^ same
Jacob, and many others. Genesis 30.26. Yea, so should God for their sakes also,
bless and prosper their master and all his household, as he did Labans for
Jacobs sake. Genesis 39.5.8. and Pharao for Joseph's sake. Gen^

For upon the faithful seruan^s and maidens, in those days will I power out my
spirit says God. Joel. 2.29.

But the servant, that wastes his masters goods wilfully, shall suddenly be
called to an account of his Lord and master, and being found faulty and
culpable, shall be utterly thrust out of service, and be forced to make this, or
the like pitiful moan, and woeful lamentation: and say, alas, alas what shall I
do, for my master has put me away: I can neither dig nor labor with my
hands to get mine own living, and to beg I am ashamed, to steal I dare
not, alas what shall I now do, what shall I most wretched caitiffe do: and who
will now^ receive me into their house and service. etc. Luke. 16.1.

The servant abides not in the house for ever, but is made free at the term
of his years: but the son abides ever, this is the and difference between
a servant a son. Ioh. 8.34.

Happy is he that has not served such as are unworthy of him. Eccle. 25.8.

Ye servants, ought not to look for thanks at your masters hands, as though
he were bound so to do, because ye have done y^ which your master commanded
you to do: for when ye have done all those things which are commanded you:
yet say, we are unprofitable servants, w^ have but done that which was our
duty to do. Luke. 17.9.10.

Of diuorcement judicial and voluntary separation, and for what cause a woman
may or ought to be divorced and for what^ not by Gods word.
WHen a man takes a wife and marries her, if so be she find no favor in
his eyes, because he has espied some filthiness in her: then let him write
her a bill of diuorcement, and put it in her hand, and se^d her out of his
house, whereby God approoueth not that light diuorcement, but permits it to
avoid further inconvenience and mischief, as appears afterward in. Math. 5.

And when she is departed out of his house, and gone her way, and marry with
an other man: and if the latter husband hate her (also) and write her a letter
of diuorcement, and put it in her hand and send her away out of his house: or
if the latter man dye which took her to wife: then her first husband may not
take her again to be his wife, after y^ she is defiled, and seeing that by
dimitting her, he judged her to be unclean and polluted. For that is
abomination in the sight of ye Lord: and thou shall not cause the land to
sin, which God has given thee to inherit. Deuteronomy. 24.1. etc.

They say, according as it is written. Deuteronomy. 24.4. before. If a man put away
his wife, and she go from him, and become another ma^s wife, shall he return
again unto her? shall not that land be polluted, if h^ take such one to wife
again? but thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to
me says the Lord, etc. Iere. 3.1.

It has been said. Deuteronomy. 24. before, (whosoever shall put away, his wife,
let him give her a testimonial of diuorcement: but I say unto you: whosoever
shall put away his wife, (except it be for fornication) causes her to
commit adultery, (in that he gives her leave to marry another by the
testimonial.) And whosoever shall marry her that is divorced commits
adultery. Math. 5.31.

The Pharasies came and asked Christ if it were lawful for a man to put away
his wife, and tempted him, and he aunsweared and said to them: what did Moses
Deuteronomy. 24. command you? And they said: Moses suffered to write a bill of
diuorcement, and to put her away: then Jesus replied and said. For the
hardness of your heart, he wrote this precept unto you: but at the beginning
of the creation, it was not so. For in the beginning GOD made them male and
female, saying, for this cause shall man leave his father and mother, and cleave
to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, so that they are no more
twain, but one flesh. Therefore what GOD has coupled together, let not man
separate. Mark 10. 2.etc.

Again, in the house his Disciples asked him of this matter of divorce: and he
said unto them, whosoever shall put away his wife, and marriage another,
commits adultery against her, for the second is not his wife, but his
harlot.

And if a woman put away her husband, and be married to another she
commits adultery against him. Mark. 10.12. For the second is not her
husband.

The woman is in subjection to the man, and bond unto him by the law unto him
so long as he lives. So that if while the man lives, she take an other man,
she shall be called an adulteress. Romans 7.2.3.

Unto the married I command, not I, but the Lord: let not the wife depart
from her husband. But and if she depart for hatred, dissension, anger, or any
such light occasion, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her
husband: and let not the husband put away his wife.

But to the remnaunt I speak, and not the Lord, if any brother have a wife
that believes not, if she be content to dwell with him, let him not forsake
her: and the woman which has an husband that believes not, if he be content
to dwell with her, let her not forsake him. For the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the believing wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the
husband, else were your children unclean: but now are they holy. But if the
unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not in subjection
in such things done without cause: for God has called us in peace. For what
know thou O wife, whither thou shall save thine husband? Or what know
thou O man, whither thou shall save thy wife? etc. But as God has distributed
to all, and called every one, so let him walk: for so ordain I in all
churches. 1. Cor. 7.10.

A woman ought to be the wife but of one husband at once, and therefore being
justly divorced from her first husband, she ought not to marry again: for
that were to the slander of the Church, as appears in widows. 1. Tim. 5.9.

Thou, says God speaking to priests, shall not take to wife an whore, or one
polluted, or have an evil name, or are defamed, neither shall thou marry a
woman divorced from her husband, because thou art holy unto God. etc. Leuit.
21.7.14. Ezech. 44.22.

Every vow of her that is divorced, shall stand in effect with her, because
she is not under the authority of man. Numb. 30.10. See more in the duty of
husbands.

Of Widows and second Marriage.
She that is left alone, and to be counted in the number of true widows in
deed, trusts in God and continues in supplication and prayers night and
day. 1. Timo. 5.5. For so did Anna, the prophetess as ye^ may read, Luke
2.36. and Judith the wydowe of Manasses, Judith. 16.

Furthermore if any widow have children, or nephews, or kinsfolks, that are
able to relieve and comfort her, she ought not to put the Church to any
charge: but to seek comfort at her childrens or kinsfolks hands: who as
nature binds them, ought to nourishe their mother, and to recompense their
kindred. For that is an honest thing, acceptable before God, for the children
and kinsfolk, to show godliness and liberality toward their own house and
family. 1. Tim. 5.4.

Also a widow, says Saint Paul, ought not to be taken into the number of true
widows in deed, under threescore years old, and that has been the wife but
of one husband, and well reported of for good works, and unless she have
nourished her children, and lodged strangers, washed the Saints feet,
ministered unto them that are in adversity, and except she have bin
continually given to every good work. For such things are commanded unto
widows, that they may be blameless, and worthy the name.

But the younger widows, which begin to wax wanton against Christ, and will
marry to live in pleasure and delites, or which being idle, learn to go about
from house to house, to prattle like busiebodies, and speak things which are
not comely. Such wanton and idle widows. I say says S. Paul, are dead being
alive: because they are altogether unprofitable.

Yea, they have all ready damnation, because they have broken their first
faith, that is, they shall be punished with everlasting death and destruction
both of body and soul: because they have not only thereby done great dishonor
to Christ, in slaundering his Church, and leaving their charge or vocation: but
also broken their faith, and forsaken their religion professed. 1. Tim. 5. all.

Every vow, oath, or bond of a widow wherewith she has bound her self
during her widowhood, to mortify her self, and humble her soul by
abstinence, or other bodily exercise, shall stand in effect against her,
(because the widow is not under the authority of man.)

Also every vow, bond, or oath, that she has made in her husbands life
time, whereunto her husband did consent and agree too, by holding his peace,
and not disallowe of it when he first heard thereof: shall likewise stand and
be of force against her after the death of her husband: but if her husband
in his life time did ever disanull, or disagree unto any such vow, or bond of
his wife, then after his death, his wife now being a widow, may lawfully
break these vows and bonds, so by her made in her husbands life time, and
it shall not be any sin for her so to do: for the Lord will forgive her:
As appears, Number. 30.10. etc.

Of second Marriage.
THE woman is bound by the law of Matrimonye unto the man, while he lives:
but if he be dead, she is delivered and freed from the Law of the man, so
that though she take an another man to husband: she is no adultresse. Romans
7.2.

I would that all men were even as I myself am: but every one has his proper
gift of God, one after this manner, and another after that. Therefore (by
permission, not by commandment) I say unto the unmarried, and unto the
widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I do: but if they can not
abstain, then to avoid fornication, let them marry: and every woman have her
own husband. For it is better to marry then to burn (with ye fire of
concupiscence and lust). 1. Cor. 7.6,7.

And the wife is bound by the law of Matrimony, as long as her husband
lives: but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to marrye with whom
she will, only in the Lord: but she is more blessed if she so abide in my
judgment, and I think that I have also the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 7.39.

Refuse the younger wydowes (from taking the liberality of the poor) for when
they have begun to wax wanton against Christ (forgetting their vocation)
they will marry having damnation, because they have broken their first faith.

Where note that the apostle means such wydowes, which being justly
diuourced from their first husbands, marry again to the sclaunder of the
Church, and leave their vocation: for else he does not reprove the widows
that have been oftener married the^ once, where he says: let not a widow be
taken into the number under threescore year old, that has been the wife of
one husband. Yea I will therefore that the younger women marry and bear
children, and govern the house and give none occasion to the adversary to
speak evil. For certain are already turned back^ after satan. 1. Tim. 5.11.
etc.

No wydowe, save the widow of a priest, might not be permitted to marry with
any priest in the old law: as appears, Leuit. 21. 14. Ezech. 44.22.

Naomie being not very old, and the wife but of one husband, yet after the
death of her husband she would marry no more, but said she was too old to
have an husband: as appears. Ruth. 1.12.

Ruth also being a widow, and a young woman, was commended by Boaz, because
she followed not young men to marry them, were they poor or rich, read her
story. Ruth. 3.11.

To conclude, many men desired Iudeth, when she was a wydowe, but none had her
company to her dying day, after the death of her first husband manasses, she
gave her self to contemplation, prayers, and good works, to the benefiting of
her country and people: as appears. Judith. 8.4.16,12.

Likewise Anna the prophetess, having been married but seven years from her
virginity, after the death of her husband, continued a widow fourscore and
four years, serving God in the temple, with fasting, and prayer day and
night: as ye may read in her life. Luke. 2. 36.

Contrariwise, wydowhoodde was a burden to Thamar the wife of Er, therefore
she cast away her wydowes apparel, and decketh her self brave to play the
naught with Judah, her father in law: as appears in her story more at large,
Gene. 38.11.

That widowehood is a plague of God upon the ungodly, and therefore to the
comfort of the godly widows and orphans: let them read these comfortable
sentenses of the scripture following, gathered to this end, that thereby they
seeing what care the Lord has over them in this their desolate condition and
state, as people least esteemed in the world, may the better attend unto their
vocation in prayer and good works of the spirit, to the glory of his name,
and their perpetual praise, and evermore fully trust and hang upon his
providence, which never decays.
IF my wrath be kindled, says the Lord, against you for your oppression, then
will I kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless. Exodus 22.22.

The children of the oppressor, though they be many, shall be destroyed with
the sword, etc. and his widows shall not weep nor lament for him. Job. 27.13.

Let the children of the oppressor and extorcioner be fatherless, and his
wife a widow, etc. let the iniquity of his father be had in remembrance with
the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be done away, etc. Psalm.
109.8,13.

Therefore shall the Lord, have no pleasure in their young men, neither will he
have compassion of their fatherless, and of their wydowes. For because every
one is an hypocrite and wicked. Esai. 9.17

The foolish woman says in her heart, I shall be a Lady for ever, I am and
none else, I shall not sit as a wydowe, nor desolate, again neither shall I
know the loss of husband, or children, but shall be a lady and wise for
ever: but hear, O thou nice an dilicate dame, thou carelese and retchlesse
woman, that art altogether given to pleasure and vanity: for because thou have
not set thy mind to godliness, nor remembered the latter end thereof.
Therefore, both these two things shall come to thee suddenly on one day: namely,
widowhood or disolatio^, and the loss of children, even in their perfection I
say, shall they mightily fall and come upon thee for the multitude of thy sins
and offenses. Esai. 47.8,9.

I have wasted and destroyed my people (says the Lord) yet they would not
return from their (sinful) ways. Their widows are increased by me above
the sand of the Sea (because I have slain their husbands) I have brought
upon them the destroyer at noone day, etc. She also that has borne many
children has been made weak, and lost all; her heart has failed her, the
sun has failed her whiles it was day, she has been confounded and ashamed:
yea utterly dismaide in the mids of her prosperity, etc. Iere. 15.7.8. etc.

How do I remain solitary, and alone like a widow, we are underlings, even
fatherless without father: and our mothers are as wydowes, etc. Therefore our
heart is heavy for these things. Lamen. 1.1.5.3

The widows of the wicked and rebellious people, shall either be ^layne, or
never lament their husbands death, but suddenly be taken captives, and led away
prisoners by their enemies: so that they shall have no time to lament and mourn
for their desolation and widowehood. Psalm. 78.6.4.

Ye shall not trouble any wydowe, nor fatherless child, if you vex or
trouble such, and so she call and cry unto mee^ I will surely hear her cry,
says the Lord: and then shall my wrath be kyndled, and I will kill you with
the swoorde, and your wives for a just plague upon such oppressors, shall be
widows, and your children fatherless. Exodus 22.22.

Thou shall not pervert the right of the stranger, nor of the fatherless, nor
take a widows raiment to pledge. Deuteronomy. 24.17.

They that cast out widows empty, and break the arms of the fatherless
(that is, that not only do not show pity unto the widow and fatherless,
but oppress them) even snares shall compass them round about, and manifold
afflictions shall vex them. Job. 22.9,10.

Some wicked ones there be, that lead away the ass of the fatherles, and
take the widows ox to pledge, and that does evil entreat the barren,
neither do they any good to the widow. Therefore such merciless men, shall
not be pitied nor lamented when they fall, because they never pitied others.
Job. 24.3. 21.

This is the heritage and portion of a wicked tyrant, and oppressor of
widows and orphans with God: namely, his children, though they be many in
number, shall be destroyed with the sword, and his posterity shall beg
their bread: his remnant shall be buried in death and oblivion, and his widows
shall not weep, nor any lament for him. Job. 27.13.15.

I delivered the poor that cried; and the fatherless, and him that had none
to help him. The blessing of him, that was ready to perish, came upon me, and
I caused the widows heart to rejoice, says Job, to signify what we ought to
do also, if we will be counted in the number of the godly. Job. 29.12.13.

Yea, if I restrained the poor of their desire, or have caused the eyes of the
widow to fail by long waiting for her request, or have eaten my morsetles
alone, and the fatherless have not eaten thereof: for from my youth, he has
gone up with me, as with a father, and I have nourished him: and from my
mothers womb, I have been a guide unto the widow, and maintained her cause, I
have seen none perish for want of clothing, nor any poor, without covering:
If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless and widow in the gate, to
oppress them, and to do them injury, when I saw that I might help them:
then let me be counted for a most wicked man, and let mine arm rotte off, and
body fall in pieces. Job. 31.16.

GOD he is a father of the fatherless, and a judge of the wydowes, even GOD in
his holy habitation, makes the solitary to dwell in families, and delivers
them that are oppressed. Psalm. 68.5,6.

I will surely bless their widows with increase, and will satisfy the poor
with bread. Psalm. 132,15. This was performed in the poor wydowe of Sarepta.
etc.

Let the children of the oppressor and extortioner be fatherles, and his wife
a widow, let his children be vagabondes, and beg their bread out of
desolate places, let the extortioner consume all that he has, and the
stranger spoil his labor: let there be none to extend pity and mercy
unto him, neither let there be any to show compassion upon his fatherless
children and widow. Let his posterity be destroyed, and in the next
generation following, let their names be quite put ont. Finally, let the
iniquity of his father be had in remembrance with the Lord, and let not the
sin of his mother be done away, but let them always be before the Lord, that
he may cut off their memorial from the earth. Psalm. 109.9.

The Lord keeps the stranger, he releeueth the fatherless and widow:
(even all them that are destitute of worldly means and succor) but he
overthrows the way of the wicked. Psalm. 146.9.

The Lord will destroy the house of the proud men: but he will stablish the
borders of the widow that fears and loves him. Prou. 15.25.

Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed judge the
fatherless, and defend the widow. Esai. 1.17.

Woe be unto them, that decree wicked decrees, and write grievous things to
keep back the poor from judgment, and to take away the judgment of the
poor of my people: that widows may be their pray, and that they may spoil
the fatherless. Esai. 10.1.

They execute not judgment for the fatherless and widow, nor for the poor
of the land, and shall I not visit them for these things says the Lord? to
be avenged of such wicked doers. Jeremy. 5.28.

Thus says the Lord, Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver
the oppressed from the hand of the oppressor, and vex not the stranger, the
fatherless nor the widow. Do no violence, neither shed innocent blood in
this place, etc. Iere. 22.3.

The wicked like Lions catch the pray, rauishe widows, and devour men. Ezech.
19.6.7.

In thee, O wicked city Jerusalem, in thee I say, have they despised father
and mother, in the mids of thee have they oppressed the stranger, in thee
have they vexed the fatherless and the widow. Ezech. 22.7.

Thus says the Lord, Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion
every man to his brother, and oppress not a widow, nor the fatherless, the
stranger nor the poor. etc. Zacha. 7.9.

I will be near to you to (heavy) judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the soothsayers, and all the adulterers, and against false swearers,
and against all those, that wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages, and
vex the widows, and the fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear
not me says the Lord of ho^es. Mala. 3.5.

Come say the wicked, let us oppress the poor that is righteous, and let us
not spare the widdowe, nor reverence the white hairs of the aged. Wisd. 2.10.

Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hyppocrites, for ye devour widows
houses, even under a color of long prayer: wherefore ye shall receive the
greater damnation. Mat. 23. 14. Mark. 12.40.

There are a sort of hypocrites (says Saint Paul) which creep into houses,
and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts,
which women are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. 2. Tim. 3.6.

I tell you of a truth, (says Christ) many widows were in Israel in the
days of Elias, when heaven was shut three years and six months (and the
men dyed by reason of the great famine, that was generally over all the land:)
but unto none of those widows was Elias the Prophet sent, save unto a
certain poor widdowe in Sarepta, a City of Sydon. Luke. 4.25. Whom God had
commanded there to sustain him, as 1. Kings. 17.9.

Honor widows that are widows indeed, that is, take care for them that are
left alone, and have no manner of worldly means to help themselves with. But
if any widow have either children or nephews, let them her children, friends,
and kindred, learn first to show godliness and kindness toward their own
house, and to recompense their kindred, for that is an honest thing, and
acceptable before God. Contrariwise, if there be any that provides not for his
own, and namely for them of his household and kindred, he denies the faith,
and is worse then an infidel. 1. Tim. 5.3.

Moreover, let not a widow be taken into the number of those, that shall have
the relief of the Congregation, and be chargeable to the Church, under
threescore year old, that has been the wife of one husband, and well reported
of, being continually given to every good work. And refuse the younger
widows.

But if any faithful man or faithful woman have widows, let them minister
unto them, that is, let the child nourishe his mother being a widow, or the
kinsman or kinswoma^, relie^e her poor kinswoman, as nature binds them to
their ability: and let not the Church be charged with relieuing such widows
that have wealthy friends, that there may be sufficient for them that are
widows indeed, and lack friends and kinsfolks, and all other worldly
helps and means, to succor them. 1. Tim. 5. all.

When the number of the Disciples grew, there arose a murmuring of the
Grecians toward the Hebrwes, because their widows were neglected in the
daily ministering and distributing of the alms among the poor. Acts. 6.1.

Pure religion and undefiled before God, even the father, is this, to visit
the fatherless and widows in their adversities, and to keep himself
unspotted of the world. James. 1.27.

The Lord accepts not the person of the poor, but he hears the prayer of
the oppressed. The most high despises not the desire of the fatherless, nor
the widow when she powers out her prayer. Does not the tears run down
the widows cheeks? and her cry is against him that caused them, or wrong
the^ out by violence, injury, and oppression, [for from her cheeks do they
go up into heaven, and the Lord which hears her, does accept them, and put
those tears into his bottell.] And the Lord [which is a Judge of widowes]
will not be slack, nor the almighty [which is the God of vengeance] will not
tarry long from them: til he have smitten in sunder the loins of the
unmerciful, and avenged himself of the ungodly: till he have taken the
multitude of the cruel, and broken the scepter of the unrighteous: til he have
judged the cause of the widow, and comforted the fatherless and oppressed with
his mercy, and rewarded their enemies according to their deeds. Eccle. 35.13.

The duty of old women.
THe elder women likewise, teach and exhort, as mothers or matrones, that they
be sober, honest, discreet, sound in faith, in love, and in patience, and
that they be in such behavior as becomes holiness, not false accusers,
nor given to much wine: but teachers of honest things: that they may be able
[both with doctrine and good example of life] to instruct the young women to be
sober minded also, and that they love their husbands, that they love their
children, that they be discreet, chaste, keeping at home, not running to and
fro, without necessary occasion, which is a sign of lightness: that they be
good, virtuous, and subject to their husbands, yt the word of God be not evil
spoken of, etc. Titus. 2.3.

Cast away profane and old wives fables, and exercise your selves unto
godliness. 1. Tim. 4.7.

Ye shall not use witchcraft, nor observe times. Leuit. 19.26.

Let none be found among you, that makes her son or her daughter to go
through the fire, or that uses witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, or a
marker or obseruer of the flying of fowls, or a sorceresse, or a charmer, or
that counsaileth with spirits, or a soothsayer, or that asks counsel of
the dead, [as the witch of Endor did] for all that do such things are
abomination unto the Lord, and shall be stoned to death. Deuteronomy. 18.10.11.

Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Exodus 22.18.

Soothsaying, witchcrafte, and dreaming is but vanity, and a mind that is
occupied with fancies is as a woman that trauelleth. Eccle. 34.5.

The witches children, and the seed of the adultresse and the whore, are both
alike abominable and detestable to GOD. Esaias 57.3.

Three sorts of men [or women] my soul hates, and I utterly abhor the
life of them: A poor woman that is proud, and a rich woman that is a liar,
and an old woman that doteth in lust, and is become an adultresse. Eccle. 25.2.

Age is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way of righteousness [and
is joined with vertue] else the wickedder they are, the more they are to be
abhorred. Pro. 16.31.

The crown of the aged and old folks is to have much experience, and the
fear of God is their glory. Eccle. 25.34.

Oh how comely a thing is wisdom unto aged folk, and understanding and
prudencie to men and women of honor. Eccle. 25.4.5.

Speak thou that art the elder, for it becomes thee: but yet so that it be
with sound judgment, and hinder not music: power not out great sentences,
or words of importance, where there is no audience, and show not forth wisdom
out of time. Eccle. 32.3.

Oh how pleasant a thing is it when gray headed folks can behave them selves
justly, and when the elders can give good counsel. Eccle. 25.5.

The beauty of young women is their strength, and the glory of the aged is the
gray head. Pro. 20.29.

They that have gathered nothing in their youth, how should they find relief
and sustenance in their age. Eccle. 25.3.

They that are old in wicked life, the sins that they committed in their
youth, shall come to light to their destruction, as in Daniell 13. 52.
appears in the story of the two old leacherous Judges.

Though the wicked live long, yet shall they be nothing regarded, and their
last age shall be without honor. Wisd. 3.17.

But though the righteous be prevented with death, yet shall he be at rest.
For the honorable age is not that which is of long time, neither that which is
measured by the number of years: but wisdom is the gray hair, and an
undefiled life, is the old age. Wisd. 4.7^ 8.9.

Therefore better is a poor and wise child, then an old and foolish woman
that will not be admonished. Eccle. 4.13.

Yea, it is no shame for the aged to learn of the young: but a great shame and
rebuke for old folk to contend with youth, and to disdain to be instructed
of them. Eccle. 42.8.

Your strength is devoured and spent, yet ye know it not: yea gray hairs are
here and there upon you: yet will ^ee not know them to be tokens of your
manifold affliction for your sins. Hosea. 7.9.

The worthy praise and due commendation of all godly wise women, with their
virtuous properties, and commendable conditions.
Who so finds a virtuous woman, and is joined with her in marriage as his
wife, finds a good thing, and is blessed, or receives favor of the Lord.
Prou. 18.22.

House and riches may a man have by the heritage of his fathers or elders: but
a prudent wife, and discrete woman is the gift of the Lord, and comes of
him. Pro. 19.14.

A virtuous woman, is a noble gift of God, which shall be given for a good
portion unto such as fear God. Eccle. 26.3.

A faithful, honest, shamefast, and manerly woman, is a double grace and a
gift above other gifts: and there is no weight to be compared to her continent
mind. Eccle. 26.15.

A woman of few words, of a good heart, and a wife that is peaceable and wise,
is a special gift of God: and there is nothing so much worth as a woman well
instructed and nurtured. Eccle. 26.14.

A wicked woman is given as a reward to a wicked man: but a godly woman is
given to him that fears the Lord. Eccle. 26. 24.

He that has gotten a virtuous woman has a goodly possession, she is unto
him an help like unto himself, and a pillar to rest upon. Eccle. 36.24.

A wise woman is an heritage unto her husband. Eccle. 22. 4. 5.

A wise and good woman is a rich portion of the Lord, yea her grace is above
gold, and the gift of her honesty not to be valued. Eccle. 20.

Happy and blessed is the man that has a virtuous wife, for the number of his
years shall be double. Eccle. 26.1.

Well is he that dwells with a woman of understanding. Eccle. 25.

A friend and a companion come together at opportunity: but above them both is
a wife that agrees with her husband. Eccle. 40.23.

Three things rejoice my heart, and by them am I beautified before God and men.
The unity of brethren, the love of neighbors, and a man and wife that agree
well together. Eccle. 25.1.

Children and the building of the city, makes a perpetual name: but an
honest woman is counted above them both. Eccle. 40.19.

An honest woman makes her husband joyful, and she shall fill the years of
his life with peace. Eccle. 26.2.

Whether the man be rich or poor, he may have ever a merry heart, and a
cheerful countenance toward the Lord, that has a good wife. Eccle. 26.4.

For the grace of a good and loving wife reioiceth her husband, and feeds his
bones with her wisdom and understanding. Eccle. 26.

Yea, as the Sun when it arises, is an ornament in the high heavens of the
Lord: so is the virtuous woman and wife the beauty of her house. Eccle. 26.16.

A fair woman reioiceth her husband, and a man loves nothing better. Eccle.
36.23. Especially, if there be in her tongue gentleness, meekness, and
wholesome talk. For then is not her husband like other men. Eccle. 36.23.

For as the clear light is upon the holy candlestick: so is the beauty of the
face upon an honest body. Eccle. 26.7.

And like as the golden pillars are upon the sockets of silver, so are the
fair feet of a woman that has a constant mind. Eccle. 26.18.

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and was made with the
faithful in the mothers womb: it shall go with the chosen women, and shall be
known of the righteous and ^aithfull. Eccle. 1.15.

Perpetual are the foundations that are laid upon a strong rock: so are the
commandementes of God in the heart of an holy woman. Eccle. 26.19.

A good woman is a fountain of blessedness, and joy of life, she will be as
the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, delighting her husband continually. Prou.
5.18.

A gracious and modest matron atteineth honor: and the strong men get riches,
Prou. 11.16.

An holy woman will worship the Lord: and she that is shamefast will reverence
her husband. Eccle. 25.

For a woman that honors her husband shall be judged wise of all: but she
that is shameless, and despises her husband shall be blased for her pride.
Eccle. 26.27.

A holy woman that is married, is counted as a tower against death to her
husband. Eccle. 26.23.

Yea, a virtuous and huswifely woman is the crown of her husband. Pro. 12.4.

A wise woman builds her house, by taking pain to profit her family, and
to do that which concerns her duty in her house: but the foolish wife
plucketh it down, and destroieth it with her own idle hands. Pro. 14.1.

For where no hedge is, there the possession or goods are spoiled: and where no
huswife is [there the husband and family lacks, and the] friendlesse
mourns. Eccle. 36.25.

Therefore, who so finds a virtuous, honest, faithful, and a painful
woman, says Bethsabe to her son Solomon, he is blessed of God, for she is
far more worth then pearls and precious stones. Pro. 31.10. etc.

For the heart of her husband may safely trust in her (wheresoever he goes:)
so that he shall be sure neither to fall into poverty, nor to have need to
fall to robbing and spoiling of other, nor to use any unlawful shifts, or
wicked means to get his living. Pro. 31.

Yea, she will do him good, and not evil all the days of her life.

She occupies wool and flax, and labors gladly and cheerfully with her
hands.

She is like a Merchants ship, that brings her victuals from a far
country,

She is up in the night season to provide meat betimes for her household, and
work and food for her maidens.

She considers land, and purchases it with the true gotten gains of her
sore travel: and with the fruit of her hands, she planteth a Uineyarde.

She girdeth her loins with strength, and fortifieth her arms to labor, and
if she perceives that her huswiferie or merchandise does good: her candle
goes not out by night.

She lays her fingers to the spindle, and her hands takes hold of the
distaffe.

She opens her hands to the poor, yea she stretches forth her hands to
such as have need [and relieueth them with her liberality.]

She fears not the cold and snow of the Winter, neither shall the storms
thereof hurt her, or her household: for all her family, and household folk
(by her industry) are clothed with scarlet [and warmely prepared to endure
cold weather.]

She makes her self carpets, and fair ornaments for (household stuff) her
clothing and garments also is white silk, purple and ^ine linen.

Her husband also is much known, and set by in the gates and assembly of the
Judges and Magistrates, when he sits among the rulers of the land.

She makes fine linen, and cloth of silk, and sells it, and delivers
girdles unto the merchant.

Strength and honor is her clothing, or the inward apparel of her spirit,
and in the latter day she shall rejoice.

She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of grace,
[yea her tongue (I say) is as a book whereby on^ may learn many good things]
for she delights to talk of the law, and word of God reverently.

She ouerseeth and looks well to the ways of her family and household, and
eats not her bread with idleness.

Her children rise up and call her blessed, or do her reverence and ask her
blessing: and her husband shall make much of her, and praise her, saying:

Many daughters there be that have done virtuously, and gathered riches
together: but thou surmountest them all.

Give her therefore of the fruit of her own hands: and let her own works
praise her in the gate. Forasmuch (I say) as the most honorable are clad in
the apparel that she has made, confess her diligent labors, and give her,
her due deserved commendation therefore.

For as for favor it is deceitful, and beauty is but a vain thing: but a
woman that [is huswifely] and fears the Lord, shall be praised and commended
both of God and men. Pro. 31.10. etc.

And she that is continually given to every good work, shall be well
reported of for her virtues. 1. Tim. 5.10. Read more of the praise of women in
virgins, wives, etc.

The Kings daughter is glorious within. Psalm. 45.14.

Moreover, that women are to be praised, and highly commended of all, for
their creation and necessary use we may see in the first woman, and great
grandmother of all women, Eve or Heua, who as she was the last creature that
God made in Paradise: So was she not made of the very material moulde of the
earth, as the man Adam and other creatures were: but of a more excellent
substance, not of the head nor of the foot, but even of the rib or bone taken
out of the side of man, which God did to the end she should not be his Lady,
nor handmaid, but bone of the man's bones, and flesh of his flesh, and indeed
most dear and near unto him, in equality of love and friendship, and the
best and most natural help and comfort meets for man in all his sickness and
infirmities: and therefore is she called woman, because she was taken out of
man. For before the woman was created, God taking a general view of all his
other creatures that he had made of the earth, could not find one worthy
enough to accompany man in human society and fellowship: therefore God
created the woman, as a very necessary helper and mate meet for man only. Yea,
before the woman was created, mankind was imperfect and like an unfinished
building: but when she was formed and made, then the work of mankind was
fully finished and made perfect for the propagation of man, and his increase
upon earth, as ye may read in the life of Heua in the 7. Lamp of Uirginitie.
Gene. 1. and 2. etc.

In woman did God first make his promise of the blessed seed to comfort man,
saying. The seed of the woman shall tread down the head of the serpent.
Gene. 3.

The woman is the glory of the man, or receives her glory in commendation of
man, and therefore is subject, as the man is the Image and glory of God, or the
image of Gods glory in whom his majesty and power does shine concerning his
authority, for ye man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man, neither
was the man created for the woman's sake: but the woman for the man's sake.
Therefore ought the woman to have power on her head: (that is something to cover
her head as well when she prays as at all other times, in sign of
subjection) because of the Angels, to whom they also show their dissolution and
not only to Christ. Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman,
neither the woman without the man in the Lord who is author and mainteyner of
their mutual conjunction. For as God made the woman of man, so now is man
multiplied by the woman, for as the woman is of the man, so is the man also by
the woman, but all things are of God. 1. Cor. 11.7. etc.

Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair (as women
use to wear) it is a shame unto him? but if a woman have long hair, it is a
praise unto her: for her long hair is given unto her of God for a covering, or
to the end she should trusse it up about her head, to declare that she must
cover her head. 1. Cor. 11.14. 15.

Honor is to be given of the man unto the woman as unto the weaker vessel,
and yet as fellow heir together with man of life everlasting. 1. Pet. 3 7.

Also, that women are worthy to be praised and duly commended for their faith,
religion, repentance, love and obedience to God and his word, it is manifest
by the examples of Anna, Bernice, Candaces O. the Cananitesse of Damaris,
Dorcas, Elizabeth, Eunice, Huldah, Ioanna, Lydea, Loyis, Marie the Uirgin,
Marie Magdalen, and all the other Mary's, Martha, Phebe, Persis, Priscilla,
Philips 4. daughters, Rahab, Ruth, Samaritesse, both the Saraes, Susanna,
Salomen, Triphona, Triphosa, the woman of Abell, the woman with the bloody
issue, Sarepta, the mother of the 7. sons of the Machabees, and other, as you
may read at large in their several lives and stories.

And that women are to be extolled for their holiness, devotion, fear of God,
justice, uprightness, and other like virtue and godliness, it evidently
appears by the lives of these most holy and devout women: viz. Anna, Debora,
Cananitesse, Elizabeth, Ester, Hanna, Hagar, Hulda, Ioanna, Iudi. Lady
co^me^ded of S. Ioh. Leah, Loyis, Lydea, Marie ye virgin, ye other Mary's,
Rahel, Rezpa, Sara ye wife of Abraham, Sara the wife of Tobit, Susanna,
Philippe the Evangelists four daughters.

Likewise that women are to be praised for their excellent wit, wisdom,
learning, prophesiyng, skill in arts, policy in government, strength, audacitie
to bring mighty memorable things, and worthy valiant acts to pass for the
delivery of them selves and Gods people: It does most notably appear in the
lives and stories of these famous and godly women, Deborah, Queen Hester,
Iaell, Judith, the woman of Abell, Abigail, Bethsabe, the mother of the quick
child before Solomon, Micholl, the queen of Saba, the Shunamitisse, Hulda,
Hanna, Sara the daughter of Raguel, Sara, Rebecca, Rahab, Ruth, Elizabeth, ye
virgin Marie, Marie Magdalen, the mother of the seven sons in the Machabees,
Miriam, Naomie, the woman of Tekoa, Phillip the Evangelists four daughters
virgins, Pilates wife, the woman of Thibez. Also of Sherah, that built three
great cities, of the Shunamites yt built a house or lodging for the man of God,
and recovered her possession, and of ye importunate widow of Samaria, and of
Rispa that built a tent over the dead carcasses of her sons etc. whose
stories are both worth the diligent reading, and often imitating of all the
godly.

Again, that women are to be greatly lauded, and of all imitated for their
courtesy, hospitality, liberality, alms deeds, and good works: Ye may
read in the lives of Abigail, Dorcas, Ioanna, Judith, Lydea, Marie the mother
of James, Marie Magdalen, Martha, Marie the mother of John, Mark, Phebe,
Priscilla, Rahab, Rebecca, the virgin Marie, the poor widows, the woman of
Bahurim, Saphi^a, Sarepta, Shunamitesse, Susanna, Triphona, and Triphosa,
Tali^ha widow of Jerusalem etc. whose good works as they all proceeded of a
lively faith the had in God, so are they to be commended and imitated
continually of all the true faithful children of God, to his glory, and the
benefit of his Church and congregation.

Furthermore, that women are to be praised for their fidelity, love,
reverence, good counsel, and obedience toward their husbands: it may appear
in the stories of Adah, Abigail, Bethsheba, Drusilla, Hester, Michol, Phinees
wife, Rahell, Rebecca, Sara, Zillah, Pilates wife, the virgin Marie, Elizabeth.

As also for their motherly care, natural love, and virtuous education of
their chlidren, it is evident in Anna, the woman of Canaan, Edna, Hanna, Hagar,
Iehosheba, Loyis, Lady commended of S. John, Marie the virgin, Naomy,
Ieroboams wife, Rizpa, Rebecca, Samsons mother, the mourning mother, as in
Esdras, mother of the seven brethren, the widow of Sarepta and of Nahum.

And for their courtesy and kindness toward their alience kindred and
acquaintance, ye may read in the lives of Bethsheba, Elizabeth, Ester,
Iehosheba, Marie the virgin, Marie Magdale^, Rahel, and sundry others.

Besides, for their obedience and good behavior toward their parents,
governors and betters, ye may see in the story of Ester, Iepthas daughter,
Ruth, Orpah, Sara, Abra, Hagar.

Moreover, such women as were praised for their nobility, royal parentage,
great riches and estimation in the world, were Elizabeth, Naomy, Marie the
virgin, Lady commended by S. John, Shunamitesse, Sara the wife of Abraham, the
woman of Abell, Judith, Debora, and many others.

Such as were poor and godly, were Anna, Marie the virgin, Naomy, Sarepta,
Shunamitesse.

Such as were commended for their beauty, chastity, modesty, and virginity,
were Abigail, Abisage, Bethsabe, Dinah, Ester, Heua, Iephtas daughter, Ieminah,
and all Iobes daughters, Judith, Kezia, Rerenhapha, Marie the virgin, Rebecca,
Rahell, Sara, Susanna, Thamar the daughter of David, Uasti, etc. Ruth Anna.

Such as are praised for their womanly pity and compassion to shed innocent
blood, are Puah, and Shiphrah, the two godly midwiues of Egypt, Rahab the wife
of Bahurim, the mother of the quick child before Solomon, Hester, the virgin
Marie, Pharaos daughter ye preserved Moses, Ihosheba that saved Ioas her
brother from the blooddy hands of Athalia, and Pilates wife, who counseled
her husband in no wise to consent to shed the innocent blood of our savior
Christ, etc.

Such as are woorthily commended for their Industry, sore labor and pains
taking for their living and sustenance, are Anna, Heua, Lydea, Naomy, Ruth,
Dorcas, etc. as may appear in their lives and stories more at large in the 7.
Lamp.

Suc^e as are to be praised for their patience in adversity and humility
under the cross, are Hanna, Hagar, Iepthas daughter, Leah, Marie the virgin,
Susa^na, Sara the wife of Tobie, and many other.

Finally, such as are for their obedience to God, more then man, and for their
constancy in the truth, chose rather to suffer persecution, yea violent death
and martyredome, then to offend god, are most highly to be extolled and had in
admiration and remembrance to all posterity: are these godly and virtuous
zealous women, Puah, Shiphrah Rahab, Iepthas daughter, Hanna, Hagar, Leah,
Marie the Uirgin, Sara the wife of Tobit, Susanna, the woman of the Machabites,
and the mother of the seven sons of the Machabits the lambs wife our
virtuous sovereign Queen Elizabeth, etc. as to their perpetual renown, and
all faithful Christians godly example may and does appear to ye delige^t
reader in the several lives of these holy women, set forth in the 7. Lamp.

The disprayse of wicked and foolish women.
A Wicked woman is given as a reward to a wicked man. Eccle^ 26.24.

I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is as nets and snares,
and her hands as bands: he that is good before God shall be delivered from
her: but the sinner shall be taken by her. Eccle. 7.28.

A shameless woman contemns shame, and is compared to a dog. Eccle. 26^25.

She that dispiseth her husband, shall be blased for her pride. Ec^le. 26.27.

She that makes her husband ashamed, or behaueth her self dishonestly, is a
corruption in his bones. Prou. 12.4.

A fair woman without discreet manners, is like a ring of gold in a swines
snowt Prou. 12.22.

A foolish daughter shall be little regarded, and she that lives dishonestly
is her fathers heaviness. Eccle. 22.3.

She that is bold and past shame, dishonors both her father and her
husband, the ungodly shall regard her [because she is not inferior unto them
in wickednesse] but both her father and her husband shall despise her [for her
folly and wickednesse] Eccle. 22.4.

A dronken woman, and such a one as can not be tamed is a great plague, for
she can not cover her own shame. Eccle. 26.8.

The wickedness of the man is better then the good entreaty of a woman, (to
wit) of a woman that is in shame and reproach: for it is better to be with
an ill man, then with a friendely woman that puts one to shame and rebuke.
Eccle. 42. 14.

Ye adulterers and women that break matrimony, know ye not that the
friendship of the world is enmity with God? Iam. 44.

There are some simple women laden with sins, and led with di^ers lusts,
which are ever learning, and yet are never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. 2. Timo. 3.6.

Pride was not created in men, neither wrath in the generation of women. Eccle.
10.19.

The greatest heaviness is the heaviness of the heart, and the greatest
malice is the malice of a woman. Eccle. 25.14.

Give me any plague save only the plague of the heart: and any malice save
the malice of a woman, for all wickedness is nothing to the wickedness of a
woman. 25.15.

Give me any assault save the assault of the heart: or any vengeance save the
vengeance of the enemy or woman. 16.

There is not a more wicked head then the head of a serpent, and there is no
wrath above the wrath of a woman. Eccle. 25.17.

All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman, the portion of the
ungodly shall fall upon her. Eccle. 25.21.

I had rather dwell with a Lion and Dragon, then to keep house with a wicked
wife. Eccle. 25.18.

It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, then with a brawling or
contentious woman in a wide house. Prou. 21.9.25. 24.

For a brawling and contentious woman is like the top of an house,
wherethrough it is ever dropping with rain, that rotteth the house Prou.
19.13.27.15.

And as the clyming up of a sandy way is to the feet of the aged: even so is a
wife full of words to a quiet man. Eccle. 25.22.

A loud crying woman and a babbler, let her be sought out to drive away the
enemies, the mind of every man that lives with such, shall be conversant
among the troubles of war. Eccle. 25.28.

The double or prattling tongue, has cast out many virtuous and honest women,
and robbed them of their labors. Eccle. 28.15.

The wrath of a woman is dishonor and great confusion, if a woman got the
maisterie, then is she contrary to her husband, or if a woman nourishe her
husband, she is angry, and impudent, and full of reproach, and vpbraydyngs.
Eccle. 25.24.

A wicked wife makes a sorry heart, an heavy countenance, and a wounded
mind: weak hands, and fee^le knees, is a woman that her husband is not the
better for, or that can not comfort him in heaviness Eccle. 25.25.

When one has an evil wife, it is even as when an unlike pair of Oxe^ are
yoked and must draw together. He that has her, is as though he held a
Scorpion. Eccle. 26.7.

Set a good lock where an evil wife is. Eccle. 42.6.

Accompany not amongst beautiful women, for as the moath comes out of
Garments, so does wickedness of the women. Eccle. 42.13.

Ask no counsel of a woman, touching her of whom she is ielous. Eccle. 37.11.

For when one woman is ielous over an other, it brings pain, grief, and
sorrow unto the heart. And she that communeth with all, or tells out all
things that she hears, is a scourge of the tongue. Eccle. 26.6.

The wickedness of a woman changes her face, she shall muffle her
countenance as it were a Bear, and as a sack shall she show it black among
her neighbors.

Her husband is brought to shame thereby among his neighbors, because of her,
and when he hears it, it makes him to sigh ere he be aware as he sits
among his friends. Eccle. 25.19.20.

For three things the earth is moved, yea for four it cannot sustain it
self: viz. For a servant when he reigns: for a fool when he is filled with
meat: for the hateful woman when she is married, and for a handemaide that is
heir to her maistresse, or which is married to her master, after the death of
her maistresse. Prou. 3. 21.23.

Give the water no passage, no not a little: neither a wicked woman liberty to
gadde abroad at her will: For if she walk not after thine hand, or in thine
obedience, she shall confound thee in the sight of thine enemy. Cut her
off then from thy flesh, give her the bill of deuorce, and forsake her that
she do not always abuse thee. Eccle. 25.27.28.

Moreover, that women, yea and those of the godlyest sort, had their
imperfections, infirmities, and faults worthy reprehension and disprayse,
and which are manifested and laid open by the holy Ghost in the Scriptures,
not to be followed, but shunned and avoided, it may appear in the first woman
Heua: who was the first sinner. For of the woman Heua, says Solomon, Eccle.
25.26. came the beginning of sin, and through her we all dye. And S. Paul
he says, 1. Timo. 2.14. Adam was not deceived, but the woman was deceived
and was in the transgression, (that is, the woman was first deceived, and so
became the instrument of satan to deceive the man, and was guilty of the
transgression.) Or the occasion was first offered by the woman to transgress,
but the sin was finished by the man consenting thereunto: and so is that true
yt S. Paul to the Romans the 5. chap. ver. 12. says, yt by one man sin entered
into ye world, and death by sin, and so death went over all men, forasmuch
as all men have sinned.

Behold says the preacher, Eccle. This have I found seeking one by one, to
find out the count and come to a conclusion, and yet my soul seeks, but I
find it not. I have found one man of a thousand: but a woman among them all
have I not found. For Solomon having a thousand wives, yet found not one
that was perfectly good. Eccle. 7.29.10.

The wine is wicked, the king is wicked, women are wicked, and all the children
of men are wicked: but truth abides, and is strong for ever, and lives and
reigns for ever and ever. 1. Esdra. 4.3.

Such as the holy Ghost discommendeth and condemns for their Idolatrye,
superstition, and irreligon, were Athalya, Iesabel, Maacha, Rahell, for
stealing her father Labans Idol, by means whereof her husband Jacobs houle was
long corrupted with superstition, as appears Gene. 35.2. Mickas mother. The
mourning women of the Jews, as appears Iere. 9.20. Ezec. 8.17. The
Idolatrous women of Phatures. Iere. 44.15.

Such women as were contemners of religion, mockers of Christ, and notable
troublers, and persecuters of his saints, were Iesabel, Michol, Zeresh, the
woman of Samaria, Caiphas the hie priests Maidens. Matthew. 26.69.

Such as lacked faith and were too much addicted to the bodily or carnal
presence of Christ, were Sara that laughed at the Angels words, Marie Magdalen
that would needs touch Christ newly risen.

Such as are abhorred for their unnatural cruelltie, abominable tyranny and
blooddy factes, are Athalia, Herodias, Iesabell, the Harlot and mother of the
dead child before Solomon.

Such as used too much dissimulation, hypocrisy, flattery, subornation,
cosoning, subtlety and craft, were Heua, Judith, Michol, Samsons wife, Iabel,
Rahab, Iesabell, Rebecca, Saphira, Sara Abraham's wife, Putiphers wife, the
woman of Tecoah, Herodias, Saphira, the Ido. Lottes daughters, Rahel, the
midwiues of Egypt, the Moabites women.

Such as used vile witchecraft, sorcerie, and devilish inchauntmentes,
contrary to Gods Laws, were Iesabell, the witch of Endor, the woman and her
maid of Phillippie.

Such as are to be dispraysed for their incontinencie of life, or that
committed filthy fornication, whoredom and uncleanness, to the condemnation
of their own souls and destruction of many others, were Aholah, Aholibah,
Bethsabe with David, Cozby, Dalila, Herodias, Iesabell, Levites wife, Lottes
two daughters, Putiphers wife, Binhamie, Marie Magdalen, Rahab, Rizpah, Tamar
with her father in law, the woman of Samaria, the woman taken in adultery,
the whore of Babylon. Dinah also though not volentarily, yet lost her
virginity, at 15. years of age, by taking of too much liberty to go to
marriages and feating: and so did Tamar the daughter of David, leese her
virginity at 14. years of age, being forced by her half brother: as you may
read in their several stories.

Such virgins, as through taking too much liberty, wantonness and dancing,
were deflowred and violently ravished, were Dinah, the daughter of Sylo.
Thamar, David's daughter, Iobes daughters.

Such as were too impudent bold with men, and paste all shame, were Appam,
dalilah, Putiphars wife, Herodias, Salomen her daughter.

Such as were strong in wickedness to overcome men, were Salomons concubines,
Samsons wife, Dalila, Caiphas maidens, Mat. 26.69. Salomen, and Appam, of whom,
and by whose impudency and boldness with Darius the King, Zorobabell one of
his guard, took occasion to put forth this wise sentence on commendation of
wome^s strength, and to prove that they were stronger then either the king, or
wine, saying as follows:

O ye men, neither the mighty king, nor many men, nor wine is strongest: who
then rules them or has dominion over them? are they not women? women have
borne the king, and all the people which bear rule by sea and by land, even
of them were they borne, and they nourished them which planted the vines, of
which the wine is made. They also make men's garments, and make men honorable,
neither can men be without women. And if they have gathered together gold and
silver, or any goodly thing, do they not love a fair and beawtifull woman? do
they not leave all those things, and give them selves wholly unto her, and
gape and gaze upon her: and all men desire her more then gold or silver, or
any precious thing? A man leaves his own father which has nourished him, and
his own country, and is joined with his wife, and for the woman he regards
not his life, and neither remembers father, nor mother, nor country.
Therefore by this ye may know that the women bare rule over you: do ye not
labor and travel, and give and bring all to the women? Yea, man takes his
sword, and goes forth to kill and to steal, and to sail upon the sea, and
upon rivers, and he sees a Lion, and goes in darkness, and when he has
stolen, ravished, and spoiled, he brings it to his love. Wherefore, a man
loves his own wife more, then father or mother: Yea many have run mad for
women, and have been servants for them. Many also have perished, and have erred
and sinned for women. Now therefore do ye not believe me? Is not the king
Darius great in power, insomuch that all regions fear to touch him: Yet saw I
him and Appa^ his concubine, sitting on his right hand, and taking his crown
off his head, and putting it upon her own, and stroke the king with her left
hand: whiles the king in the mean season did nothing but gape and gase upon
her, and if shee^ laughed at him, then he laughed: but if she were angry with
him, then was he fame to flatter her, yt he might be reconciled with her. Now
then, Dye men, does not this mine example prove unto you, that women are
stronger then men, seeing they do this to so mighty a king. 1. Esdr. 4.14.
etc.

Such as through abominable pride, paynting their faces, and decking their
bodies with superfluous attire, were therefore miserably overthrown, were
Iesabell, Tamar the wife Ouan and Er, Uasti, the whore of Babylon, but Judith
and Ester, used that to another end, read Isa. 3.

Such as were deformed in body, was Leahi.

Such as were a grief of mind to their parents through disobedience and
rebellion, were Bethshemath, and Judith her sister, to Isaak and Rebecca, their
father and mother in Law, Michol ^o Saul, Rahel and Lea, that untruly
disclaymed in her fathers right or heritage.

Such as despised their dames, and disobeyed their mistress, were Hagar, the
maids of Sara Tobits wife, and all concubines.

Such as dealt roughly and hardly with their handmaids, were Sara the wife of
Abraham, and Sara the wife of Tobit.

Such as murmured, grudged, and repined at their kindred, and others prosperity
or welfare, were Myriam, Martha, Sara, Lea, Rahell.

Such as are dispraysed and noted for their covetous minds, are Heua, A^sah,
Iesabel, Athalia, Hester, the mother of Zebedees sons, the importunate widow.

Such as gave wicked counsel and sinester perswatio^ to their husbands and
others, to their overthrow, were Athalia, Herodias, Heua, Iesabell, Rebecca,
Zeresh.

Such as gave their handmaids to their husbands for concubines, and
procreation, because they themselves were barren, where they distrusted Gods
providence, or otherwise coueted or desired children unlawfully, were Sara,
Leah, Rahell, Lots daughters, the woman of the dead child before Salomon^ etc.

Such wives as were rebellious, contemners, vnfaith^ull and disobedient to
their husbands, were Abigail that called her husband Naball fool, Ahinoam,
that was rebellious to Saul, Anna, that said to Tob^ when he was struck blind,
where are now thy alms and good deeds become^ etc. Hold thy peace, deceine me
not, etc. Iesabel, who said to Achab, thou know not what it is to reign:
Command and entreat not. Iobes wife, who was an instrument of Satan, tempted
her husband in his affliction, saying, do thou continue yet in thy
vprightnes, curse God and die? etc. Lots wife who looked back, and went not
forward with her husband as god comanded. Michol, who derided David for dancing
before ye arc, and called him fool for his zeal in Gods service. Rahell, who
reproched her husband of vnfruitfullnes, saying, give me children, or else I
die. Rebecca, ye dissembled with her blind husband Isaak, to disinherite her
eldest son for her youngest. Sara, that chid her husband, saying, thou do
me wrong, etc. the Lord judge between me and thee. Sa^sons first wife, yt by
importancie, understanding his riddle, reueiled it to her countrymen against
her husbands profit, yea, to his great hinder^ace and hurt. Putiphars wife, yt
would have defiled her husbands bed, and lien with her man Joseph. Uastie, yt
utterly refused to come to her husband when he sent so often for her. Zipporah,
yt reproched her sick husband Moses saying, Oh blooddy husband, thou art in
deed a blooddy husband to me, etc.

Such as were negligent in the good education and bringing up of their
children, and otherwise were unnatural and pitilesse toward them, were
Hagar, Rebecca, the mother of the dead child.

Such as are noted for their foolish words and speeches, are Hena, Sara^ Rahel,
Samsons wife, Dalila, Michol, Anna Tobits wise, yt ha^dmaids of Sara, Raguels
daughter, the mother of the dead child, the wife of Haman, Jobs wife, the
mother of Zebidees sons, the maid that made Peter forswear himself, Mat. 26.
the woman of Samaria.

Such as ran away and forsook their own husbands, or became wives to other
men, leaving their first husbands, were Cliopatra, Michol, Levites wife,
Samsons first wife.

Such as were deuorced and put away by their husbands for their vices, were
Baara, Uasti,

Finally, such as by Gods secret and just judgment for their horrible and
sinful wicked lives, came to a violent death, and shameful end, were
Athalia, who was slain, Cozby, that was thrust quite through with a swords
playing the harlot, Iesabel that was thrown out of her window, and eaten with
dogs, Maacha that was deposed by her own son from her reign. Saphira, that
was struck with suddayne death at the Apostles feet, Levites wife, that fell
down stark dead at the door, Samsons first wife, that was burnt with fire,
the whore of Babylon, and the five foolish Uirgines that went down quick into
hell. From the which good Lord deliver us.

The description of an Harlotte, and disprayse of an Whore, with Christian and
Ghostly exhortations to the Godly, to beware of her poisoned bayte, pestilent
properties, and crafty conditions: and not to suffer them selves sottishly to
be deceived by her.
AS I was in the window of my house (says Solamon,) I looked through the
lettesse, and saw and considered among the fools, and children, a young man
void of wit, and destitute of understanding, who passed through the streets
by her corner, and went toward her house, in the twilight of the Evening, when
the night began to be black (for there was almost none so impudent, but they
were afraid to be seen, and also their own consciences did accuse them, which
caused them to seek the night to cover their filthiness.)

And behold, there met him a woman with open tokens, the garment and
behavior of an harlot, and subtle in heart, which only was hid. She was full
of babbling and loud words, and ready to dally: whose feet can not abide in
her house, now she is without, now in the street, and lies in wait at
every corner. (So she caught him and kissed him, and with an impudent face and
shameless countenance, she said unto him: I have peace offerings, or meat
at home to make good cheer with). This day also have I paid my vows and
made satisfaction for my sins, so holy and religious will Harlottes seem to
be outwardly: both because they may the better deceive others, and under a
cloak of holiness to get them into her snares. Therefore came I forth to meet
thee, that I might seek thy face, and so have I found thee. I have decked my
bed with couerings or ornaments of tapistrie, and clothes of Egypt. I have
perfumed my bed with Myrhe, Aloes, and Cynamon. Come let us take our fill of
love until the morning, and let us solace our selves, and take our pleasure in
daliaunce: For mine husband is not at home, he is gone a journey far off:
he has taken with him the bag of money, and will return home at the day
appointed (and not before.)

Thus with her great craft and sweet words she overcame him, and caused him
to yield, and with her flattering lips, she entised him: And he followed
her straight ways, even as an Ox led to the slaughter, which thinking he
goes to the pasture, goes in deed willingly to his own death and
destruction: And as a fool, that laugheth when he goes to the stocks to be
punished: so long went he after her, till she had wounded his liver with a
darte: as a bird hastes to the snare, not knowing that he is in danger, and
that the peril of his life lies thereupon.

Hear me now therefore, O my children, and hearken unto the words of my
mouth. Let not thine heart wander or declyne to her ways, and be not thou
deceived in her paths, for many a one has she wounded and cast down: Yea,
many a strong man has been slain by the means of her. Her house is the hie
way to Hell, and brings men down into the chaumbers of death and
destruction, (so that neither wit, nor strength can deliver them that fall into
the hands of an harlot.) Prou. 7.6. etc.

My son, let wisdom (I say) enter into thine heart, and let thy soul
delight in knowledge, that thou may be delivered from the strange woman (or
Harlot) and from her that is not thine own, which flattereth and gives sweet
words, even from her I say whithe forsakes the guide of her youth, (her
husband I mean) which is her guide to govern her, from whom she ought not to
depart, but remain in his subjection, and which woman forgets the covenant
of her God, or promise made in marriage. For surely her house (that is, her
acquayntance, with her familiers, and them that haunt her) tends to death,
and her pathe unto them that are dead both in body and soul.

All they that go in unto her return not again, neither take they hold of
the ways of life: Therefore walk thou in the ways of good men, and such as
be virtuous, and keep the paths of the righteous, for the just shall dwell
in the land, but the wicked shall be rooted out. Prou. 2.10. etc.

A foolish retchlesse woman full of words, and such a one as is troublesome,
ignorant, and has no knowledge nor fear of God, (that is an harlot) sits
at the door of her house, and on a seat in the high places, (and common
meetinges) of the City, to call them that pass by the way, and go right in
their paths: saying, who so is simple and ignorant, let him come hither: and
to him that is destitute of wisdom, she says also, Stolen waters are sweet,
and the hid bread privily eaten is pleasant, and has a good taste. But he
poor soul knows not, neither does consider that they are but dead which
are there, and that her ghestes are in the deapth of Hell. Prou. 9.13. etc.

Therefore my son, give me thine heart, yea give thy self wholly to wisdom,
that folly hurt thee not this way, and let thine eyes delight in my ways: for
the commandment is a lantern or lamp, lighting and instructing thee in the
way of life, to keep thee from the wicked woman, and from the flattering,
dissembling tongue of a strange woman. Prou. 23.26.6.23.

Cast not thy mind upon harlots I say in any manner of thing, least thou
destroy both thy self and thy heritage and patrimony, as the prodigal son
did. Prou. 9.6.

Desire not her company, neither lust after her beauty in thine heart, but
beware she take thee not with her fair looks, and wanton gesture. Prou. 6.25.

For by an harlot, a man is brought to beg a morsel of bread and a whorishe
woman will hunt for the precious life of a man. Pro. 6.26.

Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? or can a man
go upon coals, and his feet not be burnt? Even so he that goes into his
neighbors wife and touches her, shall not be innocent nor vnguyltie: (Yea
she will never cease till she have brought him to beggerie, and then seek
his destruction). Prou. 6.23. etc.

There are three things which are never satisfied, yea four that cry never
hoe, it is enough: viz. The grave, the earth, the fire, and the barren womb of
an harlot. Prou. 30.16.

Gaze not on a maid, that thou be not hurt in her beauty, and fall by that
which is precious in her. Eccle. 9.5.

Go not about gazing I say in every lane or street of the City, neither
wander thou in the secret corners and privy places thereof.

Turn away thy face and eye from a beautiful woman, and look not upon the
fayrnesse of other: for many have perished and been deceived by the beauty of
women: for through it love is kindled as it were a fire. Eccle. 9.7,8.

Look not too narrowly upon the beauty of a women, least thou be provoked in
desire toward her. Eccle. 25.25.

The whoredom of a woman may be known in the pride of her eyes, and eye
liddes: Take heed of her therefore that has an unshamefast eye, and merueyle
not if she cause thee to trespass, for as one that goes by the way and is
thirsty: so shall she open her mouth and drink of every next water, yea, by
every hedge will she sit down and open her quiver against every arrowe, and
so make her self common to every man that passes by. Eccle. 26.9. etc.

An harlot is compared to a sow, and a shameless woman to a dog. Eccle.
26.23.25.

As a whore hates an honest woman, so shall righteousness hate iniquity when
she decketh her self, and shall accuse her openly. 2. Esdr. 16.42.

All bread is sweet to the whore and whoremonger, they will not leave off till
they both perish, and come to utter shame and destruction. Eccle. 23.17.

What my son Lamuel? and what the son of my womb? and what Oh my derely
beloved son? (says Bethsheba unto her son king Solamon) give not thy
strength and ways unto women, which are the destruction eue^ of many kings, if
they haunt the^: O Lamuell, it is not for kings, it is not for kings I say, to
drink wine, nor for princes strong drink, (or give them selves to
wantonness, and neglect their office. Prou. 31.12. etc.

For wine and women lead wise men out of the way, put men of understanding to
reproof, (make the mighty miserable) and the (rich) runnagates,. Eccle. 19.2.

Yea, he that companieth adulterers, shall become impudent, rottonnesse and
worms shall have him to heritage: And he that is too bold, shall be taken
away, and made a public example. Eccle. 19. 3.

Therefore my son, keep thy strength of thine age stable, and give not thy
strength to strangers. Eccle. 26.20.

Give not the power of thy life I say un to a woman, least she overcome thy
strength, and so thou be confounded. Eccle. 9.2.

Meet not an Harlot, neither look thou upon a woman that is desirous of many
men's felowships, least thou fall into her snares. Eccle. 9.3.

Use not the company of a woman that is a player, a singer, and a daunser,
neither hear her, least thou perish through her intising. and be taken by
her craftiness. Ecele. 9.4.

For there be three things hid from me [saith Solomon,] yea, four that I
k^owe not: The way of an Egle in the air, the way of a Serpent upon a stone,
the way of a Ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a woman.
Prou. 30.19.

Yea, such is the way also of a wife, or adulterous woman that breaks
wedlock: for she eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have not committed
iniquity, so finely can she counterfaite when she has her desires, and cast
a miste before her husbands eyes, making as though she were an honest woman
Prou. 30.20.

The mouth of a strange woman is as a deep pit, he with whom the Lord is
angry, shall fall therein, (so God punishes one sin by an other, when he
suffers the wicked to fall into ye acquaintance of an harlot.) Prou. 22.14.

A wicked woman is given as a reward to a wicked man. Eccle. 26^24.

A whore is a deep ditche or (gaping) grave, (easily to fall into) and a
strange woman is a narrow pit, (hard to get out off.) She lies in wait
also, as for a pray, and she increases the transgressions amongst men, by
seducing and causing them to offend God. prou. 23.26. etc.

The lips of a strange woman (or harlotte, that gives her self to another
man, then to or besides her husband) drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is
more soft then butter, and her throat more glistering then oil, (her
flattering and inticementes are most subtle and smoothe to beguile men with.)
But the end of her is bitter as woormewood, and as sharp as a two edged
sword. Her feet go down to death, her steps peerce through, and take
hold of Hell, (and all her dooinges tend to destruction) she weighs not
the way of life, her paths are moveable, so unsteadfast are her ways that thou
can not know the^, for she has ever new means to allure men unto
wickedness and folly.

Hear me now therefore O children, and depart not from the words of my
mouth, keep thy way far from her, and come not near the door of her house,
least thou give thine honor [euen thy strength and goods] unto others, and thy
years to the cruel woman that will have no pity upon thee, when thou have
spent al and consumed thy self upon her, as is read of Sampson and the
prodigal son) least (I say) the stranger be filled with thy strength, and
thy labors, and goods gotten by thy travel, or inheritance, come into the
house of another man: yea, and least thou mourn at the last, when thou have
consumed and spent thy body and lusty youth, and then be forced to lament and
say: Alas, why have I hated instruction, and why did my heart despise
correction? Wherefore was I not obedient unto the voice of my teachers? And why
hearkened I not to them that instructed me? I was come almost into all
misery, misfortune, and evil in the midds of the congregation and assembly:
although I was faithfully instructed in the truth, yet had I almost fallen to
utter shame and destruction, notwithstanding my good bringing up in the
assembly of the godly. Pro. 5.3: etc.

The penal punishments, and terrible threatenings of God in his word, against
all sorts of ungodly women, for their sins and wickednesses..
THE Lord God said unto the first woman Eve [which being seduced by the
serpent, did first taste, and afterward entised her husband Adam to eat of the
forbidden fruit in Paradise, contrary to Gods commaundement] Woman, why have
thou done this? Because thou have done it, I will greatly increase thy sorrows,
and thy conceptions. In sorrow shall thou bring forth children: and thy desire
shall be subject to thine husband, and he shall rule over thee. Thus does the
Lord punish the body of woman, for the sin which the soul should have
been punished for: that the spirit conceiving hope of forgiveness, may live
by faith in Christ. Genesis 3.13.16,

See thou not (says the Lord to his Prophet Jeremy) what they do in their
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood,
and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knede the dough to make cakes to
the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offeringes unto other Gods: [that
is, they sacrifice to the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which they called the
Queen of heaven, as appears. 2. King. 23.5. Iere. 44.17.] that they may
provoke me unto anger. Do they provoke me to anger, says the Lord, and not
themselves to the confusion of their faces? Therefore thus says the Lord God,
Behold mine anger and my wrath shall be poured upon this place, upon man and
upon beast, and upon the tree of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground,
and it shall burn and not be quenched. And thou shall not pray for this
people, neither lift up cry or prayer for them, neither entreat me, for I will
not hear thee: [but will surely punish their wickedness which remain in their
obstinacy against me, and will not obey my word, and worship me according to
the same.] Ierem. 7.17. etc.

Moreover, Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women, Hear the
word of the Lord all Judah, that are in the land of Egypt, thus speaks the
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, saying: Ye and your wives have both spoken
with your mothers, and fulfilled with your hand, saying: we will perform our
vows y^ we have vowed to burn incense to ye queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offering to her, etc. as verses 16.17.18.19. ye may read more at large
in ye lives and stories. Ye will perform your vows, and do the things yt ye
have vowed, (wherinye have committed double evil, in making wicked vows, and
in performing the same after your own vain fancies.) Therefore etc. Behold, I
have sworn by my great name, says the Lord, yt my name shall no more be called
upon by the mouth of any man of Judah, in all the land of Egypt, saying, the
Lord lives. And behold, I will watch over the^ for evil and not for good,
and all men of Judah shall be consumed by the sword and famine until they be
utterly destroyed, [which declares an horrible plague toward Idolaters,
seeing that God will not vouchsafe to have his name once mentioned, by such as
have poluted it, and that their wives shall be made widows and children
fatherless, etc.] Read the whole chapter at large. Iere. 44.25, etc.

The women that lay up the things offered unto Idols, and that bring gifts to
the gods of silver, gold, and wood, and cloth themselves with the garments of
those images, and ye me^struous women, or they in childbed yt touch their
sacrifice offered to these idols of gold, silver, or stone, Al such women that
worship images (I say) for their idolatry committed are full of reproof, and
shall be utterly confounded, as ye may read in Baruc. 6.27.28.29.32.

If thy brother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or thy wife that lies in thy
bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, entice thee secretly,
saying: Let us go and serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers
have known, etc. Thou shall not consent unto him or her, nor hear her,
neither shall thine eye pity her, nor show her mercy, nor keep her secret:
but thou shall kill her, thine hand shall be first upon her to put her to death,
and then the hands of all the people, and thou shall stone her with stones,
that she die, that al Israel may fear, and do no more such wickedness, to go
about to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God to worship him only. Deuteronomy. 13.6.

If there be found among you in any of your cities, man or woman yt has
wrought wickedness in the sight of ye Lord thy god, in tra^sgressing his
covenant, and has gone and served other gods and worshipped the^: as the Sun,
or the Moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded, and it
be told unto thee that art the magistrate: then shall thou enquire diligently,
and if it be true and certain that such abhominatio^ is wrought in Israel:
Then shall thou bring forth y^ man or that woman, which have committed that
wicked thing, unto thy gates whether it be man or woman, and shall stone them
with stones till they die, etc. Deuteronomy. 17.2.

The great whore of Babylon, ye mother of (spiritual) whoredoms, idolatry, and
abhominatio^s of the earth, which woman is drunke^ with the blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of Jesus Christ, eueu she which is become the habitation of Devils,
and the hold of al foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful
bird, with who^ the kings of the earth have committed [spirituall] fornication
[by idolatrie] and of whose golden cup full of the wine of superstition, wrath
and filthy pleasures, al nations of ye earth have drunke^ very deep. Finally,
she yt so proudly glorifieth herself and lives in pleasures, She (I say) yt
boasts so gloriously and arrogantly like a strumpet, and says in her heart:
I ^itt being a queen, and am no widow, neither shall I see any mourning: Eue^
that proud whore of Babilo^ (I say) shall suddenly fall down to the ground, and
be rewarded dou^^ according to her idolatrous works, and be tormented with
sorrow and grief: yea, therefore shall all her plagues come at once in one day,
even death, torment, sorrow, vexation, and fa^mine. And all nations shall hate
this idolatrous whore, and make her desolate, and strippe her naked, and shall
^ate her flesh to the bone, and burn her up altogether with fire. For strong
is the Lord God which will condemn her: And all her merchantes and lovers
(the whole route of idolatrous men and women) shall cast dust on their heads,
and make great lamentation for her fall: howling, roaring, crying, weeping and
wailing, saying: Alas, alas, the great city Babylon, the mighty City (yt
fair and bewtifull woman) alas how in one minute of an hour, is thy judgment
come (from the Lord,) and she made desolate and confounded: But, O heaven
rejoice at her destruction, and O ye holy Apostles, Prophets, and blessed
Martyrs of God, whose blood has been cruelly shed by her, in her, triumph ye
in her over throw, and confusion, for God has given your judgment on her, and
revenged your cause in thus plaging and punishing her, for her abominations,
idolatry, and persecution. Reuela. 17.18.

The women ye wax wanton against Christ, forgetting their vocation, and
breaking their first faith, that is, which leave their charge and forsake their
religion, which they profess, and break their faith and promise made to God
and their husbands, to the great slander of the Church, and dishonor of God,
and others evil example, and that gad abroad idly from house to house,
evermore learning and never learned, like pratlers and busy bodies, speaking
things that are not comely nor woma^lie, eue^ such women (I say) which thus
are turned back after Satan and irreligion, and are waxen wanton against
Christ, have the grea^er damnation, and shall therefore be justly punished
with everlasting death. 1. Tim. 5.11. etc.

Have thou not seen this, O son of man (says the Lord to Ezechiel) how the
women sit in the temple mourning for Ta^muze, the Prophet of the idols, all
the night long, and worship the Sun with their faces toward the East? Have
thou seen this abomination, O thou son of man? and is it a small thing to
the house of Judah, to commit these abominations which they do here in the
Lords house^ etc. Therefore will I execute my wrath upon them, mine eye shall
not spare them, neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears
with a loud cry, yet will I not hear them, says the Lord. Eze. 8.14. 15.
etc. Read in the st^^^s of women more. Yea, because there were certain
supersticious women, which made an art of mourning, and taught their daughters
and other women to mourn and weep with feined tears for the dead. Therefore
the Lord by his Prophets Jeremy derideth the superstition of these women, and
threateneth them, saying: Hear the word of the Lord O ye women, and let your
ears regard the words of his mouth, and teach your daughters to mourn, and
every one her neigbour to lament, for death is come up into your windows, and
is entered into your palaces, to destroy the children without, and the young men
in the streets, and there is no means to deliver you, nor any of ye wicked
from my judgments that shall fall upon you. Ierem. 9. 20. etc. 17.

And when the Lord would deride the prophets lack of repen^tance and
hardness of heart, that could not lament for their own^ sins, he willed
them by his Prophet Jeremy in the same chapter, to call for those foolish
women, whom of a superstition they had to lament for the dead, that they by
their fained tears might provoke them to some sorrow and remorce, saying, Thus
says the Lord: take heed, and call for the mourning women (among you, that
they may come, and send for skifull women, that they may come, and let them
make have, and let them take up a lamentation for you, that your eyes may cast
forth tears, and your eye liddes gush out of water. For a lamentable noise is
heard in Sion, saying, How are we destroyed and utterly confounded? etc.
Iere. 9.17.

If a woman have a spirit of divination, or soothsaying in her she shall be
stoned to death (as a sorceresse or witch.) Leuit. 20^ 27.

Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Exodus. 22. 18. Deuteronomy. 18^10.

And woe be unto the women that sow pillowes under all men's arm holes, and
make vailes upon the head of every one that stands up, to hurt souls. Will
ye hurt the souls of my people? and will ye give life to the souls that
come unto you? and will ye pollut^ me among my people for an handful of
Barley, and for a piece of bread, to ^laie the souls of them that should not
die, and to give life to the souls that should not live, in lying to my
people, that hear your lies? Wherefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I
will have to do with your pillowes, wherewith ye hurt the souls of my people,
to make them flee, and cause them to perish and depart from the bodie^ and I
will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, whom ye hunt to
make them fly or depart from the body. Your vailes also will I tear in
pieces, and deliver my people out of your hands, and they shall be no more in
your hands to be (abused or) hunted (to death) and ye shall know that I am the
Lord. Because that with your lies and threatenings ye have made the heart of the
righteous (foolishy resorting unto you) sad, who^ I have not made sad, and
because ye have contrariwise strengthened ye hands of the wicked (still running
unto you) that he should not return from his wickedness and evil ways. by
promising him life unto whom I have threatened death (for haunting your houses
and committing abominations in Israel.) Therefore ye shall see no more vanity,
nor divine diuinations: for I will deliver my people out of your hands, and ye
shall know that I am the Lord. Ezech. 13.18. etc. Thus does the Lord threaten
a curse, and woeful destruction unto all those supersticious women, commonly
called Calk^rs, or wise women, but indeed witches, who for lucre sake do
prophecy, or take upon them to tell every man his fortune, or who stole his
goods, and where they are become, which women in old time used to give to those
that came unto them, pillowes to lean upon, and kerchifs to cover their heads,
to the intent they might the more allure and bewitch the^, which sorceresses
also to make the word of god blasphemously to serve their belly, made the
people believe that they could preserve life, or destroy it at their pleasures,
and that it should come to every one according as they diuined or prophesied.

If any turn after such as work with spirits, and after wise women, or
soothsayers to go a whoring after the^, then will I set my face against that
person be it man or woman, and will cut him or her off from among my people
(says the Lord.) Leui. 20.6. Deuteronomy. 18.10.

That the daughter or child which is stubborn, rebellious, riotous, and
disobedient to her fathers or mothers instruction and correction, or infected
with such like notorious vice, ought by Gods law to be stoned to death, ye may
read in the chapter of the daughters duty to her parents. Deuteronomy. 21.2^,

If a woman's father spit in her face in his displeasure conceived against her
for her disobedience: she should by the law be shut out from his sight and be
ashamed for seven days together, before she were reconciled, as appears.
Number. 12.14. in the story of Miriam.

If there be any woman that curses her father or mother she shall die the
death. Leuit. 20.9. read more in the childs duty.

The wife that commits adultrie with an other man beside her husband, shall
die the death, says the Lord. Leuit. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 22.22.

The mother that lies with her son, or son in law shall die the death.

She that lies with her own natural brother, or brother in law, or with her
father in law, shall die the death.

And if a woman come to any beast, and lie with it, she shall die the death,
and be burnt with fire, her blood shall be upon her: for all that commit such
villainy and abomination, are execrable and detestable before God, and shall be
cut off by violent death, as appears. Leu. 11. 12.17. etc.

She that lies with her nephew, or cousin germane, her brother, or sisters
son, etc. shall die the death, and their children counted as bastardes. Leui.
20.29.

The maid or virgin that plays the harlot in her fathers house, ought to be
stoned to death, as appears in virginity and daughters Deuteronomy. 22.20.

The maid betrothed to an husband that lies with an other man in the city or
town before marriage: ought also to be stoned to death, as ye may read at
large in virginity. Deuteronomy. 22.25.28.

If a Priests daughter fall to play the whore, she polluteth her fathers
house, therefore shall she be burnt with fire. Leuit. 21.9.

The women that are given up into vile affections, and do change the natural
use into that which is against nature, being full of unrighteousness,
fornication, and wickedness, and not regarding to know God, nor follow his
laws, but commit al abomination, even with greedines, shall worthily taste of
death everlasting. Romans 1.16.2. etc.

If a woman suspected of her husband to be an harlot, be tried by the law of
jealousy to be poluted with other men, and to have trespassed against her
husband, then shall her belly swel, and her thighs rot, and she shall be an
accursed creature among her people, and bear her iniquity, as appears. Number.
5.27. in wives.

If a bond maid affianced to an husband, and not redeemed, nor made free lie
with an other man, she shall be whipped and scourged for it, but not die the
death, because she is not made free. Leuit. 19. 20.

And if a maid betrothed to one man, be found lying with another then she
shall be compelled to be his wife, with whom she lay, but if her father refuse
to give her unto him, then shall he that lay with her^ give unto her father
50. shekels of silver, according to the dowry of virgins, as ye may read in
virgins. Exodus 22. 16. Deuteronomy. 22. 18.

If a woman, put away from her husband, and be married to another, she
commits adultery, and shall surely be plagued as an adultresse, read Mark.
10. 12. in deuorce.

There shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be
any whoremonger of the children of Israel: Thou shall neither bring the hyre of
a whore, nor the price of a dog into the house of the Lord thy God, for any
vow: for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 23.17.
etc.

Every woman that is an harlot, or an adultrous woman that forsakes her
husband and lies with other men, shall be tro^en under foot as mire or
dounge, of every one that goes by the way. Eccle. 9.9.

The women that sit in the streets girded with cords, and burn straw or
brom, and are drawn away and lie with such as come by, and after casts her
neighbor in the teeth, because she was not so worthily reputed, nor her cord
broken: even such shameless harlots are near all reproof and shame, and shall
be confounded. Baruc. 6.42.

Thus shall it go with every wife that leaves her husband, and gets
inheritance by an other (stranger whom she has married after divorce, etc.)
She shall be be brought out into the congregation, and after examination made of
her wickedness, she shall be punished in the streets of the city, and
shall be chased like a young mar^ fool: When she thinks not upon it, she
shall be taken and brought to punishment. Thus shall she be put to shame and
open rebuke of every body, yea, examination also shall be the^ made of her
children had in adultery, and they shall not take root, nor her branches
bring forth any fruit. A shameful report shall she leave behind her, and
her dishonor and reproach shall be not be put out, and that because she would
not understand the fear of the Lord: but has been disobedient to the laws
of the highest, trespassed against her own husband, and gotten children by
playing the whore in adultery by other men. And they that remain shall know
by her example and punishment, that there is nothing better th^n the ^eare of
the Lord, nor nothing sweeter then to take ^eede to the commandments of the
Lord. Eccle. 23.17. etc. read more in divorce.

If two men strive together and fight, and the wife of ye one come and put
^oorth her hand and take the other man by the priuities to pull him from her
husband: then shall thou cut of her hand, thine eye shall not spare her:
which law imports that godly shamefastness ought to be preserved, for it
is an horrible thing to see a woman manly and past shame. Deutetonom. 25.11.

And Solomon says, that she that is impudent and too bold, shall be taken a
way, and made a public example of great reproach. Eccle. 19.3.

If a woman put apart for her natural disease, uncover her shame and open the
fountain of her blood by lying with a man, she shall die the death, and be
cut off for her uncleanness. Leuit. 18. 19. ^0. 18.

The woman shall not wear that which pertains to the man, neither shall a
man put on women's raiment, for all that do so are abomination unto the Lord
God. Deuteronomy. 22.4.

If a maid or a wife vow a vow either by oath, or solemn promise, and
thereby bind her self to mortification, abstinence, or otherwise, then if the
same vow, bond, or promise, be afterward confirmed by the father or husband,
and she notwithstanding brake it: she shall be sure to bear her iniquity,
for it is sin in her, and the Lord will surely require it of her, and will
not forgive it. So also is it of a vow made by a widow, or divorced woman
without confirmation, as ye may read. Numb. 30. Deuteronomy. 22.21. in maids,
wives, etc.

Furthermore, thus says the Lord, If thou will not obey the voice of the
Lord thy God, to keep his commandments, and his ordinances, which he
commands thee: This curse among many other shall come upon thee and thy
women, pursue you, and overtake you. The tender and dainty woman among you,
which never would venture to set the sole of her foot upon the ground (for
her softnenesse, and tenderness or nicenes,) shall be grieved at her husband
that lies in her bozome, and at her son, and at her daughter, and at her
after birth, that shall come out from between her feet, and at her children
which she shall bear, for when all things lack, she shall eat them
secretly during the siege and straightness, wherewith the enemy shall besiege
thee in thy Cities, (as came to pass in the days of Ioram, king of Israel.)
2. King. 6.29. And when the Romans besieged Jerusalem, when hunger so bit
their women, that they were ready to eat their own children before they were
borne, and being borne, did most unnaturally devour them. Deuteronomy. 28.45.56.57.

Let the harlot, and she that of long time has accustomed to play the whore
and adultresse, take away her fornications out of her sight, and her adulteries
from between her breasts, (by earnest and speedy repentance:) least if she
continue so still in her filthiness, I strip her stark naked as ever she was
borne, and slay her through beggerie and penury. Hosee. 1.2.3.

The harlot that forgets me, says the Lord, and thus says to her self,
I will go after my lovers that give me my bread, and my water, my wool, and
my flax, my oil, and my drink, that is my wealth and abundance, even her
way will I stop with thorns, and make an hedge that she shall not find her
paths, though she follow after her lovers, yet shall she not come at all:
though she seek them, yet shall she not find them: for I will so punish
and plague her, and bring her into such streigthes and afflictions^ that she
shall have no lust to play the wanton, says the Lord by his Prophet Hos.

Furthermore, I will have no pity upon her children: for they be the children
of fornication: even bastardes be gotten in adultery. Hosea. 2.4.5.

Yea, I will visit upon her the days of her shame, and will discover her
lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and no man shall deliver her out of my
hand, Hosea. 2.4.5. etc.

Because, by swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they
break out, and blood touches blood, and whoredom and wine take away their
heart: Therefore I will visit their ways upon them, and reward them their
deeds, for they shall eat and not have enough, they shall commit adultery,
and yet having many^ wives, shall not increase with children as they hoped,
because they ha^^ left off to take heed to the Lord. Yea, therefore your
daughters shall be harlots, and your spouses shall be whores, (for I will give
them up to their lusts, so that they shall dishonor their own bodies,
because they have dishonored me says the Lord:) neither will I visit nor
correct your daughters when they are harlottes, nor your spouses when they are
whores to amendment: but will let the^ run headlong to their own damnation:
for they themselves are separated with harlots, and sacrifice with whoores,
therefore the people that play the harlots, and does not understand, shall
fall into utter destruction. Hose. 4,10.11.13.14

Their abominations are according to their lovers: for the spirit of
fornication has caused them to err, and they have gone a whooring from their
God. Woe therefore unto them, and to their children, for I will depart from
them and will destroy their children, even from the womb, and from the
conception: and though they bring up their children, yet I will deprive them
from being men, for they shall bring forth their children to the murderer:
and though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the dearest of their body:
(wherefore the prophet seeing the great plague of God like to come upon those
women of Ephraim and Judah, prays to God to make them barren, rather then that
this great slaughter should come to their babes and children, (saying,) O
Lord give them, what will thou give them? give them a barren womb, and dry
breasts. Hose. 9^10. etc 4.12.

Finally, the Lord increases the plague, because of the arrogancy and pride
of the women which gave them selves to all vanity, niceness and
dissoluteness, saying by his prophet Esaias thus: Because the daughters of Sion
are waxen proud and hawtie, and walk with stretched out necks, and with
wanton eyes, walking, and mincing, tripping nicely as they go, and making a
trickling with their feet: Therefore shall the Lord make the heads of the
daughters of Sion balde, and the Lord shall discover their secreete parts and
filthiness. In that day shall the Lord take away the ornament of the corked
slyppers, and the caules, and the round tyres (much after the fashion of the
Moon) the sweet balls, and perfumes, the bracelets, and the bonets, the
mu^^ers, and the maskes, the tyres of the head, and the sloppes, the
headbandes, and the tabletes, the eareringes, the handringes, and the nose
jewels, the costly apparel, and the vayles, the wimples, the crisping pinnes,
and the glasses, the fine linen, the hoodes, and the lawnes. And in stead o^
sweet savor there shall be stink, and in steed of a girdle, a rent, and in
steed of dressing the hair and well setting or curling it, baldnes, and in
steed of a stomachar, a girding of sackcloth, and in steed of beauty,
sunburning. Thy men also shall fall by the sword and thy strength in the
battle: Then shall her gates mourn and lament, and she being desolate shall
sit upon the ground. And in that day when God shall execute this vengeance,
there shall not be one man found to be the head of many women, and they
contrary to womanly shamefastness shall seek unto men, and offer them selves
to any condition: then shall seven women (I say) take hold of one man, saying:
We will eat our bread, and wear our own garments, only be thou our husband
and head, and let us be called thy wives, to take away the reproach of
widowhood. Esaias. 3. 18. etc. 4.1. etc. Thus will God (I say) not only punish
the women for their excessive and intolerable, strange and monstrous pride, and
for their nice curiosity, lightness, wantonness, and vay^e vanity, as those
that cannot be content with comely apparel and decent attire according to
their degrees. But he will punish also for their sakes the men and their
husbands, which have suffered this dissoluteness, together with the
Magistrates and whole common weal wherein they live, which have not remedied
it by the execution of good laws.

Now therefore rise up ye women that are at ease in Sion, Hear my voice ye
careless daughters of Jerusalem, give good ear unto my words (I say). For ye
women which now are secure and careless (for your sins,) shall be in great
fear, and that above a year in days, even very long: for the vintage shall
fail, and the gathering or harvest shall come no more, and one plague shall
succeed another. Ye women (I say) that live thus at your ease in careless
security, neglecting the judgments and threatening of gods word, be ashamed
and astonished: yea, quake ye and tremble through dread and fear, O ye
retchlesse dames, and nice women. Cast off your gorgious attire, rent off your
gay cloth, strip your self stark naked and bare, and gyrde sackcloth upon
your tender loins. For if in time ye take not heed, and provide to turn to
the Lord, and meet him by repentance, such calamity and misery is like to
come, and remain both on you, and your hus^ands, your Magistrates and
country, lands and cattle, that the enemy will neither spare you nor your
children, husbands nor daughters, young nor old: Your selves shall mourn like
sorrowful mothers: because for sorrow and leannes ye shall lack milk to
nourish your tender babes: and your husbands also shall lament even for their
teates, that is, for the pleasant fields, and for the fruitful vine: because
they yield no more fruit to sustain them as they were wont, and because the
Lord has taken from you the means and occasions which made you to contemn
him: To wit, abundance of victuals and worldly goods, whereby you are nourished
and maintained alive. Esaias. 32.9.10. etc.

Two women shall be grinding at the mill, and the one shall be received, and the
other shall be refused: watch therefore for ye know not what hour your Master
will come. Mat. 24.41.42.

Yea, watch (I say) and let your loins be gyrt in a readiness to execute the
charge which is committed unto you, and let your lamps or lights be burning.
Luke 12.35. That having oil in your lamps, though ye slumber and sleep a
little in security, yet when the bridgrome Christ comes at midnight and
calls, ye may with the 5. wise virgins be ready to meet him, and to follow
and go with him to ye wedding chamber of his celestial paradise to do him
perpetual honor, least if ye make no provision in time for oil to your lamps:
but suffer them to go out and be quenched for lack thereof, whiles ye go to
buy oil for your lamps, the bridgrome come and finding you absent and
unready, go his way and shut the gate of heaven against you, and so you
afterward be feign to seek that which ye have contemned, and all too late
to cry Lord Lord open to us: but then he will answer and say unto you, verily
verily I know ye not: neither will I open unto you, because ye have once given
your selves to follow me: but have not continued but failed in the midway.
Watch therefore (I say) and be your selves like unto the wise virgins and
servants that wait for the bridgrome and master when he will come and return
from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, ye may open unto him
immediately. For ye know neither the day, nor the hour, when the son of man
will come. Math. 25. 1. etc. Luke 12.36.

FINIS.
THE Seventh Lamp of virginity, containing the acts and histories, lives, and
deaths of all manner of women, good and bad, mentioned in holy Scripture, as
well by name, as without name, set forth in alphabeticall order, with the
signification and interpretation of most of their names: and in some part
paraphrastically explaned and enlarged for the better understanding of the
story, and benefit of the simple reader.

Whereunto are added (for the affinity they have with some part of the
Scripture) the lives and stories of sundry such other women, as are mentioned
in the third book of Macchabees, and Josephus. A treatise very necessary,
pleasant, and profitable for sundry good uses and purposes, especially to the
true imitation of virtue, and shunning of vice, by example in all women kind.
Newely collected, and compiled to the glory of God, and benefit of his
Church, by the said T. B. G.

Prouer. 31.29.30.31. Many daughters (through the fear of the Lord) have done
virtuously, and gotten thereby great renown: give them therefore of the fruit
of their hands, and let their own works praise them, 1582.

The seventh Lamp of Virginity. Containing the names, acts, and hystories,
lives, and deaths, of all manner of women, mentioned in holy Scripture, as
well by name as without, with the interpretacion of every of their names, set
forth in Alphabeticall order.
A
Abi (or after some translation Abiiah) signifies by interpretation, an ^ome
time, ready, my Father, the will of the Lord. etc.

SHe was the daughter of Zachariah, the Son of Ierobam king of Israel, or as
Lyranus thinks of Zachary the Prophet, whom Ioas the king of Jerusalem
stoned to death: and being after the wife of Ahaz the good king of Judah, she
bare unto him a virtuous son called Hezechiah, which afterward also was a
godly and zealous king of Judah, as ye may read at large. 2. Kings 18.2. and
2. Chro. 29.1.

Abia, or Abiah, signifies my fathers plenty, father, Lord, the father was,
the will of the Lord.

She was the daughter of Machir Prince of Giliad, and wife of Hezron the son
of Phares, who married her when she was threescore year old, in the year of
the world 2358. and she bare unto him two sons, the one named Segub, in her
husbands life time, the other after his death called Ashur, that was Prince of
Tekoa, at a Town called Bethlehem, or Caleb Ephratah belonging to the tribe of
Judah. 1. Chro. 2.21.24.

Abiahil (or Abihail, or Abiaiei) signifies Father of strength, of the host,
or of riches a vaunt mure or forewall father. Also father of grief, of light.
or of praise.

She was the wife of Abishur, and bare unto him two sons called Ahban, and
Molid. 1. Chro. 2.29.

Abigail (or Abigal, or Abigael) signifies my fathers joy, reio^ing or
gladness, or the father of rejoicing.

She was the wife of the Churl Naball the Carmelite, and a woman man not only
beautiful, but of a singular wisdom withal. For when her faithful and
diligent servants told her how her husband had rayled on David's messengers,
and currishly driven them away without any victuals, or sustenance, to relieve
their master David and his weary soldiers in their necessity. And being
counseled by her wise servants to take heed therefore yt some mischief came
not unto her and her family through her negligence and her husbands their
masters wickedness. She then like a wise woman, not contemning the judgment
of her virtuous servants, (as Job teaches, chap. 31.13.) but following their
advice tending to so good purpose, wisely considered the great peril and
danger that might arise of the wilful occasion offered by her foolish husbands
niggardship, both to her self and all her family: and by and by made great
have and loaded her Asses with sundry kinds, both of good and fresh victuals,
and sent them forth by her own servants to relieve David and his men. Which
she did unawares to her husband (because she knew his crooked nature to be
such, that he would rather have perished, then consented to that her wise,
godly, and charitable enterprise. Yea she her self also, like a courageous and
bold woman without any fear, as she that doubted not but to pacify the fu^ie
of the Lion: rode after, and followed her men with speed to appease the wrath
of David, and as she was ryding a privy way to shun the multitude, (the
providence of God was so) that she met David and his men by the way upon the
side of an hill coming toward^s Carmell (where her husband and she dwelt) and
full determined utterly to have destroyed her husband and all that he had by
the dawning of ye day following, and to have left none to piss against the
wall, as her servants had foretold her. Then she perceiving the unlawful oath
and unjust fury of David provoked against her and hers for her husbands only
offense, lighted down of her Ass, and falling flat on ye ground before David
at his feet, she with all reverence to David's kingly personage wisely gave apt
remedies for ye sore mischief of her husband Nabal, and in reco^pe^ce of her
husbands nigardly denying victuals, she first presented David with abundance of
presents and gifts of corporal food or sustena^ce: and for her husbands railing
and churlish language, she gave David sweet and pleasant words, and made this
her learned oration and humble peticion or request unto him and said, O my Lord
I have co^mmitted the iniquity, I pray thee therefore let thine ha^dmayd speak
unto thee, and hear thou ye words of thine handmayden. Let not my Lord, I pray
thee, regard this wicked man Nabal, who has requited thee evil for good. For
as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. But I thine
handmayd saw not the young men of my Lord, when thou sentest the^. Now
therefore my Lord, as the Lord lives, and as my soul lives (the Lord I say
that has kept the innocent and clean and withholden thee from coming to
shed blood and caused that thine hand should not save thee, (nor thou
revenge thy self upon thine enemy my husband) so now thine enemies shall be as
Nabal, and they that intend to do my Lord evil. And now receive this present
I pray thee, which I thine handmayde have brought, and let it be given unto the
young men that follow my Lord. And I pray thee forgive the trespass of thine
handmayde: for the Lord will make my Lord a sure house, (and confirm his
kingdom to his posterity) because my Lord fights the battles of the Lord,
and none evil has been found in thee in all thy life. And [albeit, that man
Saul has risen up to persecute thee and to seek thy soul: yet] the soul of
my Lord, shall be bound in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God, who shall
preserve thee by his protection long in his service from all dangers: but the
soul of thine enemies shall God cast out as forth of the myddle of a sling,
and utterly destroy the^. And when the Lord shall have done to my Lord, all
the good that he has promised thee, and shall have made thee king and ruler
over Israel, then shall it be no grief unto thee, nor offense of mind unto my
Lord, that thou have not shed causeless, nor that my Lord has not
preserved or avenged himself (which things would have tormented his
conscience.) And when the Lord shall have dealt well with my Lord, then think
on thine handmayde, and remember my words.

Which pithy petition of hers being done and ended, it not only pacified his
wrath and stayed his hands from shedding of blood that day: but also gave
David great cause both to praise GOD for sending her to be the occasion
thereof, and also highly to commend Abigail for her wise counsel and good
advice therein. And so David being greatly moved with her wisdom and godly
perswasio^s, ge^tly received her present that she had brought, and did clearly
remit the churlish behavior of Nabal her husband for her wisdom and virtues
sake, saying: Abigal blessed be the Lord God of Israel that sent thee this day
to meet me, and blessed be thy good counsel, and blessed be thou which have
kept me this day from shedding blood, etc. Now therefore go in peace to thy
house, for behold I have heard thy voice, and do grant thy petition. Which
being granted, she took her leave and returned again to Carmell. But when
she came home, and found Naball her Husband so far ouercharged with wine,
that his wits were gone through drunkenness and belly cheer, she thought it
convenient to follow the wise man's counsel. Eccle. 31. Not to rebuke him in
his wine, nor to say any thing unto him good or bad at that time: but to let
the matter rest till the drink were all out of his brain, and his memory
fresh, for as then he had no reason to consider the danger he was in, or to
give thanks for this great benefit of deliverance wrought by his wife, if
she had told him. And so on the next morrow, she declared to Naball the
great and perilous danger he was in for his churlishness and unkindness
showed to David and his servants. Which when he heard, did smite him so
sore to the heart, that he was cold as a stone for fear thereof, and never
enjoyed it, but dyed within ten days after for very sorrow. Of whose death
David being advertised, after a certain time he remembered Abigail, as she
in her petition before had requested him, and having had good experience of her
great godliness, wisdom, and humility: he sent messengers to Carmel to
commune with Abigael concerning marriage, and to signify unto her that he was
willing to take her to his wife. And Abigail, after great and courteous
entertaynment of David's Ambassadors or servants that did the message or
errand, in most humble manner said unto them: Behold, let thy handmayde be a
servant to wash the feet of the servants of my Lord, as though she would
say, I am more fit to be wife unto one of his servants. And with great
gladness and good will she made haste to make her self ready to go with the^,
and so with her five maids following her she took horse, and went with the
messengers of David, and became his wife. 1. Sam. 25. 3. etc. al. And when he
dwelt in Ziklag among the Philistines whiles he went with Achis the king to
war, Abigal his wife and her mate Ahinoam were both taken prisoners by the
Amalechites, and led away captive until such time as they were rescued by
David their husband, as appears. 1. Sam. 30.5.18. And in process, this woman
Abigail bare unto David a son called Chiliab, which in the 1. Chro. 3.1. is
called Daniel. 2. Sam. 3. 3.1. Chro. 3. 1.

There was an other woman called Abigal, or Abigael, which was the daughter of
Nahash or Ishai, and sister to David, Zeruiah Ioabs mother, and wife to Iether
an Ishmalite, unto whom she bare a son called Amasa. 2. Sam. 17.25.1. Chro.
2.16.17.

Abihail (or Abiahil.) sig. the father of light, or of praise, as before in
Abiahil.

She was the daughter of Eliab, the son of Ishai, and one of the xviii. wives
of Rehoboam king of Israel, which bare unto him iii. sons, as 2. Chro.
11.18.19.

Abishag (or Abisag) signifies the Fathers ignorance, or mistaking: The father
catching, touching or increasing. etc.

She was a goodly fair young damosel, or virgin of the Tribe of Isacar,
brought up in the City Shunem. And for her exceeding beauty and good manners,
she was chosen before all other women to lie in the bozome of king David, and to
keep and nourish him with her heat in his extreme old age. And she
cherished the king and ministered unto him: but the king knew her not. After
whose death (she being still a pure virgin and maid) was greatly desired of
Adoniah (king Salomons half brother) to be his wife^ and for a means to beg
and obtain her the sooner, he used the help and mediation of Bethsheba,
David's widow and Salomons mother, to whom he thought Solomon would not say
nay in a greater request. But this request of his mother to give Abishag to
Adoniah his brother to wife, so displeased king Solomon, that he did not only
say his mother nay, and refused to give him Abisag to wife: but also for this
presumption of Adoniah in asking Abishag to wife, he took occasion straight
ways to put Adoniah to death, so that he died for it, as appears 1. King.
1.3. and 2.17.22.

Abital or Abithal, signifies the father of dew or shadow.

She was one of the wives of king David, who bare him a son in Hebron named
Shephatiah. 2. Sam. 3.4. 1. Chro. 3.3.

Abra signifies awayting maid, a handmayde, or servant.

She was the faithful and trusty handmaide of Judith that had the government
of all things under her mistress, and continually attended upon her person,
insomuch as when her mistres went about her wonderful attempt to destroy
Olophernes the Lords enemy, she only went with her mistress Judith, and
carried the bag of victuals and bottels of wine and oil all the way, making
her prayers often together with her dame, and kept her company diligently,
till being so commanded by Judith her mistress, she stood without the
door, and waited her coming, while she went to pray alone and work her
feate against Holophernes. Which being done, and his head delivered unto Abra,
she put it in her wallet, and so carried it after her mistress to Bethulia the
City. Judith 10.2.10.13.5.11. etc. Note that this name Abra is only read in
the common or vulgar translation.

Achsah or Axa, signifies dect, wanton, the brenking or tearing asunder of the
covering.

She was the daughter of Caleb, whom according to his promise made before, he
gave to Othniel the son of Kenez to wife, and with her also the South
country for her portion and preferment, because he had smitten and conquered
Kiriath Sepher, otherwise called Debir according to his request and desire: and
being now Othniels wife, she moved with a little covetousness, persuaded him
to ask of her father a field that had springes in it: because her south
country was barren which she had. But because her husband tarried long, and
somewhat neglected to satisfy this her request, she took her Ass, and rode
her self unto her father Caleb to requ^st it, and said: Give me this
blessing, and grant me this petition O my father, thou have given me the south
Country, but it is barren: give me also I pray thee a field that has in it
springes of water, and is fruitful. And straight ways Caleb granted her
request, and gave her a fruitful field that had springes of water both
beneath and above to augment her portion and living, and for an inheritance to
her and hers for ever, as appears. Joshua. 15.16. Judge 1.12.1. Chro. 2.49.

Adah or Ada signifies a company or congregation, a witness, or assembly,
decked, passing by, a pray taken away etc.

She was one of the two wives of Lamech the son of Methushael. And the first
woman that was coupled to a Concubine, and had her marriage corrupted by
pluralities of wives: her mates name was Zillah, who seeing that all men hated
their husband for his cruelty, were sore afraid least he should have been
murdered, and therefore gave him good counsel, and willed him to take heed
and look well to himself. But he with great bragges and big boasting words
currishly contemned their good and loving advice to his own hurt and their
further discomfort. This Adah also was the mother of Iabal the first inuenter
of tents and grasing: and also of his brother Iuball the first inuenter of
Instruments and music. Genesis 4. 19.23.

There was another woman after the flood called Adah, which was the daughter of
Elon and Hittite, and one of the wives of Esau, unto whom she bare a son
called Eliphaz before the division made of the land between Jacob his brother
and him. Genesis 36.1.10.

Ahinoam or Achinoam, signifies the brothers comeliness or beauty.

She was the daughter of Ahimaaz the son of Zadecke the high Priest, wife of
king Saul, and mother of Jonathan (that faithful friend of David in his
persecutions) whom Saul his father therefore much reviled for taking David's
part, saying: thou son of that wicked and rebellious woman, thou that art
ever contrary unto me as thy mother is. 1. Sam 14.50.20.30. 1. Chro. 6.8.

There was an other woman called Ahinoam which was an Israelitesse borne, and
one of the wives of David that he had in his banishment, and which was the mate
or companion of Abigail, with whom also she was taken prisoner and ^edde
captive away by the Amalekites out of Ziklag. And after David had by her his
eldest son Ammon who afterward defiled his sister Thamar. 1. Sam. 25.43. 27.
3. 30.5.2. Sam. 13.1.14.

Aholah or Oolla, signifies a mansion or dwelling in it self, meaning Samaria
which was the royal city of Israel.

Aholibah or Ooliba, signifies my pauilion, tent, mansion, or my brightness
in her: whereby is meant Jerusalem where Gods Temple was.

These were two sisters, under whose names the holy Ghost does set forth the
fornication, that is to say, the Idolatry of Samaria and Jerusalem, as
appears in Ezech. 23.4.

Aholibamah or Oolibama, signifies as before, my pauilion some where, my high
pauilion, or hall, the brightness of the high one, the height of the ^ent.

She was the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibion, and one of the wives of
Esau, unto whom she bare three sons, Iehus, Ialeam, Corah, who became great
men in the World. Gene. 36.2.5.

Anah Answearing or singing.

She was the daughter of Zibeon, the sister of Anah, the first inuenter of
Mules, and the mother of the forenamed Aholibamah. Genesis 36. 2.

Anna signifies his grace, favor, or gracious, favorable, merciful, Lady,
resting, freely giving.

She was the wife of old Tobie, and bare unto him a son called also Toby
after his fathers name. And being in captivity with her husband, she
worshipped the true GOD, and forsook al Idolatry, doing diligently good deeds
as her husband did, even to her own further trouble and impouerishment, for
being threatened by the king to be slain, both she and her husband for burying
the dead: she together with her son and her husband fled away naked from
Niniue and hid her self from the cruelty of Senacherib^ So her goods being
confiscate, and she left very poor, it pleased God yet at the last to restore
her home to her house, where also her husband being stricken blind and not
able to get his and her living, she went daily to the weauing work, and took
weauers works to do, and look what living she could get with the labor
of her hand, she brought it home, for she labored sore for her living. And
when on a time she sent home her work to the owners, one sent her a kidde
more then her wages, which she had earned: And when Tobie her blind
husband, heard the kidde bleate, he said to Anna, from whence came that
kydde? is it not stolen? restore it to the owners again, for it is not
lawful to eat any thing that is stolen. Then was Anna angrye with her
husband Tobie, and rebuked him as one whose trust in God was all in vain:
like to Iobes wife, casting him in the teeth with his good deeds, saying these
or the like words: Where are now thine alms, and thy righteousness become,
behold, they all appear now in thee manifestly? which her reproach and
vpbrayding, so grieved the good old blind man, that taking it very heavily at
his wives hand, he wept, and made his prayers with tears unto God, to have
mercy upon him, to forgive his wife, and to take that reproach away from him.
And God heard his prayer, and sent his Angel to cure him. And yet looking for
death, he called for his son, and to declare his love and good nature toward
his wife, he in his death bed gave his son a great charge concerning his
mother Anna, saying, Son, despise not thy mother: but honor her all the
days of her life, and do that which shall please her, and anger her not, etc.
as in the 4. cap. does appear, and when she is dead, bury her by me in the
same grave.

After this, it fortuned old Tobie to send young Tobie his son to the City
Rages, to receive certain money, which in his prosperity, he had lent to one
Gabael. Then Anna, being full of heaviness, for the departure of her son,
burst out a weeping, and rebuked her husband again the second time, saying:
Oh what have thou done? why have thou sent our son away, is he not the staff
of our age, and our hand to minister unto us? I would to God, that money had
never been laid up of us, nor required again: but that it had been lost and
cast away in respect of our son, and that we had been content with our
poverty and kept our son. For that which God has given us to live with,
does suffice us, and we should have counted it riches enough, that we saw our
son here. Then said Tobie unto her: Leave thy weeping (my sister) and be not
careful, our son shall return in safety, and thine eyes shall see him For
the good angel does keep him company, and his journey shall be prosperous: so
that he shall both go safely and return to us again sound with joy. Then at
these words Anna being somewhat comforted, left off from weping, and held her
peace.

But when the days of the journey were expired, and her son came not home as
she looked, then both Tobie her husband and she were exceeding sorrowful,
and began to weep both together: Insomuche, that Anna now wept again with
discomfortable tears and bewailed, saying, woe is me, my son, O my son
Tobie, surely my son is dead, seeing he tarieth so long. O what meant we to
send thee my son away into a strange country, seeing all the things that
we have are only in thee my son, we should not have sent thee away from
us: But now I care for nothing, my son, since I have lost thee, thou light
of our eyes, thou staff of our age, thou comfort of our life, thou hope of our
generation. Then her husband Tobie seeing her impaciencie, comforted her
again, hold thy peace, and be not discomforted, for the man that went with
our son is so faithful, that he will bring him to us again safe and
sound: nevertheless she might in no wise be comforted, but being too much
addicted to the love of her child, and altogether distrusting gods providence,
very angerly rebuked her husband again the third time, saying: Hold thou
thy peace man, and deceive me not, for my son is surely dead. Thus was
Annastill unquiet in her mind for her son, neither would she by any means
be persuaded: but daily went out, looked abroad, and went about all the
streetees, whereby she thought he should come again, yea and daily did she
go to the top of an hill and there sit long, that if it were possible, she
might spy him coming a far off: neither did she eat any meat on the day
time, but did ^^nsume whole nights in lamenting and bewayling her son Tobie:
until at the last, as she sat upon the top of the hill, still looking and
waiting for him, she espised him coming a far off, and for joy ran home and
told her husband, saying, behold thy son comes, and the man that went
him, which being done, she ran forth again to meet her son, and meeting
him, she fell in his neck, and wept for joy, and said, O my son Tobie,
now seeing I have seen thee, I am content from henceforth even to die.
Afterward when Anna was dead, her son buried her honorably, and laid her
with her husband, as his father had before given him in charge. Tobit. 1.9.20.
21.11.12.4.26.5.16.17.18.20.21.10.4.5.6.7.11.5.6.9.14.12.

A^ma, the wife of Raguel was mother of Sara, young Tobies wife.

Look for her story in Edna, for so is she called in the geneua translation.
Tobi. 7.

Anna, the daughter of Phanuell (of the tribe of Asser.)

She was a Prophetess of a great age, and had been married to an husband seven
years from her viginitie, and after continued a wydowe fourscore and four
years: serving God continually in the temple, with fasting and praying, day
and night. And when Christ was brought into the Temple to be presented unto
the Lord, in the year of the world 4142. she came at the same instant upon
them and praised the Lord, confessing him to be God as Simeon did, and
prophesied or spoke of that child to all that looked for the redemption of
Israel, to the admiration of all about her. Luke. 2.36. etc.

Apame, signifies, e^pelling or driving forth, casting away.

She was the daughter of the famous man Bartacus, and the concubine of Darius
the king of the Percians, who being a very impudent woman, durst do more unto
the king, then all other men or women beside: for whereas none ever durst
presume to lay hands upon this mighty king, such was his power and might,
that all lands stood in awe of him: Yet this bold woman Appam would presume
to sit by his side, and that upon his right hand, and durst take the crown
off from his head, and put it upon her own head, and also toy and play with
him, and smite him with her left hand before every body, the king himself in
the mean season not resisting, striving, nor in any thing gainesaying her: but
gaping, gazing, and smiling upon her: Yea, so was he besotted with her love,
that if she laughed upon him, then must he laugh also upon her: but if she
were angry with him never so little, then must he flatter her, and speak her
fair, and all to win her favor, and to be reconciled with her again.
Which example of impudency and audacitie in her, Zorobabell, one of the kings
guard that beheld it, took for an occasion presently to reprove the king for
his folly, and for an argument to prove that even before the king himself,
(but to his shame if he had had grace) that such women were stronger then the
king given to pleasure, or wine vnmeasurablye drunk, 3. Esd^ 4.29.

Apphia, signifies stayde, chastity, free,

She was a godly professor of the gospel, and a faithful woman: unto whom
Saint Paul in his Epistle to Philemon, sent heartily commendations as to a
dear sister, and well willer to the Apostles in all their troubles and
persecutions. Phile. 1.3.

Asenath, (or Asnath, or Aseneth,) ^igni. danger, or mi^fortune.

She was the daughter of Potipherah, prince of On, whom Pharao the king gave
unto Joseph to be his wife, in recompense of hi^ faithful and honorable
service done unto him whilst Joseph was in Egypt, unto whom also (before the
years of famine) she bare two sons, called Manasses, and Ephraim. Gene.
41.15.50.

Atarah, or Athara, or Araia. ^ign. the Lords anger or heat, a Crown.

She was one of the wives of Ierathmeel, and the mother of Onam 1. Chro. 2.26.

Athalia, signi. time for the Lord, his time, an hour, etc.

She was the daughter of Omri (or as some will) of Ahab, which was the son
of Omri, either for that she was brought up still with Achab, or for that she
imitated his manners in all kind of Idolatry. She was also the wife of
Iehoram, king of Judah, whom she corrupted greatly with her Idolatry, and
unto whom, in the year of the world 3217. she bare a son, called Ahaziah,
which was Iehorams youngest son: who also (all his elder brethren being
before slain by the Philistines) succeeded his father Iehoram in the kingdom.
His mother Athalia entised him also to all wickedness, insomuch, that the
Lord caused him to be slain by Iehu. Then Athalia perceiving that her son
was dead, she in the year of the world, 3239. took upon her the rule and
government, and to the intent, that there should be none of that lynage of
Iehosophat to rain, or make title to the crown, and that she only might
usurp the government, and reign quietly, she most cruelly murdered and
destroyed all the seed and posterity of Iehosophat, and Ioram, to whom the
kingdom appertayned, save one: for so it pleased God to use the tyranny of
this wicked woman, to destroy the whole family of Ahab, only Ioas the son of
Ahaziah, was stolen away, and hid from her by Iehosheba, as appears in her
story.

And when wicked Athalia had ruled the land most cruelly six years, and had
broken up the house of God, and bestowed upon Balam and Idols, all things
that were dedicated therein to the Lord: In the seventh year, Ioas was brought
forth by Iehoida the priest, and proclaimed king: She hearing that, ran into
the Temple of the Lord, and there beholding Ioas crowned king, she rent her
clothes, and cried out, treason, treason. But at the commandment of Iehoida
the priest, the captain and soldiers took her, and carried her out of the
Temple, and slew her by the way as they went to the kings house, in the year
of the world 3245. and this was the end of that wicked idolatresse and booddy
woman Athalia. 2. Kin. 8.18.26.11.1.2.15. 2. chro. 21.6.22.2.3.10. etc. 24.6.

Atossa, was first the wife of king Cambyses, afterward married to king Darius
Histaspis, and married the mother of Xerxis: in the year of the world 3620.
read more in Ester. For as some think, this Atossa was Ester, who first was
the wife of A^huerus, and after his death, became wife to Darius Histaspis,
unto whom she bare Xerxes, the father of Artaxerxes, in the year of the
world. 3621.

Azuba, or Asuba, sig. left or forsaken, his strength in her.

She was the daughter of Silhi, and the wife of Aha, king of Judah, unto whom
she bare a son called Iehoshaphat, that was also king of Judah after his
father. 1. King. 22.42. 2. Chro. 20.31.

There was another woman of this name, which was the wife of Caleb, and bare
him diverse sons, as appears: 1. Chronicles. 2.18. 19.

B
Baara, or Bara, or Baraa, sig. a workemanshippe, a bed, a fire, in wicked
mind, in ill, a companion, in joys, in feedyng, in buildyng. etc.

She was one of the wives of Shaharaim, whom with her mate Hushim, he put away
from him, and took other. 1. chro. 8.8.

Bashemath, or Basemath, ^ig. sweet smelling spices, destruction of death, in
discomforting.

She was the daughter of Elon an Hittite, and one of the wives of Esawe, who
with her mate Judith, was a grief of mind to her good father and mother in
law, Isaak and Rebecca, through her continual disobedience and great
rebellion. Genesis 26.34.

Bernice signifies a hurtlesse Son, a heavy victory, the weight of
vanquishing, finely moved, or with choice.

She was the daughter of Herod Agrippa, borne in the year of the world,
4170. and the natural sister of king Agrippa, and wife to Herod king of
Chalcida her Grandfather. And being entertained of king Agrippa in his house as
his wife, also she went with him to Cesaria to salute Festus, and to welcome
him into the Country, who was then but newly entered into his office of
preside^tship in the room of Felix: And when Paul's matter should be heard
before Agrippa, she went with him also into the common hall, where she was
received with great pomp, and there sat with Agrippa, and the other
governors all day, to hear the examination of Paul before Festus the new
President: and being almost converted with her husband Agrippa, at the words
of Paul, she together with the rest of the Governors arose, and in secret
conference justified Paul as altogether innocent, and most unworthy of death
or imprisonment. Acts 25.13. 23.26.30.

Bethsheba (or Bethsabe, Bethzabe, Bathshua, or Bersabe) signifies the seventh
daughter, or the daughter of an oath: The daughter of fulness, of noise, or the
daughter of salvation, or the honorable or noble daughter.

She was the daughter of Eliam, (called also Bathshua the daughter of Ammiel.
1. Chro. 3.5.) and the wife of Uriah the Hittite, which was with Ioab in king
David's wars against the Moabites at Rabbath. And on a time in the year of
the world 3086. as Bethsabe was washing her self in her privy garden alone,
it chanced king David to look out at a window in his palace, as he walked
on the top or roof thereof in the afternoon, and seeing her to be a very
fair woman, he was presently so ravished with her beauty, that (forthwith)
he sent for Bethsabe, and she coming unto him he lay with her, and
committed adultery with her, and so sent her home again to her own house.
Then shortly after, she perceiving her self to be with child, and fearing
least for that fact she should be stoned to death, according to Gods law,
sent David the king word thereof secretly. Whereupon the king, partly to hyde
his own fault, and partly to save the woman from danger of the law, sent for
Urias her husband to come home from wars, that he might color and father
the matter by lying with his wife. But when David saw that Urias would by no
means company with his wife Bethsabe, as he desired, he returned him back
again to Ioab with a letter, the contents whereof caused Urias quickly to be
dispatched out of his life by the enemy. And when Bethsabe heard that her
husband Urias was dead, she mourned for her husband: so when the mourning was
done, David sent for Bethsabe, and to make her amends, he took her into his
house, and she became his wife, and in the year of the world 3086. she
brought forth the same child conceived in adultery, being a son which
lived not long: but being stricken by God with a sore sickness for David's and
Bethsabes sins, and punishment, it died. After that, in the year of the
world 3088. Bethsabe conceived again, and brought forth another son, called
Solomon. 2. Sam. 11.12.

Lastly, when David was waxed old, and fallen into exteeme age: and Abishaag
the Shunamite her handemayde ministered unto him.

Bethsabe understanding by Nathan the Prophet, that Adonia, the son of Aggit
her mate, began to aspire to the kingdom of his father David yet living:
she (by the counsel and advice of Nathan the Prophet, who taught her, her
lesson) went unto the king her husband, and making her humble obeysaunce unto
the king as he sat in his chaumber, and Abisag the Shunimite, or young virging
ministering unto him, he said unto her, Bethsheba, what is the matter? She
answered, my Lord, thou swearest by the Lord thy God unto thine handemaide,
saying, assuredly thy son shall raygne after me, and he shall sit upon
my throne: But behold, now is Adoniah king, and thou my Lord the king know
it not, so closely is the matter kept from thee by flatterers. For he has
offered many oxen, fat cattle and sheep, and has called all the kings
sons, and Abiathar the priest, and Ioab the captain of the host, but my
son Solomon thy servant has he not bidden. And now my Lord O king, the
eyes of all Israel wait on thee, that thou should tell them who ought to
sit on the seat of my Lord the King after him: for else when my Lord the king
shall sleep with his fathers, I and my Son Solomon shall be reputed vile, and
so put to death, as wicked transgressors and sinners. And lo the Queen had no
sooner ended her tale, but the Prophet Nathan came and confirmed her words to
be true. Whereupon the King called for Bethsabe again (who was gone aside
while Nathan talked with the king) and swore unto her, to assure her that
Solomon her Son should be that day proclaimed King, and reign in his stead
after him. Then Bethsabe the Queen humbling her self to the ground, did
yield reverence and thanks unto the King, and desired of GOD, that her Lord
King David might live for ever.

Afterward when David was dead, and her Son Solomon reigned King, and was
established in his throne, it chanced that Adoniah, whose purpose she
prevented, came unto her: and she suspecting him as her privy enemy, and
fearing least he would work more treason still against the King her son,
demanded first of him, whether he came peaceably and to good intent or no. And
when he answered yea, and that he had suite unto her: then she bad him say on,
for she would hear him, and understand his suite. So Adoniah made this
request unto her, that she would vouchsafe to do so much for him, as to go
unto the King her Son, and speak unto him to give him Abishag the shunamite
to wife: for said he I know the king will not say thee nay: then Bethsabe
willing to pleasure even her very enemy, especially in so small a matter as she
thought, said unto Adoniah: well I will speak for thee unto the King my
Son. So Bethsabe coming unto the king Solomon her son, to speak unto him
for Adoniah, the king as soon as he saw her, rose up to meet her: and in
token of reverence, and that others by his good example might have her being
his mother in greater honor, and to teach all children (how hye in dignity
soever they are above their parents) their duty toward their parents, he
bowde or humbled him self unto her, and sitting again in his throne, he
caused a seat to be set for his mother by him, and she satte on his right
hand. Then she preferring Adoniah suite, said unto Solomon: I desire a small
request of thee, say me not nay: unto whom the king gently answered, Ask
on my mother, for I will not say thee nay. My request is quoth she, that thou will let Abisaag the shunamitisse be given to Adoniah thy brother to wife: But
king Solomon wisely perceiving further mischief to lurk in that request, then
his mother who made it a light matter, was aware off, and knowing that if he
should grant Abishag (that was so dear unto his father at her request) unto
Adoniah, he would afterward by that means, aspire unto the kingdom,
answered his mother thus, O good mother, and why do thou ask Abisaag the
Shunamite for Adoniah, you might as well ask for him the kingdom also: for
he is mine elder brother, and has for him both Abiathar the priest, and Ioab
the son of Zeruiah, as thou know, as if he would say, if I should grant
you the one, he will thereby soon aspire to the other having such means,
therefore I cannot for my safety grant your request so prejudicial to my
royal estate, so she departed without her purpose, and Solomon wisely to
prevent the aspiring purpose of Adoneah, went straight ways and put him to
death. 1. King. 1.2.

Finally, so godly, wise, and learned a woman was this Bethsabe, that Solomon
her son, being now a king, yea and a most wise and learned king, yet she, to
show her duty and motherly affection toward him her child, taught him the
doctrine and precepts of good life, and how he should rule and govern to
the glory of God and his perpetual praise and renown.

Her words and doctrine, which she taught Solomon, and wherein she exhorted
him to chastity, sobriety, and justice, are these:

What my Son? And what the Son of my womb? And what O Son of my desires?
Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways, which is to destroy kings,
(for women are the destruction of kings, if they hate them.)

It is not for kings O Lamuel (for so was Solomon also called) it is not for
Kings to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink: (that is, the king must
not give himfelfe to wantonness, and neglecte his office, which is to execute
judgment) least he drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment of
all the children of affliction. Give ye strong drink unto him that is ready
to perish: and wine unto them that have grief of heart. Let him drink that he
may forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more: (for wine does
comfort and cheer the heart of man: as Psalm. 104. 15)

Open thy mouth, for the dombe in the cause of all the children of destruction:
(That is, defend their cause that are not able to help them selves. Open thy
mouth, I say, judge righteouslye, and judge the afflicted and the poor. Pro.
31.1.2.3. etc.

Read more of the conditions and properties of a worthy woman and virtuous
wife, described by Bethshabe in the praise of women. Pro. 31.10.

Bilha, or Bala, or Baala after some translations, signifies old, or fading, a
pretye one, the lesser swalowed up, having her, his man, troubled, shedding of
an underling, had, In getting up, Destroying.

She was a young Damsel, which served Laban the father of Rahel: and when
Rahel his daughter should be married to Jacob, Laban gave Bilha his maid, to
Rahel his daughter to be her handmayde and servant. And afterward when Rahel
perceiving she was barren, and could bear Jacob no children, she gave Bilha
her maid unto her husband to be his wife, who conceived by Jacob, and brought
him forth two sons: The first called Dan, the second called Nepthali.
Afterward Bilha and her mate zilpha went with Jacob to meet Esau, and was
placed foremost with her children in the company, and meeting Esau, did him
first reverence and obeysaunce. Then at the commaundment of Jacob, she reformed
her self of her Idolatry, and resigned up unto him her earinges and Idols,
and worshipped God aright, with him and all the rest of his household: yet
after this, that is in the year of the world 2275. Ruben the eldest Son of
Jacob went and lay with this Bisha his fathers Concubine, and caused her to
commit adultery, to her shame, and his curse given of his father, unto whose
ears the vile fact came, as appears. Gene. 29.29.30.3. etc. 33.2.6.35.4.22.
46.25.49.3 1. Chro. 7. 13.

Bithiah^ or Bethia, signi. the Daughter, or measure of the Lord.

She was the daughter of Pharaoh, and wife of Mered, or after some ^he first
wife of Ezrah, and the mother of Mered. Read 1. Chro. 4.18,

C
Calmana, signi. a nourishing, gift or present.

She was one of the two daughters of Adam and Eve, sister to Delbora, and wife
to Rayn her own brother: by whom the world was first replenished, as
appears in Graftons Chronicle. fol. 27.

Candaces, signi. changed, having breach of mind, a clean or the purest
having in use, and it is a common name to all the Queens of Ethiopia.

She was the Queen of Ethiopia, who sending her Eunuch or chief governor,
that had the rule of all her treasure to Jerusalem: as he rode in his charyot,
reading Esaye the Prophet, was by the way met with of Philip, who baptized and
instructed him in the true understanding of the scripture he read, and
converted him to the Christian faith, by preaching unto him Jesus: so that he
worshipped God aright at Jerusalem. Acts. 8.27.

Cleopatra, signi. the flourishing glory or joy of the country, or of the
Father.

She was the daughter of Philometor, king of Egypt, who in the year of the
world 3981. being first given in marriage by her father upon good lyking to
Alexander the son of noble Antiochus, Epiphanes king of Syria, and royally
married with great glory after the manner of Kings at the City of Ptolomays:
afterward upon displeasure causele^se taken by her father against her husband,
she was taken away from him again, and given by her unnatural father to
Demetrius the son of Demetrius, and so became his wife also, having now two
husbands alive, as appe. 1. Ma. 10.75. and. 11.12.

The Prophet Daniel also prophecyeth also of the faythfulnesse and constancy
of one Cleopatra, a bewtiful Woman, that was the daughter of Antiochus, the
great king of Syria, and wife to Ptolomeus Eptphanes king of Egypt: saying in
this wise He (that is Antiochus) shall set his face to enter with the power of
his whole kingdom and his confederates with him (against Ptolomeus:) thus
shall he do, and he shall give him the daughter of women to destroy him. But
she shall not stand on his side, neither before him: meaning that Antiochus
should give his daughter Cleopatra to Ptolomeus, to destroy him with her
beauty, and betray him to her father, after his advice: or if that served not,
he would destroy him together with his daughter by that marriage under
pretense of friendship: for he like a most covetous and cruel wretch, regarded
not the life of his daughter, in respect of the kingdom of Egypt, which he
chiefly shot at: yet for all that Daniell prophesied, that she should not
agree to her fathers wicked counsel: but should love her husband, as her
duty required, and not seek his destruction for her fathers pleasure, or any
friend in the world beside. Read Dani. 11.17.

Cozbi, signi. a Liar, leaving off, as flowing, as a fludde.

She was the Daughter of zur Prince of Midian, who playing the harlot with
zimry the Israelite, and son of Salu, and being taken in the very committing
and doing of the filthy fact of adultery, was by zealous Phinees the son of
Eleazar, Gods execucioner of his just wrath, thrust quite through her belly and
slain, as she lay together with zimry her adulterous mate. Which zealous fact
of Phinies so pleased God, that therefore the Lord not only turned away his
wrath, and caused the plague to cease, which he had sent upon the Israelites,
for committing both corporal and spiritual whooredome with the woman of Moab,
and following their idolatry: but also God made the covenant of priesthood to
remain with him and his for ever, as appears. Numb. 25.6.7.

D
Damaris, signi. a little, or a pretty, wile, a still heed.

She was a certain godly and devout woman, dwelling at the City of Athens,
who with Denis Areopagita and others, believed the Gospel preached by S.
Paul, and was converted to the Christian faith. Acts. 17.34.

Deborah, (or Debbora) signi. a word, a Be, good vtteraunce, a babbler, speec^e.

She was the wife of one Lapidoth, and a Prophetess: who after the death of
Ehud and Shamgar was the fourth Judge and gouernesse of the people of Israel,
and judged them by the spyrite of prophecy, in resolving of controversies and
doubts, and declaring unto the^ ye will of God. And in the year of the world
2766. when ye children of Israel were given by the Lord for their sins into
the hands of Iabyn King of Canaan, and invaded by Sisara his captain, and a
great host of enymyes. They went to Deborah unto her house, that dwelte under
a Palm tree, between Ramah and Bethel in Mount Ephraim, and in great sorrow
and lamentation asked her advise: who understanding the matter, sent presently
for Barack: who being come, she said unto him: has not the Lord GOD of
Israel (revealed unto me by the spirit of prophecy) and commanded thee,
saying, go to Mount Tabor with ten thousand men? And I (says the Lord) will
draw unto thee to the river Kison, Sisera with all his huge host, and deliver
him into thy hand. But Barak seeing his own weakness, and his enemies
power, desired Deborah the Prophetess to go with him, to assure him of Gods
will from time to time: saying, If thou will go with me, I will go: But if
thou will not go with me, I will not go. Then said Deborah, I will surely go
with thee (as thou desire:) but (for thy distrust and doubtful mind, know
thou this, that) this journey which thou take shall not therefore be for
thine honor: for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the hands of a woman. So
Deborah arose and went with Barak and all his host to Kedesh. And when she saw
Sisera and his army come ready to wage battle with Barak, she still encouraged
him to the enterprise, by assuring him of Gods favor and aid, saying, up
Barak: for this is the day that the Lord has delivered Sisara into thine
hands. Is not the Lord gone out before thee (to fight for thee?) So the Lord
according to her words having destroyed the army of Iabin, and forced Sisara
to light down of his chariot, and fly away on his feet. Barak pursued after
him: but he being escaped his hands, and hid in the tente or house of one
Iael, the wife of Heber, and a faithful friend to Israel, was there slain by
the said Iael, (as in her story more plainly appears) until at ye length
Barak still pursuing after Sisara, came and found him dead in the tent of Iael:
and so lost he the honor of the victory, and Iael got it, as Deborah before
prophesied. And thus Deborah by her pollicye and wisdom, through Gods power
and Baraks help, assisting and working for her and her people, delivered her
people mightily from the tyranny of Iaben, Sisara, and all their enemies, that
had vexed them very sore the space of twenty year before, and were set at
peace and liberty, and their enemies utterly confounded.

And therefore to the glory and praise of God for that victory, and to the
perpetual memory and fame of Iaell, she made a notable and learned song,
which she together with Barak sange the same day, saying: Praise ye the Lord
for the auenging of Israel, and for the people that offered them selves
willingly, etc. as it is at larg in the prayers of the Bible made by women
before in the first Lamp, page 3. And after the death of Debora, the Lord
raised up Gideon to judge his people. Judges 4.4.5.1.

D
There was an other woman called Debora, which was the nurse of Rebecca, and
went with her and her maidens when Abraham's servant brought her from her father
to Isak his masters son, and who after long traueiling and iourneying
coming to Bethel, there in the year of the world 2275. dyed by the way going
toward Egypt, when she had lived 156. years after the birth of Rebecca, and
was buried beneath Bethel under an Oak: which place Jacob her master for her
sake called, the Oak of Lamentation. Gene. 24.59.35.8.

There was an other woman called Debora, which was the great Grandmother of
Tobyas the elder: that is, his father Tobiels mother, and his garder or bringer
up, a very godly and devout woman, as may appear in that Tobyt said, that he
gave his offerings and tithes of the tenth part unto them, unto whom it was
meet, as Debora his fathers mother had commanded him, unto whom he was pupil.
Toby. 1.8. She is only mentioned or read off in the Geneua translation.

Delbora, (or Noaba, after Philo) signifies Bees, a thing, a casting down.

She was the second Daughter of Adam and Eve, the sister of Calmana, and wife
of her own brother Abell, as it is supposed. Her name nor her sisters is not
read or found in the scriptures: but in Lyra, also look Graftons Chronicle.
fol. 27.

Delilah, or Dalila, signifies a poor wench, a bucket, or paile, a consumer,
her paile, poverty, his bow, drawing out, lean.

She was a woman of the Philistines, dwelling by the river of Sorek, whom
Sampson the Israelite an enemy to the Philistines loved and took to wife,
whilst he abode amongst the Philistines: which when the Princes of the
Philistines perceived, they having long hunted him to destroy him, and knowing
no way so good as by the means of a woman, came at the length to this Dalilas
house, and persuaded her to betray her husband, saying: Entice Sampson, and
see wherein his great strength lies, and learn by what means we may best
overcome him, that we may come and bind him and punish him after our desire:
and for thy labor every one of us shall give thee a xi. hundred shekels of
silver (which comes to four score and a xi. pounds, thirteen shillings
four pence a man, after xx.d, a shekel: and says Lyra, they being five in
number, it amounts in all to the sum of 336.li.xiii.s.iiii.d. Then Dalila
being thus bribed or entised, for covetousness of so much money went and said
unto Sampson: Tell me I pray thee wherein thy great strength lies, and whereby
thou might be bound to do thee hurt? And Sampson mistrusting her nothing at
all, he was so blinded with her love, told her saying, if they bind me with
vii. grene cords or withes, then shall I lie as weak as another man. So she
having gotten of the Philistines vii. grene cords, bound Sampson therewith, and
having certain men of the Philistines lying ready in wait with her in a
secret chamber, she then cried out unto Sampson, saying, The Philistines are
upon thee Sampson, shift for thy self. But Sampson brake the cords as a
thread and escaped, so that his strength could not be known by her craft.
Then said Dalila unto Sampson, see, thou have mocked me and told me lies, I
pray thee now yet tell me wherein thou might be bound. And Sampson, though
her falshoode tended to make him loose his life, yet his affection toward her
so blinded him, that he could not beware, but told her, saying: If they bind
me with new ropes that were never occupied, then shall I be weak and like
other men. Dellida therefore took new ropes, and bound him again therewith,
and said as before: The Philistines be upon thee Sampson. But as her spies
came out of her chamber to have taken him: he brake them also from his arms as
a threede and escaped again the second time. After this Delilah said unto him
again the third time, hitherto Sampson thou have beguiled me, and told me
lies, tell me yet how thou may be bound. And he giving place still to
his wicked affections, told her again the third time, saying: If thou plat
seven locks of the hair of my head with the threades of the woofe, I shall
be weak, so she fastened it with a pin, and cried as before, The
Philistines are upon thee Sampson, the Philistines are upon thee: but he awoke
out of his sleep, and went away with the pin of the web and woofe. Then
Dalila being very angry that he had so often mocked her, began to chide
him saying, How can thou say as thou continually do unto me, I love thee
Dalila, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? Thou have mocked me
now these three times together, and have not as yet told me wherein thy
great strength lies. And because she was importunate upon him with her words
continually, and vexed him, his soul was pyned to the death, therefore he up
and told her all his heart, and said unto her: If I be shaven, and my hair
cut off, my strength will go from me, and I shall be as weak as all other
men are. So when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart: she went
privily for the Princes of the Philistines that had bribed her to do the
feate, saying, come up once again, for he has showed me now all his
heart: then the Princes of the Philistines came up to her and brought their
money in their hands, which they had promised her. And Dalila then so dallied
with Sampson that she made him lie a sleep upon her knees, and whilst he lay
down his head in her lap, and was a sleep, she caused a man that she had
ready for the purpose to come and shave off the seven locks of the hair of
his head, whereby she began to vex his soul and his strength was quite gone
from him: not so much for the loss of his hair, but for the contempt of the
ordinance of God, which was the cause that God departed from him. Then having
wrought her feate, she after her accustomed manner, cried unto him and said:
The Philistines are upon thee Sampson, the Philistines are upon thee. And with
that he awoke out of his sleep, and thinking to escape them now as he had
done before, he shook himself: But knowing not that the Lord was departed
from him, he had no power or strength left to fly away: and therefore the
Princes of the Philistines then took him and bound him hand and foot now at
the last, and put out his eyes, and carried him away bound in fetters to
Azzah, where they made him a slave to grind in the prison house. And thus
Sampsons inordinate affection toward a wicked woman caused him to loose Gods
excellent gifts, and became a slave unto them, whom he should have ruled.
Where we see how dangerous a thing it is, for any man or woman to give place
too much to our affections, for if we do, without doubt we shall be sure to be
destroyed, as Sampson was by Dalila, who thus by wicked daliance betrayed him to
the Philistines for money. Judge. 16.4. etc.

Diana, signi. the Moon, having name of the day: for that it gives a light
counterfeiting the day light.

She was a great Goddess of the Ephesians, whose magnificence not only the
Cytizens of Ephesus, but all Asia, yea and all the world worshipped as their
Goddess: insomuch that when any man went about to impeach her honor, or
speak against her, or her Temple, to bring her in little estimation among the
Christians, as Paul and others did, then the people of Ephesus would be full
of wrath, and cry out continually: great is Diana of the Ephesians. A great
maynteiner of this Goddess and her Temple, was that enemy of godliness, and
superstitious fellow Demetrius the silver smith, who got great gains and much
wealth by making shrines and silver temples for Dianas temple: and who under
her pretense raised great sedition in the City and trouble, to Paul and the
true Christians, as ye may read. Acts. 19.24. etc.

Dinah, signifies judgment, or doom, judging, or deeming.

She was the only Daughter of Jacob, borne in the year of the world 2258.
whom Lea bare unto him, whilst he served Laban her father and his uncle. And
when her father soiourned in Sechem, going toward Egypt, she being but
fifteen years of age, and taking a little too much liberty, went out alone
from her father and brethren, to see the daughters or women of that country,
but lost her virginity before she returned. For when Sechem the son of Hamor
the hittite and Lord of that country saw her among the dancing damsels, he
took her, and lay with her, and deflowred her by force, she being not past
fifteen years of age, as I said. And afterward Sichems heart still cleaving
unto her, he requested his father, saying: go get me this maid to be my wife.
And his father coming to Jacob, to beg Dinah, her bre^hren hearing thereof
(talked first priuilye among them selves how to revenge this villainy done to
their sister) granted to Hamors request, if so be he with his son and all
his people would become circumcised Christians, as she and they were. And they
being glad to do any thing, that they might obtain so fair a Damsel, as
she was, were all circumcised: but then her brethren having that they would,
two of them, to wit, Symeon an Leuy, took each of them his sword, and went
boldly into the City, and slew Sechem with his father, and all their male
kind, while they were sore, and not able to resist, in full revenge of that
villainy offered to their sister: and when they had done, they took their
sister Dinah out of Sechems house, and went their ways with the spoil that
they had gotten of all their goods, wives and children, that were in the
City: which when her father Jacob heard, he reproved his two sons greatly,
as one sorye for so great a murder so rashly committed: but they answered him
again, saying: should he abuse our sister, as a whore. Gene. 34. all.

Dorcas, (or Tabitha) ^ignifieth a do, a Robucke, a pricket, or a ^allow dear,
read^ of her in Tabitha.

Drusilla, signifies bedewed or sprinkled with deweof, a quiet kin^ed.

She was the daughter of Herod Agrippa, and a Jew borne, in the year of the
world 4179. who being first married to Azizo, forsook him, and became
afterward in the year of the world 4193. wife to Felix, by whose counsel he
called for Paul, and heard him entreat or preach of the faith of Christ.
Acts. 24. 25.

E
Edna, or Anna, sig. pleasure. time.

She was the wife of Raguell and mother of Sara the wife of young Tobie. Who at
Tobies first coming to her house to woo her daughter, very courteously
entertained him when she understood whose son he was, and that he was
indeed her near kinsman. And when she heard that old Tobie her cousin was
blind, she was very sorrowful, and wept for his trouble. Afterward having
given her consent to her husband, that Sara her daughter should be married to
Tobie, she was present at the contract making and solemnization of the marriage
between them, and when night came, and the feasts were done, she prepared
another fair chamber for her daughter to lie in, as her husband Raguell had
commanded her: and seeing her daughter fall a weeping when she should go to
bed, for fear least the evil spirit Astrodias would come again and slaie
Tobias that night, as he had done her other seven husbands before, Edna like
a tender hearted mother wiped away her daughters tears, and comforted her,
saying: be of good cheer my daughter, the Lord of heaven and earth shall
give thee joy for this thy sorrow: Be of good comfort my daughter, weep not:
so her daughter being well comforted, went to bed. And in the morning Edna sent
her maid to see whether Tobie were alive or not, who finding them both a
sleep and alive, went and told her master and dame, and they for joy praised
God together. And when the days of feasting were ended, and her daughter was
to go her way with her husband to his friends and country: Edna blessed her
daughter, and gave her ghostly instruction like a godly mother, saying first to
her: The God of heaven bless thee my daughter, and make thy children to
prosper before I die. Honor thy father and thy mother in law, which are now
thy parents, that I may hear good report of thee, and with that kissed her and
took her leave of her: and then turning her to Tobias her son in law, she
also most wisely and carefully said unto him: The Lord of heaven restore thee
my dear brother, and grant that I may see thy children of my daughter Sara,
that I may rejoice before the Lord. Behold now I commit to thee my daughter
as a pledge, do not entreat her evil. So Tobias praising God, that he had
given him so good a wife: blessed Raguell and Edna his wife, and went away to
Niniuie to his own father and mother, whom when he had honorably buried,
then he returned with his wife to Ecbatan to Raguell and Edna his father and
mother in law, whom also he there buried honorably and possessed their
^oods. Tobi. 7.8.10.11.11.1.14.13.

Eglah, or Heglah, sig. a cow calfe, a wagon, a wind about, a turning wind,
or his feasting.

She was one of the wives of David in Hebron, and who bare unto him a son
called Ithream. 2. Sam. 3.5. 1. Chro. 3.3.

Elisabeth, or Elizabeth, or Elisheba. signifies the oath of God, or the
fullness of my God, or the seventh of my God, she is of God. Or the name thus
divided and written (Eli-sabeth) signifies My God, going upward, or getting
up. (By Ely and sabeth) signifies rest, or a stay, the staff of Majesty. Or
written with a (z) as thus (zabeth) sig. the dowry or great portion of the
Lord.

She was of the house and came of the daughters of Aaron the Lords high
Priest by her fathers side, and by her mothers line she was of the house and
lineage of king David, and near cousin unto the virgin Marie, and being the wife
of Zacharias the high Priest, she like a godly woman lived justly before God,
and walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord without
reproof. And being long barren and very old, it pleased God at the last even
in the year of the world.4141. to remember her, and sent his Angel Gabriel
unto her husband, as he was making his prayers unto God in the Temple, who
signified unto him that his prayers were heard, and that his wife Elizabeth
should bear him a son, and that he should call his name John, which
signifies the grace of God, of which child he should have great joy, and
many should rejoice at his birth, etc.

After he went home and his wife Elizabeth conceived by him as the Angel had
said, and she perceiving her self with child, hid her self five months
praising God most joyfully, and saying: Thus has the Lord dealte with me in
the days wherein he looked on me, to take from me my rebuke among men (for
the barren women enjoyed not the promise which God made to them that were
married to have issue: but principally they were deprived of that promise which
God made to Abraham, that he would increase his seed, which promise could
not be performed nor accomplished without issue). And now being six months
gone with child, so it happened that Mary the wife of Joseph, which also had
conceived by the holy ghost, came to Hebron to visit Elizabeth her cousin: who
had no sooner heard the salutation of Mary, but by and by the babe sprang in
Elizabeth's belly, and she was presently filled with the holy ghost, and cried
out with a loud voice, saying: blessed art thou (cousin Mary) among women,
because the fruit of thy womb is blessed, and whence comes this to me, that
the mother of my Lord should come to (visit) me? For behold, as soon as the
voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ear, the bakesprang in my belly for
joy: and blessed is she that believed, for those things shall be performed which
were told her of the Angel Gabriell from the Lord. But Mary saying nothing
unto her, as one rap^ with joy also fell to magnify God, and after abode with
Elizabeth her cousin about three months, and then returned to her own house.
And now when the time was come that Elizabeth should be delivered she
brought forth a son to the great rejoicing of her self and all her
neighbors and cosins, who therefore together with her praised the Lord for
his great mercy showed unto her. And when on the eight day her child was to
be circumcysed, and the women her cosins and neighbors would have named him
Zachary after his fathers name: Elizabeth his mother said no, not so, he
shall be called John, which was according to the words of the Angel before.
Then although the women said unto her that there was none of her kindred named
with that name: yet, they caused his dombe father Zachary her husband to write
him in his tables by y^ name of John, which being don, Zacharies mouth was
presently opened and to the great admiration of all that stood by, he being
filled with the holy ghost, spoke and prophesied of his child, and praised
God, as ye may read, Lu. 1.

Elisheba, signifies as before in Elizabeth, the God of oath, she is of God.
etc.

She was the daughter of Aminadab, who was a prince of Judah, and her sister
Nahashon, the wife of Aaron, the brother of Moses, unto whom she bare four
sons, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazer, and Ithamar. Exodus 6.23.

Ephah, signifies without measure, unbridled, werie, flying plighted, folde^
up.

She was one of the Concubines of Caleb, and bare him three sons, Haran,
Moza, and Gazez. 1. Chro. 2.46.

Ephrath, sig. plenty, dustie, leaden, fruitful, coming out of ashes. a
fawn.

She was one of the wives of Caleb, which he took after the death of Azuba,
and who bare unto him a son called Hur. 1. Chro. 2.19.50. of her also the
City Ephrata, or Caleb Ephrata, or Bethlem Ephrata, first took the name: as
1. Chro. 2.24. Genesis 35.48. etc.

Ester, or hester or Esther, otherwise called, Hadashah or Atassa: signifies
close, hidden, plucking down, the working or beholding of the medicine, the
Turtles medine.

She was the daughter of Abihail a Jew borne, and being a very fair virgin,
and beautiful young damosel (after the death of her father and mother,) she
was nourished and brought up in the house of Mardocheus her cousin Germane, who
took her as his own daughter, after his uncle her father was dead. During
which time it chanced that Uasti the Queen of Persia, for her disobedience
to Assuerus the king her husband, was deposed from her princely state, and
deuorced from her husband. And then the king being counsayled to take an other
in her room, sent one Hege his Eunuch the keeper of women with his commission
abroad, to take up Uirgins and Maidens, as y^ manner was: by virtue whereof,
certain fair young Damsels and beautiful Uirgins, (among whom Ester was
one,) were taken and brought to the court, then being at Shushan, and there in
certain houses appointed for the Uirgins, somewhat distant from the houses of
Concubines and Wives, they were kept and found at the kings charges for the
space of a twelve month, or one whole year, with all manner of sumptuous
apparel and gorgeous deckings under the hands and custody of ye foresaid Hege
yt kings Eunuch and keeper of ye kings Uirgins and women, to the end the king
might choose one of them, whom he fanc^ed best, to be his Queen. For as the
abuse of these country and heathen kings was great in inue^ting many means to
serve y^ lusts of Princes, and ordayning wicked laws, that the king might have
whose Daughter he would: so had they three diverse houses appointed for women to
be keept in near the King: as one for them whyest they were Uirgins: another
when they were Concubines: and for the Queens an other: every house having a
several man or an Eunuch to be their governor, guide and keeper: as Hege, who
was the keeper general of the first house of Women, especially while they were
Uirgins, to adorn them, puryfie them, and send them first to yt King. Next
Shaashgaz the Eunuch, who was the keeper of the second house of the Women, that
were Concubynes: that is, such as were dislyked of the King the first night,
and came at him no more, unless it pleased him to call for them specially by
name. And lastly Hathach the Eunuch, who was keeper of the third house, and
namely of her that was Queen, and served her, and attended upon her person at
the Kings commandment. And when the course of every Maid or Uirgin came to
go into the King, after that she had bin xii. months a purifying according to
the manner of women, that is vi. months with oil of Myrhe, and other vi.
months with sweet odours: so long were the days of those women's purification,
yt should go into ye king: then look whatsoever she asked or required of the
Eunuch Hege, whether it were apparel, jewels, or other ornaments for women, yt
was he bound to give her, when she went out of the wome^s house unto the king.
In the evening commonly she first went unto the king, and on the morrow she
returned into the second house of women Concubines if the king disliked her,
neither might she come any more unto ye king, except it pleased him to se^d and
call for her specially by name.

So when Ester among other Uirgins was thus by commission brought unto ye kings
^ouse, in Su^han under the hands of Hege, keeper of the women, the maid Ester
so greatly pleased him, that she found favor presently in his sight: whereupon
he thinking her meetest for the king in his judgment, therefore caused her
things for purificatio^ to be given her speedily, with such things as belonged
to her portion or state, and appointed her seven comely maidens out of the kings
house of women Uirgins to attend upon her person, unto whom also he gave
change or suites of apparel, and other things of the best that was in the
house of women, both to her, and her maidens.

Now when the course of Ester came, yt she should go into the king, such was
her modesty and maydenly sobriety, that she desired no apparel jewels, or any
other ornament or thing, to set forth her beauty with bravery as others before
her did: but stood to the Eunuch Heges appointment, took whatsoever he said
she should have, although shee^ might have commanded him, as before appears:
but she by Gods providence finding favor not only in ye sight of Hege her
keeper, but also of all other that looked upon her, had al things given her by
Hege her governor that might possibly adorn her, and set her forth gorgeously
and gallantly to the king. And so Ester being brought unto the king Asuerus
into his house royally at Shushan, in the month of January, and in the seventh
year of his reign: the king courteously took her unto him, and he loved her
above all the women, for she found more grace and favor in his sight, then all
the other Uirgins: yea, and because he lyked her best, he then set the crown
of the kingdom upon her head, and made her Queen in steed of Uasthi, and
this was in ye year of the world 3613. And for joy of her ye king made a great
and most royal magnificall marriage feast, which he called Esters feast: at
which feast also for her sake, he not only lyberallye released many
provinces of their tribute yt was due unto him: but also gave most large and
princely gifts unto his princes, servants and provinces. And thus was her cousin
Mardocheus dream verified of her, who dreamed a little before, that a little
fountain became a flood of much water, and a light or lamp as bright and
glorious as ye son in his heighest orie^t: which flood and sun in troth he
found to be his cousin Ester, who^ he saw thus exalted to yt dignity of a
Queen, and married to y^ great king Ashuerus, to his no little rejoicing, and
her and her peoples comfort, as after shall appear.

Then Mordecay her cousin being at y^ kings c^urt, to see yt sole^nizatio^ of
her marriage and feast, charged her, yt she as yet should in no wise declare
or show her kindred and people of this her preferme^t. And she, though now a
royal queen, yet was as obedient unto Mordecay her poor kinsman, as when she
was under his government, and was nourished of him at home in his house: and
kept al things close from y^ king for ye space of 5. years, and did in every
thing after ye counsel and advise of her cos^n Mordecay, to ye good example of
al children to their parents, and of one kinsma^ to another. After this, whilst
Mordecay her cousin was in ye kings house, it fortuned yt two of ye kings
Eunuchs Biglha^ and Ter^she yt kept ye door, like traitors co^spired the death
of ye king, and sought to lay their violent hands on him, and to kill him, which
treason being known to Mordecay her cousin, so soon as he understood thereof, he
straight ways came to Ester yt queen, and told it her: and she likewise by
and by, in the year of the world 3614. went to the king her husband, and
certified him thereof in Mordecays name: which being inquisitio^ found true, the
off^ndours, like traitors were both put to death for it, and the thing
registered and written in the book of Acts and Chronicles of the kings of the
Meeds and Persians.

Now in the year of the world 3619. the king having highly promoted one called
Haman, and commanded al his Princes servants and people to do this Haman
reverence and honor: it harned yt her cousin Mordecay being commanded, yet
would not do so to ^a^^a^, because he saw yt he was both an ambicious and a
proud man, whereof Haman being advertised by sycophants and clawbacks of the
court, and thinking it a small revenge for him to fyle his hands on him, or
hurt the person of Mordecay in this his conceived malice and displeasure taken
against Mordecay, he mischieuously devised to practice the destruction not
only of Mordicay, but even of the queen and al her people and countrymen the
Jews, yt were in the la^d of Persia for his sake: and to ye end indeed he
offered yt king a bag of 10. thousand talle^ts, which amounts to a thousand
thousand pounds, or more, treble the revenue of the crown of this realm, which
being of the king yet refused, he without it obtained secretly of the king
(through false lying tales and devilish perswasio^s,) his letters to all the
rul^rs of every province, yt they should root out and destroy all the Jews
both old and young, me^ and women in one day only, as upon the xiii. day of
march next following: which letters Hama^ in all post^aste, se^ding down
accordingly to every province, and the rumor thereof being spread far and
near, y^ devised mischief not a little vexed Mordecay, and al y^ Jews his
cou^treime^ in ye la^d, and then Mordicay in sackcloth, fastings, great
p^rplexety and first made his prayers unto almighty God for the safegarde of
his people, and moving his people to do the same often and fervently. And then
because he would advertise Ester of this cruel decree and proclamation, he came
to the kings gate: but because he was so clothed in sackcloath, he might not
be suffered to enter into the Court: Yet Esters Maids and Eunuchs hearing
his piteous outcryes and lamentation, of goodwill they bare unto her, went and
told her, how her Cousin mourned in sackcloath: with which news she good woman
being grieved at the heart, was very heavy and sad, and sent Mordecay her cousin
better raiment to cloth himself withal, and willed the messenger to take away
his sackcloath from him: but he received it not, neither would he cast off his
attire. Then Ester called Hathach her Eunuch, whom the King had appointed to
serve and attend upon her, and commanded him to go out unto Mordecay, and
know the matter and cause of his mourning, and why he went so clad in
sackcloth, who coming to Mordecay, and understanding the whole matter, brought
with him a copy of the letters procured by Haman against her and her people,
and delivered it to queen Ester, with this request from her cousin Mordecay,
yt she would presently upon the receite thereof, al other things laid aparte,
go to the King, and make petition and supplycation before him for her peoples
safetye and lives, or else they were al like to perish. So Ester having now
knowledge of this deuillish decree, at the first durst not satisfy the request
of her cousin Mordecay: but sent the same messenger Hathach back again unto
Mordecay, to signify unto him, that forasmuch as there was a law, that no man
or woman might presume to go unto the King in his priuye chamber uncalled
under pain of death, but only he or she unto whom the King held out his
scepter, or golden rod, that therefore she now having been absent the space
of thirty days, durst not presume to go unto the King uncalled for her
life: but was afraid of that danger. But when Mordecay received this answer
from her, he being nothing pleased therewith, but somewhat moved with her too
womanly tymerousnes and fear, sent her this word again by the same messenger,
saying: Remember O queen the days of thy low estate, how thou was nourished
under my hand: and think not with thy self O queen, that thou shall escape,
though thou be in the Kings house now^ so hye in his favor more then all the
rest of the Jews: and know that, if thou hold thy peace at this time, and
dare not speak unto the king for the life of thy kinsman and people, that yet
comfort and deliverance shall appear to the Jews out of an other place, for
God will deliver his though all other worldely means fail them in their most
need: but thou O Queen, and thy fathers house shall perish. Now then, since
this Haman which is next unto the king has given sentence of death against us,
call thou therefore upon the Lord, and go in unto the king, and speak for
us unto him, and deliver us from death, for who knows whether thou art called
of God to come to this glory and kingdom, for to deliver Gods Church out of
these present dangers. Which letter or message, when Ester received, she
therewith being touched to farther remorse, sent Mordecay word again, that
he go and assemble the Jews to fast and pray publicly for her, three days
and three nights, that God would prosper her enterprise as she and her
maids would do, and then she promised him that she would put her life in
danger, and go unto the king uncalled, though it were contrary to the law,
and if I perish (quoth she) I perish: yet will I refer the success to God,
seeing it is for the glory of his name, and the deliverance of his Church.

So Mordecay departed, and did according to all that Hester had commanded him.
And Q. Hester also being now in great danger of death, resorted unto the
Lord, and laying aside all her glorious apparel, she put on the garments of
sighing and mourning, and in stead of precious ointments, she scattered ashes
and dounge upon her head: Yea, all the places of her joy filled she with
tears, and the hairs that she plucked off. And thus having greatly humbled
her body with fasting, she made her lamentable petitions by prayer unto God
for her peoples deliverance, as appears in the first Lamp. page 46.

And on the third day after that the Jews had begun to fast and pray, when
Ester also had ended her prayers, she laid away her mourning garments, and
put on her glorious and royal^ apparel again, and decked her self goodly
after that she had called upon God, which is the beholder and favorer of all
things, and took two handemaides with her. Upon the one she leaned her self
as one that was tender and faint with fasting so long: and the other followed
her, and bare up the train of her vesture. And so with a beautiful rose
colored face, cheerful look, and amiable countenance: but yet with ^n
heavy and troubled soul, sorrowful heart, pensive mind, and weak body, she
casting off all fear, and putting her only confidence and trust in God,
boldly went in through all the doors of the kings palace, till she came into
his privy chamber, and there stood before the king, who sitting in his royal
throne, shining in all his princely robes of majesty, as one very terrible to
behold, at the first lift up his face, and looked fiercely upon Ester the Q.
which so daunted her woma^ly courage, that it made her presently for fear to
fall down, and being very pale and faint, she leande her self upon the head
of her maid that went with her: Nevertheless, God turned the kings mind
that he became gentle and meek, insomuch that he perceiving the Queen to
faynte and fall down before him, and being moved with pity toward her,
carefully leapt out of his throne, and took her in his arms, till she came
to her self again, and then comforted her with most loving words, and
said: Ester, what is the matter? I am thy brother, be of good cheer, thou
shall not die: for our commandment touches the commons, and not thee, come
near. So Ester found favor in his sight, and the king in sign that her
coming, was agreeable unto him, and not to the breach of the law: held out
his golden Scepter that was in his hand, and laid it upon her neck, and
kissed her, and said, talk with me. Then said she, I saw thee O Lord, as
an Angel of God, and mine heart was troubled for fear of thy majesty, for
wonderful art thou O Lord, and thy face is full of grace. And as she was thus
speaking unto him, she fell down again before him for faintness. Then the
king being sore troubled, did all that both he and his servants could, to
comfort her: and the king held out his septer again unto her, which she
touched and laid her hand upon the top thereof, and then the king said
again unto her: Be of good comfort Ester, and fear nothing that is done
against the Jews, for our decree shall not touch thee: but tell me what will thou Queen Ester? and what is thy request? ask what thou will, it shall be
granted thee: yea, it shall be even given unto thee though it be half my
kingdom.

Then said Ester to the king: nothing O king, but that it would please your
majesty, and Haman to come this day unto the banquet of wine, which I have
prepared: To the which he with Haman gladely went, according to her desire,
and whilst he was banqueting with Hester, he demanded of her again the same
question, saying: what is thy petition Ester that it may be given thee? Oh
quoth she, if it shall please your highness to give me my petition, and to
fulfill my request, then let my sovereign Lord and Haman come once again to
morrow to my banquet of wine, and then I will certify your grace of all that I
require, and declare what thing I demand. And on the morrow when the king and
Haman were come again unto her banquet, he said again unto the Q. now what is
thy petition Ester that it may be given thee? ask, and it shall be performed
even to the half of my kingdom. Then the Q. answered and said, if I have
found so much favor in thy sight O king, to have my petition granted: then I
most humbly beseech thee, grant me my life, and the lives of all my people
the Jews, which are not only sold to be bondslaues, (yea I would to God it
were no worse, for then I would have held my tongue) but to be slain and
utterly destroyed, and that all in one day, which forces me to speak boldly
unto thee. Who is he, said the king, and where is the man that dare presume to
do such a deed? Oh said Ester, and if it shall please your majesty to know the
truth, our great enemy and adversary that has conspired our death, and gotten
out this decree against us, is even this wicked man Haman here present, whom
your grace has exalted so hie to honor and estimation under you. At which
words of Hester, Hamans conscience barked, his heart quaked, his body waxed wan
and pale, his flesh trembled, and he was terribly afraid of the king and
Queens displeasure. Yea the kings indignation was then so kindled against Haman
at this the Q. complaint, that he arose in an anger from the banquet, and went
into the palace garden, in whose absence, Hama^ (whose conscience still accused
him) perceiving that there was some mischief a preparing for him of the king
for his bloody and cruel conspiracy, fell down at the beds feet or couch
whereupon Ester sat, and made humble request unto her for his life. And when
the king came again out of the garden, and found Haman fallen upon the bed
where Ester sat, being thereby more incensed against him, he very angerly said,
what will he force the Q. also before my face? which word was no sooner
proceeded forth of the kings mouth, but it gave his guard and servants
occasion presently to lay hands upon Haman, and to cover his face, as they
used to do unto all that were out of the kings favor, who forthwith also at
the kings commandment, went and hanged Haman therefore upon the same Gallows
yt he had prepared for to ha^g Mordecay, Esters cousin, after whose death, the
very same day did the king give unto Ester the Queen, all Hamans goods and
lands.

And Hester to prefer her dear kinsman Mordecay, then took good occasion
also to let the king understand that he was her near kinsman, whereupon the
king took off his ring which he had taken from Hama^, and for the Queens
sake, gave it unto Mordecay. And when Ester had thus far prevailed against
Haman, for her own safety, she gave her cousin Mordecay al Hamans house, as
freely as it was given her, to his preferment. And afterward, she falling down
prostrate at the kings feet, with tears besought him to grant her one
request more, which was that his grace would utterly abolishe the wicked
decrees which he had made for the destruction of the Jews her people, saying:
if it please the king, if I have found favor in his sight, or the thing be
acceptable before him, and that I please him, let letters be written and sent
to all his provinces, to revoke and countermande the letters of Hamans cruel
devise sent against my people ye Jews. For else what good will it do me to
live, if I shall suffer and see y^ evil to come unto my people which was
pretended? Or how can I suffer and see the destruction of my kindred? So the
king granted her request, and she having obtained the letters of countermande,
sealed with the kings own signet and ring, delivered them to Mordecay, who
with all speed by posts, conveyed them to all the provinces in Percia and
Medea, to the great comfort of the Jews, and daunting of the enemies. Yea, the
king for Esters sake, not only by the same his letters revoked the former
wicked decree: but also he therein gave commandment and leave to every Jew,
to kill his enemy that purposed to kill them, by means whereof Hamans ten
sons also amongst diverse others in Sushan, were slain with the sword before
the kings gate, which being known unto the king, he said unto Ester (because he
would satisfy her request to the full, and gratify her to the vttermoste, if
it were possible,) Thy countrymen and people the Jews have by force of my
letters now slain and destroyed, even in Sushan my palace, five hundred men
besid the ten sons of Haman: what trowest thou, have they then done in the
rest of my provinces? now therefore Hester, if this content thee not for a
sufficient revenge of that villainy that they offered thy people, then what
do thou require yet further of me: ask and I will give it thee? Tell me
thy request I say yet further, and I will surely perform it unto thee:

Then Ester, not so much for desire of vengeance as moved with a zealous desire
to see Gods iustiudgements executed against his enemies, said unto the king,
if it please ye king, let it be granted also to ye Jews y^ are in Shusha^ by
decree, yt it may be lawful for them to hang up the dead corpse or bodies of
Hamans ten sons upon ye self same gallows or tree with their father, which
her request the king also not so willingly granted, but it was as diligently
executed accordingly by ye Jews: who for joy of that victory of their happy
deliverance, kept ye same xiiii. and xv. days of March, (in the which they
should have all been slain, and in the which they did kill their enemies and
were preserved) high and holy days to ye Lord, calling the^ the days of
Purim, or casting of lots, by the special commandment of Mordecay and the Q.
Ester, who her self wrote with all authority to confirm those letters of
Purim, sent by Mordecay her cousin unto the people, commanding them by her
decree also to keep those days holy, and observe them as feast with fasting
and earnest prayer, and thanksgiving unto God for their deliverance wrought
by her, which her noble and valiant acts are registered in the book of the
Chronicles, of the Kings, of the Meedes and Persians, to the glory of GOD, and
her, and her cousin Mordecayes perpetual memory, fame, and renown to all
posterity. Ester. 2.3.4. 5.7.8.9.10.13.14.15.

Eunice, signi. decking, a good victory, or conquest.

She was the daughter of Loyis, the mother of Timothy, which women, both the
mother and daughter are highly commended of saint Paul, for their sincerity of
faith, which he desired Timothy earnestly to follow. 2. Tim. 1.5.

Gomer, signi. consuming, failing.

She was the daughter of Diblaim, and a very wicked woman, who having long
accustomed to play ye harlot, at the last became ye wife of Hosea the Prophet,
and bare unto him three wicked adulterous children like her self: to wit, a
son called by God Iezreel, then a daughter called also by God Loruhamah: and
when she had wayned her daughter, she conceived and bare Hosea another son,
called by God also Loammi, after the Lord threatened to plague her and her
children greatly for her whoredom and adultery, except she repented in time.
Read this mistically in Hosea 1.3.2.1.

H
Haddasha, see Ester.

Hagar, or Agar, signi. a stranger, a newecome, chewing cudde, fearing,
ouerthwa^^, turned, turning, dwelling, wayfaring, delay, etc.

She was an Egyptian woman, and the handemaide of Sara Abraham's wife, who being
old, long barren, and childelesse, when she had dwelt in the land of Canaan,
by ye space of 10. years and in the year of of ye world 2094. she gave this
Hagar her handmayd unto Abraham to be his wife, whiles he dwelt in the land of
Canaan. And she conceived: and feeling her self with child, began then to
despise her old barren mistress Sara: whereat Sara being grieved, went and
complained thereof unto Abraham her husband: who giving her power to correct
the maid at her pleasure, she began to deal so roughly with Hagar, that in
no wise she would abide it, but ran away from her dame, and fled into the
wilderness: and sitting there beside a fountain called Berlaheroy, or the well
of ye living, and seeing me, not knowing whether to go, the Lord (which
rejects no estate of people in their misery) sent his good Angel, even
Christ Jesus to comfort her, who appearing unto her in the shape of an Angel,
said unto her, Hagar, from whence come thou, and whether intendest thou to
go? I fly quoth she, from Sara my dame, which fares so foul with me,
that I am even weary of my life. Well said the Angel, return to thy dame
again, and submit thy self humblye under her hands: for I, even I the
Lord, will so greatly increase thy seed, that it shall not be numbered for
multitude. Lo, thou art with child, and shall bear a son, whose name thou
shall call Ishmaell. Then Hagar rebuking her dullness, acknowledged Gods
graces', who was with her every where, and gave him hearty thanks for this his
consolation in her trouble, saying: Thou O God look on me, and have not I
also here in this place looked after him that sees me in misery? which being
ended, she returned home again to Sara her mistres, and submitted her self
unto her, as the Angel gave her counsel. And after in process of time, that
is, in the year of the world 2094. she brought forth unto Abraham, being
the^ 86. years old, his first begotten son, called Ishmael, as the angel had
before said, of which Ishmaell came the peculier people of the Ishmaelites, as
of Hagar came the Hagarians. 1. chro. 5. 10. And thus was Hagar the bondewoman,
the mother of the Ishmalites and children of the flesh, and not of the
promise: but Sara she was the mother of the true Israelites, and heirs of
promise as shall appear.

For when it pleased God to make his promise first to Abraham, that Sara though
old and barren should have a son by him, called Isaak, he thinking that
impossible, besought God for Hagars sons, saying: Oh let Ishmael live in thy
sight, and it shall suffice. Whereunto God answered him, saying, I have hard thy
prayer for Ishmael, Hagars son, and lo I will bless him with temporal
blessings, etc. As of who^ shall come all the children of the flesh, but mine
everlasting covenant will I make and establishe with Isaak, the son of Sara,
of whom shall come ye children of the spirit: for Hagar or Sinai, says S.
Paul to the Gal. 4.24. is a mountain in Arabia, bearing ye name of Hagar, and
signifies the old Testament, and the Law, and Ismael her son, signifies
the Iewesh sinagogue: but Sara, or Jerusalem, which is above, and is the mother
of us all, signifies the Gospel, and Isaak her son, signifies the Church
of Christ. So that we now are all children of the promise, and in the Church of
Christ, which is our mother, and not children of ye flesh, nor of ye Sinagog,
which is a servant unto the law. So when ye time came that it pleased God,
according to his promise, to visit Sara, she conceived and brought forth a
son called Isaak, after whose birth a new contention arose between Sara and
Hagar her maid about their children: for Sara perceiving Ishmael Hagars son
to be a mocker and despiser of her son Isaak, with the apostle Paul to the gal.
4.29. calls persecution, would not suffer Ismael to keep company with her
son Isaak, but made her complaint unto Abraham, saying: cast out this bond
woman and her son: for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with my
son Isaak, which thing, though it were grievous unto Abraham to do, because
he tenderly loved Hagars son Ishmael: yet being commanded by God to follow
his wife Saras counsel therein, yt rather for yt the promised seed should be
counted from Isaak, and not from Ishmael: and also being comforted by God yt he
would bless Ismael also to a mighty people, because he was of Abraham's seed:
Abraham obeyed the voice of his wife Sara, and the next morning early, sent
Hagar and her son away with bag and bottel, and good provision of victuals upon
her back to shift for her self and her child. So Hagar being thus departed
from Abraham with her young child Ishmael in her arms, gate her unto the
wilderness of Beersheba: where she wandered so long up and down, till all
her provision of meat and drink was spent and gone. And when she saw no
remedy but yt both she and the child must needs perish for lack of
sustenaunce, she in this great perplexity, renounced all natural affection
and distrusting in Gods providence, notwithstanding that she had had good
experience thereof before time, went and cast her child Ishmael under a
certain tree behind a bushe, and went her self away from it, and sat over
against it a far off about a bow shoot, weeping and saying, thus with her
self, I will not see the death of the child: but as she sat thus a far
off, mourning and lamenting for her son: Behold God (for his promise sake
made before to Abraham, and not because either she then prayed for the child
as she ought to have done, or that the child it self had the capacity and
wit, to pray for it self being so young,) sent his angel again, even from
heaven, which comforted her in this her misery and woeful plight, saying: what
ayleth thee Hagar? fear not, for God has heard the voice of the child where
he lies. Arise, take up thy child, and hold him in thine arms, and I will
make of him a great people, as I have promised unto Abraham. So where as before
she could neither see, nor use the means which was even before her eyes,
God at this instant, opening her eyes, and Hagar now arose, and saw a well of
water, whereunto she went and refreshed her self and filled her bottell with
water, and then ran to the boy, and gave it drink thereof, by which good
providence of God, both she and her son were relieved, and lived together a
long time after, to her great joy and comfort. And when her son came to man's
state, she then dwelling in ye wilderness of Para^, took him a wife out of the
land of Egypt. Gene. 16.17.21.

Haggith, or Aggite, signi. holidayes, yearly feasts, turning about, merry.

She was one of the vi. wives of David that he had in Hebron, who there bare
unto him a son called Adoniah, that afterward was put to death by his
brother king Solomon for treason, as appears in the story of Abishag. 2.
Sam. 3.3. 1. King. 1.5. 1. Chron. 3.3.

Hannoch, or Anna, ^igni. g^acions or merciful, his grace, or favor, gracious
Lady, favorable, freely giving, res^ng, etc.

She was the wife of Elkana an Ephrathi^e: who being coupled with a mate
called Penennah, or Fenenna that was very fruitful, and she her self long
barren and without child, yet because Ha^na was better beloved of her husband
then her mate Penenna was although Penenna had more porcions and gifts given
unto her of her husband when he went abroad, and unto her sons and
daughters then Hannah had. Therefore her adversary and mate Penenna did daily
vex her sore by ^^brayding her and casting her in the teeth with her barre^nes:
yea as often as went up to the house of the Lord, to sacrifice and serve God,
her companion would so vex her herewith to her great reproach, that she would
sit and weep and lament greatly in fasting and prayer in her house before
she went out adores: which when her husband perceived, he to comfort her said
unto her: Hannah, why weepest thou, and why eatest thou not? And why is thy
heart thus troubled? am not I thy loving husband better to thee then ten
sons? Let this suffice thee, that I tenderly love thee, no less then if thou
had many children. So Hanna to satisfy her husbands mind, did eat and
drink a little, but yet being full of heaviness, that God had made her such
a railing stock, that she could not quietly eat nor drink, nor serve GOD as
she ought, she arose and went to the Temple of the Lord in Siloe where the
Arc then was, to woorshippe GOD. And there being tormented and troubled in
mind, she made her hearty prayers unto GOD, with tears, to give her a son
or manchild, the form of which prayer or vow appears in the first Lamp of
Uirginitie, page 6. And as she continued praying very earnestly in the Temple
before the Lord, it fortuned that Eli the high Priest, as he sat there also,
marked her mouth, and perceiving her lips only to move a little, and no
voice heard (for she prayed mentally and secretly in her heart,) he thought she
had bin dronken and said unto her Thou woman, how long will thou be dronken,
put away thy dronkennes from thee? Then Hannah being further vexed in mind to
see her self thus interrupted in her prayers, and more slaundered by the rash
judgment of so grave a man, could no less but make him this aunsweare in her
excuse, and said: Nay my Lord, I am not drunk, neither have I drunken either
wine, or strong drink: But I being a woman troubled in mind, and dexed in
spirit, I do here power out my sorrowful soul before the Lord in mental or
secret prayer: therefore do not so rashly count thy handmayde to be the
daughter of Beliall, or a wicked woman, for out of the abundance of the
heaviness and grief of my heart have I spoken hitherto. Then go in peace
said Eli, and the GOD of Israel grant thy petition that thou have asked. And
(she knowing that ye prayers of others would be of force with God toward
her,) desired Ely to pray for her, saying: O let thine handmayden find grace in
thy sight, and be remembered in thy prayers offered unto God. And so reposing
her self to the mercy of God, and commending her self to Elyes prayers, she
departed cheerfully home to her house, where she ate and drank merrily, and
looked no more sad. And shortly after God remembered her according to her
petition, so that in process of time she conceived by Elkana her husband, and
bare him a son in the year of the world 3000. or therabouts, whose name she
called Samuel, because she begged him of God. And when she had given her child
suck, and brought him up and weaned it, she like a virtuous mother prepared a
sacrifice, and went to the temple of the Lord in Sylo, with her young son,
and there presented before the Lord both her offering and child to Ely the
high Priest, whom she then put in remembrance thereof, saying: oh my Lord as
certainly as thy soul lives, my Lord, I am the woman that stood with thee
here of late, praying unto the Lord for this child: and because my Lord has
given me my desire, which I asked of him, therefore also I now (according to my
vow and promise, made in my prayer) am come to dedicate him unto ye Lord, unto
whom I have given him while he lives. And so after a notable song of praise
and thanks giving made by her unto God for her child, as appears in the
first Lamp page 6. She departed with her husband home, and left her child
Samuel with Ely the Priest, to minister in the temple of God in all that Ely
commanded him. So Samuel her child being but young ministered before the Lord,
gyrded with a linen Ephod. And every year after did Hannah his mother make a
little coat for Samuel her son, and bring it up to him when she came with
her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice, as the custom then was, once
every year to appear before the Lord with their families. And when she came
into the house of God, Ely the Priest blessed her husband, and her saying: The
Lord give thee seed of this woman for the petitions that she asked of ye Lord.
And so departed they home again unto their place in mount Ephraim where they
dwelt. And thus God took away her rebuke of barrennes and visited her and
blessed her with more children, so that after Samuel she conceived and bare
three sons more, and two daughters, to her great comfort and the rejoicing of
her husband. 1. Sam. 1.2.

Hazleleponi or Asalelphuni, or Asalephum. signifies the shadow or drownings
of the countenance, the sound of tinking in the face.

She was the daughter of Etam, and sister to Izreel, Ishma, and Idbash, that
were of the tribe of Judah. 1. Chro. 4.3.

Heleah or Helaa, signifies rust, weakness.

She was one of the wives of Ashur, who bare unto him iii. sons, Zereth,
Iezohar, and Ethnan. 1. Chro. 4.5.7.

Herodias, signifies the glory of the skin, or the boasting or glorying in
skinnes^ proud of his furs, the hill of pride or of presumption, the fiery
Dragon. etc.

She was the wife of Phillip, Herod the Tetrarches brother, to whom she
brought forth a daughter whose name as (Josephus reports) was called
Salomen. This woman being very licentious, and more familier with her brother
in law Herod then honesty required, grew into such favor with him, that he
(contrary to the law of Moses) married her, his brother being yet alive.
Against which unlawful marriage, that holy man of God John Baptist spoke very
much to Herod's reproof, saying, that it was not lawful for him to have his
brothers wife. Then she fearing, least that Saint John would make Herod
break of the incestuous marriage, first caused Herod to take Saint John and
bind him, and put him in prison for her sake, and would have put John to death
openly: but that he feared the multitude who counted him a Prophet of the
Lords. But this wicked woman Herodias not being herewith satisfied, counseled
her daughter Salomen at the feast of Herodes byrthdaye when she daunced before
him, to ask of him the head of John Baptist in a platter, who did so, and it
was granted her, and given her in a platter, and she carried it to her
mother. And so by the wicked devise of this unchaste woman Saint John Baptist
lost his head, to the great trouble of the Church, and grief of Christ Jesus
and his Disciples. Matthew. 14.1.

Heuah or Eua signifies quick, living, or serpent, woe, alas, life, a woman,
the mother of all mankind.

She was the last reasonable creature that God made in Paradise, and the first
woman that ever was. For when all creatures and Adam were made, Adam having now
given names to all creatures, and God seeing that among the^ all, he could not
find one helper meet for Ada^s society, said: It is not good yt man should be
himself alone, I will make him an help meet for him, and so ye Lord upon ye 6.
day of the worlds creation, caused an heavy sleep to fall upon Ada^, and whilst
he slept, he took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh in steed thereof.
And of the ribbe which the Lord God had taken out from the man made he the
woman, to finishe and make perfect the woorkemanshippe of mankind by the
woman's creation, which before was like an imperfect buylding. And the woman
being thus created, the Lord brought her to the man to see how he would name
her, and to make her his mate: who as soon as he saw her, said thus of her,
This now is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called woman
(or man's) because she was taken out of man. Thus Adam and the woman being
coupled together as man and wife by the Lord in paradise: (to show yt marriage
requires a greater duty toward our wives, and likewise the wife to the
husband, then otherwise we are bound to our Pare^ts^ therefore (said God) shall
man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they shall be
one flesh.

Now Adam and Eve being both naked were not ashamed, because they were yet in
their state of innocence: for before sin entered, all things were comely and
honest. And being both put in ye garden of pleasure called Eden, or Paradise,
Satan envying their felicity, as he can change himself into an Angel of
light: so did he now first abuse the wisdom and subtilty of the serpent, the
subtilest beast in the field: and making the serpent his instrument, he went
and spoke in the serpent unto the woman and said: yea, has God indeed said, ye
shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And the woman aunsweared the
serpent, saying, We eat of the trees of the garden, but of the fruit of ye
tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said ye shall not eat of
it, neither shall ye touch it least ye die. Then the serpent or Satan (whose
chief subtilty was to cause Heua not to fear gods threatenings) say^ unto the
woman, ye shall not dye at all. But GOD does know that when ye shall eat
thereof your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and
evil, as though he should say, God does not forbid ye to eat of the fruit,
save that he knows if you should eat thereof, ye shall be like to him. So
the woman Heua doubting of Gods threatening yielded to Satan, and seeing that ye
tree was good for meat, and that it was pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be
desired to get knowledge, she took of the fruit thereof and did eat. And
being thus beguiled through the subtlety of the serpent, by who^ through envy
of the Devil, she was first deceived, and guilty of the transgression of Gods
commandment: And so consequently, the beginning of sin and first entrance of
death over all flesh into the world. She gave also of the same fruit unto her
husband Adam, and so entised him also to sin with her. And he (not so much to
please his wife, as moved by ambition at her persuasion) did eat also of the
forbidden fruit. Whereupon immediately the eyes of them both being opened, they
knew that they were naked, and began to feel their misery: but yet starting
from God, as those that had no grace to seek to him for remedy, they
foolishly sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves breeches thereof, or
things to gyrde about their loins to hyde their priuities: and so having
sinful consciences, hid themselves for shame from the presence of the Lord
God (as they thought) among the trees of the garden. And this fall of Adam and
Eve was as some think upon the tenth day of May. But the Lord God walking in
the mids of the garden in the cool of the day, with a mighty voice called
first unto the man and said, Adam where art thou? Who aunsweared, Lord, I heard
thy voice and was afraid, because I was naked: and therefore hid I my self.
Wherein his hypocrisy appeared in that he hid from God the cause of his
nakedness, which was the transgression of Gods commandment. And the Lord said
unto Adam: who told thee that thou wast naked, have thou eaten of the tree
whereof I commanded that thou should not eat in no case? Then Adam said, the
woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree and I did eat.
Where note the wickedness and lack of true repentance in Adam, in that he
burdened God with his fault, because he had given him a wife which entised him
to offend.

Then the Lord called the woman and said unto her: why have thou done this?
And the woman Heua also in stead of confessing her fault, increased it by
accusing the Serpent, saying: The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. Thus God
having asked the reason of the man and the woman, because he would bring them
to some remorce and repentance for their sin that he might have mercy upon
them, if they had had the grace to confess their follies, as like Hypocrites
they posted it of from one to another, would no longer stand reasoning or
debating the matter so with the Serpent, because he would show him no
compassion at all: but straight cursing and^ condemning Satan in the Serpent,
he said unto the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art cursed above
all cattle, and above every beast of the field, upon thy belly shall thou
go, and as a vile and contemptible beast, shall thou eat dust and filth all
the days of thy life. I will also put enmity between thee (meaning Satan, by
whose motion and craft the serpent deceived the woman) and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed. He (that is Christ) shall break thine head,
that is, the power of sin and death. And thou shall bruise his heel, that is,
Satan shall sting Christ and his members but not overcome them.

And to comfort Adam and Eve again by the promise of the Gospel or the
blessed seed, as also to punish the body of woman for the sin which the
soul should have smarted for, that the spirit having conceived hope of
forgiveness might live by faith in Christ, therefore the Lord said again
unto Eua, and in her to all women: I will greatly increase thy sorrow and
thy conceptions, In sorrow shall thou bring forth children, and thy desire
shall be subject to thine husband, and he shall rule over thee. Also to Adam GOD
said, because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, and eaten of the
forbidden fruit, cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat
of it all the days of thy life. Thorns also and thistles, as unnatural
fruits proceeding of the corruption of sin, shall it bring forth unto thee,
and thou shall eat the herbs of the field: yea, in the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat bread, til thou return to the earth, for out of it wast thou taken,
because thou art dust, and to dust shall thou return. Thus the transgression
of Gods commandments in Adam and Eve, was ye cause that both they and all
mankind in them together with all other creaturs were subject to the curse of
God.

And then GOD deriding as it were Adams misery, whereunto he was fallen by
ambition, to Adams great reproach said, behold the man is become as one of
us to know good and evil. And now least he should put forth his hand, and
take also of the tree of life, and eat and live for ever, therefore the Lord
God having first made coasts of skins to cloth both Adam and Eua, or given
them knowledge to make themselves garments to cover their nakedness, he sent
them forth and cast out man and woman from the garden of Eden, to till the
earth whence they were taken. And at the East side of the garden of Eden, he
set an Angel or Cherubin with the blade of a swoorde shaken, to keep the
way of the tree of life from Adam. And thus Adam and Eve now deprived of life,
soft also the signs thereof.

Afterward Adam changed his wives name, and called her name Heua, because she
was the mother of all living, who before was called woman, man's or Adam. And
Heua conceived and bare Adam her husband three sons, Cayn, Abell, and Seth:
and two daughters, Calmana and Delbora: by whom the world was first
replenished. When her first son Cayn was borne, she greatly rejoiced and
praised God for him, and promised to offer him unto the Lord, as the first
fruits of her birth, saying, I have obtained a son to (or by) the Lord. And
when after the death of Abel she conceived and bare another son, she called
his name Seth, and praised God also saying, God has appointed me another seed
for Abel, whom his brother Cayn has ^layne. Genesis 2.3.4.

Hodesh or Hodes, signifies a month, a newelty.

She was one of the wives of Shaharaim, who^ he took after he had put away his
2. other wives, Hushim and Baara, which Hodesh bare unto him diverse sons yt
became great me^ in ye world, as appears. 1. Chr. 8.9

Hodia or Odaia, the praise, or acknowledging of the Lord.

She was the sister of Naham. 1. Chro. 4.19.

Hoglah or Hegla signifies her holiday cheer, or wherling about.

She was one of the 5. daughters of Zelophead the son of Hephar, and of the
family of Manasses, who together with her sisters inherited al her fathers
lands by partitio^ as coheires or partners for want of heir male, and who was
afterward married to one of her uncles sons, of ye tribe of Manasses, to the
end their inheritance should remain in that tribe for ever, read Mahlah, Number.
26.33.27.1.36. all.

Huldah or Holdai, holda, or Olda, signifies the world, or a weasell, ru^f.

She was the wife of one Shallum the son of Tikuah, the son of Harhas
keeper of king Josias wardrop. And being a Prophetess dwelling in Jerusalem
in the college or place called the house of doctrine, which was near to the
temple, and where the learned assembled, to entreat of the scriptures, and the
doctrine of the Prophets. Joshua the king of Judah, upon a time, that is in ye
year of the 3498. finding the book of the law in the temple at the
reformation thereof, sent Helkiah the priest, and Shaphane the Chaunceller with
other noble me^ of his counsel unto this woman Hulda the Prophetess, to
common with her and enquire of the Lord for him and his people, concerning
the book of the law so found in the temple, and read before him, what should
be done therewith. And when the messengers had done their errand, the
Prophetess aunsweared them saying, go tell the man that sent you to me, thus
says the Lord God of Israel, behold I will bring evil upon this place,
and upon the inhabiters thereof, even all the words of the book which the
king of Judah read, because they have forsaken me, and have burnt incense unto
other Gods to anger me with all the works of their hands, and men's inventions
contrary to the word of God: my wrath also shall be kindled against this place,
and shall not be quenched, (for their abominations). But to the king of Judah
who sent you to enquire of the Lord, so shall ye say unto him, Thus says the
Lord God of Israel, the words that thou have heard read in that book, shall
come to pass, but because thine heart did melt and thou have repented and
humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against
this place, and against the inahbitants of the same, how they should be
destroyed and accursed, and have rent thy clothes and wept before me: I have
also heard it says the Lord. Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy
fathers, and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not
see all the evil that I will bring upon this place. And so the messengers
departed from the prophe^esse and told the king what she said. 2. King. 22.14.

Hushim or Husim signifies hasting, holding peace, given to pleasu^e.

She was one of the wives of Shaharaim of the tribe of Beniamine, who bare him
two sons called Ahitub and Elpaal, and afterward with her mate Baare was put
away from her husband. 1. Chro. 8.8. 11.

I
Iael or Iahel signifies a Do, or ascending or going upward, a small Dear, a
Roe, a Hynde, the match of heart and hynd, beginning.

She was the wife of one Hebar a Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab
Moses father in law: and being a stranger yet worshipped the true God, and
joined with Israel in all things. And when Iael in the year of the world 2766.
had heard of the great overthrow of Sisera, and how he fled and was coming
toward her tent for succor, she went out and met him saying: Turn in my
Lord, turn into me, and fear not: so he being come into her tent or house,
asked her a little water to quench his thirst, and she brought him a bottell
full of milk. And when he had well drunk thereof, he laid him down to
sleep, and as she was covering him with mantles and clothes, he prayed her to
go and ^tand at the door of her tent, and whosoever does come and ask for any
man^ say (I pray thee quoth he) there is no man here. And so when Sisara was
fast a sleep, Iael being thereto provoked by Gods spirit to take revenge
upon the enemy of his people, went softly unto him with a nail in the one
hand and a hammer in the other, and smote the nail through the temples of his
head, and nailed him fast to the ground, which done, she went and stood at her
tent door, and seeing Baracke pursue Sisara, she went and met him saying, Come
and go in with me, and I will show thee the man whom thou seek, and so he
followed Iael who brought him into her tent where Sisara lay dead and the nail
in his temples. And then he saw that a woman had the honor and not he, and
knew that the prophecy of Debora was truly fulfilled, which she prophesied
unto him when she said, Baracke this journey that thou take upon thee now,
shall not be for thy honor, for the Lord shall sell Sisara into the hand of a
woman, who shall take away the honor of the victory from thee: as it came to
pass indeed. Judge. 4.17. 18. etc. For which valiant act of Iaels: Deborah in
her song of praise, highly commended, and praised her, saying, Blessed shall
Iael the wife of Heber be above other women dwelling in tents, blessed shall she
be above other women, etc. as you may read in the song at large in the first
Lamp page 3. Judge. 5.24.

Iecholiah or Iecolia Iechelia, Iecelia, si. the profiting or power of the Lord.

She was the wife of Amaziah king of Judah, and the mother of Uzziah called also
Azanah king of Judah. 2. King. 15.2. 2. Chro. 26.3.

Iehoaddan or Ioadan or Ioiadan, sig. the Lords delight, the Lords plea^ure,
the Lords good season.

She was the wife of Ioash king of Judah, and mother to Amaziah king of Judah. 2.
King. 14.2.2. Chro. 25.1.

Iehoshabeath or Iehosheba, or Iehosabeth, Iosabeth, or Iosaba, sig. the fulness
of the Lord, the Lords oath, or the seventh of the Lord, endewed.

She was the daughter of king Ioram, or Iehora king of Israel, and sister to
Ahaziah, wife to Iehoiada ye high Priest or Bishop of ye Jews. And when
Athalia her Grandmother went about cruelly to destroy the king her brothers
seed by murder: God for his promise sake made to the house of David, moved the
heart of Iehosheba to preserve some ^e^nant of that stock: whereupon she went
and took Ioash the youngest son of Ahaziah her brother, and stole away her
young nephewe from among the kings sons that were appointed to be slain:
and hid both ^im and his nurse in her own bedchamber with her husbands
counsel, and kept him from slaughter in the chamber where the Priests did lie,
near the house of the Lord, the space of six years, so that he perished not
with the rest of his brethren: but after became king of the land, and deposed
his grandmother Athalia, as appears in the life of Athalia 2. King. 11.2.2.
Chro. 22.10.

Iehudiiah or Iudaia, Judea (or Iudaea) sig. praising, granting, or
acknowledging the Lord.

She was the second wife of Ezrah, and bare unto him three sons, Geret the
father or Prince of Gedor, and Hebar the Prince of Socho, and the 3. Iekuthiel
the Prince of Zanoah. 1. Chro 4.18.

Iemimah or Diem, sig. beautiful as the day, or of long life.

She was one of the three beautiful daughters of Job, which God gave him
after his fall, unto whom also with her sisters Keziah and Kerenhappuch he
gave an inheritance among her brethren. Job. 42.14.

Ierushah or Ierusa, sig. Banishment, or inheritance.

She was the daughter of Zadock the hie Priest, and wife to Uzziah or Azariah
king of Judah, to whom she bare a son called Iotham, that after the death of
his father, was a good king of Judah. 2. King. 15. 33. 2. Chro. 27.1.

Iezabel or Iesabel, or Isabell sig. an Island, or habitation, a dweller with, a
vain flud, an issue of blood, or issuing blood, where is the dunghill, the
Island of the dwelling. Woe to the dwelling, the I Will of the dunghill, woe to the
dunghill.

She was the daughter of Eth. baal king of the Sidonians, and wife to Ahab the
son of Omri king of Israel, to whom she bare 2. sons called Ahaziah and
Iehoram afterward kings of Israel also. This Iezabel being a wicked woman, and
vile idolatresse, not only entised and pricked forward her husband Ahab to
all kind of wickedness, strange idolatry, and cruel persecution: but also
her self slew the prophets of the Lord and destroyed them, and most ragingly
persecuted Eliia the Lords Prophet, for destroying Baals priests whom she made
so much of, and sent a messenger unto him with threatening words, saying: The
Gods do so to me (quoth she) and more also, if I make not thy life Elia, like
one of their lives whom thou have slain, by to morrow this time. Whereupon the
good Prophet was feign to fly away from her into the wilderness, where he
remained by her cruelty in great perplexity and sorrow til the Lord comforted
him. Moreover, when she perceived the sullen sadness, and inward fretting of
Ahab her husband, and understood the cause thereof to be for nothing else but
for that he could not have his inordinate appetite satisfied, and Naboths
vineyard granted unto him to make him a garden at his request, she came to her
husband lying languishing and fretting for anger upon his bed, and said unto
him: Why is thy spirit so sad that thou eatest no bread? Do thou now
govern the kingdom of Israel? Thou know not I perceive what it is to
reign and be a king, for if thou did, thou would command thy subjects,
and not entreat them? Up therefore, and eat bread, and be of good cheer, for
I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Iezre^lite. So in the year of the
world 3224. she wrote letters in Ahabs name, and sealed them with his seal,
and sent the letters unto the Elders and nobles of the city, the contents of
which letters was this: Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth among the chief of
the people, and set two wicked men before him, and let them witness against
him, saying: Thou did blaspheme God and the king, then carry him out, and
stone him, that he may die. Which letters when the Elders had received, they
like wicked worldlinges. obeyed rather the wicked commandments of this
wicked Princess: then the just law of God, who wills not to consent to the
shedding of innocent blood: and did as Iezabell had written in the letters sent
unto them, and having thus truelly without all equity under color of law put
innocent Naboth and his sons to death, they sent Iesabell word thereof: who
so soon as she heard thereof, went to her husband lying languishing on his
bed, and said, up now (man) and take possession of Naboths Uinyarde for
naught, which he before refused to give thee for money: for behold he as a
trangressor of the law is stoned to death, and all his sons that should
inherit it, and resist thy purpose by clayming possessions: which she did that
her husband might enjoy it the more quietly. With which news Achab being
revived, straight ways arose and went to take possession of Naboths vineyarde,
as his wife counseled him: but as he was in the Uineyarde taking possession,
God sent his Prophet Elia unto him, which reproved Achab and his wife with
terrible threatninges of Gods judgments, saying, first to Ahab. Have thou
killed and also gotten possession Ahab, or do thou think to have any
advantage by murdering of the innocent? Uerilye thus says the Lord, I have
seen yesterday the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons, and I will
render it thee in this field: therefore in the place where dogs licked the
blood of Naboth, even there shall dogs lick even thy blood also, because
thou have shed innocent blood and sold thy self to work wickedness in the
sight of the Lord, etc. And also as concerning thy wife Iezabel, thus says
the Lord of her: that forasmuch as she whose nature or kind should have
abhorred all tyranny, and ben moved and inclined to all pity, mercy, and
compassion, has contrariwise given and horrible example of most monstrous
cruelty in womenkinde, and not only given wicked counsel to her husband to
become a vile Idolater, and cruel murderer: but also ben as one that gives
her self wholly to serve all manner of sin: therefore the dogs shall eat her
also in the field, or by the wall of her palace in Iezreel, and there shall be
none to bury her. With terrible words of the Prophet when Ahab heard, he rent
his clothes and repented his sins in dust, ashes, and sackcloth, which caused
the Lord by and by to have mercy upon him, and to turn the evil from him
unto his son Iorams days. But as for Iezabel the holy Ghost makes no
mention that ever she blushed at the matter or once repented of her villanny:
but went on still in her Idolatry and abominable life, during her husband Ahabs
reign, and the reign of Ahaziah and Iehoram her two sons. Insomuch, as when
her son Iehoram was sick of wounds and an hurt that the Aramites had given
him, God raised up Iehue to be king, who being made an instrument of God to
execute his foresaid judgments against the house of Ahab ye king to avenge
the blood of his servants the Prophets and servant, shed by the hand of
Iezabel: He conspired against Ioram, who meeting Iehue in the field of Naboth
the Israelite, demanded of Iehue, saying: come thou peaceably Iehue? But
Iehue being furiously bent to execute Gods vengeance against Ioram, and his
mother Iezabel, aunsweared Ioram, what have thou to do with peace? the
whoredoms of thy mother Iezabell, and her witchcraftes are yet in great
number: and with that Iehu shot Ioram quite through his heart, as he fled
from him, so that he fell down dead in his chariot. And after Iehu had caused
the dead corpse of Ioram to be put and cast in the field of Naboth, to fulfill
the word of the Lord against Achab, which was now first accomplished in his
son Ioram, after this judgment of God (I say) executed upon ye son for
imitating the sins of his father Achab and mother Iezabel: Iehu went toward
Iezreel to do ye like judgment in revenging of Gods cause upon the mother
Iezabel that lay there.

But she being of an hauty and cruel nature, persisted still in her impiety
and impudency, and fearing Gods judgments nothing at all, so soon as she
heard of Iehues coming toward her, because she would still retain her
Princely state and dignity, painted her face, tired her head, and trimmed her
self in gorgious array: And so laying thus be painted and bedecked, looking out
of her chamber window, as Iehue entered in at the gates, she cried out upon him,
and called him traitor, and reviled him with these words, saying: Had Zimry
peace that slew his master Elah? 1. Kin. 16.10. as if she should have said,
can any traitor or any that rises up against his superior have good success?
Noe, neither can thou Iehu prosper in this thine eger enterprise. But
forasmuch as this was Gods determination, that Iesabel also should be dismaide,
Iehu then forthwith lifted his eyes to the window, and cried aloude to her
guarde and men of her chamber, and said, who is on my side, who? With that two
of her own Eunuchs of chief servants looked out unto Iehu, and he said unto
them, cast her down, and they at his commandment straight ways took her in
their arms, and with such violence cast her down out of her window (as she
lay vaunting her self and railing against Iehu) that she was dashed all to
pieces, and so miserably died with the fall, who being thus dead, Iehu also
besprinkled her blood upon the wall and upon the horses, and trod her delicate
corpse under his horses feet. Which he did by the motion of gods spirit, that
her blood should be shed, who had so often shed the blood of innocents, to be a
spectacle and example of Gods judgments to all tyrauntes, oppressors, and
idolatrous persecutors. And when Iehu was entered into her house and had well
refreshed himself with meat and drink, he being willing yet that she should
have had the honor of burial: said to some of his men, Go, visit you yonder
cursed woman and bury her, because she is a kings daughter. But when they came
to take her up to be buried, they found no more of her body left but the scull,
and the feet, and the palms of her hands, (for the dogs had eaten the
rest:) whereof Iehu being advertised, he the^ said, now is ye word of God and
prophesy of Elias spoken of before, fulfilled, which said, In the field of
Iezreel shall the dogs eat the flesh of Iezabel, and the carcas of Iezabel
shall be as doung upon the ground in ye field of Iezreel, so that none shall say,
This is Iezabel, this was done in the year of the world 3240. And this we may
see Gods judgments does and shall appear eue^ in this world against them,
that suppress his word and persecute his servants. 1. Kings 16. 31. 18.4.
13.19.2. 21. all. 2. Kings 9. all.

Furthermore, note that God so detested for ever and ever through all ages the
Idolatry and cruelty of this woman Iezabel, that the holy Ghost to her
perpetual reproach and infamy, in the Revelation ca. 2.18.20. finds great
fault with ye minister or Angel of the church of Thiatyra, for that some among
them imitating her strange religion, and tyranny, and both spiritual and
corporal whoredom, exhorted them to repentance, saying thus, I know thy
works, thy love and service, faith and patience, etc. Notwithstanding I have a
few things against thee, namely this, that thou suffer the woman Iezabel,
which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and deceive my servants, to
make them commit fornication, and to eat meat sacrificed to Idols. And I gave
her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not: behold I will
cast her into a bed and them that commit fornication with her into great
affliction, except they repent them of their works. And I will kill her
children, that is, them that follow her ways with death, and all the Churches
shall know that I am he which search the reins and hearts: and I will give
unto every of you according to your works. Revel. 2. 18.20. etc.

Ioanna or Iohanna sig. the grace or favor of the Lord, or the Lords gift,
or mercy.

She was the wife of one Chusa, Herodes steward, and a godly woman, who with
Susanna and many other godly women converted to the faith of Christ, ministered
liberally unto Christ and his Apostles of her subste^ce whilst he lived here
on earth. And after Christ had suffered his passion, she went with Mary
Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James and other women, to seek Christ at his
sepulcher: And being told of the Angels that he was risen and not there, she
with the rest returned from the sepulcher to the Apostles, to bring the^
tydinges of his resurrection. But the news or thing seemed unto the Apostles,
to be but a feygned or made thing of the women's own heads, and therefore
believed them not at the first report. Luke 8.3.24.10.

Iochabed or Iocabeth, sig. glorious, the Lords glory, sage, weighty, where
is gayness, she is sage or grave.

She was the daughter of Leuy, borne in Egypt, and sister to Gershon, Koah and
Merari, and after she became the wife of Amram (or Amaramis after Couper) her
brother Koaths son (which kind of marriage was afterward in the Leuiticall
law, Leui. 18.12. forbidden) unto who^ she bare three notable members of Gods
Church, to wit, Aaron, Moses, and a daughter called Miriam. And when she bare
Moses in Egypt, and was commanded by king Pharao to cast him in the river to
be drowned, as all the Hebrews among the Egyptians were: Iochebed seeing that
Moses her son was a very fair and proper child, with a good faith in God,
not fearing the kings commandment, went and hid him the space of three
months: but when she could no longer hide him on the land, she in the same
faith in God, took an Arc or Cradell made of wicker or of reed, and daubed
it with lome, slime and pitche, and laid the child therein, and put it among
bulrushes by the rivers brinke: committing her child to the providence of God,
whom she could not keep from the rage of that blooddy tyrant. So whilst
Miriam her daughter and his sister stood a far off, watching what would
become of the child her brother: Behold it happened that the daughter of the
same tyrant Pharao, came to wash her self in the river, whilst her maidens
walked along by the rivers side: and being come to the bank, she saw the arc
among the bulrushes, and sent her maids straight to fetch it, who brought the
arc unto her, and she then opened it in the presence of her maids and his
sister, and finding the child in it, said, surely this is one of the Hebrews
children: and she hearing the babe weep and cry for sustenance, had compassion
on it and was moved with pity toward it. Whereupon his sister Miriam being
come near unto them to see the event, said unto Pharaos daughter, shall I go
and call unto thee a nurse of the Hebrew women to nurse the child for thee. Yea
(quoth Pharaos daughter) go thy way. So the maid his sister went and called
this Iochebed the childs mother and hers, to whom Pharaos daughter committed
the child to nurse saying, take this child away and nurse it for me, and I
will reward thee. Then Iochebed took her own child and nursed it, and so was
Moses preserved from perishing by water, as the king had cruelly commanded.
Whereby we see that man's counsel cannot hinder that which God has determined
shall come to pass, nor destroy that which he will have saved. So when the
child was well grown in age, Iochebed brought him unto Pharaos daughter, who
made him her adoptiue son, and called his name Moses, because (said she) I
drew him out of the water. Exodus 2.1.6. ^0. Number. 26,59:

Judith, or Judea, signi. praising, or confessing, he that prayseth or
confesses.

She was the daughter of Merari, the son of Ox, and wife of one Manasses. Who
being dead in the year of the world 3492, about barley harvest time, left her
much riches, and a great family in the city of Bethulia, where she dwelt. So
being left a desolate wydow, she made her a tent upon her house to pray in, and
put on sackcloth, and her widows apparel, and fasted all the days of her
widowhood, save the day before ye Sabbath, and the Sabbath, and the eues and
feasts, or solemn days, yt were kept in Israel: yea she was a woman of so
great chastity, virtue, and godliness, and feared God so greatly that there was
none could bring an evil report of her, but every one gave her their good
word.

Now during the time of her widowhood, it chanced Olophernes the captain of
Nabuchodonozor king of Assyria, to come and besiege the city of Be^hulia where
she dwelt, of whose huge host and mighty power the Jews and Citizens of
Bethulia were so sore afraid, that they wist not what to do, for he having
laid siege unto the city 34. days, had in that time destroyed all the water
conduits, so that they must either starve or yield of force. Whereupon the
people with one consent, men, women and children, ran to Oseas the hie Priest,
and chief elders of the city, and cried out upon the^ to yield, and give over
the city to Olophernes in time, least they al perished through their
negligence, who exhorted them to tarry and wait yet five days longer for the
mercy of God, and if he helped them not in that space, the elders would do as
they had required.

Then Judith, who all this while had kept her house, and was continually in
fasting and prayer, hearing of the evil words of the people against the
Governors for lack of water, and what promise Ozias and the elders had made
unto the people, to deliver the city unto the enemy within 5. days, she sent
her maid Abra that had the government of all things yt she had, for Ozias and
the other ancients of the city, and made this learned oration unto them
saying: Hear me O ye Governors of the inhabitaunts of Bethulia, for your
words that ye have spoken before the people this day are not right, touching
this oath and promise that ye have made and pronounced between God and you, and
have promised to deliver the city to the enemy, unless within these 5. days the
Lord turn to help you. And now what men are ye, that ye have tempted God
this day, and set your selves in Gods steed among the children of men? So now
you seek the Lord almighty, but ye shall never know any thing, for you can
not find out the depth of the heart of man, neither can ye perceive the things
that he thinks: then how can you search out God, that has made all these
things, and know his mind, or comprehend his purpose? Nay my brethren,
provoke not the Lord our God to anger: for if he will not help us within
these five days, he has power to defend us when he will, even every day, or
to destroy us before our enemies. Do not you therefore bind the counsayles of
the Lord our God, for God is not as man, that he may be threatened, neither
as the son of man to be brought to judgment. Therefore this your devise,
obtayneth no mercy of God, but rather provoke him to wrath and displeasure.
Will ye set the mercy of the Lord a time, and appoint him a day at your will?
No, exhort the people to repentance and prayer, and let us heartily fall down
before him, and serve him with a meek spirit, and with weeping eyes say unto
the Lord, that he deal with us according to his own will speedily in
mercy: that like as our heart is now vexed and brought low through the pride
of our enemies, it may so be comforted by his grace. Yea, let us wait for
salvation of him, and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice,
if it please him. For there appears none in our age, neither is there any
now in these days, neither of tribe, nor family, nor people, nor city among
us which worship the gods made with hands, as has bin before time of our
forefathers: for the which sin, our forefathers were given to the sword for a
spoil, and had a great fall before our enemies: as appears Judge.
2.11.4.1.6.1.

But as for us, we know none other God but only the Lord: therefore we
trust that he will not despise us, nor any of our lynage: yea for his comfort
let us tarry with meekness, and he shall require and make inquisition for our
blood from the vexation of our enemies: he shall bring down all the heathen
that rise up against us, and put them to dishonor: even the Lord our God
shall do it, neither when we shall be taken, shall Judea be so famous: for
our Sanctuary shall be spoiled, and he will require the profanation thereof
at our mouth. And the fear of the people our brethren, and the captivity of
the country, and the desolation of our inheritance (which they rather wish)
will he turn upon our heads among the Gentiles wheresoever we shall be in
bondage, and we shall be an offense and reproach to all them that possess us:
for our servitude shall not be directed by favor: but the Lord our God shall
turn it to dishonor. Now therefore, O dear brethren, Let us show an example
to our brethren the people: because their hearts depend upon you, and the
Sanctuary, and the house and the altar rest all upon you, that are the
honorable and elders in the people of God. Moreover, let us give thanks to
the Lord our God, which tries us even as he did our fathers, and lift ye
up the hearts of the people with your exhortations, that they may call to
remembrance how our fathers also in times paste were tempted, that they might
be proved, if they woorshipped their God aright: yea put them in mind of
this I say, how that our father Abraham being tempted and tried through many
tribulations, was found a lover and friend of God. So was Isaak, so was Jacob,
so was Moses, and all they that pleased GOD passed steadfast in faith through
manifold troubles: but they that received not their temptations with the fear
of God, but put them selves forth with impatience and murmuring against God,
peryshed of the destroyer, and were slain of serpents. And therefore, seeing
the Lord has not tried us, as he did them to the examination of their hearts,
neither does he take vengeance on us: we also should not undertake to be
revenged for the things that are done unto us: but to consider that al these
punishments are far less then our sins and misdeedes, and believing that
this correction comes unto us, as to the servants of God, for our amendment
and instruction, and not for our destruction.

Thus her eloquent and godly oration being ended, Ozias the chief governor,
then to her great commendation said unto Judith, as follows: All that thou
have spoken, thou have spoken with a good heart, and it is true, and there is
no man can reprove or resist thy words. For it is not to day that thy wisdom
is known, but from the beginning of thy life have we known thy wisdom: for
the devise of thine heart is good: but the people for very thirst compelled us
to make that oath and promise unto them which we may not transgress. Therefore
now pray thou for us unto God, because thou art a holy woman, and fear God,
yt the Lord may send us rain to fill our cesterns, yt we faynte no more. Unto
who^ Judith replied and said unto Ozias and the rest of the governors: seeing
ye know yt my words are of God, the^ hear me, and prove my counsel and
devise, I pray you, if it be of God: for I will do a thing, which shall be
declared in all generatio^s to ye children of our nation, and beseech ye God
for me, yt he will bring my counsel and devise to good end. Thus have I
devised: ye shall stand this night in the gate before the port gate of
Bethulia: And I will go forth with Abra my handmaiden, and pray ye therefore
unto God, yt he will graciously visit and remember his people Israel by mine
hand, and deliver the city from the enemies, within these five days that ye
have promised the people to deliver up ye city. But as for ye act or thing
that I go in hand withal, ask ye no questions of it, nor make further
inquiry of me: for I will not declare it unto you, till God have finished that
I do, and till I bring you word again, do ye nothing else but pray, pray unto
the Lord our God for me. Then Ozias the prince of the people of Judah, with
the rest of the Elders, said: hoe Judith, Go thy way in peace, the Lord God be
with thee, and before thee, to take vengeance on our enemies. So taking their
leave of Judith, they returned from the tent, and went from her again every
man to their wards.

Now when the governors were gone their way, the^ Judith went into her secret
closet, and there clothed her self with sackcloth, strawed ashes upon her head,
and fell down upon her face before the Lord. And about the time that the
incense of the evening was offered in Jerusalem in the house of ye Lord, she
cried unto the Lord with a loud voice, and made her humble prayers for the
deliverance of her people, saying: O Lord God of my fathers, etc. as it is in
the 1. Lamp if vi^. page.41.

And when she had left off to cry unto ye Lord, and had made an end of al her
prayer, she rose up from the place where she had fallen down and lien flat
before ye Lord: and called her maid Abra, and went down into her house, in the
with she abode in ye sabbath days, and feast days, and when she had put off the
sack or hairecloth^ and laid away the garments of her widowhood: she washed
her body, anointed her self with precious ointme^ts and things of sweet
savor: braided, platted, and dressed ye hair of her head, and put attire upon
it, and put on her garments of gladness, wherwt she was clad during the life of
Manasses her husband: also she put on slippers upon her feet, bracelets,
spanges, and sleeves upon her arms, eareringes, and finger rings, and decked
her self bravely with all her best ornaments and array, to allure the eyes of
all men that should see or behold her, which she did not for any
volup^uousnes, or pleasure of the flesh: but of a right discretion and virtue.
Then she gave her maid Abra also a bottle of wine, a pot of oil, and filled a
scrip with flower, and with dry figs, and fine cakebread and cheese: al which
being lapt up together, and put in her maids lap, she went her way forth to ye
gates of the city of Bethulia, and found standing there Ozias and the
ancients of the city, waiting her coming as she had before counseled them.
Who seeing Judith thus gorgiouslye attyred and changed, they as men
astonished, merueyled greatly at her wonderful beauty: for the Lord had
increased her farenesse, and given her a special beauty, so that she was
exceeding amiable and well favored in all men's eyes, and they asking no
questions at her: but making their prayer unto God for her, let her go,
saying, The Lord God of our fathers give thee grace and favor, and with his
power perform and accomplish all the devices and enterprises of thine heart,
to the glory of the children of Israel, and to the exaltation of Jerusalem:
that Jerusalem I say may rejoice over thee, and that thy name may be in the
number of the holy and righteous, And all they that were there afterward,
said with one voice, So be it.

Then after their prayer ended, Judith said to Ozias: Command the gates of
the city to be opened unto me, that I may go forth to accomplish the
things which you have spoken unto me. So the gates being opened at her
request: she took her leave of the people, and with her maid Abra, went out
in the night: the people still persisting in hearty prayer for her, and
beseeching the Lord to be her defense, and well to perform the device of her
heart, that they might safely, and joyfully receive her presence again, and so
committing her to God, shut the gates, and looked over the walls after her,
so long as they could see her. And as she was gone past the mountains, and
kept her way strait in the valley, it happened that about the spring of the
day: the first watch and spies of the Assyrians met with her, and took her,
and asked her saying: of what people art thou? and whence come thou? or
whether go thou? And Judith answered, I am a woman or daughter of the
Hebrews, and am fled from them: I know they shall be given you to be spoiled
and consumed, because they thought scorn to yield them selves unto you, that
they might find mercy in your sight. Therefore have I devised by my self
after this manner, I will go before the prince Olophernes, the chief captain
of your army, and tell him all their secrets, and will show him ye way how
he may come by them, and win their city without the loss of body, or life
of any one of his men.

Now when the men had pondered her words, and considered well her beawtie,
her cou^tena^ce and fair face: they were astonished, and wondering greatly at
her excellent beauty, they put her in good comfort of her life, saying: Thou
have saved thy life by finding out this device, and making have to come before
our Lord. Now therefore come with us to his tent, and some of us shall conduct
thee till they have delivered thee into his hand. And when thou stand
before him, be not afraid in thine heart: but show unto him what thou have
to say, and be thou sure, he will entreat thee well. So they set her and her
maid in a chariotte, and being accompanied with an hundred men, brought her
to Holophernes cent: where by reason her coming was bruted among the
pauilions, or tents of his soldiers, there was such a running too and fro to
see her, that they came and stood round about her as she stood without
Olophernes tent, merueiling at her beawtie, and wondered at the children of
Israel, because of her feature, comely, and goodly personage: insomuch, as
every one being immediately overcome and taken with her beawtie, said one to
another, who would despise this people of the Jews? that have among them
such goodly and fair women. Should we not by reason fight against them for
these women if for nothing else? surely it is not good that one man of these be
left: for if they should remain, they might deceive the whole earth. So when
Olephernes was advertised of her coming, and that she stood without his tent,
waiting to speak with him, he sent his guard and servants for her, who
brought her near unto his tent door: where he lay very stately upon his bed
under a canopie, which was wouen with purple, and gold, and emeraldes, and
precious stones: and when his men went in and told him that Judith was
come: Olophernes came forth unto the entrey of his tent lighted with Lamps of
silver (because it was in the night) carried before him, to meet her and
welcome her. And when Judith was come before him: he no sooner saw her, but
immediately he was overcome and ravished with her beawtie: for both he and his
servants marueiled all thereat. So Judith looking wishly upon him, and being
somewhat abashed at the first with his majesty, she fell down upon the
earth as one almost dead for fear, and being revived again, did reverence
unto Olofernes: and his servants took her up again at his commandment.

Then said Olofernes unto her, woman, be of good cheer, and fear not in
thine heart: for I never hurt any that would serve Nabuchadnezer, ye king of
all the earth. As for thy people, if they had not despised me, I would not have
lift up my spear against them, but they have procured these things unto
themselves. But tell me now, what is the cause that thou art fled from them?
And wherefore thou art come unto us? For if thou be come for safegarde and
succor: then be of good comfort, thou shall live from this night and
hereafter: for none shall hurt thee, but entreat thee well as they do the
servants of king Nabuchadnezer my Lord. To whom Judith made answer on this
wise, saying: Sir (quoth Judith) if thou will receive the words of thy
handmaid, and suffer thine handmaid to speak in thy presence, I will declare
no lie unto my Lord this night: And if thou will follow and do after the
words of thine handmaide, God will bring the thing perfectly to pass by thee,
and my Lord shall not fail of his purpose. As Nabuchadnezer king of all the
earth lives, and as his power is of force: who has sen^ thee to reform and
punish all persons, that go wrong, not only men shall be made subject to
him by thee: but also the beasts of the field, and the cattle, and the fowls
of the heaven, shall live by thy power under Nebuchadnezer, and all his house.
For we heard of thy wisdom, of thy prudent spirit and actiuitie do all
people speak: yea, it is declared and bruted through the whole earth, that
thou only art good, excellent, and mighty in all the kingdom, and of a
wonderful knowledge in the feats of war. For as concerning the matter which
Ach^or whom thou banished thine army, did speak in thy presence, and gave
counsel unto my Lord to make search whether the people of the Jews had
sinned against their God or no. It is manifest and true, and we have heard of
his words, for the men of Bethulia did take him, and he declared unto them all
that he had spoken unto thee concerning us, and the people of Israel. Now
thrrefore, least my Lord should be frustrate and void of his purpose, and
that death may fall upon them, and that they may be taken in their sin
whiles they provoke their God to anger, which is so often times as they do that
which is not beseeming. Yea, this is plain and of a surety, that our God is
so wroth with us, by reason of our sins, that he has she'wed by his
Prophets unto the people, how that far their sins he will deliver them over
unto ye enemy. And for as much as the children of Israel know that they have
so displeased their God, they are sore affrayde of thee: yea, and suffer great
hunger also at this present: For want of drink they are in a manner as dead
men: for because their victualles fail, and their water is wasted, they have
in their extremity determined to slay their cattle that they may drink the
blood of the^, and are purposed to consume all things yt God has forbidden
the^, to eat by his laws. Yea they have purposed to spend ye holy things of
their God, which he has forbidden the^ to touch, as the first fruits of ye
wheat, and the tithes of the wine, and of the oil which they had reserved and
sanctified for the priests that serve in Jerusalem before the face of our God,
the which thing it is not lawful for any of the people to touch with their
hands. Moreover, they have sent to Jerusalem (because they also that dwell
there have done the like,) such as should bring the^ license from the Senate,
and when they shall bring the^ word, the^ they will do it, and they shall be given
thee therefore to be destroyed the same day. For if they do these things it is a
plain case that they must needs be destroyed.

Wherefore I thine handmaid knowing all this, am fled from the^ to show thee
these things, for God has sent me to work a thing with thee, whereof all the
earth shall wonder, and whosoever shall hear thereof. For I thy handmaid fear
God, and worship the God of heaven day and night. And now I pray thee let me
remain with thee my Lord, and let thy ha^dmaid go out in the night into the
valley, and I will there pray unto God that he may reueile unto me when they
shall commit their sins, and when he will reward them with punishment for
their iniquities, and that I may show it there unto thee: and then may thou
go forth with all thine army, for there shall be none of the^ yt shall resist thee.
And I will lead thee through the mids of Judea safly, until thou come before
Jerusalem, and I will set thy throne in the mids thereof, and thou shall drive
them as sheep that have no shepherd, and there shall not so much as a dog
bark against thee. For these things have bin spoken and declared unto me,
according to my foreknowledge, and by the providence of God. And for so much as
God is displeased with them, he has sent me to tell the same.

These her words so greatly pleased Olophernes, and all his servants, that
they marueiled much at her wisdom, and said one to another: There is not such
a woman in all ye world, both for beauty of face, favor in countenance, and
wisdom of words. And Olophernes being far in love with her beauty, said unto
Judith, God has done well in this, to send thee before the people, yt thou
may give them into our hands, and bring destruction upon the^ yt despise my
L. Nebuchadnezer, neither can I choose but commend thee Judith, for thou art
both beautiful in thy colors, and witty in thy speech. And now forasmuch as
thy promise is good, if therefore thou do as thou have spoken, and thy God
perform it unto me: surely thy God shall be my God also, and thou shall be
excellent and great in the court of Nabuchadnezer my L. where thou shall dwell,
and thy name shall be renowned and spoken of throughout the whole earth. And with
yt he comanded his me^ to bring her in and lodge her in the tent where his
treasure was laid. and charged them that they should prepare and appoint her
diet of ye same meats and wines from his own table. But notwithstanding,
Iudeth told the king, I may not as now eat of thy meats and drinks, (quoth
she,) least there should be an offense found to be committed by me, and so
I displease my God: therefore give no charge concerning my diet: for I can
suffice my self with the things that I have here brought with me in my
scrippe and bottelles. Yea quoth Olophernes, but what if these things with thou
have brought should fail thee, how should we give thee the like, for there
i^ none with us of thy nation? O my Lord quoth Judith, take you no thought for
my victualles. For as thy soul lives (my Lord) thine handemaide shall not
spend all those things that I have, before the Lord work by mine hand the
thing that I have determined, and devised.

Then his servants brought her into the tent whereas he had appointed her.
And as she was gone in, she desired of Olophernes that she might have leave
to go forth by night, and before day to pray, and to make intercession unto
the Lord. And being licenced of Olophernes so to do, who commanded his
chaumberlaines and guard that she should go out and in at her pleasure to
pray unto God, and that they should not stay her. She went into the tent, and
there slept with her maid until midnight, and then arose at the morning
watch, and went in the night season forth of the camp into the valley of
Bethulia, and there washed her self in a fountain, even in the water by the
camp, and when she came out, she prayed unto the Lord God of Israel, that
he would direct her way, and prosper her enterprise, to the exaltation and
deliverance of her brethren his people.

And so she returned, and remained pure, fasting all day in her tent, until
she eat her meat in the evening. And thus did Judith remain pure and clean
in the camp, and used in the night season to go out and in to wash her self,
and to pray for the space of three nights together: and in the fourth day, it
came to pass that Olophernes (by Gods providence) made a great feast or supper
to his own servant only that attended about his person: but called none of
them to the banquet that had the affairs of wars in hand. And said to
Bagoas his Eunuch or chamberlain, go thy ways, and by counsel persuade this
Hebrews woman Judith which is with thee, that she be willing to come and
eat and drink with us, and to consent to keep company with us: For it were
a shame for us, to let such a woman alo^e, and not talk with her, and if we
do not allure her she will mock us, and laugh us to scorn, that she were
come from us vnmedled withal. Then went Bagoas unto Judith, and said, let not
this fair maid and good daughter be afraid, or make difficulty to go in to
my Lord Olophernes, that she may be honored in his presence, and to drink
wine with him joyfully, and be meerie with him, and to be entreated as one of
the daughters of the children of Assure, which remain in the house of
Nabuchadnezar. Then Judith being right glad of that opportunity, perceiving in
her heart, that the Lord by his mighty providence had wrought this as a mean
for her, the better to bring her device to pass to his glory and her peoples
deliverance, and to the enemies overthrow: answered Bagoas, and said: Who am I
that I should now gainesay my Lord? Surely whatsoever pleases him, and seems
best unto him, I will do it speedily, yea, it shall be my joy unto the day
of my death, and I shall think it well done as long as I live, to gratify
him in any thing I may.

So Judith arose, and tired her self with her gay apparel, and with the
ornaments of women, and her maid Abra went and spread the skins (which she
had received of Bagoas for her daily use, to sit and eat upon) all along on
the ground, over against Olophernes Tent, and for her mistres to go upon.
Now when the messenger had brought Judith to Olophernes, and she sat down
before him, his heart was presently ravished with her, and his spirit by and
by was moved and ravished with her beauty, insomuch that he brent in desire
toward her, and coueted her company greatly: for he had waited for the
time to deceive her, from the first day that ever he had seen her, and he
said unto her, drink now and sit down, and be merry with us, for thou
have found favor before me. My Lord (quoth Judith) I will drink now and
rejoice, for my mind is merier to day then ever it was in all my life, and
because my state is exalted now more the^ ever it was since I was borne: and
with that she called her maid Abra, and took of her the victuals she brought
and had prepared for her, and did eat and drink cheerfully with Olophernes.
Then Olophernes rejoiced so greatly in Judith, because of her company, that he
drank much more wine at that time then ever he had drunk at any one time
before since he was borne.

Now when the evening was come, and it was late in the night, his servants made
have every man to depart to his lodging, and Bagoas his Chamberlain, shut the
chamber doors and dismissed those that were present from the presence of his
Lord, and they went all to their beds, for they were all werie (because the
feast had been long) and ouerladen with wine. So Judith in the year of the
world 3496. being left all alone in Olophernes tent, and Olophernes himself
lying stretched along upon his bed, all drunken and filled with wine, of very
drunkenness falling fast a sleep: she commanded her maid Abra to go and
stand without the tent door and wait for her coming forth: and so every
body being gone forth of her presence, and not one left in the chamber little
or great, but her self and Olophernes that was fast a sleep: she standing by
his bed side, fell down on her knees, and there secretly in her heart (her
lips only a little moving) made her prayers with tears unto God for his help,
and that he would strengthen her in yt her enterprise, as appears in the
first Lamp. Page 43.

And her prayers ended, she went and took down his sword or fauchin hung on
the post at his beds head, and drew it, and then went and took hold of
Olophernes by the hair of his head, and beseeching God even then in that hour
to strengthen her, she smote twice upon his neck with all her might, and cut
of his head at two blows quite from his body, and rolled his dead body down
from the bed, and pulled down the Canopie from the pillars. And immediately she
gat her forth and delivered the head of Olophernes unto her handmaid Abra, and
bad her put it in her scrip or wallet of meat, and so they twain went forth
together, as though they had gone after their accustomed manner to pray, and so
passing by the host, and coming about through the valley near unto the gate
of ye City of Bethulia: She cried a far off to the watchme^ upon ye walls,
saying: Open now the gates, for God even our God is with us (quoth she) and
has showed his power yet in Israel, and his force against his enemies as he
has done eue^ this day. Now when the me^ of the city heard her voice, they
called the elders together, and they all made have to go down to the gates,
and ran all together both small and great, young and old, to mee^ her, for it
was above their expectation yt she should come so soon again. So they opened
the gates and received her young and old, and made a bone fire for a joyful
light, and stood round about Judith and her maid. But she went up into an
high place and caused silence to be proclaimed, and when every man now held his
peace: Judith said unto the^ with a loud voice, O praise ye the Lord, and give
thanks unto our God, for he has not despised his people, nor taken away his
mercy from the house of Israel, nor forsaken them yt put their trust in him:
but in me his handmaide^, he has performed his mercy, which he promised unto
the house of Israel. Yea by mine hand this same night has he slain and
destroyed ye enemy of his people, and with yt she took forth the head of
Olophernes out of ye wallet, and showed it unto the^, saying: Behold here the
head of Olophernes ye chief captain of the army of ye Assyria^s, who^ the
Lord has slain by me his minister: and behold also the Canopie wherein he
lay in his dru^kennes, and where ye Lord has smitte^ and slain him by the
hands of me a silie woman his minister: But as ye Lord lives, his angel has
kept me in my way going thither, remaining there, and coming hither again
from thence. And the Lord (who has brought to pass yt my countenance has
deceived him to his destruction) has not suffered me his handmaiden to be
defiled, neither has he committed sin with me by any pollutio^ or villainy. But
without any defiling of sin or reproach has ye Lord brought me his handmaide^
again unto you, and yt with great victory: so yt I am escaped, and you
delivered. O therefore give praise and thanks unto our God every one, for he is
gracious and his mercy endures for ever.

The^ all the people were wonderfully astonished, and bowed themselves, and
praised ye Lord altogether, and said with one accord: blessed be thou our god
which have this day brought to naught ye enemy of thy people. And they highly
co^me^ded Judith, and said unto her, the Lord has blessed thee in his power,
for through thee he has brought our enemy to confusion. Yea, and Ozias ye
prince of Bethulia, extolled her to the skies, saying unto her: O daughter,
blessed art thou of the most hie God above al women of ye earth, and blessed be
ye Lord ye maker of heaven and earth, which has guided and directed thee,
aright, to wound and to smite of the head of the chief captain of our
enemies. Surely this thine hope shall never depart out of the hearts of me^, for
they shall remember the power of God for ever. And God turn these things to
thee and thy name for a perpetual praise and honor, and visit thee with good
things, because thou have not spared thine own life, but put it in ieoperdie,
considering the anguish and affliction of our nation and people, and so have
helped our ruin and fall walking a strait way before God our Lord, and all the
people said. Amen.

The^ said Judith unto the^, my brethren hear me yet, hang this head upon ye
highest place of your walls, and when the Sun arises, take you every man his
weapon, and go forth like valiant me^, not as though ye would go beside the^,
but run upon the^ with violence: and when ye Assyria^s spies your enemies see
this, they shall of necessity take up their armor, and their pety Captains
shall go into the Tent of their chief Captain Olophernes to raise him up to
battle: but when they shall there find his dead body wrapped and imbrued in
his own blood, fearfulness and trembling shall so fall upon them, that they
shall be compelled every man to fly backward before your face, so that you
and all that inhabit the coasts of Israel shall pursue them without fear,
and overthrow them as they fly, for God has delivered them into your hands.

But before ye do these things call me Achior the Ammonite, whom they
banished into our City, and threatened to mingle his blood with ours for
speaking of us to Gods glory, that he may see the head of his enemy
Olophernes, and know ye end of him yt so despised the house of Israel, and that
sent him to us as to death. So when Achior came out of the house of Ozias with
whom he remained in his banishment, Judith said unto him: The God of Israel
unto whom thou gave witness, that he would be avenged of his enemies, even by
his might through my hand has smitten of the head of the unfaithful, and that
thou may see that it is so, behold this is the head of Olophernes, which in
his presumptuous pride despised the God of Israel, and threatened thee with
destruction, saying: When the people of Israel are taken, I shall cause thee
also to be stricken with the sword, and slain among them. And when Achior saw
the head of Olophernes in a certain man's hands in ye assembly of the people, he
fell down on his face to the ground, for very anguish and fear, so that his
spirits failed, and he sorowed withal. But after that he was come again to
himself, and was taken up, he fell down again at Iudiths feet, reverenced
her, and praised her exceedingly, saying: Blessed art thou of thy God, in all
the Tabernacles of Jacob or Judah: for all the people and nations that hear of
thy name, shall be astonished, and praise the God of Israel because of thee.
Now therefore tell me all the things that thou have done in these days. Then
Judith declared unto Achior in the midst of the people, all that she had done
from the day that she went forth, until that present hour she spoke unto
them. And when she had done, the people rejoiced with a great voice, and made a
noise of gladness through all the City. And Achior also, seeing the power of
God, and all things that he had done for Israel, fell from his Heathenish
religion, and believed in God unfeignedly, and put his trust in God only, and
let himself be circumcy^ed, and so he was joined and numbered among the people
of Israel unto this day. Now as soon as it was day, they hanged up Olophernes
head out on the wall, and every man took his weapon, and went forth and did
as Judith bad them. When the spies saw that the Bethulians came out against
them, with such an horrible cry, they ran to Olophernes tent, and willed
Bagoas to go and awake Olophernes their Lord, saying in contemptible wise of
the Israelites: The slaves and mice are bold to creep out of their holes, and
dare provoke us unto battle to their own destruction for ever. Then Bagoas
went and knocked hard at the tent door of Olophernes, thinking he had bin a
sleep with Judith, but because none answered, he opened the door and went into
the chamber, and finding his body headless, cast upon the ground weltring in
blood: he cried with a loud voice, with weeping and mourning, and a mighty
cry, and rent his garments. After he went into the tent of Judith, where she
used to remain, and when he found not her there, then he leaped out like a
mad man, and ran to the hosts, and cried, saying: These slaves have committed
wickedness, one woman of the Hebrews has brought shame upon the house of king
Nabuchodonozer. For he hold, Olophernes lies upon the ground without an
head. When the captains of the Assyrians army heard these words, they rent
their coats, and their hearts were wonderfully troubled, insomuch as there
was a lamentable cry, and a very great noise hard through the camp. And being
astonished at the thing, for fear and trembling durst not abide: but
altogether amassed, confused and out of order, fled every man with as much
speed as was possible, to save himself, and left all their munition and
victuals behind them. Which when the Israelites and Bethulians saw, they
earnestly pursued the chase, and followed hard upon the Assyrians, so that they
discomfited them, and slew them down right in all quarters where they went,
and then returned to the spoil of their enemies, and were greatly enriched
therewith.

After this notable victory, Ioachim the high Priest at Jerusalem hearing of
this mighty work of God, by the hand of Judith, came with the Ancients of
Israel that dwelt in Jerusalem, to confirm the benefits that God had showed
to Israel, and to see Judith and salute her. And when she came out unto the^,
they began al to bless and praise her, with one voice and accord, saying: Thou
art the worship and exaltation of Jerusalem: thou art the great glory and honor
of Israel: thou art the great joy, and rejoicing of our people and nation:
because thou have done all these things, namely by thine own hand, and thine
heart is comforted, and for that thou have loved cleanliness and chastity,
and have known no man, but thine own husband, and because thou have done much
good to Israel, and God is pleased therewith: therefore has the hand of the
Lord comforted thee, and blessed be thou of the almighty Lord for ever: and
all the people said, Amen, amen.

And when the people had slain all their enemies, and for the space of thirty
days had gathered ye spoils in the Camps of the Assyrians, and brought it to
Bethulia: they gave unto Judith by whom God had so mightily wrought their
deliverance, all ye gold, silver, precious stones, clothing, bedding, ornaments
and stuff whatsoever, that was Olophernes, and belonged unto him: which she
took gratefully, and loaded her Mules and chariots therewith, ready to convey
it home to her house. But before she went, all the women of Israel came
together to see her, having her in great honor, reverence, and estimation, and
blessed her, and made a joyful dance among them for her: and she took
branches in her hand, and gave also to the women and maidens yt were with her.
Then all the people reioiced, both women and maids, and young people with
Pipes and Harpes, with such joy as never the like was seen. And they crowned
her also with Olive branches, and Abra her maid that was with her, and she went
before the people in a dance, leading all ye women: and all ye men of Israel
followed the^ in their armor, with crowns and with songs of praise to God in
their mouths. Yea, Judith herself began a song of praise unto the Lord, for
the victory and deliverance of his people by her hands, as appears in the
first Lamp. Page 44.

After this victory and triumph, all the people went to Jerusalem, to worship
the Lord with praise and thansgiuing: and when the women were purified, they
offered all their whole burnt offerings, their free offerings or vows, and
their gifts or promised sacrifice, for joy that God had wrought for his people,
so mightily by the hand of a woman. Judith also her self offered all the
stuff of Olophernes, which ye people had given her, and gave the Canopie which
she had taken from his bed, for an oblation to the Lord. So the people rejoiced
as the use is, by reason of the victory, for the space of three months, and
Judith remained with them in Jerusalem by the Sanctuary. And after this, every
one returned home to his own house and inheritance. And Judith went to
Bethulia, and remained in her own possession, and was for ye time right
honorably taken in all the country and land of Israel. Unto her virtue also
was chastity joined: so yt although many desired her, yet she never knew man,
nor companied with any all the days of her life, after that Manasses her husband
was dead, and gathered to his people. But on the high solemn feast days, she
went out with great worship and increased more and more in honor, and waxed old
in her husbands house, where when she had been a widow three years and four
months, was become an 105. years old. After that she had made her maid Abra
free, and distributed her goods to them yt were nearest of her kindred, to her
husband and her, she died in Bethulia, and there was most honorably buried
beside her husband. Whose death the Jews or people of Israel lamented with
mourning vii. days together: and every year solemnized ye day wherein she got
the victory, as a holy day to be kept for ever among their fastiuall days.
And there was none yt made the children of Israel any more afraid in the days
of Judith. nor along time after her death.

There was another woman called Judith, which was the daughter of Beeri an
Hittite, and one of the wives of Esau, who with her mate Bashemath, was a
grief of mind to Isaac and Rebecca her father and mother in law, for her
disobedience and rebellion towares them. Genesis 26. 34.35.

K
Keren-happuch, or Cornu-sibii, signifies, the horn, or child of beauty.

She was the youngest of Jobs three daughters that he had after his fall, and
sister to Ieminah and Kezia, a very beautiful virgin, as her sisters were:
and unto whom Job her father gave an inheritance amongst his sons to her
preferment and portion. Job. 42.14.

Ketura, or Cetura or Chethura, signifies smelling sweet like spices, or
perfuming, or bound, a good savor.

She was the second wife or concubine of Abram, whom he took (as some think
whiles Sara was yet alive) and who bare him vi. sons as appears. Genesis
25.1.2.

Kezia, or Cassiam, signifies, as pleasant as Cassia, or sweet spice.

She was the second daughter of Job, a most beautiful and comely woman and
virgin, unto whom also with her sisters, Ieminah and Karen-happuch, her father
gave an inheritance for her portion among their brethren. Job. 42.14.

L
Lea, or Lia. signifies painful, or weeried.

She was the eldest daughter of Laban, the son of Nahor Abraham's brother,
and sister to Rahel, but being bleare eyed, or squint eyed, she was nothing so
fair and beautiful as her sister Rahel was: yet when her sister Rahel (for
whom Jacob served seven years) should have been given unto him in marriage, ye
same night after the wedding feast kept by Rahel her father, to prefer his
eldest daughter in marriage before the yo^gest, especially being somewhat
deformed, covered his daughter Leahs face with a veil in sign of chastity
and shamefastness, as the manner of virgins, or young married wives then was,
and so in the dark and in steed of her sister Rahel brought her to bed to
Jacob, who lay with her, and so she prevented her sister Rahel in marriage, and
became Jacobs first wife, and this was in the year of the world. 2252. And
her father gave his maid Zilpa to Leah, to be her waiting maid and servant.
Which deceit in Laban caused Jacob to serve seven years more for Rahel her
sister. But when the Lord saw that Lea was despised, and not so well beloved of
her husband Jacob as her sister was: she in her affliction had recourse unto
God by prayer: and because children are a great cause of mutual love between
man wife, he heard her prayer, and made deformed Lea fruitful, and fair Rahel
barren; so yt the same year Leah conceived and bare a son, and called his
name Ruben, saying: Because the Lord has looked upon my tribulation and given
me a child, now therefore my husband will love me. And the next year, being
the year of the world 2253. she conceived again and bare another son, and
called his name Symeon, saying: because the Lord has heard that I was hated,
therefore he has given me this son also. And in the year 2254. she
conceived again the third time, and bare a son, and called his name Leuy,
saying; Now at this time will my husband keep me commpanie, because I have
borne him three sons. Lastly, in the year of the world 2255. she conceived
and bare him another son, and called his name Judah, saying: Now, will I
praise the Lord, and so she left bearing. Afterward, when she saw that for her
fruitfulnes she was envied of her barren sister Rahel, and that she her self
also now had left bearing, then she gave Zilpah her maid unto her husband
Jacob to wife, who bare him a son, and Leah called his name Gad, saying: God
does increase me with a company, or multitude of children. Again, Zilpah her
maid conceived and bare another son, whose name Leah called Asshur, saying:
Ah, blessed am I, for the daughters will bless me. After this in the year of
the world. 2256. it chanced that Ruben her eldest son in the time of wheat
harvest went out into the field, and found (certain herbs called) Mandrakes
(whose root has a certain likeness of the figure of a man) and brought them
home unto his mother Lea. And when Rahel her sister heard thereof, she went to
Lea her sister, and desired her to give her of her sons Mandrakes: but Lea
unwilling so to do, answered and said to her sister Rahel: Is it not enough
that thou have taken away mine husband, but would take away my sons
Mandrakes also? Well (quoth Rahel) let him sleep with thee this night for thy
sons Mandrakes. And so Jacob coming out of the field at evening: Lea went
out to meet him, and said: Come in unto me and lie with me this night, for I
have bought and paid for thee with my sons Mandrakes. So Jacob did, and God
heard Leah, and she conceived by him that night, and bare unto Jacob the fifth
son, and called his name Issachar, saying: God has given me my reward,
because I gave my maid to my husband. In which words she offended, because in
steed of acknowledging her fault, she boasts there, as if God had rewarded
her therefore. After that, in the year of the world 2257. Lea conceived again,
and bare Jacob the sixth son of her own body, and called his name Zebulim,
praising God and saying: God has endued me with a good dowry, now will mine
husband dwell with me, because I have borne him six sons. Last of all, in
the year of the world 2258. she conceived and brought forth Jacob a daughter,
whose name she called Dinah. Now when Jacob was to depart away from Laban, with
his wives Leah and Rahel, and such goods and cattle as God had blessed him
with in his service for recompense of his true service: Jacob perceiving Labans
children to murmr against Jacob, as though he had enriched himself of their
fathers substance to their impouerishment, called his wife Leah and Rahel, and
told them of that discourtesie, and what the Lord had reveled unto him
concerning his departure from Laban. Leah and Rahel said unto Jacob their
husband: Have we any more portion in our fathers house? does not he count us
as strangers? for he has sold us, in that he has given us unto thee in
recompense of thy service, which is a kind of sale, and has eaten up and
consumed our portions and money, therefore all ye riches which God has taken
from our father is ours, and our childrens. Now then whatsoever God has put
in thy mind to do, do it. Whereupon Jacob with his two wives Leah and
Rahel, departed from their father Laban, and returned toward their own
country: and having divided his family into order: Leah his wife and her
children were foremost, next the maids and their children. And when they met
his brother Esau coming against him, to meet him, Lea with her children came
near and made obeisance unto him very reverently. And so passing on their
journey safely to Sechem, a city in the land of Canaan, there she rested a
while, and gave her daughter Dinah a little too much liberty, to go abroad to
gaze upon the women of that Country, by means whereof unawares, her fair
daughter was violently taken, ravished, and deflowred, and abused as a whore,
by Shechim the son of Hamor, to his, and his Countries destruction, as
appears in the story of Dina. Genesis 29.30,31.33.34.1.

Lydia, signifies nativity or generation, birth, begetting, aforehande,
builded.

She was a cetaine woman, and seller of purple, of the City of Thiatyria, who
being a very devout woman, and a worshipper of God: she came together with
other women to the assembly of the Apostles and Christians, to the Common
prayer and exercise of the word, then used by a rivers side without the City
of Philippi, where her heart was so by the Lord opened at the Preaching of
Paul, that she gave diligent ear and attendance to the things which Paul
spoke: and was with all her household presently converted, and baptized to the
christian faith. After this she besought Paul and the other Disciples, saying;
If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and
abide there: and so she constrained the Apostles to tarry with her, who found
so much good faithfulness in the woman, that afterward being cast into prison,
and delivered again, they returned into her house to comfort the brethren which
resorted thither. Act. 16.14.40.

Loys, or Loyde, signifies better, she that has got profit,

She was a faithful godly woman, and grandmother to Timothy who always
brought up her children and family in the fear of God, and faith and
knowledge of Christ's doctrine, as appears. 2. Tim. 1.5.

Loruhamah, ^ign. not obteining mercy.

She was the daughter of Hosea the Prophet, whom Gomer ye daughter of Deblaim
bare unto him, her brothers name was Loammi: and when she was borne and brought
forth into the world, the Lord said unto Hosea her father, call her name
Lo^ruhama, for she is the child of fornication and of an adulterous woman,
and of one that of long time has accustomed to play the harlot, therefore I
will no more have pity upon the house of Israel, but forget them, and put them
clean out of my remembrance, read this mistically. Hosea. 1.6.

M
Maacah, or Maacha, or Maakah, or Michaiah, signifies a woman bruised or
pressed.

She was the daughter of Tasmai, king of Geshur, and one of the wives of king
David, unto whom she bare a son called Absalom, who afterward rebelled
against his father, to his own destruction. 2. Sam. 3.3.1. Chro. 3.2.

There was another woman called Maachah, or Michaiah, which was the daughter of
Abishalom, Uriel or of Gibea, or as it is in the second of the Chr. 11.20. of
Absalom, whom some think was David's son, and one of the xviii. wives of y^
wicked and licentious king, Roboa^ the son of Salomo^ king of Judah, unto whom
she bare four sons, called Abiiam, Atthai, Ziza, and Shelomith. And because
her husband loved her best, above all his xviii. wives, and lx. Concubines.
Therefore in his life time he made her eldest son Abi, Abiiah, or Abiiam y^
chief ruler among his brethren, and ordained him to reign as king after him,
for ye love he bare to his mother, as appears. 2. Kin. 15.2.2. Chro. 11.20.
21.22. 13. 2. But after the death of her son Abiiam, she was deposed by Asa
her sons son from her Regencie, because she had made an idol in a grove,
and was an idolatresse woman, and Asa brake her idol and stamped it into
powder, and burnt it at the brook Ridion. And yet for all this, Asa herein
showed yt he lacked zeal: for whereas she ought to have dyed both by the
covenant yt he made with God, to slay man, woman, and child, and also by the
law of God. Deuteronomy. 13.6. Yet he gave place to foolish pity, and would seem
after a sort to satisfy yt law. 2. Chr. 15.16.

There was also another woman called Maachah, which was one of the concubines
of Caleb, the son of Hur, and bare unto him v. sons, called Sheber,
Tirhanah, Shaaph, the father or prince of Madmannah and Sheua, the father or
prince of Machbena, and of Gibea: and a daughter called, Achsah, or Axa. 1.
Chro. 2.48.49.

Moreover, there was yet another woman called Maachah, which was the daughter
of Ir or Aher, and sister to Huppim and Shuppim, and after she became the wife
of Machar the son of Manasses, and bare unto him two sons, called Peresh
and Sheresh. 1. Chro. 7.12.15. 16.

Lastly, there was yet a fifth woman called Maacha, which was the wife of Ieiel,
the father or Prince of Gibeon, unto whom she bare ten sons, Abdon, Zur,
Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab, Gador, Ahio, zechariah, Mikloth: and her son Ner
begat Kish, which Kish begat Saul, who afterward was ye first king of ye
Israelites: so yt this Maacha was ye great grandmother of Saul, and the first
woman of whose raze and stock the first king that ever was over the people of
God, came, 1. Chro. 8.29. 9.35.

Mahalath, or Maheleth, or Malath, or Malaah, signifies a Queere or company
of singers, a Harp, weakness, pardon.

She was the daughter of Ishmael, Abraham's eldest son, the sister of
Naabaioth and one of the wifes of Esaw, who^ he took for his third wife
besides the rest of his two other Heathen wives, Judith and Basmath, thinking
by marrying of her to have reconciled himself to his father Isaac, yt was
displeased with him for marrying so many strange women of the Heathen
Cananites, contrary to gods commandment: but all in vain, for he took not
away the cause of y^ evil, that is, he should first have put away all his
vplandish wives, and then have married this Mahalath or other woman of his own
kindred: so might he easily have bin reconciled to his father by marrying of
this woman. Genesis 28,9.

There was another woman called Mahalath, which was ye daughter of Ierimoth the
son of David, and one of the first of the xviii. wives that the lice^tious
man Roboam Salomons son, king of Judah took to wife, together with her mates,
Abihail and Maalah. 2. Chr. 11.18.

Mahlah, or Malhah, Maala, Maalon, sign. as before in Mahalath, that is, a
queere of Musicians, strength, weakness, remission, etc.

She was the eldest of the five daughters and coheires of Zelophehad the son
of Hephar, her sisters names were Noah, Heglah, Milcha, and Tirzah, who
perceiving that the house, name, tribe and family of Manasses their
grandfather, was like to decay, by reason their father died without issue male:
if they should have no portion of his land and possession to inherit among
the other tribes. These five daughters went all together before Moses to the
Tabernacle of the congregation, and there in the presence of Eleazar the
Priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and before the Princes and all the
assembly, spoke for them selves, and said: Our father dyed in the wilderness,
and was not among the assembly of those wicked men that were assembled against
the Lord in the company and rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram: but dyed
in his sin (according as all men die, for as much as they are sinners) and
had no sons, but us his five daughters. Wherefore, that the name of our
father be not taken away from among his family, because he has no son,
give us a possession among the brethren of our father. Then Moses perceiving
their request reasonable, and yet hard for him to decide, for as yet there had
not happened any such matter, brought their cause before the Lord to be judged,
and to know what he should determine thereof, as he did hard matters. And the
Lord commanded Moses, saying: The daughters of Zilophehad speak right. Thou
shall therefore give them a possession to inherit among their fathers
brethren: and shall turn the inheritance of their father, and suffer it to
descend unto them. Also thou shall make this law of discentes from henceforth
among the children of Israel, that if a man die and have no son, then shall he
turn his inheritance to his daughter: And if he have no daughter, ye shall
give his inheritance unto his brethren: and if he have no brethren, ye shall
give his inheritance unto his fathers brethren: and if his father have no
brethren, ye shall give his inheritance unto his next kinsman of his family,
and he shall possess it. And this shall be unto the children of Israel a law of
judgment or an ordinance, final decree, or presidence to all posterity to
judge by in like case of the discents of inheritance lineall or colateral, to
issue male or female for ever, as I have commanded thee. Number. 26.33. 27.1. etc.

Which law of the heritage being thus by God made for Malilah and her sisters
the daughters of Zolophehad, whereby they were entitled to inherit the lot or
inheritance of their father in the land of Canaan: An order also for their
marriage and succession of this their inheritance was afterward made by Moses
at the request of the sons of Joseph, who (perceiving that other tribes to
contend now who might marry these daughters to have their inheritance)
proposed the matter to Moses, saying: The Lord commanded thee my Lord to give
the land to inherit by lot to the children of Israel, and amongst them, thou
my Lord wast commanded to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto
his daughters: but now if they be married to any of the sons of the other
tribes, then shall their inh^ritance be taken away from our tribe of Manasses
our father, and be put or fall unto the inheritance of the tribes whereof
their husbands shall be, so shall our fathers inheritance be lost, and his tribe
decay etc. Then Moses, perceiving in deed that the tribe of Manasses could not
have continued, if the inheritance, which was the maintenance thereof, should
have been abalienated by the marriage of these daughters to other tribes: said
unto the ten tribes, or the children of Israel thus, The tribe of the sons of
Joseph have said well, and moved a good doubt. This therefore is the thing that
the Lord has yet further commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehads
marriage and inheritance. They shall be widows to whom they think best, only
to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry: so shall not the
inheritance of the children of Israel, remove from tribe to tribe, for every
one of the children of Israel shall join himself to the inheritance of the
tribe of his fathers. And every daughter that possesses any inheritance, for
lack of issue male, of the tribe of the children of Israel, shall be wife unto
one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may
enjoy every man the inheritance of their fathers. Neither shall the inheritance
go about from tribe to tribe: but every one of the tribes of the children of
Israel, shall stick to his own inheritance. And as the Lord commanded Moses,
so did Mahlah and her sisters, for they were all married unto their fathers
brothers sons, and became wives to certain of the families of the sons of
Manasses, the son of Joseph, so that their inheritance remained in the tribe
of the family of their father. Number. 36.

After, when Moses was dead, and Joshua being appointed gouerner came into the
land of Canaan, and there allotted every tribe his portion of inheritance. This
Mahlah or Malhah with her other sisters came again before Eleazar the Priest,
and before Joshua, and the other princes of the ten tribes, to put them in mind
of Gods commandment and law made to Moses before, concerning them and their
portio^s, saying: The Lord commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our
brethren of our tribe. Therefore according to the commandment of God, Joshua
gave them an inheritance in the land of Canaan among the brethren of their
father. And there fell to them five portio^s, and other five to the males, so
they did inherit among their brethren, as appears. Joshua. 17.3.4.5. etc.

Mary, Maria, Maara, or Mirya^, signifies my lightner, or lightning them,
Light^ing, lightened, the City, or star of the Sea, the Lady of the Sea, the
Sea of bitterness, a bitter Sea, a bitter one, reised up. The mirh of the
Land, the mirhe of the Sea, the teacher or mistres of the Sea. etc.

She was the blessed and holy virgin and mother of Christ our Savior, whose
parents are not expressed in Scripture by name: but as some think, she was the
daughter of Heli, otherwise called Ioachim, and of Anna his wife, borne in the
year of the world 3948. in the days of Cambalinus, and before the birth of
Christ xv. years. But whose daughter soever she was, certain it is, that
both she and her husband Joseph came of the princely race, and royal stock,
or lineage of king David, and that she was near cousin to Elizabeth S. John
Baptist his mother (as shall appear) and Marie the wife of Cleophe was her
sister also.

Now this blessed virgin being affianced or betrothed to a certain good man
of her own stock and tribe of Judah, named Joseph. So it was that before she
came to dwell with him, the Angel Gabriel in the year of the world 4142.
being sent of God, came and saluted her, as she was in her house at Nazareth, a
City of Galilee, saying: Hail, thou that art beloved (orgladnesse be unto
thee which art highly received into favor, and full of grace) the Lord is
with thee, blessed art thou among women. The Virgin seeing the Angel, was sore
abashed and troubled at his words, and mused much in her mind, what manner of
salutation that should be. Then said the Angel, Fear nor Marie, for thou have
found favor with God; for lo, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a
son, and shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great, and shall be called the
son of the most high. And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his
father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
kingdom shall be none end. Then Marie, because she would be resolved of all
doubts, to the end she might the more surely embrace the promise of God,
said unto the Angel. How shall this be, seeing I know no man? The holy Ghost
(quoth the Angel) shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high shall
ouershadowe thee, (and secretly work in thee above all natural reason.)
Therefore also that holy (and pure) thing which shall be borne of thee,
shall be called the son of GOD. And thy cousin Elizabeth she has also conceived
a son in her old age, and this is her sixth month, which was called Barren.
For with God shall nothing be impossible. Then said Mary, behold the
handmaide of the Lord: be it unto me according to thy word. So the Angel
being departed from her, upon this she prepared her self with speed to go
and visit her cousin Elizabeth, and coming to Hebron where her cousin dwelt,
she entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted her cousin Elizabeth his
wife: who no sooner heard the salutation of Mary, but the babe myraculously
sprang in her belly, and being filled presently with the holy Ghost, she
cried with a loud voice, and said to Marie, Blessed art thou among women,
because ye fruit of thy womb is blessed: and whence comes this to me that
the mother of my Lord should come to me etc? Then Mary believing all these
things to be performed which were told her by the message of the Angel, with
a joyful heart and mind, made a notable song in the praise of God for his mercy
toward her, saying: My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. as in the first
Lamp of Uirginitie, Page 48. Which song being ended, she remained with her
cousin Elizabeth about three months, and then returned home to her own house
again to Nazareth a City of Galilee. Where being found with child of the
holy Ghost as the Angel had said, before her husband and she came together,
and that her husband had taken her home unto him. Then Joseph her husband being
a just man, upright, and fearing God: and therefore suspecting yt she had
committed fornication before she was betrothed unto him, and not willing to
make her a public example, was minded to put her away secretly, and would
neither retain her, which by the law should be married to another, nor by
accusing her, would put her to open shame for her fact: But whiles he thought
these things, behold the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, and
by revelation said unto him, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take
Mary for thy wife, for that which is conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost,
and she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus: for he
shall save his people from their sins. And all this was done that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet Esaias, 7.14. saying:
Behold, a virgin shall be with child and shall bear a son, and they shall
call his name Emmanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us. Then Joseph
being raised from sleep, did as the Angel of the Lord had enjoined him, and
took his wife Marie home unto him. But he knew her not till she had brought
forth her first borne son, nor at any time ever after.

Shortly after it chanced that Joseph her husband went up from the city of
Nazareth to the land of Jury, to a city called Bethlem: and she also being
great with child, went with him there to be taxed according to the Emperor
Augustus commandment: because they were of the house and lineage of David. And
being forced to lie in the stable for lack of room in the Inn, her hour
came to be delivered, and there (she being now about the age of xvi. years as
it is said) brought forth Christ Jesus the savior of the world, her first
begotten son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a cratch
or manger: because there was no other room or convenient place for them in the
Inn: whereby appears her poverty at that time, and their cruelty both
toward her, and her babe, which would not pity a woman in such a case. Which
strange, or rather joyful news, being by Gods angel reueiled unto the
shepherds in the field, they ran with all have to Bethlem, and there first
found both Marie and Joseph, and the babe laid in the cratch, and when they had
seen it they published it first abroad to the world, and all that heard it
wondered: but Marie kept all these sayings, and pondered them in her heart. And
the Shepherds returned, praising God for all that they had heard and seen of
our savior Christ. And when ye eight day was come, they circumcised her child,
and his name was called Jesus, as the angel had so named him before he was
conceived. And when the days of her purification, after the Law of Moses, were
come, she went with her child Jesus and her husband to Jerusalem, to present
him to the Lord, and there according to her poverty, offered two young pigions,
and a pair of turtle doves for an oblation according to the law, for her
manchilde that was holy unto the Lord. And when she heard old father Simeon,
and mother Anna the prophetess, prophecy strange things of Christ her son,
and confess him openly to be the Savior of the world, she marueyled greatly
at those thing^s which were spoken touching him: Especially when Simeon blessed
her, and her babe, and said unto her: behold this thy child is appointed for
the fall (of the reprobate) and raising again of many (of the elect) in
Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against. Yea, and a swoorde
(that is sorrows) shall pearce through thy soul (or heart) that the thoughts
of many hearts (by the trial of the cross,) may be opened. And when she
had performed all things at Jerusalem according to the law, she returned
with Joseph her husband home to the City of Nazareth again. And being
accustomed yearly she and her husband to go up at the feast of Ester to
Jerusalem, she chanced on a time to forget her Son Jesus behind her, and
supposing that he had been in the company, went a days journey, and sought
him among her kinsfolk and acquaintance: But when she could not find him, she
turned back to Jerusalem, and there sought him for the space of three days,
ere she could find him. At the last she found him out in the temple, sitting
in the mids of the doctors, hearing and apposing them with questions, and
said unto him: Son, why haste thou thus dealt with us? thy father and I have
sought thee with heavy hearts: but he preferring his duty to God before
father or mother, said: how is it that ye sought me? Know ye not that I must
go about my fathers business? but they understood him not. So he came, and
went home to Nazareth with her, and was subject unto his mother, who kept all
these his sayings in her heart. Another time as she was with her son at a
marriage feast in Cana, a town in Galilee, when the wine failed at the feast:
she told her Son that they lacked wine, and receiving his answer meekely,
she bad the ministers or servants to do whatsoever he commanded them.
Fynallye, when she with her sister Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalen stood by the cross, whereon her Son Jesus houng crucified, and
shed his blood as well for her as for all other Christians: sorrow then
pierced her heart like a sword, according as Simeon had prophesied and
foretold her. And when Jesus saw her, and the Disciple Saint John standing by
her whom he loved: He said unto his mother, woman, behold thy Son. Then
said he also to the Disciple: behold thy mother, and from that hour the
Disciple took her home unto him, and comforted her. To conclude, after
Christ's ascension up into heaven, she kept company with the Apostles, and
together with the other women and all the Apostles, continued in one accord in
prayer and supplication in Jerusalem. Luke. 1. Math. 1^2. Luke. 2. John.
2.3.19.25.26. Act. 1. 14.

Marye the wife of Cleophas or Clophas, was sister to Marie the Uirgin, and
mother of our Savior Christ, and stood with her by ye cross whero^ Christ
dyed, to behold with tears and sorrow of heart his pacient suffering, and
guiltles passion for them and all Christians. John. 19.25.

Mary Magdalen, which word Magdalen signi. magnified, or exalted.

She was the sister of Martha and Lazarus, whom Christ raised from death, and
being a very sinful woman, dwelling in Bethynia, it pleased God, for the
comfort of al sinners to call her so to repentance and remorce, for her former
foul and wicked life, yt when she knew Jesus to sit at meat in one of the
Pharisees houses, called Simon the Leaper, she went with a box of very costly
and sweet ointment, called Spiknard or Nardus in her hand: the which box,
after she had broken it, and powered the Oil upon Christ's head as he sat, so
that it ran down along upon his body: she then fell down also at his feet
behynd him, and wept so abundantly for her sins, that she washed his feet
with her tears, and did wipe them with the hayres of her head, and also kissed
them, and anointed them with that sweet ointment: so that the house was
filled with the sweet savor and odor thereof. Which her godly fact was
very offensive both to Judas his Apostle, the dissembling traitor, and also
to Simon, the ignorant Pharisie and master of the feast. Insomuch as Judas
hereby took occasion to betraye Christ. For having indignation against it,
not for yt he cared for the poor, because he was a thief, and bare the bag of
money that was given to the poor, he murmured and disdayned in himself, and
said: why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given unto
the poor? But Jesus to excuse, or rather approve and commend Mary's fact, said
unto him: Let her alone, why trouble ye her? she has wrought a good work on
me, and done that she could, coming before hand to annoint my body to ye
burying, and to honor my buryal withal. The poor ye have with you always,
and when ye will, ye may do them good: but me ye shall not have always.
Therefore verily I say unto you, whersoeuer this Ghospel shall be preached
through out all the world, this fact which she has done shall be spoken of in
her worthy remembrance and perpetual memorial. Also when Simon the Pharisie,
which bad Christ to the feast, saw what Mary had done, he likewise murmured and
grudged within himself, and began to doubt of Christ, and to justify himself,
and to condemn Mary: saying, if this man were a Prophet, he would surely have
known who and what manner of woman this is, which touches him: for she is a
sinner or common harlot: but Jesus seeing ye great faith of ye woman, and
knowing his hypocritical thoughts, presently put forth this parable, and said
to him: Simo^, I have so^what to say to thee: say on master (quoth he) There
was (said Christ) a certain creditor had 2. debtors, ye one ought him 5.
hundred pence, and the other fifty, when they had naught to pay, he them both,
which of them therefore think thou will love him most, tell me? I suppose
(quoth Simon) that he to who^ he forgave most, will love him most. Thou have
judged truly (said Christ) and with that, turned him to the woman, and said to
Simon: See thou this woman? I entered into thine house, and thou gave me no
water to my feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, and wiped them
with the hair of her head. Thou gave me no kiss, but she since the time
that I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil thou
did not anoint, but she has anointed both my head and feet with
oyntmente. Wherefore I say unto thee, many sins are forgiven her: for she
loved much. To whom a little is forgiven, he does love a little. And then he
turned him to Marie Magdalen, and said unto her, woman, thy sins are
forgiven thee, and thy faith has saved thee, go in peace: and presently there
went out of her seven diuelles or foul spirits, to the admiration of all that
sat at the table. Then Marie feeling her self much bound to Christ, which had
forgiven her so many sins, and cast out of her so many devils, fell in so
great love of Christ, that al her whole meditation and study ever after yt
time, was only upon him. Insomuch that to acknowledge ye great benefits which
she had received of him, and to show her perseverance in thankfulness and
knowledge of Christ, she diligently followed Christ with Ioanna the wife of
Chuza, and Susanna, and many other women, whom Christ had healed together with
her of their evil spirits, and infirmities: and ministered unto Christ of her
substance. And when her sister Martha received Christ into her house to meat,
and was cumbred about much serving of Christ at the table: Marie Magdalen
(choosing ye better part) sat at Jesus feet all the while and heard his
preaching. Also when her brother Lazarus was dead and laid in the grave, and
Jesus was coming to her sisters Marthas house to raise Lazarus again to life:
so soon as her sister Martha called her secretly, and told her that her
master Christ was coming, and asked for her, she to declare her affection
and reverence that she bare to Christ, arose with speed and went to meet
him: and when she was come where Jesus was and saw him, she fell down at
his feet, and wept, saying unto him, Lord, if thou had bin here my brother
had not bin dead. And when Jesus saw her weep, for very compassion, as one yt
felt our miseries, and suffered ye lik, he groned in spirit, was troubled in
himself, and wept also together with her for sorrow, as ye may read more in the
story of her sister Martha. Moreover when Jesus suffered his passion, this
Marie Magdalen with Marie the virgin and mother of Christ, and Marie the wife
of Cleophas, and with other women, who had followed Jesus from Galilee to
Jerusalem, ministering unto him, first stood a far off, and beheld how he
was crucified, and afterward came and stood by the cross to see the end, and
when he was taken down by Joseph Aremathea, and wrapped in linen clothes to be
buried: she with Marie Ioses mother sat over against the sepulcher, and
beheld where he should be laid, and so returned home to buy and prepare
odours and sweet ointments to anoint his body, and rested the Sabboath day
according to the commandment: And the morrow after the Sabbath day, when
she came with sweet oyntmentes, very early in the morning before sun rising
to the sepulcher, thinking to have anointed and embalmed the body of Jesus in
his grave, and saw the stone taken away from the tomb: she with fear and
great joy at the Angels commandment, ran to Peter and John, and told
them saying, they have taken the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know not
where they have laid him: But Peter and John not believing her words, ran both
of them to the grave to try the matter, and finding her words true, they
returned back again to their companies, leaving Marie standing at the grave
weeping for the love she bare unto Jesus. And as she wept and bowed her self to
look into ye grave again, as one not satisfied with seeking Jesus her Lord,
behold she saw two Angels sitting in white clothes, who said unto her, woman,
why weepest thou? Oh quoth she, they have taken away my Lord, and I know not
where they have laid him. And turning her self about, she saw Jesus
standing, but knew not yt it was he, to whom he said: Woman, why wepest thou?
whom do thou seek? she supposing it had bin the gardner, said, sir, if thou
have borne him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will fet him.
The^ Jesus said unto her (Marie:) with yt she turned her self, and said unto
him, (Rabbony,) which is to say, Master, and fell down to the ground to have
kissed his feet. But to withdraw her from being too much addicted to his
corporal presence, and to teach her to lift up her mind by faith into
heaven, where only after his ascension he remains: Jesus said unto her,
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father: but go to my brethren,
and tell them that I ascend to my father and to your father: to my God and your
God. Thus Jesus after his resurrection, having appeared first to Marie Magdale^
a sinful woman, out of whom he had cast seven devils. She then went to the
disciples and told them that she had now seen the Lord, and what things he
had said unto her, to the better confirmation of their belief in his
resurrection: read Matthewe. 26.7.27.56.28.1. Mark. 14.3.15.40. 47.16.1,9. Luk
7.37.8.2.10.39.23.55. John 11.12.3.19.25.20. all Marie, the mother of John, and
Mark.

She was a godly and faithful woman, unto whose house Peter came (after the
Angel of God had delivered him out of prison, from the hands of Herod:) where
many were gathered together in prayer, being let in (after much knockyng) by
her maid Rhode, that kept the door. Act. 12.12.

Marie the mother of James the less, and of Ioses.

She was (as some think) the same Marie Cleopas before named, which was the
sister to the virgin Marie, and was so called after her second husbands name,
which was Cleopas: who being first married to one Alpheus, had by him two
sons, the one James the less, who was called the brother of Christ, and the
other Ioses. And she being a very godly and devout woman, who with Marie
Magdalen among other women followed Jesus from Galilee to Jerusalem, ministered
unto him of her substance. And when he was led to be crucified, she followed
him also lamenting and bewailing him, unto whom Jesus said, Ye daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for your children:
for behold the days will come when men shall say, blessed are the barren, and
the wombes that never bare, and the pappes with never gave suck. Then shall they
begin to say to the mountains, fall on us, and to ye hills cover us. For if
they do these things to a green tree, that is, if they thus handle me being an
innocent, what shall be done to the dry? that is, to the wicked man. And when
Christ was crucified, she with Marie Magdalen among the rest of the women,
stood a far off and beheld him suffer his passion, and to see, what would
become of him: and after his death, drew nere, and stood ever against his
sepulcher where he should be buried: and afer went home to prepare odors, and
came the morrow after the Sabbath very early to embalme the body of Jesus, but
found him not there, for he was risen and gone, and so was a witness of his
resurrection: as ye may read in the story of Marie Magdelen. Mat. 27.56. 28.1.
Mar. 15.40.47.16.1. Luke 8.3.23.27.

There was another woman called Marie, which was a godly woman dwelling in
Rome, and who best owed much hospitality and labor upon S. Paul and the
Apostles while they were there at Rome: to who^ therefore S. Paul in his
Epistle to ye Romans has him specially commended by name among the rest,
saying: greet Marie, which bestowed much labor on us etc. Ro^ 16.6. Of Marie
Salome, read in Salome. Martha, signi. bitter, egging, or provoking.

She was sister to Marie Magdalen and Lazarus, and dwelling in Bethynia, called
ye town of Marie and Martha, almost two miles from Jerusalem. On a time she
invited Jesus home to her house to dinner: and being cumbred about much
serving, and seeing her sister Marie sit still at Jesus feet, to hear his
preaching, she went to Jesus, to compain unto him, and said: Master, do
thou not care, yt my sister has left me to serve alone? bid her come and help
me? And Jesus perceiving yt she had smotten the principal, which was to hear
Gods word, answered and said unto her: Martha, Martha, thou carest and art
troubled about many things: but verily, one thing is needeful. Mary has
chosen ye good or best part, which shall not be taken away from her, as if he
should say: it is not meet, yt Mary should have bin drawn from so profitable a
thing, as ye hearing of gods word is, wheru^to she could not always have
opportunity.

And when her brother Lazarus fell sick in Bethynia, she and her sister Marie
sent word thereof unto Jesus, saying: behold, he who^ thou love is sick, come
therefore and heal him. And when Jesus, who loved Martha and Marie her sister,
and Lazarus their brother heard yt, he said, his sickness was not unto death,
but for ye glory of God, and therefore staid a while with his Disciples: and
then when he knew Lazarus was dead, he said to his Disciples: Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, and is dead: but I go to wake him up, and to raise him to
life for your sakes, yt ye may believe in me. So when Martha heard that Jesus
was coming to Bethynia, toward Marthas house, whether many of ye Jews were
resorted after ye death of Lazarus, to comfort Martha and her sister Mary, for
their brother departed, Martha went out to meet him: but Mary sat still in ye
house. And when Martha met Jesus, her faith being almost ouerco^e by her
affliction, she said unto him: lord, if thou had bin here, my brother had
not bin dead: but now I know also, yt whatsoever thou ask of God, he will
give it thee. The^ said Jesus: Thy brother shall rise again: yea (quoth Martha)
I know yt he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. I am
(said Jesus) the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me: yea
though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall not dye: Beleeuest thou this? Yea, Lord, quoth Martha: I believe
that thou art Christ, the son of God, which should come into the world. And
when she had so said, she went her way and called Marie her sister secretly,
saying: The master is come, and calls for thee: which when Marie heard,
she arose quickly and came unto him, unto the place where Martha met him.
The Jews also that abode behind with Marie in the house to comfort her, when
they saw Marie rise up so hastily, went out and followed her, thinking she
had gone unto the grave to weep and lament there over her dead brother: But
when they perceived that Marie was come to meet Jesus, they abode with her:
who there presently so soon as she saw Jesus, with all reverence fell down
at his feet, saying: Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not been
dead. And Jesus seeing her, and the Jews that came with her, all weep and
lament the death of Lazarus: He also, as one that presently felt their
misery, and as though he suffered the like with great compassion and remorse
wept also with them, and groned greatly in spirit, as one much troubled and
disquieted in him self, and said unto them: where have ye laid him? They
said unto him, Lord, come and see: and the Jews perceiving him to weep for
Lazarus, said one to another, behold how he loved him. Yea, some of them
blasphemed and said, could not this man which has opened the eyes of the
blind, have made also that this man Lazarus his friend should not have died?
which their blasphemy so grieved Christ, that he again groned in spirit, and
then coming to the grave of Lazarus, he commanded the stone of the grave to be
taken away, Lord (quoth Martha) he stinketh already by this time: for he has
bin dead four days. Said not I unto thee (quoth Jesus) that if thou did
believe, thou should see the glory of God? Then they took away the stone,
and Jesus through hearty prayer raised Lazarus her brother from death, who
came forth bound hand and foot, and his face covered with a napkin, which
when Martha had loosed and taken away as Jesus commanded, he was let go and
revived: so that she saw her brother Lazarus restored from death to life, to
the glory of God, her great comfort and the conversion of many of the Jews
(that came and saw this miracle) to the faith of the Jesus, whose name be
therefore blessed and praised for ever. Amen.

Matred or Mathred, signi. a rod, striking, the stick of the commander,
coming down, the falling down of the bed, soueraintie, work to weariness.

She was the daughter or Mezahab, and the mother of Mehetabell that was wife to
Hadad, which women (as appears by their names) were of great favor among the
Edomites. Gene. 36.39. 1. chr. 1.50.

Mehetabel or Meetable, or Meezable, sig. how good is God, The well working God.

She was the daughter of Matred, and wife of Hadad, the 7. and last king of the
Edomites, that reigned before there were any kings over the children of
Israel, even until the line of David who first conquered their country. Genesis
36.39. 1. Chro. 1.50.

Merab or Merob sig. fighting, chyding, or multiplying of the people, Mastry.

She was the eldest daughter of king Saul and sister to Michall David's wife.
And when her wicked father could not by fury kill David, as he often
attempted with his own hand, he devised with himself to promise David to give
him this his eldest daughter Merab to wife, if he would go to war for him
against ye Philistines, thinking hereby no more to defile his own hands upon
David, but that the Philistines should kill him by fight of wars, and so be
made away, But ere the time came, that David should inioye her, Saul her
dissembling Father had given her to another man to wife named Adriel, by whom
she conceived and bare him five sons, which were all put to death afterward
by David at the request of the Gibionites, in revenge of the injury that Saul
their Grandfather had done unto them. 1. Sam. 14.49.18.17.19. 2. Sam. 21.8.

Michaiah or Maacha, sig. the Lords poverty, or lowliness, the Lords stripe,
who is the Lord.

She was the daughter of Uriel or Abshalom the wife of Roboam, and mother of
Abiiah king of Judah, called also Maacha, as ye may read in the story of
Maacha. 1.2. Chro. 13.2

Michal or Michol, sig. who is perfect, who is all but you, who is fully
appointed but you, The very goodness or perfectness or forbidding of the
waters, all the water, or of all.

She was the youngest daughter of king Saul, whom because she loved David
well, her father gave unto David to be his wife: but yet with this diuelishe
and hipocriticall intent, that she might be a snare to bring him into the
hands of the Philistines to be destroyed, as he before had promised to give
him her sister Merab upon the like wicked practice. But Michal loved David her
husband so faithfully, that her father could not have his wicked purpose that
way to take effect. For when after this marriage he had assayed to kill David
with his own hand and could not. And therefore sent men of purpose to watch
his house and to stay him there in his own bed: God so moves the heart of
Michal against the tyrant her father, and to favor her husband, that she
knowing of that conspiracy went and told David thereof, saying: If thou save
not thy self this night, to morrow thou shall be slain: wherefore to save the
life of David her husband, she let him down at a back window, that he
escaped, and laid an image in his bed, with a pillow under his head stuffed
with Goats hair, and covered it with a cloth. And when her fathers blooddie
messengers came into her house in the morning, and asked for David: Michal said
he was sick, the cruel messengers thinking to have carried David bed and
all to the king, that he himself might slay him, as he commanded, went into
David's chamber, and when they came there and found nothing else in ye bed but a
block, they were ashamed to be so mocked, and so returned to Saul and told him.
Then Michal being demanded of Saul wherefore she had so derided him, and sent
his enemy David away, made her excuse, that if she had not let him go, he
would have killed her: for he so to do had threatened her. So David by her
means and policy escaped, and fled from Saul. After this her father took
her from David, and gave her to one Phaltiel the son of Laish to wife, with
whom she remained till the death of Saul. And then David being somewhat settled
in his kingdom, made truce with Abner and the house of Saul, upon this
condition, that Abner would bring him his wife Michal with him when he came,
which condition being granted, David sent messengers to Ishboseth Saul's son,
saying: Deliver me my wife Mychal which I married for an hundred skins of
the Philistines, and for whose sake I put my life so desperately in danger. So
Ishboseth as he that feared David, and durst do none other, took Michal away
from her husband Phaltiel, and sent her by Abner to David. And her husband
Phaltiel so dearly loved her and was so loath to depart from her, that he went
with her, and came weeping all ye way behind her for sorrow, til she came to a
place called Bahurim, and there and then (being commanded by Abner so to do)
he forsook her and returned home, and Abner brought her to David to Hebron,
and there left her and went his way, and so was she restored again unto David
by Abners means. Finally, when David came dancing before the Ark of God in
his shirt or linen Ephod to the city of David, it chanced Michal to look
out at a window, and beholding ye king her husband how he leaped and daunced
before the Arc, she (like a worldling not able to comprehend the motions of
Gods spirit that moved him, and zeal of David the child of God,) began to
despise him in her heart: and meeting him after all things were done coming
home to bless and pray for his own house, as he had done before for the
people, she interrupted him greatly and said, O how glorious was the king of
Israel this day, which was uncovered to day, or naked in the eyes of the
maidens of his servants, as a fool uncovers himself. But David, whom no
worldly affection caused so to do, but only the zeal that he bare to Gods
glory, rebuked Michal his wife saying: It was before the Lord which chose me
rather then thy father and all his house, and made me ruler of his people,
therefore did I play and dance before the Lord: yea, and I will yet be more
vile then thus, and will be low in mine own sight, and of the very same
maid servants, which thou have spoken of, shall I be had in honor. And so
for thus despising and mocking her husband David the faithful holy child and
zealous servant of God, the Lord plagued her with barrennes, that she never
had child. 1. Sam. 14.49.18.20. etc. 19.11. etc. 25.44. 2. Sam. 3.13. etc.
6.16. etc.

Miriam or Marie, sig. exalted or reaching, or bitter, as before in Marie.

She was the daughter of Amram and Iochebed, and sister to Aaron and Moses, who
in her young and Maydenly years was called Aimia, or Alima, and being above x.
years old, when her brother Moses was borne, and laid in an Arc and cast
into bulrushes by the river to be drowned, as Pharao had cruelly commanded:
she stood a far of, to wit, what would become of him. And seeing Pharaos
daughter called Memphetica, take him out of the water, which was in the year
of the world 2434. she ran to her and said, shall I go and call to thee a
nurse of the Hebrew women to nurse the child, and she said, go: whereupon she
went and called her own mother Iochebed, who came and took Moses, and so by
Gods providence she nursed her own child, who^ God thus maruellously had
preserved to be a notable member of his Church. And when her brother Moses
had brought the children of Israel through ye red sea, and king Pharao their
persecutor with all his host was drowned therein, she being a prophetess took a
timbrel in her hand, with other women following her in like sort, and began
joyfully to dau^ce and sing ye song yt Moses made, which was this, Sing ye unto
the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously. The horse and the rider has he
overthrown in the Sea, as before in the first Lamp page 1. After this she
grudged against her brother Moses, which had taken an Ethiopian or woman of
Inde to his wife, called Zipporah, saying; what has the Lord spoken but only
by Moses? has he not spoken also by us? Which her murmuring, Moses being a
very meek and gentle man, gently bare: but the Lord being therewith highly
displeased and very angry, did therefore smite Myriam with a Leaprosie as white
as snow, in the year of the world 2516. Then Moses partly for pity to see
his sister in such a loathsome case, and partly at the earnest request and
intercession of Aaron his brother, who said to Moses: Alas my Lord I beseech
thee lay not the sin upon us which we have foolishly committed, and wherein
we have sinned. Let her not I pray thee be as a child dead, of whom the flesh
is half consumed when he comes out of his mothers womb, having as it were
but skin and bone. Moses besought the Lord for his sister saying: O Lord I
beseech thee heal her now: but the Lord made him aunsweare saying, if her
father in his anger and displeasure had spit in her face, should she not have
been ashamed seven days? Let her be shut out of the host seven days, and
after she shall be received. So Miriam was shut out of the host seven days as
the Lord commanded, and the people removed not till Miriam was restored and
received in again into the host. Finally, in the year of the world 1554.
when she had lived 119. years after the birth of Moses, and when Moses and the
children of Israel were come into the desert of Sinai to the city Cades,
forty year after the departure out of the land of Egypt: Myriam there dyed
and was buried, when she had lived above a 130. years. Exodus 2.4.7.6.20.
15.20. etc. Number. 12.1. and 20.1. 1. Chro. 6.3.

Milcha Milcah, or Melcha, or Melea, sig. a Queen, his Queen, or aduiser,
fulfilling.

She was the daughter of Haram Abraham's youngest brother, the sister of Lot,
and (as some think) of Sarai the wife of Abraham, and also was the wife of
Nahor Abraham's second brother, so that her husband and her father were natural
brothers the sons of Terah, and she her self near unto her husband, who was
her uncle, which kind of marriage was after forbidden by the law: after she
bare unto her husband Nahor eight sons to wit, Uz, Buz. Kemuel, that was
afterward Prince of the Assyrians, Chesed, Hazo, Pildash, Iidlaph, and Bethuel
which was the father of Rebecca, that afterward became wife to Isaac, so
Milcha was Rebeccaes gra^dmother, her mates name was Reumah. Genesis 11.29.22.20.

There was another woman called Milcah, which was one of the five daughters
and coheires of Zelohehad of the tribe of Manasses, as ye may read in Mahlah
her sisters story. Number 26.33.27. 1.36.

Molecheth signifies a Queen.

She was the sister of Gilead and daughter of Machir, and bare unto her husband
three sons called Ishbod, Abiezer, and Mahalah. 1. Chro. 7.18.

N
Naamah or Naama,, signifies comeliness, fair, beautiful, or greatly moving
affliction.

She was the daughter of Lamech and Zillah, and the sister of Tubalkain the
cunning brasier and smith, Genesis 4.22.

There was another woman called Naamah, which was an Ammonitesse and one of the
wives of king Solomon, who bare unto him a son called Rehoboam, that after
was king of Judah. 1. Kings 14. 21.

Naarah or Naara, or Naari, signifies a puzill, a damsel, striking of, or
walking.

She was one of the two wives of Ashur the father or Prince of Tekoa, her mates
name was Heleah, and she bare unto her husband four sons called Ahuzam,
Hepher, Temeni, and Haashtari. 1. Chro. 4.36.

Naomi or Noemi, or Mara, sig. fair, comely, or provoking much, or greatly
assuring, Bitter.

She was the wife of a certain man called Elimelech, dwelling in the land of
Judah, in a city called Bethlem, and for because of the present dearth, which
was over all the land of Judah in the time that the Judges ruled: She went with
her husband, and her two sons called Mahlon, and Chilion, into the country
of Moab, to soiourne, where in process of time, her husband first, died, and
her two sons with whom she remained (being married to two of the Moabitish
damsels, to wit, Orphah, and Ruth) died there also. So that Naomi which had
dwelt in the land of Moab ten years was now left desolate, both of her husband
and of her sons. Then Naomy hearing how the Lord had visited her country
again with plenty, returned from Moab homewardes again, her two daughters in
law, Orpha and Ruth bringing her on ye way in her journey: And when she saw
they had gone a good way with her, and coueted not to return from her, she
said unto them: Go now my daughters, and return each of you unto your
mothers house, and the Lord deal as kindly with you, as ye have dealt with
the dead men my sons, and with me their sorrowful mother. And the Lord
grant that you may find rest either of you in the house of her husband, and
so kissed them to have bid them farewell. But when she saw that they wept and
would not depart from her, she said unto them again, return my daughters I
pray you, for what cause will ye go with me? Are there any more children
within my womb to be your husbands? Turn again therefore I say, and go
your way for I am too old to have an husband. And if I should say, I had hope
of children, or if I had an husband this night, or had already borne sons:
Would ye tarry for them till they were grown of age? and refrain from
taking of husbands so long? No not so my daughters, it greeueth me much for
your sakes that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me. Then they wept
altogether, and Orpha kissed her mother in law and took her leave, and
returned into her own land of Moab again. But because it was Gods
wonderful providence, that Ruth should become one of his household, she
abode still with Naomy. But Naomy did all that she could to persuade her
likewise to depart and return with her sister saying: behold thy sister in
law is gone back unto her people and unto her Gods, return thou also after
her. But when Naomy saw that for no entreaty Ruth would depart from her, but
was steadfastly minded to go on with her, she left speaking unto her. And so
when they came to Bethlehem Judah, which was about the beginning of barley
harvest or in April, where when her coming was noysed abroad, the women of the
city which saw Naomy (knowing her to come of a great family, and to have been
of great reputation when she dwelt among them) said one to another, is not this
Naomy? Naomy said she, call me not Naomy, that is beautiful: but call me
Mara that is bitter, for the almighty has given me much bitterness. I went out
full, and the Lord has brought me again empty. Why then call ye me Naomy,
seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the almighty has brought me unto
adversity? And so Naomy remained in Bethleem Judah, and her daughter in law
Ruth with her: where she lived poorly by the corn that Ruth gleamed for her
sustenaunce in the fields of Booz her husband Elimelechs kinsman: and when
Ruth brought home the corn and told her where she had it, she praised God
and said: blessed be he that knew thee, and blessed be the Lord, for he
cease not to do good to us that are now living, and to our husband and
children when they were alive, and are now dead. The man Booz is near kin
unto us and of our affinity, therefore this now is my counsel unto thee my
daughter, whose rest I ought to seek, by providing thee an husband, with whom
thou may live quietly, that thou may prosper. Behold he winnoweth Barley
this night in his barn floor, wash thy self therefore, and annoint thee, and
put thy raiment hansomely upon thee, and get the^ down to his barn, and there
hyde thy self privily, and let not Booz nor any other know of thee, until he
have left eating and drinking. And when he shall sleep, mark the place where
he lays him down, and when he is fast a sleep, go privily and uncover his
feet, and lay thee down at his feet, and he shall tell thee what thou shall
do. So Ruth departed and followed her counsel, and did in every thing as Naomy
had her: but when Ruth came home again in the morning, and Naomy perceived ye
Booz had not taken Ruth to his wife as she hoped, she was somewhat astonished
and said, Who art thou, my daughter Ruth? and when Ruth told her what
entertainment she had, Naomy said, sit still my daughter until thou know how
the thing will fall out, for the man will not be in rest, until he have
finished ye matter with thee this day. And as she said, so it came to pass,
for ye very same day Booz took Ruth to be his wife, by whom God gave unto Naomy
a son, at whose birth yt women said unto Naomy: Blessed be the Lord which
has not left thee this day without a kinsman, to have a name in Israel, and
to leave a continual posterity, and yt shall bring thy life again, and cherish
thine old age: for thy daughter in law which loves thee has borne unto him,
and she is better unto thee then seven or many sons. And Naomy took the
child and laid it in her lap, and became dry nurse unto it, being glad yt a
son was borne unto her in her old days. Ruth. 1.2.3.4.

Noah or Noa, sig. stirring, or moved.

She was one of the 5. daughters and coheires of Zelophead as ye may read in
Mahlas story. Number. 26.33.27.1.

O
Orpah or Orpha, signifies a neck, lifting up, or bari^ of the face.

She was a Damsel of the country of Moab, which was married to a stranger of
Israel called Chilion, the son of Elimelech, and Naomy, and became sister in
law to Ruth her country woman, of her read more in the story of Namony at
large. Ruth. 1.2.

P
Penennah or Phenenna, sig. a gem, or a face.

She was one of the wives of Elkanah, and mate of Hannah the mother of Samuel,
and because Penennah had children and Hannah had none. Therefore Penennah vexed
Hanna sore, and vpbrayded her continually with her barrenness, especially when
Hanna went up to Jerusalem to the house of the Lord, to serve and woorship
him: And when Elchana sacrificed, he gave to Penennah his wife, and to all her
sons and daughters portions. But unto Hanna he gave a portion with a heavy
cheer, read the story of Hanna. 1. Sam. 1.2.3. etc.

Persis or Persida, sig. breaking or dividing a little nail.

She was a woman singularly beloved of S. Paul, as to whom especially with
Phebe, Marie, Priscilla, Triphon, Triphosa and other women by name he has
commended himself in his Epistle to the Romans, for her diligence in setting
forth the Gospel, as does appear by his words saying: Salute the well-beloved
Persis, which woman has labored much in the Lord. Romans 16.

Phebe sig. bright, clear, or pure.

She was a certain godly widow, which served in the congregation of
Cenchrea, by whom Saint Paul sent his Epistle written to the Romans, wherein
he says in her praise and commendation on this wise, I commend unto you Phebe
our sister, which is a servant of the Church of Cenehrea, that ye receive her
in the Lord as it becomes Saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever
business she needs of your aid, for she has given hospitality unto many,
and to me also. Romans 16.1.2.

Priscilla signifies somewhat ancient, knowing.

She was the wife of Aquila, the Jew of Ponthus the tentmaker, who with her
husband came from Rome to Corinth, and there dwelt: into whose house Paul being
of ye same occupatio^, came and lodged whiles he abode there, and wrought at
his art, and so became Paul's mistress in ye year of ye worlds creation 4019.
and afterward she went with her husband and Paul to Ephesus, and there remained
behynd Paul, who went on his journey to Jerusalem. And when Apollos yt
eloquent man came to Ephesus, and preached Christ as well as he could, Priscilla
and her husband heard his preaching, and perceiving him not to be as yet fully
instructed in ye knowledge of Christ, took him home with her, and severally
taught him more perfectly the mysteries of the Gospel. And he being a very
eloque^t and great learned man, disdayned not to be taught of these poor
crafts man and woman. Acts 18. Finally, she was a woman so deerly beloved of S.
Paul, yt in most of his Epistles, he made special remembrance of them as worthy
members of Christ's Church. As namely in his epistle to ye Romans, reco^mended
himself unto her and her husband, specially by name, among other worthy godly
men, and women saying: Greet Priscilla and Aquila my fellow helpers in Christ
Jesus, which have for my life laid down their own neck, unto whom not I
only give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles, Romans 16. 3.4.

Also in his epistle to the Corinthians, he says, the churches of Asia salute
you. Aquila and Priscilla with the church that is in their house salute you
greatly in the Lord. 1. Cor. 16. 19.

Lastly in his epistle to Timothy he says, salute Prisca, or Priscilla, and
Aquila, and the household of Onisiphorus. 2. Tim. 4.19.

Puah or Phua, or Fua, sig. a red headed man, a shamefast woman, groaning, a
mouth, howling.

She was one of the two favorers or chiefest mydwiues of Egypt in the time of
Pharao that tyrant, who with her companion Shiphrah so greatly feared God, that
they did not murder the male children of ye Hebrews, as the king had
commanded them, but preserved them alive, and made their excuse unto the king
to his contentment, for which their fact, God increased them with his
blessings. Exodus 1.15.

R
Rahab or Rachab, sig. famine, a thirst, breadth, broad, enlarged, a street, a
proud dame, strong making, a ruffle or tumult.

She was a Gentile borne, and a harlot and victualer, dwelling upon the town
wall of Jericho, where she kept a tavern or common Inn, or hostage for
wayfaring men and others. And when it chanced that the two men of Israel, whom
Joshua had sent to spy and view the land of Jericho, came and lodged in her
house: so it was that their coming was bewrayed by some unto the king of
Jericho: whereupon he sent straight ways unto Rahab, saying: bring forth the
men yt are come to thee, and entered into thy house, for they be spies and are
come to search out al our la^d. But Rahab having brought these two men of
Israel her gests up into the top or roof of her house, and there hid them, and
covered them with stalks of flax spread abroad over them, aunsweared the
kings messengers, saying: there came men unto me indeed, but I wist not whence
they were, and when they shut the gate in the dark, yt men went out and slipped
away: but whither they went I wot not, follow ye after them quickly, for ye
shall overtake them. So while they believing her words, went in all have and
pursued after the two me^ toward Jordan, and sought them in the foords and
ditches: Rahab as soon as they were gone out of her house, shut the gates upon
them: and before ye two men that were hyd above under ye flax, were asleep,
she ran up unto them where they lay, and said unto them, I know that the Lord
has given you ye land, and yt the fear of you is fallen upon us, and that all
the inhabitauntes of the Lord faint before you. For we have heard how the
Lord dried up the water of the red sea before you, when ye came out of
Egypt, and what ye did unto ye two kings of the Ammonites that were on the
other side Jordan, unto Seon and to Og whom ye utterly destroyed, and when we
heard it, our hearts did faint, and there remained no more courage in any of
us, because of you, for the Lord your God, he is the God of heaven above, and
in earth beneath. Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by ye Lord, that
as I have showed you mercy, you will also show mercy unto my fathers house,
and give me a true token, that ye will save alive my father and my mother, and
my brethren, and my sisters, and all that they have, and that ye will deliver
our souls from death.

And the men answered her and said, we warrant thee in pain of our lives,
and swear unto you that if ye utter not this our business, we (when the Lord
has given us the Land) will deal mercifully and truly with thee and thy
fathers house and kindred, as thou have requested. Then Rahab dwelling well for
that purpose, let these two men down by a cord through a back window in her
house over the town wall, and said unto them: Go you into the mountains
which are near unto the city, least the pursuers meet with you, and there
hyde your selves three days, until the pursuers be returned, and then
afterward may ye go your way safely. And the men thanking her for her
courtesy toward them, said unto her: We shall be blameless and discharged of
this our oath, which thou have made us swear, if thou do perform this
condition following, that we shall make, for so shalt thou and thine be
delivered, namely, the condition is this behold thou shall bind this cord of
red thread, wherewith we are let down, in this window, and shall bring thy
father and thy mother, thy brethren, and all thy fathers household home to thee,
that when we come into the land, we may by this sign and token of the red
thread hanging in the wyndow know thy house. And whosoever then does go out of
thine house into the street, he shall be guilty of his own death, and we
guiltless of our oath: but who soever shall keep within thine house, his blood
shall be on our heads, if any hand violently touch him: this condition if ye
keep, ye shall be all safe as we have promised: but contrariwise if ye utter
these our secrets or condition to others by side, so yt they likewise should
think to escape our hands together with you by this means: then at your own
perils be it, for we will then be quyte of the oath and promise, which thou
have made us to swear unto thee. Well (quoth Rahab) according to your words and
condition so be it. So she sent them away, who hid themselves in the mountains
3. days, and when they were gone, she bound the red thread or scarlet colored
cord, whereby she let them down about the mallines of the window, and went
and gathered her father, her brethren, friends, and kindred unto her house to be
preserved therein in the day of the destruction of yt city Jericho, as the men
had promised and condicioned with her.

Now shortly after when Joshua with his host came and besieged ye city Jericho,
before he destroyed the city, he being mindful of Rahabs good turn done
unto his 2. men, gave his soldiers and men a great charge concerning Rahab by
name, saying: The city is appointed of God as an execrable thing to be
destroyed with all that are therein, only Rahab the harlot shall live, she
and all that are with her in her house. For she hid and preserved the two
messengers that we sent to spyie out the land. And after, when by the hands
of GOD only without man's force the walls of Jericho fell down, and Joshua
entered into the city to take the spoil and kill man, woman, and child, still
remembered Rahab, and said unto his two men whom she preserved: Go into the
harlots house, and bring out thence the woman Rahab and all that she has, as
ye swear unto her. So the young men that were the two spies, went directly to
Rahabs house by means of the red thread that houng at her window for a sign,
and brought out Rahab, her father and her mother, her brethren, her family,
and all that she had, and put them without the host of Israel, because it was
not lawful for Rahab and her company being strangers to dwell among the
Israelites till they were purified: and when Rahab and hers were thus according
to promise carried out of the city and preserved alive: Joshua set the city
Jericho a fire, and burnt up all therein. So Joshua saved Rahab the harlot, her
fathers household, and all yt she had, because she had hid the messengers which
he had sent to spy out yt land, or rather as Saint Paul says, By faith this
harlot Rahab perished not with them which obeyed not when she had received the
spies peaceably. Wherein appears the great mercy of God, that in so great
and common a destruction, he would vouchsafe to draw such a miserable sinner as
this Rahab the harlot was, void of all good works, only by faith to repent,
and confess his name, as she did to both hers and others salvation for her
sake. For after this, she being a Gentile or Heathen, dwelt in Israel, and
there was married to Salmon Prince of ye tribe of Judah, and bare unto him a
son called Booz, who after took to wife Ruth, the Moabitish woman another
Gentile, of whom came Obed, Iesse, David, and so lineally Christ, and all to
save both Jews and Gentiles. Blessed be his name therefore. Joshua
2.6.7.22.25. Matthew. 1.5. Heb. 11. 31. And David makes mention of Rahab an
Egyptian, saying: I will make mention of Rahab and Babel etc. Psalm. 87. verse. 4.

Rahell or Rachel, sig. a sheep, seeing, the beginning, the sight of
mischief, beholding God.

She was the youngest daughter of Laban the son of Nahor, and being a very
fair and beautiful maiden borne in Haran, disdayned not to keep her fathers
sheep. And as she came with her fathers sheep to water them at the well, it
was her chance there to meet with Jacob the son of Isaak and Rebecca, and
her fathers nephewe, who after some courtesy showed toward her in helping her
to water her sheep, kissed Rahel and took acquayntaunce of her, as his near
kinswoman: whereupon she ran and told her father Laba^, who presently went
out and fetched Jacob home, and there after intertaynment made, retained Jacob
in his service, where in process Jacob fell in love with Rahel, and offered to
serve her father seven years for her to be his wife: unto whom Laban made as
willing a promise saying, It is better that I give her thee which art bone of
my bones, and flesh my flesh, then that I should give her to another. So Jacob
serue^ seven years for Rahell, and they seemed unto him but a few days,
because he loved her. Howbeit, when the time came that she should have been
given unto Jacob, behold her covetous father (who esteemed more the profit
that he had of Jacobs service, then either his promise or the course of the
country,) at night after the feast was done, went and laid his eldest
daughter Leah Rahels sister in her steed in Jacobs bed, who thereby prevented
Rahel, and became Jacobs first wife contrary to his mind. For which his
dissembling when he was rebuked by Jacob, who served for the younger and not
for the elder, he alleged custom for his excuse saying: It was not the manner
of the country to give the yunger daughter before the elder, therefore if thou will serve me yet seven years more for the younger, I will also give her unto
thee for thy service. So Jacob being driven for the great good will he bare to
Rahell, to serve her covetous father seven years more for her, at the seven
years end, she also was given unto Jacob, with her maid Bilha to be her
servant, and became his wife together with her sister Lea. But Rahel was ever
better beloved of her husband then Lea: Therefore when the Lord saw that, he
made Rahell barren and her sister fruitful. Now when Rahell saw that she bare
Jacob no children, she enuyed her sister Lea, and said unto Jacob her husband:
Give me children or else I die. Then Jacobs anger being with these words
kindled against his wife Rahel, he said unto her, Am I in Gods steed which has
withholden from thee the fruit of thy womb? as if he should say, it is God only
that makes barre^ and fruitful, and therefore I am not in ye fault. Behold my
maid Bilha then (quoth Rahel) and go into her, and she shall bear upon my knees
yt I may have children by her, and I will receive her children on my lapp, as
though they were mine own, so Rahel gave Jacob Bilha her maid to wife, who
conceived and bare her a son whose name she called Dan, praising God and
saying: God has given sentence on my side, and has also heard my voice, and
has given me a son. Then Bilha her maid conceived again and bare Rahel the
second son, whose name she called Naptali, then after she had received this
benefit of God to have children borne unto her (such is the arrogancy of man's
nature) Rahel began to contemn her sister Lea more then before, and said with
excellent wrestling, have I wrestled with my sister, and have gotten the upper
hand. Afterward when she heard that Ruben her sisters son, had brought home
Mandrakes out of the field, she could not be quiet till she had gotten those
Mandrakes of her sister, and therefore went unto her and said, give me I pray
thee of thy sons mandrakes, and thou shall sleep with Jacob my husband this
night. So she sold her husband for the mandrakes. And within a while after
Rahel having bin long barren, at the last, that is in the year of the world
2259. God remembered her, heard her and opened her womb, or made her fruitful:
so that she conceived and bare her first son, whose name she called Joseph,
praising God and saying, God has taken away my rebuke, the Lord will yet give
me another son. And as soon as Rahel had borne Joseph, Jacob her husband
would no longer tarrye with her father Laban, but having got his wages of Gods
blessing, and not of Laba^s delivering was ready to depart. And when he heard
how Labans children and his wives brethren did murmr and grudge at his wages
or wealth, wherewith God had blessed him in Labans service: He called Rahel and
Lea to the field unto his flock, and there told them of their fathers
discurtesy, or rather cruelty toward him, saying: wives, I see your fathers
countenance is not toward me as it was wount, and yt he enuieth me because the
God whom my father worshippeth, has blessed me. And ye know that I have
served your father faithfully with all my might, but your father has deceived
me, and changed my wages ten times, howbeit God suffered him not to hurt me,
but has taken away your fathers substance or cattle, and given it me in
recompense of my faithful service done unto him. Now therefore, forasmuch as
ye know that the Lord has appeared unto me by his Angel in Bethel, and willed
me to depart out of this country, and return unto my native country where I
was borne: I think it necessary and convenient for me to do so, as the
Lord commanded. Then Rahel and Lea being very well content with that Jacob
said, answered Jacob and said: Let us depart hence, for we have no more
portion and inheritance in our father Labans house. Yea, he does rather count
us as strangers, for he has sold us (in that of a covetous mind he has given
us unto thee in liew and recompense of thy service which is a kind of sale,)
and has eaten up and consumed our money. Therefore all the riches which God
has taken from our father is ours, and our childrens. Now therefore,
whatsoever God has said unto thee do it. So Jacob with his wives Rahel and
Lea unknown to Laban went away, and Rahel at her departing from Laba^ her
father, while he was gone to his sheepshering, and unknown to her husband,
stole away her fathers Idols or Gods, not to woorship them, but to withdraw her
father from Idolatry. Howbeit it proved not so, for afterward these Idols
were the cause that Rahel and some of Jacobs family worshipped strange Gods, as
appears Genesis 35. where Jacob was commanded by GOD to cleanse his household,
and to cause them to put away the strange Gods from among them, and to worship
God aright in Bethel. So when Jacob and Rahel were gone, Laba^ hasted after as
fast as he could, and ouertaking Jacob and Rahel at Mount Gilead, there he chid
Jacob for stealing away his heart, and carrying away his daughters without
leave taking of him, and made no little ado with Jacob for his Gods, saying:
Wherefore have thou yet stolen away my Gods, for he wist not yt Rahel his
daughter had stolen them, and therefore he laid them to Jacobs charge. But
Jacob altogether ignorant of such matter and guiltles, bad Laban make search
for his Gods saying, search thou all yt I have, and with who^ thou find thy
Gods, let him not live. Whereupon Laba^ began and searched Jacobs tent, Leas
tent, and the two maidens tents, but found not his Gods: and when he came to
search Rahel his daughters tent, she having hid his Idols in the Cammels
lytter, sat down upon the^, and as her father was ruffling about the place
where she sat, she said unto him: O my Lord, be not angry yt I cannot rise up
before thee, for the custom of women is upon me, and so the thing for all his
searching was not known. The^ after a little chiding had betwixt Jacob and
Laba^, there was a covenant of peace made betwixt them: upon condition, yt
Jacob should use Rahel and Lea his wives well, and to take no mo wives unto the^
to vex them, whereunto Jacob easily granted: and so Laba^ having blessed Rahel
and Lea his daughters, he took his leaue^ and departed back again. and Jacob
went on his journey to meet Esau his brother, placing his wife Rahel and her
son Joseph last, yt they might be furthest from danger: and when she met her
brother in law Esau, Rahel drew near, and did reverence unto him, and so
took her leave and departed safe with Jacob unto Sichem. And when she was
going up with her husband to Bethel to dwell, she put away the strange Gods that
she had stolen from Laban her father, and earinges that houng in her ears,
and gave them to Jacob when he reformed his household, who took her Idols, and
superstitious trashe, and hid them under an Oak by Sichem. And when she
departed from Bethel and came within half a days journey to Ephrath, Rahel
there by the way traveled with her second child, and in traueling, being in
great pains and sore labor, the mydwife to comfort her, said unto her,
fear not Rahel, for thou shall have this son also: but she through sore and
perilous labor, being about to yield up the ghost even in the birth, called
her childs name Benony, yt is, the son of my sorrow, but his father Jacob
called his name Benjamin, and so she died in childbed in ye year of the world
2275. after that she had bin married 23. years to Jacob, and shortly after ye
death of her nurse Rebecca, and was buried in ye way to Ephrata, which is
Bethlehe^ in ye border of Be^iamin: where Jacob caused a pillar of stone to be
set upon her grave, as a ceremony, to testify the resurrection to come, not
generally reueyled: which pillar was ever after called Rahels pillar or grave,
or sepulcher stone. Genesis 29.30.31.33.35.48.7. 1.Sam. 10.2. After whose death ye
prophet Jeremy long after did compare ye destruction and captivity of the Jews
to ye destruction of the Beniamites or Israelits saying: This says ye Lord, a
voice was heard on hye, mourning and bitter weeping: Rahel weeping for her
children refused to be comforted, because they were not alive but dead, yt is
the Beniamites and Israelites were so destroyed yt if Rahel the mother of
Benjamin could have risen again to seek for her children, she should have
found none remaining. Ier. 31 15. Which prophecy of Rahel and her children,
was afterward fulfilled at the birth of our savior Christ Jesus, when ye cruel
and blooddy tyrant king Herod renewed the sores of the Beniamites suffered long
before, by causing all the young children under 2. years old yt were in
Bethlehem to be slain, of purpose to kill Christ among them, but al in vain,
for mauger his head Christ did and does raygne a king blessed forever. Math.
2.18.

Rebecca or Rebekah, sig. great patience, much sufferance, she that has been
well rewarded, Gods glory, bearing, afausone, gross or welfauoured wenche.
etc.

She was the daughter of Bethuell (the son of Milcha the wife of Nahor
Abraham's brother) borne in the year of the world 2118. and sister to Laban: who
being a very fair maid and bewtifull virgin, unknown of man, as she went on
a time with a pitcher upon her head, to the common well without the City to
draw water, it chanced Abraham's servant or steward, whom he had sent to get
a wife for Isaak his Son, to stand by the same well, with ten Camelles lying
thereaboutes, who when the maid had filled her pot, and set it upon her
head, ready to go away: desired her, that he might drink a little of her
water. And she very courtuously set down her pot, and not only gave him
drink, but also she powered out the rest into the water trough, and ran
again to the well, and drew water for his Camelles also, until they had all
dronken their fill. Then Abraham's man (perceiving thereby, that God had heard
his prayer, and granted his request, to make his journey prosperous, in that
he saw this was the woman, whom God had provided for his masters Son,)
took out two golden eareringes, of two sicles weight, which were worth 32.s.
and two bracelets of gold, weighing ten sickels, which were worth 23. pounds,
and gave them to the maid, demanding whose Daughter she was: I am (quoth
Rebecca) the Daughter of Bethuel, the Son of Milcha, which she bare unto
Nahor. Then tell me I pray thee, said the man, is there ^oome in thy fathers
house to lodge in? yea quoth she, there is both room and lodging: and also
both lytter and prouender enough for your beasts. Blessed be God (quoth he)
that has dealte so mercyfullye with my master, and has brought me the right
way to my masters Brothers house. Then Rebecca (hearing him speak of her
fathers Brother) ran home and told al things what the man had said, in the
presence and hearing of Laban her brother: who beholding the earinges and
bracelettes upon his sisters hands, and marking what she said, ran
presentlye forth to meet the manne, and with gentle entertainment brought him
home into the house, and saw his Camelles dressed, and provided for of
prouender: and when he had so done, he set meat also before the man to eat:
but the man would not eat before he had done his masters message, and
declared the cause wherefore his master had sent him, together with the manner
of his meeting with Rebecca their Daughter at the well, whom he disired them to
give to his masters Son to wife. Whereunto Laban her brother, and Bethuel
her mother, so soon as they perceived by his discourse and tale that he told,
that this was Gods ordinance, they yielded to the man's request, saying: This
thing is procured of the Lord, we cannot therefore say unto thee neither
evil nor good: Behold Rebecca is before thee, and at thy commandment, take
her and go, that she may be thy masters sons wife, even as the Lord has
ordained. Which words so greatly rejoiced the man, that he having first praised
the Lord for his mercy toward his master, and for that he had his request
granted, took forth more iewelles of gold and silver, and rich apparel, and
gave them Rebecca in the presence of her friends. He gave gifts also unto
her brother and mother, for tokens of goodwil, and to requite their courtesy,
and then satte down, and did eat and drink merrily with them. And on the
morrow, when the man made haste to be gone with Rebecca: her brother and
mother (to show that parents have not authority to marye their children
without consent of the parties,) called the Damosel forth to ask her counsel,
and to know whether she would go with the man or not. And she being content to
go with him, prepared her self ready: but before she went, her brother and
mother blessed her, saying: Thou art our sister, grow into thousands, and thy
seed possess the gate of thine enemies, and be victorious over them, which
blessing was afterward fullye accomplyshed in Jesus Christ. So Rebecca taking
her nurse Deborah and her maidens with her, she left her brother and mother,
and rode away with the man, who brought her toward Isaak his masters son,
and when she espied Isaak coming by the way in the field to meet her, she
said unto the servant: who is yonder man that comes in the field to meet
us? It is Isaak my masters son (quoth the servant) who walks yonder,
praying in the fields, as his manner is: so when she came near him, she
alighted, and in token of shamefastness and chastity, (as the custom of
every spouse first brought unto her husband was,) she took a veil, and
covered her head and face, and was delivered unto Isaak, being 40. years old:
who brought her unto his late mothers Saraes tent, and so she became his wife,
and this was in the year of the world 2148. and was dearly beloved of him.
Whereby he having newly left mourning for his mother Sara, that was lately
departed this life, was now by Rebecca his wife greatly comforted and cheered
again, to his great comfort. And this marriage was made in the year of the
worlds creation 2148.

Afterward Rebecca having bin xx. years barren, and without any child, at ye
last, at the earnest petition and prayers of her virtuous husband, (whom God
heard) conceived with 2. children at once, and when she felt them strive
together within her womb, she made her moan to God, saiing: Seeing it is so,
that one shall destroy an other, why am I thus with child? but God made her
answer, saying: There are two manner of people in thy womb, and two nations
shall be divided out of thy bowels, and the one nation shall be mightier then the
other, and the elder shall be servant to the younger. And so, when her time was
come to be delivered, she brought forth two twins, the one red and rough,
that came out first, whose name was called Esaw: the other white and smoothe,
that came out last, and held his brother by ye heel, whose name they called
Jacob: which two afterward became mighty men in the world. But Rebecca loved
Jacob her youngest son better then Esaw her eldest: for Esaw had married in
process of time two wives at once, of the daughters of the Hittites, one
called Judith, ye other Beshemath, who were a continual grief of mind unto
her for their disobedience and rebellion. And to prefer Jacob before Esaw,
she said unto Jacob: Hear me my son: Behold thy father is blind, as thou
know, and I have heard thy father say to thy brother, go and kill some
venison, and make me meat thereof, such as I love, that I may eat, and bless
thee before ye Lord, before I die. Now therefore my son hear my voice, in that
which I command thee: Get thee now to ye flock, and bring me thence 2. good
kids, yt I may make pleasant meat of the^ for thy father, such as he loves,
and thou shall bring it him to eat, that he may bless thee before his death.
Which subtle dealing of Rebecca with her husband is blame worthy: because she
should have tarried til God had performed his promise made toward Jacob the
younger, and not to have sought by this sinister means to prevent Esaw. Then
said Jacob unto her: Mother, my brother Esaw is a rough man, and I am smooth:
and if my father shall happen to feel me, I shall seem unto him, as I went
about to deceive him, and so shall I bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
Well (quoth Rebecca) upon me be thy curse my son, only hear my voice, and go
fetch me yt kids: so he went and fet the^ unto her, and she made pleasant meat
thereof, such as his father her husband loved. And when she had done: she fet
out certain fair clothes of Esawes, and put the^ upon Jacob, and covered his
hands and the smooth of his neck with Goats skins, and put the meat in
Jacobs hands, to carry to his father. By which policy of Rebecca, Jacob gat
first his Fathers blessing, to fulfill the word of ye Lord, who before had
said to Rebecca, that the elder should serve the younger. But when she heard
how Esaw her son threatened to kill her son Jacob his brother, for stealing
away thus by subtyltie his blessing, she told it Jacob, saying: Thy brother
Esaw threatens to sleye thee: therefore my son, hear my voice, make thee
ready, and get thee to Laban my brother at Haran, and there tarry with him a
while, until thy brothers furye and fierceness be assuaged, and that his
wrath be turned away from thee, and he forget the things which thou haste
done unto him, and then will I send and fetch thee away from thence: for why
should I be deprived of you both (by murder) in one day? And when she had
given her son Jacob this counsel to fly away, she went to Isaak her
husband, to persuade him to anger for Jacobs departure, and said: I am weary
of my life, for this Judith and Bathshemath the daughters of Heath, my son
Esaws wives, for they continually vex my heart with their disobedience, and
therefore if my son Jacob should take a wife also of ye daughters of Heath,
such a one as these are, of the daughters of that land: what good should my
life do me? Whereupon Isaak called Jacob, and blessed him, and sent him
away with a great charge to take a wife of the Daughters of Laban Rebeccas
brother. And thus by the counsel and persuasion of Rebecca, Jacob escaped the
danger of Esaw, and was sent to Laban his mothers brother, where in process
he gat him a wife, and purchased the love of Esaw again. Afterward Rebeccaes
nurse called Debora died, and was buried in Bethel under an Oak. Genesis 22.23.
24.5.25.26.34.27.35.8.

Reuma, or Ruma, or Roma, signi. a hie, stately, or lofty dame, thunder,
outcast.

She was the Concubine of Nahor, Abraham's brother, and Milchas mate: who bare
unto Nahor four sons, called Tabath, Gaha^, Thahash, and Maachah. Gene.
22.24.

Rhode, signi. seeing, strong, a fight, a disascenting, a rose.

She was the faithful maid of Marie, the mother of John Mark: who hearing
Peter knock at the door, knew his voice: but did not at the first open the
door, and let him in, for joy and gladness of his coming: but ran in and
told her mistress, and the company of the faithful then assembled, praying for
him, that Peter stood at the door. And they not believing her report to be
true, said unto her, thou art mad. Yet she affyrmed it constantly that it
was so: then said they, it is his Angel. So Peter continuing still knocking,
at the last she went and opened the door, and when they saw Peter so
miraculously delivered, they were all astonished. Act. 12. 13.

Rizpha, or Respha, signi. a hurt with a s^one.

She was the daughter of Ahyah, and after became king Saul's Concubine, by
whom she had two sons, the one named Armony, and the other Miphiboseth. And
after the death of Saul, she played the naughtypacke with Abner, the chief
Captain of Saul's host: who being therefore reproved by Ishbosith Saules
son, (Abner like a wicked man, could not abide to hear of his fault with
this woman) herby took occasion in his wrath conceived against Ishbosith, to
betray the kingdom of Saul, and to transfer it first to David: who afterward
delivered her two sons above named, together with the five sons of Merob
Saul's eldest daughter, to the Gibeonites: who, for the offense of Saul, hanged
them up together upon an hill before the Lord. Then Rizpha perceiving their
carcases to remain upon the gibbet longer then the law required, made
provision to save their bodies, that neither birds should fall upon them by
day, nor beasts by night. Also in the time of the great famine, that then was
by reason of the drought, she made her self a tent of sackcloath, and place it
upon a rock, wherein she continued praying from ye beginning of harvest, until
water dropped upon ye people from heaven. And when it was told David what
Rizpha Saules Concubine had done, to pacify the wrath of the Lord: He caused
the bones of her sons, with the bones of Saul and Ionathas to be carried
into the country of Benjamin, and there buried in the Sepulcher of Cis Saules
father. 2. Sam. 3. 7.21.8. etc.

Ruth, signi. watered, or filled, seeing, hasting, falling, enspiring, glutted,
dronken.

She was the sister in law of Orpha, a very fair Damosel, borne in the
country of Moab, where by chance she became the wife of Mahlon, the son of
Elimelech, and Naomy a stranger of the Israelites, that came out of the land
of Judah there to soiourne. And when her husband was dead, and her sister in
laws also, she and her sister went to bring her old mother Naomy then a
widdowe also, on her way, travailing home to her own country of Judah. And
when she had gone a good way with her mother, and her sister Orpha, with much
entreaty of her mother in law, was returned back to her house in Moab. Ruth
for no entreaty nor persuasion that her mother in law could use unto her,
would in any wise forsake her or depart from her: for when her mother Naomy
said unto her: Oh see my daughter, thy sister in law Orpha is gone home
again to her people, and to her gods, return thou also and go after her, she
being by Gods wonderful providence appointed to be one of his household,
could by no persuasion be turned back from God, that had chosen her to be
his: but answered Naomy her mother in law thus, Entreat me not to leave thee,
nor to depart from thee: for whether thou go, I will go: and where thou
dwell, I will dwell: thy people shall be my people: and thy God my God:
Look where thou die, there will I dye also, and there will I be buried. The
Lord do so, and so unto me, if ought but death only depart thee and me
asunder: so forsaking father and mother, and her own country where she was
borne, she went forward with her mother in law, till she came to Bethlem
Judah, which was in the month April, or in the beginning of barley harvest.
Whither when she came, to declare her great affection that she bare toward
her mother in law, she was very diligent and willing to spare no paynefull
diligence, to get both her own and her poor mother in laws living, and
humbly said unto Naomy: I pray thee let me go to the field and gleane
ears of corn together after him, in whose sight God shall make me find
favor. And so as Ruth went out one day a leasing among the harueste folk,
she happened by the providence of God, upon the fields perteining to Boaz,
who showed her such kindness, that she neither lacked meat nor drink,
neither yet corn so long as harvest lasted, which she carried home still to her
mother in law, to relieve her. And when al harvest was done: her mother in law
Naomy gave her this counsel, saying: This man Booz, in whose field thou have
leased all this while, is our near kinsman: therefore do now by my counsel.
This night he wynnoweth barley in the barn, wash thy self therefore, and
annoyt thee, and put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee to the barn, and
keep thy self close until he have left eating and drinking, and when he
goes to sleep, mark the place where he lays him down: And when he is a
sleep, go and lift up the clothes softly at his feet, and lay thee down,
and he shall tell thee what thou shall do. So when Ruth had done all things
according to her mother in laws teaching, Boaz about midnight awaked out of
his sleep, and feeling one lie at his feet, was afraid, and groping with his
hand, he asked who it was: I am Ruth (quoth she) thine handmaide: spread
therefore the wing of thy garment over thine handmaiden, for thou art next of
my kin. Now blessed art thou (quoth Booz) for thou haste showed more
goodness at the latter end then at the beginning, in as much as thou folowest
not young men, were they poor or rich. And now my daughter fear not, I will
do unto thee all that thou requirest: for thou art well known to be a woman
of virtue. Howbeit there is one nearer of kin to thee, then I, if he will
do the kinsmans part unto thee, well let him do it: if he will not, then
will I. And so in the morning he gave her so much ^orne, as she could carry
home. And shortly after she became his wife: because the other kinsman refused
to marie her, and sold and resigned her his right to Boaz. And in process,
that is in the year of the worlds creation 2717. Ruth,) conceived, and
brought forth a son, called Obed, which was the father of Isha, the father of
David. Read the story of Naomy. Ruth. 1.2.3.4.

Salome, or Mary Salome, signi. peaceful, just, rewarding, etc.

She was the wife of zebideus, and the mother of his two sons, called John
the Evangelist, and James the great: a very faithful and godly woman: who,
when Jesus went up to Jerusalem with his disciples, followed him, and came with
her sons worshipping him, and desired a certain thing of him, saying: Grant
that these my two sons may sit, the one at thy right hand, and the other
at thy left hand in thy kingdom. But Jesus, to put her from ambition, and to
set the cup or cross of affliction before her eyes, answered her and said:
Ye know not what ye ask, are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall
drink off, and to be baptized with the bastime yt I shall be baptized with?
(yea (said she and her sons) we are able) ye shall drink in deed of my
cup (quoth Christ) and shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized
with: but to sit at my right hand and at my left, is not mine to give: but it
shall be given to the^, for who^ it is prepared of my father: as if he should
have said, God my father has not given me charge to bestow offices of honor
here: but to be an example of humility unto all. Fynallye, she with Marye
Magdalen, Mary the mother of James and Ioses and other women, followed Jesus
from Galilee ministering unto him of her substance, and when he was crucified
stood a far off to behold the end. And after his death, she brought
sweet odours to annoint his body, and was a witness of his resurrection.
Math. 20.20.27.56. etc. Mark. 10.35. 15.40.16.1. Josephus li. 18. ca. 3 makes
mention of an other Salome, that was the sister of king Herod.

Salomen, signi. rewarding, peaceful.

She was the Daughter of Herodias and Phillip, and being a very wanton wench
and dancing damosel, laciuiously brought up, under an unchaste mother: When on
a time she daunced trymly before Herod her uncle, with whom her mother
Herodias lived in incest, and forsook Philip her husband: she so greatly
pleased and delighted him with her dancing, that he bad her ask what she
would, and he swear to give it her: yea though it were eue^ to the half of
his kingdom. Than she went forth to her mother Herodias, to ask her advice,
what to beg at Herodes hands: and her mother (having long before caused John
Baptist to be cast in prison, and sought his death for speaking against the
incestuous life of Herod, but could not till this occasion offered, bring her
wicked purpose to pass) then instructed her, and gave her counsel to go
unto Herod, and ask of him John Baptistes head in a platter. So Salomen, to
please her mother, ran in haste unto the king her uncle, and begged of him
John Baptistes head, saying: I would O king yt thou should give me now in a
charger ye head of John Baptist. The king then hearing her ask such a petition
even the life of such a just man, whom he feared and reuere^ced for his holiness
and virtue, was very sorry in his mind, and repented that he made such a
promise: yet for his oath sake, and for their sakes which satte at meat with
him, he would not deny or resist her: but then granted her petition. And
sent forthwith his hangman to behead John Baptist, lying in prison, and gave
him a charge to bring his head in a charger before him: which being done
accordingly, and his head given unto Salomen, she straight ways brought it
unto her bloodthirstie mother for a present. And thus we see what a great
mischief and inconvenience unto the Church and Saints of God came, by the
lewd licentious life of a dancing damsel. Mat. 6.12.

Saphira, signifies telling or numbering, beautiful, showing, bookish, learned.

She was the wife of Annanias, who in the year of the world, 4174. having
first of hypocrisy (because she would seem as religious and beneficial to
the poor as other) consented with her husband to sell a possession to
distribute among the Saints. Afterward of distrust for lack of living,
together with her husband, committed Sacrilege, and was of counsel with him
to keep back part of the price of the possession, which they had sold, and
laid the rest at the Apostles feet. And when her husband hearing the Apostle
Peter reprove him for this his dissembling and lying to the holy Ghost, fell
down suddenly stark dead, and was stricken with soden death, to the terror of
all that stood by: It chanced, that about the space of three hours after,
Saphira also came unto Peter and the Apostles, ignorant of that which had
happened to her husband, unto whom Peter said: Tell me Saphira, sold ye the
land for so much, yea, (quoth she) for so much: Why have ye two thus
conspired and agreed together, to tempt the spirit of the Lord? Behold, the
feet of them that have buried thine husband are at the door, and shall carry
thee out also. And with that only word of Peter, not of any outward violence,
but of a spiritual fear, she fell down and gave up the Ghost, like as her
husband before had done, and this was done in the year of the world 4174. And
the same men that carried her husband to burial, came, and carried her out
also, and buried her beside her husband, to the further terror and fear of all
hypocrites dissemblers, distrusters in Gods providence, Church robbers, and
liars. Act 5.1, etc.

Sarai, (or Iscah) or Sarah, Serah, Sherah, Sara, Sarra, sig. my Princess or
Lady, my Lord or Prince, the Prince, or song of the Lord, the Lords gate,
regard, value, or headheare, my song, the Lords goat, barley, the Lord of
spirits, a Leaper, Hornet, (a woman after Ischa.)

She was the daughter of Haran, borne in Ur in Chaldea, in the year of the
world 2018 the sister of Lot and Milcha, and wife of Abraham, her fathers
half brother, which marriage within the degree of consanguinitie, was after
forbidden in the Leuiticall law. Leuit. 18. And Sarah being a fair woman, as
she traveled with her husband toward Egypt, by the way made this covenant
with her husband for his fafetie as she thought, but to the great peril of
her honesty, that she would call him brother, and not husband, and say,
wheresoever she became that she was his sister and not his wife. So being
come into Pharaos court in Egypt, the Princes and Courtiers of the Egyptians
beheld her beauty, and commended her unto Pharao, to be a very fair woman.
Whereupon Sara was straight way caught up, and taken into Pharaos house to be
his wife, who entreated Abraham well for her sake, and enriched him greatly
with sheep, Beeues, Asses, Camels, and men servants and maid servants. But
the Lord took the defense of the poor stranger against a mighty king: and
as he is ever careful over his, so did he preserve Sara clean and
undefiled, and from being defloured by the king or his princes: but plagued
Pharao and al his house with great plagues, that could not be cured but by the
prayers of Abraham, and that because he had violently taken Sara Abraham's wife
from him to defloure her. Which when Pharao felt and saw, then he called
Abraham, and said: why have thou done this unto me? and why did thou not
tell me plainly, that she was thy wife? But call her sister, which made
me take her to be my wife. Now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go
thy way. So when she was restored home to Abraham again, honest, pure, and
unpolluted, to the intent none should hurt either Sarai or Abraham her
husband, gave his men charge and commandment, to conduct them safe out of his
country with all that they had.

After this, Sara now being come into the land of Canaan, and having been long
barren, and perceiving that the Lord had restrained her from bearing of
children, as she that had respect to Gods covenant and promise made before unto
her husband, that one which should come out of his own loins, should be his
heir, according to his request in earnest prayer, and that his seed should be
as the stars in the sky for number etc. She gave her husband Abraham leave
to take Hagar her Egyptian maid to wife, saying: Behold, now the Lord has
restrained me from child bearing, I pray thee go in unto my maid, it may be
that I shall receive a child by her. (Wherein note that Sarai offended God in
binding his power to the common order of nature, by giving her young maid
Hagar to her husband to wife, as though God could not give her children in her
old age.) So Abraham did as she bad him, and her maid Hagar conceived with
child, and brought forth a son called Ismael. But when Sara saw herself
despised of her maid that had conceived, which punishment God suffered to fall
upon Sara, to declare what they gain that attempt any thing against the word
of God: Then she made her complaint unto Abraham, and said: Thou do me
wrong, I have given my maid into thy bozome, and she sees that she has
conceived, and I am despised in her eyes, the Lord judge between thee and me.
Behold (quoth Abraham) thy maid is in thy hand and power, do with her as it
pleases thee. Then Sara dealt roughly with Hagar her maid, and was so quick
and sharp with her, that she made her run away. Nevertheless at the humble
submission of Hagar, Sara received her again.

After this it pleased God to renew his promise and covenant made with Abraham
her husband, concerning the issue that he should have of the body of Sarai his
wife, whose name God then changed with her husbands, and called Sarah, that
before was Sarai. And to that end when God sent his three Angels to renew the
same promise to Sarah herself in the plain of Mamre, she courteously
entertained those three Angels, and made them a feast in her tent: and as she
stood behind the tent door, and heard the Angels say unto her husband Abraham,
Lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a soon. She rather having respect to the order
of nature (because she being well stricken in age, and very old, even
fourscore and ten year old, insomuch that it ceased to be with her after
the manner of women, that is past child bearing:) Then believing the promise of
God, so often made and repeated, and thinking it impossible for her to have a
child: she, I say, then laughed within her self, and said: Is it of a surety
yt I shall have a son? Shall I now give my self to lust being old, and my
Lord is old also? 1. Pet. 3.6. And when she had talked thus with her self, the
Angel of the Lord seeing the distrust of Sara, at the first said unto her
husband Abraham: wherefore did Sarah thus laugh, as though (quoth he) it were a
hard thing for the Lord to perform his promise. Then she being asked the
question, and reproved for her incredulity of the Angel, denied it, saying: I
laughed not (for she was afraid) but the Angel said, it is not so, for thou
laughedst.

Afterward Sara going from Mamre, and soiourning in ye land of Gerar among the
Philistines: It chanced yt Abimelech ye king of Gerar, hearing of her wonderful
beauty, sent and took Sara away from her hushusband of purpose to have lain
with her. But God whoeuer most greatly detesteth ye breach of marriage, by dream
or vision in ye same night before yt ever he had come near her or touched her,
revealed unto Abime. Behold thou art but dead, because of the woman, which thou
have taken, for she is a man's wife: whereunto Abimelech, as one failing by
ignorance, and not doing evil of purpose, nor thinking to do any man harm,
made his excuse to God again, and said for himself thus, Lord will thou slay
even the righteous nation? said not he (that is Abraham) unto me: She is my
sister? yea, and she herself said, he is my brother: (which fault she had
now twice fallen into, such is man's frailty) with an upright mind, and
innocent hands have I done this. I know it said God, that thou did so: but
yet I kept thee also that thou should not sin against me, therefore
suffered I not thee to touch her, now therefore deliver the man his wife
again. For he (meaning Abraham her husband) is a Prophet, and he shall pray for
thee that thou may live: but if thou deliver her not again, be sure that
thou shall die the death, and all that thou have. Then Abimelech in all have
very early in the morning called for Abraham, and said unto him, what have thou
done unto us, and wherein have I have offended thee, that thou have brought on
me and my kingdom this great sin? Thou have done this unto me by calling thy
wife sister, that ought not to be done. Because (quoth Abraham) I thought this
with my self, surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay
me for my wives sake, therefore did I call her sister, yet in very deed she
is my sister (that is my cousin germane) for she is the daughter of my father
(that is of my fathers brother): But not the daughter of my mother, and she is
my wife. And that she calls me brother, is but of a covenant of kindness
that was privily made long ago betwixt her and me in all places where we
became. Then Abimelech the king gave Abraham beeues, sheep, men servants, and
maid servants, and greatly enriched him: and also restored unto him Sarah his
wife, giving him leave to depart and dwell where he would in his Dominion:
but before Sara departed, as God had suffered this Heathen king to do unto her
husband: so now he reproved Sarah his wife also for her dissembling and
lying: Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver, behold he
is in the veil of thine enemies to all that are with thee, and to all others:
as if he had said: Sara, seeing God has given thee an husband, as a veil or
defense, yea, such a head, as with whom thou may be preserved from all
dangers, thou have done evil to use this dissimulation with me, in calling
him thy brother, that is indeed thine husband. Then Abraham prayed unto God
for Abimelech, and God heard his yrayer, and healed Abimelech, and his wife,
and his maid servants: so that they conceived afterward and bare children, for
before the Lord had taken away from them the gift of conceauing, and shut up
every womb in the house of Abimelech, because of Sara Abraham's wife.

Now the Lord visited Sara while she was in the land of the Philistines at
Gerar: so that she through faith received strength to conceive seed, and
brought forth a son in her old age, at the time appointed of God, according
as he had promised by the Angel, because she judged him faithful that had
promised: So that of one woman, even of her yt was as one dead and past age,
there sprang so many, as ye stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand
in the Sea shore, which is innumerable. Heb. 11.11. 12. And Abraham called his
sons name Isaac, and when the child was borne, she accused her self of
ingratitude in that she did not believe the Almighty, and said: God has made
me to rejoice: all that hear will rejoice with me, who would have said to
Abraham, that Sara should have given children suck? for I have borne him a
son in his old age.

After this, when Sara saw and perceived Ismael the son of Hagar her maid,
as he played with Isaak, mocking and deriding Gods promises made to Isaak,
which the Apostle to the Galathians, 4.29. calls persecution, she complained
thereof unto Abraham, and said: Put away, or cast out this bond maid and her
son: for the son of this bond woman shall not be heir with my son
Isaak. Which thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight, because he loved
Ismael. But God said unto Abraham, Let it not grieve thee for the childs
sake, or his mother: but in all that Sara shall say unto thee, hear her voice,
for in Isaak shall thy seed be blessed: that is, the promised seed shall be
counted from thy son Isaak borne of Sarah, and not from Ismael. Romans 9.9.
Then Abraham followed his wife Saraes counsel, and put away Hagar, and her
son forth of his house, who after lived in the wilderness of Paran, and
troubled Sara no more.

Finally, when Sara was an hundred and seven and twenty years old, in the
year of the world, 2145. she died in Kyriath-arba, otherwise called Hebron,
in the land of Canaan, and was buried in the double cave of the field
Machpelah, over against Mamre, which is Hebron, which Abraham her husband
bought of the sons Heath, called the Hittites, of purpose to bury Sara: for
whose death he greatly lamented and mourned, and after her to be a place of
common burial, for all his and her posterity for ever. And after the death of
Sarai, Abraham took him another wife called Keturah, by whom he had diverse
sons. Genesis 11.29. 12.5.13. etc, 13.1.16.17.15.21. 18.6,9.11.12. etc. 20. 21.
1.2. etc. till verse 15. 23.1. read Josephus fol. 180.181.

Sarra, or Sara, sig. my princehood, a prince, and as before in Sarai.

She was the only daughter of one Raguel, and Anna or Edna that dwelt in Rages,
otherwise called Ecbatane, a City of the Medes, where Sarra having had seven
husbands, one after another in her fathers house, the men before they had lien
with her, were all one after another (by Gods providence and permission, who
had reserved Sara to be wife for young Tobie, as afterward shall appear)
slain by the evil spirit, or Devil called Asmodius, to the great discomfort
and heaviness of the young woman and her friends. And yet to aggrauate her
sorrow and grief the more, Behold, her fathers maids when she did correct
them for their faults, would slander her, cheek and reprove her, on this
wise, saying: Do thou not know that thou have strangled thine husbands?
Thou have had now seven husbands, neither wast thou named after any of them.
Wherefore do thou beat us for them, if they be dead, go thy way hence to
them, and God let us never see son nor daughter of thee more upon earth,
thou killer of thine husbands, will thou slay us also, as thou have slain
seven men? When Sara heard these words, she was very sorrowful: so that she
thought to have strangled her self: But being better advised, she said with
her self: I am the only daughter of my father, and if I do this, I shall
slander him, and shall bring his age to the grave with sorrow. Whereupon she
cast aside all such wicked and ungodly thoughts, as at the first oppressed
her, and in great patience, betook her self to fasting and prayer, with all
devotion and godliness, in so much as in the midst of her grief and
affliction, she got her up to an high chamber of her house, where she
continued three days, and three nights without meat and drink, in hearty
prayer, toward the window: beseeching God with tears, that he would
vouchsafe to loose and deliver her from this rebuke, or else to take her out of
the earth, saying as before in the first Lamp of Uirginitie, Page 39. After
prayer, she came down from her chamber and praised the Lord. And note that
at the very same instant that she made her prayers, old Tobie also made his
prayers to God, being rebuked of his wife Anna, and both their prayers came
together, and were heard, and received also at one time before God, who
thereupon to both their comfortes, sent his good Angel Raphael to heal them
both: that is, to take away the blindness of Tobie: and to give Sarra for a
wife to Tobias, the son of Tobit, and to bind Asmodius the evil spirit,
because she belonged to young Tobie by right. For young Tobie being sent by
his father to Rages, where Sara dwelt, and conducted all the way by the Angel
Raphael, when they were come near to Rages, the Angel said to the young man:
Brother, to day we shall lodge with Raguel, who is thy cousin, he also has
one only daught^r named Sarra: I will speak for her, that she may be given
thee for a wife, for to thee does the right of her pertain, and thou must
marry her: seeing thou alone art the remnant of her fathers kindred, and the
maid is fair and wise, now therefore hear me, and I will speak unto her
father, that we may make the marriage, when we are returned from Rages: for I
know that Raguel cannot marry her to another, according to the law of Moses,
else he should deserve death, because the right of her does rather appertain
to thee, then to any other man. Then answered the young man Tobias, and said:
I understand, and have heard (brother Azariah) that this maid has been given
to seven men, who died in the marriage chamber, and were slain of the Devil.
I am afraid therefore, least such things should happen unto me: for if I,
as thou know, the only begotten son of my father, should go into her, who^
I fear the wicked spirits do love, because they hurt no body but those which
come into her, and it should come to pass, yt I also should die as ye other
vii. I should (I fear me) bring my father and mothers life (because of me) to
ye grave in sorrow, for they have none other son to bury the^.

Then said the Angel again unto him: do thou not remembtr the precepts that
thy father gave thee, when he charged thee of his blessing that thou should
marry a wife of thine own kindred: wherefore hear me, O my brother, for she
shall be thy wife, neither be thou careful or fearful of the evil spirit.
For I will tell thee what they be of whom the Devil has power: namely, they
that receive marriage after such a fashion, that they shut God out of them, and
from their hearts, and give themselves to their own lusts, even as it were
an Horse and Mule, which have no understanding: upon such has the the same
Devil Asmodeus power: But this same night shall Sarah be given thee in
marriage. And when thou take her, and art come into the bed chamber, withold
thy self from her three days, and give thy diligence to nothing, but unto
prayer together with her. And in the first night, take the heart and liver of
the fish, and lay it upon hot coals, and make a perfume thereof, to perfume
the chamber, and when the Devil does smell the same, he shall flee away, and
never come again any more. The second night also, when thou shall come to
her, and go into thy bed, rise up both of you, and pray to God, which is
merciful, who will have pity on you, and save you: and so shall you be
received into the company of the holy Patriarchs. The third night, arise, and
pray likewise both together, that ye may obtain the blessing of God, and have
whole and sound children begotten and borne of your bodies. And after the
third night fear not, but take the maiden in the fear of God, for she is
appointed unto thee from the beginning, and abuse her not, but use her body
modestly, more for the desire of children, then for any fleshly lust, that in
the feed of Abraham thou may obtain the blessing in children: And thou
shall keep her, and she shall go with thee. Moreover, I suppose that she
shall bear thee children. Now when young Toby heard these things, he loved
Sara before that ^uer he saw her, and in his heart he was effectually joined
to her.

And when they were come to Raguels house in Ragis, it was Saraes chance to
meet them first, who after gentle salutations used each to other, brought them
into her fathers house, where after further acquaintance taken, when she heard
that old Toby was blind, she with her father and mother wept, and were very
sorrowful for that his affliction. And after much good cheer, and courteous
entertainemente, made by her father and mother, and her self unto them: the
Angel brake the matter and cause of their coming, first to Raguel, and
communed with him, about the giving of his daughter to young Toby his cousin.
And Raguel Saraes father being very willing so to do, told him all the doubt,
and things that he feared would discourage the young man, saying: It is
meet that thou should marry my daughter. Nevertheless, I will declare unto
thee al ye truth, I have given my daughter already in marriage to seven men, who
dyed that same night yt they came into her. Therefore, I fear least it should
chance unto thee in like manner: No, (quoth the Angel) fear not to give him thy
daughter in marriage, for unto this man Tobie which fears God, does thy
daughter Sara belong to wife, therefore might many marry her, but none other
have or enjoy her, as appears by thy saying, in that the seven men are all
dead, before they ever lay with her. Yea, (quoth yo^g Toby) who for all this
was courageous, and merry, and constantly set in the love of Sara, I will
neither eat nor drink here this day, except thou first grant me my petition:
that is, do not only promise me, to give me thy daughter Sara, but also bring
her forth hither, and presently betroth her to me to be my wife. Then Raguel
perceiving this to be the work of God, who had sent them for the same intent,
yt his daughter might be married in her own kindred, according to the law of
Moses, doubted not to give her unto young Tobie, but said unto him: take her
then, and marry her according to the custom: for thou art her cousin, and she
is thine, and God which is merciful, make this prosperous to you both in all
good things. So he called his daughter Sara, who came unto him, and he took
her by the right hand, and gave her into the right hand of Tobie for a wife
unto him, and blessed the^ saying: Behold, take her after the law of Moses, and
lead her away to thy father: And the God of Abraham, the God of Isaak, and the
God of Jacob, be with you, join you together, and fulfill his blessing in you.
And then, yt is to say, in the year of the world, 3414. Raguel with his wife
Edna made a contract of marriage, and sealed it, to approve both their consents
to the marriage of their daughter: and so after the feast praised God. And when
night came, her mother Edna, at her husbands commandment, prepared another
chamber for Sara to lie in, who so soon as she was brought thither, fell a
weping. But her mother wyped away her daughters tears, and comforted her with
sweet words, saying: Be of good cheer my daughter, the Lord of heaven and
earth give thee joy for this thy sorrow and heaviness yt thou have suffered,
be of good comfort my daughter. So when she was in the chamber a bed, they
brought in Tobie her husband also into her, who remembering the Angels words,
perfumed the chamber with the liver of the fish, which perfume, when the evil
spirit had smelled, he fled straight way into the uttermost parts of Egypt,
for the Angel Raphael had taken hold of the Devil Asmodeus, and bound him, and
sent him into the wilderness of the higher Egypt. And after that they were both
shut in, Tobias rose out of the bed, and said unto the virgin, up sister Sara,
arise, and let us make our prayer unto God, that he would have pity on us, to
day, to morrow, and the third day: for these three nights will we join or
reconcile our selves to God, and when the third holy night is past, we shall
join together in the duty of marriage. For we are the children of holy men,
and we may not come together, as the Heathen that know not God. Then she
arose, and they stood up both together, and besought God earnestly, that he
would preserve them, praying and saying, as in the first Lamp of Uirginitie.
And after their prayer ended, they went to bed and slept both together that
night: But Raguel Saraes father, thinking Tobias was dead as the other seven,
made a grave for him, and purposing to have buried him secretly the same night,
that none should have known of it, He sent his maid into the chamber to see
whether he were dead or alive: who coming into the chamber, and finding them
both safe and sound, fast a sleep together, brought good tidings again to
Raguel, and told him, that Tobias was alive: which caused Raguell not a little
to rejoice, and praise the Lord, because he had mercy on them two, which
were the only begotten children of their fathers. And after commanding the
grave to be filled up, he made a great wedding feast, which he kept for joy
14. days, and gave half of his goods to Tobie toward the marriage of his
daughter Sarra, assuring the rest unto him and her by writing after his and his
wives death. So after the fourteen days expired, in the which space Tobias
begat his wife with child, When Raguel by no entreaty could persuade Tobie
to carry any longer from his sorrowful father and mother, that long expected
his return: He delivered his daughter Sa^ra unto him, together with her
portion, and so sent her away from him with health and joy, and with his
blessing, saying: The God of heaven make you my children to prosper before I
die. And with this exhortation given to Sarra his daughter, saying: Honor thy
father and mother in law, which are now thy parents, that I may hear good
report of thee. Also, see thou love thine husband, and rule well thine
household, keeping them in good order, that thou may show thy self
faultlesse, and so kissed them, and took his leave of them. And to Tobias, her
mother Edna gave this charge concerning Sarra, saying: The Lord of heaven
restore thee my dear brother, and grant that I may see thy children of my
daughter Sarra, that I may rejoice before the Lord: Behold, now I commit to
thee my daughter as a pledge, do not entreat her evil. So she embraced her
daughter, and kissed her, and let her go. So Sarra went with her husband to
Niniuie, and there dwelt with her husbands father, old Tobie, and where after
his and her mother in laws death, she returned again with her husband to
Ecbatan to her own father, and there dwelt with him, while he and her mother
lived, and after their death, which was in the year of the world 3456. she
inherited al their substance, and there lived, and died with her husband,
before ye destruction of Niniuie. Tob. 3.7.6.10. etc. 7.8.9.6.10.10. etc.
11.1.14.13

Serah, or Sarah, or Sarai, sig. the same that Sarah does.

She was the daughter of Asher (the second son of Jacob begotten of Zilpa his
concubine, and the handmaid of Lea) and sister to Beriah, Isui, Iesuah, and
Iimnah, the sons of Asher her father. Genesis 46.17. Number. 26 46. 1. Chro. 7.30.

Sherah, or Seera, or Seerah, or Sara, sig. the same also that Sara does.

She was the daughter of Ephraim, or as some think, his Niece, and daughter of
Manasses, who being a noble woman, and rich in possessions, built to her
perpetual fame, three great cities in Gezar in ye land of Ephraim her father,
and gave unto them several names, the one being called Bethhoron the nether,
the second, Bethhoron the upper, and the third, Uzzen Sheerah after her own
name. 1. Chr. 7.24. Which cities being afterward taken and spoiled by Pharo
king of Egypt, were given by him for a present unto his daughter king Salomons
wife: and after repaired, and fortified again by Solomon, as appears. 1.
King. 9.16. 2. Chro, 8.5.

Shelomith, or Selomith, Salomith, sig. a peaceful woman, or perfect, or
recompensing.

She was the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan, became wife to an
Egyptian, by whom she bare a son, that afterward was the first yt ever was
imprisoned and stoned to death, for blaspheming of the Lord, by swearing or
despiting God in a fray or mutiny, that he made with another man of Israel:
upon which occasion, God among other, made this law for ever to remain
against all blasphemers, That whosoever curses his God, should be punished and
bear his sin, and he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, should be put
to death for it. But this law being now out of use (the more is the pity) it
wounds the hearts of the godly, to hear the blasphemers in every place, in
this wicked age of the world, without any public reproof, or penal
punishment inflicted by the Magistrate, so crucify Christ again, and rent
his most precious members asunder one from another, by rapping out of infinite,
ugly, and most horrible oaths, and execrable cursings, to the great disglory of
God, the profanation of his sacred law, and too too much offense of the godly
and zealous Christian.

There was another woman called Shelomith or Salomith, or Selomith, which was
the daughter of Zerubbabell, the son of Pedaiah, and nephew of Zalathiell,
which came of the stock of David, of whose line or stock Christ came: also she
was sister to Meshullam and Hananiah. 1. Chr. 3. 19.

Shimrath, or Semath, or Semaath, sig. hearing, obeying.

She was an Ammotish woman, and mother to Zabad, who with his fellow Ieho
zabed, traitorously killed his master king Ioash, and was therefore justly
slain, and put to death by Amaziah the king, after the death of his father,
whom they slew. 2. Chr. 24.25.26.25.2.

Shimrith, or Simrith, or Semarith, sig. she is warned, hard as a Diamond, a
thorn, dregs.

She was a Moabitish woman, and mother of Iehozabat, the other traitorous
servant of king Ioash, who with his fellow zabad, the son of Shimrath before
most vilanously conspired together, and slew their master king Ioas as he lay
sick in his bed, but afterward, for this his blooddie fact, he suffered the
condign punishment of shameful death, by the hands of Amaziah the king, and
son of Ioah, as appears. 2. Chr. 24.25.26. 25.2.

Shiphrah, or Siphrah, or Sephora, sig. fair, fairenes, pleasing, a sparrowe,
his bird, a Trumpet, well doing, goodness, early, a Goat.

She with her companion Puah, were two of the most famous and chiefest midwiues
of the Hebrew women in the land of Egypt: unto whom king Pharao in his cruel
rage against the Israelites, and the children of God, gave this commandment,
saying: when ye do the office of a midwife to the women of the Hebrews, or
Israelites, and set them on their stools or seats, whereupon they satte in
traveling of child: If it be a son, then ye shall kill him, but if it be a
daughter, the^ let her live. Notwithstanding, these two midwiues feared God
more then the king, and did not murder the infants of the women of Israel in
ye birth, as yt bloody butcher king Pharao had comanded the^: But contrariwise
preserved ye me^ children still alive: which when yt tyrant the king
understood, he sent for these two good midwiues, and rebuked the^ saying: why
have ye preserved alive ye me^ children contrary to my commandment? But the
Midwiues made their excuse, and answered the king, saying: Because O king
(quoth they) the Hebrew women are not like the women of Egypt, for they are
more strong, and sturdie women, and lively, and quickly delivered yer the
Midwiues come at them. Which answer the tyrannous king well allowing of: when
he saw he could not prevail by that craft, he burst forth to open rage
against Gods people, and commanded all his people that they should cast every
man child of the Hebrew women into the river, but to reserve every maidechilde
alive. But as touching this act of Shiprah and her fellow Midwife, as their
disobedience herein to the king was lawful enough: so their dissembling and
lying in their excuse so unto him, was evil, howbeit because the Midwiues
feared God: therefore God made them houses and prospered them, that is, God
rewarded their constancy, not their lying, and blessed and increased the
families both of the Midwiues and of the Israelites by their means: so that
the people of Israel multiplied, and were very mighty. Yea, by their means
that notable member of Gods Church, and holy man of God Moses was preserved, by
whom God delivered his people out of the oppression and slavery of that Tyrant
Pharo, to his utter destruction in the red Sea. Exodus 1.15.16. etc.

Shuah, or Sua, or Suaa, sig. crying, saving, mighty, honorable, regardful, of
the savior, lowliness, study, speech, budding prayer.

She was a Cananitish woman borne, the daughter of one Suah, or as some think
of Hirah an Addulamite, and became the wife of Judah, the son of Jacob, which
affinity notwithstanding was condemned of God: so she bare unto Judah three
sons, Er, Onan, and Shelah at a place called Chezib. But because her two
eldest sons were both wicked men in the sight of the Lord, therefore the
Lord slew them both to her great grief. And in process of time she also
died, after whose death her husband Judah committed horrible incest with her
daughter in law Tamar, the wife of Er her eldest son, to the slander of the
Church and offense of the godly, as ye may read. Genesis 28. 1. Chro. 2.3.

There was another woman called Shuah, which was the daughter of Hebar, the
son of Beriah, the son of Ashur, and who also was the sister of Iaphlet,
Shomer, and Hotham. 1. Chr. 7.32.

Susanna, or Sues^hanna, sig. a Lilly, a Rose, Mirth, his Lilly, grace or Lady
her grace, and good behavior, lovely, favorable, etc.

She was the daughter of Helchias of the tribe of Judah, and wife of Ioachim a
very great rich man, and of high reputation and honor among the Jews in
Babylon where he dwelt. Now she being a very fair woman, well brought up,
and instructed by her parents in the law of Moses, and one yt feared God. In
the same first year that she was married, there were two Judges made of ye
Ancients of the people, which resorted much to her husband Ioachims house,
because he was the most honorable of all others, and all they of the Jews
which had any thing to do in the law, came thither also unto them to have
their matters heard and decided. These two Judges (being wicked men) were so
wounded with the love of Susanna, and burned so in lust toward her both at one
time unwitting one to the other, that they wist not what to do: but neither
durst tell the other his grief, nor yet for shame utter their inordinate dotage
and lust unto her. And so on a day when they had sat long in Ioachims house
about matters of the law, and waited for to have their purpose on Susanna, and
could not, they brake up and went home to dinner. And at their return again
togethers, the one brake to ye other their whole minds, and appointed a time
when they might take her alone. And when they had espied out a convenient time
yt Susanna went into a fair garden that she had adjoining unto her house (as
her manner was there to walk ever about noone, when her husbands Clients were
all gone home to dinner:) with two of her maidens only accompanying her
there, to walk and wash herself in the heat of the day: Behold these two
old lechers hid them selves in the garden against her coming. And as soon as
her maidens had shut the garden or orcharde door, and were gone for oil and
soap for their mistres, as she had commanded them: These two wicked Elders or
lecherous Judges, who had lain there privily hid unknown to Susanna and her
maidens, like two neighing horses came upon her now being all alone, and
said: Behold, the garden doors are now shut that no man can see us, and we
burn in love with thee: therefore consent unto us and lie with us, if thou
willt not, we will bear wtinesse against thee, that a young man was in the
Orchard with thee, and yt therefore thou sentest away thy maidens from thee,
because thou would commit adultery with him. And then Susanna sighed, and
said, Alas, I am in trouble on every side, for if I follow your minds, and
do the thing, it will be my death: And if on the other side I consent not
unto you, nor do it not, yet can I not escape your hands, Well, it is better
for me to fall into your hands without the deed doing, then to sin in the
sight of ye Lord by doing it. And with that she cried out upon them with a
loud voice. And the old lechers cried out as fast against her, which clamor
on both parties was so great, that it was hard among her servants without,
which ran to the garden door, and burst it open for have, to see what the
matter was. And when the servants had heard the elders false report of Susanna:
they being a little too hasty in beleeuyng so false a report of their
mistres, were greatly ashamed of her: for there was never such a report made
of Susanna before.

So on the morrow after these two wicked Judges full of mischeuous
imaginations against Susanna, came to Ioachim her husbands house, as the
manner was, and there declared the matter (but most falsely) against her to her
husband, and all by wrongful accusation to bring her to death, for spite
that she would not consent to their diuelishe desires. And when she was sent
for to her fathers house, where she then lay, and came accompanied with her
father and mother, her children, and all her kin, to be judged and araygned
before them for a breaker of wedlock, and an adultresse according to the law
of God: she being a very tender person, and marvelous fair of face, stood
before the two wicked Judges with her face covered: But these lecherous
dottards, to the end they might at the least be satisfied with her beauty,
commanded to take the veil or cloth from her face, that they might fully
behold her, and have a full sight of her beauty, which thing being done, to
the grief of her friends, and many that stood about her: These two wicked
Judges stood up them selves both to be her accusers and judges, and laying
their hands upon the head of Susanna (who wept and looked up to heaven, for
her heart trusted in the Lord:) They said, as we were walking alone in the
garden, this woman came in with her two maids, who^ she sent away from her,
making fast the orchard doors after them, with yt a young fellow which there lay
hid in the garden, start up and went unto her, and lay with her: then we which
stood in a corner of the garden, seeing this wickedness, ran unto them and
saw them as they were together, but we could not hold the fellow, for he
was stronger then we, and got open the door and leaped out. And when we had
taken this woman, we demanded of her, what fellow it was, but she would
not tell us. This is the matter that we lay unto her charge, and we be
witnesses of the same: Then the common sort believed them, as those that were
the Elders and chief Judges of the people: and so they condemned Susanna to
death: whereupon her friends, yea, and all they that knew her, for sorrow
began to weep and lament heartily for her. Yea, and Susanna her self then
cried out with a loud voice, and made her fervent prayer unto God, saying as
before in the first Lamp, Page 48. O everlasting God, thou searcher of
hearts, thou that know all things before they come to pass, thou wotest
that they have borne false witness against me, and behold I must die, whereas
(thou Lord know) I never intended, or once so much as thought, much less
did any such thing, as these men have maliciously imagined or invented against
me. And the Lord heard her prayer: Therefore when she was led to be put
to death according to her judgment, and as she was going to the place of
execution, the Lord of heaven which had commpassion of this innocent woman,
and never forsakes and leaves his, but helps them even then when all
things seem past hope of mercy, to the great comfort of all oppressed
Christians, raised up the spirit of a little young child called Daniel, who
cried with a loud voice to the great admiration no doubt of all that heard
him, saying: I am clean from the blood of this woman. And when the people
heard that, they stayed and turned them toward the child, and demanded of
him what he meant by his words: O ye children of Israel (said he) are ye
such fools that without examination and knowledge of the truth, ye have
condemned a daughter of Israel? Return again to judgment, for they have
borne false witness against her. Then the people went back again in all
have. And the Elders took Daniell, and set him among them in judgment, who
when he had commanded the two old lecherous Judges that were the false
witnesses, to be severed one from another, that he might examine them
severally a part, he called the one of them and said unto him: O thou old
cankered carle, that art old in a wicked life, and have used thy uncleanness
so long. Now thy sins and ungracious deeds which thou have committed before
time, are come to light, for thou have born false witness, and have pronounced
false erroneous judgment. Thou have condemned the innocent, and have let the
guilty go free: Albeit, the Lord said: the innocent and righteous shall thou
not slaye. Now then, if thou have seen her commit this villainy, tell me
under what tree of the orchard or garden thou saw this woman and the young
fellow company together? He answered: under a Mulbery or Lentiske tree. Now
verily (quoth Daniell) thou have lied against thine own head. For lo, the
Angel of God has received the sentence of God to cut thee in two. For thou
art worthy of death, in that thou have oppressed the innocent woman, contrary
to the commandment of God, who said: The innocent and righteous, see thou
slaye not: neither shall thou bear false witness against thy neighbor, and
so he put him aside.

Then the child called the other old dotard, and said likewise unto him: O
thou seed of Canaan, and not of Judah, beauty has deceived thee, and lust has
subverted thine heart. Thus have ye long dealt with y^ daughters of Israel,
and they for fear conse^ted unto you, and companyed with you: but this woman
being a daughter of Judah, would not abide your wickedness. Now tell me under
what tree did thou take them companying together? He answered: under a Pyne
prune, or Myrtle tree. Uery well, said Danyell. Now verilye thou have lied
also against thine own life or head: therefore the Messenger or Angel of the
Lord stands waiting with the sword, to cut thee also in two, and so to
destroy you both. And with that all the whole assemblye cried with a loud
voice, and praised God, which so miraculouslye had preserved Susanna that day,
and saved her that trusted in him. And so fell upon the two wicked Judges, who
were convict by their own mouths of falshoode, and according to the law of
Moses Deuter. 19.19. put them both to death for bearing false witness against
their neighbor. Thus the innocent blood of Susanna was saved ye same day from
being spilt, in ye year of ye world 3518. Therefore Helchias her father and
mother praised God for their daughter Susanna, with Ioachim her husband and all
the kindred, that there was no dishonestie found in her. Dan. 13. Susanna. 1.

There was an other woman, called Susanna, in ye time of Christ, which being a
godly woman, followed Christ and his Apostles diligently to hear their
preaching, and ministered unto them of her substance to relieve the^, so much as
lay in her power, to her perpetual praise, and the great shame of many, both
men and women now in the time of the same gospel, who be so far from
relieuing the professors thereof, that they will not vouchsafe to follow them:
no nor so much as to hear the^, preach they never so well, and charm the
charmar never so wisely: but to their utter condemnation in the day of
judgment. Luke. 8.3.

Tabitha, is by interpretation Dorcas, that is a do, a dear, a robucke, or
fawn.

She was a certain godly woman, and a disciple of Christ, dwelling at
Ioppa: who in her life time had been vertuouslye occupied, and especially
in the works of mercy, relieuing the poor and needy. And while Peter was
preaching and doing his office at Lydda, which was a City not far from
Ioppa, it was her chance to fall sick, and dye. And when her friends after
their custom had done with washing her dead corpse, and laid it forth in
an upper chamber to be anointed, ready to the buryal, they sent for Peter
to come unto them: who being come, they had him up to the chamber, where
the dead corse lay, and where the widows came about him weeping, and laying
forth the coats and other garments, which Tabitha had prepared in her life
time for the poor, before him: Then Peter put them all forth of the chamber,
and being alone, kneeled down and prayed, and turning him to the dead body,
said: Tabitha, arise: at the which words she arose, and looked upon Peter,
who then gave her his hand, and lift her up, and called the Saints and
widows, and restored Tabitha unto them alive: which he did not for her own
sake, but for their sakes that were alive, to the intent they might hereby have
occasion to believe and glorify God the author of that miracle wrought by
Peter. And this was done in the year of the world 4179. Acts. 9.36. etc.

Tahpnes, or Taphnes, or Taphnes signi. a privy temptation, a flight, a covered
banner.

She was a Queen, and the wife of Pharao, that was king of Egypt, in the
days of Solamon, and sister to the wife of Hadad, the Edomite, that first
rebelled against king Solomon, whose son her nephew called Genubath she
weaned and brought up in her husband Pharaos house, among ye sons of Pharao
as one of her own. 1. Ki. 11.19

Talitha, signi. maiden.

She was the little daughter of Iarus, one of ye rulars of the sinagogue, who
being of the age of 12. years, fell sick, and died, and was restored again
afterward at ye earnest request of her father to life by Jesus, speaking only
these two words, Tabitha: cumi, which is by interpretation, Maiden arise: and
straight ways she arose and walked: which miracle greatly confirmed the faith
of her father, and all that heard thereof. Mark. 5.22.41.

Tamar, or Thamar, signi a palm tree, or a date tree, a date, a chaung or
exchange, bitterness, a sharpning, to displeasure.

She was first the wife of that wicked man Er, the eldest son of Judah the
fourth son of Jacob and Leah: and after the death of Er, who^ the Lord slew
for his wickedness, she was given by her father in law Judah to Onan his
second son to wife, and so she became wife to two natural brothers: to the
end there should be seed raised up by one brother to an other brother, if the
first died without issue: which order was then used in the old law, for the
preservation of the stock, that the child begotten by the second brother
should have the name and inheritance of the first, and this is now in the new
testament utterly abolyshed. But Onan her husband knowing, that the seed
should not be his, refused to lie with Thamar his wife: for which his
wickedness, the Lord slew him also, as he had done his brother Er. Now Thamar
being a widdowe again, and Judah fearing to marry his third son unto her,
least he should die also, said to his daughter in law Thamar: Thamar, remain a
widdowe in thy fathers house, til Selah my youngest son grow up to man's
state. So Thamar, for as much as she could not marry in any other family, so
long as Judah would retain her in his, went and dwelte a widdowe in her
fathers house, during which time Suah Iudahs wife also dyed: so that he became
a widdower. And when it was told Thamar, that Judah her father in law was a
widdower, and that he had left mourning, and was gone to a place called Timnah
with his friend Hyra, to see his sheepeshearers: she perceiving that Selah was
not given to her in marryage, cast off her widows garments from her, and
covered her with a veil, and wrapped her self, and so went disguised like a
common harlot, and satte down in an open place, by the hye way side going to
Thimnah. And as Judah her father in law passed that way, and saw one sit
muffled with her face covered, like a whore, and being wonderfully blinded by
God, that he could not know her by her talk to be his daughter in law, he
went unto her, and said: Come I pray thee, let me lie with thee. What
will thou give me then (quoth she) I will (quoth he) send thee a kidde
from the flock: Then leave me a pledge (quoth she) till thou send it. What
pledge shall I leave thee (quoth Judah?) thy signet (quoth she) upon thy finger,
thy cloak and thy staff. He did so, and lay with her, and she was begotten
with child by him at the same time, which was in the year of the world 2283.
And then she arose and went and put her veil from her, and put on her widows
raiment again. Afterward Judah coming to his flock, according to his
promise, sent her a kydde by his friend Hyra: to the end no other might know
of his wickedness, and gave him charg to bring with him his ring, cloak and
staff, that he had left with her in pledge. Who coming to the place, and
finding not the woman there: he asked of the men there about where the whore
was, that sat in the hye way as they came: They made answer again there was
no whore there. Then Hyra returned to Judah, and told him, he could not find
her. Well said Judah (who feared man more then God, as it appears,) let her
take it to her, least we be ashamed.

Now was Tamar conceived with child, and when she had gone three months, the
thing was espied, and one came and told Judah, that his daughter in law Tamar
had played the whore, and was with child. Then bring her forth (quoth he) and
let her be burnte. Whereby we see that the law which was written in man's
heart, taught them that whordome should be punished with death: Albeit, as yet
no law was given. And as she was lead forth to the fire to be burnt to death,
she sent the pledges to Judah her father in law, saying: by the same man to
whom these things do pertain, am I with child. Then Judah knowing his
pledges, that is his ring, his cloak and staff, and having the horror of the
sin condemning him, said: she is more righteous then I: yea she ought
rather to accuse me, then I her, for she has done this deed through my
defaulte and negligence: because I gave her not to Sela my son, as I
promised. So was Tamar saved from death, and he lay no more with her. And
afterward when the time came, that she should be delivered, behold there
were two twins in her womb: And in her travel, the one put out his hand,
and the midwife took and bound a red thread about his hand, saying: this is
come out first: but when he plucked his hand back again, lo his brother
came first out, And the midwife said, how have thou broken the breach upon
thee, or the separation between thee and thy brother, and his name was called
Phares: that is a parting. And afterward came out his brother, that had ye red
thread about his had, annd his name was called zarah, yt is vpsproonge, or
rising, by whose monstrous birth, the heinous sin of incestuous adultery in
the father and mother, God would should be signified to all men. Genesis 38.
all. Notwithstanding, it pleased God afterward, that of this Phares her son,
Christ Jesus our Savior should be borne, according to the flesh: as from the
stock and line of David, by Judah, which shame our Savior Christ did take
upon him to set forth his great humility: who made himself of no reputation
in this world, but became a servant for our sakes: yea a worm, and no man,
the reproach of men, and contempt of the people, and at length suffered the
most shameful and accursed death of the cross, to him therefore of all his
creatures both in heaven and earth, be rendered and given all glory, praise and
thanks for ever and ever. Amen. Mat. 1.3.

Thamar, or Tamar, the Daughter of King David, borne unto him in Jerusalem,
about the eighte year of his reign there, and in the year of the world 3077.
was so bewtifull a young woman, that Amnon her half brother fell greatly in
love with her: insomuch that because it was hard for him to do any thing to
her, and that he could not have such access unto her, as he would, by reason
that she being a virgin was so straightly kept in her fathers house, as virgins
were accustomed in those days: he therefore was so sore vexed, that he fell
sick for love of her, and wist not what to do, until he brake his mind unto
his friend Ionadab, who being a subtle fellow, and understanding that he
languished and pyned away for love of his sister Tamar, he gave Ammon his
friend this counsayl, saying: lie down in thy bed, and make thy self sick,
and when thy father shall come to see thee: say unto him, I pray thee let my
sister Tamar come and give me meat, and let her dress meat in my sight,
that I may see it, and eat it of her hand (where we see yt there is no
enterprise so wicked, that can lack counsel to further it.) So Amnon redilye
followed this lewd counsel of his friend, and went and laid him down
upon his bed, and made himself very sick: which when king David his father
heard, he came to visit him: unto whom Amnon then said, I pray thee O king,
let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes even some delicate or
dainty dish of meat in my sight, that I may receive meat at her hand. Then
David mistrusting nothing, sent home to Thamar, and willed her to go to her
brother Ammo^s house, to dress him meat. So Thamar went and visited her
brother Ammon at her fathers commandment, and dressed him certain deintie
and delicate meat in his sight, and brought it him to eat: but he refused it.
And because he like a wicked man was ashamed to do that before men, which he
was not affrayd to commit in the sight of God, he said: cause ye every man to
go from me: So when every body was gone out from him, he said to Thamar, now
bring me thy meat into my chamber, and I will eat it at thy hand. Now when
Thamar brought him his meat, and set it before him to eat, Ammon took her,
and beeganne to force her to lie with him, saying: come lie with me my sister:
Then she seeing that, said: Nay my brother do not force me, for no such
thing ought to be done in Israel: commit not that follye against the law,
which says: thou shall not discover the shame of thy sister, the daughter of
thy father. Leuit. 18.9. For if thou do, alas (quoth she) how shall I put
away my shame, or whether shall I be able to go, to cover my reproach. As for
thy self, thou shall be counted as one of the fools, or as a lewd and
wicked person in Israel. Now therefore I pray thee speak (rather) to the
king my father: for he will not deny me unto thee. Howbeit, Ammon burned so
filthely in lust toward her, that he would not harken to her virtuous
words and good counsel: but being stronger in wickedness then she, he
forced her, and violently ravished and lay with her against her will, she
being but fourteen years of age. And then the flame of his hot love was
quenched, and the fire of his malice so kindled against her, that the hatred
wherewith he now hated her, was greater then the love wherewith he before
loved her. And in a rage he thrust her from him, and with currishe speech
said unto her: up, get thee hence out of my sight. Well (quoth Thamar)
thou have no cause thus to in^reate me: for this evil, to put me away, is
greater then the other, that thou did unto me. Nevertheless he would not
hear her, and there was no remedy, but out of his house she must needs go:
and therefore he called his servant and commanded the^, saying: put this
woman now out from me, and lock the door after her. So Thamar being shut
out of his house, and for shame wiste not whether to go: put ashes upon her
head, and rent her gaye garmente of diverse colors and pieces, such as the
kings daughters, that were Uirgines did use to wear, and was had in greatest
estimation in those days. And so went she crying home to her own brother
Absoloms house: but when her father king David heard all these things, he was
very wroth with Ammon. And Absolon when he understood the matter and cause of
her complaynte, by and by he conceiving sodeine vengeance in his heart against
his brother Ammon, for defiling thus his sister: yet dissembling the matter a
while, till occasion served: in the mean while he comforted his sister
Thamar, saying: Has Ammon thy brother bin with thee? Now yet be still my
sister, he is thy brother, let not these things grieve thine heart. So Tamar
remained desolate in her brother Absoloms house: who two year after took
occasion to be revenged on Ammon, for this villainy offered to his sister
Tamar: and at a banquet made of purpose, he caused his men to kill him, as he
satte at the table, with the rest of his brethren. And this was the end of
that wicked man Ammon, by Gods just judgment, for deflouring so pure and godly
a Uirgin: but esp^ciallye for committing inceste so unnaturally with his own
sister, to the terror of all Athiestes, ungodly wretches, and incestuous
lyuers, that abound in these days so greatly in all places, abroad and run
headlonge to their own damnation, without any shame, remorce or conversion,
without dread either of Gods vengeance to light upon them in this world, or
of the deuilles torments to vex them in the world to come. 2. Sam. 13. all.

Tamar the daughter of Absolon was a very fair woman also to look upon,
she had a sister called Maacha, which was the wife of Roboam, king of Judah,
and best beloved of all his wives and Concubynes, as appears in her story.
2. Sam. 14.27. 2. Chron. 11.20. 1. Kings. 15.2.

Taphath, or Tapheth, or Taphet, dropping, a drop, a pretty one.

She was the daughter of king Solomon, and wife to Abinadab, one of his xii.
chief officers and purueiours for his victuals in the country or region of
Dor. 1. Kings. 4.11.

Timna, or Thimna, or Thamna, signi. an image, shape, a numbering, telling,
forbidding, failing, faithful, perfectness, etc.

She was the Concubine of Eliphaze, the son of Esawe, and mother of Amaleck:
of whom came the curssed Amalekites. Gene. 36.12.

There was an other woman called Thimna, which was the daughter of Seir, an
Horite, and sister to Lotan, one of the chife and mighty Princes of the
Horites, with whom Esaw grew in affinity. Gene. 36.22. 1. Chro. 1.39.

Tirzah, or Thirza, or Thersa, signi. pleasing, well liking, contenting,
willing, sweet, running.

She was the youngest of the five daughters and coheires of zelophead, the
son of Hephir, of the tribe of Manasses, the son of Joseph: of her read
more in her eldest sister, Mahlahs story. Numbe. 26. 33.27.1.36.11.

Triphena, signi. both one thing, as meaning returning, a nise woman, a clear,
delicate and fine dame.

Triphosa, signi. both one thing, as meaning returning, a nise woman, a clear,
delicate and fine dame.

These were two certain godly women, to whom among other godly women, S.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, for their diligent labor in the Gospel,
sends greeting, saying: salute Triphena and Triphosa, which women labored in
the Lord. Romans 16.12.

V
Uashti, or Uasti, or Uasthi signi. drinking, bibbing, doubling, putting,
flax, on the distaffe.

She was the wife of Ahasuerus, otherwise called Artaxersis, or Cambysis, king
of Persia: And when on a time she made a great and princely feast and
bankette of wine for all the women of the City of Susan, in the royal house of
the king her husband, as he likewise did at the same time unto all the men,
to show his magnificence and glory of his kingdom. So it was, that the king
her husband being merye with wine, sent certain noble men about him, and
commanded them to bring Queen Uashti before him, with the crown royal upon
her head, that he might show the people and the Princes there assembled at
the feast, her beauty: for she was a very fair and goodlye woman to look
upon. But the Queen Uashti refused to come unto him at the king her husbands
commandment. Therefore, ye king being very angry with her, in the 3. year of
his reign, and in the year of the world 2610. called 7. Princes of Persia and
Media, which were of his privy Council together and said unto them: What
shall we do unto Queen Uashti according to the law, because she did not obey
our commandment, nor come unto us when we sent for her, by commission given
to ye Eunuchs? The Memuchan one of his seven chief Counselors gave this
advice and counsel, and said: The Queen Uashti by her disobedience has not
only done evil against the king, but against all the Princes and people that
are in the Provinces of the king, for thereby has she given an example to all
the women in the land to do the like unto their husbands. For it cannot be
chosen, but that the act and disobedience of the Queen shall come abroad into
the ears of all women both Princesses and other, so that they shall by her
evil example dare to displease their husbands: yea, and despise them also in
their own conceytes and opinions, and arrogantly shall say: Lo, the king
Ahasuerus commanded Uashti the Queen to be brought in before him, but she
came not at his sending for, nor obeyed him. So shall the Princesses and noble
women of Persia, and Media this day, take first occasion hereof to do the
like: And say also unto all the kings, and Princes when they hear of the act
of ye Queen, as she did: and then also the rest of the inferior women in ye
land will by continuance do the same. By which occasion much despitefulnesse,
and wrath shall arise, and shall be engendered and may intend, if this example go
unpunished in Uasty: if it please the king therefore, let a royal decree be
enacted and proceed from him, and let it be written and registered for a law
inviolable, and never to be transgressed in the statutes of Persia and Media:
that Uasti be divorced and come no more before the king, and let the king give
her royal estate unto another of her companions, that is better then she and
more worthy to be made Queen in her steed. And when this decree or statute
of the king shall be made and published by proclamation, throughout all his
kingdom: then shall all women both great and small fear to offend their
husbands, by following Uasties evil example, and shall give their husbands
more due honor, reverence and obedience, at the least, if not for love as they
ought: yet for fear of further punishment by the law as they are compelled.
Which wise and grave advise of his privy counsel so pleased the king and the
Princes, that the king straight ways followed the same, and put it in
execution. So that the Queen Uashti was divorced from the king, and Hester
received in her place: and after ye law and statute made, ye king sent from his
court letters in diverse la^guages, to publishe the same law and statute in all
his provinces, and to every people after their language, straightly charging
and commanding yt every man should bear rule in his own house, and yt every
wife should be subject to her husband, and at his commandment. Hester 1.9.
etc.

Zebudah or zebida, sig. edowed, dowment.

She was the daughter of Pedaiah, of Rumah, and wife of Josiah king of Judah,
and mother of Eliakim, otherwise called Ioiakim, who^ Pharao Necho made king,
and deposed Iehoahaz. 2. King. 23.36.

Zeresh or Sares, sig. a root, a small chain, a foreign misery or
inheritance, a severed misery or heritage, a rundel or crown of unhappiness, or
of inheritance.

She was the wife of yt proud and ambitious man Haman, who when he was exalted
by Assuerus ye king in steed of acknowledging his change and humbling himself,
waxed so ambitious and disdaynefull, and cruel, that because Mordicay a Jew
would not do any reverence unto him, he wrought all the spyte and malice he
possibly could against him. And after that he was invited with the king to
Hesters feast, he for joy that he was so highly in her favor also, as he
thought, went home and called for zeresh his wife, and all his friends, and
told them all, how the king had preferred him to honor above other, and
especially how that Hester the Queen had bid no man to her banquet but the
king save him only: but says he to his wife all this does nothing avail
me, nor do me any good, so long as I see yt malepart Jew Mordicay sit still at
the kings gate, and do me no reverence as I pass by.

Then zeresh his wife being a wicked woman, gave him as wicked counsel against
Mordicay, and said: Let them make a Gibet or a pair of gallous fifty cubits
high, and to morrow speak unto the king that Mordecay may be hanged thereon.
Then shall thou go joyfully with the king unto the Queens banquet: which wicked
advise and counsel was no sooner given, but Haman her husband as speedily put
it in practice, and caused a most huge pair of gallous to be made and set up
for Mordicay. But when he came to ye king, thinking to have begged Mordicay to
be hanged, God in ye mean time had so wrought in ye kings heart to promote
Mordicay, and that Hama^ contrary to his expectation was commanded by ye king
to do Mordicay al ye honor he might, as unto ye kings chiefest friend. But
when he had done, ye thing went so near his heart, that he hasted home again
very sorrowful and sad, and told zeresh his wife and his friends al yt had
befallen him quite contrary to his hope: the^ said his wife zeresh unto him, if
Mordicay thine enemy be of ye seed of ye Jews, before who^ thou have begun to
fall, thou shall not prevail against him: but shalt surely fall before him.
And as God put in the mouth of this wicked woman to speak, even so indeed ye
Lords decree came to pass against her husband. For afterward he was hanged
upon the same gallous that she caused him to make for Mordicay, together with
her 7. sons also at one time and she her self turned out of house and home,
and all that ever she had confiscate and given to Q. Hester, as appears in
the story of Esther, at large. Esther 5.10.14.6.13.

Zeruah or Serua, sig. a woman Leaper, or hornet.

She was ye wife of one Nabat an Ephrathite of zerida, and bare unto him a
son called Ieroboa^, and when her husband was dead and she a widow, because
her son was a man of strength and courage, she preferred her so^n into ye
service of king Solomon, where in process for his wisdom and valiantnes, he
became surueyour of the kings works for ye tribe of Ephraim and Manasses, but
at the last for the great offenses of ye king, God (among other enemies) raised
up this her son Jeroboam to rebel against the king his master, and after his
death, advanced him to the kingdom of Israel, 1. King. 11.26.

Zeruiah or zaruia, or zeruah, or Serua, or Seruiah with an S. si. bound,
grief, distress, or trouble of the Lord, binding up, framing, shaping, etc.

She was the daughter of Ishai, or Nahash David's father, and sister to David
and Abigail, and mother of Abishai, Ioab, and Asael 3. valiant captains, and
worthy men of the tribe of Judah. 1. Chro. 2.16. 2. Sam. 17.25

Zibiah, or zibia, or Sebia, sig. a prickette, fair, chief, standing to the
Lord, willing.

She was a woman of Beersheba, and wife of Ahaziah king of Judah, and mother to
Ioash the good king of Judah, who repaired the temple of the Lord, which Athalia
and her children had broken down and spoiled, and restored the true religion
that Athalia had defaced and set up Idolatry. 2. Chro. 24.1.6. 2. King. 12.1.

Zilla or Sella. sig. a shadow, a rosting, a scorching, a tingling, a setting
up, a treading down, a comparing, a wicker basket.

She was one of the two wives of Lamech, the son of Methushael, and the
mother of Tubalkain, the cunning smith and brasier, and of his sister Naamah:
her mates name was Adah, who seeing that all men hated their husband for his
cruelty were afraid, least at one time or other he should be killed. Genesis
4.19.22.23.

Zilpah or zelpah, zelphan, sig. the rewme, naught worth, the despising of the
mouth, a slauering mouth.

She was the maid servant or handmayde of Laban, whom he gave to Lea his
youngest daughter, the wife of Jacob, to be her handmayd: and when Lea had left
bearing of children, she gave her maid zilpha unto her husband Jacob to wife,
who bare unto her 2. sons called Gad and Assure, which afterward were two of
the ten tribes of Israel. Genesis 29.24.30.9. etc.

Zipporah or Sephora, sig. his bird, fayrenes, pleasing, a sparrow, a trumpet,
well doing, goodness, fair, early, a Goat.

She was one of the seven daughters of Revel or Iethro, or Hobab, Prince of
Midian, or Ethiopia, who coming with her sisters to draw water at a well, and
fill the troughes for to water their fathers sheep, were resisted by
Shepheardes that drove them away. Howbeit, being rescued by Moses, that sat
there at the well, as a banished man driven out of Egypt, who rose up and
defended them, they drew water enough and watered their sheep: they returned
home again, their father there seeing them come sooner then they were wont to
do, asked of them how chance they had done so quickly: A man of Egypt (quoth
they) delivered us from the hands of the Shepherds, and also drew water
enough, and watered our sheep. The^ their father to declare his thankful
mind, was desirous to recompense the benefit and good turn, done by Moses
unto his daughters, and said unto them, where is he? Why have ye so left the
man? call him that he may eat and drink with us. So they went and called
Moses, who agreed to dwell with their father. And at the last their father gave
this his daughter zipporah unto Moses to wife, unto whom she bare 2. sons,
the one called Gershon, the other named Elezer.

And when it pleased God to call Moses from keeping his father in laws sheep
out of Ethiopia of Midian, to go into his own country Egypt, to deliver his
people from the tyranny of Pharao, he took his wife zipporah and her two
sons with him, and returned toward Egypt. And as he was by the way in a
common Inn, God punished Moses so with a sore sickness, for neglecting his
sacrifice of circumcision (for he had not as yet circumcised his son as God
had appointed) that he had almost killed him with death. Then zipporah his wif^
seeing that her husband for sickness could not, and GOD even then required
it to be done, as an extraordinary act of a woman not to be followed of any
other women in baptising their own children: took a sharp knife, and
circumcised or cut away the foreskinne of her son, and cast it at her
husbands feet, and very impaciently said unto him: thou art indeed a
blooddy husband unto me. So when the Angel of Gods indignation that would
have killed him, was departed from Moses, and he recovered of his disease,
zippora again very angerly vpbrayded him with his negligence and said, O
blooddy husband: and this she said because she was driven to circumcise her
child, whom her husband ought to have done long before. Whereupon Moses seeing
the great impaciencie of his wife zippora, fearing least if she should go on
still with him, she would be a great let and hinderance to his vocation, which
was now most dangerous and troublesome, to deliver Gods people from the
tyranny of such a mighty tyrant and oppressor, as Pharao was, therefore he
sent zippora his wife with her 2. sons back again unto her father Iethro:
where she remained til after the deliverance of the Israelites through the red Sea. And in the year of the world 2515, when she heard what God had done
for her husband and for his people, she with her two sons and her father came
unto her husband Moses into the wilderness by the mount of God called Horeb,
where the Israelites camped, and ever after she remained with Moses her
husband. Howbeit, not without some grief to Moses kindred, for afterward at
Hazerotes both Miriam his sister and Aaron his brother, murmured and spoke
against Moses, because he had married zippora, that was a woman of Ethiopia:
but Moses being a very meek man bare with their grudginges, although he knew
them, and loved his wife zippora never the less. And God being angry with
Miriam, punished her with a grieuons leprosy for murmuring against her brother
and sister, as ye may read in her story. Exodus 2.16.4.24. 18. 2. Number. 12.1.

Here follow the lives and stories of other women, mentioned in Scripture
without name: which for the readier finding out, are set down according to the
Alphabet of the names, of their fathers, mothers, masters, mistresses,
husbands, diseases, cities, countries, or places where they dwelt, etc.
A
Abelitesse.
THere was a certain wise woman in the city, called Abel, near to
Bethmaachah in the tribe of Nepthalim, who perceiving the city to be besieged,
and about to be overthrown by Ioab David's captain, and being ignorant of the
cause went her self upon the walls of the city, and there cried out with a
loud voice, unto Ioabs host saying: Hear, hear, I pray you, and desire Ioab
your captain to come hither that I may speak with him. So Ioab being come,
she said unto him, art thou Ioab? (yea quoth he) hear the^ the words of thine
handmaiden said she. They spoke in the old time, saying: they should ask of
Abel, and so have they continued: as if she would have said, Thou know Ioab,
yt the old custom is not to destroy a city before peace be offered, as
appears by the law of arms and battle. Deuteronomy. 20.11. I therefore in the name
of all the city, speak unto thee and say, I am one of them that are peaceable
and faithful in Israel, and thou go about now to destroy a city, and me a
mother in Israel? Why will thou devour the inheritance of the Lord? Then Ioab
hearing his fault so wisely told him by a woman, gave place to reason, and
telling her the whole matter, required only him that was the Author of the
treason, and said: O God forbid, God forbid it me, that I should devour or
destroy it. The matter is not so, but a man of mount Ephraim Sheba the son of
Bichri by name has lifted up his hand and rebelled against king David, deliver
us him only, and I will depart from the city. If that be the matter (quoth
she) behold his head shall be thrown thee over the wall, and with yt she went
unto all the people, and so with her wisdom persuaded them all, to cut of
the head of Sheba the traitor and cast it over the wall to Ioab, who straight
ways raised his siege, and retired from the city, and returned therewith to the
king unto Jerusalem. And thus by the wisdom, policy, and valiantnes of this
worthy wise gentlewoma^, the city and people were happily preserved from
bloodshed, death, and destructinn to Gods glory, the Citizens safety, and her
perpetual praise to al posterity. 2. Sam. 20.16.17. etc.

Aduoutresse.
There was a certain woman taken in aduoutry, and brought by the Scribes and
Pharisees into the Temple before Christ, as he was teaching the people, to be
condemned or acquitted by his judgment, and when they had set the woman in the
myds, they began thus to accuse her unto Christ and said, Master, this
woman was taken in adultry in the very act and deed doing. Now Moses in the
law, Leui. 20.1. comma^deth us yt such should be stoned, what say thou
therefore? But Jesus knowing their dissembling and hypocritical hearts, that
they said this, but to tempt him, that they might have whereof to accuse him,
either for breaking the law if he did deliver her, or of lightness and
inconstancy, if he did condemn her, and not for any zeal of godliness or
honesty, ye they had to see vice and adultery punished: stouped down and with
his finger wrote on the ground. And when he saw, they (being very importunate
upon him) continued still asking his opinion and judgment: the^ Jesus lift up
himself and said unto them, Let him yt is among you without sin, cast the
first stone at her, and with that he stouped down again and wrote on the ground
with his finger as before: with these words being accused with their own
consciences, while Jesus stouped down, the scribes and pharisees her accusers
both eldest and youngest, first and last, secretly withdrew themselves one by
one, and stole away out of the presence of Christ. So Jesus being left alone,
and the woman standing in the myds, lift him self up again: and perceiving no
man but the woman left, he said unto her: woman, where are those thine
accusers? Has no man condemned thee? No man Lord (quoth she,) neither do I
condemn thee said Christ: go thy way and sin no more. Which, Jesus spoke
not to abolish the law against Adultery, but that for his office as now was,
not to meddle with such matters, but only to bring sinners to repentance, and
newness of life by believing the truth, which God give us grace to do, Amen.
John. 8.3. etc.

B
Bahumitesse.
There was a certain man's wife in Bahurim, a city of the tribe of Benjamin,
who when Jonathan and his brother Ahimaas David's friends, being narrowly
pursued by Absalom that would have apprehended and killed them, fled into her
house, and there had hid themselves primly in a well that she had in her
backside: she finding them there, and understanding the matter, went and threw
a couerlet over the wells mouth, and thereupon spread a great deal of corn,
yt the well might not be found, nor they being therein known. So when Absoloms
seruaunces that pursued them, came to make search in her house for them, and to
ask her where they were, the wife made aunsweare and said: they be gone over
the brook or water of Jordan, but they giving no credit to her words, made
further search for the men, and when they saw they could not find them, they
went their way. Who were no sooner gone, but the wife went by and by and told
Jonathan and his brother thereof. Whereupon they immediately came forth of the
well and went unto David. And thus God sent these 2. good men succor and
relief by the means of this good wife to David's preservation in his kingdom,
and his son Absoloms utter destruction, as ye may read at large in the
Bible. 2. Sam. 17. 18. 19. etc.

Woman with blooddy issue.
There was a certain woman among the Jews, which was long diseased with a
blooddy issue, or flux of blood even the space of twelve years, and had
suffered many medicines, and things of many Physicians: insomuch that she spent
all her substance that she had upon Physicians, and it auayled her nothing, for
she could not be healed of any, but became still much worse and worse. This
woman therefore, as one utterly despayring of any humayne help, when she
heard that Jesus was come into those parts where she dwelt (which was, as I
take it in Decapolis by ye city of Gadaris) she said within her self, I will
surely go unto Christ, for if I may but touch his clothes only, I shall be
whole. So her faith that she had in Christ and not any superstitious opinion
that she had to attribute any virtue to his garment, moving and emboldening
her, she came and crowded in among the great press and throng of people that
were about Jesus, and approaching as near Jesus as she could, she assured of
the virtue and power of Christ to heal her, came behind him and touched but
the hemme of his garment, and straight ways the issue or course of her blood
stanched and was dried up, and she felt presently in her body that she was
healed of the plague: with that Jesus immediately knowing in him self, that
virtue went out of him, turned him about and said, who is it that has touched
my clothes? not I quoth on^, not I quoth another, and when every man denied
that they touched him: Peter and his disciples said unto him: Master thou
see the multitude thrust, and throng thee, and tread on thee, and do thou
ask us who has touched thee? yea quoth Jesus, some one has touched me, for I
perceive ye virtue is gone out of me, and then looked round about to see her
that had done it. Now when the woman saw that she was not hid, and knowing
what was done in her, she feared and came trembling, and fell down before
Jesus, and told him the whole truth before all the people, and for what cause
she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately. Then Jesus perceiving
the great faith of the woman that brought her unto him, said mercifully unto
her: Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole: go in
peace, and be whole of thy plague. And the woman was made whole at that same
very hour to the glory of God, and her comfort. etc. Math. 9.20. Mark. 5.25.
etc. Luke 8.41.

Diseased woman.
There was another woman which had a spirit of infirmity, and who^ Satan had
stricken with a disease 18. years, and was bowed together, as she whose s^owes
were shronke together, and when she heard that Jesus was teaching in the
Synagogue on ye Sabbath day, she went unto the temple and stood before him,
whom when Jesus saw, he having pity upon her, called ye crooked creature unto
him and said: woman, thou art loosed from thy disease, and so laid his hands
upon her, and immediately she was made straight again, and glorified God, as
all ought yt receive any benefit of his mercy. Howbeit the ruler of ye
Synagogue taking occasion hereby to reprove Christ, for healing her on the
Sabbath day, which might have been done on ye week days. Jesus perceiving
his hypocrisy, answered and said unto him, thou hypocrite, does not each of you
on ye Sabbath day lose his ox or his Ass from ye stal, and lead him to
water? and ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound so these
18. years be losed from this bo^d on ye Saboth day? with which his words al
his adversaries being confounded, for shame went away, but all the people
rejoiced at ye excellent things, and good deeds yt were done by him, to who^
therefore be al glory and praise for ever. Luke 13.11.12. etc.

C
Cananitesse.
There was a certain woman of Canaan a Greek, and a Syrophenisian by nation,
who had a little daughter, that was very sick, and possessed with an unclean
spirit, when she heard that Jesus was come into the coasts of Tyrus and Sydon
where she dwelt, she came to Jesus and fell at his feet crying and saying: Have
mercy on me O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is miserably vexed with a
Devil: but he answered her not a word: wherefore she cried the more earnestly
upon him, with which her importunity his disciples being offended, they besought
Jesus to se^d her away, because (quoth they) she never stinteth crying still
after us. I am not sent quoth Jesus but unto ye lost sheep of the house of
Israel, so the woman continued her crying, and came and worshorshipped him
saying: Lord help me, and I beseech thee cast out the devil out of my
daughter. And then Christ spoke unto her and said, let the children (among the
Jews to whom the promises were first made) first be fed, for it is not good to
take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto whelps, that is to strangers
from the house of God, for so he spoke after the common opinion of the Jews,
who took strangers for no better then dogs. Truth Lord quoth she, yet
indeed the whelps, eat of the croomes that fall from the children their
ma^sters table. Then Jesus perceiving her faith and humility in asking but the
poor croomes, and not the childrens bread, granted her petition for her
faiths sake, and not the request of his disciples: and said unto her, O woman
great is thy faith for this saying, go thy way, be it to thee as thou
desire: the Devil is gone out of thy ^aughter. And her daughter was made
whole at that same hour. So that when she was come home to her house, she
found the Devil departed, and her daughter lying on the bed safe and whole, to
the glory of God, and her great comfort. Mat. 15.22. etc. Mar. 7.25. etc.

Cayphas maid.
Cayphas the high priest of ye Jews had 2. maidens, who when ye one saw Peter
the Apostle (yt followed Christ to see his araignment before her master)
beneath in the hall warming himself by the fire, among ye rest of her
fellows, she came unto him and beheld him wishly as he sat by the fire, and
having well looked on him, she said: Thou wast also with Jesus of Nazareth: but
Peter, such now was his infirmity and weakness, that even to a silly wench he
began to deny his master Christ before them all, and said, woman, I know him
not, neither wot I what thou say. And with that preparing himself to fly
if he were further laid unto, he went into the porch, where within a little
while after, another of Cayphas maids saw him again, and affirmed, saying
unto them that were there: Uerily, this man was also one of them that was with
Jesus of Galilie. But Peter still denied it, yea then began to curse himself,
and forswear his master with an oath saying: I know not ye man of whom you
speak, and immediately ye cock crew, wherewith Peter remembering himself, and
being lively touched with repe^ta^ce, went out and wept bitterly, yt ever he so
cowardly denied his Lord and master, to the 2. maide^s and their fellows
silly women, but this it pleased god we should have Peter for an example of our
infirmity yt we considering ye same, may learn by his fall to depend upon God
only, and not put our trust in our selves, or in our own stre^gh as he did.
Mat. 26.69. Mar. 14.66. etc. Luke 22.55.

When David was driven to fly from Jerusalem by reason of the conspiracy of
Absolo^ his son, he left x. Concubines behynd him to keep his house, who^
afterward Absolo^ by the wicked counsel of Ahitophel de^oured, and went in, and
lay with the^ in the sight of all Israel in a tent set up for the purpose on
the top of ye house: wherefore David, when he was restored to his kingdom after
he came again to Jerusalem, he took these x. women his co^cubines yt he had
left to keep his house, and put the^ in ward, and fed the^, but lay no more
with them: but they were enclosed and kept in perpetual prison unto the day of
their death, living in widowhood. 2. Sam. 15.16.16.21.22.20.3.

E
Witch of Endor.
There was a certain woman witch at Endor, a city in ye tribe of Manasses, yt
had a familier spirit, unto who^ on a time king Saul after the death of Samuel
ye prophet, quite contrary to his own conscience, for he had destroyed ye
witches and sorceresses before, not seeking to god in his misery, but as one
led by Satan to unlawful means which in his own conscience he condemned,
came disguised by night to consult and ask counsel of her concerning the
Philistines, whom God had raised up to be his enemies, that they made sore
war against him, and said unto her, I pray thee conjecture unto me by thy
familiar spirit, and bring me him up whom I shall name unto thee.

But she not knowing him to be the king because he was so disguised, and
dreading the danger of the law, which then Saul himself had made against
witches, utterly refused to satisfy his desire and said: Alas thou know
what Saul has done, how he has destroyed the Sorcerers, and the Southsayers
out of the land, wherefore then seek thou to take me in a snare, to cause me
to die the death. Howbeit Saul to drive her out of all doubt and fear, swear
unto her by the Lord, saying, As the Lord lives, no harm shall come unto
thee for this thing, fear not. Then ye witch somewhat emboldened, demanded of
Saul, saying: whom shall I bring up unto thee? And Saul speaking according to
his gross ignorance, and not considering the state of the godly, and Saints
after this life, how that Satan has no power over them, said to her, bring me
up Samuel: so she went to work her devilish feate, and when by her figure
casting she saw as she thought Samuel, she thereby descryed Saul also, and knew
him to be the king. Whereupon thinking her self but a dead woman for playing
the sorceresse, even before the king himself, she cried out to Saul, saying:
Alas why have thou deceived me, for thou art Saul the king. Be not afraid of
that quoth Saul, but tell me what saw thou? I saw said she, Gods assending
and coming up out of the earth. What fashion is he of quoth the king. And old
man quoth she, comm^th up lapped in a mantle. Then Saul, (in his imagination
thinking it to be Samuel, although in truth it was Satan, who to blind his
eyes, took upon him the form of Samuel, as he can do of an Angel of light)
so soon as he saw Samuel, he bowed himself down unto the ground, in token of
the reverence and honor that he had had Samuel in before when he was alive.
But when Samuel and he had reasoned a while, and Samuel had denou^ced unto him
ye heavy tidings of Gods severe judgments to light upon him, to his utter
destruction for his wicked life and apostasy, or reuolting from God: Saul being
sore frighted and astonished in his mind, with fear at these terrible threatenings
of God pronounced by Samuel, in great perplexity, tre^bling and despair, without
all remorce or grace to repent and seek for mercy, presently fainted and fell al
alo^g backward on ye earth. Whervppon ye witch seeing him thus sore troubled,
thinking yt he had fainted with fasting too long, came unto him and said: See,
thine handmayd has obeyed thy voice, and I have ventured my life, and put my
self in peril of death for thy sake, and done as thou willedst me: now
therefore I pray thee hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handm^yde, and
let me set a morsel of bread before thee, that thou may eat, and get thee
strength and courage to go on thy journey. But he refused at the first and
would not eat, yet at the length being persuaded, and even compelled by the
woman and his servants about him, he arose from the earth, and sat upon her
bed. So when she had got him up and laid him on his bed, she dressed a fat
calfe and baked cakes of unleavened bread for have, and set it before Saul and
his men, who when she had thus well refreshed and cheered them up, they took
their leave of her and went away the same night, and tarried not. By which
example of Gods heavy judgment upon Saul, we see and may learn what those
foolish and vain women (or men) get for the most part, that in their troubles
and misery so forsake God and follow Satan, by seeking unlawful means, even
in these bright shyning days of Christ's Gospel: Wherein his word yt forbids
them such abominations, is so often preached and read: Nevertheless are not
ashamed so often for every trifle to run far and near, to calkers,
sorcerers, witches, enchaunters, Egyptians, alcumistes, figurers, foysters, or
casters, ^o understand of things lost and found, of the state of their bodies,
the lives of their husbands, and their children, and the recovery of their
goods, clean contrary to their duties, and as it were in despite of Gods
word, which utterly condemns the same, and to the great peril of their
bodies, and souls, goods, lands, and posterity, yea, utter destruction both
of bodies and souls for ever in hell, without speedy repentance and
conuertion.

Woman in a vision.
Zachariah the Prophet among other his visions says, that he saw a woman
sitting in the mids of an Ephah or bushel, covered with a talent of led
over the mouth of it, and also that he saw two other women with wings, like
storkes, bearing the same Ephah between the^ in the air or sky flying away
with it toward the la^d of Shinaar, there to set or place it, which woman
represented, signified the iniquity of ye ungodly: which the Lord shuts up
in a measure, and keeps it as it were in a prison, yt he only can shut and
open at his pleasure, so ye Satan ca^ have no such power to te^pt the godly
therewith, as he would feign have. And this vision of the 2. other women, does
further signify how that God ca^ eue^ by such weak vessels and small means,
remove iniquity, with the weight of all afflictions that come thereby, from the
godly to their enemies, if they repent and turn unto him, as I pray God we
may have al grace to do, and that speedily, Amen. Zach. 5.6.7. etc.

The two harlots of Jerusalem.
In the year of the worlds creation, 3112. there came two harlots or women
victualers unto king Solomon, as he was at Jerusalem, in the beginning of his
reign, and stood before him to plead for a quick child, the one woman began
to accuse the other of murdering her child, and said: O my Lord, I and this
woman dwell both together in one house, and I was first delivered of a child,
and within 3. days after that I was delivered, this woman was delivered also,
in the same house: and so we lay both in childbed together, no stranger being
with us in the house but we twain, and this woman ouerlaye her child in the
night and it dyed, and to avoid both the shame and the punishment, due for so
unnatural murder of her own child, she arose at mydnight and stole away my
quick child from my side, while thine handmayd slept, and laid her dead child
in my bosom in steed thereof. And when I rose in the morning to give my child
suck, behold he was dead. And when I had looked upon it, and well considered it
in the light: I found it was not my son whom I had borne.

Then the other harlot replied, saying: Nay it is not so as thou say, but
this is my son that lives, and thy son it is that is dead. No quoth the
other, this is thy son that is dead, and mine it is that is alive.

Now Solomon the king hearing their contention, how the one said the child that
lives is my son, and the dead child is thy son, and the other denied it so
stiffely saying, that the dead was none of hers: but the living, and no
witness nor proof of either side brought to prove their assertions, to the
end therefore, that the impudency of the one trespasser should not overthrow
the just cause of the innocent woman, he like a most just judge, and wise
Prince, to try out the trothe presently, devised and adjudged as follows:
First, he called for a sword, which being brought unto him, now take ye living
child (quoth he) to ye servants, and divide it in twain, and give the one
half to the one woman, and the other half to the other: with that the first
woman that made the complaynt, who was the mother of the living child indeed,
having now her motherly affection, and tender compassion toward her child
kindled, ^ried out, and as she that had rather endure the rigor of the law,
then to see her child cruelly slain before her face: said unto the king: Oh
my Lord, give her the living child and slay him not. But ye other harlot most
impudently said, nay let it be neither thine nor mine, but divide it: Then the
king wisely understanding and observing the unnaturalness, or rather cruelty
of this harlot, who had killed her child, gave this righteous judgment, and
said: Give her that complained, the living child, and slay him not, for this
is his mother. By which example of Salomons wisdom tried in judgment, God
made it plainly appear to all the world, that he kept true promise with him,
in granting him wisdom at his desire: yea it so terrified the hearts of all
the hearers thereof, that for ever after they feared the king, as he in whom
the very wisdom of God himself remained, and as a figure of Christ. 1. King.
3.16. etc.

Jeremy the Prophet in his Epistle to the captive Jews in Babylon, makes
mention of certain impudent and common harlots, yt were in Babylon in his
days saying: Furthermore, the women gyrde^ with cords, sit in ye streets,
and burn straw or branne, and if one of them be drawn away, and lie with any
such as come by, she casts her neighbor in the teeth, because she was not so
worthily reputed, nor her cord broken. Baruch. 6.43.

The description of an harlot by Solomon.
As I was in the window of my house says Solomon, I looked through the
lettice and saw and considered among the fools and children, a young man void
of wit, and destitute of understanding, who passed through the streets by the
corner and went toward the house of an harlot in the twylight of the evening,
when the night began to be black and dark, for there was almost none so
impudent, but they were afraid to be seen: and also their own consciences did
accuse them that they went about wickedness, which caused them to seek the
darkness of ye night to cover their filthiness and sin withal.

And behold, there met him a woman with open tokens of an harlot both in her
apparel, gesture, and behavior, for she was full of babbling, and loud
words, and ready to dally, her feet cannot abide in her house, now she is
without, now in the streets, and lies in wait at every corner: So this
light woman caught this foolish man and kissed him, and with an impudent face
and shameless countenance, she ^ayde unto him: Come, I have peace offringes,
and meat at home, prepared to make good cheer with, this day also have I paid
my vows, and made satisfaction for my sins, (so holy was this harlot, as she
would seem outwardly under a cloak of hypocrisy, the better to deceive others
and to allure them into her snares:) therefore came I forth to meet the quoth
she, that I might seek thy face, and I am glad that I have found thee: come
home now I say with me, for I have decked my bed with couerings and gay
ornaments of tapistry, and clothes of Egypt, yea, I have perfumed my bed with
myrrh, alloes, and cynamom: Come I say, let us therefore lie together and
take our fill of love, and let us solace our selves, and take our pleasure in
daliance, for my husband is not at home, he is gone a journey far of, and
has taken with him a great bag of money, and will not return home again of
a long time, until the day appointed.

Thus this impudent harlot with her great subtilty and craft joined with sweet
words, and flattering speeches, overcame so the silly young man, that she
caused him to yield, and with her dissembling lips, she so entised and
bewitched him as it were, that he silly fool, followed her straight ways home
to her house, as an Ox led to the slaughter, which thinking he goes to the
pasture, willingly goes to his own death and destruction: And as a natural
idiot and fool that laugheth when he goes to the stocks to be punished, and
as a bird yt hastes to the snare, not knowing what danger and peril his life
is in. Even so I say, went this besotted young man after her so long, till she
had wounded his languishing liver with the dart of her filthy lust, and
brought him home into her house of hell, and chamber of death and destruction,
and there placed him as her gheste in the deep pit of hell. Prou. 7.

The description of the great whore or harlot of Babylon By S. John the
Evangelist. Whore of Babylon.
I saw (says Saint John) a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full
of names of blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten horns: and the woman
sat upon many waters, and was arrayed all in purple and scarlet: and gilded
with gold and precious stones, and pearls, and had a cup of gold in her hand
full of abhominatio^s and filthiness of her fornications. And in her forehead was
this name written: A mystery, great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and
abominations of the earth. And I saw this woman dronken with the blood of
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. And I heard this strumpet
glorify her self, and boast gloriously of her prosperity, saying in her
heart: I sit and live in pleasure being a queen, and am no widow, and shall
see no mourning: Yea, I saw the kings of the earth commit fornication with this
whore, and the inhabitants of the earth drink, til they were dronken with the
wine of her fornication, and the marchantes of the earth traffike with her, and
buy her ware, to make them selves rich thereby of the abundance of her
pleasures, even her ware of gold and silver, precious stones and pearls of
fine linen, purple, silk, scarlette, and all manner of Thymwood, vessels of
Iuory, and of precious wood, of brass, iron and marble: her wares also of
synamom, sweet odours, oyntmentes, frankincense, wine, oil, fine flower and
wheat, of beasts and sheep, horses and charyots, servants and souls of men.

And when I saw her, says S. Iohu: I wondered with great marvel. But the
Angel of the Lord after that he had shewde me the mystery of the woman, and
of the beast that bare her, told me that this whore or harlot Babylon, for her
sins and abominations committed, which were all ascended and come up to
heaven, shall have a great fall, and be sore plagued and tormented in one day
all at once, even with death, sorrow and famyne, and that she should be
rewarded double according to her works, and drink the dreegges of her own
cup, and be burnt with fire: for strong is the Lord which will condemn
her: yea, that they that hate the whore shall with one consent make her
desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, as God
has put in their hearts, to fulfill his will upon her. That the kings of
the earth which lived in pleasure with her, also shall bewail and lament her,
when they shall see the smoke of her burning. And standing a far off for
fear of her torment, shall say, Alas, alas, the great City Babylon, the
mighty City, how is thy judgment come even in one hour? The inhabitants
and people of the world also shall run out of her and cry out mightelye with
a loud voice, and say: Alas, alas, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the
great city: is fallen, and is become the inhabitation of devils, and the hold
of all foul spirits: and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird. Finally
ye merchants of her trash, which made them selves rich thereby: for sorrow and
want of their filthy gain, shall stand a far off from her, for fear of her
tormente, and erye out and despair, weeping and wayling, and say: Alas, alas,
the great City that was clothed in fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and
gilded with gold and precious stone, and pearl how in one hour are so great
riches come to desolation. And all shipmen and trauaylers, by sea shall fly up
to the top of their mastes, to see her destruction, and shall cry out when
they see the smoke of her burning, and cast dust upon their heads, and say
alas, alas, what City in all the world was like unto this great City: wherein
all that had ships on the sea were made rich by her costlynesse, how in one
hour is she made desolate?

But contrariwyse, the Angels told me, that the Saints and Martyrs, whom
she had slain, should greatly rejoice in her destruction, and say: O
heaven rejoice of her desolation, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets triumph
in her overthrow: for GOD has given your judgment on her, etc. And with that
the Angel cast a great mighty mylstone into the sea, saying: With such
violence shall that great City Babylon be cast down: so that she shall be
found no more. Reuela. 17. 18. see more. 19.1.2.3.

I
Of the Virgins of Iabes Gilead, read in Syloe Ieptahs daughter.
Ieptahs daughter being a very fair virgin, unknown of man, ^he only
child and heir of her father, went out of her fathers house in Myspheh,
accompanied with diverse damoselles to meet her father, with Tymbrelles,
daunces and songs, (as the manner and custom of women then was after any
great victory) to welcome him home from war, and to praise God for the
victory given him against the Ammonites: but alas to her destruction, and her
fathers infamy. For her father having before made a rash vow to God, that if
he gat the victory, and came home in peace, he would dedicate and offer up in
sacrifice unto God the thing that first came out of his house to meet him, as
wickedly performed the same rash vow. And so soon as he saw his daughter come
out to meet him, being now overcome with blind zeal, and little considering
whether his vow were lawful or no: he rent his clothes, and said, alas my
daughter, thou haste brought me low, and art one of them that trouble me:
for I have opened my mouth, and made a vow unto the Lord to sacrifice unto him
the first thing that meets me, and cannot go back: O my father quoth she,
if thou have opened the mouth so unto the Lord, do with me as thou have
promised, seeing that the Lord has avenged thee of thine enemies, the
children of Ammon. Howbeit, yet before thou perform thy vow, do thus much
for me, suffer me I pray thee for the space of two months, that I may go to
the mountains, and bewail my Uirginitie together with my fellow Uirgins: so
Ieptah gave her leave, and sent her away. And she went with her companions, and
lamented her Uirginity upon the mountains, because it was counted a shame in
Israel, to die without children. And after the end of two months, she returned
again unto her father, who slew her, and sacrificed her according to his vow
that he made: And ever after it was a custom in Israel, that the daughters and
virgins of Israel, went year by year to lament the death and Uirginitie of
the daughter of Ieptah the Gileadite four days in a year upon the
mountains. Judges 11. 34. etc.

Ieroboams wife.
Ieroboams wife when her son Abijah fell sick, at her husbands request took
a present of ten loaves, cracknels, and a bottel of honey, as ye custom was,
and because she would not be known to be ye Queen, she disguised herself,
and so went unto Syloe to the Prophet Ahiiah, and there feining her self to be
another woman then the wife of Jeroboam, she asked counsel of him what should
become of the young man her son, whether he should live to succeed his father
in the kingdom^ or die of that disease. But the Prophet albeit he was blind,
and his eyesight decayed for age, yet having her coming unto him revealed by
God before hand, and her craft and subtletie disclosed unto him ere she came,
so soon as he heard the sound of her feeete as she came in at his door he
said: Come in thou wife of Jeroboam, why feynest thou thy self to be another
then the wife of Jeroboam? I am sent to thee with heavy tydinges: Go tell thy
husband thus says the Lord, that forasmuch as I have exalted thee, which
wast but a servant to Salomo^, from among yt people, and have made thee Prince
over my people Israel, etc, and thou have not kept my commandments, but done
evil above all other kings yt were before thee, in committing abominations
setting up Idolatry, and not only sinning thy self, but making other to sin,
Therefore behold, I will bring this evil upon the house of Jeroboam for his
sins: namelye I will cut off from him, all that piss against the wall, that
is, every male even to the dogs: as well of them yt are shut up in prison and
strong holds, as at liberty and abroad: yea I will sweep away his
posterity, as a man sweepeth away dounge or dyrte, till it be all gone. And
the dogs shall eat them that dye in the City, and the fowls of the air
devour them that die in the field: for the Lord has said it. Up therefore,
and get thee to thine house, for when thy feet enter into the City, thy
child shall die, and all Israel shall mourn for him, and burye him. For he
only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some
goodness toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam. So
Ieroboams wife with a heavy cheer departed, and came to Terzah, where she
dwelt: and when she came to the threshold of the door, ready to enter into the
house, the young man her child died, and they buried him, and all Israel
lamented his death, even according as the Prophet from the mouth of the Lord
had foretold her. 1. King. 14.

Widow of Jerusalem.
There was a certain poor widow in Jerusalem, who being in the Temple at
the time when the rich men and people cast in their alms into the tresorie, to
the relief of the poor, came also, and cast in two mites, which make a
quadrin or half a farthing, into the treasorie with the rest of the people:
whom, when Jesus sitting over against the treasorie, saw and beheld: he to
show he esteems our gifts or alms deeds by the hearts, ready will, and
affection of the giver, and not by the quantity or value of the thing given,
commended this poor widows offering and liberallitie, above the rich men's:
saying unto his Disciples that were about him: Uerily I say unto you, that this
poor widow has cast more into the offerings of God, the^ all they which have
cast into the treasorie: for they all did cast in of their superfluity: but
she of her poverty did cast in all the living that she had. Mark. 12.42. Luke
21.1.

Jobs Wife.
Jobs wife seeing her husband visited by the hand of God, and grievously
plagued with botches and byles from top to toe, began to loathe and despise
him, because of the loathsomeness and continuance of his diseases. And being
stirred up of Satan, as an instrument to ^empt her husband Job, as Eve was to
tempt Adam: she knowing death to be appointed for the blasphemer, most
impatiently and wickedly said unto her husband: Do thou continue yet in
thine uprightness? curse God, and die: as though she would have said, what
gaynest thou to serve God, seeing he thus plagueth thee, as if he were thine
enemy: Blaspheme Gods name, by curssing and denying him, so shall thou be
stoned to death by judgment of the law, and be quicklye rid of this pain,
wherein most loathfully thou languishest. But Ioab, like a most quiet and
pacient man, teaching her and us all patiently to endure the cross of
affliction and hand of God, said unto her: O wife, thou speak like a
foolish woman. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not
receive evil also? Job. 2.9.10.

L
There was a certain Lady, a noble Gentlewoman, which for her excellent
virtue and devout godliness in religion, and bringing up her children in
virtue and learning accordinglye: was had in great reputation, and worthily
honored of all men, especially of the Apostles: Insomuch, that S. John, not
for any worldly or private affection, but according to godliness so loved
this Lady, that to her perpetual praise and all other women's good example, by
imitating her virtues, he wrote a learned Epistle to her and her children, as
an elect and most noble Lady: wherein he rejoiced greatly (as all godly
men do) that he found her and her children walking in the truth of Christ's
Gospel, and shunning the by paths of error, superstition and idolatry:
exhorting her most friendely and christianlye therein, that as she had begun
to love and embrace the Gospel, so she and her children would still love, and
continue in the constant profession of the same doctrine of Christ, which she
and her children to fore had learned. And warns her and them also to beware
of deceivers, and to have nothing to do with false preachers and teachers. 2.
John. 1.

The description of the woman called the Lambs wife, or Church of Christ,
persecuted by that dragon Antichrist: not unprofitable to be read of women in
travel, to their comfort and edification, as a lesson in prayer.
THere appeared in heaven a great wonder says S. John, a woman clothed with
ye sun, and the moon was under her feet, and upon her head a crown of xii.
stars, and she was with child, and cried traveling in birth, and was pained
ready to be delivered. And behold, a great red dragon with seven heads,
ten horns, and a long tail that reached up to heaven, stood before the woman
which was ready to be delivered, to devour her child when she had brought it
forth. So she brought forth a man child which should rule all nations with a
rod of iron, and her son was taken up to God, and to his throne. And the
woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, that
they should feed her 1260. days. Then this great Dragon that old Serpent,
called the Devil and Satan, which deceives all the world with his Angels, was
cast out of heaven unto the earth for ever, by Michael and his Angels that
waged battle with him. And when he saw that, he persecuted the woman which had
brought forth the man child. But to the woman were given two wings of a great
Eagle, that she might fly unto the wilderness, into her place where she is
nourished for a tune and times, and half a time from the presence of the
serpent. And the serpent seeing the woman fly away, cast out of his mouth
water after her like a flood, that he might cause her to be carried away of the
flood: but the earth help the woman, for it opened and swallowed up the flood
which the Dragon cast out of his mouth. Then the Dragon was more wroth with the
woman, and went and made war with the remnant of her seed which kept the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. Revel. 12. See
more chap. 19. 7.21,9.

Levites wife.
There was in the time of Judges a certain woman of Bethleem Judah, who being
the Concubyne or wife of a certain Leuit, dwelling in mount Ephraim, there
played the whore with other men, and when she had done, she added one evil to
an other, and for fear of punishment ran a way from her husband, and went
and dwelt with her own father in Bethleem Judah, from whence she came. And by
that time she had continued the space of four months, it chanced at the
last, that her husband riding after her, and understanding where she was come
thither to her fathers house with horse and man to fetch her away home to his
own house in mount Ephraim, where after much entreaty, and fair promises,
and sweet words used by him unto her to come away home again with him upon
the Ass that he had brouht for her to ride on: She first brought him into her
fathers house, who very courteously entertained him for her sake, five or six
days before he would suffer her to depart: afterward she being willing to
come away with her husband, took her leave of her father and friends, and so
departed with her husband homewards. And coming somewhat late in ye night into
Gibeath, a place so called in Benjamin, where the wicked men of Iemeny dwelt,
they were feign to sit in the street, because they could get no lodging in the
Innes, until it fortuned that an old laboring man came late from his work,
who espying her and a man sitting like wayfaring folk so late in the streets,
went unto them, and after he understood of them what they were, and from whence
they came, and whither they were going, of very courtesy and compassion he
took them both home with him to his house, and gave them lodging and
intertaynement the best he could. But as they were at Supper making merry:
behold, certain Beniamites, that is, wicked men of the City, came and like
night walkers besette the house round about, and smote at the door, to the
intent they might break in, and commanded the old man that was master of
the house saying: Bring forth the man that came into thine house that we may
know him: whereupon the old man went out of his house to pacify them and
said: Nay my brethren do not so wickedly I pray you, seeing that this man
is come into my house, commit not such vilanie against him. Behold, rather
then ye shall so do, lo here is my daughter which is a Uirgin and his
Concubine, them will I bring out now and humble them and abuse them, and do
with them what seems you good, but to this manne do not this villainy: but
the wicked men would not be entreated, therefore the old man took the
Levites wife or Concubine and brought her out unto them, and they forced her
and knew her carnally, and abused her body most villainously all the night,
until the morning, and in the break of the day let her go.

So the woman came in the dawing of the day, and fell down stark dead at the
thresholde or door of the old man's house, where her husband was, and there
lay till day light. And in the morning, when her husband arose, and opened
the doors of the house, thinking to have gone his way, behold he saw his
wife lie at the door with both her hands lying upon the threshold, and
supposing her to have been fast a sleep: called unto her, and said, up, let
us go: but she answered not. Then he stouped to take her up, and perceiving
her to be stark dead, through the rapin, force and villainy of these wicked
Beiamites, he laid her upon his Ass, and carried her home to his house at
mount Ephraim. And as soon as he was come home, he took a knife, and cut his
dead Concubine in pieces, and divided her bones and all into twelve parts, and
so sent her all to be mangled unto the twelve trybes, that is to every tribe a
part of her, to signify unto them the horrible murder committed by those
wicked Beniamites against the law, that they might revenge it by executing due
punishment upon the offenders. And all that hard thereof considered the matter,
and consulting of the manner, gave this sentence, that that sin was like to
the sin of Sodom and Gomorrhe: for which God rayned down fire and
brimstone from heaven. For there was never the like thing done or heard of,
since the delivery of the people of Israel out of Egypt. And afterward the
twelve tribes as soon as they understood the matter, consulted together, and
sent for the Leuit, the woman's husband, who came and declared the whole
circumstance and troth of the matter unto them: whereupon they determined to
send to the governors of the tribe of Benjamin, that they should find out
the offenders, and deliver the^ up to the rulars of the ten tribes, to be
punished with death, according to justice: but the children of Benjamin utterly
refused so to do, and began to take up arms against the children of the
Israelites, as maintainers of their brethrens cruel fact: but therefore they
were all by Gods just judgment justly plagued: for the other tribes of the
children of Israel joining with them in battle, upon that occasion offered:
And (after the loss of two and twenty thousand men of Israel, that were
slain at the first conflicte, and eighteen thousand men of Israel at the
second battle, and threescore men of Israel at the third and fifth
encounter, in all forty thousand and 60. men of the one side) the Israelites
then at Gibea slew of the Beniamites in one day five and twenty thousand and
an hundred chosen men of war, at another conflict 18. thousand, and at the
last battle five and twenty thousand men, in all threescore and eight
thousand, and an hundred men of the Beniamites all chosen, and valiant
soldiers, and stout men of war on the other side: and went and burnt their
cities, and destroyed man and woman, beast and cattle, with the sword and
fire, so that this harlots death cost the lives of an hundred and eight
thousand, one hundred and threescore valiant men of war, besides an infinite
number of women and children. And after this great slaughter, the children of
Israel of the other tribes, made an oath and swear within themselves, by
consent and solemn decree, as it were, that none of them should ever after
give their daughters, or women unto the Beniamites to wives, saying, cursed be
he that gives a wife to Beniamine, so greatly did they then detest, and
abhor that wicked fact, committed by the children of Beniamine against this
Levites wife or concubine. Iud. 19.20.

Lots wife.
Lots wife being drawn by God out of Sodom, and commanded to escape for her
life, and to fly from his plagues, ready to be powered upon that city, for the
abominable sins thereof, and not to look behind her, nor to be sorry to
depart thence for any riches or vanity that she had or knew in the city and
country: yet for all this, as she went behind her husband to Zoare in the
plain, she looked back again unto Sodom, and beheld it how it burnt with
fire and brimstone, lamenting no doubt for the loss of so godly a city, and
her wealth and possessions which she had left therein behynd her. Wherefore
presently by Gods just judgment, for a notable monument of Gods vengeance upon
Sodom, and all carnal or fleshly Sodomites, as touching her body only, she
was turned into a pillar of salt, and so in saving her life, she lost it
through disobedience, and mistrust. Genesis 19.17.26. Whose example our Savior
Christ, speaking of the latter days, sets before our eyes, saying: In that
day let him that is in the field not turn back to that he left behind, but
let him remember Lots wife, for whosoever shall seek to save his soul, shall
loose it, and whosoever shall loose his corporal life, shall get life
everlasting. Luke 17.31.32.33.

M.
Manoahs wife.
Manoahs wife, the mother of Sampson, dwelt in a place called Zorah in the
tribe of Dan, and having been long barren, and without any child, the Angel of
the Lord appeared unto her and said: behold, thou art barren, and bear
not, but thou shall conceive and bear a ^onne. And now therefore beware that
thou drink no wine, nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing, for
lo thou shall conceive and bare a son, and no rasor shall come on his head:
for the child shall be a Nazarite, that is, one separate from the world, and
dedicate unto God from his birth, and he shall begin to save Israel out of the
hands of the Philistines.

Then the wife came and told her husband saying, A man of God came unto me,
and the fashion of him was like the fashion of the Angel of God exceeding
fearful (for flesh and blood to behold:) but I asked him not whence he was,
neither told he me his name. But he said unto me: Behold, thou shall conceive
and bear a son, and now thou shall drink no wine nor strong drink,
neither eat any unclean thing, for the child shall be a Nazarite to God,
from the birth to the day of his death. Then her husband and she showing them
selves ready to obey Gods will, and desiring to know further, prayed unto the
Lord and said: I pray thee my Lord, let the man of God whom thou sentest,
come again now unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto ye child, when he
is borne. And God heard their voice, and the Angel of God came unto the wife
as she sat in the field alone without her husband: then she ran home in
all haste to show her husband, and said unto him: behold the man of God
has appeared unto me again, that came unto me to day. With that her husband
arose, and went with his wife unto the man, and said unto him: Art thou the
man that spakest unto this woman? Yea (quoth the Angel.) Now then said Manoah,
let thy saying come to pass: but how shall we order the child, and do unto
him when he is borne? The woman thy wife (quoth the Angel) must be ware of all
that I said unto her: she may eat nothing that comes of the vine tree, she
shall not drink wine nor strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing forbidden
by the law. Let her observe all that I have commanded her. The Manoah
entreated ye man of God to tarry and eat with him: but the Angel refused,
saying: though thou make me abide with thee, I will not eat of thy bread: but
if thou will make a burnt offering to God, offer it unto the Lord. The^ what
is thy name (quoth Manoah) yt when thy saying is come to pass, we may honor
thee? Why ask thou after my name (said the Angel) which is secret or
marvelous? Then Manoah offered his burnt offering unto the Lord, and the
Angel did wonderously, whiles Manoah and his wife looked on, for God sent fire
from heaven, to consume their sacrifice to confirm their faith in his promise,
and when the flame went up toward heaven, from the alter, the Angel of the
Lord ascended up in the flame: which when Manoah and h^s wife beheld, they fell
on their faces unto the ground, and woorshipped God: for then they knew that
it was an Angel of the Lord, that so appeared unto them. And Manoah said unto
his wife, we shall surely dye, because we have seen God: but his wife said
unto him, if the Lord would kill us, he would not have received a burnt
offering, and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us
all these things, nor would have told us any such, as if she would have
said: these graces that we have received of God, and his accepting of our
obedience, are sure tokens of his love toward us, so that nothing can hurt us.
So the Angel of ye Lord did no more appear unto Manoah and his wife. And
afterward at the time appointed, his wife bare a son, and called his name
Sampson, and the Lord blessed him, and the spirit of the Lord so strengthened
him that he grew and became a mighty strong man in the house of Dan. And when
he fell in love with a woman, one of the daughters of ye Philistines in Timnah,
he came and told his father and his mother, and asked their counsels, first
saying I have seen a woman in Timnah, of the daughters of the Philistines,
now therefore, give me her to wife: but his father and mother not knowing that
this was the secret work of ye Lord in Samson, did justly reprove their son
Samson, and said: is there never a wife among the daughters of thy brethren,
and among all my people for thee to take, but thou must go to take a wife of
these uncircumcised Philistines? No (said Sampson) give me her, for she
pleases me well,: then his father and mother went with him to Timnah, where by
the way he killed a young Lion that roared upon him, without any weapon, and
never told his father and mother what he had done: and when his father and
mother were come to Timnah, to common and talk of y^ matter with the friends of
the woman, which was so beautiful in Sa^psons eyes: Sa^pson their son went
unto ye dead carcas of ye lyo^ which he had slain, and therein finding a swarm
of bees, and honey in ye lions body, took thereof in his hand, and came to his
father and mother, and gave unto the^ to eat, but told the^ not where he had
it: so ye matter of marriage being bargained upon by his father and mother, and
ye womans friends, they married their son Sa^pson at his own liking and
choice, and after ye wedding feast (as ye manner is) his father and mother
returned home to their own house in Zorah near to Eshtaol. Iud. 13.14.

Michas mother.
Michas mother, being an old Idolatresse and supersticious woman dwelling in
mount Ephraim in the days of Othniel, Judge of Israel, on a time was robbed by
her own son Micha, of a xi. hundred shekles of silver, which amou^teth in our
money to ye su^me of lxxxi. pound xiii. ^, iiii.^. or there about, which she
had laid up of purpose to make an Idol therewith. And when she missed her
silver, she so cursed and ba^ned ye thief yt had taken it away, in ye hearing
of Micha her son, yt he could not choose for his mothers quietness sake, but
confess the felony, and bewray himself unto her, that he was the thief, and
therefore said unto his mother, The xi. hundred shekles of silver which were
taken from thee, for the which thou curse^t and spakest so ill, even in my
hearing: behold the silver is with me, I took it and have it yet in my
possession. Then his mother was glad to hear that news, and rejoiced greatly,
saying unto her son: Blessed be thou my son of the Lord. And when he had
restored the silver again unto his mother, she said unto him, I had
dedicated this silver to the Lord of mine hand for thee my son, to make a
graven and molten Image thereof. Now therefore I will give it thee again: so
contrary to ye co^ma^dement of God, and true religion she took 200. of ye
shekles of silver, and gave the^ to ye founder to make thereof a graue^ and
molte^ image, which being done, she gave it to ye idolater Micha her son,
with whom ever after it remained to the offense and destruction of many
Israelits, who thereby forsook the Lord and his true worship, and fell to
Idolatry. Judge. 17.1.

Mourning witches.
There were among the Jews at Jerusalem in old time, certain foolish women,
who^ of a superstition they especially appointed and hired once a year, yearly
to go into ye temple, and there in ye night with feigned tears to mourn and
bewail the death of one Tammuze, ye great prophet of ye Idols long since dead
and buried, which superstitious women mourners, by reason of ye custo^e in
process of time, made an art and occupatio^ of fained mourning, insomuch as
they were not only hired at eueri calamity yt happened among ye people to lament
for ye same: but also they taught their daughters and other me^ and women to
weep, and mourn with feigned tears for ye dead, and other their miseries^ of with
superstitious and Idolatrous women mourners y^ Lord by his prophet Ier. in
deriding, mocking and reproching his people y^ Jews, who could not lament
their own sins speaks thus: Thus says yt Lord of hosts, take heed and call
for y^ mourning women, yt they may come and send for skilful women, yt they may
come and let the^ make haste, and take up a lamentation for us, that our eyes
may cast out tears, and our eye liddes gushe out of water, for a lamentable
noise is heard in Sion crying, how are we destroyed and utterly confounded?
for we have forsaken the land, and our dwellings have cast us out [as though
they were weary of us, because of our iniquity: as they did in the last
Earthquake 1580. when the neighbors on both sides of the streets ran out of
their houses for fear they would fall upon them, and met to gether in the
midst of the streets, amazed at the terrible judgments of God then
presently shaking the earth and driving them out, the which day and time I pray
God give us grace always to remember, that with ye five wise virgins, we
having and bearing Lamps full of oil in our hands, we may so watch and expect
the coming of the bridegroom, that we may be readily prepared to meet him
and be found worthy through his merits to return with him unto the wedding.]
Therefore hear the word of the Lord ye women, and let your ears regard
the words of his mouth, and teach your daughters to mourn, and every one her
neighbor to lament, for death is come up into our windows, and is entered into
our palaces to destroy the children without, and the young men in the streets
etc. Iere..9.17.18.20.

Again, the Prophet Ezechiel was showed in a vision, ye superstition and
abomination of these Idolatrous women, as they sat in ye temple of Jerusalem
saying: And ye Lord caused me to enter into the entry of the gate of ye Lords
house which was toward ye North, and behold there sat a woman mourning for
Tammuze. Ezech. 8.14.

Let mothers read this after the death of their children, especially newly
married, and be comforted.
Mourning mother.
As I lay in a trance in the field (says Esdras) I saw in a vision, a woman
which mourned sore, and lamented with a loud voice, and was grieved in heart
and rent her clothes, and she had ashes on her head. Then I left my thoughts
where I was occupied, and turned me unto her to commune with her and said:
Wherefore weepest thou? why art thou so sorry in mind? O sir (quoth she) let me
alone, that I may bewail my self, and increase sorrow, for I am sore vexed in
my mind, and brought very low, what ayleth thee (quoth Esdras) tell me? I ^hy
servant (quoth she having an husband) have been barren, and have had no child
this thirty years, and every hour and every day these thirty years, I pray
to the most high God, day and night for a child. And after thirty years God
heard me thine handmayden, and looked upon my misery, considered my trouble,
and gave me a son, and I was glad of him: so was mine husband also, and al
they of my country, and we gave great honor unto the almighty. And I
nourished him with great travel, so when he grew up and came to take a wife I
made a feast: but when my son went into his chamber, he fell down and dyed.
Then we all overthrew the lights, and all my neighbors rose up to comfort me:
so I rested till the second day at night, and when they had al left of to
comfort me, that I should be quiet: the^ I rose up by night, and fled, and am
come into this field, as thou see, from whence I am not purposed to return
again into the city: but to remain here, and neither to eat nor drink, but
continually to mourn and fast until I die.

Then Esdras seeing the woman's great folly and desperate mind, began to comfort
her, and very ^ng^rly spoke unto her and said: thou foolish woman above all
other, art thou so sorry for one son? What if thou have lost the fruit of thy
womb, which thou have brought forth with heaviness, and bare with sorrows?
will thou thus wast and consume thy self with excessive mournin^, for that
which thou can not help, and strive against ye almighty, who has caused thy
son to return into the earth from whence he came? Oh do not so foolishly,
but withholde thy sorrow in thy self, and bear constantly that which comes
unto thee, for if thou allowest Gods purpose and receiuest his counsel in time,
thou shall be commended therein leave thy mourning therefore arise and go thy
way now into the city to thine husband: I will not (quoth she) I will not go
into the city, but here will I die.

Then Esdras seeing her desperate misery, was ye more earnest to comfort her,
and continued his speech more and more unto her and said: O do not so woman,
but be counseled. Shake off thy great heaviness, and put away the multitude
of sorrows, and be of good comfort, that the almighty may be merciful unto
thee, and y^ the most high may give thee rest and ease, from thy labor and
sorrow which thou endurest.

But while I was thus talking with her, and comforting her, says Esdras,
behold her face and beauty shined suddenly, and her countenance became so
bright, that I was afraid of her, and musing what it might ^e, immediately she
cast forth a great voice, and very fearful, so that the very earth shoke at
the noise of the woman. And I looked, but behold the woman vanished away, and
appeared no more but in her place there appeared a city builded, then being
more afraid, I called for the Angel Uriel to understand this vision, who
presently came unto him, and told him the solution and meaning thereof:
namely, that the woman was Syon wherein there was no offering offered for 30.
years space, but after 30. years it was built up by Solomon, who offered
offeringes, and so the barren city bare a son. The inhabiting of Jerusalem,
was signified by her nourishing of her son: And the fall yt came to
Jerusalem, is the death of her son in his wedding chamber: her mourning
represents the lamentation of ye people for the destruction of Gods temple
and city: and Esdras comforting her declar^d his sorrow, grief, and
sufferinges for her misery, for which cause God showed him the cleerenesse of
her glory, and the fairness of her beauty, even the restoration of the
temple and city of God into a better form, etc. 2. Esd. 9.38.10. etc.

Machabitesse.
In the year of the worlds creation 3964. there was among ye Machabites or
Jews, a righteous and godly woman (whose name was (Hanna) as Josephus says
fol. 4. a) And who with her 7. sons, were all taken and compelled by the
cruel tyrant Ant^ochus and uncircumcised king of the Macedonia^s, against Gods
law to cast swines flesh, and were tormented with scourges and whippes. Which
woman their mother was marvelous above all other, and worthy of honorable
memory. For when she saw her seven sons slain within the space of one day,
she suffered it with a good will, because of the hope that she had in ye Lord,
yea she exhorted every one of them in her own language: and being full of
courage and wisdom, stirred up her womanly affection with a manly stomach, and
said unto them: I cannot tell how ye came into my womb, for I neither gave you
breath nor life: it is not I that set in order the members of your body: but
doubtless the creator of the world, which formed the birth of man, and found
out the beginning of al things, will also of his own mercy give you breath
and life again, as ye now regard not your own selves for his laws sake.

With which her words and oration made unto her children, the king being
displeased, and thinking himself greatly abused, and iniuried thereby, in
that contrary to his expectation she rather en^ouraged them to death,, then
dissuaded them as he looked, after many terrible threatninges and fair
promises made unto her youngest son to convert and eat: when he saw it would
not be for any thing he could do, he called his mother, and with many words
and fair promises exhorted her that she would counsel the young man to save
his life. So she promising the king that she would give her son the best
counsel she could, turned her self unto him: laughing the cruel tyrant to
scorn, and spoke in her own language unto her son and said: O my son
have pity upon me thy mother, that bare thee ix. months in my womb, and
gave thee suck three years, and nourished thee, and took care for thee unto
this age, and brought thee up: I beseech thee my son, look upon the heaven
and the earth, and all that is therein, and consider that God made them of
things that were not, and so was mankind made likewise, fear not this hangman:
but show thy self worthy such brethren by suffering death, as they have done
before thee, yt I may receive thee in mercy with thy brethren: when she had
spoken these words, her son by and by called for the Executor, and offered
him self body and life to die for the laws of his God, as his brethren had
done etc.

Then the king being kindled with anger, raged more cruelly against him then
the other, and took it more grievously that their mother had so often mocked
him: so he caused her you^gest son to be most cruelly handled and put to
death, then any of his brethren. And last of all after her sons were this all
slain and martyred: She also their mother suffered death and martyrdom, and
patiently, constantly, and holily, dyed in the same opinion and religion for
mainteining of the law of God. 2. Match. 7. Joseph. fol. 202.

Machabites.
There were also before these, two other women of the Machabites, who because
they had circumcised their sons, according to Gods law contrary to the
commandment of this cruel tyrant Antiochus, were brought forth with the babes
ha^ging at their breasts, and after they had led them round about the City
for example to others, they were cruelly ^ast down headlong over the walls
with their children sucking at their breasts, and so both mothers and babes
perished, and were most butcherly slain and martyred for the laws of their
God. 1. Match. ^.63^2. Match. 6.10.

N
Widow of Nahim.
In the City of Nahim a Town of Galilie, in the tribe of Isachar hard by
Tyberias, there was a certain widow who having but one only son left her
to comfort her after the death of her husband, it pleased God that it fell
sick and dyed. And as she was following the corse out of the gates of the
City to the burial, so it was that Jesus by Gods providence came and met her,
and when the Lord saw her mourn and take her sons death so heavily as she
had great cause, he had compassion on her, and said unto her: Woman, weep
not, and commanding them that bare the corse to stand still, he went and
touched ye coffin, and said unto her dead son: Young man I say unto thee,
arise, with yt only word of Christ, her dead son sat upright in y^ coffin,
and began to speak. Then Jesus del^uered him to his mother, to her great
comfort, and his everlasting glory. Luke 7.11.12.13.

P
Pathroitesse.
In Pathros a City of Egypt there were certain superstitious and Idolatrous
women of the Jews, who when they heard the Prophet Jeremy from the mouth of
the Lord preach unto them there, and reprove the^ for their Idolatry, with many
threatenings of Gods plagues to light upon them, unless they did turn and
repent in time.

These wicked women standing by, set light by the threatninges of the Lord
uttered by his Prophet, and most impudently answered Ieremias, saying: The
word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hear
it of thee. But we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, as to
burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offeringes unto
her, as we have done both we and our fathers, our kings and our Princes in the
city of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, for then had we plenty of
victuals, and were well, and felt no evil. But since we left of to burn incense
to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have
had scarcenes of all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by
famine. And when we burn incense to the Querne of heaven, and powered out
drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to make her glad, and power
out drink offeringes unto her without our husbands consent? as if they
should say, no we did it by their sufferance: where we may learn, how great
danger it is for the husbands to permit their wives to do any thing,
whereof they be not assured by Gods word: for if they do, their wives
thereby will take occasion to justify their doings, as these supersticious
women here did: for which folly, and wickedness in the wife, the husband shall
assuredly give an account before God, who will not only punish the women, but
their husbands also, which have suffered this superstition and error in their
wives without reprehension.

Then the Prophet Jeremy, perceiving these Idolatrous women to esteem religion
by their belly, and so greatly to dishonor God, by attributing his works to
their Idolles, and seeing their extreme madness and impudency that they were
fallen into, by declyning from GOD, to follow their own fancies, even to
justify their idolatry, and wickedness in woorshipping the sun, moon and
stars, against GOD and his Prophets: The Prophet I say spoke again unto
the women and their husbands, gave them this aunsweare and said: Hear the
word of the Lord ye women, thus says the Lord: Forasmuch as ye and your
wives have committed double evil in making wicked vows, and in performing the
same spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled them with your hands saying: We
will perform the vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the Queen of
heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto her. Therefore behold, I have
sworn says the Lord, by my great name, that my name shall be no more called
upon by the mouth of any man (or woman) in Judah in the land of Egypt, as to
say, the Lord lives, yea behold I will watch over them for evil and not
for good, and all the men, women, and children of Judah yt are in Egypt, shall be
consumed by ye sword, and famine, til they be utterly destroyed. etc. Iere. 44.
Also Ier. says, yt in Babylon there were certain superstitious and
Idolatrous women, and the menstruous women, and they that lay in childbed came,
and brought gifts to the Idols of silver, gold, and wood, and touched the
sacrifices offered to Idolles, which gifts so offered, the Priests gave unto
their wives to cloth them, and their children, and to lay up to use at their
pleasure: but unto the poor and sick, they gave nothing. Baruc. 6.27.28.29.32.

Pharaos daughter.
Pharaos daughter, after that her father the king of Egypt had most cruelly
caused the Hebrewe women to cast their men children into the water to be
drowned, upon a time went down to wash her self in the same River whereinto
their children were thrown and as she walked by the River side, she espied an
Arc or Cradell of wickar, lying among the bulrushes, and sent one of her
maids, that were there with her, to fetch it and draw it out of the water: and
when they brought it unto her she opened it, and when she saw therein a
fair young babe, and a man child, and heard it cry and make pitious moan for
the mother and sustenance: she had compassion on it and said: surely this is
one of the Hebrews children. Then the child's sister Miriam, standing a far
off, to watch what would become of the child, seeing it so taken up by
women: ran unto them, and not revealing unto them whose child it was, said to
Pharaos daughter: shall I go and call unto thee a nurse of the Hebrewe women to
nurse the child? yea (quoth Pharaos daughter) go. So the maid went, and
called Iochebed hers and the childs mother, to whom Pharaos daughter said:
Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will reward thee. So the
woman took her own child, and nursed it, and when the child was grown,
she brought him unto Pharaos daughter who called his name Moses, because (said
she) I drew him out of the water, and ever after she took him as her son:
and so by Gods providence, she contrary to her fathers cruel commandment
preserved him, who afterward became the destroyer of her father and preserver
of Gods people. Exodus 2.5.6.7. etc.

There was another Pharaos daughter which was wife unto Salomo^, for who^ he
made a very stately and princely house like unto ye forest of Libanon, or
Salomons porch, into ye which also in ye year ye world 3131. she came from
the city of David, and there dwelt after ye Salomo^ her husband had finished
all his building, as ye may read. 1. King. 7. 8^ and 9.24.

Philips daughters.
Philip the Euaugelist which was one of the vii. Deacons, and dwelt in Cesaria,
had iiii. daughters virgins which did prophecy. Acts 21.9. And were buried
with him in Hierapolis a city of Phrigia, as says I^idorus, and Fox. page 53.
cul. 1.2. Edit.

Maid of Philippi.
In the City of Philippi a town in Macedonia, there was a certain Maiden
dwelling with her mistress, which maiden had a spirit of divination and could
guess before hand, and foredeeme of things past, present, and to come, which
knowledge in many things God permitted to the Devil, by means whereof this
maid gate her mistress much vauntage with divining. And when on a time Paul
and Sylas were come into that City to preach Christ, and went to pray, she by
chance met with them, and followed them crying and saying: These men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation. And
thus did she many days, but Paul at last being offended with her, and grieved
at the subtlety of Satan in her, least by her confession it might seem that
Satan and the spirit of God taught both one doctrine, he turned about unto ye
maid and said unto the evil spirit within her: I command thee in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ that thou come out of her, and forthwith the spirit
of divination came out of her in the same hour. Now when her mistress saw
that the hope of their gain was gone, they for very anger caught Paul and
Sylas, and drew them before the rulers and there accused them, as Jews and
troublers of the City, preaching ordinances not lawful for them to observe.
By means of the false and slanderous report of this mayds maistresse and
other, that holy men Paul and Silas were condemned for sedicious men, beaten
with rods, and put in the stocks in prison, where they lay fast locked in
stocks and yrons, till God delivered them. Act. 16.16. etc.

Phineas wife.
Phineas wife being great with child, and near her travel, when she heard the
report that the Ark of God was taken, and that her father in law Ely the high
Priest of the Lord, and her husband his son were both suddenly dead: she
bowed or settled her self toward her labor, and traveled with child, her
pains with that, fright and fear came so sore upon her, and about the time of
her death, as she through sore labor was a departing this life, the mydwiues
and women that stood about her comforted her saying: fear not, for thou have
borne a son. But she answered not, nor regarded it: but to declare her great
sorrow, and feeling of Gods judgments to light upon his people, she named the
child Iochebed, saying and repeating twice together these words. The glory is
departed from Iesrael: The glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark of God
is taken, and this she spoke because the Ark of God was taken, and her father
in law, and her husband dead. And so she gave up the ghost, and died in
child bed. 1. Sam. 4.19.

Pilates wife.
Pilates wife, being moved by God to defend Christ's innocence: sent unto her
husband so soon as he was set upon the judgment seat, to examine, adiudge,
and condemn Christ, saying: Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I
have suffered many things this day in a dream by reason of him. Howebeit for
all this her good counsel given unto her husband, he like a wretch, clean
contrary to his own conscience, proceeded against Christ in judgment, and
condemned him to death, to his great condemnation. Math. 27.19.

Potiphars wife.
Potiphars wife, (called after some Memphetica) being a very incontinent woman,
cast her eyes upon Joseph, and being incensed with inordinate lust and love
toward him: because he was a very fair man and welfauourd person, she
flattered him long, and at the last, contrary to all womanly shamefastness,
she desired his company unlawfully, and said: Joseph come and lie with me.
But Joseph fearing God, refused to satisfy her request, or to offer his
master that vilanie, and said unto her: behold my master knows not what
he has in the house with me, but has committed all that he has into mine
hand. There is no man greater in his house then I, neither has he kept any
thing from me, but one^^ thee because thou art his wife, how then can I do
this great wickedness, and so sin against God?

Nevertheless, his mistress continually tempted and allured him day by day to
inco^tine^cy: But yet Joseph being ever preserved by ye fear of God against
her continual assaults and flattering promises, would in no wise consent to
ly with her. No, nor be so much as in her company: because he would as much
as in him lay avoid ye occasion of evil. Now when his mistres saw she could
not prevail with him by flattery and fair speech: she fell to open force
and violence, and from thence to tyranny and oppression. For when on a
certain day, Joseph entered into the house, every body being from home save
she, and went into a secret place to do his easement, she lurking in a
corner, watched his coming, and as he passed by her, she reached after him,
and caught him by the cloak, and pulled him nill he will he unto her, saying:
Sleep with me: But Joseph being stronger then she, wound away from her, and
leaving his cloak in her hand, he fled and got him out from her as fast as
he could. Now when she saw that he was fled and gone, and that her folly
and wickedness would be bewrayed by his cloak that he had left behind him in
her custody: She subtillie devised with her self that it was best for her to
bewray him first, to save her honesty, and so joining extreme impudency and
craft to her incontinencie and licencious life, she cried out, and called for
her men in the house, and told them, saying: Behold my husband has brought
an Ebrew man into our service to mock us and to do us villainy and shame, who
came into me here being all alone, and would have lien and slept with me, had
not I lift up my voice and cried as loud as I could: but when he heard me so
cry, then for haste he left his garment behind with me, and fled away and is
gone out. So she laid up Joseph's garment by her until her Lord and husband
Potiphar came home. And then at his return, she up and told him also the
same false tale of Joseph, saying: The Ebrewe servant which thou have brought
unto us, came into me (in thine absence) to mock me and do me vilanie and
shame. But as soon as I lift up my voice and cried, he left his garment with
me, and fled out with speed. When Potiphar heard his wife thus report of
Joseph his servant, whom he so much loved and trusted: he being too light of
credence so sone without further and better trial, to believe the false and
slanderous report of his wife, began to wax wroth with Joseph, and now
causlesse turned his good opinion of Joseph into ielosie, his love into hatred,
and his trust into tyranny. For presently upon his wives suggestion, he
apprehended Joseph, and for the harlot his wives sake, he cast poor innocent
Joseph in the prison, where he lay fettered with yrons in the stocks, and was
very evil entreated for the space of three years, until by Gods providence,
he was delivered by Pharao, king of Egypt. Genesis 39.7. etc.

Q
Queen of Saba.
Queen of Saba, or of Ethiopia, dwelling in the South parts of the world
far from Jerusalem: when she heard of the great fame of king Solomon, that
went far and near over all the world, concerning the name of the Lord, his
wisdom and high favor that he was in with the Lord: She came in the year
of the world. 3137. with a very great train from the uttermost parts of the
earth to Jerusalem to prove Solomon with hard questions, and to know whether
his wisdom were so great as the report was: and having brought with her
great and many presents to give him, as namely much gold, precious stons, and
sweet odours, she came to Solomon and communed with him of all that was in
her heart: unto whom Solomon declared al her hard questions, neither was there
any question so hard propounded by her, but Solomon did resolve and expound it
unto her. Now when she saw his wisdom, his stately buildings, and the whole
trade and goodly order of his house in every thing, she was greatly
astonished, and said unto the king: It was a true report that I heard in mine
own land of thy sayings, acts, and wisdom: Howebeit I believed not this
report, till I came and mine eyes have seen it, and now behold I must needs
confess that the one half of thy great wisdom and prosperity was not told
me. For thou far exceedest the fame that I heard of thee, and have more
wisdom and prosperity then was reported. Happy are thy men, and happy are
these thy servants which stand before thee always and hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be the Lord thy God which loved thee, to set thee on his throne of
Israel as king in stead of the Lord thy God: because the Lord thy God loves
Israel for ever to establishe it: therefore has he made thee king over them
to execute judgment and justice, and to do equity and righteousness. Then she
gave the king sixescore talents of gold, and all her precious stones, and
sweet odours that she had brought, neither was there such sweet odors since,
as the Queen of Sheba gave unto the king. And Solomon the king beside that
which of his kingly liberality for recompense of that treasure which she
brought gave unto the Queen of Sheba every pleasant thing that she asked, and
so she returned and went with all her servants home to her own country. 1.
King. 10. 1. 2. Chron. 9.1.

Whose fact, and not whose person, our Savior Christ him self commends and
recited to condemn and rebuke the unfaithful Jews that would not believe
him without signs and tokens, saying: The Queen of the South shall rise in
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: For she came from the
uttermost parts of the earth, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a
greater then Solomon is here. Math. 12.42. Luke 11.31.

And it came to pass as Jesus said these things, a certain woman of the
company lift up her voice, and said unto him: Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the pappes which thou have sucked: but Christ perceiving that she
omitted the chief praise which was due unto him, gave her a privy taunt, and
said: Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
(For they are blessed in deed to whom he communicates him self by his
word. Luke 11,27.

S
Samaritesse.
IN Samaria a City of Syria adjoining to Judea, and the chiefest City of the
ten tribes. There was a certain poor widow which had been sometime wife
to one of the sons of the Prophets: who in his life time being fallen in
debt not by unthriftiness, but by the hand of God, died and left her very
poor and not able to pay his creditors, who nevertheless being very cruel
toward her, and coveting to have her children serve it out as slaves unto
them, when she heard that Elisha the Prophet was come into the City Samaria,
she came crying and making great moan unto him, and said: Thy servant mine
husband is dead, and thou know that thy servant did fear the Lord, and
the creditor is come to take my two sons to be his bondemen. Then Elisha
being moved to pity her misery, demanded of her and said, What shall I do
for thee? tell me, What have thou at home? Thine handmaide quoth she, has
nothing at home save a pitcher of oyle^ Go thy way said Elisha and borrowe as
many empty vessels among thy neighbors as thou can get, and when thou
come home and have shut thy door upon thee: power out the oil that is in
thy pitcher into all those empty vessels, till they be all full, and then
set them aside. So the poor widow departed, and did as Elisha bad her: And
when the empty vessels were all full, she said unto her sons, bring me
yet an other vessel. There is no more quoth they, and with that the oil in
her picther ceased to augment and increase in the vessels.

After this she went and told Elisha the man of God, that she had done as
he bad her: Now go said Elisha, and sell the oil in the vessels, and
with the money that aryseth thereof, pay thy husbands creditors, and them that
thou art in debt unto, and live thou and thy children on the rest. 2. King.
4.1. etc. By which story, the holy Ghost does give us to understand, that God
never fails to provide for his servants, their wives and children, if they
trust in him, that his doctrine and profession should be kept without
slander. And that he suffers his children many times to be brought to
extreme necessity and poverty, as he did this poor man and woman before he
succored them, to the intent, that afterward being helped and restored by him
again, they might have the more ample cause to praise his mercy.

When Benhadad king of Aram, had besieged Samaria so long, until the famine
was wonderful great: and that an Asses head was soulde for fourscore pieces
of silver, to eat for want of victualles, and the fourth part of a kab of
Doves dung was soulde for five pieces of silver, to burn for lack of wood:
Behold, as Iehoram the ungodly king of Israel was going upon the walls of the
City to look unto his affairs, there cried a certain woman of the City
unto him, and said: Help my Lord O King, whose voice being heard, the king
began to wax angry, and in stead of comfortable words he being moved, gave
her reproachful speeches, (thinking in deed she had called unto him for that
which he had not, namely for sustenance and victuals, which as then was very
hard for him to give, because they were all spent) and said unto her: Seeing
the Lord does not succor thee, how should I help thee with corn or wine,
or any other victual? for as thou know there is no such things left among
us. Then the woman answered, my Lord O king, I ask of thee neither
victualles, nor sustenaunce: therefore the king said unto her again: Woman,
then what ayleth thee, and what would thou have? O king quoth she: there is
a controversy between me and another woman one of my neighbors, about a
bargayne or covenant. For we made this contract or covenant between us, that
we would eat our children, one one day, and another another day: so I in
good faith stood to my promise, and killed my son and sodde him, and we have
eaten him together: but this woman now when the day came that we should eat
her son, she has craftily conveyed him away, and hid him from me, either
to spare his life for compassion and natural affection, or for to satisfy her
own hunger, and to eat him alone without me, and so she has broken her
covenant, and is departed from her promise, whereby I am like to perish for
hunger, unless thou O king give sentence and judge my But ye king abhorring so
unnatural and wicked a contract or bargain, could in no wise ratify ye same,
nor allow thereof. For what is more horrible the^ to receive into ye belly again
ye children once brought up, and to bury their bowels even in their own
bowels, thereby making that their grave which was their nourishment. Therefore
when the king heard these unnatural words and cruel contract of the women,
he feeling the judgments of God fallen upon him and his people for his
wicked life, rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth in sign of sorrow and
lamentation. For now was the curse of God against the contemners and despisers
of his law performed, which he threatened Leuit. 26. where he says: Ye shall
eat the flesh of your own sons, and the flesh of your daughters shall ye
devour. Now I say, was fulfilled that heavy indignation and wrath of God
against the idolaters and wicked people foreshewed by God in Deuteronomy. 28. where it
is said, that the enemy shall besiege thee in all thy cities, until thine high
and strong walls fall down etc. And thou shall eat the fruit of thy body,
even the flesh of thy sons and thy daughters, which the Lord thy God has
given thee, during the siege and straightness wherein thine enemy shall
enclose thee. So that the man that is tender and exceeding dayntie among you,
shall be grieved at his brother, and at his wife that lies in his bosom, and at
the remnant of his children which he has yet left, for fear of giving unto
any of them of the flesh of his children, whom he shall eat: because he has
nothing left him in ye siege and straightness wherewt the enemy shall besiege
thee in all thy Cities. Yea, and the tender and dainty woman among you, which
never would venture to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for her
softness and tenderness, shall be grieved at her husband that lies in her
bosom, and at her son, and at her daughter, and at her after birth that shall
come out from between her feet, and at her children which she shall bear:
for when all things lack, she shall eat them secretly during the siege and
straightness wherewith thine enemies shall besiege thee in thy cities. 2.
King. 6.

Samaritesse.
In ye same city of Samaria called Siche^, there was a certain woman yt ^ame
about noone to draw water at Iocobs well, where she met Jesus sitting all alone
upon the wells mouth to rest him, whiles his disciples were gone into the
Town to buy victualles. And when she had drawn her water, and filled her
pitcher, Jesus said unto her, woman give me drink. How is it (quoth she)
that thou being a Jew ask drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? For
the Jews meddle not with the Samaritanes: yea they esteem the Samaritanes as
wicked and profane. Then Jesus speaking of him self, whom his father had sent
to convert this woman among other, said unto her: if thou knew the gift of
God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me drink: thou would have asked
of him, and he would have given thee water of life, which is the love of God
in his son, powered into our hearts by the holy Ghost unto everlasting life.
Romans 5.5. 1. John. 3.5.

Sir (quoth the woman) thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep:
from whence then have thou that water of life? Art thou greater then our father
Jacob, which gave us the well, and he himself drank thereof, and his
children, and his cattle? Yea said Jesus, whosoever drinks of this water,
shall thirst again: but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
that is, of the Gospel of Grace, shall never be more a thyrst, dried up, or
destitute. For the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water, springing up into everlasting life. Sir (quoth she) give me of that
water, that I may not thirst, neither come hither to draw. First go (said
Jesus) and call thine husband, and come hither: I have none quoth she: Thou
have well said, (said Jesus unto her) I have no husband: for thou have had
five husbands, and he whom thou now have is not thine husband: that saydest
thou truly. Then the woman being lively touched with her faults, where before
she mocked and would not hear Christ, now she could say: Sir, I see that
thou art a Prophet, our fathers worshipped in this mountayn: and ye say that
in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Woman, said Jesus,
believe me the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor at
Jerusalem worship the father: ye worship that which ye know not: We
worship that which we know. For salvation is of the Jews: but the hour
comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the father in
spirit and truth, for the father requires even such to worship him: God is
a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth.

I know well quoth the woman, that Messiah shall come which is called
Christ, when he is come he will tell us all things: I am even he said
Jesus, that speak unto thee.

And with that came his disciples, who marueiled to see him talking thus with a
woman: yet none of them durst say unto him, what ask thou, or why talkest
thou with her? The woman then left her water pot, and went her way into the
City, and said unto the men of Samaria, Come, see a man that has told me
all things that ever I did, is not he the Christ? Now many of the Samaritans
of the City, believed in Christ for the saying of the woman, which testified,
saying: he has told me all things that ever I did: And so went out of the
City with her unto Christ, and besought him that he would tarrye with them.
And at their request he abode there in Samaria two days, and many mo
Samaritans believed in Christ: because of his own words, and said unto the
woman, Now we believe in Christ, not so much because of thy saying and report
or testimony that thou gave of him: but because we have heard him our
selves, and know that this is in deed the Christ, the Savior of the world.
John 4.

Samaritesse Importunate widow.
As Jesus passed through the mids of Samarie, to the end that we ought
always instantly to pray, and not wax faint, or cold, or to give place in
afflictions and dangers, he put forth this parable of a importunate widow
unto his disciples, saying: There was a judge in a certain City which feared
not God, nor reverenced man. And there was a widow also in that same City,
which came unto him, saying: Do me justice against mine adversary, who
pleads against me. And the judge would not for a time, but delayed her from
day to day: yet afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor
reverence men, yet because this widow troubles me, I will do her right,
least at the last she come and make me weary with her importunacie. Hear
now what the unrighteous judge says unto the widow. And shall not God avenge
his elect, which cry day and night unto him? Yea though he suffer long for
them, and seem flow in revenging their wrongs, I tell you he will avenge
them quickly: but when the soon of man comes, shall he find faith on the
earth? Luke 18^1. etc.

Samsons wife.
Samsons wife was daughter of a Philistine, dwelling in Timnah a City in the
tribe of Judah. And when at her marriage feast day her husband had propounded
this ridell: Out of the Eater came meat, and out of the strong came
sweetness, and promised her friends then sitting at the table, that if they
could read and interpret this his ridell within seven days of the feast,
he would give them 30. sundry suites of apparel to wear at solempe feasts
days: But if they could not declare nor find it out, that then they should
give him 30. suites or changes of raiment as costly. Because her friends
could not within the first three days expound this ridell, on the fourth day
they came and threatened her, saying: Entise thine husband that he may declare
us the ridell, least we burn thee and thy fathers house with fire: have ye
called us to your feast to impouerishe us, is it so in deed? With that Samsons
wife being afraid went unto her husband, and wept before him, saying: Surely
husband thou hate me, and love me not. For thou have put forth a ridell
unto them which are my countrymen, and have not told it me. Behold quoth
Sampson, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?
Then his wife from the fourth day until the seventh, wept still unto her
husband while the feast lasted, to know the ridell. And when the seventh day
came, he up and told her the meaning of his ridell, because she was so
importunate upon him. And when she had learned it, she went strait ways and
told it to her friends and countrymen. So when the seventh day of the feast
came or ever the same was set, they came to Sa^son and declared unto him his
ridell, saying: what is sweeter then honey? And what is stronger then a Lion? O
well quoth Samson, if ye had not plowed with my heyfer, that is, used the
help of my wife, ye had not found out my redell. And so being very angry
with his wife, that she had hereby caused him to loose the wager, he was by
her folly moved first to take vengeance on the Philistines, and presently went
and slew 30. of them in one of the five chiefest Cities called Ashkelon, and of
the spoil of them, gave change of garments to them that had expounded his
ridell. So when he had thus robbed Peter to pay Paul, he forsook his wife and
her friends, and went back to his father Manoahs house in Zorah. And in the
mean time, his wife was given to his companion whom he had used as his friend:
but within a while after, Samson came back again to Timnah, thinking to have
visited his wife, and lien with her, and when he saw that her father had given
her to another and would not suffer him to go in to her, saying: I thought that
thou had hated her, therefore gave I her to thy companion. Is not her younger
sister fayrer then she? take her I pray thee in stead of the other. Samson
then by his wives father being thus moved again the second time to take
vengeance on ye Philistines, said: Now am I more blameless then the
Philistines, therefore will I do them displeasure, and be avenged on them. And
with that he went and got 300. wild Foxes, and turned them tail to tail, and
put a fire brande in the mids between the two tails, and when he had set the
firebrandes a fire, he sent the Foxes into the standing corn of the
Philistines: and so burnt up both the rikes of corn and hay that were reaped
and gathered, and also the standing corn in the fields, with all the
vineyardes and Olives. Which fact so grieved the Philistines when they
understood who did it, and wherefore, that for fear of danger that else might
come unto them, and not for love of Justice, like wicked men in like malice and
spite, they came up to Timnah to his father in laws house, and there burnt his
wife that had forsaken him, and her father, and all that they had with fire
likewise. Therefore in revenge of which vilanie done this unto his wife, Samson
yet again the third time went to be avenged on the Philistines, and slew them
horsemen and footmen with a mighty plague. Judge. 14.15.

Sareptesse.
In Sarepta a town in Syria, or city in Sydon: There was a certain widow
dwelling, who in the time of the great famine that the^ was in the city and
country, in ye year of the world 3220. by Gods providence on a time went out
of the gats to gather sticks to make a fire to dress her meat, who^ when
Eliah ye prophet yt God had sent thither saw, he called her unto him and said,
bring me I pray thee a little water in a vessel, yt I may drink. And as she
was going to fet it, he called to her, and said: bring me also I pray thee a
morsel of bread in thine hand. As the Lord thy God lives (quoth she) I have
not a cake, but even an handefull of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
cruise, and behold I am gathering a few sticks for to go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it and die, for there is no hope of any more
sustenance the famine is so great. The^ Elisha said unto her, fear not woman,
come, do as thou have said: but make me thereof a little cake first of all, and
bring it unto me, and afterward make for thee and thy son. For thus says the
Lord God of Israel, The meal in the barrel shall not be wasted, neither shall
the oil in the cruise be diminished unto the time that the Lord send rain
upon the earth, and so take away the drought which was the cause of the famine.
So she went and did as Eliah bad her, and she did eat, so did he, and her
house for a certain time, even till he had rain and food on the earth. The
barrel of meal wasted not, nor the oil was spent out of the cruise,
according to the word of the Lord which he spoke by the hand of Eliah: where
we see that God receives no benefit for the use of his saints and
seruaontes: but he promises and performs a most ample recompense to the
giver for the same.

After all this, God to try whither this widow had learned by his merciful
providence to make him her only stay and comfort: stroke her son that he
fell sick, and his sickness was so sore, that there was no breath left in
him. Then she being very sorrowful said to Eliah, what have I to do with
thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sins to
remembrance, and to slay my son? when Eliah heard his hosts thus burden
him, he (being afraid least Gods name should have been blasphemed and his
ministry contemned, except God should have continued his mercies as he had
begun them toward her, especially while he there remained) said unto her:
Give me thy son, and with that took him out of her arms and bosom, and
carried him up into his chamber where he lay, and laid him upon his own
bed: And then called unto the Lord by fervent prayer, and said: O Lord my
God, have thou punished also this widow with when I soiourne by killing her
son? So he stretched him self upon the child three times, and called unto
the Lord, saying: O Lord my God, I pray thee let this childs soul come into
him again. And the Lord heard the prayer of Eliah, and the soul of the
child came into him again, and he revived. Then Eliah brought the child down
out of his chamber into the house, and delivered him to his mother, saying:
behold thy son lives. Now I know (quoth she) that thou art the man of
GOD, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is true: so hard a thing it
was for her to depend on God, except she saw and was confirmed by a miracle.
1. Kings 17. 9. etc.

Of this widow our Savior Christ specially makes mention in Saint Luke,
where he says: I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the
days of Elias, when heaven was shut three years and six months, and when
men dyed through the great famine that was dispersed over all the land: but
unto none of the^ was Elias sent, save unto a certain widow in Sarepta, a
City of Sydon. For unto him God said, up Eliah, and get thee to Sarepta,
which is in Sydon, and remain there: for behold I have commanded a widow
there to sustain thee. 1. King. 17.9. which example Christ among other brought
forth unto the despising Jews, to show them that God oftentimes prefers
the stranger to them of the household, and that for their pride and disdain,
the grace of God should be taken from them, and given to other. Luke. 4.25.26.

Sylomitesse.
In Silo a city in Canaan, in the tribe of Ephraim, it was a custom and manner
among the maidens and virgins, once every year to go and meet altogether in a
certain place on the North side of Bethell, there to dance and sing Psalms
and songs of Gods works among them selves without the company of men. And
when on a time the Israelites in the quarrel of the Levites wife, that was
most vilanously abused in her body to death by certain wicked men of the
Beniamites as ye may read in her story, had almost destroyed all the whole
tribe of Benjamin their brethren, man, woman, and child in battle, and
against these few that were left had made a rash vow, and oath among them
selves, that none should ever after give his daughter to any of the Beniamites
to wife in detestation of the fact committed against that harlot the Levites
wife. They being very sorry therefore, partly for the preservation of that tribe,
and partly for the keeping of that oath, devised nevertheless secretly this
means how to marie those vi. hundred Beniamites that were left, unto certain
of their daughters. And first they devised, that because none of the
inhabitatants of Iabish Gilead, were at the making of that rash oath, therefore
they thought their daughters might safely be given unto the Beniamits to wives,
and thereupon sent an host of twelve thousand valiant men of Israel, to
destroy the City Iabish, man, woman, and children with the sword, for their
disobedience in not coming to the Parliament or making of that oath, with this
charge, only to reserve the virgins vnslayne that had never lien with men. Who
sacking the city accordingly, and killing all the males and women that had
lien by men, there found four hundred maidens virgins, that had known no man
by lying with any male, and those they brought unto the host and congregation
to Siloh: who presently sent for the Beniamits, and gave them wives of those
virgins so far as the number would reach unto. But when they saw that they
had not enough for them, and that there lacked yet 2. hundred more, then they
took thought saying, how shall we do for wives to the remnant, for ye women of
Ben^iamin are destroyed, and the inheritance of the tribe of Beniamine be
reserved and preserved and not destroyed. And yet we may not give the^ wives of
our own daughters, because we have sworn, cursed be he yt gives a wife to
Be^iamin: therefore thus at last they further devised, saying unto ye remna^t of
ye Be^iamits. Behold there is a feast of ye Lord, every year in Syloe in a
place which is on ye North side of Bethel, and on ye east side of Sichem and on
the South of Lebonah. Now therefore, go your way, and lie in wait in the
Uineyards, and when ye see that the daughters of Syloe come out to dance in
daunces, then come ye out of the Uineyards and catch you every man a wife of
the daughters of Syloe, and get you into your own land of Beniamine. And when
the maids fathers, or their brethren come unto us and complain, we will say
unto them: have pity on them for our sakes, because we res^rued not to each
man his wife in the war, and because ye have not given these your daughters
unto them hitherto, ye have sinned. And the children of Be^iamine did so, and
took wives of them that daunced according to their number, that is to say two
hundred virgins, and so returned with them to their inheritance, and repaired
the cities and dwelt in them. And thus was that tribe of Beniamine restored and
preserved, notwithstanding, their rash oath which they made. But note, that
although the Israelits hereby thought to persuade men that they kept their oath
by using these pretty devises, yet before God surely it was broken, and so a
great and double sin in them, first to make so rash an oath, and then so
subtlely to break it. Judge, 21.

Shunamitesse.
In Sunem a City of the tribe of Isachar nigh unto Nahim, there dwelt a woman
of great estimation, who when the Prophet Eliah came into the city,
constrained him to eat and drink with her, and as he passed by, he turned
into her house and did eat: Then this noble Lady or Gentlewoman being very
devout, godly, charitable, and full of hospitality, especially to those, that
were of the household of faith, said unto her husband: Behold, I know now yt
this is an holy man of God, that passes by us continually, let us make him a
little chamber I pray thee with walls, which may be separated from the rest
of the house, that he may more quietly and commodiously, give him self to
study and prayer, and let us set him there a bed, and a table, and a stool,
and a candlestick, that he may turn in thither whenever he comes unto us,
and take it for his furnished lodging: which chamber so being made and
furnished by her procurement, on a day as Elisha came again y^ way, he turned
in thither to this virtuous woman's house: who most courteously entertained him,
and lodged him in ye same new chamber, which of purpose she had made for him:
and as he lay there Elias said to his servant Gehazi, call me up this
Shunamitesse, and when she came and stood before him, he like ye servant of
God, to show himself not unthankful for the benefits he received at her
hands, said unto her: Now behold, since thou have had all this great care for
us: what shall we do for thee? Is there any thing to be spoken for thee to the
king Iehoram, or to the captain of the host: O no (quoth she) I dwell among
mine own people, as if she would have said, I am content with that, ye God
has sent me, and can want nothing, that one man can do for another, and so
went her way. When she was gone, Elisha turning to his man Gehazi said unto
him, what is then to be done for her? Then Gehazi knowing yt she had never a
child, which was then counted a great reproach unto her, was therefore
desirous, that his master should pray to God for her, yt she might be
fruitful, and answered his master saying: Indeed sir, she has no son, and
her husband is old. Then call her unto me again (said Elisha:) so she being
come, as she stood at ye door, Elisha said unto her at this time appointed
according to the time of life, thou shall embrace a son: Oh my Lord (quoth
she) thou man of God do not lie unto thine handmayd: so ye woman conceived and
bare a son at that same season, according to the time of life that Elisha had
said unto her. And when the child was grown, it chanced that he went out in
the hot harvest time unto his father and the reapers in the fields: where
feeling his head ache sore with the heat of the son, he cried this unto his
father, and said: O my head, O my head, and with that his father commanded his
servant to bear him home to his mother, who laid him in her lapp, but ere
noone her child died as he lay in her lap. Then she went up and laid him on
the bed of Elisha the man of God, and shut the door upon him, and went out to
call her husband, and said, send with me I pray thee one of thy men, and one of
thy Asses, for I will hasten and rid to the man of God and come again:
wherefore will thou go to him to day said her husband: since it is neither new
moon nor sabbath day, for at such times the people are wont to resort to ye
prophets for doctrine and co^solatio^. But she answered, all shall be well: so
she sadled an Ass, and went toward mount Carmel, where the man of God was,
and said to her servant, drive apace and go forward, stay not for me to get
up, except I bid thee: and when the man of God saw her coming a far of, he
said to Gehazi his man, behold the Shunamitesse is coming yonder, g^e now I
say and meet her, and ask her if she, her husband, and her child be all in
good health: and she answered yea, we are in health. So when she came to ye man
of God unto the mountain, she, in toke^ of humility and joy, yt she had met
with him, caught him by his feet: which when Gehazi saw, he went unto her to
thrust her away, but his master the man of God said, let her alone, for her
soul is vexed within her, and ye lord has hid it from me, and has not told
it me. Then she said unto him: O thou man of God, did I desire a son of thee
my lord? and did not I say unto thee when thou of thine own accord promisedst
me one, yt thou should not deceive me? how be it lo, ye child yt I obtained
is dead: which news, when Elisha heard, he turned him straight ways to his
man Gehazi, and said: arise, gird thy loins, and take my staff in thine
hand, and make al possible speed, yt nothing may le^ thee by the way, and go
thy way, and lay my staff upon the face of ye child. So he went in all have and
did so: but all this notwithstanding, the mother of the child was importunate
upon Elisha, to go himself unto her child, and said: As the Lord lives, and
as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee until thou go with me thine own
self: whereupon Elisha the^ arose, and went himself with her, who met his man
Gehazi by the way returning from the child, yt told him how he had laid the
staff upon the face of the child: but he neither spoke nor heard for all
that, neither was he as yet awaked. Wherefore Elisha went forward on his journey
with the mother of the child, and when he came into the womans house, and
entered into his own chamber or lodging, behold there he found the child dead,
and laid upon his bed. The^ causing every body to depart, he shut the door
upon himself, and the dead child, and prayed heartily unto the Lord for the
child's life. After prayer he went up and lay upon the child, and put his mouth
on the childs mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands,
and stretched himself upon him, so yt at the last the flesh of the child waxed
warm. The^ he went from him and walked up and down in the chamber, and after
went up upon the bed and spread himself upon the child again the second time,
and then the child neesed vii. times together, and opened his eyes. And when he
saw the child restored to life, he called to his man and bad him call ye
Shunamitesse his mother: who being come unto him he said unto her, here, take
thy son, and with that for joy and reverence, she fell down at his feet, and
bowed her self to the ground, and then took up her son and went out, and
Elisha returned to Gilgall.

After this, when the great famine was in the land of Israel, it cha^ced that
Elish^ came again into this Shunamites house, whose son he had restored to
life, and finding her now a widow, for her husband was dead, he prophesied
unto her the dearth of seven years to come, and willed her to provide for her
self in time, saying: up and go thou and thine house, and soiourne where thou
can find a commodious place to dwell in, and whereas is plenty, for the
Lord has called for a Famine, and it comes also upon the land for the space
of vii. years, And the woman arose, and did after the counsel of the man of
God, and went both she and her household, and soiourned in the land of the
Philistines seven years. And at the seven years end she returned out of the
land of the Philistines, home to Sunem her own city and country. But so it
was, yt in her absence other naughty covetous persons, had taken her house and
lands from her, and kept her out of her own possessions by force and disseason:
whereupon she then poor widow urged through this wrong, to come by her own
lawfully, took her son with her, and went out to complain unto the king
Iehoram against those intruders: and being come into the kings presence, such
was the woonderful providence of God, that she there found Gehazi the servant
of Elisha the man of God, talking with the king, and (as it fell out,)
preparing an entrance indeed unto her suit, for the king being very desirous
to hear of Gehazi of all the famous Acts, and great miracles done by Elisha
his master, amongst all other things Gehazi told him how that he had
restored one dead to life: and as he spoke these words, the woman knowing that
he meant her son, and wisely taking so good opportunity offered, with that
stepped boldly unto the king, and called upon him for her house and land,
wrongfully taken from her: whom when Gehazi beheld and saw that she was his
masters hostess, of who^ he spoke, he presently to confirm his tale, and
former report, said unto the king: My Lord O king, this is the very same
woman, whom I spoke off, and this is her son whom my master Elisha restored
from death to life. And when the king asked the woman whether that were so or
no: she aunswdred that it was most true, and that she was the woman indeed,
and the same was her son, that was restored to life by Elisha. Then the king
without any further delay upon the troth of ye matter known, appointed her an
Eunuche, or one amongst his chiefest officers, and commanded him to put her in
possession of her own again, and to restore all that was hers, together with
all the fruits, and profits of her lands, since the day she left the city
or country, even until the time of her return, and so she was justly
restored to that which was wrongfully withholden from her, to her comfort, and
y^ glory of God, that so graciously wrought in the heart of the king to do her
that good turn. 2. King. 4.8. etc. 8.1. etc.

T
Tekoitesse.
In Tekoah a city of Judah, sometimes built by Rehoboam king of Israel, and
being six miles distant from Bethleem, there dwelt a certain subtle or wise
woman, whom Ioab David's captain sent for to Jerusalem, of purpose to use her
for a means to reconcile Absalom, now out of David the king his fathers
favor, and a banished man for killing his brother Ammon, that had defloured
his sister Thamar: And when she was come, he being also a very subtle man,
taught her what to say, and how by way of a parrable or dark phrase of speech,
she should describe unto the king, the death of Ammon by Absalom, and how she
should best persuade the king to reconciliation, saying: I pray thee (quoth he
unto her) now put on mourning apparel, and annoint not thy self with oil,
but feign thy self to mourn and to be as a widow woman, that has now long
mourned for the death of her husband, and go to the king and speak unto him
after this manner. So the woman (being thus taught her lesson before by Ioab
what to say) went disguysed unto king David, and falling prostrate before his
feet upon her face on the ground, did her obeisance and said: Help O king,
save me desolate woman, or else I perish. The king seeing her in that woeful
plight, said presently unto her again: woman, what ayleth thee? O my Lord
(quoth she) I am indeed a widow woman, whose husband is lately dead: and
thine handmayde had two sons, who strove and fought so long together in the
field, till the one slew the other, because there was none to part them. And
now behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmayde, and call upon
me, saying: Deliver us him that has slain his brother, that he may be put to
death for that his fact according to the law, in revenge of his brothers death,
which if I should do, the^ would they destroy the heir also of mine husband:
and so they shall leave to mine husband, neither name, nor posterity upon the
earth, and for that cause O king, I am come to beg mercy and pardon of thee,
for my son that is left. The king thinking her request but reasonable most
graciously by and by said unto her, woman, go home to thy house, and take no
thought for thy sons life, for I will give a charge concerning him, that none
shall hurt thee nor him. Yet the woman to be further satisfied, said unto the
king: O my Lord, O king, this trespass as touching the breach of the law,
which punishes blood with blood, let it be on me, and on my fathers house:
I only will bear the blame, but let the king and his throne be guiltless. I
warrant thee (quoth the king) if any man touch thee or thy son, bring him to
me, for if he does but speak against thee, he shall neither speak nor touch
thee any more. Yet the woman subtil^y purposing to urge the king, to bynd his
promise with an oath for more assurance, said again unto the king: O, but I
pray thee let the king remember and swear by ye Lord thy God that thou will
not suffer many reuengers of blood to destroy, least they slay my son. And
with yt the king to put her out of al doubt swear unto her saying: as the Lord
lives, woman, there shall not one hair of thy sons head fall to the earth
nor perish.

Then the woman having thus far prevailed with the king, was bold upon this
advantage gotten, in plain speech to open her meaning uttered in that
parrable, and said: I pray thee O king, now let thy handmaid speak a word to
my Lord the king: say on (quoth he:) O wherefore then (quoth she) have thou
thought such a thing against the people of God? Or why does the king as one yt
is faulty, speak this thing, and give contrary sentence against thy son
Absalom, that thou will not be reconciled, and bring him again that is
banished from thee. For as thou know we must all dye, and we are as water
spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, neither does GOD
spare any person: yet does he appoint means not to cast out from him, the man
that is expelled, but has provided ways (as Sanctuaries) to save them often
times, whom man judges worthy death. Now, because the people have made me
afraid, and that I thought they would have killed mine heir, therefore I thine
handmayd devised this with my self. Now will I go and speak unto the king for
the life of my son: It may be, that the king will have pity upon a widow
and perform the request of his handmayde: for the king verily (thought I) is
merciful, and will hear the humble suit of a widow, and deliver his handmayde
out of the hand of many reuengers of blood, and of the man that would destroy
me together with my son from the inheritance of GOD left by his father.
Therefore, I thine handmayde (I say,) presuming greatly upon thy clemency, am
come to speak of these things unto my Lord the king, beseeching thee that
the word of my Lord ye king may now be comfortable unto thine handmayd, and
give rest unto me, for I know my Lord the king is even as an Angel of God in
hearing of good and bad: and of great wisdom to discern right from wrong,
therefore the Lord thy God be with thee.

The king now perceiving her drift, that it was done by the subtlety and
devise of Ioab, demanded further of the woman this question, saying: woman,
hyde not from me I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee: Is not the hand
of Ioab with thee in all this? And have thou not done it by his counsel and
advise? As thy soul lives my Lord ye king (quoth she) I will not turn to
the right hand nor to the lef^ from ought that my Lord the king has spoken,
or demanded: for even thy servant Ioab indeed bad me say as I have said, and
has put all these words in the mouth of thine handmayde: yea and to the
intent that I should change the form of speech by speaking rather in a
parable, then plainly: It was thy servant Ioabs only instruction and devise
that has done this thing: but my Lord the king is wise, even according to ye
wisdom of an Angel of God, to understand al things yt are on ye earth,
neither ca^ any hide ought from thee. So y^ king granted the woman of Tekoah
her request, and caused Ioab by and by to send for Absalom from banishment
home to his own house: but partly to cover herby his fatherly affection, and
partly to show some part of justice toward his son Absolo^ to please ye
people, he yet commanded Absolo^ to keep his house, and not to come to ye court
for a space, and this was he by this womans means reconciled into his fathers
favor again, as ye may read at large. 2. Sa^, 14.

Thebitesse.
In Thebez a city in Canany, there was a certain woman, who (when Abimelech y^
usurper and blooddy king besieged the city, and took it) went up together
with other men and women into a strong tower within the same city, there to
save themselves as long as they might. And when Abimelech himself fiercely
came to batter down this Tower, as he stood hard by the door of the same to
have set it on fire, purposing to have burnte all the people therein: This
woman being more courageous then the rest, took up a piece of a mylstone and
cast it down from the top of the Tower, which by Gods just judgment fell
directly upon Abimelechs head, and brake his brayn pan al to pieces: whereupon
Abimelech perceiving himself to be wounded to death by ye hand of a silly
woman in a great fury of mind, and desperate rage, called hastily to his page
that bare his harness, and said, Draw thy sword, and slay me, ye men say not
hereafter of me to my reproach, behold, a woman sieve Abimelech. And wih that his
page as desperately drue out his sword, and thrust his master quite through,
so that he presently died. This God by a miserable death, took vengeance on
this tyrant even in this life, and yt by the feeble hands of a weak woman, to
the preservation of his people, and the terror of al tyrants, that oppress
them. Glory be to his immortal name therefore for ever. Judge. 9.50.53. 2. Sam.
11.21.

V
The ten Virgins.
Our Savior Christ, to teach us that it is not sufficient for us to have once
given our selves to follow him, but that we must continue and persevere unto ye
end without faynting or failing in the mydway, and to the end he might warn
every man to make provision in time, to watch for his sodayn coming to
judgment, put forth this similitude of x. virgins in the Gospel after S.
Matthew, saying: The kingdom of heaven shall be likened unto x. virgins, which
took their lamps, and went to meet the bridgrome to do him honor (as the
manner then was) And five of these were wise, and five foolish. The foolish
took their Lamps, but took no oil with them: but the wise took oil in
their vessels with their Lamps: now, whiles the bridegroom tarried long, all
slumbered and slept, and at midnight there was a cry made, saying: behold the
bridegroom comes, go out to meet him. Then al these virgins arose and
trimmed their Lamps, and the foolish said to ye wise, give us of your oil,
for our Lamps are out and quenched: but the wise answered, saying: we fear
least there will not be enough for us and you too, but go you rather to them
that sell and buy for your selves. And whiles they went to buy, behold, the
bridegroom came in the mean while, and they that were ready went with him to
ye wedding, and the gate was shut. Afterward came also the other Uirgins,
saying: Lord, Lord, open to us, but he answered, and said: verily I say unto
you, I know you not, watch therefore, and let your loins be girt about, and
your Lamps burning, yea take heed, watch, and pray, for ye know neither the
year, day, time, nor hour, when the son of man will come to judgment: watch
therefore I say, watch and pray. Mat. 25.1. etc. Luke 12.34.

The names, lives, and acts of certain other women not mentioned in
Scripture, but gathered out of the third book of Machabees, and Josephus, and
other autentical Authors, worthy to be read of all godly men and women for the
affinity they have with some part of the Scripture.
ALexandra (called also Cassandra) was the daughter of Priamus, and the wife of
Alexander king of the Jews, who in the 27. year of his reign, which was the
third of his sickness, made an expedition into the land of Moab, against a
certain city called Ragaba, to get it by force. At which time, because he was
very sick and weak, his wife Alexandra the Queen (like an honest and loving
wife) went with him, fearing least he should dye by the way. And as he
encamped himself against the city, and urged it sore with assaults, his
sickness increased upon him more and more. Wherefore, his wife perceiving yt he
was like to die, wept bitterly before him, and said: To whom shall I be so bold
as to show my face when thou art once dead? seeing thou have wrought such
mischief against the Pharisees, whom all the land favors, and following
their traditions, obey their institutions, If they shall be disposed to wreek
themselves upon me and thy young children: for that you in your merry mood,
did hang upon the gallous 800. of ye chief Pharisees in Jerusalem, they shall
have aid of all that dwell in the land.

The king answered, weep not, nor show any resemblance of pensiveness, I will
tell thee what thou shall do, and if thou will follow my council, thou shall
prosper and reign, thou and thy children, as thou would desire. Be it that
I die, there is no man in the world need know thereof: tell thou every man
therefore, that ask for me, that I am sick, and will not that any man come
at me. In the mean while annoint and season me with balmes, fight with a
courage against this city, till thou win it, and then return to Jerusalem
with joy: and beware thou put on no mourning apparel, nor weep: but bring
bring me into Jerusalem, and lay me upon a bed like a sick man: and after
call together the chief of ye Pharisees, bring the^ where I am, and speak
unto them gently in this sort, Alexander has been ever your enemy, I know it
very well, wherefore take him if ye list, and cast him into the fire, or to the
dogs, or bury him, it shall be at your choice. I know well they are pitiful
men, and so full of mercy, that they will bury me honorably, and shall
appoint some one of my sons whom they like best, to be king.

The Queen did therefore as she was instructed of the king. And when she had
won Ragaba, she joyfully returned to Jerusalem: after that gathered
together the elders of the Pharisees, and spoke to the^ as the king had
advised her. The Pharisees hearing that the king was dead, and that his body
was in their hands to do withal what they list, they aunsweared the Queen,
God forbid we should do this unto our Lord the anointed of GOD. He was
the king and high Priest: what though he were a sinner, yet his death shall be an
expiatio^ for him of all his iniquities. Therefore we will bewail him, and
mourn for him: yea, we will carry his coffin our selves upon our necks and
bury him as it becomes a kings Majesty, and so they did. The time that he
reigned, was xxvii. years.

After him reigned his wife Alexandra in his steed: for the Pharisees after
they had finished the seventh day of the mourning, they committed the kingdom
unto her. She had two sons by the king, the elder was called Hircanus, the
other Aristobulus. Hircanus was a just man and a righteous: but Aristobulus was
the warriar, and a man of prowess: Besides that of a familier and loving
countenance, he favored also the learned men, and followed their
instruction. But Hircanus his elder brother loved the Pharisees. On a time
therefore when the Queen sat in the throne of her kingdom, she called the
Auncientes of the Pharisees before her, honored them, and commanded to
release and set at liberty all such Pharisees as the king her husband and
her father in law, had cast in prison: and taking the Pharisees by the hands,
she commanded all Israel to obey their ordinances. Then made she Hircanus
her son high Priest, and Aristobulus Liefetenaunt of the wars. She sent
also to all the lands that her husband and father in law Hircanus had
subdued, and demanded the noble men's sons for the pledges, which she kept
in Jerusalem. So the Lord gave unto the Queen quietness from all that were
under her subjection: she gave also the Pharisees authority over the learned
sort, putting them into their hands, to order at their pleasure. Whereupon
straight ways they found one Dogrus, a great manne amongst the learned
sort, whom they slew, and much people besides of the Auncientes of that
sect, so that the Sectaryes were in great distress. They gathered themselves
together therefore, and came to Aristobulus the Liefetenaunt of the wars, and
with him they came to the Queen, saying unto her, Thou know the enmitye,
that is between us and the Pharisees, which hate thy husband and father in
law, yea, and thy children also: We were his men of war that went with him
in all his affairs, and aided him: now thou have given us into their hands
to be murdered and banished out of the land. What will Hartam king of Arabia
do, when he hears this, that we shall forsake thee? He will come and
revenge him of all the battle that thy husband fought against him: Yea, the
Pharisees will take his part, and deliver thee and thy children into his
hands, that there shall not be left unto Hircanus the king, and his son
Alexander thy husband, any name or remnant at all.

The Queen gave them no word to aunsweare, whereat Aristobulus her son was
angry, and let not to utter to his mothers face: but she would not hear
him.

Wherefore Aristobulus counseled the Sectaries to go their ways and depart
out of Jerusalem, to choose them Cities in the land of Judah, where they might
dwell with their honor, and not to suffer them selves to be slain under the
Pharisees hands. Wherefore, departing from Jerusalem, they dwelte in the
Cities of Judah. Not long after this, it fortuned the Queen fell sore sick,
that she was like to dye: Whereof, when Aristobulus heard, he feared least
the Pharisees would make his brother Hircanus king, and at length apprehende
him: wherefore he fled away by night to the Cities of the Sadduces to be
their head, and make war upon his brother, if he would presume to raygne.
He came therefore to the Prince of the Sadduces, called Galustius, who was a
good manne of war. And after he had gathered a strong army of the
Saduces, his mother the Queen sent unto him, yt he should return unto her,
which he would not do, but rather went to war upon the nations that dwelt
about him, where he wanne twenty Cities, and got him great renown thereby.

Now as the Queen his mother waxed sicker and sicker, the chief Pharisees
came unto her with her son Hircanus, weeping before her, and saying: how
they were afraid of her son Aristobulus, who if he should come into
Jerusalem and take it, he would deliver them up into the hands of the
Sadduces. Unto whom she aunsweared, I am as you see at the point of death, not
able to talk much with you: There is here in my house great treasure, that
my husband and my father gathered, and their Parents kings of the posterity
of Chasmonani, take that unto you, and make my son Hircanus king over you. If
Aristobulus will perturbe him and make war against him, ye may wage men of
war therewith and succor him as you think good. And even with this she
faynted and dyed, and was buried amongst her people, after she had reigned
nine years over Israel. Josephus fol. 21. 22.23.24.75.

There was another woman of this name called Alexandra, which was the daughter
of Hircanus the king of Israel, and son to the before named Alexandra: and
when she heard that, her father Hircanus was taken prisoner, deprived of his
kingdom, and led away captive by Antigonus into Persia, she with her
daughter Marimy that she had by Alexander the son of Aristobulus her uncle,
went toward Rome, where by the way Herod met with her and her daughter,
and brought them again into the land of Israel: where he took Marimy her
daughter to wife, and solemnized the marriage with her in the mount of Galilee,
for there the chief of all Israel dwelt, and so became king of Jerusalem.
Afterward, when her father Hircanus was released and came home to Jerusalem.
Herod her son in law came out to meet him, embraced him, and kissed him:
after brought him into his house, and feasted him, daily calling him his
father before all men, albeeit in his heart, he conspired to murder him:
And that knew Alexandra his daughter and mother in law to Herod, who opened
it unto Hircanus her Father: but he would not credit her at the first, till
on a time he perceived the matter clear to be so: then devised he how to fly
to Maloc king of Arabia, but before he could get away, Herod so handled ye
matter, that he was accused and put to death wrongfully, and by this means
Herod was the better established in his kingdom.

After he had thus dispatched Hircanus his wives progenitour, father of
Alexandra his mother in law, and had deposed Haniel from the office of the high
Priesthood, and preferred his wives brother Aristobulus to that dignity.
Which he did to quiet his wife, and to fulfill his mother in laws mind.
Notwithstanding this, Alexandra his wives mother was not content nor satisfied,
for the death of her father was such a grief: but always spoke snappishly to
the king, that he committed her to ward. Then she wrote to Cleopatra Queen of
Egypt, and wife to Marcus Antonius a Noble man of Rome, declaring unto her all
the mischief that Herod had done to the posterity of Chasmonanie, and
desiring her of aid. To whom Cleopatra made this aunsweare, if thou can
find the means to come to me secretly, thou shall perceive what I will do
for thee.

When Alexandra had read the letter, she sent to Aristobulus her son the
high Priest, showing him that she would fly to the Sea Iapho, and from
thence would take shipping into Egypt, persuading him also to fly with her.
We will (says she) make two coffers, one for me, another for thee: and we
will with rewards allure our servants to carrye us out priuilye, whereby we
may fly to save our lives. This their devise was pecceyued of one of Herodes
servants, who forthwith made the king priuye unto it. The king commanded
his servant that bewrayed them, that when they did conueye their coffers, they
should bring them to him, which the servant did. So when the coffers were
brought to the kings presence, he caused them to be opened, and took out
Alexandra and her son Aristobulus, to whom the king spoke sharply, and
rebuked them sore. But Alexandra aunsweared him again as short, insomuche that
the king moved with anger fla^g away from her into his chamber, saying: It is
better to sit solitarye in a corner of the house, then with a brawling or
scoulding woman in an open place. The king dissembled the matter, and showed
outwardly no great displeasure whatsoever he did inwardly.

But a year after, the king fearing sore yt the Israelites would in the end
restore the kingdom unto Aristobulus, and the children of their fathers, he
perceiving every man's heart to be so inclined to Aristobulus for his virtue and
godliness sake, wickedly devised, and secretly concluded at a feast made to
Aristobulus, and all his Nobles, that certain of his own servants being
disposed to go and swim in Jordan: should desire Aristobulus the young man,
to go and bathe with them in Jordan, and then and there to drown him. So
Aristobulus continuing swimming with the kings servants till sun setting,
when it began to be dark, they drowned him amongst them. Whereof when tidings
came to the court, and it was well known that he was dead: all the people made
great lamentation for him, but chiefly Marimy his sister, and Alexandra the
young man's mother, she could in no wise be comforted. Yea, and although she
saw the king himself also to weep, and make great moan, for it repented him
that he had done so wicked an act: yet all the people knew well i^ough, that ye
thing was procured by him: Insomuch that Alexandra his mother in law, let
not to tell it him to his face, that he was the murderer of her husband and
her father, and now last of all of her son: to who^ the king aunsweared
neither good nor bad.

From that day forewardes there was perpetual hatred between Alexandra and
Marimy, and Riparim the mother of Herod and Salumith her sister, that came of
base and servile blood. After this, Salulumith on a time perceiving that the
king detested Marimy, took occasion to accuse Marimy of treason, and that she
would poison the king her husband: which the king too lightly believing to be
true, at her false report, commanded Marimy to be brought forth, and to be
beheaded in the city. And as she was brought forth unto the market place of
the city, all the women of the city followed her: Alexandra her mother also
cursed and rated at her saying, come out, thou yt have abhorred and conspired
against the Lord. Alexandra wept also, as though it had been for the wickedness
that her daughter had committed, thinking surely to please the king by that
means, and to bleare his eyes, if peradventure he might suffer her to live til
she might have opportunity to poison him: but all would not help, for Marimy
for all this was guiltless beheadded, and put to death by the king her
husband, as you may read more in her history.

Then the king repenting him of her death for love of her, he fell sick, and
being at deaths door: Alexandra his mother in law, sought means how to poison
him: which being uttered to the king, he commanded to apprehend her and to kill
her, which was done accordingly. So was Alexandra also beheaded and put to
death, as appears in Josephus. fo. 35.38.40.41.42.45.46.56.

Anna, of this name there have bin many noble women, one was a Jew, wife of
Elcana and mother of Samuel, as ye may read in the Scripture: another was an
old widow, and prophetess in Jerusalem in Christ's time, etc. and ye 3. was
daughter to Isachar, of ye tribe of Leui, or as Damascen says, of ye tribe of
Judah, and was married to Ioachim of ye same tribe, which being long barren, at
last brought forth ye blessed virgin Mary, and after the death of Ioachim she
was married to Cleophas, and after his death to Solome. Cooper in his
dictionary. Damascen.

Aristobulus wife the Queen upon a false report given out against her good
brother in law Antigonus, commanded him to be cruelly put to death in prison
without knowledge of the king her husbands and his brothers mind, which cruel
murder and blooddy fact of hers hastened her husbands death speedily, for being
very sick before, now for thought died. Joseph. fol. 17.

Afterward, when her son Alexander fled to Alexandria, and there was narrowly
besieged and pursued by Gabinius a Romain with a strong army: she like a good
mother went forth to Gabinius weeping, and besought him yt he would not destroy
her son: so for her sake Gabinius spared her son Alexander, and did him no
harm. Joseph. fol. 30.

Arsinoe was the daughter of Ptolome, and sister to Philopater, who going to
wars against Antiochus with her brother Philopater, as they fought fiercely
together, Arsinoe went diligently about her me^, weeping pitifully with her
hair about her shoulders, and desired the^ yt they would help her, and fight
valia^tly, promising to give unto every of their wives and children if she had
the victory, 2. pounds of gold. Thus by her means it came to pass yt their
enemies were overthrown, and her brother Philopater got ye victory over
Antiochus, as ye may read more at large in the 3. book of the Machabees.
fol. 1.2. and 3.

Beronice, who was sister unto king Agrippa, when she came by chance to
Jerusalem of devotion to visit the holy place: and saw one Florus president
and captain of the Romans, most grievously and violently to oppress the
people of the Jews, and for payment of exactions and tollage to slaye many of
them, even at the entrance of the Temple. She came forth weeping unto Florus
that furious wretch, and besought him to be favorable and spare the people,
for she pitied them very greatly: but Florus relented nothing. But when she
was departed from him, he flouted and mocked her, although she were the kings
sister, and that in the temple of the Lord, to her great discomfort. Afterward
Eliasar, and the seditious people having gotten ye rule of the city Jerusalem,
and not only furiously set a fire, the king Agrippas house and all therein, but
Beronices house also the kings sister they burnt to the ground, and divided the
spoil amongst them, as ye may read in Josephus fol. 64.68.

Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, wife unto Marcus Antonius a noble man of Rome,
having received letters of aid from Alexandra, made this comfortable aunsweare
again in another letter: If thou can find the means to come to me
secretly, thou shall perceive what I will do for thee. After this Marcus
Antonius her husband, being made next unto the Emperor Augustus, and sent by
him to war upon the kings of the West countries, as he that reigned in
Egypt, now by his wives Cleopatras provocation, he rebelled against Octauian
Augustus his master, and made war with him both by Sea and by land, and
joined in league with Herod king of the Jews. But at the last her husband
being slain, and dead by Octauians host coming by ship to the Isle of Rhodes,
Herod escaped, and having reconciled him self to Octauian: Then they went
both together toward Egypt to be revenged upon Cleopatra, as she that was the
only cause of her husbands conspiracy and rebellion by inciting him thereunto.
But (says Iosepus) that wicked woman, when she saw her city to be overcome,
put out her most precious apparel, and sitting upon ye throne of her kingdom,
commanded a Uiper to be brought unto her, which as soon as she had suffered to
sting her breast, she died. As Octauian Augustus came to the place, and saw her
sit there, he rejoiced that he might be revenged of her, and commanded to
thrust her from her throne, but when they came to her and found her dead, it
displeased Octauian the Emperor, and grieved him very sore. Iosph. 40.44.

Deboras (says Josephus) a prophitesse, by her prayer brought to pass great
health in Israel, so did diverse other just and godly women, which by their
prayers obtained many things at Gods hand. Josephus fol. 184.

Hyrcanus wife the Queen being a widow, was banished from Jerusalem by her
own son Aristobulus, together with Alexander her youngest son, Joseph fol.
17.

Hasmonais maid being very well beloved of one Herod the servant also of the
said Hasmonai, that killed her master, and the whole family save this maid
whom he loved, and usurped the kingdom over Israel: When she saw that her
master and all his family were dead, and she only left alive, she
distrusting Herodes cruelty, went and clymed up to the top of an house,
saying: There is no body left alive of my fathers house but I alone: so she
cast her self headlong from the top of the house, and dyed. Herod hearing
this, caused her to be taken up and laid in honey, and so preserved her for the
space of seven years. Yea there were that said he had carnal copulation with
her after she was dead, so beastly he doted in love toward her. Read
Joseph. fol. 357.

Julius Coesars mother being wife to one of the Senators of Rome, and dying in
the birth and travel of him, they therefore that were about her, straightwayes
ripped her body, and gat the child out alive, whom they named Julius: and
because his mother was cut, they called him Ceasar, and so her child was
called Julius Ceasar: and in process, her child came to be an Emperor of
Rome, as ye may read in Joseph. fol. 31.

Iosephes mother, wife of Gorion the priest, when she heard the Sedicious
sound a Trumpet, and go about to take Joseph her son, and to put him in
prison with her husband Gorion his father, she also being kept in Shimeons
house as prisoner: and very old even 85. years of age: asked what the cause
was of that hurly burly. They told her that the sedicious issued out at that
shout of the Trumpet against Joseph her son to take him. When she heard
that, by and by she ran out of the house that she was kept in, and clymed
up the walls, as lustily as though she had been a young girl of fourteen
years old, tare her hair, and cried out, weeping, and saying before all them
that were present: Is my hope then come to this? could I ever have looked that
I should have over lived my son, and that I should not be suffered to see him,
and to bury him? I had trusted he should have buried me, and that he
should have been a help to me in mine age, and when my whole family by the
sedicious was almost made away and extinguished: yet I said, this shall
comfort me: Now therefore what shall I do? when I have none left to comfort
me of all my children that I bare, for between the sedicious and the Gentiles
our enemies, they have slain eighteen sons that I had, and what shall I do
now from henceforth but covet death? For I desire not to live now any longer.
And how should I receive and consolation, when I see my son dead, and I can
not bury him? Lord that I might die by and by. For I can not live any longer,
since my son Joseph is dead.

She went up yet further upon the walls till she came to the ^urret where
her husband Gorion was in prison, and stretched out her hands toward heaven,
crying with a loud voice: O my son Joseph, my son where art thou? come and
speak unto me, and comfort me. The sedicious hearing her, laughed her to
scorn: but the Romans when they heard her, and knew of Joseph that it was
his mother, they wept and lamented her case, and many of the Jews also that
were in Jerusalem: but they were feign to refrain it, least they should be
perceived of Schimeons cruel cutthr^ates.

Then Joseph's mother said to the sedicious that were by her upon the walls,
why do ye not kill me also, which bare Joseph my son, and nursed him with
these breasts? Ye enemies of the Lord have murdered him with other just and
righteous men, why kill ye not me also? GOD be judge betwixt me and you that
have killed my son giltlesse.

The sedicious answered her, Can thou not if thou list, tumble down over the
wall and die? we will give thee good leave. When thou have done so, the
Romans shall take thee up, and bury thee honorably, because that thou art
Iosephes mother, who is their friend.

She answered, how should I do this evil unto me self, to kill me
self, and constrayne my soul to go forth of my body, before that GOD do
call it? if I should do so, I should have no hope left in the world to
come, for no body will bury them whom they perceive to have killed themselves.
These and such like while she reasoned wisely, the sedicious heard, and
mocked her: Wherefore she wept the more abundantly: so that the Romans and
other godly men hearing her wisdom, could not absteyne from weeping.

Joseph when he heard his mother speak, he gate on armour^ and approached to
the wall, accompanied with most valiante Romans, to defend him from the
arrows of the Jews, and spoke to his mother:

Fear not my dear mother, nor take no thought for me, for I have escaped the
hands of the sedicious: GOD has not suffered me to come into their hands.
Wherefore I have heard the words of these wicked counselors that advised
thee to kill thee self, and thine answer again to them which before thou
gave them, I knew thou would answer.

GOD forbid I say, GO^D forbid that Iosephes mother and the wife of Gorion,
should consent to the counsel of the wicked. Wherefore (my dear mother) be
content, and bear the yoke of the sedicious patiently, and humble thy self
before them. Never strive against the miseries and calamities of this time,
which thou can not alter nor remedy. For they shall perish, but we shall
stand and continue. Joseph. 187.206.207.

Josephus touching his wife in his Oration made to the Jews when he was at
Rome, says thus: Although I be in the Romans Camp, yet I am not absent from
you, for my dearly beloved wife is with you, the wife of my youth, whom I can
not set lightly by at this present, although I never had children by her, but
rather love her most entyrely, because she came of a most honest and godly
house.

My dear father and mother are also with you, very aged persons: for my father
is at this day an hundred and three years old, and my mother fouresore and
five: but the years of my life are very few and evil, etc. Read Joseph. fol.
189.187.

Kiparim was the wife of Antipater, and mother of Herod king of Jerusalem and
Salumith her daughter, who were both deadly enemies to Alexandra, as you may
read in the story of Alexandra. Joseph. fol. 42.

Marimi was the daughter of Alexander, and Alexandra, and wife of Herod king
of Jerusalem, whom he married in the mount of Galilee, being the chiefest
city of all Jerusalem, as ye may read in the story of Alexandra. This Marimi
had a brother whose name was Aristobulus for whom she made earnest suite unto
Herod, and lay sore upon him for to promote him to the high Priesthood after
the death of Hircanus: but Herod her husband would in no wise grant her
request, but made a stranger on Han^el high Priest. Notwithstanding when he
had once dispatched^ Hircanus his wives progenitor, father of Alexandra his
mother in law: then he deposed Haniel, and preferred his wives brother
Aristobulus to the dignity of high Priesthood, being but a child. And this he
did at his wives request, to quiet her for the death of her father, whom a
little before he most wickedly had put to death. Yet afterward, such was his
privy malice to his wives stock, that this Herod procured the said
Aristobulus to be cruelly drowned by Herod's servants. Of whose death when
Marimi understood certaynely: she greatly bewailed his death, and could in
no wise be comforted, and from that day forwards could never abide Kiparim her
mother in law, nor her sister in law Salumyth that came of base and seruill
blood. For Marimy cast in their teeth to their faces, that they were not of the
seed of Israel: but profane, unholy, and of base birth. Notwithstanding,
Herod loved Marimi as his life, wherefore he would never displease her as
long as she lived, nor say so much to her, as why say thou so to my mother
and sister? which his hot love was afterward turned to hate, for when Herod
went after Octauian the Emperor and his master against whom he had conspired
and rebelled with presents to be reconciled unto him, as he set forwards,
he called Joseph his brother in law, and commanded him that if Octauian the
Emperor put him to death, as he doubted, then he should poison Marimi his
wife, for said Herod: it is not seemly for kings, that any mean and base
man should marry with a kings widow, and sleep with her upon a kings
bed.

So when Herod was gone on his journey in the mean while Joseph her brother
in law, disclosed unto, Marimi all that the king her husband had commanded
him, and how that if it so fortuned, him to be put to death by Augustus the
Emperor, that he should poison her: Whereupon Marimi conceived a greater
hatred toward the king her husband, insomuch, that when the king was
returned in safety, sound, and with honor also from Octauian Augustus the
Emperor, and that all his men and whole household rejoiced greatly, Marimi
only showed no good countenance of gladness, no not when the king him self
told how greatly he was magnified and honored of Octauian: but always she
was sad. Salumith the kings sister, perceiving that Marimi so vexed the king,
she told him how Joseph her husband had lien with Marimi while he was with
Augustus. But Herod (say what she could) gave no credit to her words,
knowing that she envied Marimi, and spoke of malice, until at lengh he asked
the cause of Marimi, why she rejoiced not as other did when he returned in
safety from Augustus, but was ever sad, which showed her to have some
rancor and malice in her heart toward him. She answered, thou have said
heretofore, that thou louedst me above all thine other wives and concubines:
yet thou did will Joseph thy sisters husband to poison me. When Herod
heard this, he was exceedingly abashed that Joseph had disclosed his secret,
and began to mistrust with him self that which Salumith had before told him,
that he had slept with his wife in deed, and upon that had detected that
secret, therefore he departed out of his place in a great anger and rage.
Whereby Salumith perceived that he detested Marimi, and therefore she accused
her further, suborning false accusers and forgers of lies, to witness that
Marimi would have poisoned the king, whereof she had diverse presumptions also
by her countenance. She added more over, if thou (says she to the king) let
her escape thus, she will speedily destroy thee, and bereave thee of thy
kingdom. The Law gives this counsel, if any man go about to murder thee,
prevent him, and slay him first: with this and such like words, she so moved
the king, that he commanded to bring Marimi forth, and to be beheaded in the
high street of the city. And as she was brought forth unto the markette
place of the City, all the women of the City followed her: Alexandra her
mother also cursed and rayled at her, saying: come out, thou that have abhorred
thy husband, and conspired against thy Lord, which she did not of malice but of
policy to pacify the kings wrath against her daughter, whom she knew to be
innocent of that fact and wrongfully accused, as in ye story of Alexandra
appears. But Marimi thus going to execution, held her peace, and looked
neither to the right hand, nor to the left, nor yet feared death any thing,
knowing, that she was innocent in deed and thought, and therefore God would
render her a good reward in the world to come. Wherefore she bared her neck
without fear, and they cut off her head, shedding the innocent blood. But God
made no delay in punishing the same: for there fell a sore plague and
pestilence in the house of Herod, so that his chiefest servant, his Noble
women and concubines died sore thereof: Yea throughout all Judea reigned the
pestilence vehemently: which affliction all Israel knew well enough chanced
unto them for the blood of Marimi.

They cried therefore unto the Lord, saying: will thou for the offense of one
man, deal so cruelly with the whole congregation? And the Lord took pity
therefore upon the Land, and withdrewe the plague from the people at their
earnest petitions. The king repented him also, that he had so rashly shed
the innocent blood of so dear a wife without cause, and love of her so grew in
his heart, that he was sick and at deaths door for grief of mind. This
Marimi had by Herod two sons, the one called Alexander, the other
Aristobulus. Read more in Alexandra her story. Joseph. fol. 35.40.42.43.44.45.
46.56.

Miriam, was a certain notable rich woman at Jerusalem of a Noble house, her
dwelling was beyond Iordane: who when she perceived the wars to grow more
and more in the time of Uaspasian the Emperor, and the siege at Jerusalem to
be very great and sore, she came up with her neighbors to Jerusalem, bringing
with her not only her men servants and women servants, and all her whole
family: but also her goods and riches, which were very great. When the hungar
was grievous at Jerusalem, and the sedicious went from house to house to seek
meat, they came also to this woman's house, and took away from her by force
all that ever she had, and left her nothing remaining. By this means she was
oppressed with very great hungar, so that she wished her self out of the
world, but her time was yet come to die. Wherefore that she might slake her
hungar, and sustain her life, she began to scrape in the chafe and dust
for beasts dounge, but could find none.

She had one son, and when she saw the famine wax greater and greater
upon her, she laid aside all womanhood and mercy, and took upon her an
horrible cruelty. For when she heard her boy weep and ask for meat, which
she had not to give him, she said unto him: What shall I do my son? For
the wrath of God has environed the whole city, in every corner thereof famine
reigns: without the city the sword kills up all, within we stand in fear
of the seditious: our enemies prevail without, in the Town are fires,
burninges, and ruins of houses, famine, pestilence spoiling, and destroying,
so that I cannot feed thee my son. Now therefore my son, if I should die
for hunger, to whom should I leave thee being yet a child? I hoped once,
that when thou should come to man's state, thou should have sustained mine
age with meat, drink, and cloth, and after when I should die, to bury me
honorably, like as I was minded to bury thee, if thou should have died
before me: But now my son thou art as good as dead already. For I have no
meat to bring thee up with all: because of this great famine and cruelty of
the enemies both within and without. If thou should die now amongst other,
thou should have no good nor honorable tomb as I would wish thee.

Wherefore I have thought good to choose thee a sepulcher even mine own body,
least thou should die, and dogs eat thee in the streets.

I will therefore be thy grave, and thou shall be my food. And for that,
that if thou had lived and grown to man's state, thou ought by right to
have nourished me: Now feed me with thy flesh, and with it sustain mine
age before that famine devour thee, and thy body be consumed.

Render therefore unto thy mother that which she gave unto thee, for thou
came of her, and thou shall return into her. For I will bring thee into the
self same shape in the which the breath of life was breathed into thy
nostrelles: Forasmuch as thou art my well-beloved son, whom I have loved
always withal my strength, be therefore meat for thy mother, an ignominy
and reproach to the Sedicious, that by violence have taken away our food.
Wherefore my son hear my voice, and sustain my soul, and my life, and go
to thy end that is determined for thee by my hands, thy lotte be in the
garden of Eden and Paradise: be thou meat for me, and a rebuke and shame to
the Seditious, that they may be compelled to say, Lo a woman has killed her
son, and has eaten him.

So when she had thus spoken to her son, she took the child, and turnyng
her face away, least she should see him dye, she killed him with a swoorde,
and after cut his body into certain pieces, whereof some she roasted, some
she sodde, and when she had eaten of them, she laid up the rest to keep.

The savor of the flesh roasted when it came out into the streets to the
people, they said one to another: see, here is a smell of rostmeate: Which
thing came to the knowledge of the sedicious at length, who went into the house
of the woman, and spoke roughly unto her, why should thou have meat to live
with, and we die for hunger? The woman then made them an answer, and said
unto them: Be not displeased, I beseech you, with your handmaide for this,
for you shall see I have reserved part for you. Sit you down therefore, and
I will bring it you, that you may taste thereof, for it is very good meat. And
by and by she laid the table, and set before them part of the childs flesh,
saying: Eat I pray you, here is a childs hand, see here his foot and
other parts, and never report that it is any other woman's child but mine
own only son that ye knew with me, him I bare, and also have eaten part,
and part I have kept for you. Which when she had spoken, she burst out, and
wept, saying: Oh my son, my son, how sweet wast thou to me whiles thou
yet liuedst, and now at thy death also thou art sweeter to me then honey. For
thou haste not only fed me in this most grievous famine, but thou have
defended me from the wrath of the sedicious, wherewith they were incensed
toward me, when the smell of the meat brought them into my house? Now
therefore are they become my friends, for they sit at my table, and I have
made them a feast with thy flesh.

After she turned her to the seditious, and badde them eat and satisfy them
selves. For why (said she) should ye abhor my meat which I have set
before you? I have satisfied my self therewith, swhy therefore do you not eat
of the flesh of my son? Taste and see how weete my sons flesh is, I dare
say you will say it is good meat.

What needs pity? Ought ye to be more moved therewith then a woman? If ye
will in no wise eat of the sacrifice of my son, when as I have eaten thereof
me self, shall not this be a shame for you, that I should have better
heart, and greater courage then you? Behold I have prepared a fair table for
you, most valiant men, why eat ye not? Is it not a good feast that I have
dressed for you? and it was your will that I should make you this feast. It had
been my part rather to have been moved with pity of my son, then yours: and
how chances it therefore yt ye are more merciful then I? are not ye they that
spoiled my house, and left me no kind of food for me and my son? are not
ye they that constrained me to make you this feast, notwithstanding the great
hunger that I have? why then eat ye not thereof, when as ye were the
authors and the causers that I did this deed?

The Jews hearing this matter, were wonderfully smitten into saddenesse: Yea,
even the governors of the Seditious began to stoop when they heard of this,
so that they all in a manner desired death, they were so amazed at this horrible
act. Many therefore of the common people stale out in the night forth of
Jerusalem with all their substance to the Romans camp, and showed Titus of
this: who wept thereat, and was sorry for the matter exceedingly, holding up his
hands to heaven, and crying, Thou Lord God of the world, God of this house,
to whom all secrets are known, which also know my heart, that I came not
against the City as desirous of wars, but rather of peace, which I ever
offered them: but yet the Citizens thereof ever more refused it, although I
oftentimes entreated them. And when they destroyed one another by their civil
discention, I would have delivered them, but I found them always like most
fierce and cruel beasts, nothing sparing them selves: And this mischief is
come now so far that a woman has eaten her own flesh, being driven
thereunto by most extreme necessity.

I have heard, and my forefathers have told me all the power that thou have
exercised in times past toward them and their fathers, how thy name dwelt
amongst them. etc.

And now Lord God, etc. if so be thou will not deliver this people into my
hands, I will get me hence from these most wicked men, and fly away to
save my life, least I also perish in their sins when thou shall overthrow
them, as thou did Sodom and Gomorre etc. For with hardened hearts they
say, why should we not be like to our fathers in cruelty? For our father
Abraham when as he had but one only son, he went to sacrifice him to the
Lord, whom in deed I do not reprehend for this fact: for why? I know not the
mystery thereof, albeit I marvel how he had no pity on his son. I have
heard also of a certain king of theirs (called Gefta) who the same day he
went forwards to the wars, made a vow to God that he would offer a
sacrifice, if he should have good success in his wars: And when he
returned from the wars, he offered to God his only daughter, and so
performed his vow that he had vowed unto God. And hereby I know they are men
of a stubborn spirit: for what so ever it gives them in their heads to do,
that they think must needs be done, and they are a noughtie people, and most
heinous sinners. Wherefore except thou will deliver them unto me, I will give
over the wars. For I will not be slain with them without all judgment.

When Titus had thus said, he battered the wall of Jerusalem with an iron
Ram, and cast it down: Then came forth many of the Nobles of the Saduces
unto him, and made peace with him.

Pheroras wife having had a vyall of poison, which Antipater bought as he
went to Rome, and sent unto her husband to keep for him till his return: In
the mean while her husband Pheroras dyed. And when Antipater came home again
from Rome: Pheroras wife and he fell at variaunce, insomuch that she objected
unto him, that he was the cause that her husband Pheroras was banished the
kings presence, the sorrow whereof was his death. On the other side Antipater
went about to accuse her, sowing discord between her and the king, to stir
him against her. He suborned also a certain Eunuche or gelded person to go
unto Herod the king, and enfourme him, how that, at what time as he took
displeasure with Pheroras his brother, and banished him his presence, Pheroras
procured a strong poison, and gave it to his wife, commanding her to destroy
the king therewith. The king hearing this was wroth with the Eunuch, and said:
I searched for that venom long ago, when it was noysed that my household
servants would have given it me to drink, but I could not find the thing
to be true: Yea I have been too rash in such matters. For I put my wife
Marimi to death without a cause, and Alexandra my mother in Law, with my two
children.

When Antipater heard that the king credited not the Eunuche, he made suite
to the king to send him to Octauian the second time: for he was afraid for
the vial that was in Pheroras wives house.

He had written also with his hand, how that he sent it, intending
therewith to poison the kings sons children: but he that prepares a pit
for other, often times falls into it him self, and desiring the king to send
him, he let him go.

After this the king commanded to make search, if the Eunuchs words were
true or no: He sent first for Pheroras household servants, examined them
whether ever they could perceive that Pheroras was in mind to hurt him: They
all swear no.

Then the king commanded to scourge them very sore: but they confessed
nothing, although some dyed under their hands in the examination. Some he
ordered with diverse kinds of torments, of some he caused to pluck out all
their teethe. And as he had scourged a certain woman servant which had
been very trusty to Pheroras, at length when she could no longer stand
for strokes, she cried out and said: The holy and blessed God revenge us of
Rostios the kings wife, which is the cause of this. The king hearing these
words, badde let her alone, she will disclose all, Then spoke she, Antipater
made feasts every foot for thy brother Pheroras and him self: And as they
eat and drank, they devised how to poison thee, especially when as Antipater
was going to Octauian.

For they said, except we destroy him he will destroy us, as he has done
all the children of this house. Moreover, he loves the children of his sons
that were put to death, which grow apace, and it is possible he may alter
his mind, and make one of them king. Antipater also said to thy brother, The
king makes as though he he were much my friend: but I trust him not. He
gave me (says he) an hundred pound weight of gold, but all that satisfies
not me.

When the king heard this, he told how he had given Antipater this gold
secretly. The woman said moreover, There is yet a vyall of strong poison in my
mistress house, that thy son sent out of Egypt: With that the king sent
straightwayes to Pheroras wife, that she should bring him the vyall of poison
her own self: but when she espied the kings Eunuchs come to fetch her
whether she would or no, she gate her up to the top of the house, and cast
her self down headlong to kill her self: because she would not see the king,
nor abide his torments: Yet she died not thereof. Whereupon the kings
messengers brought her in a horselitter, and set her before the king: Then she
confessed unto him, how Antipater his son had conspired with Pheroras his
brother to kill him with a strong poison that he had bought in Egypt, and sent
it to Pheroras her husband to keep, when he went to Octauian: And how that
Pheroras being at the point of death, repented him thereof, charging that we
should never give that venom to Antipater, but power it out upon the ground,
that the king might not be poisoned therewith: and I did, as he badde me, cast
it out all, save a little that I kept in the glass bottom: For I ever feared
that which is now come to pass. Then at the kings commandment the vial
was brought forth before him, and there was a little of the venom left,
wherefore they gave better credit to her words: so the king was content, and
bad his physicians heal her, and she recovered. Joseph. 55.56.57.

Pheroras maid servant that disclosed the treason of Antipater to poison his
father king Herod: of her read next before in Pheroras wives story, and how
she was handled before she would confess it, etc. Joseph. 56.57.

Rostios was one of the wives of Herod king of the Jews, and the mother of
Antipater that would have poisoned his father: as ye may read at large
before in Pheroras wives story. Joseph. 56

Salumith was the daughter of one Antipater and Kyparim his wife, and sister to
Pheroras and Herod, which Salumith came but of base blood: of her malice and
spiteful dealing toward Marimi, read more at large in the story of Marimi.
Joseph. 25.42.43.44. 45.

Schimeons mother and wife were killed both by the said Schimeon, the mother
first, least she should entreat him for the children and be sorry for their
sakes. Then his wife came running of her own accord, and held her neck
down to the sword, least she should be constrained to see her children die:
and last of all, he slew him self: as ye may read more at large in Joseph.
fol. 72.

There was another woman that was the wife of a cruel Cuttethroate among the
Jews, called Schimeon: who living like an outlawe, and his wife dwelling in
Jerusalem, at the last she fled out of the City, with her men and women
servants toward her husband, for fear least she should be slain for her
husbands cruelties sake if she should have tarried at Jerusalem, but as she
passed by where Iehochanan lay in ambushment for to take her husband, her he
took and brought again to Jerusalem not a little proud of such a pray,
thinking now we shall have Schimeon at our pleasure, seeing we have his wife
our prisoner: he loves her so entirely, that he will do for her sake,
whatsoever we will have him. This came to Schimeons ear, who had taken at that
time many of Iehochanans men, and cut of their right hands, sending them so
with shame to Jerusalem to their master. He sent moreover Ambassadors to
Iehochanan, willing him to send him his wife, in such sort that she might
come to him with all that was hers, or if he refused to do it, he should be
the extreemelier handled, for he would take the town ere it were long, and to
Iehochanans shame cut of the hands and legs of all them that did inhabit it.
Iehochana^ hearing this, was sore afraid and all they that were with him, and
therefore they sent him his wife, whereupon Schimeon kept him still without the
Town, and playde the tyrant without, as fast as Iehochanan did within,
rauishing the Israelites wives before their faces, and shedding innocent blood
unmercifully. Josephus 134.

Josephus reports that at the siege of Titus and Uespasian against Jerusalem,
the men soldiers were so scant and destroyed, that the women were feign to
defend the walls, where it chanced that a great stone shot by the
Romans, hit a woman with child with such a violence, that it passed through
her body and carried the child with it by the space of half a mile.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
the assigns of William Seres. 1582.


