Ovid his inuectiue against Ibis.

Translated into English Meeter, whereunto is added by the Translator, a short
draught of all the stories and tales contained therein, very pleasant to be
read.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas East, and Henry Middleton.

Anno Domini. 1569.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and my very good lord, sir Thomas Sackuyle knight, lord
Buckhurst: Thomas Vnderdovvn wishes continual health, with increase of
Honor.
IN addressing of my book (right honorable, and my very good lord) it is
necessary, that the geuer thereof should consider, whether the gift be a
present meet for the patron or not, least in presuming ouerbouldly to offer
the same, he purchase great dyspleasure in stead of desired favor. Which
consideration debated so long of this voorke in my brain, that I determined it
a thing ouerbase to be proffered to your excellent honor: not for the
vnvvorthinesse of the work which is very vvytty, but for the simpleness of
the translation which ^ill besemeth the same: yet I was comforted again,
when I vvayed diligently the curtesy, by the report of all men bruted to be in
your Lordship, which is accustomed to accept, not so much the quantity of the
gift, as the will of the geuer. And this is the property of a gentle nature,
which also caused the hauty Persian king to take in gentle part a cup of
troubled water at one of his soldiers hands. Receive this therefore (my
singular good Lord) if not for the translators sake, which I grant to be
unworthy, yet for the authors sake Ovid, whose excellency I dare compare
with any save VIRGYL, if not in this wise, yet as the Macedonian king Philip
did hear an unlearned Orator. Who blamed by his council for so doing
ansvvered, be content my lords, after I have heard him I shall like the better
of my learned men. I say that the skilfulnes of your honors head, (which I
know to be pereles in our days) if at idle hours it will vouchsafe to
read the same, shall have better fancy to apply such as be more learned, and
of riper judgment afterward. All which things considered (and otherwise by
mine own private devvty bound, for the good affection your honor has had
to my dear father, Steven Vnderdovvne, which I pray God long to continue) I
am bold to adventure to profer you this book, which by leisure I have
translated into Meeter, and because the sense is not easy otherwise to be
under standed, I have drawn a brief draught of all the stories and tales
contained therein, which are so many, as I dare affirm in the like volume, a
man may not read any where: so that I doubt not, the readinge thereof will be
very pleasant to your honor, and perhaps profitable also. But what need I make
many words hereof, saying it is at hand ready to perform I trust, what I
have said? but howsoever it fall out, the good will of the geuer is never
the less. Who prays to the living God, alvvay to increase your honor here,
and after this life to send you eternal joy with blessed souls.

At your honors commandment alvvayes. T. V.

The Preface to the gentle Reader.
I Have translated (gentle Reader) a little piece of Ouyd, which he wrote
against a feigned friend. It is very hard and therefore deserves ye more
pardon, if in any part thereof I have erred. And that the obscurytie of it
should not be displeasant unto thee, (which I know must needs have been) I
have added thereunto a brefe draught of all the stories and tales, that are
contained therein, by reason whereof the reading of it, no doubt, wylbe very
pleasant, and perhaps not without profit. For therein shall you see all manner of
vices punished, all offenses corrected, and all misdeedes revenged. There is
nether story, nor tale almost, from the beginning unto his time, wherein any ill
luck was noted, to happen to any man, but the Poet wishes the same to light
upon his adversary. The causes that moved him to write thus sharply were two,
as in the work may appear. One for that after his banishment he whispered
lies and untrue tales into Augustus the Emperor his ears, thereby to keep him
the longer in exile. The other for that he solicited his wife to be vncurteys.
These two causes if they much incensed Ovid, no man I think can blame him. For
what greater vncurtesy, I will not say vilany, can be showed to any man, then
so to tread upon him when he is down, that he shall after never be able to rise
again. Of troth me thinks when I consider the gifts that God has bestowed
upon men, I am almost rapt, and beside my self, for the greatness and number of
them: but of al friendship is the greatest. Which (if any thing do) comes
most near to the celestial society, and heavenly agreement of angels and
blessed creatures. But it is so rare, ye since the beginning of the world,
there has been great scarcity thereof, so that if you consider ye number of other
men, it will amount to nothing. Surely that man is happy (as says Tully) who
has one to whom he may freely break his mind, and utter all his cogitations,
who will rejoice with him in prosperity without envy, and with true heart be
partaker of his adversity, that man may well think that he has gotten the
most precious jewel in the world But how a man should attain hereunto, but by
virtue, which is the ground of freendshippe, there is no way, neither is there
any other mean whereby it is tried and conserved. That agreement which is
among evil men, the society of dyssemblers, the fellowshippe of flatterers.
the consent of thieves, is not to be termed by the name of freendshippe, for
as much as in these is neither troth nor plain dealing, and therefore no
freendeshipppe. For except you do detecte, and open the very secreates of your
heart, without color to your freende, and he to you again likewise, there
can be no constant or steadfast amity. There must be therefore especial care
given in the choice of a true freende, least instead of him we light upon a
flaterer, which is of such affinity with him in appearaunce, that he is very
hard to be descryed.

There is not so high an hill, but a man may clyme to the top thereof, not so
long a journey, but it may be gone at length, not so deep a Sea, but it may
be sounded with Lead, nor so strong a Castle, but it may be battered with
shot, not so hid a thing, but it may be revealed by time, only the heart of
man is unsearchable, so that in twenty years a man shall not find the depth
thereof. Wherefore in mine opynion he was a wise man, that wylled us to eat
many bushels of salt, with him who^ we meaned to make our freende, whereby he
meant nothing else, but by long continuance, to try whether he whom we love,
be meet to be our freende or not. O how many have thought to have had true
friends, but have been much deceived, whereof you shall in the book following see
many examples. As of Thessalus and Eurialuss, Cocalus and Minos, Mirtilus and
Oenomaus, and such like. There is no poison, to the poison of a Serpente, no
strength, to the strength of Gunpouder, no sting, to the sting of the Aspe, no
malice, to the malice of a woman, nor no evil, to the evil of a feigned
freende, and a dissembling lover. It is a great deal better, no doubt, to have
an open ennimie then a counterfeyte friend: For of the one we may take heed,
but of the other it is not possible to beware. A true friend then must need be
so much worth, as nothing may be more. For who is not well pleased, to hear of
Orestes and Pilades, Theseus and Perithous, Achilles and Patroclus, Nisus and
Eurialus, Castor and Pollux, Damon and Pithias, Achates and Aeneas, Alexander
and Ephestio, Celius and Petronius, C. Lelius and Scipio Affricanus, Darius and
Megabisus, and a great number of payres of friends mo, which I could rehearse,
but that it needs not? All which each for other refused no death nor torment.
Wherefore even now also their renown is fresh, and they be extolled above the
skies, neither shall there be any so ungrateful posterity, which shall forget
their passing amity. Contrariwise, if we consider the horrible effects of
enmity and hatred in Atreus and Thiestes, Etheocles and Polinices, with such
other, which for brevity I leave out, I think there will be no man so rude,
which will not detest. But what mean I to entreat of friendship, of which so
many excellent men have written before in such sort: that I shall rather
hereby bewray the barennesse of my sclender wit, then do any thing thereto
worthy praise. And the more for that Fauorinus in Aul. Gellius says, it is
better to disprayse earnestly, then to praise coldly. I will therefore leave to
speak of this any more, and will come to the other cause, which no man can well
perceive, but he that is married. For my part, if you will bear with mine
unexperienced judgment, I am well pleased, that Ovid took it in very evil
part to bear S. Lukes helmet, seeing that many men even now a days, be scant
well content to wear that loathsome liuerie. Of this I am well assured that
Propertius could be content that his friend should be partaker of all the
goods he had, and what soever else was in his power, but as touching his wife he
could spare Jupiter no part of her. He writes thus. Te socium lecti, te
corporis esse licebit,
Te dominum admitto rebus amice meis.
Lecto te solum, lecto te deprecor vno,
Riualem possum non ego far Iouem.
But of these causes enough. I will therefore omit, to blot my paper with any
more words concerning these matters, and will tell you what Ovid was, and why
he called this work Ibis, and wrote it in so hard a style. He was a gentleman
of a good house, borne at Sulmo, who rather to please his father, then for any
love he bare thereunto, studied the law. But after his decease, he returned to
his old study of Poetry again, wherein he profyted so much, that except
Virgill, I dare call him peerless. He was fifty years in prosperity, and
good credyte with Augustus, but was afterward banyshed into Pontus, where he
lived eight years, and then dyed, and was buried in Dorbite, a City of
Hellespont. The cause of his banishment is uncertain, but most men think, and
I am of that opinion also, that it was for using too familiarly Iulia, Augustus
his daughter, who of her self too much inclined to lasciuiousnes, was the more
incensed thereto by him, unto who^ he wrote many wanton Elegies, under the name
of Corinna, as Sidonius plainly affirms.

Et te carmina per libidinosa
notum, Naso tener, tonosque missum,
Quondam Cesareae minis puellae
falso nomine subditum Corinnae.
In his banyshmente he wrote diverse books, and among other, this against an
untrue freende, and calls it Ibis, thereby to declare, that there is no
valor nor hansomnes in him, nor any thing worthy to be accepted. For Ibis is
a bird of Egypt, the fylthiest that we read of, of it you may find more in
Pliny. He is obscure, and his verses of purpose imperfect, for that he
imitateth Callimachus, who in like style, wrote against his own scholar
Appollonius Rhodius, which wrote the voyage of the Argonants, and calls him
by the same name of Ibis also.

Thus much I thought good to note in the Preface, because I would not trouble so
little a book with an other argument. Take it (courteous Reader) and accept it
in good part, and think that it comes from one, who has enough if he
please thee.

Fare well.
Ovid his inuectiue against IBYS.
WHole fifty years be gone and past
since I a live have been:
Yet of my Muse ere now there has
no armed verse be seen.
Among so many thousand works,
yet extant to be had:
No bloody letter can be red,
that ever Naso made.
Nor yet no man (set me a side)
my books have caused to smart: He means his books of the art of love for
the which he was banis^ed.

Sith I my self am cast away,
by my invented art.
One man there is that will not let,
(this is a grievous pain)
The title of my curteyse verse,
for ever to remain.
What so he be, as yet his name,
shall not by me be wrayde:
Who me constraynes to take in hand,
No weapens erst assayde.
He will not let me scent almost,
unto the frosen Zone:
In banishment take restles ease,
and there to ly unknown.
That cruel man does vex my wounds,
that seek for needful rest:
And sclanderous words does utter often,
Where great resort is pressed.
He suff'reth not my cuppled mate,
by lasting league of bed:
To wayle her wretched husbands corse,
not much unlike the dead.
And while some part of beaten bark,
I hard do hold in hand:
He strives to have the only bowrde,
Whereon I swim to land.
And he who should of right put out,
each suddayne kyndled flame:
Too violent does seek to get,
his pray amyd the same.
He labors that my wandering age,
due noryshment should lack:
Oh how much worthyer to bear,
our myschefes on his back.
The Gods do grant me better luck,
of whom he'is great'st to me:
That will not see my travel want, Augustus the emperor who banyshed him.

oppressed with pennury.
To him therefore deserved thanks,
as long as I shall live:
For his so kind and curtyse heart,
I evermore will give.
Let Pontus hereof record bear,
and he perhaps will make:
That I shall of some nearer ceast,
hereof a witness take.
But unto thee thou cruel man,
that treadest on me so:
Wherein I may (alas therefore)
I will be still thy foe.
Yea moisture shall surcease to be,
contrary to the dry:
And with the Moon bright Phoebus beams,
shall joined be on hye.
And one part of the heavens shall
send East and West wyndes forth:
And eke the moysting Sotherne wind
shall blow out of the North.
And new agreement shall be made, Etheocles and Polinices Oedipus his sons king
of Thebes

in brothers smooke again:
Which erst in blasing slames of fire,
old rancor rent in twain.
After the death of Oedipus King of Thebes, his two sons Etheocles and
Polinices, did strive whether of them should succeed their father in the
Kyngedome, until their agreement was made of this condition: that they
should rule by course, one year the one, the next year the other. Etheocles
reigned syrst. But when his year was expired, he would not give place to his
brother. Polinices, therefore by the help of Adrastus, his father in law, king
of the Argiues gathered an Army, came to Thebes, and fought with his brother,
in which unfortunate battle, both parties were almost slain: so that yet
thereof remains a Proverb. Adrastia nemesis.
And the two brothers fyghting hand to hand were slain, and being put in one
Fire to be burned, the flame parted in twain, so that their malice seemed not
to be ended by Death.

The spring with Autumn shall be one,
with Winter Summers guyse:
And in one Country shall the Sun,
at once both set and rise.
Ere I will concord have with thee,
sith thou did break the band:
And set these weapons clean a side,
that I have taken in hand.
Then that my grefe by any space,
may ever ended be:
Or time and hour may assuage,
my hatred toward thee.
This peace shall be betwyxt us still,
as long as life shall last:
Betwyxt the Wolse and sely sheep,
that commonly has past.
My first battayles I mind to wage, Iambus is the rayli^g verse, devised by
Archylocus.

in style as I begone:
Although like wars in style not like,
are wonted to be done.
And as the pleased soldiars spear,
that does fearse Veles hight:
Does first styck fast in sandy ground,
as cunning taught him right.
So I with sharp and poynted dart,
yet will not shoute at thee:
Ne shall my spear forthwith confound,
thy hated head of me.
Velites were a kind of light harneshed Soldiars, who used great spears, and
for practice, they would toss them before the skyrmish, and if need were, even
then also, use them against the enemy.

And in this book ne name nor deed,
of thee I mind to said:
And what thou art a little while,
I give the leave to feign.
But if as now, hereafter thou
do still, Iambus good:
And fytte for me, shall weapons give,
sprent with Lycambus blood.
Lycambus promised to give his daughter Niobole, in marriage to the Poet
Archilocus, but afterward being bestly ^^ued with her beawry, would not perform
his promise. With which injury Archilocus moved so sharply, inuayed against
them both, that for shame they hanged them selves. Neither lived he long after
for by the friends of Lycambes, he him self was also slain.

But now as erst Calimachus,
did enmy Ibis curse:
By that same means both thee and thine
I earnestly do curse.
The latin word that I have translated to curse, is deuouere, which rather
signifies to vow. In the old time among the Inchanters, there were two kinds
thereof in greatest honor. By the one whereof, the gods, defenders of any city
(as every city had some) were called out by the victorious enemy, least he
should seem to carry the Gods captive.

The other whereby either cities, countries, or men were vowed to the wrath of
the Gods, for others health. As Decii father and son, Codrus Athenian king,
Sceuola in the tents of Porsena, and a thousand other.

And as he did, so I my verse,
will wrap in stories blind:
Although my self am never wont,
to imitate this kind.
His trade obscure I following:
gainste Ibys will inuay,
My customs old and judgment to,
the while will cast away.
And for because yet what thou art,
(to them that ask the same)
I tell it not, thou also shall
till then have Ibys name.
And as my verses shall be stufte,
with some obscurytie:
So let the course of all thy life,
be fyll'd with myserye.
Of him that luckyest is to guess,
the same be done to thee:
One day wherein thou tokest life,
and first of Ianuarye.
Among the old Romans, there were two times wherein it was most diligently
observed, that no unlucky word should be uttered. The one private, which was each
man's birth day to him self. The other publyck, which was the first of
January, for all. On either of these they badde an opinion, that what soever
was said, good or bad, it should come to pass.

The gods that rule both sea and land, Here beginnethe Ouyd his curses by
invocation of all the whole rabble of the Gods. The Poles are two, North, and
South.

and better kyngedomes guide:
In equal power with Jupiter,
between the Poles so wide.
The Gods of the sea are Neptunus, Castor, Pollux, and a great sort else, of
whom because Textor in his Officine, has written at large, I will omyt to
speak.

The Gods of heaven in greatest honor, who also drynk of the sweet wine
Nector, are Jupiter, Mars, Liber, Apollo, Mercury, Vulcan, Aeolus. etc. The
Goddesses Juno, Mynerua, Diana, Vesta, Ceres, Venus. Vide Textorem in capite de
Diis. Tomo secundo.

Oh hitherto I pray you all,
be pressed t'apply your mind:
And grant that these my hearty hestes, Tellus the earth, had a Godhed,
therefore she was called upon in making truces. Homer Plinius. So had Either
also, the Air.

The Sun and Stars also, not without sacrifyces appointed to them.

Nox, the night was deified and had her ministers Fumanus and Vmbre



desired weight may find.
And thou thy self (oh Tellus fair)
thou Sea with all thy waves:
And Air highest of the rest,
grant what my prayers craves.
And eke you Stars and Phoebus to,
with beams compassed bright:
Thou Moon also who never do,
as ere show forth thy light.
Thou Night who by thy darkness art,
of many honored:
And eke you Dames who with three hands,
do spinne the certain thread.
There be three Ladies of desteny, daughters of Demogorgon, and according to
Tully of Herebus and Nox. Clotho, Lachesis, Atropos. who have al men's lives
wound, as it were on a distaffe, ready to be sponne. Clotho caryeth the
distaffe, Lachesis draws out the thread, and Atropos breaks it of: and then
the life of him that is on their Spindels of necessity must end.

Thou River to that through hell,
with fearful noise do run:
By whom who so does make a vow,
the same must needs be done.
Victoria daughter of Acheron and Stix, Styx a Floode in Hell.
which did Jupiter very good service in the wars that he had against the
Giants, obtained of Jupiter, that all the Gods should swear by her mother, and
if any that had so sworn, had falsified his oath, Why the Gods do swear by
Styx, the Floode in Hell.
that he might not drink of the sweet wine Nectar by the space of nine days
after, which thing Jupiter granted her with all his heart: And for this cause
the Gods do swear by nothing else save by Stix, she was the daughter of
Acheron, and Terra.

Also ye Furies three that sit,
before the gares of Hell:
Whose riueled hairs are fearful snakes
as ancient Poets tell.
In Hell be three Furies, Furix infernales.
Alecto, Siphone, Megara, daughters of Acheron and Nox, and sisters by the
mothers side to the three Parcae, their qualities are in many words described
by the Poets every where.

Ye basest Gods, Fauni, Satyrs,
and those that Lares hight:
Ye Floods and Nymphs, and half Gods to
not yet of perfect might.
Fauni, Satiri, Fauni. Satyri.
be Gods that live in the woods, half men and half beasts, and if you list
not believe me, ask S. Benedict who talked with one of them a great while.

Lar was a bewtifull Nymph, Lares children of Mercury and Lar.
daughter of Almon, who perceiving the love of Jupiter and Iuturna, sister to
Turnus, told Juno thereof, wherefore Jupiter being angry, commanded Mercury to
carye her to Hell, who by the way being somewhat bold with her, got her with
child, whereof came two pretty children called Lares, who in times past were
supposed to be the household Gods.

Floodes were Gods, Floudes were gods Nilus. Inachus. Nimphe.
as Nylus in Egypt, and Inachus, Ios Father, some were Nymphs, and some were
half Gods, who yet had not deserved Heaven: yet Jupiter cared for them, as
in his irefull Oration that he makes in the counsel house in Heaven against
Lychaon may appear. Read the first book of Ovid Metamorph.

And last ye Gods both old and new,
that since great Chaos were:
Unto our time, all you I pray,
my humble prayers hear.
New Gods were lately canonised, New gods
as Caesar's, both Julius and Augustus. Of the manner of Deifying: Read Herodian
in the latter end of his Seuerus, and Marco in his.1. libro de some. Scipionis.

That whyl'st I an unfaithful man,
by verse do cause to smart:
And raging anger takes in hand,
with grief to play his part.
Let every one of you by course,
give grant to my request:
And let no part of prayers mine,
without effect take rest.
Let all that I have prayed be done,
and that Neptune may guess:
These not my words, but his who was
son to Pasiphaes.
Theseus son of Neptune and AEthra, Neptune. Thescus. Aethra. Hippolitus
giving too light credit to his wife Phedra that falsely accused his son
Hippolytus, craved of Neptune (or as some say of his father who was made a God
of the Sea) that he would destroy him, which in deed he did: for as once
Hippolytus came in his Charyote by the Sea side, Neptune sent out some of his
Phocasis, which so frayed the young man's Horses, that they ran out of their
way, and at length tare him in pieces. You shall read more of him in
Hippolytus.

And all the pains that I do bear,
let them to him betide:
And that he may more wretchedness,
then erst I did abide.
And that my verses which do banne,
his counterfeyted name:
Do no less harm, or less may move,
the Gods about the same.
I him do curse, who knows well,
what means Ibis name:
Whose conscience knows well that he
deserved has the same.
Without delay I ready pressed,
my causes will pursue:
Who so art at my sacrifice,
do it with silence view. Signs of euillucke

Who so art at this sacrifice,
do dolefully lament:
And go to Ibis, all thy cheeks,
with moisty tears besprent.
With all ill luck that may befall,
with left feet meet him sone:
Let vestures black your bodies hide,
as is of mourners done.
And thou why do thou doubt to take
thy deathlike bands of force?
Now stands the Altar (as thou see)
prepared for thy corse.
Let no delays my banning stay, He curses him from all that is either
pleasant, or profitable or nedeful

pomp is prepared for thee:
A cursed sacrifice thy throat,
unto my knives apply.
Let the earth deny thee fruit, and stream
his waters hold from thee:
Let every wind deny fit blastes,
for thy commodity.
Let not the Sun shine bright on thee,
nor glistering Moon by night:
And of thy eyes let glimsing stars,
forsake the wished sight.
Let not the fire grant thee his heat,
nor Air humiditie:
Let neither earth nor yet the Sea,
free passage grant to thee.
That banyshed and poor thou may,
strange houses seek in vain:
That craving to, with trembling voice
small alms may obtain.
That neither sownd of body, nor
thy mind in perfect plight:
This night be worse then passed day,
and next day than this night.
That thou may still be pitiful,
but pitied of none:
And that no man nor woman may,
for thy mischaunces moan.
And that thy tears may hatred move,
thou judged worthy to:
On who^ (though many mischefes light)
yet worthy many mo.
And that, that seldom comes to pass.
I wish thy whole estate:
All wonted favor for to want,
and be replete with hate.
And that thou want no cause of death,
but may be void of power:
And that thy life be forste to fly,
of death the wished hour.
And that thy soul with troubles tossed,
constrained still to stay:
May leave thy weary limbs at length,
tormented with delay.
It shall be so, and Phoebus to,
that this in force should stand:
Did give a sign, a dolfull bird,
did fly on my left hand.
Birds that were thought to import any evil luck, were an Owl, a night
Crow, a Raven, with diverse other.

And sure I think that what I wish,
the Gods on high shall move: Birds that were thought unlucky.

I will (oh wretch) be fed with Hope,
till death thee hence remove.
Hereof shall that day make an end,
that shall thee take from me:
Hereof shall that day make an end,
that comes to late to me.
But first this soul so many times,
sore spyted at of thee:
That day shall carry quite away,
that comes to late to me.
Then this grief may by any space,
of time be wipte away:
Or that either day or hour shall,
my rooted hate alay.
While Thracians shall with arrows war, Thraces. Iaziges. Ganges. Ister.

Iaziges with bow:
While Ganges shall be luke warm felt,
And Ister cold as snow.
Thraces and Scithi, were counted in times past as one, and they used one
tongue. In their wars more then any other people they used Bows and
Arrows, because they were inverted among them by Scythus Jupiter his son, of
whom Scithia, was called.

Iaziges bordered hard on them, and practiced the bow also.

Ganges a River that runs from among the Hills of Scythia, (for of the head
thereof I read no certeyntie) it is of such bredthe that where it is
narrowest it is eight miles broad, and commonly an hundred. Where it is
shallowest it is twenty yardes deep, it is lewke warm, because it runs
out of the East.

Ister, a great River runs out of the Hill Arnoba in Germany, it is also
called Danubius, it runs by many countries. When it comes into Illyria, it
receives into it.lx. other Ryuers, and falls into the North seas in seven
parts, and therefore is very cold.

While mountains hye great trees shall bear
in fields while grass shall grow:
While Tibris shall through Tuscan land
With any water flow.
Tibris a flood in Italy, so called of Tiberius drowned therein, called in
times past Albula, it runs through Hethruria.

I will make wars with thee, not death
shall bring my wrath to end:
But will give weapons to my ghostes
against thy sprytes to send.
And then also when into air, Read the syxt book of Virgyl, his aeneidos, of
the state of men's souls, after death

my self shall turned be:
My lyuelesse shadow shall with hate,
pursue the gostes of thee.
Then also myndefull of thy deeds,
I will thy shadows chase:
And I a bony form wylbe,
with thee in every place.
Whether I by years consumed long,
(which I would not) shall dye:
Or else shall be by force of hand,
resolved by and by.
Or whether tossed amyd the Seas,
shall suffer wrack with grief:
And Fyshes strange upon my corse,
shall seek to find relief.
Or whether that the Ravens shall,
make of my flesh their food:
Or greedy Wolves shall have their lyps
embrewed with my blood.
Or whether some may well vouchsafe,
me under ground to lay:
Or cast me ints flaming Fire,
When life is gone away.
What so I be, I mind to come
from Hell, that ugly place:
And then with cold (revenging) hands,
will scratch thee by the lace.
Thou waking shall me see, with gostes,
my self I Will secret keep:
Then will I seem t'appeare too thee,
to wake thee from thy sleep.
And last what so thou do, before
thy face and eyes, I Will flee:
And will complain, so that no where,
in quiet thou shall be.
The cruel strokes wherewith I will
thee smite, shall sownd again:
And hellish brandes before thee still,
shall smoke unto thy pain.
Alive the furyes shall the vex,
and after Death also:
So that thy life shall shorter be,
then either pain or woe.
To thee shall nether Death rytes hap,
nor friendly tears befall:
Thy body shall be cast abroad,
bewailed naught at all.
It was in old time counted a great mishap to dye in a strange Country where
none of their kynne might close the eyes of the dead, or bewail their corse.
As may appear in the first Epistle of Ovid, and also in many other places.

Thou shall with cruel hang man's hand
be drawn to all men's joy:
The hook hard fastened to thy bones,
unto thy more annoye.
Also the fire that all consumes,
from thee alone shall fly:
The just earth shall not grant thy corpse,
a place wherein to lie.
The Ravens shall with crooked beak,
and talans draw a part
Thy entrayles, and the greedy Dogs,
devour thy faithless heart.
And though this praise do make thee proud,
that Wolves insatiate:
About thy caryan corpse shall have,
continual debate.
In places too, thou shall be cast,
far from the feeldes of joy:
There shall thou be where th'urtful sort
abides in annoy.
In Hell be three diverse places, Three places in hell.
the first conteyneth Infantes, those that were put to Death by false
accusation, those that killed them selves, such as dyed for love, valyant
Warryours and other, and this place is in the entrance as it were of Hell, as
soon as a man has passed the River STYX. When a man has passed this
place, there be two ways, the one leads to the happy feeldes, called Campi
Elysii. The other to the great and terryble tower wherein the wicked men be
tormented, some of whose punishments Ouyd prosequuteth as follows.

If you list to read more at large hereof, see the sixth book of Virgyl his
Aeneidos and Homer in the leuenth of his Odisse.

There Sisiphus does roll the stone,
and Phlegias is there Phlegias.

Fast tide unto a turning Wheel:
that does his members tear.
Sisiphus son of Eolus for troublyng those that inhabited Istuus, Sisiphus.
was thruste into Hell, where he is punished with rolling a stone to the top of
a hyl, which as soon as he has laid there, tumbleth down back, and he
runs after it to fetch it again, and this does he continually.

Phlegias for despising the Gods, was tied to a Wheel in Hell. See the sixte
of Virgyl his Aeneidos.

Some will understand this to be spoof Ixion, Ixion.
who desired to lie with Juno, or as Homer says, with Latona. Which thing
Jupiter perceuing, turned a clowd into the likeness of her, with which Ixion
accompaning, engendered thereof the Giaunt like Centaures, for which sin,
Jupiter thrust him into Hell. His punishment was as says Virgyl, in the sixte
of Aenedos, in this sort.

Lapithe, Lapithe. Ixion and Perithous
Ixion and Perithous are set at a gorgeouse table, furnished with all kind
of delicate meats, but over their heads hanges a great stone, ready to fall
upon them, and before them, sittes one of the furyes that will not permit them
to eat any byt of the good meat, so that they be in double danger as well of
the fall of the great stone, as also of famyshment, for lack of food.

There Belides on shoulders bear, Belus.

still waters gushing out:
Who banysht Aegiptus daughters were
a passing bloody route.
Danaus the son of Belus, Danaus. Aegiptus
king of ye up per Egypt, had fyftye daughters, and Aegiptus his brother
fyfty sons. Belus. Danaus Aegiptus.


Aegiptus instantly desired that his sons might mary his brothers daughters,
but Danaus by no means would consent to that, because he hard of the Oracle yt
his son in law should kill him. Upon which occasion, war arose between the
two brothers, and Danaus constrained by flight to seek saftye, sailed into
Greece, where having expelled Gelamor, or as some say, Stelenus, he raygned
fyfty years. Gelamor. Stelenus.


Aegiptus not content that his Brother was thus departed, gathered a great
Army, made his sons Captains thereof, and gave them charge, that they should
never return, except they either had killed Danaus, or married his daughters.
The young men had so good success, that Danaus of force, was constrained to
yield unto them. And in fine, concluded the marriage, Belides killed their
husbands.
and straightly commaundinge each one of his daughters the first night to kill
their husbands, which thing saving Hipermnestra, they all accomplished.
Hipermnestra. Linus.


She saved Linus of who^ after her father was slain. She alone among fifty was
found rather to have preferred ye rights of Matrimony and love to her husband,
than the cruel commandment of her unreasonable Father. But the rest of her
sisters, for the accomplishing of this enterprise, are feigned of Poets to carry
water in bottomless Tubbes, until they have filled a Tun without a bottom
also.

There Pelops father, Tantalus,
does Apples want hard by:
And still amidde the watery flood,
for thirst is like to die.
Tantalus, Jupiter his Son, Tantalus.
by the Nimphe Plote, king of Paphlagonia, he had wars with Tros for the
taking away of Ganimedes and being vouchsaued at the table of Gods, Ganimedes
taken away.
hearing their counsel, and detectinge the same, was therefore set in a river
in Hell up to the chinne, over whose head to his upper lip hanged fair ripe
Apples, but when he catches at them, (as Homer says) a wind comes and
blows them away: and if he stoop to drink, the water of it self declyneth,
so that in great plenty both of fruit and water, he is ready to dye for
hunger and thirste.

And he whose head is from his feet,
nine acres breadth away:
Who gives his bowels still unto
the Vulture for her pray. Titius.

Titius the son of Jupiter and Helara, he was counted the son of Terra, the
Earth, because he was brought up by his mother in a cave for fear of Juno for
rauishing Latoan, was tied in Hell to a Rock, where two Ravens come and feed
upon his entrayles. Homer.11. Odiss. Virgil 6. lib. AEneid.

Here shall one of the Furies cut
with cruel whips thy sides:
And shall constrayne thee to confess,
the sum of thy misdedes.
The second shall thy toern limbs
commit to serpents ire:
The third thy face bemoyst with tears
shall cast into the fire.
Thy sinful ghost a thousand ways,
shall there be put to pain:
And AEacus to punish thee,
shall search his skillful brain.
Minos, AEacus, Iudices infernales
and Rhadamanthus the sons of Jupiter and Europa, for their upright and just
dealing on earth, after their death, were feigned by Poets to be Judges in Hell.

The pinching pains of ancient men,
he shall transfer to thee:
To those that long have lyu'd in pain,
thou cause of ease shall be.
Thou Sisiphe have one He alludeth to the stories before of Sisiphus, Tantalus,
Phlegias. Titius.
to whom
thy stone commit thou may,
New members shall turn round on wheles
that run about so fast.
In vain at fruit and water to
this man shall seek relief:
This man shall feed the greedy birds,
with everlasting grief.
No other death shall end the pains,
that this death bringes to thee:
Unto the griefs that thou shall have,
no hour last shall be.
Of them I Will tell a few, Ida.
as if
the leaves of Ida wood,
A man would seek to count, or tell
the drops of Aphrike flood.
Ida was a wood of Crete, whereof the Troyans who had their original in Crete
called a wood of Phrigia hard beside Troy, Ida, In it be Pine trees that
never decay nor wax rotten. Theophrastus.

I cannot tell how many flowers, Hybla.

on Hybla hill there be:
Nor yet what store of Saffron grows, Crocus.

in land of Cicily.
Hybla a city of Cicilia so named of a king called Hyblo, who betraying the
same to the Megarenses, brought to pass that they builded it again, and called
it Megara. Strabo writes that the Dorienses a people of Greece, builded it, and
that the old name thereof remained still, for the goodness of the Honey that was
made there, and thereof called Mel Hybleum. Not far from that town there is
an hill also called Hybla, whereupon grows much Time, and many other flowers,
whereof the Bees feeding, do make very good Honey.

Crocus a young man loved Smilax well, Crocus and Smilax.
he was turned into a flower of his own name, we call it Saffron, and she into
Ivy, this flower for the sweet odor thereof, is much praised of Homer, with
Lotus and Hiacynthus: there grows great store thereof upon the hill Coriciu^
in Cicily.

Nor when the Winter waxes cold,
with boisterous Northern blast:
What store of Hayle on Athos falls, Athos.

till it be white at last.
Athos is a marvelous high hill, belonging both to Thracia and Macedonia, it
was made plain by Xerxes king of the Persians, when he brought his army into
Greece, the space of a thousand, five hundred pace, of our measure a mile and a
half, on the top thereof stands a city called Acron. Acron.


Nor by my voice all the mishaps,
most like to fall on thee:
Can counted be though thou would give
a thousand tongues to me.
So many and so great mishaps,
shall (wretch) to thee be sent:
As I my self I think may be,
constrained to lament.
Those tears should make me evermore,
a happy man to be:
That weeping should more pleasant be,
than laughter unto me.
Thou were unhappy at thy birth,
(the Gods would have it so:)
No star did seem to favor thee,
that might abate thy woe.
Then Venus did not shine on thee, Venus. Jupiter. Iuna. Sol. Mercury.

nor Jove so full of grace:
And neither Moon, nor Sun for thee,
had favorable place.
Nor he who^ Maia bright brought forth
to Jupiter the great:
For thee in Skies his star did place,
in any prosperous seat.
The cruel stars of frowninge Mars, Mars.

have all the rule of thee:
And Saturn old that nothing have, Saturn.

to promise luckely.
The Poet here proves that at his birth, by celestial influence, he was
unhappy: but because that the Astrologians do in many words declare the
properties of the Planets, according to their ou-ses, conjunctions, aspects.
etc. I will talk thereof nothing at all, saving of that which in this place of
necessity must be touched. There be vii. Planets, they be placed in order from
the lowest to the highest, thus. Luna, Mercury, Venns, Sol, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, whereof two, Jupiter and Venus be always very good, and Saturn and
Mars always very evil, the other iii. Sol, Mercury, Luna, indifferent, that
is, if either by conjunction, or aspect they behold any good or badde Planet,
they increase his power and property.

Thy birth day to, that thou might see
nothing but heaviness:
Was very black for to behold,
covered with cloudines.
Which thing was counted a very unlucky
sign.
This day in in the Calendar,
that men do Allia call: Allia.

In which also was Ibis borne,
a common ill to all.
Lucius Aquinius a Soothsayer told the Senate or counsel of Rome, that Quint.
Sulpibius ready to fight with the Frenchmen did sacrifyce to the Gods at Allia a
flood in Italy, about.xv. miles from the city of Rome, in which battayl the
estate of the Romans were brought to so low an ebb, that it was thought
they should never have recovered it again. This battayl was fought the.xvi.
day of July, and for that cause the Senate decreed, that no supplications on
that day should be made to the Gods, Dies alliensis.
and called it Aliensis dies, or Postriduanus: on which day Ovid fayneth Ibis
to be borne.

Whom as soon as his mother vile,
out of her womb had cast:
Himself found in Ciniphia,
with stinking body plast.
There may be two reasons alleged, why the Poet says that Ibis was borne in
Ciniphia which is a country in Libia. Ciniphia.
The one because there be good store of Gotes, whose savor is very grievous to
the nose, that he might tax him of vnsauourinesse, which exposicion his verse
seems to approve. The other for that the scantnes of water in Africa is such,
that diverse kind of beasts do come to drink of the floode Cinips, or as
some call it Ciniphus, where they of sundry natures engendring togethers,
procreate strange monsters, that he might make him a monster also.

The Owls that flies but by night,
against him right took place:
And uttered with her fatal mouth.
unlucky cries apace. Eumenides, the Furyes of whom we spoke before.

Him forthwith washed Th'eumenides,
with water full of mudde:
Whereas it came right black, from out
the foordes of Styx his flood.
Those hellish Furies did anoint.
his heart with bitter gall:
Which done, their hands embru'd with blood
three times they clapped all.
These done, they powered bitches milk,
Into his childsh throat:
This was the meat that first of all,
In Infancy he got.
Whereof, he whelpe of such a dame
does all his fiercenes gain:
And barketh forth in every place,
his dogged words amayne.
With clothes in color Iron like,
his members have they clad:
That from some fire of cursed corpse,
they lately taken had.
The colors of Hell be like the rust of Iron, Color insernalis.
so is Charon his Boat, that is the Fery man over Styx into Hell.

The cloth that was taken from an evil man's corse, was counted unfortunate.

And lest that on the ground too bare,
his head should lie alone
Not boren up, there under they
do lay a hard Flint stone.
And then they ready to depart,
do make amid the place:
A fire of green wood, which they put
unto his nose and face.
A fire of green wood is noyfull, because it makes much smoke.

As soon as he did feel the smoke,
he began aloude to cry:
To who^ then forthwith thus did speak,
one of the sisters three.
We move to thee these weeping weals
for ever to endure:
Which always shall for cause enough
fall from thee, be thou sure.
Thus did she say, and Clotho bad,
her promise firm to stand:
And forthwith span a cole black thread,
with her unlucky hand.
And for because she list not tell
long destenies before:
Of all thy facts (quoth she) there shall,
a Prophet tell thee more.
That Prophet sure am I, of me
thou shall thy mischiefs know:
So that the Gods some of their skyll
would on my words bestow.
God grant the things I wish to thee,
may to my verse agree:
Which thou amid thy dolor may,
approve right true to be.
And that without examples old,
thou have not thine annoy:
God grant thy mischiefs be no less,
then those that hapt to Troy. Troy.

How cruelly Troy after.r. years war was destroyed, each man does know.
And that the occasion of the war was for Helena, wife of Menelaus king of
Sparta, daughter of Jupiter and Leda, sister to Castor and Pollux, and
Clitemnestra wife of Agamemnon, general of ye Greeks army at Troy, and king of
Micene, whom Jupiter in the likeness of a Swan, begot.

And in thy thigh as great a wound,
with poisoned shatte may have:
As Peace son, t'whom Hercules
his bow and arrows gave.
Philoctetes Peace son, Philoctetes.
companion of Hercules, enjoyed his bow and arrows after his death, which
were given him, partly for that he made the fire wherein Hercules was burned,
partly that he should never disclose the place where he was buried: but being
afterward constrained to manifest the same, Herculis sagittae.
as he was coming to Troy in the company of Ulysses with Hercules arrows
(without which Troy might not be taken) was therefore wonnded in the thigh with
one of the arrows empoysoned with the blood of Hydra, of which kind were two
in Hercules quiver, the grief whereof, drove him into such a madness, that the
Greeks of force were constrained to leave him in Beumos, yet some say that he
came to Troy, and was wounded in his return, but Homer and our Ovid, in the
13. of Met. are of contrary opinion.

And greu'd no less than he that sucked,
a Heart in time tofore:
Who armed, with unarmed hand
was wounded very sore.
Telephus son of Hercules and Auge daughter of Aleus, Telephus.
being found among the busshes, was nourished by a Heart. He was afterward
given by a certain shepherd to Corithus king of Thessalia, Corithus.
but when he had learned that his mother was banyshed the country by her
father for committing adultery with Hercules, he came into Misia, where
findinge his mother married to Theutras king of that country, and the king
without heir, Theutras.
him self was appointed successor in the kingdom after the decease of Theutras,
where he raygned when the Greeks landed in Misia, being by tempest driven out of
their way to Troy, with whom also for molesting his country, he fought a
valiant battle, wherein he was wounded by Achilles, who had but his spear,
Achylles.
yet he constrained them to retire into Greece, but afterward being certified by
the oracle, that he might not be healed, except he were wounded in the same
place again by Achylles, he sailed into Greece, and promised the Greeks that if
Achilles would heal him, that he would conduct them to Troy, and let them have
prouysion also for their army out of Mysia, which thing was done.

Or he that headlong fell from horse,
in countries strange to ground:
Whom comely personage almost,
did viterly confound.
Pretus, Pretus. Stenobea. Bellerophon.
Abas his son, king of the Argiues, married Stenobia, or as some say Antia,
daughter of Iobas king of Licia, had in his court a very beautiful young man
named Bellerophon, who^ the queen loved more than reason would permit, and
many ways attempted to have him lie with her, but when by no means she could
bring that to pass, she turned her hot love into extreme hate, and
complained to her husband that he would have ravished her. Pretus herewith
was much moved, yet would he not kill him in his house, but sent him with
letters to Iobas his father in law, Iohas.
wherein he desired that the bearer by one means or other should be flayne.
When he came thither he was well entertained, and had colorable good cheer
store. But in the end under a cloak of an honorable enterprise the king sent
him to destroy a Chimer, that molested the Licians, Chimera.
to the intent that he might there be slain, but he conquered the beast, and
returned victorious. After this he was sent to subdue a cruel kind of people
called Solimi, Solimi.
which he did. To be short, after many valiant exploytes, the kings malice
being turned into perfect love, for the virtue he saw in him, and deeming
that to be false which his Son had told him, Achimene.
married his other daughter Achimene unto him. Stenobea hearing hereof hanged
hirselfe. Bellerophon after this, having a mind to see what was in heaven,
because he had Pegasus the winged horse (that was Perseus his before, engendered
of the blood of Medusa, kyld by the said Perseus) he flew a great height, from
whence lokyng down he was so afraid that he fell down and brake his neck,
but his Horse flewe into Heaven, and was placed among the Stars, this the
Poets feign. Read his true history in Strabo.

And may see as Amintors son,
who trembling gropt his way:
With nothing else save with his staff
without the light of day.
Phoenix, Phoenix.
Amintors son, his grandfather was called Ceraphus, and his great
grandfather Ormecius, lay with his fathers Concubine, and being thereof accused
by his stepmother, he fled to Peleus Achilles father, whose companyon he was
always after. He was Achilles master, and went with him to Troy, but in the
end desirous to go into his country Phocis, could not see his people because
he was blind. That some say he was made blind by his sons, seeing they
allege no cause why, seems not very like to be true.

Nor may behold no more then he,
whose daughter did him guide:
Whose wickedness his father, and
his mother both has tried.
He means Oedipus, Oedipus his petigree.
whose unhappy stock because it plays a great part in this Pageant, it shall
not be much amysse, if we fetch his Petigree somewhat far, we will
therefore first begin with Jupiter, who begotte Helene, Hellene Belus, Belus
Abas, Abas Agenor, Agenor Europa Cilix, Bassus, and Cadmus, Cadmus Polidorus,
Polidorus Labdacus, Labdacus Laius, Laius Oedipus of Iocasta. Lains desirous to
know what children he should haueen, quired of the Oracle of Apollo, by who^ he
was certified, ye he should have a son which should put him to death. He
commanded therefore, that all his men children should be slain. Oedipus was
borne, and having put thorough his feet two withies was hanged on a tree,
Polybia.
where he was found by Polybia, a woman, who brought him up to man's state. But
being grieved that he knew not his parents, determined to go to Delphos, to
enquire of them, whether at that time went Laius also to know what was become
of his son. They met together in Phocis, Laius slain.
and stryuing for the way, Laius was slain by Oedipus. After this, he
overcame the monster Sphinx, and attempted the kingdom of Thebes, and married
the queen, by whom he had two sons and two daughters, Etheocles Polinices,
Antigone and Ismena, thus Diodo. Seneca says, that Phorbas a shepeherde found
him hanging by the feet, and gave him to Merope king Polibus wife king of
Corinth, of whom because they wanted heirs, he was brought up as their own
child, but knowi^g after by the Oracle that he should kill his father,
supposinge them to be his true parents, fled from them, thinking by that means
to avoid his desteny, and coming to Thebes, killed his own father hunting in
a forest, and married his mother unwittingly: but when he knew hereof (which
thing he did by the means of the plague that happened to the City of Thebes) he
would have slain himself, but his men would not suffer him, then would he
have cast himself headlong from a rock, but his daughter Antigone who always
waited upon him, would not permit him so to do. When therefore by no means he
could end his wretched life, he scratched out his ewn eyes. Sen. Diodorns
siculus, writes hereof far otherwise.

And that thou may be such as he
who judged the ioconde strife:
Who after in Apollos art,
was famous during life.
Tyresias a Theban, Tyresias.
son of Chyron and Othoriclo, was elected a Judge between Jupiter and Juno,
to determine whether the man or woman was more enclyned to lasciuiousnes, or
most prone to accomplish the lusts of the flesh. He gave sentence of Jupiters
side, and concluded that women were the wantoner. Wherefore Juno moved to anger
put out his eyes, but Jupiter comforted his calamity, and made him a
Soothsayer. He foreshewed the taking of Thebes, and when the City was
overthrown, he was led captyue among the rest, and drinking of the water
of the fountain Tilphusa, in his Journey dyed. Daphnae, alias Sibilla.
His daughter Daphne, after called Sibilla was wise in that art, and wrote
many answers. It is called Apollos art, for that he is the God of those that
foreshew things to come.

And that thou may be such as he
who did command a Dove:
To conduct safe the goodly ship,
Phoenix had three sons Cilix, Phineus.
Phyneus, and Doriclus, Phyneus had two sons by Cleopatra, Orithus and
Crambes. He put out their eyes, for that they were accused of certain misdeeds
by their stepmother, in reuengement whereof, Jupiter made him blind, and sent
the Birds called Harpiae to molest him. Harpiae.
But when he had received hostede and aided the Argonants. They were driven
from him by two young men, Zethus and Calais, the sons of Boreas (the
Northwynde) and Orithia, which could fly, and were also of the fellowship of
the Argonants. They were chased to the Islands then called Plote, Strophades
insulae
after Strophades, because ye young men returned from the chase, being
admonished by Irys, that they should chase Jupiters dogs no further.

For which benefyt, Phyneus gave council to the Argonants, that they should
follow the Dove that Pallas would send the^, lest they run on the rocks called
Saxa cyanea, otherwise Simplegades. But that Phyneus gave them the Dove beesyde
Apollonius Rhodius, none writes.

Or he who lackt his eyes with which
he naughtly gould has kende:
Whom to her son a sacryfyce,
the Mother greu'd did send.
Polymnestor, Polymnestor.
king of Tracia married Ilione daughter of Priamus and Hecuba To him when the
wars of the Greeks and Trojans began, Polidorus
was sent Polidorus Pryams youngest son, and with him a great sum of Goulde,
there to be kept, till the end of the wars, whom while Troy remained in
good estate, Polymnestor kept honorably. But so soon as the fortune of Pryam
and the Troyans decayed, he killed his Clyent, for to enjoy his money, and cast
him into the Sea, whose body after the destruction of Troy, was found on the
shore by Hecuba, Hecuba.
who desembling the death of her son, sent for Polymnestor, persuading him
that she would deliver him an other great sum for the norishment of her child.
He beleuyng her, came into her chamber, where of her and her maidens, his eyes
were pulled out.

Or as Th'etnean shepeherd was,
to whom was prophesied:
By Telemus Eurimous son,
what after should betyde.
Polyphemus was son of Neptune by Thoosa, Poliphemus
he kept sheep about the hill Etna in Cicilia, after he had eaten six of
Ulysses men returninge from Troy, being dronken with wine, had his eye put out
by Ulysses, The whole manner hereof is described at large in the ninth book of
Homer his Odisses.

Or Phyneus his two sons, from whom
who gave to them the same:
He took their eyes, or Thamyras,
or Demodoce of fame.
Orithus and Crambes for hurting I Would daughter of Dardanus, Orithus. Cramhes.
their stepmother, by their father Phineus were made blind Se the story of
Phineus.

Thamyras, Thamiras
son of Philamon and Argiope, as he came from Euritus king of Aethulia a
City of Peloponesus, met with the Muses at Dorion, for boastyng that he could
play better then they, had his eyes put out of them, and his harp taken from
him, his masters name was Linus. Linus. Demodocus.


Demodocus a harper, he had of ye Muses both good and harm, he wanted his eyes
but was a singular Musician: he is much praised of Homer in the.viii. book of
his Odisses. He sange at Alcinous table two songs, one of the adultery of Mars
and Venus, the other of the bringinge of the wooden horse into Troy. Some
think that by him, Homer means himself, and not without cause.

Here must you note that of whatsoever good qualities were in any of these men,
he wysheth nothing to Ibis but their blindness.

Or that some may thy members cut
as did Saturnus old:
Who those parts whereby he was formd
to cut away was bold.
Saturnus son of Coelum and Terra, Saturnus.
cut of his fathers members, but the drops that fell from that g^sh, Terra
received, whereof were engendered the furious Giaunts, and the Nymphs that
Hesiodus in his Theogonia calls Meliae. Of those members cast into the sea,
after they had swame a while and gathered a little foam, was created Venus.

That Neptune in the swelling seas,
no better be to thee:
Then unto him who saw his wife
and brother birds to be.
Ceyx, Ceix.
Lucifers son, married Alcione, Eolus his daughter, who going to Delphos was
drowned. His wife sacryfyced daily to Juno for his safe return. Juno having
pytie of her, for that she lost so much pain, set Irys to Somnus with
commandment that he should tell her of the death of hix husband. Somnus, he
sent Morpheus (one of his three messe^gers) who in likeness of her husband,
appeared to her by night, and certyfyed her of all his state. In the morning
she ryseth and goes to the Sea side, and fynding the body of her dead husband,
would have drowned her self, but she was in the fall turned into a Byrd of her
own name.

Dedalion, Dedalion.
brother to Ceyx, had a very fair daughter, loved of Apollo and Mercury,
her name was Chione, she bare to Apollo Phalamon, (father of Thamiras, of whom
we spoke before) the excellent Musition. To Mercurye, the infamous thief
Antolicus, for comparinge with Diana in bewty, she was slain with her Arrows,
for grefe whereof, her father was turned into a Hawk.

Or else unto the skylfull man,
whom houlding in his hand:
The pieces of his broken bark,
did Ino help to land.
Cadmus builder of Thebes, begat of Harmonia, the daughter of Mars and Venus,
Agaue, Autonoe, Ino, Semele and Polydorus.

Ino, was married to Athanias, Ino. Athanias
who in his fury thinking that his wife and children had been wild beasts,
called for his hu^ting nets to hunt the^. She had by him two sons, Clearchus
and Melicerta, the elder whereof his father catching, swinged about his head
till he had bearen out his brains again the trees, Ino taking her other child
in her arms went to the Sea mynding to cast her self hedlonge thereinto. But
in the mydst of their fall they were made he a god, and she a gods of the
Sea. Ino is called Lencothea, or Matuta, she helped Ulysses, Ulysses.
when Neptunus his heavy friend had broken his ship, and would have drowned
him also if he might. All this dyspleasure grew, for putting out the eye of
Polyphemus, his dearly beloved son.

And that not one alone may know,
this kind of punishment:
God grant thy members may with horse
in pieces all be rent.
Metius Suffetius, Metius Suffetius
a traitor to Tullus Hostilius, making war against the Fidenates, after the
victory gotten, was tied to two chariots, and pluete in pieces. Liuius. li. i.
Neither before nor after was any punished after such sort in Rome.

And that thy pains may be as great
as of Amylcares hand
He felt, the which would have redemde
none of the Romayne band.
Marcus Attilius Regulus, Artilius Regulus.
in the first Carthagynian war, general of the Romayne armies, took Clypea
a great eytie, and.300. other walled towns. The Carthagynians thinking their
success to be so ill for lack of a good and expert captain, sent to
Lacedemon for one, from whence came Xanthius, and overcame him. His army being
so faint for lack of water, and with continual labor that of thyrty thousand
not four thousand would take their weapons and fight for their lives, in which
battle him self was taken prisoner, and after sent to the senate of Rome to
entreat for the redemyng of the prisoners, would by no means condyscend that
one of them should be raunsomed. Him self also returned to cruel punishment
voluntarily, for he had rather suffer any torments, then break his promise made
to his enemy. He was killed, Eubero.
but after what sort it is not well known. Some say that he was constrained to
look upon the Sun with his eyes open and so to dye. And other says that he
was constrained to watch, Tuditaous.
and so for lack of sleep to dye. Other that he was put into a barrel full
of nails and so dyed, which is most like to be true, Sillius.
because his children having the Carthagynian prisoners delivered to them, put
them to death after like sort.

And that no power that heaven holds,
may be to the more aid:
Then Jupiter Herceus altar was,
to Pryam sore afraid.
Priamus, Troyan king, Priamus.
past all hope of safety, fled to the altar of Jupiter Hirceus which was in the
mydst of his palace for succor, where by the cruel hand of pytilesse Pyrrhus
he was slain. Virgill.

Or as king Thessalus from top
of Osla hill was cast:
So thou may from some stony clyfte,
be headlong flong as fast.
Hemon by Chalciope, Thessalus
had alsonne called Thessalus, he was king of Thessalia. He received Eurialus,
one of Coricira, a stranger, and entertained him courteously. But he,
notwithstanding this gentleness, as on a time they walked upon the Hill Ossa
in Thessalia, was by the said Eurialus cast down hedlong, after this be
killed his son Neson, and was him self king of Thessalia. But in the end,
when he could not be purged of this murder, he is reported to have his head
eaten still with the furyes of hell. Which thing Ovid in the next verse
affyrmeth.

Or that thy lyms may feed the snakes,
as did Euryalus, Eurialus

Who did the regal scepter hold,
after king Thessalus.
That water hot powrde on thy head,
may be to thee the cause
Of Shortnyng of thy fatal life,
as it to Mynos was.
Mynos, Minos Dedalus. Cochalus.
having received an injury of Dedalus, for making of the Laberinth, pursued him
with his navy to Cochalus king of Sicilia, to whom Dedalus fled for succor,
whose favor with his ercellent workmanshyp he had thoroughly gotten. As soon as
Mynos was arrived in Sicilia, and began to destroy the cuntrye. Cochalus
required him to common of the matter, showing him good hope that he would
deliver Dedalus. Whereto Mynos agreyng, came to him. Cochalus had provided for
him a bath, in which he kept him so long, that with the vapors of the hot
waters, he was murdered. Whose dead body he delivered to his men, affyrming
that by chance he fell into the warm water and there dyed. thus Diodo.
Eusebius de temp. says, that he was slain of Cochalus daughters by craft.
He was son of Jupiter and Europa, king of Crete, and is one of the three
Indges in hell. But how soever he died the Cretenses so hate the Sicilians,
that which of them soever arriueth at either country, he is sure to be slain.

Or else as wicked Prometheus,
thou may be tied fast:
Unto some hill, upon whose flesh,
the byrds may have repast.
Iapetus begat of Asia Prometheus and Epimethus, Prometheus.
some say, Atlas also, and Argos with the hundred eyes. Prometheus made the
form or picture of a man, and desired much to have life in it. But how he
might bring ye to pass, he knew no way, till Mynerua carried him into heaven,
to show him the commodities thereof, where he espied the charyot of the son,
to which he put his rule, and so brought fire in to earth, wherewith also, he
put life in to his Image. For which deed Jupiter being very angry, commanded
Mercury, some say Vulcane, to tie him to the hill Caucasus, in Assiria, where
an Egle continually eats out his heart.

Or else that being slain thou may
in to the sea be sent:
As Etracydes from Hercules,
the fyftenth by dyssent.
Etracides, Etracides Cleba.
setting much store by Dorus son, Cleba, and giving him what soever he would
have, was for all that slain by him, because the child was desirous to be a
warriar, after his death the lusty yonker gathered an army, and having
atchiued many valiant exployts, he builded Cuma Phrytionia.

Or that as Phillip was, thou may
with cruel sword be slain:
Of himwhome thou in beastly sort,
to love do not dysdayne.
Attalus shamefully abused a yo^ge man called Pansanias, Attalus
who complained there of to Phillippe king of Macedonia, son of Amyntas,
Phillippus.
who did but little regard his complaynt, because Attalus was his systers
son. Pansanias therefore much moved with the kings injustice, turned the
vengance toward him, and slew him. But because this was not king Phillips
lover, it seems the poet means some other. I would therefore take it to be
spoken of Archelaus son of Amyntas also, and brother to Phillip, by an other
woman, who assuredly was slain by one whom be beastly loved, and brutishly
abused, then may you read it thus. thus. Or ye as Archelaus, thou may etc.
Archelaus.


Or that as faythlesse cups to thee
thy seruitures may profer:
As unto him who was the son,
of horned Jupiter.
Iolla, Iolla. Alexander magnus.
son of Antipater, cup bearer to Alexander, son of Phylip and Olimpias,
surnamed the great for his valiance, poisoned his master.

This Alexander, would neades be the son of Jupiter Hammon, whose image was
like a Ram and that for this cause. At what time Bacchus son of Jupiter and
Semele passed through the desartes of Libia, Bacchus.
almost lost for water, Jupiter appeared to him in ye likeness of a Ram, and
betyng the ground with his foot, caused the water to come forth abundantly,
wherefore Bacchus erected a temple to him, and set his Image therein in
likeness of a Ram, Corniger Jupiter.
thereof was he called corniger Jupiter.

That hanging as Acheus did,
thy life thou may not hold,
Who wretched man by cord was tied
in flud that flows with gould.
Acheus, Acbeus.
king of Lydia, compelled his subjects to pay new trybuts, with which things
they moved, made an insurrectio^ against him, Their captain was Attalus.
Attalus.
They took their king, and to put him to more shame for his covetousness, they
hanged him with his head downward in the river Pactolus, which flows with Gold.
why Pactolus flows with gold.
And here it shall nolt be much amiss, to tell how that river became golden.
Bacchus greatly offended with the whole country of Thracia, because the women
had killed Orpheus his minstrell, came into Lidia, where he lost Silenus
being drunken, but he was found by the Lidians, and brought to Midas their
king, who especially honored Bacchus, of who^ he was very courteously
entertained a while, and after restored to Bacchus. For which benefit Bacchus
willed him to ask what he would, and he should have it. Midas desired that
whatsoever he touched with his body might be gold. God Bacchus (for he was
son to Jupiter and Semele) granted him that gladly, and was sorrowful that
he had asked no better thing. He therefore glad of this golden grant, thought
to try whether it were so or not, and taking diverse things in his hand, saw
that all was Gold. Amid this joy, his servants prepared his dinner, he sat
down and thought of nothing but of Gold. He turned trenchers, knives,
spoones, and all into gold. At length he fell to meat, which also as soon as
he touched was gold. He then in danger of famishment, perceived that he had
played the fool, and desired his god to release him of that grant, and he
would ask wiselyer next time. Bacchus was content, and commanded him to go
wash himself in Pactolus, and he should come into his old form again. Which
he did, and for that cause the river ever after flowed with Gold. But after
that he could never abide the city, nor any riches, but lived in the fields,
and was God Pan his companion.

Or that a Tyle upon thy head,
from enmies hand may fall:
As to Achilles neuew, whom
men famous Pirrhus call.
Pirrhus begotten of Pithia, Pirrhus king of Epirus.
daughter of Memnon, and one Alacides, of Achilles blood, befieging Argos,
where Antigonus king of Macedonia was, was killed with a Tyle that a woman
threw. His head was brought to Antigonus, by Alcinous his son, but his body
was honorably buried by the said Antigonus. Plutarch, Trogus, and Cornelius
say, that he was delivered to his own son Belenus, and brought into Epirus,
and there buried. He was surnamed Clacus, for his valiant deeds.

And that thy bones may restless lie,
as Pirrhus were, be tossed
Who long did lie unburied,
about Ambracia cost.
Pirrhus the son of Achilles, Pirrhus son of Achilles.
slain by Orestes, Agamemnons son and Clitemnestras, had his bones strowed
about Ambracia a coast of Epirus. Some will understand it of the other
Pirrhus, of whom I spoke before, and may well to, before he was buried.

Or as king Hieros daughter was,
with darts thou may be slain:
No doubt this deed to Ceres would
he acceptable plain.
Heraclia, daughter of Hiero, Heraclia.
king of Siracuse, in an uproar of the people was slain with her father and her
two daughters, although she fled to the altar of Ceres, for which deed, Ceres
sent a great pestilence among the^. Nereis. Laodamia Gelon.
Other will understand this, of Nereis and Laodamia, only lest of Pirrhus
blood: the elder of which was married to Gelon the kings son of Sicilia, and
had by him a son named Magnates, whom she poisoned, because he would not lie
with her, of which Ovid in the next verse makes mention. The younger in a
tumult of the people (though he fled to the altar of Ceres) was slain by one
Milo, Milo.
which deed the Goddess took so displeasauntly, that she plagued the country
almost to destruction. And he that killed her, the twelfe day after died,
having cut his flesh before with sword and knife, and bruised it with stones,
and tore it with his teeth, and quite ravished of his wits. His meaning
therefore is, that although Ceres was greatly grieved for this fact of Milo, yet
if Ibis should be slain at her altar, she would be well pleased.

Or as the Neuew of the king,
of whom before we spoke:
Thou poison of Cantharides,
of parents hand may take.
Magntees, Nereis son, Magnetes
daughter of Pirrhus by Gelon, poisoned by his mother: as before.

Cantharides, be green worms, Cantharides.
very venomous, commonly used for any kind of poison.

Or that some vile Adulteress may
the name of godly gain:
By killing thae, as she who has,
the traitor Levvcon slain.
Oxilochus king of Pontus, Oxilochus Lewcnus.
had a wife with whom his brother Levvcon committed adultery, who hopinge by
the means of her adulteries to get the king dome, killed his brother, but she
not therewith content, to revenge her husband, slew him, for which deed she
was called godly. Part of this story read in Strabo.

And that into some burning fire,
with thee thy self may cast
Thy dearest things, which end of life,
Sardanapalus past.
Sardanapalus, Sardanapalus.
the last king of the Assirians, the thirteth after Ninus, senne of
Anacindaraxis, (by means of Arbactus. who desired to see him, and found him in
woman's apparel, spinning among his Harlottes) was put to great trouble, and at
length driven to such an extremity, that he was constrained to hide himself,
and finding no safety that way, caused a great fire to be made, into the which
he cast himself and all his precious jewels. Read Iustine.

Or as those were that Ammons church,
to spoil did take in hand:
By violence of Sotherne blastes,
may covered be with sand.
Cambises son of Cirus Emperor of the Medes, Cambises.
desirous to co^quer strange countries, went into Egipte, and sent^ part of
his army to spoil Jupiter Ammons Church, all which were destroyed with a
vehement tempest of Hayle. Iustine. and Herodotus.

And that a heap of ashes may,
thy cursed bones possess:
As it did theirs whom Ochus slew,
by gylefull craftiness.
Ochus who put down the seven wise men, Ochus.
that at one time held the kingdom of the Persians, promised to those that were
partakers of his faction, that he would kill none of them, neither by famine
nor poison. Circumuenting them by this means, he caused a strong tower to be
made, filled it with ashes, over which was a trappe. Into that place he did
receive the^ with a sumptuous feast, in which they drunken with too muchs wine,
fell a sleep, and then the trappe pulled away, they all fell into the ashes,
and were smethered therein. Valerius de crude. This Ochus was after called
Dareus secundus.

As him that reigned in Sicion,
with Dliues fruitful soil:
God grant that cold and hunger to,
Thee of thy life may spoil.
Neocles, king of Sicion, Neocles.
a City in Achaia of Laconia, (so called of a king that raygned there, whose
name was Sicion) for his crueltye was dispessessed of his kingdom, and by
honger and cold const^ayned to end his life.

And that as one Acarnus son,
enclosed for despite:
In boliocks skin, thou may be borne into thine enmies sight.
Hermias, Hermias.
son of Acarnus tetrarche, (ye is to say, the ruler of the fourth part of the
East) had war with Memnon, Memnon.
by whom being overcome, was sowed into a bullockes skin now slain, and laid
under his table. And that his miserable life might last the longer, he had meat
given him, so that he lived until the filthy vermin that brodde in the skin
newely flayne from beasts back, did cause him to end his unhappy life.

And that as Alexander did
in bed may lose thy life:
His wife to him the deadly stroke
did give by bloody knife. Alexander Phereus.

Alexander Phereus loved his wife Thebe very well, yet he feared death so, ye
whenever he went in to her, he would send some of his guard to search, whether
in any corner of her chamber, was any weapon laid whereby he might be slain. But
for all his circumspection, at length he was murdered, because his wife
suspected that he kept other women. Surely as Tully says he was in a wretched
case, that did rather trust a company of barbarous soldiars (for of such were
his guard) then his natural wife. Offic. 2.

That those whom thou do faithful think,
(as erst Alebas found
Larissian king) thou may them try,
skant faithful by thy wound.
Alebas son of Thiodimas, Alebas.
father of Argus, was king of Larissa, in Thessalia. He ruled with great
cruelty, and thinkinge that by no means he could live well and in safety
without a guard, chose a number of valyant men, which he placed about him, and
at length was (for all his heed) by those men slain, whom he had chosen to
defend him from other.

As Milo to, which tyrant fell,
did Pisa much torment:
Alive into the waters deep,
all headlong may be sent.
Milo (to omit other three of that name) was king of Pisa, Milo.
a country in Greece, he ruled with such tyranny that the people rebelled
against him, and having him in their hands, tied a great stone about his neck
and cast him into the sea. Beside him, Oenomaus and Salmoneus were kings of
Pisa, they all had evil ends, as after shall be said.

Or that as Adimantus proud
Philetian king was slain:
So Jupiter with thenderboltes,
may work to thee like pain.
Adimantus king of Philetia, Adimantus.
which bordereth upon Pontus, (or as some say Thessalia) would not vouchfafe
to bestow any sacrifice upon Jupiter, but despised him utterly, and said that
himself was more mighty than he. Wherewith lupiter being dyspleased, killed
him with a thunderbolt.

Or else as Dionisius.
who from Amastrix fled:
So thou though in Achilles course,
forsaken may be dead.
Amastrix was a city builded by Amastrix, daughter of Oxiatres, Amastrix.
and wife of Dionisius tirante of Heraclia, in Lemnos. Out of that city her
husband was banished by Methridates, and fled into a place called Achilles
course, where forsaken of his people, he was slain by his enemy.

Or that about Thrasillus tomb,
as did Euridamas,
Fast tied about Larissian whele,
thou there may three times pass.
Thrasillus king of Larissa, Thrasillus
in an uproar of the people, was slain by one Euridamas a Soothsayer: but
within a while after the same Euridamas was by Simo brother of Thrasillus
slain, and drawn three times about the place where Thrasillus (as the manner
was) was burned.

Or else like Hector valiant, Hector.

whose body vew'd the wall:
That he had long in safety kept,
which after sone die fall.
Hector son of Priamus and Hecuba the glory of the Troyans, and terror of
the Greeks, was slain by Achilles, and drawn at a horse tail three times
about the walls of Troy, such cruelty showed he to his enemies dead body, upon
which alive, he durst skant look for fear. But as he cowardly kylde him, so he
as shamefully misused him, a toke^ no don't of a dogged nature, not to be
approved in any gentleman.

As daughter of Hippomenes,
new torments did abide:
And as th'adulterer was drawn
over Athens land so wide.
So when thy hated life of all,
thy lothed limbs shall leave:
God grant that hungry horses may
thy corpse in pieces reaue.
Hippomenes king of Athens, Hippomenes. Limone.
had a daughter called Limone, she was taken in adulterye, and by the
commandment of her father, shut up with a horse that had no meat given him,
to the intent that hunger pryckinge him, he should devour her, which came in
deed to pass. The adulterer was drawn about Athens at a horse tail, and
pulled in pieces. But he himself for this unspeakable cruelty showed to his
daughter, not long after was banyshed his kingdom. Ovid.

That some man may thy body thrust
on rocks, much tossed before:
As were the bodies of the Greeks,
on Caphareus shore.
Amimone, Amimone. Satirus. Neptunus. Nanplius Ulysses. Palamedes.
one of the daughters of Danaus, was loved of one of ye Gods called Satiri. To
her on a time being on huntinge by the Sea side, came her lover, and was
somewhat busy with her, where with she not content, shot an arrowe at him and
wounded him sore: but for all that, Satyrus was somewhat sawey with her, so
that she had no power to defend hirselfe against him. She therefore desired
Neptunus to help her, who came and chased Satirus away, and for his curtesy
she was content to let him have to do with her, who at that time begotte
Nanplius father of Palamedes the worthy Greek, slain of the Greeks by the
guylefull hate of crafty Ulysses, who always was his extreme ennemy: the
matter was handled thus.

At what time the Greeks prepared themselves to go to Troy, to fetch again
Helena the wife of Menelaus king of Sparta, stolen away by the adulterous
Paris, son of Priamus. Ulysses detracting the war, either for the love of
his new married wife Penelope, or else for cowardly fear, fained himself mad,
and got dogs and foxes and other beasts, and yoked them together, and went to
plow in the sand, and sowed corn therein. The Greeks desiringe to have him
with them, and mistrusting the thing, sent Palamades to espy his guyse, and
to see whether he could bring him or not. Palamedes came to the place where
Ulysses was at plough, and laid his son Telemachus in his way, thinkinge that
if he were mad, he could not know his own son, and by that means to try
the truth: but if he were sober, he would pass by without hurting the child,
which in deed he did, for as soon as he saw his child lie before him, he
drove on the one side, and suspended his plough, and so passed without harm to
the child. Which thing when Palamedes saw, he took him, and by force brought
him to the rest, who after in the war did very good service. But Ulysses
took the matter in very evil part, and thought in time to be revenged on him:
and this was one cause of his grief. An other was, that Ulysses was sent to
provide corn and other things, as were necessare for the camp, and returned
with out accomplyshinge any thing at all. But Palamedes being sent to those
same places, spedde so well, that he furnyshed the camp with all things
necessary, as well as was possible. These causes moved Ulysses to great hate,
and to deuyse all ways possible to destroy Palamedes, (who in wit was not
inferior to any of the Greeks, and in courage surmounted them all, even him
self Achylles) which thing at length he did in this sort. By the consent
consent of Palamedes servants, whom he had before corrupted with money. He hid
a pot of Gold in his tente, and put certain letters into his cosers, that
he himself had made. This done, he accused him of treason, that he would have
betrayed the Greeks to Priamus, and had therefore received a sum of money,
which he had hyd in the ground in his tent. This Palamedes denied, the places
were searched, the Gold was found, Palamedes condemned, was stoned to death.
His father Nanplius hearing of this, at the return of the Greeks from Troy,
made great lights upon the Promontorie Caphareus of Euboea. The Greeks
supposinge that there had been a Haven, sailed thither, and as many as came
near perished on the rocks, whereof is great store there, and as many as came
to land, by his souldyours were slain.

Euboea bordereth upon Boetia, in it be two Promontoryes that make it famous,
Cerestus. Caphare.
Cerestus which reaches toward Athens, and Caphareus which reaches
Hellespont.

And that with Thunderboltes and seas,
as Ajax ferce did dye,
God grant that so the fire may aid,
the waters drowning thee.
Ajax Oileus, Ajax Oileus.
for forcing Cassandra Priams daughter in the temple of Pallas, in his return
to Greece, hae his ship broken on Caphareus Rocks, and him self was stryken
with a Thunderboult by Pallas, and so with fire and water destroyed,

And that also with furyes tossed,
thy mind may be as mad
As his, whose body over all,
one only wound has had.
Marsias, son of Hiaguis, Marsias.
the famous Musician, pleased the rural gods and Nympes of smalskyll, with
pype very well. Wherewith he became so proud, that he challenged Apollo The
nine Muses and Minerua were appointed Judges of the controversy, they gave
sentence of Apollos side. But he thinking scorn to yield and take Apollo for
his better, was hanged on a tree, and had his skin pulled from his back. The
Nympes and Satyrs, and the rest of that crew, did so lament the loss of his
music, that of their tears came the great River of Phrigia called Marsias.
Ovid. vi. Meta.

But I think it better to understand this place of Ajax Telemons son, Ajax.
Telemoni
whose body was invuluerable, because, that when he was borne he was wrapped in
the lions skin that hercules ware, saving a little place that was left
vnceuered. and therein when he lost Achilles harness, he slew him self.

And as Lycurgus Dryas son
that Thracyan kyngedomes held:
Who cut his legs while he assayd
the vine trees to have field.
Lycurgus, Iycurgus.
son of Dryas king of Thracia, could not abide Bacchus and his mates but
expelled him out of his country, and constrained him to lurk in the marshy
places or fennes borderinge thereon, at which time he was received into Thetis
bosom. Wherefore Lycurgus was after kyld by Jupiter. Other said that in
despyte of Bacchus, he would have cut down all the Vynes in Thracia, but the
god turned his axe against him self, whereby he cut of both his own legs.
Which thing his son revenged, for presently after he slew all the priests of
Bacchus, with out mercy.

Like Hercules, and Dragons son,
that such may be thy fate.
Like Tyssamenes father to,
and Callyrhoes mate.
Hercules about to do sacrysice upon the hill Oeta, Hercules.
sent Licas to fetch his garment which he was wont to use for that purpose,
Deianira his wife sent it him, washed in the blood of the Centaure Nessus,
which was a rank poison, because she suspected that Hercules was in love with
Iolle, daughter of Euritus king of Oechalia. For the Centaure had could her
that if her husband loved any other woman, that that would withdraw his love,
and bring it to her again. But so soon as Hercules had it on, he was so
tormented, ye he was feign to cast him self in to a fire, and so to end his
life.

Athamas, married Ino, Athamas
daughter of Cadmus, and Hermone or Harmonia, after he in his rage or madness
had slain his son Learchus, killed him self. Ovid. iiii. Me. Orestes, Orestes.
father of Tissamenes, and son of Agamemnon and Clite^nestra, after he had
killed his mother, was mad, which madness, Ouyd wysheth to Ibys.

Callirhoe daughter of river Achilous, Callirhoe.
wife of Alcmeon, son of Amphiaraus, who went in to Acarnauia to be cleansed,
because he had killed his mother. He had children by two women, by the
daughter of Phegeus, Alph^soboe. Phepeus.
Alpheseboea, and Callyrhoe aforesaid. But after he had refused Alpheseboe,
and came to have again the Iuels that he had given her, while she was his
wife, he was slain by Phegeus his father in law. Callyrhoe for reuengement
hereof, craved of Jupiter, that her children then infants might be made men.
Which he granted, and they presently revenged their Fathers death.

And that thy hap may gain a wife,
no chaster then was she:
Of whom the old Tydeus might
right sore ashamed be.
Adrastus, Adrastus. Deiphila.
had three daughters, Deiphila married to Tideus, she was mother to Diomedes,
Argia.
Argia wife to Polinices, Egiale that was married to Diomedes. Aegiale.
This Diomedes went to the seege of Troy which the other Greeks, and in a
battle happened to hurt Venus, who defended the body of her son Aeneas. She
therefore angry, Aeneas.
caused his wife to make her body common to the most part of the youth of her
city, and beside married her self to Cylleborus, Steneleus son, Cilleborus
son of Stenelus. Palamedes.
by the persuasion of Na^plius, who was enimye to all the Greeks, for the
death of his worthy son Palamedes. But when Diomedes came home and was kept
from his country by the aduoulterer that had married his wife, he much wroth
fought a battle and overcame him, and chased him so far that if he had not
fled into the church of Pallas, he had slain him.

Yet for all that moved with shame, he left his own country, and came into
Italye to Davvnus, and was courteously entertained of him. After that he sailed
into Apulia, from thence to the Islands called (Diomede Insule) where his
companions were turned into byrds called Heroide aues. In which place also is a
white horse sacryficed upon his tomb, to him.

Or she of Locris, who did with
her husbands brother lie,
Who for to color this her fact,
did cause her maid to dye.
Hypermnestra of Locris, Hypermnestra.
lay with the brother of her husband, and being almost taken, yet escaped by
the benefyt of the night, and killed her maid, as though she had done the
fact, by that means thynking to color her own mysdeade.

The Gods do grant to thee a wife,
of equal faith also:
As had Talaus son in law,
and Tyndarus, his to.
Amphiaraus, Amphyaraus. Iriphile
son of Apollo. And Hipermnestra, daughter of Thestius, married Eriphile,
daughter of Thalaus, (though some say of Thelesther,) one of the seven kings
that beseged Thebes. Who because that he for fear that he should perish
there, detracte the war and hyd him self, and none, saving his wife knew
thereof. The other princes desirous to have him with them, promised her, if she
would tell where her husband was, that she should have the Jewels that
sometime were Egiales, wife of Polinices: other say they were Iuels that
appertained to Venus, which she received and bewraied her husband. In ye Theban
war, he was swallowed up with the earth. But before he went thither he gave
commandment to his son Alemeon, ye when he was dead, his wife Eriphile, should
be sacrificed upon his tomb. Which commandment immediately after his death,
Alcmeon, fulfilled.

Cebalus, son of Amiclas, Cebalus.
king of Lacedemon, had two sons, Icarus who begat Penelope of Policasta,
daughter of Lygeus, and Tyndarus ye married Leda, daguhter of Thestius, sister
of Hypermnestra. By whom he had Clytemnestra, Helena, Castor and Pollux. The
poets feign, ye Jupiter lay with Leda in lyknes of a swan, she brought forth to
him an egg, wherein was Pollux and Helena, who werimmortal, and to Tindarus,
also she brought forth an other egg in which was Castor and Clyte^nestra,
which were mortal. This Clyte^nestra, by means of Aegistus, son to her uncle
Thyestes, and her adultrer, the same night ye her husband Agame^no^ came home
from Troy, killed him as he was bathing, by giving him a shyrt to put on
without sleeves. Who having his hands as it were fettered therein, was flaine by
Aegistus Of the reueng hereof, read in Orestes.

And like king neeces Neces, who
their uncles sons durst kill:
Whose shoulders are tormented sore
with water Caryage still.
That sister thine may burn as did
Byblis and Canace:
And that but only in doing ill,
she faithful be to thee.
Myletus, Miletus
son of Apollo, fled out of Crete into Asia, where he builded a city called
after his own name Miletum: to him Ciane, daughter of Meander, bare a son
called Caunus, Caunus. Canace.
and a daughter Byblis. This Byblis, loved her brother with out respect either
of her honor, kynred or honesty. Which thing when she had declared to him by
her letter, he detesting the fact, left his country, whom she followed over
many strange lands, and last of all she came into Caria, where by the favor of
the Nymphs, her tears were turned into a well of her mame. Ovid.ix. Metamor.

Sinas of Menalippe, Sinas. Menalipp^. etc.
begat Aeolous, who was king of one part of Thessalia, which after his name he
called Aeolia. Aeolus had a daughter named Arne, by whom Neptune got two
sons, Boetus and Aeolus, two twins. Boetus succeeded his mother in her
kingdom. But Aeolus came into certain Islands of the Thuscan sea, which after
he called of his own name Aeoliae insulae, whereof at that time Liparus the
son of Anson was king, whose daughter he married, and was king after his
father in law. But after this by Cleopatra, who was of the affinity or stock
of the cruel people called Lestrigones, he had seven sons. Astiochus,
Xuthus, Androcleus, Pherenon, Locastes, Agathirsus, and Machareus. And seven
daughters. Iphe, Eola, Periboea, Dia, Astoicatia, Hephestia, and Canace, all
were for their virtues much honored saving Canace, Macareus Canace.
who lay with her brother Machareus, and had by him a child, which as she
commanded her Nurse to carry forth, unhappily cried out, so that her father
heard it, and when he knew the matter, he commanded the child to be cast
naked to the dogs, and sent his daughter a sword, wherewith she slew
hirselfe. But his son Macareus fled to Delphos and was one of the Priests of
Apollos church there, where he conspired with Orestes, to kill Pirrhus the
son of Achilles.

That thy child be to thee, as to
Thiestes, Pelope:
Or Mirrha was unto her Sire,
or else Nictimene.
Pelope had four sons, Thiestes. Atreus. Pelope.
but it is enough in this place to speak only of Atreus and Thiestes.
Thiestes got of Europa his brother Atreus wife.ii. sons, which Atreus kyld
and dressed for meat, and bad his brother to the banquet, who came and eat of
his own children. But when he know thereof, he asked counsel of Thoracle how
he might be revenged, who gave answer, that if he lay with his own daughter
Pelope, he should engender of her a son, which should sufficiently revenge
his wrong. Which he did, and got of her Aegistus, who killed Atreus, and in
the siege of Troy, used Clitemnestra wife of Agamemnon, Atreus son, and after
his return, killed him also.

Mirrha, Myrha.
daughter of Cinara king of Cipres and Cenchreis, (through the wrath of Venus,
because her mother was preferred before her) loved her father with wicked and
incestuous love, and at length, by means of her Nurse, on a solemn feast of
Ceres, when her mother was away lay with her father. For the nurse told him
that a very bewtifull maid was in love with him, but after he had accompanied
with her twice or thrice, desirous to know what his new lover was, called for
a candell, and perceauing that she was his daughter, drew his sword, and meant
to kill her, who fled nine months from him, and he continually chased her, til
at length in the sweet country of Saba she was turned into a tree of her own
name. Of this shameful incest was borne the fair Adonis, whom Venus loved no
less, Adonis
than Mirrha did her father, and that by the benefit of Cupide. Ovid.x. Meta.

Nictimene daughter of Nicteus king of Aetheopia, sister to Antiope, Nictimene.
after she had committed incest with her father, for shame, would not come in
places where men resorted, but haunted the woods, and other places desolate
and void of company, till by the mercy of Pallas, she was turned into an Owl,
and for that cause the Owl flies not but by night. Ovid.iiii. Metamorph.

And that thy daughter unto thee,
as faithless found may be:
As thine was to thee Pterela,
or Nisus thine to thee.
Lisidice daughter of Pelope, married to Mestor, had by him one daughter named
Hippothoe, upon whom Neptunus got two sons, Teleba and Taphus, who after
their own names called the people, Teleboe and Taphii. Taphus had a son
named Pterela king of Thebes, Pterela.
of whom Ovid speaks here. He had on his head a golden hair, which so long
as he kept, he had a promise by his grand father Neptunus, he should never be
overcome. He had five sons, Cromius the tyrant, Ampulus, Chersidamas, Mestor,
and Eueres, with one daughter Cituetho.

Electrio at that time king of Micene, had by his wife Alexo five sons
likewise. Stratobates, Gorgophonus, Philomorus, Steneleus, and Licimius, with
one daughter to Alcmena. Pterela desirous to have Electrio his kingdom,
Electrio.
preuided an army and made his sons captains thereof. Electrio did likewise,
the armies joined, in which all Pterela his Sons were flayne save Eueres,
and all Electrios, but Steneleus and Licimius. But the Taphii prevailed, and
got a great pray of cattle and other goods. Which thing when Electrio knew,
he made proclamation that whosoever could revenge that injury should marry his
daughter Alemena. Amphitrio takes the war in hand, and in the first voyage he
made, he fetched their pray again from Polixenus king of Elis, with whom
Pterelas men had left them. And in his return one of the kyne strayed from
her fellows out of the way, after which Amphitrio went, and thinking with a
darte to have hit her, smote the king Electrio, and killed him. Wherefore
Steneleus who succeeded his father, pursued him unto Creons kingedome, where he
was purged of the death of his father in law. Which done he proceeded in his
former enterprise, and came against the Taphii with a good army, against whom
Pterela made no less resistance. But by means of Cituetho his daughter, all
his labor was lost, for she suddenly enamoured of Amphitrios bewty, cut of
her fathers fatal hair, and brought it to Amphitrio, craving his love, but he
having gotten that hair, killed Pterela, and cast of Cituetho and married
Alcmena. Aristarchus upon Hesiodus.

Some say that Pterela was slain by Creon, and that his daughters name was
Polidice, and not taken with the love of Amphitrio, but of on Cephalus who was
Amphitrios companion in the war.

Nisus king of Megara, Nisus. Scilla.
had a daughter named Scilla, who taken with the love of Minos, betrayed her
father unto him in this sort. Minos determyning to revenge the death of his
son Androgeus, slain by the Athenians, in his way besieged Megara, which is
about a twenty miles from Athens, thynking that if he might overcome such as
would aid them, he should the easelyer subdue them. Nisus king of that city
had a daughter named Scilla, who would often go upon the walls to sport
hirselfe, because there were certain very pleasant stones. For when Appollo
the God of Musyke, builded the walls, he laid his Harp upon certain stones
of the same, which by reason thereof, obtained the sound of a Harp, so that if
any had smitten them with a counter, or with any stick, they would have
sounded like a Harp. And often she looked from the walls, and at length
seeinge Minos wholly armed, being taken with his bewty, and not knowing how to
compass his love, determined to cut of the hair of her Fathers head,
wheruppon the destenies o^ her country did depend, and profer it to Minos,
which she did, and opened the gates unto him. But he detestynge her vile and
unnatural fact, when he had taken the City, would not suffer her to enter
into his ship. Wherefore she was turned into a Lark, and was continually
pursued of her Father, who also was turned not long before into a hawke called
by his own name Nisus. Ovid in the eyghte book of his Metamorphosis says
that he was turned into an Osprey.

Or she who by her cruel deed,
reproachful made the place:
Where over her fathers body slain,
she drove her cart apace.
Tullia, Tullia.
daughter of Seruius Tullus, seemed to bear but little good will to her
father, for when he was slain by her husband Tarquinus Superbus, she made
such have to enter into his possessions, ye she drove her wagon over his body,
not yet buried, whereof the place was called Sceleratus. It is hard by the side
of Cyprus.

Or that thou may be slain, as were
the lusty youths too bowlde.
Whose heads were set on Pisa gates,
that all might them behoulde.
Oenomaus son of Mars and Aegina, Oenomaus
daughter of Asopus, some call his mother Harpina, Hippodamia.
he had but one daughter called Hippodamia. This king on a time enquyringe of
the Oracle what time he should dye, received answer that he should live, until
he affyanced his daughter to any man. For which cause he determined to keape
his daughter in perpetual virginity. But for all that he proclaimed that who
soever could over run him with horses, should have his daughter and
kingedome. But he that was ouercommed should dye. Thyrtene woers were slain.
Pelops.
At length came Pelops son of Tantalus, to Pisa, with whose bewty the maide^
Hippodamia taken, promised to Myrtolus the son of Mercury and Phaetusa, Mirtolus
who drove her Fathers chariot, that if Pelops might be victor, he should lie
with her the first night. Myrtolus, glad of her promise, made his masters
arultree of wax, which in the way with heat of the wheels did melt, and
break, by means whereof Pelops wan the price, and Oenomaus thinkinge that the
end of his life was come, kyld him self. Myrtolus craving of Hippodamia the
performaunce of his promise, was by Pelops cast into the sea, that after his
name was called Mare Myrtolum. The race that the woers ran, was from Pisa to
the altar of Neptune in Istmus of Corynthe. Before ye course, Oenomaus race.
Oenomaus sacryficed a Ram to Jupiter, and the woers charyot drawn with fewer
horses went before, whom Oenomaus having fynyshed his sacryfice, followed: and
if he ouertoke him, he would with a spear run him thorough. The heads of those
that were slain, were whereby they should be afraid to take on them the like
enterpryses. To this story do belong the two staves that follow.

Or he (which iuster was) who with
his blood bedewd the ground:
Besprinkled erst, with blood that came
from wretched woers wound.
Or as the carter that betrayed,
the Tyrant bloody wight:
Who gave new names unto the sea,
that now Mirtonum hight.
Or those that sought in vain to have,
the maiden swifte as wind:
Till she by gathering Apples three,
was somewhat left behind.
Atalanta daughter of Sceneus, Atalanta
asking the Oracle what success she should have in marriage, received answer,
that alive she should lose hirselfe: wherefore she hallowed hirselfe to Diana,
and lived in the solitary woods. But because her bewty was surpassing, least
she should seem to dispyse the good will of her suitors, ordained that she would
be his wife that could out run her, but he that attempted the course, and was
left behind, should lose his life. Many were slain, and while they were
putting to death, Hyppomenes.
Hippomenes son of Megareus, there present, blamed much their rashness, in
bying a wif so dear, till at length espying her bewty, after her face was
uncovered, he was as much entangled in her love, as the rest. Wherefore
determyning either desperately to dye, or else joyfully to win, undertook to
run with her, sauinge first made his humble prayers unto Venus, who gave him
three Golden Apples that grew in Damascus in Ciprus, which he throwing aside,
came first to the race end, and thus by the benefit of Venus, he gained his
love. But after through his great joy, forgettinge to give her thanks for
her curtesy, moved her heavy displeasure toward him, so that on a time as he
passed through a grove, which Echion had dedicated to Sibela mother of the
Gods, he was by motion of Venus, so sharp set, that even there he must
needs have to do with his wife. With which Sibela offended, turned him into a
Lion, and her into a Lyones, and for that cause Lions be sacred unto the mother
of the Gods.

Or as the men that went into
the combrouse house with pain:
Wherein the monster strange was kept
whence non could come again.
Androgeus, Androgeus.
son of Minos and Pasiphae, surmounting al men in the games at Athens, fell
into familior aquaintance with the sons of Pallas. Egeus fearing lest by the
help of Minos the said sennes of Pallas, should dyspossesse him of his
kingdom, laid an embushment about Inoe in the land of Athens, where he slew
Androgeus with them, as he went to sport himself of Thebes. In reuengement
whereof, Minds made war to them and cursed them with famine and mortality, both
which things happened unto them. The Greeks destrous to be ryd of these plagues,
asked counsel of the Oracle, what was best to be done, who commanded them to
go to Aeacus, that he might do sacryfice on their behalf, which they did,
by means whereof, all the cities of Greece, saving Athens alone were delivered.
The Athenians therefore again constrained to consult the Oracle, were commanded
to let Minos take what vengance he would for the death of his son. He
therefore charged them to send him every year, seven men children and seven
maids, to be devoured of the monster Minotaurus, which thing they did, until
the time that Theseus by means of Ariadne, slew him: this mo^ster was included
in ye co^berouse Laberinthe which Dedalus made in Crete. The first that devised
this kind of building was Peresucus king of Egipte. In it were so many doors
and ways, that whosoever entered therinto, could never come out again. That
which Dedal made in Crete whereof we spoke before, had scante the hundredth
part of the difficulties of that Peresucus devised.

Or as the bodies twelve were cast
into the flaming fire:
Which was Achilles angry work,
enraged almost forire.
After Hector had killed Patroclus Achilles his friend. Patroclus.
Achilles made a vow that he would never eat nor drink (thus Homer says) till
he had kyld him, who slew his friend, and twelve more of the valiauntest
Troyans, which he (...), and cast them into the fire wherein the cerps of
Patroclus, was burned. He raste in moreover, four horses and two dogs. etc.
Read more hereof in Homers Iliades.

Or those of whem we read by Sphynx
a cruel death have found,
If they bis doubtful curstions were
not able to expound.
Sphynx, Sphynx.
daughter of Cerberus and Echydua, had the head and face like a woman, bedy of
a dog, wyngs of a byrd, human voice, and claws of Lion. She came to Thebes,
and tarried about a rock thereby: and to ye men that passed by the place where
she lay, she propounded this Rydeil. What is that yt has two legs, three
legs, four legs. To those that could expound the same, she premised the
marriage of Iocasta, Queen of Thebes, and the kingedome for reward. To those
that could not, she assured death. None could expound she same but Oedipus
that said it was man, Oedipus.
who in infanfancy went on hands and feet, as if he had four legs, in ripe
years upright on two legs, in crooked age he took him self to a stafe as to a
third leg. Wherefore he had ye reward aforesaid. This apper teyneth to the
storye before written of Oedipus. Diodorus.


Or as the men which in the church
of Bystone Pallas dyed,
For which offense the Goddess yet
her face does also hyde.
Bystones, a people of Thracya, Bystones.
from whence ye Image of Pallas was brought to Lacedemon, the inhabytants
whereof made a law, that all strangers should be sacryficed to the Gods. Many
men of Lymnos were there, and according to the Edict though they fled into the
Temple of Pallas to her Image, were slain. With which cruelty ye Goddess
moved, turned her face away, and so looks still.

Or as the men that lenge ago,
the stately crybbe^ be bledde:
Of Thacian king, upon whose flesh,
his hungry horses fed.
Diomedes, king of Thracia, Diomedes.
in Tyrida a City thereof, kept horses, which in man of brass, tied with Iron
chains) he fed with meus flesh. Hercules cast him into their Cribbe, when
he fetched those horses away by the commandment of Euristeus, and Euristeus
sacrificed them to Juno. Their brood centinued unto the time of Alexander the
great Macedonian king, if we believe Diodorus

Or as the men that lion felt,
of fierce Therodamas:
Or sacrifice of Taurica,
to the Gods of Thoas.
Therodamas had stables of Lions in Scithia, Therodamas.
of which country he was king, which he fed with man's flesh, to the intent
they might be the more fierce, if need should be, for he greatly feared that
his people would rebel against him, which if they attempted, he accounted
that a remedy to suppress their enterprise.

Thoas borne in Lemnos, Thoas.
son of Bacchus, and father to Hipsiphile, came into Taurica, at what time
the women of Lemnos (as shall be said anon) killed all the men of their country,
to perform his vow which he made, that he would be one of the priests of
Diana Taurice, to whom Hecate Thebus daughter, had erected a Church, and
ordained that all such as came thither by any adventure, should be sacrificed
to her. She first innented the poison Aconitu^, very famous for her crueltye,
which was her only practice.

Or those that Scilla fierce did catch,
or else Caribdis grypt:
Among the fearful trembling mates
out of Ulysses ship.
Glancus son of Anthedon a fisher, Glancus. Seilla. Caribdis.
having caught certain goodly fishes, desiring to carry them very fresh into
the City, laid them under a green herb while he rested himself and dried
his Nets, but the fishes recovering their former strength, by virtue of the
herb, lepte all into the Sea again. Which thing when he saw, supposing that
there was some great virtue in the herb, tasted thereof, whereby he became mad,
and lepte into the Sea also, and was made a god of the same. And as he walked
about in these costs, he espied in Sicillia, Scilla daughter of Phorcus, and
the nymph Cratheis a very fair maid, with whose love he was much esprised,
but she regarded him not. Wherefore he went to Circe an other Gods of the
sea, a very good Enchauntres, and desired her aid and counsel to obtain her
love, but she entrapped with his love, sought al means to turn his love to
Scilla, which when she could not, she came to the sou^tayne wherein Scilla
accustomed to bathe hirselfe, and poisoned the same, so that as soon as Scilla
entered into it, she was from the Navel downward, turned in to the form of a
Dog, that by such means she might be lothed of her lovers. She haunted the
Sicilian seas, and devoured six of Ulysses mates, and used much cruelty
toward him, because he was beloved of Circe, to revenge hirself on the said
Circe. As at length in the.xii. book of Homers Odisses may appear.

She was turned into a Rock, that she might not annoy Aeneas and his mates
coming into Italy by the Sicillian Sea. Ovid.xiiii. Metamorph.

Caribdis is an other rock very nigh to the former Scilla, not so big as it,
by the report of Homer in the.xii. book of his Odisses. Who was a very
gluttonous woman, which stole some of Hercules Oren away, and was therefore by
him cast into the Sicilian sea.

Or those whom Poliphemus sent,
into his paunch right wide:
Or those that of Lestrigones
the cruel hands did bide.
Poliphemus devoured sire of Ulysses companions, as is said before.
Polyphemus. Ulysses. Acclus.


After Ulysses had lost the winds which Acolus had given him, by the
vndiscreetenes of his fellows, he came to Lamus a city in Lestrigonia, whereof
Antiphates was king. The inhabitants thereof were Grants, he sent three of his
men to crave some courteous entertaynment, but Antiphates eat one of them, and
the other two fled to the ships, and were so sore handled, that Ulysses lost
eleven of his ships, and had much ado to escape with his own alone. Homer.x.
of Odissus.

Or those whom Carthage captain bold.
in ditches deep did thrust,
And there he made the water white,
by casting in of dust.
Amilcar captain of the Carthaginenses, Amilcar.
in the time of truce, took the councelers of the people called Acerrani, and
drowned them in ditches, and after cast stones upon them. Some think he
means of Anniball Amilcars onne, Annibal.
which made a bridge of dead bodies over the fludde Gella, thereby to convey
over his army.

Or as the maids, and woers to
of chaste Penelope:
And he who woers weapons gave,
his master for to slay.
In the.22. book of Homers Odisses, Ulysses. Penelopes, proci.
Ulysses killed all the woers of Penelope his wife, by the help of Telemachus
his son, and of such her maids as had behaved themselves not chastely among
the said woers, Mela^tius.
he kanged. Melanthius, who brought wepons to the woers that they might kill
his lord, was very cruelly mangled by Ulysses and Telemachus, and after
slain. First he had his nose and ears cut of, then his priuye members
plucked away, lastly his hands and feet cut away. He kept Ulysses gotes.

Or as the lusty wrastler,
whom Hercules did kill:
Who when he fell (a wondrous thing)
then was he victor still.
Antheus son of the Earth, Antheus
king of Lixa in Libia, where the Orchardes of Thesperides were feigned to be,
was a noble wrastler. He killed many, for when his feet touched the ground,
he was made stronger of his mother. Which thing when Hercules perceived, that
wrastled with him, he took him in his arms from ground, and held him so
hard that he dyed therewith. He had a wife named Vigenna, and a daughter
called Tingenna, which was forced by Hercules, of whom was begotten Siphax, who
in the honor of his mother builded a City, and called it by her name Tingenna,
where his graundfather was buried. Whose Sepulcre when Sertorius commanded to
be broken up, in it was found a body, 70. cubits long. Plutarch.

Or those who by the boystrous hands
of Antheus lost their breath: Of Anthe us is said

Or those whom Lemnos women did,
put unto cruel death.
The women of Lemnos for despising the sacrifices of Venus, Lemniace. mulicres.
by her wrath became very loathsome, so that they and a rank and ^otish odor,
wherefore they were lothed of their husbands, who for that purpose went into
Thracia, to get them new wives. But in their return their old wives
conspired against them, and killed them with all their Concubins, save
Hipsiphile who saved her Father Thoas, as is said before. And that their
sons might not revenge ye death of their Fathers, they killed them also. So
that they left none of the male kind alive in their country.

As he that after long drouth did,
ill sacred rightes devise:
Who to get rain, was made himself,
a bloody sacrifice.
Thrasillus (but Ovid in his first book of the Art of love, Thrasil.us.
calls him Thrasius) when Egypt had wanted rain.ix. years, came to Busiris,
and told him, that if he would have rain, he must do sacrifyce to the Gods
with men. Busiri therefore began with him, and continued that cuscome until
Hercules time, who sacrifised the tyrant himself, and thereby obtained rain.

Or as Antheus brother has,
with proper blood be bled
the altars (as was right) sith he,
likewise had others shed.
Pigmalion used to sacrifice men, Pigmalio.
and was himself so served, he was brother to Antheus. But it shall be better as
I think to read for Antheus, Anceus, and understand this place of Busiris,
Busiris and Anceus. Astipalea
whom Hercules slew, as is said, for Anceus and Busiris were Neptuns sons by
Astipalea.

As he that fed his terrible horse,
with flesh of many killed:
Instead of grass or hay that grows
abroad amid the field.
Diomedes fed his horse with man's flesh, Diomedes.
and was at length himself cast to them by Hercules. As is before rehearsed.

Or those two who at diverse times,
by one to death were done:
I mean the Centaure Nessus, and
Dissimanus his son.
Nessus, promised to carry Deianira Hercules wife over the fludde, Euenus on his
shoulders, and also Hercules after. But having carried her first he would not
fetch him afterward, but meant to have ravished her, and was therefore slain
by Hercules, with an arrow. The tale is well known of all men.

To leave the tale of Dissimanus Iphiclus his son, Dissimanus.
that pleases Domitius Calderinus, whose neck Hercules brake from ye top of a
tower at Terynthus: because he came to fetch again the horses of his brother
Euritus that Hercules had driven awoy. Or Ormenus, yt denied his daughter
Astidamia, to Hercules, and was therefore slain by him. We will read for
Dissimanus, Diximanus.
Dixmianus. This Dixmianus had three daughters, Theronice, Teriphone, and
Deianira. Theronice, was married to Ctatus, and Teriphone to Euritus, which both
were Actors sons, whem Hercules killed about Cleonae, as they went to Istmus to
sport them selves. Cteatus, of his wife gate Amphimacus, Euritus of his
Thalpis. Deianira his youngest daughter was deflowred by Hercules, who promised
at a day to return and mary her, in the mean time came Eurition, son of
Ixion, and a Clovvde, and asked to have her in marriage. Her father for fear
granted his good will, and ordained the marriage to be against the time yt
Hercules appointed to return. At the day prefixed, Hercules came, and killed
Eurition, and married his wife, and of this man means Ouide, who was brother
to Nessus.

Or as thy neuew Neptune, whom
surrendryng up his ghost:
Did Nymphe Coronis son behold,
from out his proper cost.
If we read Neptune, Hippolite
we must understand this of Hyppolitus, whom Theseus (son of Neptune and
Ethra,) begat of Hippolite the Amazone. Of whom we spoke tofore.

But if we read Saturn, as in mine opinion it is better, then must we
understand it of Periphaltes, Periphaltes.
Vulcanus son and neuew of Saturn. This Saturn, begat Juno, Juno, bare
Vulcane, Vulcane, begat Periphaltes. He was a famous thief, called by an other
name Corinetus, Corinetus. Epidaurus.
and slai^ by Theseus, not far from Epidaurus, where (...)

As Sinis, Sciron and with them,
Poliphemons, son to:
And he whose body was half man,
and half a Bull also.
Sinis a famous thief, Synis.
who tied such men as he overcame to the tops of trees bended together
downward, and after let them up again, and so killed them. He was slain by
Theseus, upon whose daughter Perigone, the same Theseus begot Menalippus.

Sciron a famous thief, Scyron.
kept the Grekish seys, and to such as he overcame, as he satte on the top
of a high rock, he proffered meat with his foot, whom (when they took it)
he spurned down the rock. Some think that this was the father of Peleus and
Thelamon. He was slain by Theseus, and cast hedlo^g down ye same rock, from
whence he had cast many other. He haunted the places near unto Megara.

Poliphemon and his son Procustes were also flayn by Theseus. Poliphemon
procustes.
This Procustes used such as he caught thus. He had a bed, in the which he would
lay all strangers, and if they were to short, he would with a rack draw them
out unto the just length thereof: and if they were too long, then would he cut
of the overplus. He haunted not far from Athens, at a place called Cordulus.

The disformed Minotaurus was slain likewise by Theseus as is said before.
Minotaurus.
But here it shall not be much amiss, to tell how it chanced that Pasiphae
Minos wife bare such a child. Minos was accustomed to sacrifice every year a
bull to Neptune, The fairest of al pleased Pasiphae so well that she craved of
her husband so much, why Pasiphae loved a bull.
ye he saved him. Wherefore Neptune displeased, made Pasiphae to cast her love
on him, and by the means of Dedalus enjoyed him, and brought forth a son that
from the sholders downward was like a bull, but upward like a man. Ovid.viii.
Meta.

Or he who men fast tied to boughs,
from ground did cast on hye:
Of this sea or of that thou may,
the surging waves espy.
Pitocamptes dwelte in the straightes of Istmus, between the two Seas,
Pitioca^ptes.
Ionium and Aegium. He was a thief, and such as he took, he tied to the
boughs of Pine trees, and so tore them in pieces. He was killed also by
Theseus, in like sort as he had killed others.

Or that which on Cercions corpse,
dame Ceres did behold
to light, when as she saw him slain,
by Theseus the bold.
On thee for thy deserts, my wrath
and anger just does crave:
And sure I trust, than those thou shall,
no smaller mischeues have.
Ceres hated Cercion for two causes, Cercion.
one was for that he killed her daughter Alope, because Neptune had a child
named Hippothoon by her, in whose City she was well received when she sought
her daughter Proserpina. An other for that he troubled the whole country about
her City Eleusis, with his notable robberies and murders. She was therefore
very glad when she saw him slain by Theseus.

That such as Achimenides,
forsakte on Sicill shore
Thou may be: when he did espy
The Troyan fleet tofore.
Achimenides son of Adamastus, Achimenides.
Ulysses companion at Troy, was left by him in Poliphemus den in Scicilia,
until he was delivered by Aeneas, about three months after, as Virgil in the
third book of his Aeneidos declares at large.

Like Irus else with double name,
that such thy state may be:
Or those that hold the bridge, the which
shall greater be by thee.
Irus, called first Armeus, after Irus, Irus.
because of his singular craft in begging, was stayne by Ulysses in likeness of
a beggar at his own house in Ithaca. Homer in the of his Odisses.

The latter two verses seem to allude to the condition of beggars, who
commonly sit to beg their alms on brydges, because most resort passes
that way. The more be of them, the less shall each man's part come to. He
wishes Ibis to be a beggar in company with a great sort, that his part of
the alms may be very small.

And that dame Ceres son may be
beloved of thee in vain:
So that he often required may,
thy prayers still dysdayne.
Some understand this of Tryptolemus, Triptolemus.
a young man, both bewtiful and honest, often allured with many promyses to do
ill, but he would not, and they read for prayers, riches. But I think he
means it of Flutus, Plutus.
Ceres son, wheme lasius beget in Trypolis a City of Crete, that made all
rich which came to him. And this is the reason why I think t^^s. He wyshed
beggary unto him before, always to continue, and if he happened to come to
Plutus, who made all men rich, yet he wishes ye to him only he would change
his nature, and grant him nothing.

And as the sand by ebbes and fluds
of waters command gene: Comparatum.

Is washed away from under foot
that hard is set thereon.
So grant the Gods that all thy goods
(I knew not what they are)
May fall away even through thy hands,
and thou be left but bare.
And like her sire that could her self,
to sundry shapes transpose:
(Though belly full) with hunger pyn'd,
that thou thy life may lose.
Erysychthon son of Triopa, Erysychthon.
king of Thessalia, despised the gods, and the more to anger the^, he cut down
an Oak which was fyftene yardes about, whereinto a Nymphe was transformed. This
Oak was sacred to Ceres. Under the same all the Nymphs of the woods were
accustomed to dysport the^ selves. For which iniurye Ceres sent one of the
Nymphs to Hunger, to request her, that she would revenge that despyte on
Erysychthon, which she did, and set him on such a hunger, that all the meat in
his kingedome was to little for him, he soulde all that he had, and last of
all, his daughter Metra, wife of Autolicus, who had bestowed her maydenhead on
Neptune. She petying her Fathers case desired Neptunes help in reco^pe^ce of
her curtysy in times paste showed unto him, and he gave her power to change her
self into all manner of lykenesses. She would therefore be sold for any kind
of thing, and therewith sedde her Father till all her wyles were spent, and
every man knew her well, and no man would buy her. Her father therefore void
of all succor, eat his own flesh, and so at length miserably tormented, died.
Ovid in the eight book of his Metamor.

That of man's flesh thou think no scorn,
to feed amid thy rage:
In which point only thou shall be
the Tideus of our age.
Tideus king Oeneus son, Tideus.
some say of Mars and Althea, other else of Mars and Eribea, in the Theban
war was deadly wounded by one Menalippus, whose head he desired greatly to
have. Which when Canapeus, or as some affirm Amphiaraus, had brought it him,
he ready to yield his life eat the brains thereof. Which thing Pallas espying,
who came to make him immortal, feared with the cruel deed, would not
perform her promise. But for all that he fulfilled his cruel mind, and
desired of Pallas, that immortality for his son Diomedes, which he could not
get himself.

That thou may do some fact wherewith,
the horses of the Sun:
Abashed with contrary course
from West to East may run.
Pelops, Tantalus son, Pelops had four s^nes
had by Hippodamia. iii. sons Plisthenes, Atreus, Thiestes, and Chrisippus by
an other woman, who^ he loved above the rest, and therefore when he died he made
him his heir, whom Atreus and Thiestes slew. Plisthenes dyed and left.ii.
sons, Agamemnon and Menelaus whom Atreus brought up, and they were called
therefore Atrides. So yt there were but they two left, and they continual
enemies. Mercury enemy to al Pelops stock for the death of his son Mirtilus,
as is said before, put a Ram with a golden fleece into Atreus flock, A Ram
with a goulden fl^se.
therewith to set the^ together by the ears, thynking that by one means or
other Thiestes would have the same, and it came so to pass in deed. For
Aerope Atreus wife conveyed the same into Thiestes flock, for she loved him
better then her husband, and had by him diverse children. Atreus missinge his
Ram, was much offended, and by violence thought to have him again, but by
means of friends a fained agreement was made between them, and Atreus had his
brother to supper. Against his coming he kyld all the children that he had by
his wife, and made him great cheer, with some parts of them sodden, some
baked, and some roasted. Which offense sodetestable, Phoebus espying, turned his
horses, and never after would look upon him.

And that thou may attempt to make
Licaons filthy feast:
And seek again for to beguile
great Jupiter thy guest.
Licaon Archadian king, Licaon.
receiving Jupiter into his Palace courteously under pretense of good cheer,
kyld one of the Ambassadors of Molossus, and made meat of the same, meaning
also that if Jupiter perceived it not (for there was a talk that he was a god)
to kill him in like sort. But Jupiter much offended with his cruelty, thynking
that simple death was to small a punishment for this so great an offense,
turned him into a Wolf. Ovid i. Metamor.

And that some man may prove the gods
by making meat of thee:
So that thou Tantalus his son,
or Terus his may be.
Tantalus bidding Jupiter and the other Gods to a banquet, killed his son
Pelops, Tantalus.
to see whether they knew it or not. All the Gods abstayned, only Ceres eat
up a whole shoulder, which the Gods after the end of the feast (casting their
heads together) restored, but not of flesh, for in the place thereof, they made
him a sholder of Iuory, Pelops eburneus.
whereof he was caled Eburneus Pelops.

Terus king of Thracia, Terus.
son of Mars and Caucasea, helping afflicted princes about him, among other
he aided Pandion king of Athens, greatly ouercharged with his neighbors, and
in recompense of his travel, took to wife Progne his daughter, and carried her
into his kingdom. After she had been there about a five years, she desired to
see her sister Philomela greatly, and requested of her husband that he would go
to Athens and fetch her. Which he did, and in the way home ward forced her, and
left her among his shepecotes, that he might the oftener and safelyer resort
unto her. And to the intent she should not bewray him, he plucked out her
tongue, but she not content with his dealyng, wrote with her blood the whole
mind of her usage, and sent it to her sister Progne, unto whom Terens had
told before, that she was dead. Which thing moved her greatly, so that she
feigned a sacryfice to Bacchus, and went to the place where her sister was, and
brought her home to her palace, kyld her son Itis, made meat of him, and
caused her husband to eat of it, and after cast the head into his bosom.
Wherewith he half enraged took his sword in hand, and would have slain them
both, but the mercy of the Gods prou ded a remedy, for Terens was turned into a
Lapwynge. Progne into a Swalow. Phelomela into a nyghtingale. And Itis into a
Phesant. Ouide. vi. of Metamor.

And that one may so straw thy lyms,
about the sieldes right plain:
As those were of the child, which did
his fathers course retain.
Medea flying from her father Oeta, Medea Absirtus
carried her brother Absyrtus with her, following Jason into Greece, whom she
helped in taking the goulden Fleese from her father, for which Iaso^ was sent
by his uncle Peleas. Wherewith Oeta moved, prepared a navy, and followed the
Argonants, whereof Jason was Captain, and pursued the^ so near, that Medea to
stay his course, killed her brother Absyrtus, and strawed his members abroad,
and that his grief might the more increase, she did styck his head upon a
pole. Which Oeta espied, he bestowed so much time in gathering the pieces of
his slain son together, that Jason and his mates had convenient time to
escape. Ovid in yt third book de Tristi. declares this story at large.

That in Perillus brazen work,
thou Bulls may imitate:
With bullyke sound in every point
agreeing unto that.
Perillus, Perillus.
thinking to please the cruel tyrant of Agrygentum Phaleres, made a Bull of
brass, wherein whosoever were cast, and a small fire made under the same would
make a noise like a bull, and bringing the same unto him craved a reward for
his pains. As Ovid in the fourth of his Trist. says. Phaleris intendinge
indeed to try that workmanshippe, commanded him forthwith to be tormented in
the same.

And as the cruel Phalrise,
thy tongue cut out before:
Included in the Paphian work,
right like a bull may rore.
Phaleris, Phaleris.
after he had tormented many in Perillus Bull, and exercysed much cruelty, by
the space of syxten years over the Agrygentines, was taken by his subjects,
and having his tongue cut out, was cast into the same. The Poet calls it
Paphian work, because the brass whereof it was made came from Paphos a city
in Cyprus, from whence the best brass accustomably came.

And while thou would return from age,
and years more youthful see:
As was Admetus father in law,
thou may deceived be.
Medea having made Aeson, Aeson.
Jason his father young again, and Bacchus nurses also, Peleas.
was entreated by the daughters of Peleas, who was brother to Aeson, and great
enemy to to his neuew Jason, that she would make their father young again also.
She doubted much at the first, and made the matter very dainty
(notwithstanding glad that so good occasion was proffered to be revenged of her
husbands enemy) at length with much ado granted in assurance their request.
And the better to persuade them that she could do it, she killed an old Ram,
and with her medecines made him a lamb again. Herewith they were fully persuaded
that she was able to do this, so that they promised her many gifts if she
would make their father young again. They agreed of her reward, and she bad
them kill him, and cast his members cut in small pieces into a caldren of hot
water, whereto save Alceste they all agreed, and did the same.

But when Medea had done that, she came for, she went to the top of a
tower fayning that she had a sacryfice to do, and with her dragons was carried
in the air, and gave Jason a token of his uncles death, who to establysh his
kingdom the better, gave his daughter Euadne to Eueus son of Cephalus,
Amphimone to Andremon Leontheus brother, and Alcesta to Admetus: thus thus was
Pelias Admetus father in law. Ovid. vii. Meta.

And as the gentleman that thou
in filthy pit may fall:
Yet so that of thy deed there may
remain no name at all.
In the midst of the city of Rome happened to be a great cleft in the earth,
Curtius.
and the soothsayers made answer that Stulio Manius (a God) craved a valiant
man to be given him, and if he had not one, that the city should shortly be
destroyed. Curtius to deliver the city from so great danger, all armed upon a
goodly courser, with his sword drawn in his hand with a full galloppe rode into
the same, which immediately closed up, and the place ever after was called
Curtius Lake.

And God grant that thou may be slain
as those of serpents grown:
Whose teeth in acceptable fields,
by Cadmus hands were sown.
After Jupiter had stolen Europa, Agenor. Cadmus.
her father Agenor king of Phenicia, sent Cadmus to seek his sister on this
condition, that either he should bring her again, or else never return again
himself. Cadmus after long seeking and small finding, for fear of his father,
durst not come in to his own country, but went to ask counsel of Apollo,
what was best for him to do: of whom he was commanded to follow a young ox
that never was yoked, that had the sign of half a Moon on one of his sides,
and to build a city where he first lay down, which he did, and called the
cuntry Boetia, and his city Thebes. But on a time sending his men for water,
and marueyling that they returned not again, going to seek them himself, and
finding them all slain by a great Dragon that belonged to Mars, so that there
was no more left alive but himself alone, he was greatly grieved. But for all
that, he set on the serpent and killed him, to whom after came Pallas, (his
good maistres,) and bad him sow the teeth of it in the ground, whereof arose
suddenly armed men, that suddenly flew one an other, so that if Pallas had not
commanded Echion, Ideus, Cromius, The inhabitants of Thebes.
Pelorus and Hiperenor to cease, because Thebes should be inhabited, they had
all ben destroyed by mutual wounds.

Or that thy luck may be as ill
as neuew to Pentheus:
Or as Medusas brother else,
I mean Archilochus.
Pentheus begat Odasus, Pentheus. Menetius
Odasus Menetius, Menetius Creon and Iocasta, which was married to Laius, of
whom in Oedipus you may read more before. Creon begat Hemon and Menetius, of
whom in this place Ovid speaks. He killed him self for to deliver his
country from a pestilence that Mars sent, for the killing of his Dragon by
Cadmus. Read Seneca his tragedy. This stock of Oedipus his, and Achilles, with
Tantalus, were very unfortunate. Who was Medusas brother (if Ovid mean one of
the three systers called Gorgones) for my part I never read, Archilochus.
except Archilochus had any sister of that name. How he was slain, read in
Licambes in the beginning.

Or though wherewith (though it were
one did a bird remain:
Which does with casting water wash short
her body toward rain.
Coronis daughter of Coroneus, Coronis.
when Minerua had given Erichthonius shut in a basket to be kept to her self.
Pandrasos Persa, and Aglanros, daughters of Cecrops, with charge that they
should not look into the same, and they contrary to her commandment had looked
there in and found a dragon. Coronis bewrayed the same, and told it abroad,
wherefore Minerua banished her from her company. Who after walking by the sea
side was espied by Neptune, who would have rauyshed her, but she by no means
would be persuaded to leave her virginity. Wherefore when she was at point to
be forced, she was by Minerna turned into a Crow. Ovid. ii. Metamor.

That thou may have as many wounds
as by report had he:
To whom when sacrifice is done
no knife may present be.
Osiris, Osiris.
whom the Egiptians do worship for a God, was slain by his brother Tiphon, and
cut into pieces, and for that cause in his sacryfice it is not lawful to
have a knife.

Or that with fury rapt thou may,
thy privy members lance:
As those whom mother Sibele makes
to foot the Phrigian dance.
All Cibeles priests were gelded, Cibeles Prestes coribantes Atis.
and moved with a divine fury in their sacrifices daunced. They were gelded,
because at the first she loving Atis very well, being a bewtiful young man, and
he not willing to do her pleasure, cut of his Demisaris. He would feign have been gone into his country again, from whence she had carried him against his
will, but she meaning to stay him still with her, sent one of her Lions to
fear him, wherewith in deed he abashed, ran into the wood, and ever after
was one of her priests, till he was turned into a Pine tree. Hitherto does
belong the next stafe that particularly speaks of Atis.

That thou of man (as Atis did)
ne man nor maid may stand:
And that thou may learn to play
on Timbrelles with thy hand.
Cibels priests beside that they daunced, they played also on instruments.

And that thou may be turned into
the beasts of mother great:
As she that lost, and he that did
the price with running get.
How Cibel the mother of the Gods turned Hippomenes and Atalanta into Lions you
heard before. Hippomenes and Atalanta


And that Limone not alone,
such punishment may bear:
Let horses with their raging teeth,
thy flesh in pieces tear.
How Hippomenes used his daughter Limone taken in adultry, I told you before.

And as the king of Cassandrea,
(which art as fierce as he)
God grant that wounded in the ground
thou buried may be.
Cassandrus that raygned in Cassandrea, Cassa^drus
a part of Macedonia, for his cruelty, of his subjects, was ouercouered with
ashes, and so dyed. Another of that name who succeeded him, was also for his
tyranny buried quick.

Or else that slain into the seas,
some may thee hedlong throw,
As were the noble Perseus,
and Telephus also.
Erectheus begat Cecrops, Cecrops Metion Metion Canace a daughter, Canace bare
Abas, Abas got Colchodon, Colchodon Elpenor, Acrisius. Danae. Perseus.
Elpenor Acrisius, who begat Danae. This Acrisius hearing of the oracle that
his daughters son should dispossess him of his kingdom, would grant her
in marriage to none, but included her in a tower of brass, so ye no man might
come to her, but Jupiter turned himself into a shower of Gold, and came in by
the Loouer of the castle, and got of her Perseus. Which thing when Acrisius
knew, he took him with his mother and put them into a tun, and cast them into
the Sea. But they shortly after were brought by water to Polidectes king of
the Isle Seriphon, who married Danae, and brought up Perseus well, but after
sent him to many dangers. But I need not in this place tell how he had of
Mercury his slippers, Pegasus and a helmet, a crooked sword of Adamant of
Saturn, and a shield of Pallas, nor how he overcame the three sisters,
daughters of Porcus, Euriale, Stheno, and Medusa, which had all but one eye,
they were called Gorgones. The story is at large described in the fourth and
fifte books of Cuids Metamor.

The story of Telephus in the beginning is set forth at large. Telephus.


And that by Phoebus altars thou
a sacrifice may be:
As was him self king Theodotus
by cruel enemy.
Theodotus, king of the Bactrians, Theodotus.
was sacryficed by Arsace king of Persia, to Apollo, after he was ouercomed in
battle.

And that Abdera may one year,
thee vow withouten fail,
And that thus vowed thou may be hit
with stones more thick then hayle.
The people of Abdera, Abdera.
(which is a city of Thracia) did vow a man for the common wealth of all, at
the beginning of every year, and the man that was thus vowed was stoned to
death.

That Jove with his three edged boult,
may hit thee in his ire:
As he did Hyppomenes son,
and Dosythoes sire.
Hippomenes, father of Limone, for the cruelty he showed to her, was
dispossessed of his kingdom as I said before. Which thing his son Prester
took very heuely, Prester.
and rayled upon the gods shamefully, and was therefore slain by a
thunderboult of Jupiter.

So was Atrax, because he bewrayed (...) of Jupiter with his daughter
Dosithoe. Dosithoe.


As Autonoes sister, and he
whose aunt dame Maia is:
And he that rashly wished the horse,
and guided them amiss.
Semele sister of Autonoe, Semele.
as in the petigree of Cadmus may appear, was well beloved of Jupiter, which
thing when Juno espied, she came to her in the lykenes of an old woman, and
bad her ask of Jupiter, that he would come to her as he did to Juno. Which
thing obtained, came to her in his majesty, armed with thunder and lightning.
But she (poor wench) for fear untimely brought forth her son Bacchus,
Bacchus.
and died. But Jupiter took the child and sowed him in his thigh until the
full time of birth came. By this means Bacchus was twice borne.

Ops sister of Maia, had by Sisiphus a son named Porphirio, Porphirio
who following his fathers impiety, was slain of Jupiter with a thonderbolt.

Phaeton son of Phoebus and Climene, Phaeton.
rod in his fathers chariot, and gave light to the earth a piece of a day, but
being not able to guide the horses right, burned almost both Heaven and earth,
and had don much more mischief, if Jupiter of his pity had not with a
thonderbolt stricken him out of the chariot, and so out of heaven he fell into
the river Eridamus. Ovid.ii. Meta.

As Eolus his wicked son,
and he that did proceed
of that same blood, that Arctos came,
which waters wantes in deed.
Salmoneus, Eolus his son, Salmone.
counterfeytyng Jupiters thonder in earth, was by a thonderbolt slain of him.

Menius, Licaons son, brother of Calisto, Menius
which was after a stir in heaven, called Arctos, seeing his fathers house on
fire and his father himself turned into a wolf, reviled Jupiter, and was
therefore by him slain with a thonderbolt.

And as Macedon with her mate, Macedon.

was burnt in flaming fire:
So pray I that thou may be slain
by Jove's revenging ire.
Macedon a queen of Macedonia, with her husband for impiety, were burned with
Jupiters lightning.

That thou may be a pray to them,
for whom it is a crime
To come to Delos, since they kilde
Thrasus before his time.
Thrasus a young man, Thrasus.
well-beloved of Diana, on a day as he came to do sacrifice to her early, was by
the dogs that guarded her temple torn in pieces. Wherefore she requested her
brother Apollo to send a plague among them, which ceased not until all the dogs
of the Island were killed.

Or those that kyld him, which has chaste
Diana naked seen:
Or those by whom young Linus has
in pieces toren been.
Acteon son of Aristeus and Autonoe, Acteon.
weary with long chase of wild beasts, came into a valey of Gargaphia, there at
a fair fountain to cool himself, but as ill fortune was, Diana with her
mates were come thither before to bath themselves, who so sone as she saw
Acteo^ come thither, lest he should bewray what he had seen, turned him into
a Heart, and so he became a pray to his own dogs.

Psamate daughter of Crotopus, Linus
had a son by Apollo called Linus. Linus
Who^ as he came from playing out of the fields, the dogs of his grandfather
Crotopus fare in pieces. Wherewith Apollo was so sore displeased, Pena^a monster.
that he sent amonster called Pena, to plague the people of the country. Which
monster would pull the infants from their mothers breasts and deuower them
before their faces. This monster was after slain by Corebus. Corebus.


That serpents may thee hite as ill,
as erst Euridice:
The daughter of Oeagrus old,
and fair Calliope.
Orpheus son of Oeagrus and Caliope, the Muse, married Euridice, Euridice.
who walkig with the maidens about the fields, happened to tread on a serpent,
which by misaduenture did so sting her, that she dyed thereof. Ovid.x. Metamor.

Or as they did Hipsiphiles boy,
or him that durst with prick
of percing spear the holow horse
of wood suspected strike.
Hipsiphile for sparing her father Thoas, Hipsiphile
was sore persecuted of ye women of Lemnos, wherefore she fled to Licurgus king
of Greece, and was nurse to his child named Opheltes, Opheltes alias Ar^hemorus.
or otherwise called Archemorus, about the time that Thebes was besieged. For
when the Greeks by means of a great drought could have no water, for that all
the fountains saving Langia, Langia.
were dried up, and they could not find that. They craved of her that she would
show them to the same, which thing she promised, and the better to do it, she
set her child out of her arms, which before she returned, was flayne by a
serpent.

Laocoon, Laocoon.
Neptunes priest, suspecting the horse, that the Greeks set before Troy to be
full of craft, persuaded the Troyans to set the same on fire. But false
Sinon with his feigned oration, had so bewytched their wits, that they would
not be ruled by him. He therefore with a spear ran against the same with such
force, that the harnes of the Grekish captayns (as says Aeneas in Virgil)
resounded again, and therefore was with his.ii. sons slain by serpents in
the wrath of Pallas.

And that thou may no wiselyer clime,
the sleppes of ladders hie
Than Elpenor, Elpenor.
and strength of wine
may bear as erst did he.
Elpenor, one of Ulysses companions, full of good wine at Circes house, was
disposed to clyme, but he fell from the ladder, and brake his neck. Homer.x.
Odiss.

That thou may dye as did they all,
that any help did bring
Unto Thiodamas in fight
who was their cruel king.
Hercules with Deianira his wife, left his fathers in laws Oeneus house,
because Condillus, Condillus
or as some call him Ciathus his butler powered foul water into his hands, and
he therefore gave him a blow on the ear. After his departure with his son
Hilus, he came to the flood Euenus, where he flew Nessus, as is said before.
Nessus. Euenus. Driopes. Thiodamas.
After this he came to the Driopes, whose king at that time was Thiodamas, unto
whom he sent his son Hilus to crave some meat, for the child was very
hungry, but the king would give him none. Hercules therefore much dyspleased,
by force took some of the kings oxen, and made thereof meat for himself and
his company. Wherefore Thiodamas willing to revenge this injury, came with a
band of his people, and assaulted Hercules and his companyons so sore, that
Hercules was feign to arm his wife and desire her aid, and was himself sore
wounded in the breast, but at the last he got the victory, and slew the king.
After the victory he brought the Driopes into Thracinia, Hyla.
and carried with him Hyla the daughter of Thiodamas being entangled with her
bewty.

And that in proper den of thine
thy life may pass away:
As Cacus rude, whom Oxes voice
included did bewray.
After Hercules had slain Gerion, and by the commandment of Euristheus,
brought away his oxen, be came into Italy, then called Hesperia, and put them
to pasture about the hill Auentinus, now one of the seven famous hills in
Rome, in which hill, Cacus.
Cacus Vulcane his son had a den, and practiced spoiling of the trauelers
which passed that way, and hearing of Hercules Oxen, he came and took diverse of
them, and that they might not be found, he pulled them into his den by their
tayls. Hercules missing the^, seeks all the cuntry for them, but finds them
not, he therefore determined to depart thence without them. But as he was
goinge away, he heard some of them loow. With which he called back again,
sought so long that at length he found the cave, before the mouth whereof,
Cacus had laid a stone so great, that ten couple of Oxen could not move
the same, thinkyng by that means to be safe enough. But Hercules laid his
shoulders to the same, and at length with much pain removed it away. And
after long and terryble fight, he killed Cacus, and so recovered again his
cattle. This tale is written by Ovid, in the first book of his Fasti in many
words.

Or else as he who with his blood,
Th'enboicke seas made red:
Who brought a shirt in poison dipte,
that Nessus erst has bled.
Licas servant of Hercules, Licas.
brought him the poisoned garment whereof I spoke before, for which deed, by
Hercules he was cast into the Enboicke sea. But because he was not gilty of the
crime, Tethis turned him into a rock.

That headlong thou may come to hell
from top of rock right hie:
As he that Platos book has read,
of immortality.
Theombrotus readyng Platoes book of the immortality of the soul, Theombrotus.
was so moved with joys of the same, that presently he cast himself from the
top of a Rock, thereby the sooner to attain to them.

Or he that saw the guylfull sails,
of Theseus ships at last:
Or as the child who from the top
of Troyan Towers was cast.
Egeus commanded his son Theseus going into Crete to the Laberinth, Aegeus.
(as the custom was) to feed Minotaurus, that if by any good fortune he
returned again safe, that he should in the stead of ye black murning sails
wherewith his ships out ward were decked, put on white. But he returning safe by
means of Ariadne, as is said before (and also in my book of Theseus and
Ariadne) for joy remembered not his fathers commandment. Theseus. Ariadne
When therefore the father saw his ships return with the black sails, thinking
that his son had been dead, (for he sat at the top of a tower still waiting for
ye same) he cast him self hedlonge into the sea, whereof hitherto the sea is
called Mare Aegeum. Astianax, Astianax
son of the noble Trojan Hector, was by Ulysses and the Greeks, cast from the
top of one of the highest towers in Troy: for fear least if he lived, he
should revenge the death of his father and the destruction of his country
upon them. Seneca.

Or she who aunt and nurse was both
to Bacchus youthful boy,
Or he to whom thinuented saw,
was loss of lively Joy.
Ino sister of Semele mother to Bacchus, Ino.
by that means was his aunte, and she also nursed him. She was wife of
Athamas, and flyinge the rage of her husband, cast her self from the top of
a rock into the sea, as is said before.

Perdyx, neuew unto Dedalus, Perdyx. Dedalus.
was by his uncle for spyte because he invented the saw and compass, cast
from the top of a hye tower, but by the mercy of Mynerua before he came to
the ground, he was turned into a Partych, called in latin Perdyx. And this is
the cause that a Partych never will either breed, or sit in tree, least she
should again break her neck with the fall. Notwithstanding Plinye in his
seventh book says, that Dedalus invented the saw. But Ouyd in the eight
book of Metamor. is author of that I said before.

As Lidian maid who from the rock,
her self in sea did cast:
Out of whose mouth ill cursing words
against a God have past.
Ilice daughter of Ibicus a Lydian, Ilice.
was beloved of Mars, but by Dianas aid she was safe from his violence. But
she not content therewith would rail on him and revile him shamefully, where with
he much moved, killed her father, and she therewith becoming mad for grief, cast
hirselfe hedlo^g into the sea from the top of a rock.

And that a Lion with her young,
may meet thee in the field:
And cause thee so to lose thy life,
as Paphages was kilde.
Paphages king of Ambracia, Paphages.
happening to meet a Lioness great with young in his garden, was by her toren in
pieces.

That a bore may thee tear as him,
who had by tree his hold:
And was the son of Licurgus,
or Idmon else the bold.
Licurgus had a son that was called Brutes, Idmon.
on a day hunting the wild Bore, was oppressed so sore that he had no way to
escape but by taking of a tree, yet for all that ere he was up, the bore caught
him and pulled him down again, and slew him.

Idmon one of the Argonants, he came last (for he knew being a soothsayer, that
he should die therein) in Bithinia, was slain by a Bore.

And that a Bore though slain first, thee
with deadly wound may gall:
As him upon whose face the head
of cruel beast did fall.
Thoas a famous hunter in Andriegathia which is inhabited by the people
Possidoniatae, Thoas.
vowed the heads and feet of all the beasts he could take to Diana. But on a
time getting a wonderful great Bore, he hanged up to her only the head on her
tree, wherewith she offended, as he slepte under the same tree, made the same
head fall upon him, and so he was slain.

Or that thou may the hunter be
that hunted hard by Troy:
Or Nauclus else, whom with like death
Pine apples did destroy.
Atis and Nauclus slepig under a Pine tree were both slain, Atis. Nauclus.
with the fall of apples that fell from the same.

And if that at king Minos ports
thy ship arrived be:
I wish his people may theee take
for one of Sicily.
Of the great debate between the men of Crete.
and Sicilia, Sicilia.
in the story of the death of Minos, siayne by Cocalus, in the pursuit of
Dedalus, I have said before.

That with a falling house thou may
as Alcidice be slain:
To whom with Licoris her mate
one fortune did remayhe.
Alcidice daughter of Alebas a Larisseia, Alcidice. Licoris.
was with her husband Licoris by the fall of their house slain.

Or else that thou in running stream
drowned as Euenus:
May leave thy name unto some flood,
as did Tiberinus.
Euenus son of Mars, Evenus. Marpissa.
and king of Etolia, had a very fair daughter named Marpissa, who compelled
such as would mary his daughter to run a course with horse, with him. Such as he
overcame, he nailed their heads to his gates, thereby to fear other from like
enterprise. Idas.
Idas supposed the same of Aphareus. But in deed Neptunus receyuinge of his
father very swift horses, overcame Euenus, and carried away his daughter. But
Euenus followed him to have put him to death, but his horses were so good that
he might not overtake him, wherefore for spite he cast himself into the flood
of Etolia, called the^ Licorba, but afterward of him Euenus. While Idas fled,
Apollo met him, and would needs have taken his wife from him, but he would
not suffer him, by reason whereof they had come to blows, had not Jupiter sent
Mercury to determyne their controversy on this condition, that the woman should
be set betwixt them both, and chose whether she list. But she took Idas and
forsook Apollo, fearyng lest he when she should be old and full of wrincles,
would forsake her and set her at naught.

Tiberinus was drowned, and left his name to the river that runs through
Rome.

And that thy body worthy be,
on spear to have a seat:
As was Eurialus, and that
thy head may be man's meat.
Eurialus and Nisus two very faithful freades, Eurialus. Nisus.
sent ambasadours to Eeneas from Ascanius, beseged by Turnus. As they passed
through the tents of the Rutili, killed Ramnetes and many more. Eurialus put on
him Ramnetes armor, and in the morning was spyed by the horsemen of
Volscentes, and slain. Nisus who had esowne (...) caped the danger and missed
his friend, returned again, and seeing him among his ennemies fighting, desired
with his own life to redeem his, but Volscentes for all that killed him. Nisus
then not minding to live after the loss of so faithful a friend, came in among
his ennimies, where after he had slain Volscentes, and well revenged his death,
was slain upon his dead corpse. Virgil.ix. Aenei. Their heads on the tops of
two spears, were set in the tents of the Rutili, which seen of the Troyans,
moved them to great mourning and sorrow.

And as men say that Brotheus died
(who death did much desire:)
Thou may hedlong cast thy self,
into some flaming fire.
Brotheus son of Vulcane and Minerua was for his deformity so despised,
Brotheus.
that Jupiter would not make him immortal, for which cause he ashamed of
himself, willingly lept into a fire.

Or that included in some cave,
such death thou may obtain:
As had the man who did devise
a story to his pain.
Cherillus a Poet, Cherillus.
wrote the acts of Alex ander the great, and for his pains it was agreed,
that for every good verse he should have a crown of gold, and for every ill
one, a stripe with a whip. In all his work were but seven allowed verses, but
the number of the ill was so great, ye he was slain with his stripes. Of him
Alexander was wont to say, that he had rather be in honor the deformed
Thirsites, then in Cherillus the valiant Achilles. Some say that this Cherillus
was famished for his pains.

As to him who of Iambus verse,
the first deviser was:
So unto thee a froward tongue,
of hurt may be the cause.
Archilochus for his railing book that he made against Licambes and Niobole,
Archilohus.
was banished from Lacedemon, and his book was condemned. But some say that he
was by Licambes friends slain, as I in the beginning said.

Or as he who with simple verse
on Athens sore did rail:
May hated render up thy life,
when vittayles shall thee fail.
Aristophanes inuaying against the praise of Athens, Arifiophanes.
ye the Orators in their books had set forth, was by public authority pyned
to death. So were also Anaxandrides and Menius, and Anaximines as Pausa says.
In. vi. histo.

And as the Poet that against
a strong man did inuay:
The same may be a cause to thee,
to take thy life away.
An other Aristophanes invaying against the strength of one Menechius a
wrastler in that Tragedy of his own name called Menechius, Aristophanes.
was by public consent banished Athens, and after slain.

And as Orestes had a wound, Orefies.

by cruel serpents mouth:
So grant the Gods that thou may die
by byte of serpents touth.
Orestes quit of the madness that he had for the killing of his mother, having
surrendered the kingdom of Micene to his son Tisamenes, was slain by a
Serpent.

That thy first wedding day may be
to thee the last of life:
Thus Eupolis has dyed before,
and his new wedded wife.
Eupolis, Eupolis. Medilla.
son of Nicea and Glicerium, some call her Medilla his wife, the first night
they lay together were found dead. It is likely, that either they were very
heavy, or else the bed very weak, that it must fall upon them the first night
they lay thereon.

And that a shafte stoke in thy heart,
may take thy life away:
As from the lusty Licophron,
as ancient stories say.
Licophron an ancient Poet, Licophron
wrote the sayings of Cassandra, and comprysed in one short volume, a brief
sum of all the tales that the Grekish Poets had invented. On a time as he
contended about the principality of the old Poets, was by his adversary slain
with an arrowe. Some think there were two Licophrones that wrote either of
them one of the aforesaid works. But I see no reason why one might not do
the^ both.

Or rent with hands of thine thou may
be strowed about the wood:
As he was cast at Thebes, which
was sprung of serpents blood.
Pentheus king of Thebes, Pentheus.
son of Echion and Agaue, daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia, (who were turned
into serpents) despising the sacrifice of Bacchus, was therefore by him turned
into a bore, and hunted and killed by his mother Agane, and his auntes Ino and
Autonoe. Ovid in the third of his Metamor.

Or that thou may with wild bulls,
he halde about some hill:
As was the wife of Licus king,
That needs would have her will.
Antiope daughter of Nicteus and wife of Licus king of Thebes, Antiope.
refused for suspision of adultry, was forced by Jupiter, and conceived.ii.
sons, Zetus and Amphion. Her husband Licus in her room took an other wife
named Dirce, who persuaded her husband to put Antiope into prison. But she
prevented that mischief, and sled to Epopeus, with who^ she brought forth
her.ii. sons, which she left with certain sheepeherds of that cuntry. But
Nicteus moved with the impudency of his daughter, desired Licus to fetch her
again, which he did, and killed Epopeus, and gave her to be kept to Dirce, as
if she had been his sisters child. But she not liking her keeping, fled again,
and came to her sornes, to who^ the shepeherds detecting the whole matter,
caused them to seek revenge of their mothers harm. They therefore came to
Thebes. and took Dirce, and tied her to wild bulls, and so tore her in pieces,
and had also by policy slain Licus, if Mercury had not given him warninge
thereof, so that he provided safety with his heels.

As hirs that harlot was to him,
whose sister was his wife:
Thy longue may fall before thy feet,
cut out with cruel knife.
How Philomela was rauyshed by her sister Prognes husband Tireas, Philomela
I have said before.

As he that Blesus was surnamed,
to late spyed Mirrhas wound:
Thou in a thousand places may
be void of children found.
This tale also is noted before.

And that the husy Be in the eyes,
her hurtful sting may stick:
As with the same in times ago,
they did Acheus prick.
As Acheus devising his poem walked about his orchard, Achens.
a swarm of bees settled on his head, and he busied to drive them away, lost
his eyes with their stinges.

That tied unto some hill, a bird
upon thy heart may feed:
Like as upon his brothers child,
dame Pirrha was we read.
Prometheus uncle to Pirrha, Promethe'
Epimethius daughter, was tied to Caucasus, and a bird eats his heart. You
may read more of him in the beginning.

As Harpagus his child thou may
present Thiestes feast:
And to thee flayne and dressed for meat,
thy sire may be a guest.
Astiages son of Ciaxaris, Astiages.
last king of the Medes, saw in a dream, a vine grow out of the womb of his
daughter Mandane, Manddne.
that over shadowed all Asia, and consultinge with the wise men thereon, had
answer that she should bear a son, that should be king of all Asia, and
dispossess him of his crown also. Wherewyth Astiages troubled, would not give
his daughter in marriage to any neble man, least nobility of his fathers
side, annexed to the noblenes of his mother, might make his neuew of more
courage. He therefore wylling to abate his hawty stomach with base parentage,
married his daughter to one Cambises a Persian, of low degree, yet not therewith
delivered from the fear of his dream, sent for her when she was with child,
that the Infa^t borne, might before his face be slain. The child was borne,
and by Astiages delivered to his trusty counselor Harpagus to be destroyed.
Harpagus
But he fearinge that if the kingdom after should come to Mandane, (because
there was no heir male) that she would revenge her childs death on him, which
she could not on her father, Mithridates.
gave the same to Mithridates the kings shepeherd, who cast the child in a
wood, to be a pray to wild beasts, and as soon as he came home, told his wife
of the childs fortune, who at that time bad brought forth a dead child. She
therefore desired her husband, to lay hirs in the sted of the other, whereto at
length he agreed, and when he came to the child, he found a Bitch giving it
suck, and beatinge away the fowls and beasts, from the same. In process of
time, the child was by lofte made a king in pastime among children, and had
to name Cirus, Cirus.
and such as would not be ruled he caused to be beaten with whips. Wherefore one
of them named Artembares, Artembares.
told his father, and he thinking scorn that gentlemen's children should be
beaten of a sheep herdes boy, told the king thereof, who sent for the
child, and asked him how he durst beat them in such sort, who answered
that he did like a king. Astiges moved with his constancy, called to mind his
dream, and seeing him so like his daughter, enquired narowly the matter, and
found that it was his Neuew. Wherefore he took him home, and banyshed him under
an honorable color into Persia. But he bare a grudge to Harpagus, and in
reuengement thereof he kylde his son, and caused him to eat the same, and
hereof speaks Ovid here. What came afterward of all these parties, you may
read in Iustine, which Master Golding has well translated.

And that thou may thy body have
bemangled very sore
with cruel sword, which thing unto
Mamerthes hapt before.
Mamerthes brother of Sisaphon king of Corinth, Mamerthes.
for great desire that he had to be king, killed his brothers son that was
heir to the crown. Wherefore be was of Sisaphon torn limmeally, that is to
say, each piece from other.

As Poet old of Siracuse,
with halter strangled was:
God grant that so that way be stopped,
whereby thy life does pass.
Theocritus the worthiest Poet that ever wrote, Theocrit'.
of shepeherds affairs preferred before Virgill, wrote against Hyero his
son, of whom he was brought to the gallows in sport, to cause him to leave
his railing. Where being asked whether he would leave his evil saying of the
King or not, began to rail the more. Wherefore by the kings commandment,
though he were brought thither in jest, yet was he hanged in earnest.

And that thy skin being plucked of,
thy flesh may naked show:
As Marsias who on a flood
his name did once bestow.
Of Marsias strife with Apollo you may read before. Marsias.


And that thou cursed man may see,
Medusas stonny head,
The sight whereof to Cepheni,
was cause that they were dead.
After Perseus had slain Medusa (from whose neck came Chrisaor, Perseus.
Chrysaor. Pegasus.
and Pegasus the wynged Horse out of her womb) as he rode upon that said
flying horse, in Ethiopia, Andromeda.
he spyed Andromeda, daughter of Cepheus and Cassiope, for her mothers falte
tied by commandment of Hammon to a rock, to be devoured of a monster of the
sea. Whom he on condition to have her to wife, delivered. And at the marriage
day came one Phineus brother of Cepheus, to whom she was before her mischance
affianced, and would have her by force from Perseus, but he shewinge Medusas
head to him and his mates, turned them all into stones. Ovid.iiii. v. of
Metamor.

And that of Potinum mares, the byts
as Glancus may abide,
Or as an other Glancus, thou
into the sea may glyde.
Glancus of Potinum despised Venus sacryfices: Glancus.
wherefore she sent such a madness to his mares, that as he rode, he was toren
by them in pieces.

How Glancus Scillas lover was drowned by virtue of an herb, Glancus alter^.
is said before.

That Gnosos hunny to thy breath,
may passage grant no more,
As unto him who had one name,
with two rehcarst before.
Glancus, Glancas tertius.
son of Minos and Pasiphae as he playde with a tenyse bale, fell into a
barell of huny and was strangled. He was buried by his father, and with him
Polyidus a sothsayer and a Physician, Polyidus.
to the intent that either he should make him alive again, or else dye with
him: be therefore being in the tomb with him (for kings were accustomed to be
buried in vauts) he esppyed two serpe^ts fyghting so long together that the one
had killed the other. Then he that wos alive did fetch an herb, and put it
into the mouth of him that was dead, by virtue whereof, he recovered life
again. Polyidus meaning to try whether this would do any good to his master,
fetched a part thereof, and put it into his mouth, and he therewith presently
recovered life also. Higinus capite de polyido.

Or else that thou a guilty man,
may drink with heavy cheer,
That which the famous clark did drink
to fore with out all fear.
Socrates accused by Polideutus Miletus, Socrates.
Policrates, Anytus, that he corrupted the youth of Athens, as well with euel
and false religion, as also with indecent manners, was therefore cast in prison
and after condemned. Where he having disputed of the immortality of the
soul, with merry cheer and smiling countenance, drank poison and dyed. Plato.

That thou no better luck may have,
then Hemon had in love:
As Machareus his sister did,
so thou thine to may prove.
Hemon Creons son, Hemon.
loved Antigone daughter of Oedipus in such sort, that when she was buried
quick for breaking Creons wicked commandment, in buryinge her brother
Polinices (for he had commanded the contrary upon pain aforesaid) he slew
himself upon her grave.

An other Hemon using his daughter Rodope for his wife, Hemon. Rodope.
was by the anger of the Gods, turned into a hill, and she also.

Of Machareus and Canace Eolus children, I have written before.

And that which Hectors son did see
when all things were on flame,
From top of native tower, god grant
that thou may see the same.
How Ulysses cast Astianax Hectors son, Astianan
from the top of Troyan tower, is also said before.

And that with proper blood, as he
thou may repay thy shame:
Whose grandfather was made his sire
and sister to his dame.
Adonis son of Cineras by his own daughter Mirrha, beloved of Venus, Adonis.
in huntinge the Bore, was by him slain. Ovid.x. Metamor.

And that such kind of weapon may
within thy bones remain:
As wherewith Icarus son in law,
is said for to be slain.
Ulysses that married Penelope, Ulysses.
Icarus daughter, knowinge that he should be slain by his son, banyshed
Telemachus into the country or fields called Cephalenia. But Telogonus his
other son that he had by Circe, coming to seek his father in Ithaca, and not
at the first admitmitted to speak to him, killed the porter, and diverse other
of Ulysses servants, wherewith he himself came down unarmed, and was by
misaduenture slain with a Darte that Telogonus cast. But after knowinge what
he was, he he forgave him the offense, notwithstanding he dyed of the blow.

And that with proper thumb thy throat
thou may so stop as did
Agenor full of talk, whose life
by fall from horse was rid.
One Agenor a prattling fellow, Agenor.
not sparinge Jupiter in his talk, fell from his horse, and with his own
finger choked himself.

That thou as Anaxarchus was,
in mortar may be flayne:
And that thy bones may have like sound,
as they were perfect grain.
Anaxarchus the Philosopher (between whom and Nicocreon tyrant of Cyprus was a
great quarrel) supped on a time with the great Alexander, Anaxarchus.
of whom being asked how the cheer liked him, answered that it might not be
amended, and that there wanted nothing but the head of Nicocreon. Which injury
after Nicrocreon revenged. For when by mishap he arrived in Ciprus, he was
taken by the Tyrant, and beaten in a Mortar, his tongue first pulled out,
that he might not after his accustomed manner rail upon him.

That Phoebus with Lencotheas sire,
to Hell may thrust thee to:
Which thing unto his daughter first,
he did attempt to do.
Lencothea daughter of Orchamus, Lecothea. Orchamus
was loved of Phoebus, and therefore burned of her father, wherewith Phoebus
offended, with his beams burned Orchamus to death also.

And that, that monster may annoy
thy friends that erst was slain
by Corebus his prowes, who rid
the sorry Greeks from pain.
How Corebus killed the monster that infested Peloponesus, Corebus.
which Apollo sent for the death of his son Linus, is said before.

And Ethras neuew for the wrath
that stepdame did him bear:
God grant that those thy scarred horse
in pieces may thee tear.
Of this also is said before. Hippolitus
But because Jupiter and Apollo fell out by his means, it shall not be much
amysse to prosecute the story a little farther. After he was torn in pieces,
Diana having pity on him because he was so chaste, desired Esculapius Apollos
son, to make him alive again, Esculapius. Ciclopes.
which he did. But Jupiter not content, that any mortal man had such skyll to
make dead men alive again, with a thunderbolt killed him. Wherewith Apollo
angered, killed all the Ciclopes that made his thunderboltes. Wherefore he was
himself banished out of heaven nine years, and driven to so narow a pinch,
that he was fain to keep Admetus sheep till, he was again restored to his
old place.

And as the host for too much wealth,
it is clyent did destroy:
So let thine host for thy small goods,
thee reaue of lively joy.
How Priams son Polidorus, Polimnestor. Polidorus.
was slain by Polimnestor king, of Thracia, each man knows, and I have told
already.

And as so many brothers were
with Damasi^hon stayne:
God grant that so of all thy stock,
there may not one remain.
Amphion son of Jupiter and Antiopa, had by Niobe daughter of Tantalus and
Taigetes, seven sons and seven daughters. With which number, Niobe very
proud (when Manto daughter of Tiretias, commanded the Thebans to do
sacrifyce to Latona and her children) she said plainly that hirselfe was the
better woman. Wherefore Latona angry, complained to her children, so that they
came from heaven in clouds, and Apollo killed al her sonns, whose names were
Ismenus, Sipilus, Phedimus, Tantalus, Alphenor, Dama sithon, and Ilioneus, with
his arrows, and Diana all her daughters. She hirself with sorrow consumed, was
turned into a marble stone, and her husband killed himself, as in the.ii. next
staves Ovid reports.

And as the harper did his death
unto his children add:
So let there be (to loath thy life)
a just cause still be had.
Amphion was a cunning Musician. Niobe.


That thou as Pelops sister may
be turned into a stone:
Or Battus else to whom his tongue
did give him cause to moan.
Apollo banished out of heaven for killing the Ciclopes, kept Admetus cattle,
which was son of Pheres, but while he wandered pyping about the wilderness,
his cattle strayed into Pilis, which Mercury turned out of the way, and hid in
a wood, which Battus son of Neleus espied, Battus.
who kept a herd of mares thereby, to who^ Mercury gave one of the fairest kyne
to to keep his counsel. He took the Cow, and said that a stene should sooner
bewray him, then he would tell ought. But Mercury meaning to try him, came
again in an other likeness, and asked whither he saw any kyne, and made as
though he had lost them, and promised to give him a cow with a bull, if he
would tell where they were. Battus was somewhat covetous, and showed him the
place where they pastured. Wherewith Mercury was so sore offended, that he
turned him into a Tuch stone. Ovid.ii. Metamor.

And if that thou with dish do play
cast up into the air:
That with the same thou may be slain
like Hiacinthus fair.
Hiacinthus son of Amiclas, well beloved of Apollo, Hyacynthus.
as on a time he played with a dysh, (which was a great pastime in times past)
that was cast by Apollo very hye, and he somewhat greedy to catch it, with
rebound thereof from ground, his brains were knocked out, and he by Apollo turned
into a flower of purple color.

And if that any water may
with thy hands moved be:
I wish that every flood be worse
then Abidon to thee.
Leander of Abidon a city in Asia, Leander.
loved Hero that dwelled in Sestos a city in Europe not far from the other,
but divided with a narrow sea called (of the fall of Hell, sister to Phrixus
therinto) Hellespontus. He was accustomed to swym over the same every day
commonly to his lover, but at length not able to bear above seven days the
want of his lady, attempted in a great tempest to swym unto her, and was
drowned by the way. And she as soon as she hard thereof, cast her self hedlong
into the same also.

And as the poet while he swame,
in water small was lost:
Let hellysh water strangle thee,
and make the yield thy ghost. Menander

Menander the famous Greek comicall poet swymming in a very shalow water was
strangely drowned.

Terence also as he returned out of Greece, Terentius
suffered shypwrack, and was drowned, and with him a hundred and eight comedyes
that he had translated out of Greek Menander into Latin.

Or else when thou have suffered wrack,
Andsurging seas shall pass:
May when thou come to land be slain
as Palinurus was.
Palinurus Aeneas Pilote, Palinurus
deceived by Somnus, was cast into the Sea by him. Who having swimmed three
days, on the fourth landed and was slain by the Velienses, Virgil.v. and.vi.
Aeneid.

Or as the wrathful dogs that kept
Dianas things in peace:
In pieces may thee tear, as once
they did Euripides.
Euripides the excellent philosopher and Poet, Euripides
returning one night from Archelaus palace, king of Macedoma, with who^ he
supped, was by his enemy Lisimachus servant of Archelaus, and one of the bedels
of Dianas church slain. For he set such dogs on him, as served to guard
Dianas temple, and they tare him in pieces. But he enjoyed not this ill deed
long, for he was so checked by Arideus a Macedonia^, and Cratinas a
Thessalian, that for shame he killed himself. Euripides in moral Philosophy
was Socrates scholar, Euripides masters.
in natural Anaxagoras, in Rethorike Prodicus. He was borne in Salamine, and
had but poor parents, for Muesarchus was his father and kept an alehouse,
and his mother Clito sold herbs for her living. He was so famous that the
Grecians sent ambassadors for his bones, but the Macedonians would not deliver
them. For they counted them selves happy, that so notable a man was buried
among them. He began to write at the age of.18. yers.

Or that thou may upon the face
of Sicill giaunt dance:
Where Aetna does abundantly
his fiery flames advance.
Empedocles son of Methon, Empedocles.
and brother to Calicrates, to get an immortal name, lept into Aetna a hill in
Sicil, so named of a woman called Aetna buried there, who^ Jupiter loved.
Tiphocus.
Under it is a part of Tiphoens the terrible giant buried. This giant attempted
to pluck the Gods out of heaven, and fighting with them, put the^ al to
slight, and chased the^ into Egypt, where for fear Jupiter was turned into a
Ram, Juno into a cow, Apollo to a crow, Diana into a cat, Venus into a fish,
and Mercury into the bird Ibis. But at length, being beguiled by the^ he was
buried in Cicilia. Under Aetna lies his head, out of whose mouth come all
those flames that arise out of Aetna. Under Pelorus, lies his right hand,
under Pachynus his left, and under Lilebaeus lie his legs. By this burial,
you may easily guess that he was like enough to make a coward afraid, while he
was alive.

Or that by the wives of Thracia,
Orpheus meaning thee,
Thy body with their raging nails,
in pieces pulled be.
Orpheus having lost his wife Euridice, Orpheus.
and his labor that he took in going to Hell for her also, least he should try
like sorrow in an other wife, if he married any more, determined never after to
mary, but ordained the unnatural and diuelysh manner of knowing young men. And
haunted solitary places, equally despising all women. Wherefore the women of
Thracia, dyspleased (for many of them would have had him to their husbands
because he was so cunning on the Harp) set on him and slew him. Ovid.xi. of
Metamor.

As Altheas son in flaming fire,
was burned long ago.
I wish that with thy fatal brand,
a fire be kendled so.
Oeneus king of Calidonia, and son of Parthaon, instituted sacryfices to all
the Gods save Diana, whom either of forgetfulness, or of contempt he
pretermitted. She therewith not a little offended, sent a huge Bore that wasted
all Calidonia. For the killing of which a general hunt was decreed, by the
commandment of Oeneus, Meleager.
and Meleager his son was captain of the same. Thither (beside the princes
of Calidonia, among whom were Plexippus and Toxeus, Meliagers uncles) came
Atalanta a very bewtyfull maid, Atalanta
and daughter of Iasius king of Archadia, who in hunting gave the Bore the
first wound: Wherefore when the Bore was killed, Meliager gave her for her
virtue the head and vmbles thereof. With which gift his uncles much offended,
took the same from her again. Wherewith Meleager was so sore displeased, that
he slew them both. Which deed when his mother Althea knew, she cast into the
fire the brande whereupon his life did depend. For on a time when the Ladies
of Desteny sat in her house by the fire, they agreed that Meliager should live
till that block (poyntinge to one) were burned out. Which as soon as they were
gone, Althea took away, and kept safely till this time, and now to revenge the
death of her brothers, she cast it into the fire, and as soon as it was burned
up, Meliager dyed. For whose death his systers so mourned, ye amidst their
tears, they were turned into birds, called of their brother Meliagrides.

As by Medeas crown was burnt,
the new betrothed spouse,
And as her father was with her,
and eke with him the house.
How Medea killed Pelias, Medea.
is said before. But after that deed she fled the cuntry, and was carried in
the air, in a chariot drawn with Dragons. All her journey is described in
the.vii. of Metamor. But when she was weary of traueling, she returned home
again, where finding that Jason set more by Creusa daughter of Creon king of
Corynth, Creusa.
than by her, she dyssembled the matter a while, but after she had made al
things for her purpose, she sent a chaplet made of herbs, inchaunted in such
sort, that as soon as it came nygh any light, it would take fire thereof,
and not be quenched again. Creusa having this on her head, when candelles
were lighted, it took fire, and burned her with her father and the whole house,
and whatsoever else was in the same. This done, she slew the two children Medo
and Mermero, that she had by Jason, and fled to Athens, and was there married
to Egeus, Theseus father.

As poisoned blood crept in the limbs
of Hercules the great: Hercules.

I wish that so a body vile
may all thy members eat.
Of this also is mention made once or twice before.

That also thou may feel the like
new kind of punishment:
As to revenge his father did
Licurgus son inuente.
How Butes revenged his father Licurgus on Bacchus Priests, Butes.
with cruel death, is also said before. He was the fourth from Pentheus, for
Pentheus begat Drias, Drias Licurgus, Licurgus Butes.

Or that to cleave an Oak thou may
(as Nilo did) assay:
And have no power at all to pluck,
thy taken hands away.
Milo Crotoniates, Milo crotoniatess
(for there were many of that name) was a man of very great strength. He killed
a bull at one blow with his fiste, and eat him up every morsel when he had
done. He came through a wood where he espied a great tree half elefte, and the
wedges sticking fast therein. He meaning to rid the laborers (by lykelyhode) of
pain, would needs take upon him to cleave it with his hands. He pulled it so
hard that the wedges fell out, but for all that the tree came again into his
first state, and had his hands so fast in the riftes, that he could not get
them out, by means whereof, he became a pray to the ravenous beasts that
haunted that wood.

Or for thy gifts as Icarus,
like hurtes thou may receive:
To whom with armed hands his death,
the drunken men did give.
Icarus learning the use of wine of Bacchus, Icarus.
as he walked about the costs of Athens, gave the rude husbandmen some
thereof to drink. But they not content with a mean, drank thereof till they
were drunk, and thynkinge then that they had been poisoned, Mera.
forth with slew Icarus, and cast him into a ditch. Mera his bitch a contynuall
companyon of his in all his iourneys, Erigons.
ran home after her master was slain, to Erigone his daughter, who seeing the
bitch come, and not her father, suspecting that which had happened in deed,
went to know the the truth, and the Bitch brought her to the place where her
slain father lay. Which thing when she saw (not able to bear the grief that
she conceived of the sight) hanged hirselfe. As Ovid in the next slafe
following affirms.

And that the godly daughter did,
for grief of fathers death:
So let a tied cord about
thy throat, stop up thy breath.
Or else that closed in a house,
may famine bide as he:
For whom that kind of punishment,
his mother did decree.
Noble valor and hie prowes in war, with the Lacedaemonians, was so esteemed
that ye mothers would reach their shields to their sons going out to battayl,
and straightly charged the^, either to be conquerus, or else to die therefore.
For it was counted a great shame and vilany to fly. Wherefore Euristhenes,
Euristhenes.
after an overthrow retourninge home, was so hated among his people, that his
own mother shut him up in a strong chamber, and with hunger pyned him to
death, that thereby at least she might wipe away the continual shame from
her house.

Or that Dianas sacred church
thou may (as he) annoy:
Who turned quite his journey wrong,
as he returned from Troy.
He means of Ajax Cilius, Ajax Cileus.
who defloured Cassandra in Pallas church, and was therefore slain with a
thunderbolte, as is declared before.

And that as Nanplius thou may
for feigned fault be slain,
And that it may thee help no whit
that thou deseru'st no pain.
Of the worthy Palamedes gyltles death, Palamedes.
by false Ulysses conueyance, is mention made before.

Or else as Isis faythlesse priest,
slew Ethalus his guest
Whereof dame Io myndefull yet,
his service does detest.
Io daughter of Inachus turned out of a cow into her former shape in Egypt was
there married to Osiris, Io. Ethalus.
and made a goddess called Isis. One of her priests received Ethalus and
promised him good harborow, but in the night for all that he killed him. Isis
therewith greatly offended gave certain signs ye she would revenge his death
upon all the Egyptians, Who to avoid ye plage approaching, banished all his
family out of the country, that had slain Ethalus, and decreed further by
common authority, that none of that stock should ever after, bear any office
about the mynisteryes of Isis, with which deed Isis was well contented and
pleased.

Or as Melanthus son by dark
for murder hydden lay,
Whom erst his mother by the light
of candell did bewray
So wyshe I all thy body pressed
with weapons cast at thee:
So wish I that of craved aid,
thou destitute may be.
Codrus son of Melanthius, Codrus.
kylde his father, and hid himself, so that none knew where but his mother.
Who as soon as the Athenians sought for him to put him to death, declared where
he was.

That thou such night may pass as did,
the Troyan full of fear:
Who promised to get the horse
that did Achilles bear.
Dolon a Troyan, Dolon.
for a certain sum of money, promised to fetch away Achilles horses, Balion
and Zanthus. But as he went about to perform his promise, he was taken by
Ulysses and Diomedes, of whom all the night had in examination of the Troyan
affairs, was slain in the morning.

Or that thou may no better rest,
(than Rhesus had) obtain,
Or else his company the day
before that they were slain.
Rhesus king of Thracia, Rhesus.
son of Strimon had horses, which if they once tasted of the pasture of Troy,
it was destynied that Troy might not be taken. But when he came almost thither
by night, he was bewrayed by his white horses, himself and all his company was
slain by the Greeks, and his fatal horses turned another way.

Or those which with Ramnetes bold,
by quick Hirtacus son:
And his companion alone,
to cruel death were done.
What slaughter of men with Ramnetes in Turnus tents, Ramnetes.
Nisus Hirtacus his son, and his fellow Eurialus made. Virgill declares, and
I have told before.

Or that thy house enclosed with fire,
as Clicias son may have:
So that thou may half burned bear
thy members to thy grave.
To Alcibiades son of Clicias, Alciades
banyshed into Phrigia, was Pharnabasus sent from Athens. with public
authority to kill him, whom (finding in his chamber) he compassed round with
men, set fire on the house, and burned him therein enclosed.

Or else I wish that weapons rude,
upon thy head may fall:
As erst on Remus over bold
to clime th'unfinisht wall.
When Rome was building, Remus.
Romulus the founder and namer thereof made an Edicte, that no man upon pain
of death should clyme the walls, until they were finished. But Remus his brother
not esteming that commandment ascended, Fabius celer.
and was for his labor slain by Fabius Celer, a Soldier of Romulus army. For
he called all his soldiers Celeres.

And last I pray that thou may live
and dye in these same parts:
Among the cruel Sarmates,
and cruel Getes darts.
Sarmatae, Sarmatae. Getae.
are called of the Greeks Sauromatae, they dwell in a country of the North,
very poor, and disgarnished of al good provision save of trees. They fetch
their original from the Amazones. They are so barbarous, that they know not
what peace means. They use arrows in battle, as also the Getae do, whom
the Romans call Daci, they inhabyte a part of Thracia. Their cruelty Ovid in
his books De ponto many times describes.

These things in sudden mode thus pend
to thee directed be:
That thou need not complain that I
unmindful am of thee.
In deed he were much to blame, that would think Ovid had forgotten Ibis, if
he have read but this over.

They are but few, I grant, but God
can give my prayers more,
And with his favor my requests
can multiply with store.
Hereafter thou much more shall read
wherein shall be thy name:
And in such verse as men are wont
such cruel wars to frame.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, and Henry Middleton.

Anno Domini. 1569.


