Valentine: Why how do you know that I am in love?


Speed: Marry, by these special marks: -- you have learned... to sign like a
schoolboy that had lost his A B C.



UNIQUE XVITH CENTURY ENGLISH CHILD'S BOOK
A. B. C. WITH THE PATER NOSTER, AVE, CREED AND X COMAUNDEMENTES. Folio, single
sheet; folded to make a booklet of 4 leaves, 12mo. 3 by 2 inches. Preserved in
full morocco box. Printed at London in the Old bailey by Richard Lant. No date,
but about 1536.

A unique child's book which had disappeared from sight for over a century.
Variously considered by authorities as having been intended as a Horn Book or
as an education book for the very young scholar.

Last seen by bibliographers at the beginning of the Nineteenth Century, the
volume is described as follows by Ames-Herbert-Dibden's Typographical
Antiquities, 1816, Vol. III, page 581, item 1779: --

"The ABC etc. Without date. Octavo. It begins with five different Alphabets,
and Gloria Patri* then the Paternoster, etc., grace before meat, and after.
Printed only on one side, to be folded as blank pages to be pasted together,
and make one leaf of two; or four small leaves of the whole sheet. Licensed by
the Company."

From 1816 on, the volume seems to have disappeared. Pollard, apparently from
the above entry, records the fact that the work was printed by Lant (Handlist
of Books Printed by English Printers Bibliographical Society) but indicates no
copy known.

Duff, Century of the English Book Trade also had not seen a copy. He records
that the Old Bailey address was the first of several addresses at which Lant
printed, -- hence books without date printed at that address must of necessity
ante-date those of established dates printed at other location.

Though Pollard, in a haphazard fashion, gives Lant's dates as 1542-1563 (op.
Cit.), Duff records that "Richard Lant, Printer, in London, was made a freeman
of the Stationers on the 6th September, 1537, and paid 44 shillings for the
privilege.... When he started printing, he was living in the Old Bailey." Thus
proving Pollard in error, and establishing the fact that in 1537, Lant was
already a recognized printer of sufficient standing to be admitted to the
Stationers Company.

The volume under consideration bears a manuscript date of 1536, written in an
old hand. While this is not conclusive evidence of its actual date, the writer
may have had access to evidence now no longer available. Certainly the sheet
was printed before 1542 when Lant was sent to the Fleet prison for printing
Tolwyn's The Manne of Sin (of which no copy now survives.)

The date of 1536, if it is the correct date, would establish this as the
earliest known English A. B. C., the earliest known English Horn Book (for it
can be considered as such) and the earliest known book printed in England
strictly for children!

Lant, moreover, is the rarest of all English printers; far more rare, for
instance, than is Caxton. Of the many books that he printed from 1536 or 1537
until 1563, most have disappeared entirely. Only two of his works are recorded
in the British Museum for instance, and there are none at Cambridge.

Of English A. B. C.s, the following are now known.
1. The present example, printed by Richard Lant. Unique. Not in the Short
Title Catalogue. 2. A.B.C. for children. J. King. No date. Entered at the
Stationers 1561/2. S.T.C. No. 18. Unique copy at Queen's College, Oxford. 3.
The B. A. C. (sic) book in Latin and in English. T. Petyt. No date but said
to be 15^8. S.T.C. No. 19. Unique copy at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. 4. The
A. B. C. set forth by the Kings Majesty. W. Powell. No date, but said to be
1545. S.T.C. No. 20. Unique copy in the British Museum. 5. The A. B. C.; with
the catechism. for the Company of Stationers, 1633. S.T.C. No. 21. Unique copy
was in the Guild Hall Library, London.
The rarity of these little books requires no summing up after the above
evidence.

The a b c with the Pater noster Aue / Credo / and.x. commandments in
English newly translated and set forth at the king most gracious
commandment.

1536 Printed at London in the Old bailey up Richard Lant

A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t v u w x y z and ^us. Est Amen.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X.

A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u w x y z and. est Amen.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V X.

In the name of the father and son / and the holy ghost. Ame^.

The seven peticyons of the Pater noster.
Our father which art in heuyn / hallowed be thy name.

Thy kyngedome come.

Thy will be done in earth / as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bred.

And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive the^ that trespass against us.

And let us not be led into temtacyon. But deliver us from evil.

Amen.
The salutacyon of the An^^l / called Aue Maria.
HAyle MARI full of grace / the lord is with the. Blessed art thou ^^onge
women. And blessed (...) the fruit of thy womb.

Amen.
The Creed / or the.xii. artyles of the christen faith.
I Believe in GOD the father almighty make^ (...) heaven and earth.

^^d in Jesus Christ / his only son our lord. Which was conceived by the holy
ghost / borne of the vyrgyne Mary.

Suffered under Pons Pylate was crucified / deed / buried / and descended into
hell.

And the third day he rose again from death.

He ascended in to heaven / and sytteh on the right hand of god the father
almighty.

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the deed

I believe in the holy ghost.

The holy Catholyke church.

The communion of saints / the forgyuenesse of sins.

The resurreccyon of the body

And the life everlasting

Amen
The.x. commandments of allmyghty God.
THOU shalt have non other Gods but me

Thou shall not make to thy self any graue^ image nor any likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above / or in earth beneth / nor in the water under the
earth / thou shall not bow down to them / nor worship them.

Thou shall not take the name of thy lord god in vain.

Remember that thou keep holy thy Saboth day.

Honor thy father and thy mother

Thou shall do no murder.

Thou shall not commytte adultry.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shalt bear no false wytnes against thy neybour

Thou shalt not desire thy neybours house / thou shalt not desire thy
neybours wife nor his servant / nor his maid nor his ox nor his ass / nor
any thing that is thy neybors.

Grace before meat.
The lord above / grant us to take.
His gracious gifts / with thanks geuyng
And his gospel not to forsake
which is our health and life lasti^g
Our father. etc.

Grace after meat.
Thanks to that lords that all has sent
For this our fode convenient
And for his word / which is our health
And life of soul as scripture telth.
Our father which act in heaven. etc.

Finis.

