The Just Down(...) Ambition, Adultery, and Murder.
Whereunto are added 3. notorious sinners., Weston. M. Turner and Fra(...)
With his Arraignement, Confession and E(...) Who all suffered Death for the
(...)der of Sir Tho: Ouerbury, poysone(...) the Tower: of whom to these
discourses joined an Elegy, upon the death of Sir Thomas Ouerbury.



The just Downfall of three notorious Sinners, v^^. Weston, Mistress Turner, and
Fra^^klin. Who all suffered death for the Murder of Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY, who
was poisoned in the Tower.
LOoking lately into the customs of this Age, and coniecturing the inward
affections of men, I gather that the world is the house of confusion, and the
inhabitants thereof set upon mischief: for the seven Capital Sins are
grown to such a custom, that our eyes want no allurements to bewitch, our
ears no persuasions to seduce, nor our senses no subtlety to affect: Which
seizing on the hearts of men, have brought forth many pernicious children, to
the hurt of Nature; some like Centaures, begotten of clouds, as Ambition; some
like Serpents nourished in dunghils, as Sensuality; some like Vapors, raised up
to be consumed, as Flattery, and such like: generally all dangerous and full
of trouble: therefore (is it in the sense of man) most fitting to have the
painting taken off from these foul faces, the couers pulled off from these
cups of Poison, and the covert of this bed of Serpents ripped up, that we may
discern what has long time been hidden cunningly.

The first that presents himself upon our Stage, If we call Ambition, catching
at nothing but Stars, (...) only for Greatness: this is he, that cunningly
can invent stratagems to his own overthrow, giving Pens occasion to write
Tragedies: if he rise from obscurity, (as many have done) he labors to be
skillful in those things, which are most pleasing to the greater sort, and
tolerable among the Commons: His study is for praise, and not for Virtue: His
looks like Mausolus Tomb, fair and comely without, but within nothing but
rotten bones, and ^orrupt practices: his apparel increases with his ^ortune,
and as worldly affairs direct him, so su^eth he both fashions and affections:
in his study he ^ffecteth singularity, and is proud in being Author of a new
Stratagem: if he chance to come into the ^ye of the World, he then creepes
into the favor of some great Personage, in feeding whose humors (to relieve
his wants) he makes intrusion into some heritage, and matcheth not according to
his birth, but to the increase of his fortune; and by that means, by hook or
crook, he attaineth to some place in the Court. Then begins he with gifts to
win hearts; by fained humility to avoid hatred; by offices of friendship, to
bind his equals; by cunning insinuations to work his Superiors; by which
means he is held to be worthily a Statesman. Being grown to this step higher,
the authority likes him not without the style, wherein if any cross him, look
for poison in his cup, or conspiracy in his walks: yea so pestilent is his
nature, that (like fire raked up in embers) he never shows but to consume
both himself and others: if he perceive any that by ripe judgment conceiteth
his courses, with him he joins, as if he sought his only protection under
the wing of his Glory, but the very truth is, he has no other intent but this,
to clip the wings of his renown for fear he fly beyond him: if the nature of
the Nobleman whom he enuieth be gentle, he brings him in fear, either of
his own servants in his household, or his familiars that love his honor, or
else some mislike betwixt his Prince and him, sworn and confirmed by
flatteries and intelligences, till the nobleman loses either his land,
authority, or place; and he attain both his style and promotion: yet play he
never so cunningly, such uncertain honors beget daily dangers, and make him
careless of his souls prosperity: for then there enters intohis mind a
delightful sin called curiosity, by which, to make him more able in other
mischiefs, he gives entertainment to witches and charmers, and consorts
himself with nouell-mongers, and strange inuenters of banquets, to set lust on
fire, and that can devise confections to besot youth with luxury, that for an
ireful man can work strange reuenges, for a fearful, a strong tower to keep
him in: to be excellent at poisons, to kill lingringly, like the Italian. But
again to our purpose. To the Ambitious man there is commonly belonging a
rusticke troop of Flatterers, Bauds, Adulterers Soothers, and such like, that
hating (...) virtue makes sin seem pleasing, which (...) in the flexible heart
such a sweet desire of forbidden pleasures, that it even surfets and grows
sick with excess; Lust and Adultery I mean; which I describe in this manner.
It is the most insolent of all things, it troubles the mind, and takes away
the Empire of liberty, it confounds Memory, kills Providence, and treads down
good Counsel. Offends not he the Law that takes possession of another man's
freehold, and makes a Common of his Neighbors Enclosure? Adulterers, I say,
have no Spirit to goodness, nor will they be by any Council moved to
godliness: for their felicity is in the surfets of the flesh, and the
pleasures thereof bring nothing but too dear repentance: the Adulterer spights
him most that examines his proceedings; and plots his overthrow that does but
touch his infirmities. Oh! what an enemy is it to virtue, the only wrack of
wealth, and plain high way to poverty? The Adulterer is so blinded in heart,
and so hardened withal, that he can hardly look up toward Heaven to behold
Gods just Judgments: yet so just and sure they are that in all ages this vile
sin has been severely punished, as by the example of Judas, justice on Thamar,
David's adultery with Vrias wife punished in his son Absolon, thousands of men
dyed in the fields of Moab for this fault, threescore thousand of the children
of Israel were put to the sword for the rauishing only of a Levites Wife: of
all sins it is in nature the most odious, and brings with it the greatest shame
unto (...): it is a sin that has made the earth drunk with blood, to the
confusion of many Towns and Cities. Sodom and Gomorah were consumed with fire
for Incest and Adultery: Troy a proud City made a plow-land for the same sin.
It was the only adulteries of the French, that caused a Massaker of
foure-score thousand, by the ringing of one bell. Let not the Strumpets eye,
says one of the Sages of Greece, shine upon the countenance of young men,
least with the Basaliske it pearce unto the death: for her malice is as
lightening, and more raging then the she Bear: upon her attends malicious
hatred, whose felicity is only to rejoice at the harms of others, giving more
affliction to them that are most troubled with affliction, where if any offend
her, she admits no reconciliation, but lives as a partial judge in her own
cause: if she hears the advancement of virtue then grows she pensive, and if
she want credit amongst the mighty, then falls she working with the meaner
sort: she smiles not upon any man but to betray him, nor gives him countenance
but to undo him, nor contriues any Stratagems without Murder, nor dwells by any
neighbor but to hutt him; and if she be but crossed in her will, she ever
frets her self away in anger, and after in hate and malice becomes infamous:
for her love is a minute, but her spite ouerlasting. Her hand being once dipped
in mischief, she never walks abroad but in suspicion, fearing to be accused
by virtue, and still lives in dread of her good Fortune: yet by nature is she
such, that she has courage enough to adventure on any sin. An ambitious
woman shows her self to be a troublesome disturber of the world, powerful to
make small things great, and great, monstrous: Envy by nature is grieved at the
Prosperity of others: he enuieth the Great in that he cannot Equal them, he
enuieth the weak, dreading they should compare themselves with him: he enuieth
his Equals because they should not become his Companions: in Kingdoms,
Commonwealths, Princes Courts and Ambitious men's Houses, he is still working:
no Man hunteth after Honor but he affronts him, only the miserable man he
enuies not, because (being kept in Prison) he fears not his risings, yet has
he a scorn over him. Machiuell knowing the venom of this vice, gave his
son this last and not least instruction: that he should not be envious, but
to do (says he) such deeds that others may envy thee: for to be envied is
the token of good desert, but to be envious the sign of a foolish nature,
which verifies the saying of Marcus Tullius the Orator, that the most
flourishing fortune is most envied at. But now to be more familiar in my
discourse: where Ambition, Adultery, Pride, Envy, Malice, and such like Capital
Sins have set in foot, there cannot choose but follow Murder and confusion, and
where the foundation is laid with blood, there can be a building but of small
continuance, but where Honors have a true beginning, a ground of virtue
springing up by noble deserts, continued by Wisdom and maintained with Care,
there cannot choose but follow a fruitful harvest, and a plentiful Winter:
contrariwise to obtain sudden Honors begets Pride and Vaineglory: Pride and
Vainglory are the cherishers of Envy and Malice: Envy and Malice the Nurses
of Bloodshed and Murder, in which whosoever dippeth but the tip of his finger,
gives to his Soul a scarlet stain, which never can be clear until the
dissolution of the body, and then well are they that can wash it away with the
true tears of repentance.

Brittle is that greatness that fades in a moment, and vain the joy that is
unwisely lost. He that has a sudden rise and can wisely stand, is a most
happy worldling, but he that forgets himself on the Pinnacle of prosperity, is
besotted with arrogance: therefore let him that hunts for honors in Princes
Courts, wander in an even passage, for dangerous are the proceedings and
business of a Statesman. Take this for an example: suppose that a young man from
the lowest ebb of worldly chance have the advancement of Greatness laid upon
his shoulders, will it not for a time seem a heavy burden, and a great
trouble to his new transformed fortunes? Will not the pride of his heart swell
to a full Sea; even ready to burst over the banks of his Honour-giuer? Then
rightly may the Picture of ingratitude be imprinted in his forefront, playing
the Viper to his high forunes first beginner.

Being thus entitled with State-Offices, has he not many soothers in sin,
personages of base condition attending him, hemming him round with persuasions
of self conceit, which for a need will venture their lives to gain him the
commands of his will: what becomes of such follies but a sorrowful repentance,
and no recovery? All you that have your hearts pierced with sad considerations,
take this for a remembrance of grief, that is, that when a Woman of noble
Parentage, placed on the mountain of smiling chance, having the dignity of
Greatness shining on her forehead, should humble her self to base
conditions, giving her whole mind to malicious hatred, secret consents of
iniquity, selfewill and wicked proceedings, never pacified till the end of
damned performances. Oh! was not this woman created for a deep sorrow to her
Alliance, a great grief unto her Country, and a foul stain unto her own
reputation? Is it not also a lamentable example for a Gentleman of good birth
and calling, placed in dignity in high office and charge for his Country, to
give way by consent to a bloody stratagem, and for fear of the displeasures of
Groatnes entangle himself in the snares of reproach? Will not this also be a
continual remembrance to his posterity, and a bar of disgrace branding the
coat-Armes of his house, to have the common course of Justice pass upon him in
the eye of the multitude? Is it not also great pity that for want of grace
some of a servile (yet an observing condition) should from the golden mean of
low estate wait at the elbow of Greatness, and bring fuel to their fire of
iniquity, wherein at the length they themselves are likewise consumed? Oh!
wherefore should simplicity thus blind up their eyes of understanding, to be
thus the instruments of such dangerous drifts, that aim at nothing but grudge
and malice? If with Solons saying they had sealed up their hearts, Remember
the end, this had never been: then how are they led away with amiss, that
having the gifts of art and experience, the secrets of the simples of Physic,
ordained by God for man's good use, should by the Devil and them be converted
thus to malignant purposes? if the fear of God had shined in their hearts, it
would have been a light to have led them from all those dark practices, which
have now spotted the foreheads of their reputations with the marks of black
infamy. Shame cannot choose but be the reward of such enterprisers, that for
the favor of Greatness will dip their hands in the blood of Innocents, and even
as it were work against nature: Oh more then savage minded Creatures! in the
very deepnesse of your black and bloody imaginations (imboldened by
whomsoever) this might have been your Memento, in which I conclude, that
strange and wonderful are Gods judgments, that in these fore-passed
stratagems have shined in great glory: say you then that blood innocently shed
is laid up in Heavens Treasury, not one drop of it can be lost, but lent out to
Usury: water poured forth, sincks down quietly into the earth, but blood spilt
on the ground, sprinkles up to the Firmament. Murder is wide-mouthed, and will
not let God rest till he grant revenge, not only the blood of the slaughtered,
but the soul of the innocent ascending to his throne, crying out and
exclaiming for Justice, which (the Lord be praised) has been, and will be
carefully followed by the learned and worthy Magistrates of this Kingdom, whom
the Lord God prosper and protect in all their proceedings, to which let all
true hearts say Amen.

Mistress Turners Tears, for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, who was
poisoned in the Tower of London.
IF ever tears fell from a Wretches eyes,
I am that Creature: waves on waves do rise
So fast, and swell so high, they drown my soul
In her own crimes, as numberless as foul.
Oh had my cradle bin my sudden Grave,
In peace my Soul had slept, which is a slave
Now both to sin and shame: I had not then
Been of God hated, and so scorned of Men.
Unhappy was the Womb that lent me breath,
Would it had bin the Charnell-house of Death,
Had I bin stisled there, the^ had my flight
To heaven bin like a Doves, with wings more white.
O would to God the Day when I was borne,
Had from the Calender of time been torn,
Where now it stands accursed, and does bear
The mark of a most fatal Character.
Many a Widow reading there my name,
Will curse it, and the leaf that holds the same:
Children as yet unborn, coming to spell,
Will take it for a Furies name in Hell;
And casting by the Book no more will read,
But only learn to heap upon my head
VVishes of mischief though in Grave I lie,
For to confound me everlastingly.
But leaving this, let my sad Story tell*
Both from what height I fall, and how I fell:
That though time present does not moan my state
Yet times to come may pity my hard fate.
My birth was fair, my bringing up was good,
My days were golden in my widdow-hood,
And might have been so still, but climbers hye
Beyond their reach must down, and so do I.
Plenty and I at board together sat,
I fed with Dives, drank in richest plate:
Wore rich attires, tasted all worldly pleasure,
But nere had care to hoord up heavenly treasure.
With Eve I might have lived in Paradise,
But that a Serpent did my Soul entice
To touch forbidden fruit, which relished well
In chewing, but being down it smelt of Hell.
It Was not one only Apple to devour,
For which I longed; my hunger gaped at more,
At a whole tree I looked: it was a Tree,
Me thought the goodliest mortal eyes could see,
This Tree I climbed, and as I plucked it grew
Still fresh and fresh, the boughs were ever new;
The branches ever green, bushy and fair,
It seemed the Darling both of sun and air.
But when my Soul looked up with open eyes,
I saw the top-bough brauing even the skies,
When the root stuck in Hell, where looking in
I knew it then to be the tree of sin.
And though my Conscience told me I should fall,
If that I leand to: nothing could appall
My settled resolution, I would on,
Though still before me stood damnation.
From this I plucked the gilded fruit of pride,
Like Queen-apples they showed, for every side
Was ruddy and alluring, but (what trust
Is in vain earth?) being touched they turn to dust.
From this I sucked Enchantme^ts which drunk well,
And luscious sweet, yet proved the milk of hell:
Hence did I gather poisonous drugges to kill
Such as withstood my friends, or crossed my will.
Lust often lay within my widdowed sheets,
And taught me how to taste forbidden sweetes,
And that toward hell I might go one step further
The last and worst I went into was murder.
O crying sin! which smothered nere so deep,
In caves, which silent night her self does keep,
Bound up in darkness, like the steeme of Hell
which none can pierce; yet the black deed to tell
Even graves of dead men (rotten long ago,)
Will open wide: Vengeance walks often slow
To our weak sight, but when to Strike it stands,
On Heavens high Tower, it has a 1000. hands.
The Almighties Arrows fly both sure and strong,
And where they hit great Oaks fall all along.
No hidden mark but stands within his eye,
And that he cleaues, when forth his wrath does fly.
Witness my self and others, who defying
The busiest searching Sunbeam from descrying
Where Villainy lay lurking, wrapd in clouds,
so safe we thought as dead men in their shrouds
When to Man's Sense it was as impossible
Mountains to move, as find a tongue durst tell
Our buried plots; See! they are rent and torn
By Gods least finger; and we left in Scorn.
Our maskes pluckd off, our faces now appear writ
Such as they are indeed, not as they were,
Plain on our brows are our close mischiefs
Who most did hide, now most discover it.
The Wolves are caught in snares; the shepherd now
Knows that a Lamb was slain, by whom and how,
The blood of whom by cruel friend so spilt,
Flows like a Sea, yet washes off no guilt.
If any ask me, why I was so led,
And why so near to hell I ventured,
I was bewitched, for what I did behold,
Was a most bitter Pil, but wrapped in gold.
That liquorish bait enticed me take it down,
As wholesome Physic, but (with sha^e) it is known
No poison can so soon destroy the Soul,
The outside glorious, but the inside foul.
O Gold! thou glittering devil that confoundest
The Richest, Fairest, Strongest, wisest, Soundest,
Would God, as He to Indians is unknown,
That so their Drossy God were theirs Alone.
Souls would not tumble then so fast to Hell,
Nor of my Fall should I this Story tell,
Terror to Soul and Body, had not Heaven,
To sins more high and horrid, pardon given.
Pardon of thee (sweet Jesus) then I crave,
What thou have Bought and Paid for dearly Save.
Men, let me beg forgiveness from you too
Because I did more then my Sex should do.
And you of Modest dames that bear the note,
And my black Name quite from your tables blot,
As I am lost, so let my fault I crave,
And write Oblivion on my wretched Grave.
You Fathers whom of Children I bereave,
You Children whom of Parents I deceive,
You Wives whom Husbandles my Guilt does make,
Forgive me All: of All this Leave I take.
Heaven frowns to look upon me and my Sin,
Earth trembles that by her I fed have bin.
My very breath poisons the Air about me,
Hell only is within me and without me.
Yet in despite of Hell, from Heaven comes down
Mercy, I see holding a glorious Crown
O^ immortality over my faint head,
Jesus in that and thee I Am Comforted.
Strengthen my weak heart, Death is fearful grim,
One finger of thy Hand can vanquish him:
Give to my fleeting Soul a prosperous gaile;
That I to Blessed Jerusalem may Sail.
FINIS.
Master VVestons Tears, for the Murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury who was poisoned
in the Tower of London.
GOD of my Soul and Body, have mercy upon me: the one I have cast away by my
folly, and the other is likely to perish in thy Fury, unless in thy great
mercy thou Save it. My Sins are deep Seas to drown me* I am swallowed up
in the bottomless Gulf of my own transgressions. With Caine I have been a
Murderer, and with Judas a Betrayer of the Innocent. My body is a Slave to
Satan, and my wretched Soul is devoured up by Hell. Black have bin my
thoughts, and blacker are my deeds. I have been the Devils instrument, and am
now become the Scorn of Men, a Serpent upon earth, and an Outcast from
Heaven. What therefore can become of me (miserable Caytiffe?) if I look up to
my Redeemer, to him I am an Arch Traitor, if upon Earth, it is drowned with
Blood of my shedding, if into Hell, there I see my Conscience, burning in the
Brimstone lake. God of my Soul and Body have mercy therefore upon me, Save
me, O save me, or else I perish for ever, I die for ever in the world to come,
unless (sweet Lord) thou catchest my repentant Soul in thine Arms; O save
me, save me, save me.

FINIS.
James Franklin A Kentishman of Maidstone, his own Arraignment, Confession,
Condemnation, and Judgment of Himself, whilst he lay Prisoner ^n the Kings
Bench for the Poisoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury.
I Am Arraigned at the black dreadful Bar,
Where Sins (so red as Scarlet) Judges are;
All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes,
Whose Story will affright succeeding Times,
As (now) they drive the present into wonder,
Making Men tremble, as trees struck with Thunder.
If any asks what Evidence comes in,
O it is my Conscience, which has ever bin
A thousand witnesses: and now it tells
A Tale, to cast me to ten thousand Hells.
The Jury are my Thoughts (upright in this,)
They sentence me to death for doing amiss*
Examinations more there need not then,
^han what is confessed here both to God and Men.
The Crier of the Court is my black Shame,
Which when it calls my Jury, does proclaim
(...) (as they are summoned) they appear,
To give true Verdict of the Prisoner,
They shall have heavy Fines upon them set,
Such as may make them dye deep in Heavens debt.
About me round sit Innocence and Truth,
As Clerks to this high Court; and little Ruth
Because my facts are barbarous, damned, and base.
The Serieants that about me (thick) are placed,
To guard me to my death* (when I am cast)
Are the black stings my speckled soul now feels,
Which like to Furies dog me close at heels.
The Hangman, that attends me is Despair,
And gnawing worms my Fellow Prisoners are.
His first Indictment for Murder.
THe first who (at this Sessions) loud does call me,
Is Murder, whose grim visage does appall me,
His eyes are fires, his voice rough winds out-rores,
And on my head the Divine Vengeance scores:
So fast and fearfully I sink to grownd,
And wish I were in twenty Oceans drowned.
He says I have a bloody villain bin,
And (to prove this) ripe Evidence steps in,
Brow'd like my self: Justice so brings about,
That black sins still hunt one another out:
It Is like a rotten frame ready to fall,
For one maine Post being shaken, pulls down all.
To this Indictment, (holding up my hand,)
Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I stand,
And being asked what to the bill I say,
Guilty I cry. O dreadful Sessions-day!
His second Indictment for poisoning.
ANother, forthwith bids me come to the Bar,
(Poison) that Hel-borne cunning Sorcer^r,
That winds himself into a thousand forms,
And when the day is brightest flings down storms.
This has an Angels face, a Mermaids tongue,
^
This is the Coward Sin, which (like a Pill,)
When it is most gilded, is most sure to kill.
Whether this Hel-hownd strike at Morn or Night,
So treacherous, close, and speedy is his fight,
That Armors all-of-proofe, nor Towers of Stone,
Can bar his bloody Execution.
This Snake with the smooth skin hissed out my name
Among others more, and venomed me with shame
That rancles to the soul. It says that I
(For a poor golden handful) did defy
Heaven and Salvation, when I gave consent
To tear the bowels of an Innocent
With lingering poisons of themselves too strong,
But that their working God put off so long;
That darker deeds (by this) the light may try,
Which now perhaps in worser bosoms lie.
To this Indictment holding up my hand,
(Fettered with Terrors more then Irons I stand)
And being askd what to the Bill I say,
Guilty I cry. O dreadful Sessions-Day!
His third for raising of Spirits etc.
IN rushes then a heap of Accusations,
For all those Godless damned Abominations,
Raised by the black Art, and a Coniurers spelles:
As to call Spirits even from the deepest Hells,
To fetch back thieves that with stolen goods are gone,
And calculate natiuities: such a one
Credulity of fools and women made me,
And to that glorious infamy betraide me.
A Cunning man, a Wise man were my style,
Art knew I none, nor did I ever reach
A bough of learnings tree; what I did teach
To others, or did practice, it was all
Cheating, false, apish, diabollicall.
To this being likewise asked, what I can say,
I guilty cry. O dreadful Sessions day!
This Devils coat to my body made I fit,
Brave was the outside, thrid-bare was the wit.
His Judgment.
FOr these thick Stygian streams in which thou have swo^
Thy guilt has on the laid this bitter doom;
Thy loathed life on a tree of shame must take
A leave compeld by Law, er'e old age make
Her signed passport ready. Thy offense,
No longer can for days on earth dispense.
Time blot thy name out of this bloody roll,
And so the Lord have mercy on thy soul.
His speech what he could say for himself.
O wreched Caitiffe! what perswasiue breath
Can call back this just sentence of quick death?
I beg no boon, but mercy at Gods hands,
(The King of Kings, the Sovereign that commands
Both soul and body) O let him forgive
My treason to his Throne, and whilst I live,
Iebbits and Racks shall torture limb by limb,
Through worlds of Deaths I Will break to fly to him.
My birth day gave not to my mothers womb,
More ease, then this shall joys, when e're it come.
My body mould to earth, sins sink to Hell,
My penitent soul win Heaven, vain world farewell*
A Funeral Elegy, upon the untimely Death of the honorable Knight Sir Thmas
Ouerburie, who was poisoned in the Tower.
WHy in this world to live should men desire,
Since death so many ways our lives expire?
What happiness has man upon the earth,
But mountain misery for Molehill mirth?
A moments Joy, mixed with an age of woes,
Each drop of comfort floods of cares over flows.
For it is decreed by inevitable Fate,
The greatest men are not most fortunate.
The head that wears a Crown, wears many cares,
The which (before old age) makes hoary hairs.
And human honors like a fading flower,
Which florisheth, and fades in an hour.
The mean estate does only longest last,
Not being subject to each wandering blast
Of ticklish Fortunes euer-turning wheel,
Whose fickle turnings, often makes Greatness reele.
If all the winds, East, West, and North and South,
Should raging burst from blustering Eol's mouth,
The lowly shrub stands ever rooted fast,
When lofty Pines and Cedars down are cast.
And though the mighty often the weak oppressed,
Of all estates, the mean sleeps most in rest.
Thou worthy OVERBVRY, to thy Hearse
I consecrate this sad lamenting Verse.
Had thou been some unlearned rusticke hind^,
Had thou been basely borne, and base inclind:
Had thou had nothing in thee that was good
So soo^e foul murder had not sucked thy blood.
But being in all parts a man complete,
Great in regard, in goodness far more great,
Who like a Star in Britains Court did shine
Learned in the Laws, both Human and Divine,
A Scholar, full of Gentleman-like parts,
Whose noble carriage won a world of hearts.
That Arts like painful Bees did daily strive,
To fill with sacred love his learned hiue.
Which thou (as did befit thy worthy worth)
With admiration often would power forth:
So courteous, valiant, sober, and so wise,
And one that (fawning) could not temporise,
So well proportioned, of such comely feature,
So fully fraught with a true honest nature,
So hopeful, and so loving, and beloved,
Whose life and actions every tongue approved,
That expectation marked him out to be
A man of absolute Integrity.
Of Zeal, Capacity, and Eminence,
To serve his God, his Country, and his Prince.
But Satan that old enemy of man,
As he with Abels murder first began,
He still has spewed from out his damned den,
Inhumaine thoughts in bloody Caine-like men.
And as the blood of that first slaughtered Saint,
For vengeance to Jehovah made complaint:
So did the blood of OVERBVRY cry
For Justice to the Throne of Majesty.
Oh Physic, great preserver of man's breath.
Heavens Habeas Corpus against dismal death.
Most honorable treasury of health,
Renowned Pillar of each Commonwealth:
Life's loving Champion, how art thou abused,
When poyson's with thy Antidots infused?
But this unusual damnable abuse,
No bleamish is to lawful Physics use,
No more then Phoebus glorious beams are soyld,
With shining on a stinking dunghill moyld.
Thus to thy praise, whose praise does pass my skill*
(My poor unlearned, most obsequious quill)
Do offer these poor slender lines of mine,
Unworthy for that worthy worth of thine.
Which though thy soul be in eternal rest,
Thy friends may thank me, for I did my best.
FINIS. I. T.
REaders, you that are desirous to see the reward of the Adulterer and the
Adultresse, paid by Gods own hand: there is a little Table called the
Spectacles, where you may see it more at large.


