OVIDS REMEDY Of Love.

DIRECTING Lovers how they may by Reason suppress the passion of Love.

-- Nunc ego mitibus
Mutare quaero tristia.
Hor. Ode 16. Lib. 1. LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at
his Shop near Holburne Conduit, at the sign of the Sun. 1636.

On the Author and Book.
LOve being of a gentle disposition,
Was moved by Lovers sighs unto contrition:
So that the sweet-strain'd Ovid he inspires
With a sof^ shower to quench those amorous fires
B^^^e up by his Art of Love, so that you see
Love has prepared for Love a Remedy.
Wandering Aeneas talked the fair Queen Did
In Love, and after cured the Royal Widow
Within a Cave: Our Poet does approve
A chaster way in's Remedy of Love,
Closing those wounds that did before he open,
In such sort, that no Maidenhead shall be broken.
He wipeth tears from the sad Lovers eyes,
And does instruct him wittily to despise
His Mistress scorn, and all in Lines so sweet,
That every leaf may be Loves winding-sheete.
OVIDS Remedy of Love.
Liber 1.
WHen Love the Title of this book had read,
Wars against me (says he) are threatened.
Cupid do not condemn him of that crime
Who is thy Poet, and has many a time
Borne up those colors thou deliverd'st me,
And for my guide and Captain followed thee.
I am not fierce Tydides who did wound
Thy Mother Venus, so that in a swound
In Mars his Chariot she was found to fly,
And return to Heaven through the moistened sky.
Some young men are in love but for a time,
But I to love do always still incline:
And if you would know now what I do do,
I must confess, I am in love now too.
Though I did once such Rules of love impart,
As did reduce that passion to an Art.
I will not now betray thee gentle Boy,
Nor yet my Art of Love will I destroy.
That which I in my former work have done,
By my new Muse shall not now be unspun.
If any one do love, and love aright,
Placing his love where it does yield delight,
Affording sweet contentment to his mind,
Let him proceed still with a prosperous wind.
But if any one love a disdainful Maid,
Then by this Art his grief shall be allayed:
Whose Rules if he peruse, he shall not dye
For her disdain, or scornful cruelty.
For why should Lovers whom love does entangle,
Themselves so often with a halter strangle?
Why with their daggers should they stab their breast
Love, thou art blamed who love peace and rest.
Let him cease to love, who needs for love will dye,
Be not thou Author of his Tragedy.
Thou art a Boy, and unto sport should run,
And a soft government does thy years become.
Thou may use naked arrows in the Wars,
But thy gult Darts do leave no mortal skarres.
Let others in Swords and in shaipe spears delight,
And get the victory by a bloody fight.
Reverence thou thy mothers Arts more mild,
By which no mother has lost her dear child.
By thy powers let the doors at night resound
With knocking, and with flowery wreaths be crowned.
Let fearful Mayds and young men by stealth meet,
Let wives their wary husbands finely cheat,
Make the Lover flatter at the door, and chide,
While he shut out does singing there abide.
To see their tears, not death should make thee smile
Thy Torch is unfit to light a funeral pile.
When I had spoken thus, golden Love displayed
His Pearle-embroidred wings, and to me said,
Finish thy work which thou have now begun,
And you deceived young men unto me come,
You that love has deceived in every kind.
Here by my precepts you some help shall find,
And learn from him that did the Rules impart
Of love, how you may cure your selves by Art:
That the same hand which wounded you, again
May heal you, and may mitigate your pain.
The earth both wholesome herbs and weeds does cherish,
And by the Rose the Nettle often does flourish.
And Pelias Spear such virtue did conceal,
That it would make a wound, and it would heal.
To men and maidens I declare my Art,
Striving to arm them both in every part:
Wherein if some things not so useful be,
Yet by example you the way may see:
My purpose is good, to quench Loves cruel flame,
That no vice in thy servile breast may reign.
Phyllis had lived, if she had ruled been
By those precepts which may here be read, and seen.
Nor dying Dido had not seen that hour,
When she beheld from the top of her Tower
The Trojan ships, that would no longer stay,
Hoist up their sails, and forthwith steal away,
And Progne with her sorrow growing wild,
To vex her husband had not killed her child.
Though Philomela Tereus did please,
My Art had helped him, and cured his disease:
So that he had not merited to be
Transformed to a bird for his impiety.
Pasiphae had not a Bull affected,
And Phaedra had her filthy love neglected,
Menelaus had his Helena enjoyed,
Nor by the Grecians had Troy been destroyed.
If wicked Scylla this book had but read,
Nisus purple hair had still grown on his head.
Let losing lovers learn how to assuage,
By my instruction their loves furious rage,
That their ship with the rest sail fairly on,
While I their faithful guide and Pilot am.
You should have Ovid read when you begun
To love, and now you may read him again:
For I will help him whom love does oppress,
Then favor him that helps you in distress.
And I entreat thee now when I begin,
Even thee Apollo, whose brow is hemmed in
With the green Laurel, thou that did invent
Both Verse and Physic, further my intent.
Help thou thy Poet playing the Physician,
Both which Arts belong unto thy jurisdiction.
When Sun-light motions do affection stir,
Stay them before that they do go too far.
Quench those new flames before they gather force,
And stop in the beginning of thy course.
Time and delay do bring the imperfect shapes
Of desire to ripeness, as time ripens Grapes:
And which was a tender blade in show,
In time unto an ear of corn does grow.
The tree that does afford a spreading shade
To those that walk or underneath are laid.
Like to a small twig at first it did appear,
At what time it was set or planted there,
Then it might have been plucked up with our hands,
Now bigger grown it firmly rooted stands.
Consider first what she is thou do love,
And from the galling yoke thy neck remove.
"Prevent beginnings, Physics are too late at longth,
"When thy sickness by delay has gatherd strength.
Make haste, in good things always shun delay.
"He Will be unfit to morrow, that is unfit to day.
Love flatrers us, and is nourisht by delay,
If you would shake it off, shake it off to day.
You shall see few rivers that from great springs flow,
But as they run they still more larger grow.
O Myrrha! had thou soon perceivd thy sin,
To a Myrrh-tree thou had not transformed been.
I have seen a wound that curable did seem
At first, yet by delay has worser been.
Yet because we do take delight to gather
Fair Venus flowers, we do defer it rather,
And flattering of our selves, we still do say,
We Will do to morrow as we did to day.
While secret flames into our hearts do creep,
And ill affections there are rooted deep.
But if thou letst the first time slip and perish,
And that thy breast an ancient flame does cherish;
The work's the greater, yet in helpless state
I Will not leave him, though I Am called somewhat too late.
The Paeancian Hero should have with all speed
Cut off that part whence his wound did proceed.
Yet many years afterward, as it then seemed,
Being cured, he brought those wars unto an end.
I that can cure Love, when it first does grow,
When Love does older wax the cure is slow.
Strive at the first to quench thy wanton flame,
Or when the strength of it is spent again.
At first yield to it, let it take its course,
It Is hard to resist a violent force.
He is a fool that against the stream will row,
Or swim, when as he round about may go.
"The impatient mind will no impression take,
"All admonitions it does scorn and hate.
"I Will go to him, when I his wounds may open,
"When he will endure to hear truth when'tis spoken.
While that a mother does the funerals keep
Of her son, who will forbid her then to weep,
Unless it be one that is void of reason?
For then to admonish her is out of season.
But when she with tears has eased her sick mind,
Then her grief may by words some comfort find.
"Physic in season given does avail;
"But given unseasonably, hurts without fail.
"You strengthen vice, while you seek to redress it,
"If you strive out of season to suppress it.
Therefore when thou art curable by Art,
This Rule I first of all to thee impart.
I admonish thee most carefully to shun
Idleness, whence all wicked thoughts do come.
This makes thee love, and does that love maintain;
This causes, and does feed that pretty pain.
Take away idleness, and Cupids dart
Has then no power at all to wound the heart.
His Torch has then no flame or light, but lies
Contemned, and every one does it despise.
As the Popler, and Osier love the Rivers bank,
And the marsh reed loves a muddy soil that is rank,
So Venus in soft ease does take much pleasure.
Then let some business give thy thoughts no leisure,
If to expel Loves passion thou desire,
For business makes Loves flame soon expire;
Soft ease, and spending as thou list the time
In sleeping, and immoderate drinking Wine,
Weakens the mind, and makes it decay:
For treacherous Love the unwary does betray.
"Love haunts the slothful, hates those he does find
Bufie, then give employment to thy mind.
Go to the Courts, and hear how they do plead,
Study Law, or else for thy friend intercede:
Sometimes go forth, and walk into the Town,
Or behold the trainings of the City-gowne:
Or practice bloody Mars his youthful Art,
And those conceits of Love will soon depart.
Go to the Wars, where Caesar's troops do lie,
Against the Parthians to obtain a victory:
Both Cupids and the Parthian shafts overcome,
And bring two Trophies to thy Country home.
Why Aegisthus was a murderer would thou know?
The cause was, because he did idle grow.
Others were fighting at the siege of Troy,
Which Greece with all her force sought to destroy.
Would he follow Wars, at Argos none then were,
The Courts of Law at Argos empty were:
So that he loved when naught else could be done:
For love from idleness does always come.
The Country and Husbandry also yield delight:
These cares all other cares do banish quite.
Sometimes thou may yoke thy Oxen, and so wound
With thy crooked ploughshare the hard clay ground
And sometimes with the Harrow cover over
Thy seed, which thy field with interest may restore.
Look how the crooked boughs bent downwards are
With the weight of Apples that are ripe and fair,
So that the laboring tree can hardly bear
Those fruits which from her first produced were.
Look how soft streams with a sweet murmur pass:
Look how the sheep graze on the fruitful grass.
Mark how the Goats the stony rocks do climb,
Suckling their Kids when it is evening time;
While the Shepherd piping on his reed does lie,
And his watchful dogs do bear him company.
And then a Cow does make the woods resound
With lowing for her Calfe as yet unfound.
Sometimes you may with smoke put under, drive
The young brood of Bees out of their waxen hive:
And having took their Honey got with pain,
You may then hive the tender brood again.
Autumn yields apples, Summer yields fruits,
The Spring yields flowers, and fire with Winter suits.
The Countryman gathers Grapes at a set time,
And with naked feet does press out the new wine.
And certain times he cutteth down his hay,
Rakes it, and makes it, and bears it away.
Or in the Garden thou may graft and plant,
And water those herbs which do watring want.
And sometimes thou may make incision,
The graft unto the stock thereby to join,
That so the stock of any home bred tree
With outlandish boughs and fruit may covered be.
When these pleasures to thy mind delight do bring,
Then Love will fly away on a weak wing.
Besides, thou may sometimes a hunting run,
Venus has often by Diana been overcome.
Sometimes with Hounds the Hare before thee chase,
Sometimes thy nets on the shady mountains place.
Or pursue the Heart, and put him in a fear,
Or wound the Boar with thy sharp-pointed Spear:
That at night thou weary, fast asleep may fall,
And of thy Sweetheart take no care at all.
While fatning rest thy body may refresh,
And banish Love which did thy mind oppress.
Or thou may take the light-wing'd birds sometime,
Or go a fishing with thy hook and line:
Covering the crooked hook with such a bait,
That shall make the greedy Fish bite at it straight.
By these and the like ways until thou leave
To love, thou must thy self thy self deceive.
And if Loves fetters thou would feign off shake,
Then some long journey thou must undertake:
And though thou weep for being so unkind,
When thy Sweet-hearts name does come into thy mind,
Yet still go far from her, go far I say.
And the more thou art unwilling for to go.
Remember to quicken thy pace when it is slow.
Offer violence to thy self, and so go on,
And enforce thy feet away from her to run.
Let no light shower of rain thy journey stay,
Nor the observation of an Holy Day:
Nor yet enquire how many miles thou have gone,
But rather enquire how many are to come.
Nor poor excuses, nor delays do not feign,
That somewhat near to her thou may remain.
Do not thou reckon the time that is past,
Nor unto Rome a longing look back cast.
But see that thou do from her run and fly,
As the Parthian would do from his enemy.
Some will say my Rules are hard, I know it my self,
But thou will suffer much to gain thy health.
In sickness I have drunk a bitter juice,
And was denied that diet I would choose.
Thou can endure to be lanchd and seard, to regaine
Thy bodies health, and can from drink refrain:
And to suffer any thing will thou deny,
For thy minds health and her recovery?
Since that the mind is a part far compleater
Then any body, and of price far greater.
Though the entrance of my Art seem hard, the first
"Beginning of a work seems hard and worst.
At first the Heyfer's wrung with the hard yoke,
At first the saddle galleth the swift Colt.
Thou will say, it grieves thee to depart from home,
Which makes thee to return when thou art gone.
But it is thy sweetharts love thee hom has brought,
While thou with fair words coverest thy fault.
Depart but from her once, and thou shall see
The Country will yield comfort unto thee.
And the length of the way will help to banish
Thy cares, and company will make it vanish.
Yet think it not enough for to depart
From her that is thy Love, and thy Sweetheart.
But thou must stay from her, till thy desire
Do lose its strength, and ashes hide thy fire.
If thou return before thou have quenched thy flame,
Rebellious love will assault thee again.
Thou shall be what thou wa'st, thy love shall burn
The more by absence when thou do return.
Think not if thou enchanted herbs do use,
And Magicks Arts, they can thy help produce.
The use of charms is ancient and old,
But my harmless Verse does a new way unfold.
For I will force no ghost his grave to leave,
Nor old wife with her charms the earth shall cleave.
I will not blast the Corn, nor make it fail;
Nor Phoebus in his sphere shall not wax pale.
Tyber, (as he was wont) to the Sea shall flow,
The Moon be drawn with horses white as snow.
I will make thy breast with charms lay by
Thy cares, nor make subdued love to fly.
What help did enchanted herbs lend thee or aid
Medea, when thou would at home have staid?
And what did Circe by her charming Art,
When Ulysses ships did from the shore depart?
Thou striv'st to make thy crafty guest still stay,
But he hoisted up his sails and fled away.
Thou that to a thousand ships could men transform;
Thy minds affection could not change nor turn.
Thou strivest to expel Loves cruel flame,
But Love did still within thy Breast remain.
For'cis said, that when Ulysses would be gone,
Thou to deteine him thus to speak begun;
I do not now entreat thee for to be
My hu band, though that hope was once in me;
Though I deserved to be thy wife hereafter,
Being a goddess, and the bright Suns daughter.
Now to stay a while I only thee desire;
What less can thou wish me that I should require?
Thou see the Sea is rough, and thou should fear it:
The Wind hereafter will stand for thee more fit.
Why will thou go? Troy is not built again,
Thou art not called these wars now ^o mainetaine.
Here Is love and peace, and it is only I
That here am wounded by loves cruelty:
While thou in safety may stay, and command
My Kingdom, which I offer to thy hand.
When she these words had possionately to him said,
Ulysses presently his Anchor waighd
So that the North Wind drove his sails away,
And her words, which vainly pleaded for his stay.
Then Cerces furious love began to rage;
So that she sought by art how to assuage
With her accustomed charms her inward flame,
But yet they could not mitigate Loves pain.
Therefore if thou expectest help from hence,
In charms or love-cups put no confidence.
If some weighty occasion make thee stay in Rome,
Take then my council, for this is my doom.
He has a great strength that at once can free
Himself, and set himself at liberty.
He that can do thus, I Will admire his compo sition,
And say, he needs not my admonition.
But thou that love, and would thy love forget,
Yet canist not, for thy help I here will set
These Rules down: First, be sure to think upon
These wicked acts which thou and she have done.
Lay all unto the charge of the poor Maid,
Let thy cost bestowed on her be before thee laid:
Think how she has got from thee this and that,
And yet her covetous mind is insatiate.
Think how by her persuasions at the last
Thy house for her joincture thou have to her past,
Howshe falsified her Oath which she had swore,
And made thee lie oft-times even at her door:
Think that she loves some other, because she
Disdaines to love, or be beloved of thee.
And though she will not grant thee loves delight,
Her Peramour enjoyes her every night.
Let these things deeply through thy senses strike,
And from hence take occasion of dislike.
And I would have thee use such amplification
That may set forth her wrongs with aggravation.
For if thou do begin once to repent,
"Thy wrongs will make thee straightway eloquent.
My self to love a Maid was once inclined,
But she proved not agreeable to my mind:
Yet like sick Podalirius I was cured
By my own medicines which I had procured.
For I that am Loves Physician, will not stick
To confess that I my self for love was fick:
But by scanning my Sweet-hearts faults I cured my self,
And by often doing so regained my health.
My Mistress has, thought I, but a bad thigh,
And yet, to confess the truth, I did but lie,
My Mistress arms are not so fair quoth I,
And yet, to confess the truth, I did but lie.
She is low of stature, and insatiate,
And hence I grounded my dislike and hate.
And since Virtues unto vices are so near,
Her Virtues vices to me did appear.
Thus all her natural gifts thou may deface,
And let thy blinded Judgment her disgrace,
If that she be full-bodied, call her fat;
If she be brown, then thou may call her black:
And if that she be slender in the waste,
For leanenesse then find fault with her thou may:
Thou may call her wanton, if well behaved she be:
If honest, a piece of cold rusticity.
And often press her that she would but grant
To express that skill which thou know she does want.
If she have no voice desire her to sing:
If she cannot dance, her unto dancing bring.
If that her speech be homely, rude and course,
Then give her still occasion of discourse:
And if her skill in Music be not much,
Desire her to give her Lute a gentle touch.
If that her steps and gate uncomely be,
Be sure that thou do make her walk with thee:
And if her breasts hang down on either side,
Pull off the Tiffeny that does them hide.
Then make her laugh if that she have bad teeth,
If slender eyes, with sad stories make her weep.
And sometimes to thy Mistress in a morning come,
Before she be dressed, or head tyres put on.
For what are Maids when that they are undrest?
When they are in their clothes, they are at the best.
With Pearls and Gold they dress themselves with Art,
And the Maid is of her self even the least part.
And then thou may imagine thou have lost
In this throng of clothes the Maid whom thou love most:
And like a witty Lover take delight
In a resting manner to delude thy sight.
Yet to this Rule too much credit do not give,
For a careless beauty many does deceive.
When thy Mistress is painting of her self, then rush
Into her presence and so make her blush:
Thou shall find her Boxes, and her colors there
With which she makes her breast seem white and fair.
Her window will smell like to Phineus table,
So that to turn thy stomach it will be able.
And now I purpose afterward to show
What in the acts of Venus thou must do,
That Love wherein thou take such delight,
May thereby b'abanisht, and quite put to flight.
Many Rules for shame I must leave unexprest,
But by my words thou may conceive the rest.
For some of late my Books do carpe and blame,
Because my Muse has such a wanton vein.
Let him disgrace those Works which I have done,
So my Verse may please, and through the World be sung.
Envy detracted from great Homers Wit,
And Zoilus, thou did get a name by it:
And sacrilegious tongues have out of spite
Disgraced his Lines Vir.
that did of Aeneas wr^te.
Envy, winds, thunder, aim at, blow, and strike
Those things that are advanced to greatest heig^^.
But thou that art displeased with our loose vein,
Conceive each subject must have a fittstreme.
Wars must be in Heroicke Verses writ,
Not enterlac'd with pleasant strain^s of Wit.
Anger becomes a high lined Tragedy,
Acommon line a merry Comedy:
Iambick Verses serve to jeere a foe,
Whether they do run swiftly, or overflow.
The Elegy does sing of quiver'd Love,
Even as thy Mistress cursed or kind does prove.
It would not become Callimachus to rehearse
The praise of Achilles in his verse:
Nor would Cydippe be a subject fit
For Homers full ^ine, and his strength of wit.
Who can endure, that wanton Thais should be
Acted in the play of Andromache.
My Art is directed to such as Thais be;
My wanton time is sportive, and most free:
Of Thais only my Art has a care,
Not those that with a fillet bind their hair;
For if my muse has lively here expressed
Her matter fitly in the way of jest:
My Muse shall overcome those that abused her,
And of a false crime, falsely have accused her;
Let envy burst, my Muse shall have a name,
The more she frowns, the more shall be her fame.
For envies hatred will increase my fame:
Then envy be sure to cross me, for if I live,
I Will give thee more occasion for to grieve.
For it will vex thy heart (I know) to see
My Verses famous with posterity.
For as my fame increases, my desire
Of fame increases, and still mounteth higher,
Though my panting horses now begin to climb
The hill, they may reach to the top in time,
For Elegies are indebted unto me,
As much as Heroicks unto Virgil be.
Ovids Remedy of Love.
Lib. 2.
HItherto we have answered envy, now again
I will recall my self, draw in my rain;
And I the Poet will proceed to run
On in that circle which I have begun.
When thou art to perform the youthful deed,
And that to lie with thee she has agreed;
And that the promised night is now at hand,
Wherein unto thy bargain thou must stand:
Lie with some other, least thou being full of pleasure
Thy Mistress do requite thee with such measure,
And answer thee again, with such sweet height
Of dalliance that may take thee with delight.
On any one bestow thy strength of Love,
And thy next affection will more milder prove.
Venus is still most powerful at the first,
But heat seeks shades, and water quenches thirst.
I am ashamed, yet to speak I will assay,
Join Venus shapes in an uncomely way:
Which may at any time be easily done,
For they suppose naught does them mis-become.
Then to set open the Windows I thee bid,
And by daylight mark those parts that are hid.
And when the pleasur's ended which thou had desired
And that thy mind and body both are tired:
While thou repentst that thou a maid did touch,
And resolv'st nere again to do so much.
Then observe the faults that in her body are.
Look on her when she lies naked and bare.
If these rules seem of small use unto any
Though all avail not, some may being many.
The little Vipers biting ki^ls the Bull,
And a little hound the Boar will tugge and pull:
Of my precepts, being many, the belt take,
Many collected a great heap do make.
But since so many men and minds there are
To credit me in all things take no care;
For that which does not offend us, may be thought,
Perhaps by another to be a fault.
He that has seen those parts should not be seen
His love will cool, though it has furious been.
He that has seen when his sweete-heart does rise
From Venus encounter and her Veneries,
What stains and spots most shamefully are spread,
On the ^olluted and defiled bed.
If these things can delight you, he will say,
Proceed you lovers, and still sport and play.
For when that Loves torch has enflamed your mind,
Your sudden heat then no dislike can find:
For when Cupid draws his arrows to the head,
The greater wounds of Love are thereby bred.
And then of Lovers, the wounded company
Require the greater care and remedy.
What shall we say of those who have lain hid
In some secret corner, while their sweetheart did
Make water, and so by that means did see
Those parts which for modesty should conceled be?
The gods forbid we should such rules invent,
Though they profit, yet they are not expedient.
But I advise thee for to have two Loves;
He that loves many, to none loving proves.
When Love is so divided, then at length,
One Love abateth from the others strength,
Great Rivers that within the full banks glided,
Grow-lesle, being into smaller streams divided
And if sticks be pulled asunder, then the fire
Does straight go out, and the flame does expire.
One Anchor cannot hold a stout ship fast,
One hook is not enough for to be cast
Into the water: he that provides two things
Obtaines his ends and still the victory wins.
Thou that unwillingly did one sweetheart serve,
Find out another that may thy love deserve.
Minos forgot his love to Pasiphae,
When he in love with Progne needs would be.
Alcinaeus did his Phegis love forget,
When he Callirhoe to his bed did get.
And Paris still had Oenone loved,
If the Whore Hellen be had not approved.
Pandion of his wife Progne took care,
Till her Sister Philomel did seem more fair:
Why should I more examples here unfold?
"Since a new Love makes men forsake the old.
A Mother for her child's death makes less moan
That had many, than she does that had but one.
And do not think that I new laws do mention,
Yet would it were the glory of my invention,
Since Atrides who did all things see, this saw,
And was not all Greece by him kept in awe?
For he himself was conquered by the look
Of Cryses whom he in the wars had took:
But yet her father foolishly then wept,
Because he had her from Achilles kept:
Why do thou weep old man for the happy fate
Of thy Daughter hindering so her happy state?
For when Chalchas trusting in Achilles aid,
Had commanded that he should restore the Maid,
Atrides said, even she that is next in fame,
And some letters took away has the same name,
Her let Achilles yield me if he be wise,
Else he shall feel that power he does despise.
If this action (Grecians) foul to you appear,
Know that my stout hand does the Scepter bear:
If I am King, then she shall with me sleep,
Else may Thersites all my Kingdoms keep.
This said, he had her in his first loves stead,
His new love cured the old, for straight it fled.
As Agamemnon did, look thou do do,
Put love into a maze by loving two.
If thou wovldst know to get them, read our Arts
Of Love, and thou shall have choice of Sweet-hearts.
But if our Rules have any power to heal,
I Apollo do his Art by me reveal.
Though thou burnst as if Aetna did thee enfold,
Seem to thy Mistress in affection cold:
Dissemble thy pain, that thou may her deceive,
And laugh then, when thou inwardly do grieve.
I would not have thee straight way quench thy flame
That over thy affections thou may reign.
I command thee only but to counterfeit,
As if thy former affection thou did quit:
And so by imitation thou shall do
That which thou faignedst, really and true.
For oftentimes that I might so shun drinking,
I would counterfeit my self asleep by winking:
And while I in counterfeiting did proceed,
I many times have fallen asleep indeed.
So those who cunning in counterfeiting are,
Do seldom fall into Loves spring or snare.
The mind by custom does Love entertain,
And it by custom is forgot again.
He that can counterfeit himself no Lover,
By counterfeiting shall his health recover.
Come if she bid thee at the appointed night,
And if she shut her door, yet bear it light.
Do not thou use soft complements, or prate
With flattering words, or scold before her gate:
Or if that she do lock thee out in spite,
Do not thou at her threshold lie all night:
Nor yet complain unto her in the morning;
Nor show a sign of sorrow for her scorning
Thy love: for when she sees thou do not grieve
For her disdain, she her disdain will leave.
Thy Love will cease, if thou thus careless seem.
The Horse resists the bridle when it is seen.
But use such pretended shows as I have bid,
"Good effects at first are in their causes hid.
Loves cure thus by a close way shall be done,
"Since birds that see the nets, the nets do shun.
L^ve her not still when she does thee despise,
If she disdain thee let thy courage rise.
If her gate stand open pass by though she call,
On the appointed night come not at all.
Patience will make thee to endure annoy,
And from thy sufferings thou shall receive joy,
There is no hardness in my Rules or Art:
For of a Counselor now I play the part.
And since men's minds do differ, and do vary,
Our Art shall vary that may now miscarry.
Since there are thousand shapes of misery,
There are thousand salves to cure each misery:
Some bodies must be lanc'd, and seared, and cut,
And some by potions and herbs health have got.
But if thou art of a more softer mind,
So that Love in his fetters does thee bind,
And like a Conqueror holds thee at his beck,
And cruelly does tread upon thy neck,
To struggle with thy passion thou must cease,
Let thy winds drive thy ship as they do please.
I would have thee quench the thirst of thy desire,
And with some common water quench the fire.
And thou may drink far more than will suffice,
Till full of water thou do it despise,
With thy Sweetheart take thy fill of delight,
And in her company spend both day and night:
For thy Love will end with such satiety,
And thou shall be able to want her company,
And tarry from her: hungry Love is tired
With plenty, and does loath what he desired.
Be not thou jealous, jealousy does nourish
Love, and does make it both to last and flourish.
If to extinguish Love thou have a care,
Extinguish jealousy and idle fear.
He that fears his Mistress should be taken from him,
There is no remedy can work upon him.
The Mother for that son does take most care,
Of whose return from the wars she stands in fear.
Near the Colline Gate a Temple there does stand,
Which is from Erix called, and so named:
There love they, in the Lethaean waves they drench,
And Cupids torches in those waters quench.
There young men pray, they may their lovesforget,
That on disdainefull Maids their love have set:
But at the last, thus Cupid said to me;
(Else 'twas a dream, a dream it well might be)
O thou, who teach men how they should love:
And teach them the remedy to remove
Their passion: Ovid add these rules of mine
Unto those preceps, and those rules of thine:
Think on thy troubles and thy misery,
The thought of crosses will make love to fly:
"And God doch never none so entirely bless,
"But that he gives them troubles more or less.
He that has suits or fears his rent day,
Is wrested with a debt which he must pay.
He that has a hard father, that does keep him in,
Let him think on his father, though unseene.
If thou see a married man in a poor estate,
Think that his wife does cause his hapless fate.
If thou in the Country a fruitful Vineyard have,
Take care lest ill winds should thy rich Grapes blast.
If he have a ship that is returning home,
Let him think what losses often by Sea do come.
A Son at the Wars to trouble thee may be able,
Or else a Daughter that is marrigeable.
"What actions to our life belonging are,
"But will afford us cause of grief and care.
If Paris had remembered his brothers fate,
Their deaths had made him Hellena to hate:
And Cupid more unto me then had spoke,
But that out of my dream I then did wake.
For when my dream (sure 'twas a dream) had left me,
My waking thus, of many Rules bereft me:
Yet will I still go on, and no^ forsake
My intended course, till I an end do make.
Let Lovers take heed of solitude, they may be
Safer, if they frequent good company:
For thoughts of Love by being alone increase;
But if thou keep company, then they will cease.
Thou will be sad, if that thou art alone,
Thy Mistress beauty into thy mind will come.
And thus the nights are, then the days more sad,
Because no company can then be had.
Shun not discourse, nor shut thy chamber door,
Nor in the dark, thy self with tears deplore.
And have some Pylades, that may cure Orestes.
This use of friendship' among others not the least is.
What did hurt Phyllis, but that she did love
To frequent the Wood, and solitary Grove?
What caused her by her own hands to dye,
But sollitude, and want of company?
For like to Bacchus Nimphs through grief and care
She was wont to go with loose disheaveld hair,
And sometimes looking to the Sea she would stand,
Sometimes being weary lie down on the sand.
Faithless Demophoon, full of treachery;
Faithless Demophoon she aloud did cry
To the deaf waves, that against the shoares did break,
While sobs did break off those words she did speak.
There was a narrow path covered with a shade,
By which to the Sea she often her journey made:
Her miserable steps had even worn
This new way walking on it as one forlorn:
And with a pale countenance being hither come,
Upon her silken girdle she looks down:
She looks upon the bonghes, doubts, and does fear,
And to do what she desired, she does not dare.
At last her fingers about her neck did knit
A halter and so hanged her self with it.
O Phyllis! had thou not been alone,
The woods for Phyllis had not made such moan.
For every wood such grief for thee conceives,
That for thee each year it mourns without Leaves,
Le maids and men by Phyllis example take;
Beware of being alone for Phyllis sake.
There was a young man that had almost done
What my Muse prescribes, and to his health was come:
But while that he kept company with each Lover,
He lost that health he did before recover:
And Love did take again his Golden Dart,
And shot this young man deeply to the heart.
If thou do love, and would not love, then see
That thou do shun all amorous company.
For unto Cattle this much hurt has done,
Who from each other take infection.
Their Eyes, that look on bad eyes, are hurt by it,
Bodies to bodies infection do transmit.
And sometimes a Riverthat's hard by does flow,
And moisten places that are dry in show.
So love concealed through thy veins will glide,
If with thy Mistress thou do still abide:
And in framing excuses we all witty be,
That we may enjoy our Mistress company.
Another too was cured, but his pain
Renewed by living near to her again:
His wounds of Love once healed, did bleed afresh,
And so my Art thereby had no success.
If fire be near a house, 'twill soon take fire:
Keep from those places that may stir desire.
For if that she within the Cloisters walk,
Go not unto her, nor yet with her talk:
For why should thou by talking with her again,
Thy warm love with the heat of love inflame?
If thou art hungry, thou will not refrain
When meat's before thee, to fall to again:
And when the water springs up in thy sight,
To see it spring up will thy thirst incite.
The Bull that sees a Cow, follows her straight way:
The Horse that sees a Mare, after her will neigh.
Yet love will not leave thee though this course thou take
It Is not enough that thou do her forsake:
But bid her Mother, Sister, Nurse, farewell,
And whosoe'r does with thy Mistress dwell.
Her servant and waiting-maid both shun.
If with commendation to thee they do come
From thy Mistress, and do with a feigned tear
Deliver it, their words do thou not hear:
Nor how she does see that thou do not ask,
Of this silence thou will find the good at last:
And thou that of thy Mistress do complain,
Cease thy complaints, they do increase thy flame.
Thy love through silence better will expire,
A silent suffering will quench thy desire.
In silence strive thy affection to removed.
Who says too often he does not love, does love;
For flames of love are by degrees expelled,
It is a wound that must be slowly healed.
Torrents more swiftly run than Rivers deep,
Yet this is shallow, that one course does keep:
For love by srealth away from Lovers flies,
And by degrees it languishes and dies.
Yet never hate that Maid whom thou did woo,
Such dispositions savage beasts do show.
He is not cured that ends love with hate,
For still he loves, though he does her forsake.
They that were Lovers once, should not turn foes,
Appias does hate such dissentions as those.
For Love thus to insinuate does use,
And makes us love those whom we do accuse:
And wandering Love has found out an invention
To beget love by wrangling and dissension.
A young man stood by his sweet-hearts bedside,
And she began to threaten him, and chide:
Whereat in being ready away to go,
She bid him draw the Curtains, he did so;
Which as soon as he had ignorantly done,
He saw his wife, then he grew mute and dumb.
But yet at last embracing her, quoth he,
Pardon my error, thou have conquered me,
And so from her he did depart in peace.
Though he were cheated yet all strife did cease.
Let her have those gifts she has from thee obtained,
For by such losses greater good is gained.
But if that you by chance with her do meet,
These Rules which I do give you, in mind keep.
Take courage, and express thy valor on her,
Thy Penthesilea with thy weapon conquer.
Think on thy Rival, and how often late
Thou have stood knocking at thy Mistress gate:
And for those vows which thou have often made,
Now punish her, let her be soundly paid.
Curle not thy hair, nor when thou come to see
Thy Mistress, let thy Dublet unbutton'd be.
Nor of other Maids take thou care to please any,
But let her be to thee in stead of many.
But now I Will show what slacks the eure of love,
And you your self shall an example prove.
For we hardly cease to love, when we believe
We are beloved again, and so deceive
Our selves; since we most credulous and apt be
To deceive our selves with our self flattery.
But unto oaths or words no credit give,
For what than they does oftener us deceive?
Nor if thy Mistress weep, yet be not caught
With tears, for she her eyes to weep has taught.
Lovers minds are diverse ways besieged and tried,
Like a Rock beaten with waves on every side.
Show not the causes why thou do her leave,
Nor tell her why thou griev'st, yet closely grieve.
Tell her not of her faults whatsoever they are:
For if she come to excuse them, then beware,
For whatsoever her case is, you must know;
In thy own cause she will thee overthrow.
In silence bear all: for if thou do stand
To reason with a Maid, and still demand
Satisfaction for some wrong thou did sustain,
Thou will scold thy self in love at last again.
Yet to clip Cupids wings is not my intent,
Nor shall his Bow by my Art be unbent:
It is council unto you which I do sing,
Therefore obey those Rules which I do bring.
And bright Apollo as thou still have done,
Assist my work that it may yet go on.
Phoebus is present; hark, me thinks I hear
His sounding Harp; Phoebus' is present here:
In his resplendant robe I have him espied,
Richer than robes in Tyrian Purple died.
You then that are in love, see you compare
Your Mistresses to those that are more fair.
Each goddess unto Paris fair did seem;
But comparing their beauties, he did then esteem
Venus the fairest: Thus let every lover
Compare his mistress beauty with some other.
And so with others thou may compare her mind.
Let not affection thy judgment blind.
Brief are the Rules I shall hereafter sing,
Yet such, as unto many help did bring.
And I have found the power of my own Art,
Which when I was in love did ease my smart.
Keep not thy Mistress letters, nor them read;
Much harm from reading letters does proceed:
Put them into the flame, and say this fire
Shall burn this letter kindling my desire.
Thestias in a brand her son did burn,
To burn a treacherous letter will thou mourn?
Remoove her picture; why should thou be took
With the fair shadow of a beauteous look?
And also see that thou do shun those places,
That are guilty of your amorous embraces.
For when thou those places do behold and view,
Past pleasures will thy present grief renew.
Think not thus with thy self, here she and I
Have been together, here did together lie:
Here on this bed we slept, both with delight,
And I enjoyd her here one happy night.
Such thoughts as these do but renew our flame,
And make the wound of love to bleed again.
For as a Brimston match will new life give
To dying cinders, making them revive,
And as one spark may kindle a great fire,
So one spark of love may inflame thy desire.
So unless thou endeavor to shun all
Occasions, that thy love to mind may call,
Thy flame of love which seemed to expire,
Will burn again in thee with fresh desire.
The Seaman rejoices when he has saild by
A dangerous Rock which in his way does lie.
But take heed of those places which appear
Pleasant, because thou had thy pleasure there:
These places Rocks to shipwreck thee become,
And as Carybdis see thou do them shun.
And in some things, we can but advise our best,
And must commit to fortune all the rest
For love when it is poorest, is most wise,
Riches and wealth do seem to blind his eyes.
Poor men in Love oft-times more wisdom show,
For Riches do make Love a wanton grow.
Why did none of poor Hecale a Wife make?
Why did none Irus for a Husband take?
For this, the Maid was poor, and therefore tarried:
So was the other poor, and so not married.
Besides, the Theaters do not thou frequent,
While in thy breast love is not resident:
For while thou hear'st their Songs and Music often,
And see their Dances, these the mind do soften.
There fained Lovers oftentimes advance
Themselves, and in a Mask do meet and dance.
Actors do show the Lovers cunning slight,
And their showing of it stirs up a delight.
Read not Callimachus who of love does write,
And Cous who does in that strain endite.
Sappho has made me love my Mistress better,
And the Teian Muse has made my love wax greater.
Who can with safety read Tibullus Verse?
Or those which Cinthia's Lover does rehearse?
Who that reads Gallus Verses does not melt?
And some by mine the like effects have felt.
For unless Apollo do frustrate my labor,
There are no Love-lines can like mine get favor.
Though there be some that feign would imitate me,
Yet believe that none are Rivals unto thee.
The more Hermione was loved of another,
The more Orestes did begin to love her.
Menelaus grieved not when to Creete he went,
And though his wife was absent, was content:
But when he saw that Paris stole her had,
Then for his wife he raged, and grew mad.
"Those that love not their wives, yet when they see
"Another love their wives, they jealous be.
This bred Achilles grief and sad annoy,
Because that Agamemnon should her enjoy:
He wept, nor did he only weep it did seem,
But something did, or else he had slothful been.
Truly although my wisdom be not much,
I think that I my self have done as much:
For out of envy to him he did receive
Her first fruits, and the next to him did leave.
Though that he never touched Brysis he does swear
By his Scepter, his Scepter was no God to hear.
Then still pass by thy forsaken Mistress gate,
And let thy quick steps thence convey thee straight:
And sure thou may perform it, if thy mind
Do gather strength, and be thereto inclined.
For when thou passest by, go quick and fast,
Spur on thy self as if thou were in haste.
Think that the Sirens in that house do dwell,
And make haste from her, so shall all be well:
And for thy Rival never grieved be,
Esteem him not now as thy enemy:
Or salute him though thy hatred do remain:
For'tis a sign thou art thy self again.
And that I may play the Physicians part,
What meats to use I will prescribe by Art.
For Scallions from Lybia sent to thee,
Or else from Megaris both hurtful be:
And lustful Eringoe's see that thou do shun,
Which unto Venery make the body prone.
Rather eat Rue that sharpeneth the sight,
And that which hinders Venus soft delight.
If concerning Wine thou would have me to show
Some Rules, my Rules at this time shall be few.
Wine does prepare the mind to Venerie,
Unless you drink too much, and drunken be:
For too much Wine the affections stupesie,
When that the heart in Wine does buried lie,
For as by blowing a fire may be kindled,
So by blowing a new fire may be extinguished.
A gentle wind does nourish the weak flame,
A violent puff does put it out again.
Drink so much Wine as may thy cares expel,
If thou drinkst more or less, thou do not well.
This work is done, now with fresh Garlands Crown
My Ship which to the intended Haven's come,
And to your sacred Poet offerings give,
You Lovers that from hence did help receive.
FINIS.

